
"Not for me," answered Nick, shortly, for he did not care to talk about
it.

"Faither wull na have I go to school, since us ha' comed to town, an'
plough-land sold for grazings," drawled Roger; "Muster Pine o' Welford
saith that I ha' learned as much as faither ever knowed, an' 'tis enow
for I. Faither saith it maketh saucy rogues o' sons to know more than
they's own dads."

Nick wondered if it did. His own father could neither read nor write,
while he could do both and had some Latin, too. At the thought of the
Latin he made a wry face.

"Joe Carter be-eth in the stocks," said Roger, peering through the
jeering crowd about the pillory and post; "a broke Tom Samson's pate wi'
's ale-can yestreen."

[Illustration: "'WHUR BE-EST GOING, NICK?' ASKED ROGER DAWSON."]

But Nick pushed on. A few ruddy-faced farmers and drovers from the
Bed Horse Vale still lingered at the Boar Inn door and by the tap-room
of the Crown; and in the middle of the street a crowd of salters,
butchers, and dealers in hides, with tallow-smeared doublets and
doubtful hose, were squabbling loudly about the prices set upon
their wares.

In the midst of them Nick saw his father, and scurried away into Back
Bridge street as fast as he could, feeling very near a sneak, but far
from altering his purpose.

"Job Hortop," said Simon Attwood to his apprentice at his side, looking
out suddenly over the crowd, "was that my Nick yonder?"

"Nay, master, could na been," said Job, stolidly; "Nick be-eth in school
by now--the clock ha' struck. 'Twas Dawson's Hodge and some like
ne'er-do-well."




CHAPTER V


IN THE WARWICK ROAD

The land was full of morning sounds as the lads trudged along the
Warwick road together. An ax rang somewhere deep in the woods of Arden;
cart-wheels ruttled on the stony road; a blackbird whistled shrilly in
the hedge, and they heard the deep-tongued belling of hounds far off in
Fulbroke park.

Now and then a heron, rising from the river, trailed its long legs
across the sky, or a kingfisher sparkled in his own splash. Once a
lonely fisherman down by the Avon started a wild duck from the sedge,
and away it went pattering up-stream with frightened wings and red feet
running along the water. And then a river-rat plumped into the stream
beneath the willows, and left a long string of bubbles behind him.

Nick's ill humor soon wore off as he breathed the fresh air, moist from
lush meadows, and sweet from hedges pink and white with hawthorn bloom.
The thought of being pent up on such a day grew more and more
unbearable, and a blithe sense of freedom from all restraint blunted the
prick of conscience.

"Why art going to Coventry, Nick?" inquired Roger suddenly, startled by
a thought coming into his wits like a child by a bat in the room.

"To see the stage-play that the burgesses would na allow in Stratford."

"Wull I see, too?"

"If thou hast eyes--the Mayor's show is free."

"Oh, feckins, wun't it be fine?" gaped Hodge. "Be it a tailors' show,
Nick, wi' Herod the King, and a rope for to hang Judas? An' wull they
set the world afire wi' a torch, an' make the earth quake fearful wi' a
barrel full o' stones? Or wull it be Sin in a motley gown a-thumping the
Black Man over the pate wi' a bladder full o' peasen--an' angels wi'
silver wingses, an' saints wi' goolden hair? Or wull it be a giant nine
yards high, clad in the beards o' murdered kings, like granny saith she
used to see?"

"Pshaw! no," said Nick; "none of those old-fashioned things. These be
players from London town, and I hope they'll play a right good English
history-play, like 'The Famous Victories of Henry Fift,' to turn a
fellow's legs all goose-flesh!"

Hodge stopped short in the road. "La!" said he, "I'll go no furder if
they turn me to a goose. I wunnot be turned goose, Nick Attwood--an' a
plague on all witches, says I!"

"Oh, pshaw!" laughed Nick; "come on. No witch in the world could turn
thee bigger goose than thou art now. Come along wi' thee; there be no
witches there at all."

"Art sure thou 'rt not bedaffing me?" hesitated Hodge. "Good, then; I
be na feared. Art sure there be no witches?"

"Why," said Nick, "would Master Burgess John Shakspere leave his son
Will to do with witches?"

"I dunno," faltered Hodge; "a told Muster Robin Bowles it was na right
to drownd 'em in the river."

Nick hesitated. "Maybe it kills the fish," said he; "and Master Will
Shakspere always liked to fish. But they burn witches in London, Hodge,
and he has na put a stop to it--and he's a great man in London town."

Hodge came on a little way, shaking his head like an old sheep in a
corner. "Wully Shaxper a great man?" said he. "Why, a's name be cut on
the old beech-tree up Snitterfield lane, where's uncle Henry Shaxper
lives, an' 'tis but poorly done. I could do better wi' my own whittle."

"Ay, Hodge," cried Nick; "and that's about all thou canst do. Dost think
that a man's greatness hangs on so little a thing as his sleight of hand
at cutting his name on a tree?"

"Wull, maybe; maybe not; but if a be a great man, Nick Attwood, a might
do a little thing passing well--so there, now!"

Nick pondered for a moment. "I do na know," said he, slowly; "heaps of
men can do the little things, but parlous few the big. So some one must
be bigging it, or folks would all sing very small. And he doeth the big
most beautiful, they say. They call him the Swan of Avon."

"Avon swans be mostly geese," said Hodge, vacantly.

"Now, look 'e here, Hodge Dawson, don't thou be calling Master Will
Shakspere goose. He married my own mother's cousin, and I will na
have it."

"La, now," drawled Hodge, staring, "'tis nowt to me. Thy Muster Wully
Shaxper may be all the long-necked fowls in Warrickshire for all I care.
And, anyway, I'd like to know, Nick Attwood, since when hath a been
'_Muster_ Shaxper'--that ne'er-do-well, play-actoring fellow?"

"Ne'er-do-well? It is na so. When he was here last summer he was bravely
dressed, and had a heap of good gold nobles in his purse. And he gave
Rick Hawkins, that's blind of an eye, a shilling for only holding
his horse."

"Oh, ay," drawled Hodge; "a fool and a's money be soon parted."

"Will Shakspere is no fool," declared Nick, hotly. "He's made a peck o'
money there in London town, and 's going to buy the Great House in
Chapel lane, and come back here to live."

"Then a 's a witless azzy!" blurted Hodge. "If a 's so great a man
amongst the lords and earlses, a 'd na come back to Stratford. An' I say
a 's a witless loon--so there!"

Nick whirled around in the road. "And I say, Hodge Dawson," he exclaimed
with flashing eyes, "that 'tis a shame for a lout like thee to so
miscall thy thousand-time betters. And what's more, thou shalt unsay
that, or I will make thee swallow thy words right here and now!"

"I'd loike to see thee try," Hodge began; but the words were scarcely
out of his mouth when he found himself stretched on the grass, Nick
Attwood bending over him.

"There! thou hast seen it tried. Now come, take that back, or I will
surely box thine ears for thee."

Hodge blinked and gaped, collecting his wits, which had scattered to the
four winds. "Whoy," said he, vaguely, "if 'tis all o' that to thee, I
take it back."

Nick rose, and Hodge scrambled clumsily to his feet. "I'll na go wi'
thee," said he, sulkily; "I will na go whur I be whupped."

Nick turned on his heel without a word, and started on.

"An' what's more," bawled Hodge after him, "thy Muster Wully Shaxper
be-eth an old gray goose, an' boo to he, says I!"

As he spoke he turned, dived through the thin hedge, and galloped across
the field as if an army were at his heels.

Nick started back, but quickly paused. "Thou needst na run," he called;
"I've not the time to catch thee now. But mind ye this, Hodge Dawson:
when I do come back, I'll teach thee who thy betters be--Will Shakspere
first of all!"

"Well crowed, well crowed, my jolly cockerel!" on a sudden called a
keen, high voice beyond the hedge behind him.

Nick, startled, whirled about just in time to see a stranger leap the
hedge and come striding up the road.




CHAPTER VI


THE MASTER-PLAYER

He had trim, straight legs, this stranger, and a slender, lithe body in
a tawny silken jerkin. Square-shouldered, too, was he, and over one
shoulder hung a plum-colored cloak bordered with gold braid. His long
hose were the color of his cloak, and his shoes were russet leather,
with rosettes of plum, and such high heels as Nick had never seen
before. His bonnet was of tawny velvet, with a chain twisted round it,
fastened by a jeweled brooch through which was thrust a curly
cock-feather. A fine white Holland-linen shirt peeped through his jerkin
at the throat, with a broad lace collar; and his short hair curled
crisply all over his head. He had a little pointed beard, and the ends
of his mustache were twisted so that they stood up fiercely on either
side of his sharp nose. At his side was a long Italian poniard in a
sheath of russet leather and silver filigree, and he had a reckless,
high and mighty fling about his stride that strangely took the eye.

Nick stood, all taken by surprise, and stared.

The stranger seemed to like it, but scowled nevertheless. "What! How
now?" he cried sharply. "Dost like or like me not?"

"Why, sir," stammered Nick, utterly lost for anything to say--"why,
sir,--" and knowing nothing else to do, he took off his cap and bowed.

"Come, come," snapped the stranger, stamping his foot, "I am a swashing,
ruffling, desperate Dick, and not to be made a common jest for Stratford
dolts to giggle at What! These legs, that have put on the very gentleman
in proud Verona's streets, laid in Stratford's common stocks, like a
silly apprentice's slouching heels? Nay, nay; some one should taste old
Bless-his-heart here first!" and with that he clapped his hand upon the
hilt of his poniard, with a wonderful swaggering tilt of his shoulders.
"Dost take me, boy?"

"Why, sir," hesitated Nick, no little awed by the stranger's wild words
and imperious way, "ye surely are the master-player."

"There!" cried the stranger, whirling about, as if defying some one in
the hedge. "Who said I could not act? Why, see, he took me at a touch!
Say, boy," he laughed, and turned to Nick, "thou art no fool. Why, boy,
I say I love thee now for this, since what hath passed in Stratford. A
murrain on the town! Dost hear me, boy?--a black murrain on the town!"
And all at once he made such a fierce stride toward Nick, gritting his
white teeth, and clapping his hand upon his poniard, that Nick drew back
afraid of him.

[Illustration: "'WHAT! HOW NOW?' CRIED THE STRANGER, SHARPLY. 'DOST LIKE
OR LIKE ME NOT?'"]

"But nay," hissed the stranger, and spat with scorn, "a town like
that is its own murrain--let it sicken on itself!"

He struck an attitude, and waved his hand as if he were talking quite as
much to the trees and sky as he was to Nick Attwood, and looked about
him as if waiting for applause. Then all at once he laughed,--a
rollicking, merry laugh,--and threw off his furious manner as one does
an old coat. "Well, boy," said he, with a quiet smile, looking kindly at
Nick, "thou art a right stanch little friend to all of us stage-players.
And I thank thee for it in Will Shakspere's name; for he is the sweetest
fellow of us all."

His voice was simple, frank, and free--so different from the mad tone in
which he had just been ranting that Nick caught his breath
with surprise.

"Nay, lad, look not so dashed," said the master-player, merrily; "that
was only old Jem Burbage's mighty tragic style; and I--I am only Gaston
Carew, hail-fellow-well-met with all true hearts. Be known to me, lad;
what is thy name? I like thy open, pretty face."

Nick flushed. "Nicholas Attwood is my name, sir."

"Nicholas Attwood? Why, it is a good name. Nick Attwood,--young Nick,--I
hope Old Nick will never catch thee--upon my word I do, and on the
remnant of mine honour! Thou hast taken a player's part like a man, and
thou art a good fellow, Nicholas Attwood, and I love thee. So thou art
going to Coventry to see the players act? Surely thine is a nimble wit
to follow fancy nineteen miles. Come; I am going to Coventry to join my
fellows. Wilt thou go with me, Nick, and dine with us this night at the
best inn in all Coventry--the Blue Boar? Thou hast quite plucked up my
downcast heart for me, lad, indeed thou hast; for I was sore of
Stratford town--and I shall not soon forget thy plucky fending for our
own sweet Will. Come, say thou wilt go with me."

"Indeed, sir," said Nick, bowing again, his head all in a whirl of
excitement at this wonderful adventure, "indeed I will, and that right
gladly, sir." And with heart beating like a trip-hammer he walked along,
cap in hand, not knowing that his head was bare.

The master-player laughed a simple, hearty laugh. "Why, Nick," said he,
laying his hand caressingly upon the boy's shoulder, "I am no such great
to-do as all that--upon my word, I'm not! A man of some few parts,
perhaps, not common in the world; but quite a plain fellow, after all.
Come, put off this high humility and be just friendly withal. Put on thy
cap; we are but two good faring-fellows here."

So Nick put on his cap, and they went on together, Nick in the seventh
heaven of delight.

About a mile beyond Stratford, Welcombe wood creeps down along the left.
Just beyond, the Dingles wind irregularly up from the foot-path below to
the crest of Welcombe hill, through straggling clumps and briery
hollows, sweet with nodding bluebells, ash, and hawthorn.

Nick and the master-player paused a moment at the top to catch their
breath and to look back.

Stratford and the valley of the Avon lay spread before them like a
picture of peace, studded with blossoming orchards and girdled with
spring. Northward the forest of Arden clad the rolling hills. Southward
the fields of Feldon stretched away to the blue knolls beyond which lay
Oxford and Northamptonshire. The ragged stretches of Snitterfield downs
scrambled away to the left; and on the right, beyond Bearley, were the
wooded uplands where Guy of Warwick and Heraud of Arden slew the wild ox
and the boar. And down through the midst ran the Avon southward, like a
silver ribbon slipped through Kendal green, to where the Stour comes
down, past Luddington, to Bidford, and away to the misty hills.

"Why," exclaimed the master-player--"why, upon my word, it is a fair
town--as fair a town as the heart of man could wish. Wish? I wish 't
were sunken in the sea, with all its pack of fools! Why," said he,
turning wrathfully upon Nick, "that old Sir Thingumbob of thine, down
there, called me a caterpillar on the kingdom of England, a vagabond,
and a common player of interludes! Called me vagabond! Me! Why, I have
more good licenses than he has wits. And as to Master Bailiff Stubbes, I
have permits to play from more justices of the peace than he can shake a
stick at in a month of Sundays!" He shook his fist wrathfully at the
distant town, and gnawed his mustache until one side pointed up and the
other down. "But, hark 'e, boy, I'll have my vengeance on them all--ay,
that will I, upon my word, and on the remnant of mine honour--or else my
name's not Gaston Carew!"

"Is it true, sir," asked Nick, hesitatingly, "that they despitefully
handled you?"

"With their tongues, ay," said Carew, bitterly; "but not otherwise." He
clapped his hand upon his poniard, and threw back his head defiantly.
"They dared not come to blows--they knew my kind! Yet John Shakspere is
no bad sort--he knoweth what is what. But Master Bailiff Stubbes, I
ween, is a long-eared thing that brays for thistles. I'll thistle him!
He called Will Shakspere rogue. Hast ever looked through a red glass?"

"Nay," said Nick.

"Well, it turns the whole world red. And so it is with Master Stubbes.
He looks through a pair of rogue's eyes and sees the whole world rogue.
Why, boy," cried the master-player, vehemently, "he thought to buy my
tongue! Marry, if tongues were troubles he has bought himself a peck!
What! Buy my silence? Nay, he'll see a deadly flash of silence when I
come to my Lord the Admiral again!"




CHAPTER VII


"WELL SUNG, MASTER SKYLARK!"

It was past high noon, and they had long since left Warwick castle far
behind. "Nicholas," said the master-player, in the middle of a stream of
amazing stories of life in London town, "there is Blacklow knoll." He
pointed to a little hill off to the left.

Nick stared; he knew the tale: how grim old Guy de Beauchamp had Piers
Gaveston's head upon that hill for calling him the Black Hound of Arden.

"Ah!" said Carew, "times have changed since then, boy, when thou couldst
have a man's head off for calling thee a name--or I would have yon
Master Bailiff Stubbes's head off short behind the ears--and Sir Thomas
Lucy's too!" he added, with a sudden flash of anger, gritting his teeth
and clenching his hand upon his poniard. "But, Nicholas, hast
anything to eat?"

"Nothing at all, sir."

Master Carew pulled from his pouch some barley-cakes and half a small
Banbury cheese, yellow as gold and with a keen, sharp savour. "'Tis
enough for both of us," said he, as they came to a shady little wood
with a clear, mossy-bottomed spring running down into a green meadow
with a mild noise, murmuring among the stones. "Come along, Nicholas;
we'll eat it under the trees."

He had a small flask of wine, but Nick drank no wine, and went down to
the spring instead. There was a wild bird singing in a bush there, and
as he trotted down the slope it hushed its wandering tune. Nick took the
sound up softly, and stood by the wet stones a little while, imitating
the bird's trilling note, and laughing to hear it answer timidly, as if
it took him for some great new bird without wings. Cocking its shy head
and watching him shrewdly with its beady eye, it sat, almost persuaded
that it was only size which made them different, until Nick clapped his
cap upon his head and strolled back, singing as he went.

It was only the thread of an old-fashioned madrigal which he had often
heard his mother sing, with quaint words long since gone out of style
and hardly to be understood, and between the staves a warbling, wordless
refrain which he had learned out on the hills and in the
fields, picked up from a bird's glad-throated morning-song.

He had always sung the plain-tunes in church without taking any
particular thought about it; and he sang easily, with a clear young
voice which had a full, flute-like note in it like the high, sweet song
of a thrush singing in deep woods.

Gaston Carew, the master-player, was sitting with his back against an
oak, placidly munching the last of the cheese, when Nick began to sing.
He started, straightening up as if some one had called him suddenly out
of a sound sleep, and, turning his head, listened eagerly.

Nick mocked the wild bird, called again with a mellow, warbling trill,
and then struck up the quaint old madrigal with the bird's song running
through it. Carew leaped to his feet, with a flash in his dark eyes. "My
soul! my soul!" he exclaimed in an excited undertone. "It is not--nay,
it cannot be--why, 'tis--it is the boy! Upon my heart, he hath a skylark
prisoned in his throat! _Well sung, well sung, Master Skylark!"_ he
cried, clapping his hands in real delight, as Nick came singing up the
bank. "Why, lad, I vow I thought thou wert up in the sky somewhere, with
wings to thy back! Where didst thou learn that wonder-song?"

Nick colored up, quite taken aback. "I do na know, sir," said he;
"mother learned me part, and the rest just came, I think, sir."

The master-player, his whole face alive and eager, now stared at
Nicholas Attwood as fixedly as Nick had stared at him.

It was a hearty little English lad he saw, about eleven years of age,
tall, slender, trimly built, and fair. A gray cloth cap clung to the
side of his curly yellow head, and he wore a sleeveless jerkin of
dark-blue serge, gray home-spun hose, and heelless shoes of russet
leather. The white sleeves of his linen shirt were open to the elbow,
and his arms were lithe and brown. His eyes were frankly clear and
blue, and his red mouth had a trick of smiling that went straight to a
body's heart.

"Why, lad, lad," cried Carew, breathlessly, "thou hast a very fortune in
thy throat!"

Nick looked up in great surprise; and at that the master-player broke
off suddenly and said no more, though such a strange light came creeping
into his eyes that Nick, after meeting his fixed stare for a moment,
asked uneasily if they would not better be going on.

Without a word the master-player started. Something had come into his
head which seemed to more than fill his mind; for as he strode along he
whistled under his breath and laughed softly to himself. Then again he
snapped his fingers and took a dancing step or two across the road, and
at last fell to talking aloud to himself, though Nick could not make out
a single word he said, for it was in some foreign language.

"Nicholas," he said suddenly, as they passed the winding lane that leads
away to Kenilworth--"Nicholas, dost know any other songs like that?"
