The squadron, consisting of four galleys, sailed for Cyprus; where
Pisani had just endeavoured, without success, to expel the Genoese from
Famagosta. It was towards the end of August that they effected a
junction with his fleet. Pisani received Francis with great warmth,
and, in the presence of many officers, remarked that he was glad to see
that the republic was, at last, appointing men for their merits, and
not, as heretofore, allowing family connection and influence to be the
chief passport to their favour.

For two months the fleet sailed among the islands of the Levant, and
along the shores of Greece, Istria, and Dalmatia; hoping to find the
Genoese fleet, but altogether without success. In November, when they
were on the coast of Istria, winter set in with extraordinary severity,
and the frost was intense. Pisani wrote to his government asking
permission to bring the fleet into Venice until the spring. The
seignory, however, refused his request, for they feared that, were it
known that their fleet had come into port for the winter, the Genoese
would take advantage of its absence to seize upon some of the islands
belonging to Venice, and to induce the inhabitants of the cities of
Istria and Dalmatia, always ready for revolt, to declare against her.

The first indications of the winter were more than verified. The cold
was altogether extraordinary; and out of the nineteen galleys of
Pisani, only six were fit to take the sea, with their full complement
of men, when the spring of 1379 began. Many of the vessels had been
disabled by storms. Numbers of the men had died, more had been sent
home invalided, and it was only by transferring the men from the other
vessels to the six in the best condition, that the crews of the latter
were made up to their full strength.

As soon as the terrible frost broke, Pisani received a reinforcement of
twelve ships from Venice, these being, for the most part, built and
equipped at the cost of his personal friends, Polani having contributed
two of the number. With the eighteen sail, Pisani put to sea to
prosecute a fresh search for the Genoese admiral, Doria, and his fleet.

The Pluto was one of the six vessels which remained in good condition
at the end of the winter, thanks, in no small degree, to the energy and
care which Francis had bestowed in looking after the welfare of the
crew. In the most bitter weather, he had himself landed with the boats,
to see that firewood was cut and brought off in abundance, not only for
the officers' cabins, but to warm that portion of the ship inhabited by
the men. Knowing that Polani would not grudge any sum which might be
required, he obtained from his agents ample supplies of warm clothing
and bedding for the men, occupying himself incessantly for their
welfare, while the captain and other officers passed their time in
their warm and comfortable cabins. Francis induced Matteo, and several
of his comrades, to brave the weather as he did, and to exert
themselves for the benefit of the men; and the consequence was, that
while but few of the other ships retained enough men to raise their
sails in case of emergency, the strength of the crew of the Pluto was
scarcely impaired at the termination of the winter.

The admiral, on paying a visit of inspection to the ship, was greatly
struck with the contrast which the appearance of the crew afforded to
that of the other galleys, and warmly complimented the commander on the
condition of his men. The captain received the praise as if it was
entirely due to himself, and said not a single word of the share which
Francis had had in bringing it about. Matteo was most indignant at this
injustice towards his friend, and managed that, through a relative
serving in the admiral's own ship, a true report of the case should
come to Pisani's ears.

Francis was in no way troubled at the captain's appropriation of the
praise due to himself. There had not, from the time he sailed, been any
cordiality between Francis and the other officers. These had been
selected for the position solely from family influence, and none of
them were acquainted with the working of a ship.

In those days, not only in Venice but in other countries, naval battles
were fought by soldiers rather than sailors. Nobles and knights, with
their retainers, embarked on board a ship for the purpose of fighting,
and of fighting only, the management of the vessel being carried on
entirely by sailors under their own officers. Thus, neither the
commander of the force on board the galley, nor any of his officers,
with the exception of Francis, knew anything whatever about the
management of the ship, nor were capable of giving orders to the crew.
Among the latter were some who had sailed with Francis in his first two
voyages, and these gave so excellent a report of him to the rest, that
they were from the first ready to obey his orders as promptly as those
of their own sub-officer.

Francis concerned himself but little with the ill will that was shown
him by the officers. He knew that it arose from jealousy, not only of
the promotion he, a foreigner and a junior in years, had received over
them, but of the fact that he had already received the thanks of the
republic for the services he had rendered, and stood high in the favour
of the admiral, who never lost an opportunity of showing the interest
he had in him. Had the hostility shown itself in any offensive degree
Francis would at once have resented it; but Matteo, and some of those
on board, who had been his comrades in the fencing rooms, had given
such reports of his powers with his weapons, that even those most
opposed to him thought it prudent to observe a demeanour of outward
politeness towards him.

For three months the search for the Genoese fleet was ineffectual. A
trip had been made along the coast of Apulia, and the fleet had
returned to Pola with a large convoy of merchant ships loaded with
grain, when on the 7th of May Doria appeared off the port, with
twenty-five sail.

But Pisani was now by no means anxious to fight. Zeno was away with a
portion of the fleet, and although he had received reinforcements, he
numbered but twenty-one vessels, and a number of his men were laid up
with sickness. The admiral, however, was not free to follow out the
dictates of his own opinions. The Venetians had a mischievous habit,
which was afterwards adopted by the French republic, of fettering their
commanders by sea and land by appointing civilian commissioners, or, as
they were termed in Venice, proveditors, who had power to overrule the
nominal commander. When, therefore, Pisani assembled a council of war,
and informed them of his reasons for wishing to remain on the defensive
until the return of Zeno, he was overruled by the proveditors, who not
only announced themselves unanimously in favour of battle, but sneered
at Pisani's prudence as being the result of cowardice. Pisani in his
indignation drew his sword, and would have attacked the proveditors on
the spot, had he not been restrained by his captains.

However, the council decided upon instant battle, and Pisani was
forced, by the rules of the service, at once to carry their decision
into effect. Ascending the poop of his galley, he addressed in a loud
voice the crews of the ships gathered around him.

"Remember, my brethren, that those who will now face you, are the same
whom you vanquished with so much glory on the Roman shore. Do not let
the name of Luciano Doria terrify you. It is not the names of
commanders that will decide the conflict, but Venetian hearts and
Venetian hands. Let him that loves Saint Mark follow me."

The men received the address with a shout, and as soon as the
commanders had regained their galleys, the fleet moved out to attack
the enemy. The fight was a furious one, each vessel singling out an
opponent and engaging her hand to hand.

Carlo Bottini was killed early in the fight, and Francis succeeded to
the command. His galley had grappled with one of the largest of the
Genoese vessels, and a desperate conflict went on. Sometimes the
Venetians gained a footing on the deck of the Genoese, sometimes they
were driven back, and the Genoese in turn poured on board, but no
decisive advantage was gained on either side after an hour's fighting.
The Genoese crew was numerically much stronger than that of the Pluto,
and although Francis, with Matteo and his comrades, headed their men
and cheered them on, they could make no impression on the ranks of the
enemy.

Suddenly, the Genoese threw off the grapnels that attached the two
ships, and hoisting their sails, sheered off. Francis looked round to
see the cause of this sudden manoeuvre, and perceived for the first
time that the Genoese vessels were all in flight, with the Venetians
pressing closely upon them. Sails were at once hoisted, and the Pluto
joined in the chase.

But the flight was a feigned one, and it was only designed to throw the
Venetian rank into confusion. After sailing for two miles, the Genoese
suddenly turned, and fell upon their pursuers as they came up in
straggling order.

The result was decisive. Many of the Venetian ships were captured
before the rest came up to take part in the battle. Others were hemmed
in by numerous foes. Pisani, after fighting until he saw that all was
lost, made the signal for the ships to withdraw from the conflict, and
he himself, with six galleys, succeeded in fighting his way through the
enemy's fleet, and gained a refuge in the port of Parenzo.

All the rest were taken. From seven to eight hundred Venetians perished
in the fight, two thousand four hundred were taken prisoners, twelve
commanders were killed, and five captured. The Genoese losses were also
severe, and Doria himself was among the slain, having been killed by a
spear thrust by Donato Zeno, commander of one of the galleys, almost at
the moment of victory.

The Pluto had defended herself, for a long time, against the attacks of
three of the Genoese galleys, and had repeatedly endeavoured to force
her way out of the throng, but the Genoese held her fast with their
grapnels, and at last the greater part of her crew were driven down
below, and Francis, seeing the uselessness of further resistance,
ordered the little group, who were now completely pent in by the
Genoese, to lower their weapons. All were more or less severely
wounded, and were bleeding from sword cuts and thrusts.

"This is an evil day for Venice," Matteo said, as, having been deprived
of their weapons, the prisoners were thrust below. "I heard the Genoese
say that only six of our galleys have escaped, all the rest have been
taken. We were the last ship to surrender, that's a comfort anyhow."

"Now, Matteo, before you do anything else, let me bind up your wounds.
You are bleeding in two or three places."

"And you are bleeding from something like a dozen, Francisco, so you
had better let me play the doctor first."

"The captain is always served last, so do as you are told, and strip
off your doublet.

"Now, gentlemen," he said, turning to the other officers, "let each of
us do what we can to dress the wounds of others. We can expect no care
from the Genoese leeches, who will have their hands full, for a long
time to come, with their own men. There are some among us who will soon
bleed to death, unless their wounds are staunched. Let us, therefore,
take the most serious cases first, and so on in rotation until all have
been attended to."

It was fortunate for them that in the hold, in which they were
confined, there were some casks of water; for, for hours the Genoese
paid no attention whatever to their prisoners, and the wounded were
beginning to suffer agonies of thirst, when the barrels were
fortunately discovered. The head of one was knocked in, and some
shallow tubs, used for serving the water to the crew, filled, and the
men knelt down and drank by turns from these. Many were too enfeebled
by their wounds to rise, and their thirst was assuaged by dipping
articles of clothing into the water, and letting the fluid from these
run into their mouths.

It was not until next morning that the prisoners were ordered to come
on deck. Many had died during the night. Others were too weak to obey
the summons. The names of the rest were taken, and not a little
surprise was expressed, by the Genoese officers, at the extreme youth
of the officer in command of the Pluto.

"I was only the second in command," Francis said in answer to their
questions. "Carlo Bottini was in command of the ship, but he was killed
at the commencement of the fight."

"But how is it that one so young came to be second? You must belong to
some great family to have been thus pushed forward above men so much
your senior.

"It was a wise choice nevertheless," the commander of one of the
galleys which had been engaged with the Pluto said, "for it is but
justice to own that no ship was better handled, or fought, in the
Venetian fleet. They were engaged with us first, and for over an hour
they fought us on fair terms, yielding no foot of ground, although we
had far more men than they carried. I noticed this youth fighting
always in the front line with the Venetians, and marvelled at the
strength and dexterity with which he used his weapons, and afterwards,
when there were three of us around him, he fought like a boar
surrounded by hounds. I am sure he is a brave youth, and well worthy
the position he held, to whatsoever he owed it."

"I belong to no noble family of Venice," Francis said. "My name is
Francis Hammond, and my parents are English."

"You are not a mercenary, I trust?" the Genoese captain asked
earnestly.

"I am not," Francis replied. "I am a citizen of Venice, and my name is
inscribed in her books, as my comrades will vouch."

"Right glad am I that it is so," the Genoese said, "for Pietro Doria,
who is now, by the death of his brother, in chief command, has ordered
that every mercenary found among the prisoners shall today be slain."

"It is a brutal order," Francis said fearlessly, "whosoever may have
given it! A mercenary taken in fair fight has as much right to be held
for ransom or fair exchange as any other prisoner; and if your admiral
thus breaks the laws of war, there is not a free lance, from one end of
Italy to the other, but will take it up as a personal quarrel."

The Genoese frowned at the boldness with which Francis spoke, but at
heart agreed in the sentiments he expressed; for among the Genoese
officers, generally, there was a feeling that this brutal execution in
cold blood was an impolitic, as well as a disgraceful deed.

The officers were now placed in the fore hold of the ship, the crew
being confined in the after hold. Soon afterwards, they knew by the
motion of the vessel that sail had been put on her.

"So we are on our way to a Genoese prison, Francisco," Matteo said. "We
had a narrow escape of it before, but this time I suppose it is our
fate."

"There is certainly no hope of rescue, Matteo. It is too early, as yet,
to say whether there is any hope of escape. The prospect looked darker
when I was in the hands of Ruggiero, but I managed to get away. Then I
was alone and closely guarded, now we have in the ship well nigh two
hundred friends; prisoners like ourselves, it is true, but still to be
counted on. Then, too, the Genoese are no doubt so elated with their
triumph, that they are hardly likely to keep a very vigilant guard over
us. Altogether, I should say that the chances are in our favour. Were I
sure that the Pluto is sailing alone, I should be very confident that
we might retake her, but probably the fifteen captured ships are
sailing in company, and would at once come to the aid of their comrades
here, directly they saw any signs of a conflict going on, and we could
hardly hope to recapture the ship without making some noise over it."

"I should think not," Matteo agreed.

"Then again, Matteo, even if we find it impossible to get at the crew,
and with them to recapture the ship, some chance may occur by which you
and I may manage to make our escape."

"If you say so, Francisco, I at once believe it. You got us all out of
the scrape down at Girgenti. You got Polani's daughters out of a worse
scrape when they were captives on San Nicolo; and got yourself out of
the worst scrape of all when you escaped from the grip of Ruggiero
Mocenigo. Therefore, when you say that there is a fair chance of escape
out of this business, I look upon it as almost as good as done."

"It is a long way from that, Matteo," Francis laughed. "Still, I hope
we may manage it somehow. I have the greatest horror of a Genoese
prison, for it is notorious that they treat their prisoners of war
shamefully, and I certainly do not mean to enter one, if there is the
slightest chance of avoiding it. But for today, Matteo, I shall not
even begin to think about it. In the first place, my head aches with
the various thumps it has had; in the second, I feel weak from loss of
blood; and in the third, my wounds smart most amazingly."

"So do mine," Matteo agreed. "In addition, I am hungry, for the bread
they gave us this morning was not fit for dogs, although I had to eat
it, as it was that or nothing."

"And now, Matteo, I shall try to get a few hours' sleep. I did not
close my eyes last night, from the pain of my wounds, but I think I
might manage to drop off now."

The motion of the vessel aided the effect of the bodily weakness that
Francis was feeling, and in spite of the pain of his wounds he soon
went off into a sound sleep. Once or twice he woke, but hearing no
voices or movement, he supposed his companions were all asleep, and
again went off, until a stream of light coming in from the opening of
the hatchway thoroughly roused him. Matteo, who was lying by his side,
also woke and stretched himself, and there was a general movement among
the ten young men who were their comrades in misfortune.

"Here is your breakfast," a voice from above the hatchway said, and a
basket containing bread and a bucket of water was lowered by ropes.

"Breakfast!" Matteo said. "Why, it is not two hours since we
breakfasted last."

"I suspect it is twenty-two, Matteo. We have had a very long sleep, and
I feel all the better of it. Now, let us divide the liberal breakfast
our captors have given us; fortunately there is just enough light
coming down from those scuttles to enable us to do so fairly."

There was a general laugh, from his comrades, at the cheerful way in
which Francis spoke. Only one of them had been an officer on the Pluto.
The rest were, like Matteo, volunteers of good families. There was a
good deal of light-hearted jesting over their meal. When it was over,
Francis said:

"Now let us hold a council of war."

"You are better off than Pisani was, anyhow," one of the young men
said, "for you are not hampered with proveditors, and anything that
your captaincy may suggest will, you may be sure, receive our assent."

"I am your captain no longer," Francis replied. "We are all prisoners
now, and equal, and each one has a free voice and a free vote."

"Then I give my voice and vote at once, Francisco," Matteo said, "to
the proposal that you remain our captain, and that we obey you, as
cheerfully and willingly as we should if you were on the poop of the
Pluto, instead of being in the hold. In the first place, at Carlo's
death you became our captain by right, so long as we remain together;
and in the second place you have more experience than all of us put
together, and a very much better head than most of us, myself included.

"Therefore, comrades, I vote that Messer Francisco Hammond be still
regarded as our captain, and obeyed as such."

There was a general chorus of assent, for the energy which Francis had
displayed throughout the trying winter, and the manner in which he had
led the crew during the desperate fighting, had won for him the regard
and the respect of them all.

"Very well, then," Francis said. "If you wish it so I will remain your
leader, but we will nevertheless hold our council of war. The question
which I shall first present to your consideration is, which is the best
way to set about retaking the Pluto?"

There was a burst of laughter among the young men. The matter of fact
way in which Francis proposed, what seemed to them an impossibility,
amused them immensely.

"I am quite in earnest," Francis went on, when the laughter had
subsided. "If it is possibly to be done, I mean to retake the Pluto,
and I have very little doubt that it is possible, if we set about it in
the right way. In the first place, we may take it as absolutely certain
that we very considerably outnumber the Genoese on board. They must
have suffered in the battle almost as much as we did, and have had
nearly as many killed and wounded. In the second place, if Doria
intends to profit by his victory, he must have retained a fair amount
of fighting men on board each of his galleys, and, weakened as his
force was by the losses of the action, he can spare but a comparatively
small force on board each of the fifteen captured galleys. I should
think it probable that there are not more than fifty men in charge of
the Pluto, and we number fully three times that force. The mere fact
that they let down our food to us by ropes, instead of bringing it
down, showed a consciousness of weakness."

"What you say is quite true," Paolo Parucchi, the other officer of the
Pluto, said; "but they are fifty well-armed men, and we are a hundred
and fifty without arms, and shut down in the hold, to which must be
added the fact that we are cut off from our men, and our men from us.
They are, as it were, without a head to plan, while we are without arms
to strike."

A murmur of approval was heard among some of the young men.

"I do not suppose that there are no difficulties in our way," Francis
said quietly; "or that we have only, next time the hatch is opened, to
say to those above, 'Gentlemen of Genoa, we are more numerous than you
are, and we therefore request you to change places with us
immediately.' All I have asserted, so far, is that we are sufficiently
strong to retake the ship, if we get the opportunity. What we have now
to settle, is how that opportunity is to come about.

"To begin with, has anyone a dagger or knife which has escaped the eye
of our searchers?"

No one replied.

"I was afraid that nothing had escaped the vigilance of those who
appropriated our belongings. As, however, we have no weapons or tools,
the next thing is to see what there is, in the hold, which can be
turned to account. It is fortunate we are on board the Pluto, instead
of being transferred to another ship, as we already know all about her.
There are some iron bolts driven in along a beam at the farther end.
They have been used, I suppose, at some time or other for hanging the
carcasses of animals from. Let us see whether there is any chance of
getting some of them out."

The iron pegs, however, were so firmly driven into the beam, that all
their efforts failed to move them in the slightest.

"We will give that up for the present," Francis said, "and look round
for something more available."

But with the exception of the water casks, the closest search failed to
find anything in the hold.

"I do not know whether the iron hoops of a cask would be of any use,"
Matteo said.

"Certainly they would be of use, if we get them off, Matteo."

"There is no difficulty about that," one of the others said, examining
