
With that victory ended the second Hundred Years' War of England with
France, which began with the War of the Spanish Succession (1704)
under Marlborough (S508).  At the outset the object of that war was,
first, to humble the power of Louis XIV that threatened the
independence of England; and, secondly, to protect those American
colonies which later separated fromthe mother country and became,
partly through French help, the republic of the United States.

560. Increase of the National Debt; Taxation.

Owing to these hundred years and more of war (S559) the National Debt
of GReat Britain and Ireland (S503), which in 1688 was much less than
a million of pounds, had now reached the enormous amount of over nine
hundred millions (or $4,500,000,000), bearing yearly interest at the
rate of more than $160,000,000.[1] So great had been the strain on the
finances of the country, that the Bank of England (S503) suspended
payment, and many heavy failures occurred.  In addition to this, a
succession of bad harvests sent up the price of wheat to such a point
that at one time an ordinary-sized loaf of bread cost the farm laborer
more than half a day's wages.

[1] Encyclopaedia Britannica, under "National Debt."

Taxes had gone on increasing until it seemed as though the people
could no longer endure the burden.  As Sydney Smith declared, with
entire truth, there were duties on everything.  They began, he said,
in childhood, with "the boy's taxed top"; they followed to old age,
until at last "the dying Englishman, pouring his taxed medicine into a
taxed spoon, flung himself back on a taxed bed, and died in the arms
of an apothecary who had paid a tax of a hundred pounds for the
privilege of putting him to death."[1]

[1] Sydney Smith's Essays, "Review of Seybert's Annals of the United
    States."

561. The Irish Parliament; the Irish Rebellion (1798).

For a century after the battle of the Boyne (S500) Ireland can hardly
be said to have had a history.  The iron hand of English despotism had
crushed the spirit out of the inhabitants, and they suffered in
silence.  During the first part of the eighteenth century the
destitution of the people was so great that Dean Swift, in bitter
mockery of the government's neglect, published what he called his
"Modest Proposal." He suggested that the misery of the half-starved
peasants might be relieved by allowing them to eat their own children
or else sell them to the butchers.

But a new attempt was now made to improve the political condition of
the wretched country.  That distinguished statesman, Edmund Burke
(S550), had already tried to secure a fair measure of commercial
liberty for the island, but without success.  Since the reign of Henry
VII the so-called "free Parliament" of Ireland had been bound hand and
foot by Poynings's Act (S329, note 1).  The eminent Protestant Irish
orator, Henry Grattan, now urged the repeal of that law with all his
impassioned eloquence.  He was seconded in his efforts by the powerful
influence of Fox in the English House of Commons.  Finally, the
obnoxious act was repealed (1782), and a, so-called, independent Irish
Parliament, to which Grattan was elected, met in Dublin.

But although more than three quarters of the Irish people were
Catholics, no person of that faith was permitted to sit in the new
Parliament or to vote for the election of a member.  This was not the
only injustice, for many Protestants in Belfast and the north of
Ireland had no right to be represented in it.  Such a state of things
could not fail to excite angry protest, and Grattan, with other
Protestants in Parliament, labored for reform.  The discontent finally
led to the organization of an association called the "Society of
United Irishmen." The leaders of that movement hoped to secure the
cooperation of Catholics and Protestants, and to obtain fair and full
representation for both in the Irish Parliament.  A measure of
political reform was secured (1793), but it did not go far enough to
give the relief desired.

Eventually the Society of United Irishmen became a revolutionary
organization which sought, by the help of the French, to make Ireland
an independent republic.  The sprigs of shamrock or shamrock-colored
badges displayed by these men gave a new significance to "the wearing
of the green."[1] By this time many Protestants had withdrawn from the
organization, and many Catholics refused to ask help from the French
revolutionary party, who were hostile to all churches and to all
religion.

[1] See a quotation from the famous Irish song, "The Wearin' o' the
Green," in the "Shan Van Vocht," in the "Heroic Ballads," published by
Ginn and Company.

Then a devoted band of Catholics in the south of Ireland resolved to
rise and, trusting to their own right arms, to strike for
independence.  A frightful rebellion broke out (1798), marked by all
the intense hatred springing from rival races and rival creeds, and
aggravated by the peasants' hatred of oppressive landlords.  Both
sides perpetuated horrible atrocities.  The government employed a
large force of Orangemen,[2] or extreme Protestants, to help suppress
the insurrection.  They did their work with remorseless cruelty.

[2] Orangemen: the Protestants of the north of Ireland, who had taken
the side of William of Orange in the Revolution of 1688-1689 (S499).
They wore an orange ribbon as their badge, to distinguish them from
the Catholic party, who wore green badges.

562. Union of Great Britain and Ireland, 1800; Emmet.

Matters now came to a crisis.  William Pitt, son of the late Earl of
Chatham (S550), was Prime Minister.  He believed that the best
interests of both Ireland and England demanded their political union.
He devoted all his energies to accomplishing the work.  The result was
that in the last year of the eighteenth century the English Government
succeeded, by the most unscrupulous use of money, in gaining the
desired end.  Lord Cornwallis, acting as Pitt's agent, confessed with
shame that he bought up a sufficient number of members of the Irish
Parliament to secure a vote in favor of union with Great Britain.  In
1800 the two countries were joined--in name at least--under the title
of the "United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland."[3]

[3] The first Parliament of the United Kingdom met in 1801.

Pitt used all his powerful influence to obtain for Ireland a full and
fair representation in the united Parliament (1801).  He urged that
Catholics as well as Protestants should be eligible for election to
that body.  But the King positively refused to listen to his Prime
Minister.  He even declared that it would be a violation of his
coronation oath for him to grant such a request.  The consequence was
that not a single Catholic was admitted to the Imperial Parliament
until nearly thirty years later (S573).

Two years after the first Imperial Parliament met in London the Irish
patriot, Robert Emmet, made a desperate effort to free his country
(1803).  To his mind the union of England with Ireland was simply "the
union of the shark with its prey." He staked his life on the cause of
independence; he lost, and paid the forfeit on the scaffold.

But notwithstanding Emmet's hatred of the union, it resulted
advantageously to Ireland in at least two respects.  First, more
permanent peace was secured to that distracted and long-suffering
country.  Secondly, the Irish people made decided gains commercially.
The duties on their farm products were removed, at least in large
degree, and the English ports hitherto closed against them were thrown
open.  The duties on their manufactured goods seem to have been taken
off at that time only in part.[1] Later, absolute freedom of trade was
secured.

[1] See May's "Constitutional History of England," Lecky's "England in
the Eighteenth Century"; but compare O'Connor Morris's work on
"Ireland, from 1798 to 1898," p.58.

563. "The Industrial Revolution" of the Eighteenth Century; Material
     Progress; Canals; the Steam Engine, 1785.

The reign of George III was in several directions one of marked
progress, especially in England.  Just after the King's accession the
Duke of Bridgewater constructed a canal from his coal mine in Worsley
to Manchester, a distance of seven miles.  Later, he extended it to
Liverpool; eventually it was widened and deepened and became the
"Manchester and Liverpool Ship Canal." The Duke of Bridgewater's work
was practically the commencement of a system which has since developed
to such a degree that the canals of England now extend nearly 5000
miles, and exceed in length its navigable rivers.  The two form such a
complete network of water communication that it is said no place in
the realm is more than fifteen miles distant from this means of
transportation, which connects all the large towns with each other and
with the chief ports.

In the last half of the eighteenth century James Watt obtained the
first patent (1769) for his improved steam engine (S521), but did not
succeed in making it a business success until 1785.  The story is
told[1] that he took a working model of it to show to the King.  His
Majesty patronizingly asked him, "Well, my man, what have you to
sell?" The inventor promptly answered, "What kings covet, may it
please your Majesty,--POWER!" The story is perhaps too good to be
true, but the fact of the "power" could not be denied,--power, too,
not simply mechanical, but, in its results, moral and political as
well.

[1] This story is told also of Boulton, Watt's partner.  See Smile's
"Lives of Boulton and Watt," p.1.  Newcomen had invented a rude steam
engine in 1705, which in 1712 came into use to some extent for pumping
water out of coal mines.  But his engine was too clumsy and too
wasteful of fuel to be used by manufacturers.  Boulton and Watt built
the first steam-engine works in England at Soho, a suburb of
Birmingham, in 1775; but it was not until 1785 that they began to do
sufficient business to make it evident that they were on their way to
success.

Such was the increase of machinery driven by steam, and such were the
improvements made by Hargreaves, Arkwright, and Crompton in machinery
for spinning and weaving cotton, that much distress arose among the
hand spinners and hand weavers.  The price of bread was growing higher
and higher, while in many districts skilled operatives working at home
could not earn by their utmost efforts eight shillings a week.  They
saw their hand labor supplanted by great cotton mills filled with
machinery driven by "monsters of iron and fire," which never grew
weary, which subsisted on water and coal, and never asked for wages.

Led by a man named Ludd (1811), the starving workmen attacked a number
of these mills, broke the machinery to pieces, and sometimes burned
the buildings.  The riots were at length suppressed, and a number of
the leaders executed; but a great change for the better was at hand,
and improved machinery driven by steam was soon to remedy the evils it
had seemingly created.  It led to an enormous demand for cotton.  This
helped to stimulate cotton growing in the United States of America as
well as to encourage the manufacture of cotton in Great Britain.

Up to this period the north of England had remained the poorest part
of the country.  The population was sparse, ignorant, and
unprosperous.  It was in the south that improvements originated.  In
the reign of Henry VIII, the North fought against the dissolution of
the monasteries (SS352, 357); in Elizabeth's reign it resisted
Protestantism; in that of George I it sided with the so-called
"Pretender" (S535).

But steam transformed an immense area.  Factories were built,
population increased, cities sprang up, and wealth grew apace.
Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds, Nottingham, Leicester, Sheffield, and
Liverpool made the North a new country.  (See Industrial Map of
England, p.10.)  Lancashire is the busiest cotton-manufacturing
district in Great Britain, and the saying runs that "what Lancashire
thinks to-day, England will think to-morrow." So much for James Watt's
POWER and its results.

564. Discover of Oxygen (1774); Introduction of Gas (1815).

Notwithstanding the progress that had been made in many departments of
knowledge, the science of chemistry remained almost stationary until
(1774) Dr. Joseph Priestley discovered oxygen, the most abundant, as
well as the most important, element in nature.

That discover "laid the foundation of modern chemical science." It
enlarged our knowledge of the composition of the atmosphere, of the
solid crust of the earth, and of water.  Furthermore, it revealed the
interesting fact that oxygen not only enters into the structure of all
forms of animal and vegetable life, but that no kind of life can exist
without it.  Finally, Priestley's great discovery proved to be of
direct practical utility, since the successful pursuit of innumerable
trades and manufactures, with the profitable separation of metals from
their ores, stands in close connection with the facts which his
experiments with oxygen made known.

As intellectual light spread, so also did material light.  In London,
up to near the close of the reign of George III, only a few feeble oil
lamps were in use.  Many miles of streets were dark and dangerous, and
highway robberies were frequent.  At length (1815) a company was
formed to light the city with gas.  After much opposition from those
who were in the whale-oil interest the enterprise succeeded.  The new
light, as Miss Martineau said, did more to prevent crime than all the
Government had accomplished since the days of Alfred.  It changed,
too, the whole aspect of the English capital, though it was only the
forerunner of the electric light, which has since changed it even
more.

The sight of the great city now, when viewed at night from Highgate
archway on the north, or looking down the Thames from Westminster
Bridge, is something never to be forgotten.  It gives one a realizing
sense of the immensity of "this province covered with houses," which
cannot be got so well in any other way.  It bring to mind, too, those
lines expressive of the contrasts of wealth and poverty, success and
failure, inevitable in such a place:

        "O gleaming lamps of London, that gem the city's crown,
         What fortunes lie within you, O lights of London town!
         .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .
         O cruel lamps of London, if tears your light could drown,
         Your victims' eyes would weep them, O lights of London town."[1]

[1] From the play, "The Lights of London."

The same year in which gas was introduced, Sir Humphry Davy invented
the miner's safety lamp.  Without seeking a patent, he generously gave
his invention to the world, finding his reward in the knowledge that
it would be the means of saving thousands of lives wherever men are
called to work underground.

565. Steam Navigation, 1807, 1819, 1840.

Since Watt had demonstrated the value of steam for driving machinery
(S563), a number of inventors had been experimenting with the new
power, in the hope that they might apply it to propelling vessels.  In
1807 Robert Fulton, an American, built the first successful steamboat,
and made the voyage from New York to Albany in it.  Shortly afterwards
his vessel began to make regular trips on the Hudson.  A number of
years later a similar boat began to carry passengers on the Clyde, in
Scotland.  Finally, in 1819, the bold undertaking was made of crossing
the Atlantic by steam.  An American steamship, the Savannah, of about
three hundred tons, set the example by a voyage from the United States
to Liverpool.  Dr. Lardner, an English scientist, had proved to his
own satisfaction that ocean steam navigation was impracticable.  The
book containing the doctor's demonstration was brought to America by
the Savannah on her return.

Twenty-one years afterward, in 1840, the Cunard Company established
the first regular line of ocean steamers.  They sailed between England
and the United States.  Since then fleets of steamers ranging from two
thousand to more than forty thousand tons each have been built.  They
now make passages from continent to continent with the regularity of
clockwork, and in fewer days than the ordinary sailing vessels
formerly required weeks.  The fact that during a period of more than
seventy years one of these lines has never lost a passenger is
conclusive proof that Providence is on the side of steam, when steam
has men that know how to handle it.

566. Literature; Art; Education; Travel; Dress.

The reign of George III is marked by a long list of names eminent in
letters and art.  First in point of time among these stands Dr. Samuel
Johnson, the compiler of the first English dictionary worthy of the
name, and that on which those of our own day are based to a
considerable extent.  He was also the author of the story of
"Rasselas,"--that notable satire on discontent and the search after
happiness.  Next stands Johnson's friend, Oliver Goldsmith, famous for
his genius, his wit, and his improvidence,--which was always getting
him into trouble,--but still more famous for his poems, and his novel,
"The Vicar of Wakefield."

Edward Gibbon, David Hume, author of the well-known "History of
England," and Adam Smith come next in time.  In 1776 Gibbon published
his "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," which after more than a
hundred years stands the ablest history of the subject in our
language.  In the same year Adam Smith issued "An Inquiry into the
Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations," which had a great effect
on legislation respecting commerce, trade, and finance.  During this
period, also, Sir William Blackstone became prominent as a writer on
law, and Edmund Burke, the distinguished orator and statesman, wrote
his "Reflections on the French Revolution."

The poets, Burns, Byron, Shelley, and Keats, with Sheridan, the orator
and dramatist, and Sterne, the humorist, belong to this reign; so,
too, does the witty satirist, Sydney Smith, and Sir Walter Scott,
whose works, like those of Shakespeare, have "made the dead past live
again." Then again, Maria Edgeworth and Jane Austen have left
admirable pictures of the age in their stories of Irish and English
life.  Coleridge and Wordsworth began to attract attention toward the
last of this period, and to be much read by those who loved the poetry
of thought and the poetry of nature; while, early in the next reign,
Charles Lamb published his delightful "Essays of Elia."

In art we have the first English painters and engravers.  Hogarth, who
died a few years after the beginning of the reign, was celebrated for
the coarse but perfect representations of low life and street scenes;
and his series of Election pictures with his "Beer Lane" and "Gin
Alley" are valuable for the insight into the history of the times.

The chief portrait painters were Reynolds, Lawrence, and Gainsborough,
the last of whom afterwards became noted for his landscapes.  They
were followed by Wilkie, whose pictures of "The Rent Day," "The
Reading of the Will," and many others, tell a story of interest to
every one who looks at them.

Last came Turner, who in some respects surpassed all former artists in
his power of reproducing scenes in nature.  At the same time, Bewick,
whose cuts used to be the delight of every child that read "Aesop's
Fables," gave a new impulse to wood engraving, while Flaxman rose to
be the leading English sculptor, and Wedgwood introduced useful and
beautiful articles of pottery.

In common-school education little advance had been made for many
generations.  In the country the great mass of the people were nearly
as ignorant as they were in the darkest part of the Middle Ages.
Hardly a peasant over forty years of age could be found who could read
a verse in the Bible, and not one in ten could write his name.

There were no cheap books or newspapers, and no proper system of
public instruction.  The poor seldom left the counties in which they
were born.  They knew nothing of what was going on in the world.
Their education was wholly of the practical kind which comes from work
and things, not from books and teachers; yet many of them with only
these simple helps found out two secrets which the highest culture
sometimes misses,--how to be useful and how to be happy.[1]

[1] See Wordsworth's poem "Resolution and Independence."

The ordinary means of travel were still very imperfect.  Stage-coaches
had been in use for more than a hundred and fifty years.  They crawled
along at the rate of about three miles an hour.  Mail coaches began to
run in 1784.  They attained a speed of six miles an hour, and later of
ten.  This was considered entirely satisfactory.

The close of George III's reign marks the beginning of the present
age.  It was indicated in many ways, and among others by the declining
use of sedan chairs, which had been the fashion for upwards of a
century, and by the change in dress.  Gentlemen were leaving off the
picturesque costumes of the past,--the cocked hats, elaborate wigs,
silk stockings, ruffles, velvet coats, and swords,--and gradually
putting on the plain democratic garb, sober in cut and color, by which
we know them to-day.

567. Last Days of George III.

George III died (1820) at the age of eighty-two.  During ten years he
had been blind, deaf, and crazy, having lost his reason not very long
after the jubilee, which celebrated the fiftieth year of his reign
(1809).  Once, in a lucid interval, he was found by the Queen singing
a hymn and playing an accompaniment on the harpsichord.

He then knelt and prayed aloud for her, for his family, and for the
nation; and in closing, for himself, that it might please God to avert
his heavy calamity, or grant him resignation to bear it.  Then he
burst into tears, and his reason again fled.[1] In consequence of the
incapacity of the King, his eldest son, the Prince of Wales, was
appointed regent (1811), and on the King's death came to the throne as
George IV.

[1] See Thackeray's "Four Georges."

568. Summary.

The long reign of George III covered sixty very eventful years.
During that time England lost her possessions in America, but gained
India and prepared the way for getting possession of New Zealand and
Australia.  During that period, also, Ireland was united to Great
Britain.  The wars with France, which lasted more than twenty years,
ended in the great naval victory of Trafalgar and the still greater
victory on the battlefield of Waterloo.  In consequence of these wars,
with that of the American Revolution, the National Debt of Great
Britain rose to a height which rendered the burden of taxation
well-nigh insupportable.

The second war with the United States in 1812 made America independent
on the sea, and eventually compelled England to give up her assumed
right to search American vessels.  The two greatest reforms of the
period were the abolition of the slave trade and the mitigation of the
laws against debt and crime; the chief material improvement was the
extension of canals and the application of steam to manufacturing and
to navigation.  The "Industrial Revolution" transformed the North of
England.

                        GEORGE IV--1820-1830

569. Accession and Character of George IV.

George IV, eldest son of the late King, came to the throne in his
fifty-eighth year; but, owing to his father's insanity, he had
virtually been King for nearly ten years (S567).  His habits of life
had made him a selfish, dissolute spendthrift, who, like Charles II,
cared only for pleasure.  Though while Prince of Wales he had received
for many years an income upwards of 100,000 pounds, which was largely
increased at a later period, yet he was always hopelessly in debt.

Parliament (1795) appropriated over 600,000 pounds to relieve him from
his most pressing creditors, but his wild extravagance soon involved
him in difficulties again, so that had it not been for help given by
the long-suffering taxpayers, His Royal Highness must have become as
bankrupt in purse as he was in character.

After his accession matters became worse rather than better.  At his
coronation, which cost the nation over 200,000 pounds, he appeared in
hired jewels, which he forgot to return, and which Parliament had to
pay for.  Not only did he waste the nation's money more recklessly
than ever, but he used whatever political influence he had to
opposesuch measures of reform as the times demanded.

570. Discontent; the "Manchester Massacre" (1819).

When (1811) George, then Prince of Wales, became regent (S567), he
desired to form a Whig ministry, not because he cared for Whig
principles (S479), but solely because he would thereby be acting in
opposition to his father's wishes.  Finding his purpose impracticable,
he accepted Tory rule (S479), and a Cabinet (S534) was formed with
Lord Liverpool as Prime Minister.  It had for its main object the
continued exclusion of Catholics from representation in Parliament
(S478).

Lord Liverpool was a dull, well-meaning man, who utterly failed to
comprehend the real tendency of the age.  He was the son of a commoner
who had been raised to the peerage.  He had always had a reputation
for honest obstinacy, and for little else.  After he became Premier, a
prominent French lady, who was visiting England, asked him one day,
"What has become of that VERY stupid man, Mr. Jenkinson?" "Madame,"
answered the unfortunate Prime Minister, "he is now Lord Liverpool."[1]

[1] Earl's "English Premiers," Vol. II.

From such a Cabinet or Government, which continued in power for
fifteen years, nothing but trouble could be expected.  The misery of
the country was great.  Food was selling at famine prices.  Thousands
were on the verge of starvation, and tens of thousands did not get
enough to eat.  Trade was seriously depressed, and multitudes were
unable to obtain work.  Under these circumstances, the suffering
masses undertook to hold public meetings to discuss the cause and cure
of these evils; but as violent speeches against the Government were
often made at the meetings, the authorities dispersed them on the
ground that they were seditious and tended to riot and rebellion.

Many large towns at this period had no voice in legislation.  At
Birmingham, which was one of this class, the citizens had met and
chosen, though without legal authority, a representative to
Parliament.  Machester, another important manufacturing town, now
determined to do the same thing.  The people were warned not to
assemble, but they persisted in doing so, on the ground that peaceful
discussion, with the election of a representative, was no violation of
law.  The meeting was held in St. Peter's Fields, and, through the
blundering of a magistrate, it ended in an attack by a body of troops,
by which many people were wounded an a number killed (1819).

571. The Six Acts (1819); the Conspiracy.

The bitter feeling caused by the "Manchester Massacre," or "Peterloo,"
as it was called, was still further aggravated by the passage of the
Six Acts (1819).  The object of these severe coercive measures was to
make it impossible for men to take any public action demanding
political reform.  They restricted freedom of speech, freedom of the
press, and the right of the people to assemble for the purpose of open
discussion of the course taken by the Government.  These harsh laws
coupled with other repressive measures taken by the Tories (S479), who
were still in power, led to the "Cato Street Conspiracy." Shortly
after the accession of George IV a few desperate men banded together,
and meeting in a stable in Cato Street, London, formed a plot to
murder Lord Liverpool and his entire cabinet at dinner at which all
the ministers were to be present.

The plot was discovered, and the conspirators were speedily disposed
of by the gallows or transportation, but nothing was done to relieve
the suffering which had provoked the intended crime.  No new
conspiracy was attempted, but in the course of the next ten years a
silent revolution took place, which, as we shall see later, obtained
for the people that fuller representation in Parliament which they had
hitherto vainly attempted to get (S582).

572. Queen Caroline.

While he was Prince of Wales, George IV had, contrary to law,
privately married Mrs. Fitzherbert (1785),[1] a Roman Catholic lady of
excellent character, and possessed of great beauty.  Ten years later,
partly through royal compulsion and partly to get money to pay off
some of his numerous debts, the Prince married his cousin, the
Princess Caroline of Brunswick.  The union proved a source of
unhappiness to both.  The Princess lacked both discretion and
delicacy, and her husband, who disliked her from the first, was
reckless and brutal toward her.

[1] By the Royal Marriage Act of 1772, no descendant of George II
could make a legal marriage without the consent of the reigning
sovereign, unless twenty-five years of age, and unless the marriage
was not objected to by Parliament.

He separated from her in a year's time, and as soon as she could, she
withdrew to the Continent.  When he became King he excluded Queen
Caroline's name from the Prayer Book, and next applied to Parliament
for a divorce on the ground of the Queen's unfaithfulness to her
marriage vows.

Henry Brougham, afterwards Lord Brougham, acted as the Queen's
counsel.  No sufficient evidence was brought against her, and the
ministry declined to take further action.  It was decided, however,
that she could not claim the honor of coronation, to which, as Queen
Consort, she had a right sanctioned by custom but not secured by law.
When the King was crowned (1821), no place was provided for her.  By
the advice of her counsel, she presented herself at the entrance of
Westminster Abbey as the coronation ceremony was about to begin; but,
by order of her husband, admission was refused, and she retired to
die, heartbroken, a few days after.

573. Three Great Reforms.

Seven years later (1828) the Duke of Wellington, a Tory (S479) in
politics, became Prime Minister.  His sympathies in all matters of
legislation were with the King, but he made a virtue of necessity, and
for the time acted with those who demanded reform.  The Corporation
Act (S472), which was originally passed in the reign of Charles II,
and had for its object the exclusion of Dissenters (S472) from all
town or corporate offices, was now repealed; henceforth a man might
become a mayor, alderman, or town officer, without belonging to the
Church of England.  At the same time the Test Act (S477), which had
also been passed in Charles II's reign to keep both Catholics and
Dissenters out of government offices, whether civil or military, was
repealed.  As a matter of fact "the teeth of both acts had long been
drawn" by by an annual Indemnity Act (1727).[1]

[1] This act virtually suspended the operation of the Corporation Act
(S472) and the Test Act against dissenters so that they could obtain
civil offices from which these two acts had excluded them.

In 1829 a still greater reform was carried.  For a long period the
Catholic Association had been laboring to obtain the abolition of the
laws which had been on the statute books for over a century and a
half, by which Catholics were excluded from the right to sit in
Parliament.  These laws, it will be remembered, were enacted at the
time of the alleged Popish Plot, and in consequence of the perjured
evidence given by Titus Oates (S478).[2] The King, and the Tory party
marshaled by the Duke of Wellington, strenuously resisted the repeal
of these statutes; but finally the Duke became convinced that further
opposition was useless.  He therefore suddenly changed about and
solely, as he declared, to avert civil war, took the lead in securing
the success of a measure which he heartily hated.

[2] See Sidney Smith's "Peter Plymley's Letters."

But at the same time that Catholics were admitted to both Houses of
Parliament, an act was passed raising the property qualification of a
very large class of small Irish landholders from 2 pounds to 10
pounds.  This measure deprived many thousands of their right to vote.
The law was enacted on the pretext that the small Irish landholders
would be influenced by their landlord or their priest.

Under the new order of things, Daniel O'Connell, an Irish gentleman of
an old and honorable family, and a man of distinguished ability, came
forward as leader of the Catholics.  After much difficulty he
succeeded in taking his seat in the House of Commons (1829).  He
henceforth devoted himself, though without avail, to the repeal of the
act uniting Ireland with England (S562), and to the restoration of an
independent Irish Parliament.

574. The New Police (1829).

Although London had now a population of a million and a half, it still
had no effective police.  The guardians of the peace at that date were
infirm old men, who spent their time dozing in sentry boxes, and had
neither the strength nor energy to be of service in any emergency.
The young fellows of fashion considered these venerable constables as
legitimate game.  They often amused themselves by upsetting the sentry
boxes with their occupants, leaving the latter helpless in the street,
kicking and struggling like turtles turned on their backs, and as
powerless to get on their feet again.

During the last year of the reign Sir Robert Peel got a bill passed
(1829) which oganized a new and thoroughly efficient police force,
properly equipped and uniformed.  Great was the outcry against this
innovation, and the "men in blue" were hooted at, not only by London
"roughs," but by respectable citizens, as "Bobbies" or "Peelers," in
derisive allusion to their founder.  But the "Bobbies," who carry no
visible club, were not to be jeered out of existence.  They did their
duty like men, and have continued to do it in a way which long since
gained for them the good will of all who care for the preservation of
law and order.

575. Death of the King (1830).

George IV died soon after the passage of the new Police Bill (1830).
Of him it may well be said, though in a very different sense from that
in which the expression was originally used, that "nothing in his life
became him like the leaving of it." During his ten years' reign he had
squandered enormous sums of money in gambling and dissipation, and had
done his utmost to block the wheels of political progress.

How far this son of an insane father (S567) was responsible, it may
not be for us to judge.  Walter Scott, who had a kind word for almost
every one, and especially for any one of the Tory party (S479), did
not fail to say something in praise of the generous good nature of his
friend George IV.  The sad thing is that his voice seems to have been
the only one.  In a whole nation the rest were silent; or, if they
spoke, it was neither to commend nor to defend, but to condemn.

576. Summary.

The legislative reforms of George IV's reign are its chief features.
The repeal of the Test and Corporation acts and the grant to Catholics
of the right to reenter Parliament were tardy measures of justice.
Neither the King nor his ministers deserve any credit for them, but,
none the less, they accomplished great and permanent good.

                        WILLIAM IV--1830-1837

577. Accession and Character of William IV.

As George IV left no heir, his brother William, a man of sixty-five,
now came to the throne.  He had passed most of his life on shipboard,
having been placed in the navy when a mere lad.  He was somewhat rough
in his manner, and cared nothing for the ceremony and etiquette that
were so dear to both George III and George IV.  His faults, however,
were on the surface.  He was frank, hearty, and a friend to the
people, to whom he was familiarly known as the "Sailor King."

578. Need of Reform in Parliamentary Representation.

From the beginning of this reign it was evident that the great
question which must soon come up for settlement was that of
parliamentary representation.  Large numbers of the people of England
had now no voice in the government.  This unfortunate state of things
was chiefly the result of the great changes which had taken place in
the growth of the population of the Midlands (or the central portion
of England) and the North (S563).

Since the introduction of steam (S563) the rapid increase of
manufactures and commerce had built up Birmingham, Leeds, Sheffield,
Manchester, and other large towns in the iron, coal, pottery and
manufacturing districts. (See Industrial Map of England, p.10.) These
important towns could not send a member to Parliament; while, on the
other hand, many places in the south of England which did send members
had long ceased to be of any importance.  Furthermore, the
representation was of the most haphazard description.  In one section
no one could vote except substantial property holders, in another none
but town officers, while in a third every man who had a tenement big
enough to boil a pot in, and hence called a "Pot-walloper," possessed
the right.

To this singular state of things the nation had long been
indifferent.  During the Middle Ages the inhavitants often had no
desire either to go to Parliament themselves or to send others.  The
expense of the journey was great, the compensation was small, and
unless some important matter of special interest to the people was at
stake, they preferred to stay at home.  On this account it was often
almost as difficult for the sheriff to get a distant county member up
to the House of Commons in London as it would have been to carry him
there a prisoner to be tried for his life.

Now, however, everything was changed; the rise of political parties
(S479), the constant and heavy taxation, the jealousy of the increase
of royal authority, the influence and honor of the position of a
Parliamentary representative, all conspired to make men eager to
obtain their full share in the management of the government.

This new interest had begun as far back as the civil wars of the
seventeenth century, and when Cromwell came to power he effected many
much-needed reforms.  But after the restoration of the Stuarts (S467),
the Protector's wise measures were repealed or neglected.  Then the
old order, or rather disorder, again asserted itself, and in many
cases matters became worse than ever.

579. "Rotten Boroughs."

For instance, the borough or city of Old Sarum, in Wiltshire, which
had once been an important place, had, at an early period, gradually
declined through the growth of New Sarum, or Salisbury, near by.  (See
map, p.436.) In the sixteenth century the parent city had so
completely decayed that not a single habitation was left on the
desolate hilltop where the caste and cathedral once stood.  At the
foot of the hill was an old tree.  The owner of that tree and of the
field where it grew sent (1830) two members to Parliament,--that
action represented what had been regularly going on for something like
three hundred years!

In Bath, on the other hand, none of the citizens, out of a large
population, might vote except the mayor, alderman, and common
council.  These places now got the significant name of "rotten
boroughs" from the fact that whether large or small there was no
