having transferred its allegiance to three different flags within
twenty-four hours.

At the opening of the nineteenth century Spain had ceded all the region
vaguely known as Louisiana back to France, and France had sold the
territory, to the United States; but post-horse and stage of those old
days travelled slowly.  News of Spain's cession and France's sale reached
Louisiana almost simultaneously.  On March 9, 1804, the Spanish grandees
of St. Louis took down their flag and, to the delight of Louisiana, for
form's sake erected French colors.  On March 10, the French flag was
lowered for the emblem that has floated over the Great West ever
since--the stars and stripes.  How vast was the new territory acquired,
the eastern states had not the slightest conception.  As early as 1792
Captain Gray, of the ship _Columbia_, from Boston, had blundered into the
harbor of a vast river flowing into the Pacific.  What lay between this
river and that other great river on the eastern side of the
mountains--the Missouri?  Jefferson had arranged with John Ledyard of
Connecticut, who had been with Captain Cook on the Pacific, to explore
the northwest coast of America by crossing Russia overland; but Russia
had similar designs for herself, and stopped Ledyard on the way.  In 1803
President Jefferson asked Congress for an appropriation to explore the
Northwest by way of the Missouri.  Now that the wealth of the West is
beyond the estimate of any figure, it seems almost inconceivable that
there were people little-minded enough to haggle over the price paid for
Louisiana--$15,000,000--and to object to the appropriation required for
its exploration--$2500; but fortunately the world goes ahead in spite of
hagglers.

May of 1804 saw Captain Meriwether Lewis, formerly secretary to President
Jefferson, and Captain William Clark of Virginia launch out from Wood
River opposite St. Louis, where they had kept their men encamped all
winter on the east side of the Mississippi, waiting until the formal
transfer of Louisiana for the long journey of exploration to the sources
of the Missouri and the Columbia.  Their escort consisted of twenty
soldiers, eleven _voyageurs_, and nine frontiersmen.  The main craft was
a keel boat fifty-five feet long, of light draft, with square-rigged sail
and twenty-two oars, and tow-line fastened to the mast pole to track the
boat upstream through rapids.  An American flag floated from the prow,
and behind the flag the universal types of progress everywhere--goods for
trade and a swivel-gun.  Horses were led alongshore for hunting, and two
pirogues--sharp at prow, broad at stern, like a flat-iron or a
turtle--glided to the fore of the keel boat.

[Illustration: Captain Meriwether Lewis.]

The Missouri was at flood tide, turbid with crumbling clay banks and
great trees torn out by the roots, from which keel boat and pirogues
sheered safely off.  For the first time in history the Missouri resounded
to the Fourth of July guns; and round camp-fire the men danced to the
strains of a _voyageur's_ fiddle.  Usually, among forty men is one
traitor, and Liberte must desert on pretence of running back for a knife;
but perhaps the fellow took fright from the wild yarns told by the
lonely-eyed, shaggy-browed, ragged trappers who came floating down the
Platte, down the Osage, down the Missouri, with canoe loads of furs for
St. Louis.  These men foregathered with the _voyageurs_ and told only too
true stories of the dangers ahead.  Fires kindled on the banks of the
river called neighboring Indians to council.  Council Bluffs commemorates
one conference, of which there were many with Iowas and Omahas and
Ricarees and Sioux.  Pause was made on the south side of the Missouri to
visit the high mound where Blackbird, chief of the Omahas, was buried
astride his war horse that his spirit might forever watch the French
_voyageurs_ passing up and down the river.

[Illustration: Captain William Clark.]

By October the explorers were sixteen hundred miles north of St. Louis,
at the Mandan villages near where Bismarck stands to-day.  The Mandans
welcomed the white men; but the neighboring tribes of Ricarees were
insolent.  "Had I these white warriors on the upper plains," boasted a
chief to Charles Mackenzie, one of the Northwest Fur Company men from
Canada, "my young men on horseback would finish them as they would so
many wolves; for there are only two sensible men among them, the worker
of iron [blacksmith] and the mender of guns."  Four Canadian traders had
already been massacred by this chief.  Captain Lewis knew that his
company must winter on the east side of the mountains, and there were a
dozen traders--Hudson Bay and Nor'westers--on the ground practising all
the unscrupulous tricks of rivals, Nor'westers driving off Hudson Bay
horses, Hudson Bay men driving off Nor'-westers', to defeat trade; so
Captain Lewis at once had a fort constructed.  It was triangular in
shape, the two converging walls consisting of barracks with a loopholed
bastion at the apex, the base being a high wall of strong pickets where
sentry kept constant guard.  Hitherto Captain Lewis had been able to
secure the services of French trappers as interpreters with the Indians;
but the next year he was going where there were no trappers; and now he
luckily engaged an old Nor'wester, Chaboneau, whose Indian wife,
Sacajawea, was a captive from the Snake tribe of the Rockies.[1]  On
Christmas morning, the stars and stripes were hoisted above Fort Mandan;
and all that night the men danced hilariously.  On New Years of 1805, the
white men visited the Mandan lodges, and one _voyageur_ danced "on his
head" to the uproarious applause of the savages.  All winter the men
joined in the buffalo hunts, laying up store of pemmican.  In February,
work was begun on the small boats for the ascent of the Missouri.  By the
end of March, the river had cleared of ice, and a dozen men were sent
back to St. Louis.

At five, in the afternoon of April 7, six canoes and two pirogues were
pushed out on the Missouri.  Sails were hoisted; a cheer from the
Canadian traders and Indians standing on the shore--and the boats glided
up the Missouri with flags flying from foremost prow.  Hitherto Lewis and
Clark had passed over travelled ground.  Now they had set sail for the
Unknown.  Within a week they had passed the Little Missouri, the height
of land that divides the waters of the Missouri from those of the
Saskatchewan, and the great Yellowstone River, first found by wandering
French trappers and now for the first time explored.  The current of the
Missouri grew swifter, the banks steeper, and the use of the tow-line
more frequent.  The voyage was no more the holiday trip that it had been
all the way from St. Louis.  Hunters were kept on the banks to forage for
game, and once four of them came so suddenly on an open-mouthed,
ferocious old bear that he had turned hunter and they hunted before guns
could be loaded; and the men saved themselves only by jumping twenty feet
over the bank into the river.

For miles the boats had to be tracked up-stream by the tow-line.  The
shore was so steep that it offered no foothold.  Men and stones slithered
heterogeneously down the sliding gravel into the water.  Moccasins wore
out faster than they could be sewed; and the men's feet were cut by
prickly-pear and rock as if by knives.  On Sunday, May 26, when Captain
Lewis was marching to lighten the canoes, he had just climbed to the
summit of a high, broken cliff when there burst on his glad eyes a first
glimpse of the far, white "Shining Mountains" of which the Indians told,
the Rockies, snowy and dazzling in the morning sun.  One can guess how
the weather-bronzed, ragged man paused to gaze on the glimmering summits.
Only one other explorer had ever been so far west in this region--young
De la Verendrye, fifty years before; but the Frenchman had been compelled
to turn back without crossing the mountains, and the two Americans were
to assail and conquer what had proved an impassable barrier.  The
Missouri had become too deep for poles, too swift for paddles; and the
banks were so precipitous that the men were often poised at dizzy heights
above the river, dragging the tow-line round the edge of rock and crumbly
cliff.  Captain Lewis was leading the way one day, crawling along the
face of a rock wall, when he slipped.  Only a quick thrust of his
spontoon into the cliff saved him from falling almost a hundred feet.  He
had just struck it with terrific force into the rock, where it gave him
firm handhold, when he heard a voice cry, "Good God, Captain, what shall
I do?"

[Illustration: Tracking Up-stream.]

Windsor, a frontiersman, had slipped to the very verge of the rock, where
he lay face down with right arm and leg completely over the precipice,
his left hand vainly grabbing empty air for grip of anything that would
hold him back.  Captain Lewis was horrified, but kept his presence of
mind; for the man's life hung by a thread.  A move, a turn, the slightest
start of alarm to disturb Windsor's balance--and he was lost.  Steadying
his voice, Captain Lewis shouted back, "You're in little danger.  Stick
your knife in the cliff to hoist yourself up."

With the leverage of the knife, Windsor succeeded in lifting himself back
to the narrow ledge.  Then taking off his moccasins, he crawled along the
cliff to broader foothold.  Lewis sent word for the crews to wade the
margin of the river instead of attempting this pass--which they did,
though shore water was breast high and ice cold.

[Illustration: Typical Mountain Trapper.]

The Missouri had now become so narrow that it was hard to tell which was
the main river and which a tributary; so Captain Lewis and four men went
in advance to find the true course.  Leaving camp at sunrise, Captain
Lewis was crossing a high, bare plain, when he heard the most musical of
all wilderness sounds--the far rushing that is the voice of many waters.
Far above the prairie there shimmered in the morning sun a gigantic plume
of spray.  Surely this was the Great Falls of which the Indians told.
Lewis and his men broke into a run across the open for seven miles, the
rush of waters increasing to a deafening roar, the plume of spray to
clouds of foam.  Cliffs two hundred feet high shut off the view.  Down
these scrambled Lewis, not daring to look away from his feet till safely
at bottom, when he faced about to see the river compressed by sheer
cliffs over which hurled a white cataract in one smooth sheet eighty feet
high.  The spray tossed up in a thousand bizarre shapes of wind-driven
clouds.  Captain Lewis drew the long sigh of the thing accomplished.  He
had found the Great Falls of the Missouri.

[Illustration: The Discovery of the Great Falls.]

Seating himself on the rock, he awaited his hunters.  That night they
camped under a tree near the falls.  Morning showed that the river was
one succession of falls and rapids for eighteen miles.  Here was indeed a
stoppage to the progress of the boats.  Sending back word to Captain
Clark of the discovery of the falls, Lewis had ascended the course of the
cascades to a high hill when he suddenly encountered a herd of a thousand
buffalo.  It was near supper-time.  Quick as thought, Lewis fired.  What
was his amazement to see a huge bear leap from the furze to pounce on the
wounded quarry; and what was Bruin's amazement to see the unusual
spectacle of a thing as small as a man marching out to contest possession
of that quarry?  Man and bear reared up to look at each other.  Bear had
been master in these regions from time immemorial.  Man or beast--which
was to be master now?  Lewis had aimed his weapon to fire again, when he
recollected that it was not loaded; and the bear was coming on too fast
for time to recharge.  Captain Lewis was a brave man and a dignified man;
but the plain was bare of tree or brush, and the only safety was
inglorious flight.  But if he had to retreat, the captain determined that
he _would_ retreat only at a walk.  The rip of tearing claws sounded from
behind, and Lewis looked over his shoulder to see the bear at a hulking
gallop, open-mouthed,--and off they went, explorer and exploited, in a
sprinting match of eighty yards, when the grunting roar of pursuer told
pursued that the bear was gaining.  Turning short, Lewis plunged into the
river to mid-waist and faced about with his spontoon at the bear's nose.
A sudden turn is an old trick with all Indian hunters; the bear
floundered back on his haunches, reconsidered the sport of hunting this
new animal, man, and whirled right about for the dead buffalo.

[Illustration: Fighting a Grizzly.]

It took the crews from the 15th to the 25th of June to _portage_ past the
Great Falls.  Cottonwood trees yielded carriage wheels two feet in
diameter, and the masts of the pirogues made axletrees.  On these
wagonettes the canoes were dragged across the _portage_.  It was hard,
hot work.  Grizzlies prowled round the camp at night, wakening the
exhausted workers.  The men actually fell asleep on their feet as they
toiled, and spent half the night double-soling their torn moccasins, for
the cactus already had most of the men limping from festered feet.  Yet
not one word of complaint was uttered; and once, when the men were camped
on a green along the _portage_, a _voyageur_ got out his fiddle, and the
sore feet danced, which was more wholesome than moping or poulticing.
The boldness of the grizzlies was now explained.  Antelope and buffalo
were carried over the falls.  The bears prowled below for the carrion.

After failure to construct good hide boats, two other craft, twenty-five
and thirty-three feet long, were knocked together, and the crews launched
above the rapids for the far Shining Mountains that lured like a
mariner's beacon.  Night and day, when the sun was hot, came the
boom-boom as of artillery from the mountains.  The _voyageurs_ thought
this the explosion of stones, but soon learned to recognize the sound of
avalanche and land-slide.  The river became narrower, deeper, swifter, as
the explorers approached the mountains.  For five miles rocks rose on
each side twelve hundred feet high, sheer as a wall.  Into this shadowy
canon, silent as death, crept the boats of the white men, vainly
straining their eyes for glimpse of egress from the watery defile.  A
word, a laugh, the snatch of a _voyageur's_ ditty, came back with elfin
echo, as if spirits hung above the dizzy heights spying on the intruders.
Springs and tenuous, wind-blown falls like water threads trickled down
each side of the lofty rocks.  The water was so deep that poles did not
touch bottom, and there was not the width of a foot-hold between water
and wall for camping ground.  Flags were unfurled from the prows of the
boats to warn marauding Indians on the height above that the _voyageurs_
were white men, not enemies.  Darkness fell on the canon with the great
hushed silence of the mountains; and still the boats must go on and on in
the darkness, for there was no anchorage.  Finally, above a small island
in the middle of the river, was found a tiny camping ground with
pine-drift enough for fire-wood.  Here they landed in the pitchy dark.
They had entered the Gates of the Rockies on the 19th of July.  In the
morning bighorn and mountain goat were seen scrambling along the ledges
above the water.  On the 25th the Three Forks of the Missouri were
reached.  Here the Indian woman, Sacajawea, recognized the ground and
practically became the guide of the party, advising the two explorers to
follow the south fork or the Jefferson, as that was the stream which her
tribe followed when crossing the mountains to the plains.

[Illustration: Packer carrying Goods across Portage.]

It now became absolutely necessary to find mountain Indians who would
supply horses and guide the white men across the Divide.  In the hope of
finding the Indian trail, Captain Lewis landed with two men and preceded
the boats.  He had not gone five miles when to his sheer delight he saw a
Snake Indian on horseback.  Ordering his men to keep back, he advanced
within a mile of the horseman and three times spread his blanket on the
ground as a signal of friendship.  The horseman sat motionless as bronze.
Captain Lewis went forward, with trinkets held out to tempt a parley, and
was within a few hundred yards when the savage wheeled and dashed off.
Lewis' men had disobeyed orders and frightened the fellow by advancing.
Deeply chagrined, Lewis hoisted an American flag as sign of friendship
and continued his march.  Tracks of horses were followed across a bog,
along what was plainly an Indian road, till the sources of the Missouri
became so narrow that one of the men put a foot on each side and thanked
God that he had lived to bestride the Missouri.  Stooping, all drank from
the crystal spring whose waters they had traced for three thousand miles
from St. Louis.  Following a steep declivity, they were presently
crossing the course of a stream that flowed west and must lead to some
branch of the Columbia.

[Illustration: Spying on an Enemy's Fort.]

Suddenly, on the cliff in front, Captain Lewis discovered two squaws, an
Indian, and some dogs.  Unfurling his flag, he advanced.  The Indians
paused, then dashed for the woods.  Lewis tried to tie some presents
round the dogs' necks as a peace-offering, but the curs made off after
their master.  The white men had not proceeded a mile before they came to
three squaws, who never moved but bowed their heads to the ground for the
expected blow that would make them captives.  Throwing down weapons,
Lewis pulled up his sleeve to show that he was white.  Presents allayed
all fear, and the squaws had led him two miles toward their camp when
sixty warriors came galloping at full speed with arrows levelled.  The
squaws rushed forward, vociferating and showing their presents.  Three
chiefs at once dismounted, and fell on Captain Lewis with such greasy
embraces of welcome that he was glad to end the ceremony.  Pipes were
smoked, presents distributed, and the white men conducted to a great
leathern lodge, where Lewis announced his mission and prepared the
Indians for the coming of the main force in the boats.

[Illustration: Indian Camp at Foothills of Rockies.]

The Snakes scarcely knew whether to believe the white man's tale.  The
Indian camp was short of provisions, and Lewis urged the warriors to come
back up the trail to meet the advancing boats.  The braves hesitated.
Cameahwait, the chief, harangued till a dozen warriors mounted their
horses and set out, Lewis and his men each riding behind an Indian.
Captain Clark could advance only slowly, and the Indians with Lewis grew
suspicious as they entered the rocky denies without meeting the
explorers' party.  Half the Snakes turned back.  Among those that went on
were three women.  To demonstrate good faith, Lewis again mounted a horse
behind an Indian, though the bare-back riding over rough ground at a mad
pace was almost jolting his bones apart.  A spy came back breathless with
news for the hungry warriors that one of the white hunters had killed a
deer, and the whole company lashed to a breakneck gallop that nearly
finished Lewis, who could only cling for dear life to the Indian's waist.
The poor wretches were so ravenous that they fell on the dead deer and
devoured it raw.  It was here that Lewis expected the boats.  They were
not to be seen.  The Indians grew more distrustful.  The chief at once
put fur collars, after the fashion of Indian dress, round the white men's
shoulders.  As this was plainly a trick to conceal the whites in case of
treachery on their part, Lewis at once took off his hat and placed it on
the chief's head.  Then he hurried the Indians along, lest they should
lose courage completely.  To his mortification, Captain Clark did not
appear.  To revive the Indians' courage, the white men then passed their
guns across to the Snakes, signalling willingness to suffer death if the
Indians discovered treachery.  That night all the Indians hid in the
woods but five, who slept on guard round the whites.  If anything had
stopped Clark's advance, Lewis was lost.  Though neither knew it, Lewis
and Clark were only four miles apart, Clark, Chaboneau, the guide, and
Sacajawea, the Indian woman, were walking on the shore early in the
morning, when the squaw began to dance with signs of the most extravagant
joy.  Looking ahead, Clark saw one of Lewis' men, disguised as an Indian,
leading a company of Snake warriors that the squaw had recognized as her
own people, from whom she had been wrested when a child.  The Indians
broke into songs of delight, and Sacajawea, dashing through the crowd,
threw her arms round an Indian woman, sobbing and laughing and exhibiting
all the hysterical delight of a demented creature.  Sacajawea and the
woman had been playmates in childhood and had been captured in the same
war; but the Snake woman had escaped, while Sacajawea became a slave and
married the French guide.

Meanwhile, Captain Clark was being welcomed by Lewis and the chief,
Cameahwait.  Sacajawea was called to interpret.  Cameahwait rose to
speak.  The poor squaw flung herself on him with cries of delight.  In
the chief of the Snakes she had recognized her brother.  Laced coats,
medals, flags, and trinkets were presented to the Snakes; but though
willing enough to act as guides, the Indians discouraged the explorers
about going on in boats.  The western stream was broken for leagues by
terrible rapids walled in with impassable precipices.  Boats were
abandoned and horses bought from the Snakes.  The white men set their
faces northwestward, the southern trail, usually followed by the Snakes,
leading too much in the direction of the Spanish settlements.  Game grew
so scarce that by September the men were without food and a colt was
killed for meat.

By October the company was reduced to a diet of dog; but the last Divide
had been crossed.  Horses were left with an Indian chief of the
