"Cautious, why so?"

"Your majesty is doubtless afraid that that poor Porthos may probably
become a troublesome witness, and you wish to get rid of him."

"What! in making him a duke?"

"Certainly; you would assuredly kill him, for he would die from joy, and
the secret would die with him."

"Good heavens!"

"Yes," said Aramis phlegmatically; "I should lose a very good friend."

At this moment, and in the middle of this idle conversation, under the
light tone of which the two conspirators concealed their joy and pride
at their mutual success, Aramis heard something which made him prick up
his ears.

"What is that?" said Philippe.

"The dawn, sire."

"Well?"


[Illustration: THE KING ENTERED INTO THE CELL WITHOUT PRONOUNCING A
SINGLE WORD: HE WAS PALE AND HAGGARD.--_Page 370._]


"Well, before you retired to bed last night, you probably decided to do
something this morning at the break of day."

"Yes; I told my captain of the musketeers," replied the young man
hurriedly, "that I should expect him."

"If you told him that, he will certainly be here, for he is a most
punctual man."

"I hear a step in the vestibule."

"It must be he."

"Come, let us begin the attack," said the young king resolutely.

"Be cautious, for Heaven's sake; to begin the attack, and with
D'Artagnan, would be madness. D'Artagnan knows nothing, he has seen
nothing; he is a hundred miles from suspecting our mystery in the
slightest degree; but if he comes into this room the first this morning,
he will be sure to detect something which has taken place, and which he
would think his business to occupy himself about. Before we allow
D'Artagnan to penetrate into this room, we must air the room thoroughly,
or introduce so many people into it, that the keenest scent in the whole
kingdom may be deceived by the traces of twenty different persons."

"But how can I send him away, since I have given him a rendezvous?"
observed the prince, impatient to measure swords with so redoubtable an
antagonist.

"I will take care of that," replied the bishop, "and in order to begin,
I am going to strike a blow which will completely stupefy our man."

"He too is striking a blow, for I hear him at the door," added the
prince hurriedly.

And, in fact, a knock at the door was heard at that moment. Aramis was
not mistaken; for it was indeed D'Artagnan who adopted that mode of
announcing himself.

We have seen how he passed the night in philosophizing with M. Fouquet,
but the musketeer was very wearied even of feigning to fall asleep, and
as soon as the dawn illumined with its pale blue light the sumptuous
cornices of the surintendant's room, D'Artagnan rose from his armchair,
arranged his sword, brushed his coat and hat with his sleeve like a
private soldier getting ready for inspection.

"Are you going out?" said Fouquet.

"Yes, monseigneur. And you?"

"No; I shall remain."

"You give me your word?"

"Certainly."

"Very good. Besides, my only reason for going out, is to try and get
that reply--you know what I mean?"

"That sentence, you mean--"

"Stay, I have something of the old Roman in me. This morning, when I got
up, I remarked that my sword had not caught in one of the
_aiguillettes_, and that my shoulder-belt had slipped quite off. That is
an infallible sign."

"Of prosperity?"

"Yes; be sure of it; for every time that that confounded belt of mine
sticks fast to my back, it always signified a punishment from M. de
Treville, or a refusal of money by M. de Mazarin. Every time my sword
hung fast to my shoulder-belt, it always predicted some disagreeable
commission or another for me to execute, and I have had showers of them
all my life through. Every time, too, my sword danced about in its
sheath, a duel, fortunate in its result, was sure to follow; whenever it
dangled about the calves of my legs, it was a slight wound; every time
it fell completely out of the scabbard I was booked, and made up my mind
that I should have to remain on the field of battle, with two or three
months under the surgeon's care into the bargain."

"I never knew your sword kept you so well informed," said Fouquet, with
a faint smile, which showed how he was struggling against his own
weaknesses. "Is your sword bewitched, or under the influence of some
charm?"

"Why, you must know that my sword may almost be regarded as part of my
own body. I have heard that certain men seem to have warnings given them
by feeling something the matter with their legs, or by a throbbing of
their temples. With me, it is my sword that warns me. Well, it told me
of nothing this morning. But, stay a moment--look here, it has just
fallen, of its own accord, into the last hole of the belt. Do you know
what that is a warning of?"

"No."

"Well, that tells me of an arrest that will have to be made this very
day."

"Well," said the surintendant, more astonished than annoyed by this
frankness, "if there is nothing disagreeable predicted to you by your
sword, I am to conclude that it is not disagreeable for you to arrest
me."

"You! arrest you!"

"Of course. The warning--"

"Does not concern you, since you have been arrested ever since
yesterday. It is not you I shall have to arrest, be assured of that.
That is the reason why I am delighted, and also the reason why I said
that my day will be a happy one."

And with these words, pronounced with the most affectionate graciousness
of manner, the captain took leave of Fouquet in order to wait upon the
king. He was on the point of leaving the room, when Fouquet said to him,
"One last mark of your kindness."

"What is it, monseigneur?"

"M. d'Herblay; let me see Monsieur d'Herblay."

"I am going to try and get him to come to you."

D'Artagnan did not think himself so good a prophet. It was written that
the day would pass away and realize all the predictions that had been
made in the morning. He had accordingly knocked, as we have seen, at the
king's door. The door opened. The captain thought that it was the king
who had just opened it himself: and this supposition was not altogether
inadmissible, considering the state of agitation in which he had left
Louis XIV. the previous evening; but instead of his royal master, whom
he was on the point of saluting with the greatest respect, he perceived
the long, calm features of Aramis. So extreme was his surprise, that he
could hardly refrain from uttering a loud exclamation. "Aramis!" he
said.

"Good-morning, dear D'Artagnan," replied the prelate, coldly.

"You here!" stammered out the musketeer.

"His majesty desires you to report that he is still sleeping, after
having been greatly fatigued during the whole night."

"Ah!" said D'Artagnan, who could not understand how the bishop of
Vannes, who had been so indifferent a favorite the previous evening, had
become in half a dozen hours the largest mushroom of fortune which had
ever sprung up in a sovereign's bedroom. In fact, to transmit the orders
of the king even to the mere threshold of that monarch's room, to serve
as an intermediary of Louis XIV., so as to be able to give a single
order in his name at a couple of paces from him, he must be greater than
Richelieu had ever been to Louis XIII. D'Artagnan's expressive eye, his
half-opened lips, his curling mustache, said as much indeed in the
plainest language to the chief favorite, who remained calm and perfectly
unmoved.

"Moreover," continued the bishop, "you will be good enough, Monsieur le
Capitaine des Mousquetaires, to allow those only to pass into the king's
room this morning who have special permission. His majesty does not wish
to be disturbed just yet."

"But," objected D'Artagnan, almost on the point of refusing to obey this
order, and particularly of giving unrestrained passage to the suspicions
which the king's silence had aroused--"but, Monsieur l'Eveque, his
majesty gave me a rendezvous for this morning."

"Later, later," said the king's voice, from the bottom of the alcove; a
voice which made a cold shudder pass through the musketeer's veins. He
bowed, amazed, confused, and stupefied by the smile with which Aramis
seemed to overwhelm him, as soon as those words had been pronounced.

"And then," continued the bishop, "as an answer to what you were coming
to ask the king, my dear D'Artagnan, here is an order of his majesty,
which you will be good enough to attend to forthwith, for it concerns M.
Fouquet."

D'Artagnan took the order which was held out to him. "To be set at
liberty!" he murmured. "Ah!" and he uttered a second "ah!" still more
full of intelligence than the former; for this order explained Aramis'
presence with the king, and that Aramis, in order to have obtained
Fouquet's pardon, must have made considerable progress in the royal
favor, and that this favor explained, in its tenor, the hardly
conceivable assurance with which M. d'Herblay issued the orders in the
king's name. For D'Artagnan it was quite sufficient to have understood
something in order to understand everything. He bowed and withdrew a
couple of steps, as if he were about to leave.

"I am going with you," said the bishop.

"Whereto?"

"To M. Fouquet; I wish to be a witness of his delight."

"Ah! Aramis, how you puzzled me just now!" said D'Artagnan again.

"But you understand now, I suppose?"

"Of course, I understand," he said, aloud; but then he added in a low
tone to himself, almost hissing the words through his teeth, "No, no, I
do not understand yet. But it is all the same, for here is the order for
it." And then he added, "I will lead the way, monseigneur," and he
conducted Aramis to Fouquet's apartments.




CHAPTER XCV.

THE KING'S FRIEND.


Fouquet was waiting with anxiety; he had already sent away many of his
servants and his friends, who, anticipating the usual hour of his
ordinary receptions, had called at his door to inquire after him.
Preserving the utmost silence respecting the danger which hung suspended
over his head, he only asked them, as he did every one indeed who came
to the door, where Aramis was. When he saw D'Artagnan return, and when
he perceived the bishop of Vannes behind him, he could hardly restrain
his delight; it was fully equal to his previous uneasiness. The mere
sight of Aramis was a complete compensation to the surintendant for the
unhappiness he had undergone in being arrested. The prelate was silent
and grave; D'Artagnan completely bewildered by such an accumulation of
events.

"Well, captain; so you have brought M. d'Herblay to me?"

"And something better still, monseigneur."

"What is that?"

"Liberty."

"I am free!"

"Yes; by the king's order."

Fouquet resumed his usual serenity, that he might interrogate Aramis
with his look.

"Oh! yes, you can thank M. l'Eveque de Vannes," pursued D'Artagnan, "for
it is indeed to him that you owe the change that has taken place in the
king."

"Oh!" said Fouquet, more humiliated at the service than grateful at its
success.

"But you," continued D'Artagnan, addressing Aramis--"you, who have
become M. Fouquet's protector and patron, can you not do something for
me?"

"Anything you like, my friend," replied the bishop, in a calm voice.

"One thing only, then, and I shall be perfectly satisfied. How have you
managed to become the favorite of the king, you who have never spoken to
him more than twice in your life?"

"From a friend such as you are," said Aramis, "I cannot conceal
anything."

"Ah! very good, tell me, then."

"Very well. You think that I have seen the king only twice, while the
fact is I have seen him more than a hundred times; only we have kept it
very secret, that is all." And without trying to remove the color which
at this revelation made D'Artagnan's face flush scarlet. Aramis turned
toward M. Fouquet, who was as much surprised as the musketeer.
"Monseigneur," he resumed, "the king desires me to inform you that he is
more than ever your friend, and that your beautiful fete, so generously
offered by you on his behalf, has touched him to the very heart."

And thereupon he saluted M. Fouquet with so much reverence of manner,
that the latter, incapable of understanding a man whose diplomacy was of
so prodigious a character, remained incapable of uttering a single
syllable, and equally incapable of thought or movement. D'Artagnan
fancied he perceived that these two men had something to say to each
other, and he was about to yield to that feeling of instinctive
politeness which in such a case hurries a man toward the door, when he
feels his presence is an inconvenience for others; but his eager
curiosity, spurred on by so many mysteries, counseled him to remain.

Aramis thereupon turned toward him and said, in a quiet tone, "You will
not forget, my friend, the king's order respecting those whom he intends
to receive this morning on rising." These words were clear enough, and
the musketeer understood them; he therefore bowed to Fouquet, and then
to Aramis--to the latter with a slight admixture of ironical respect,
and disappeared.

No sooner had he left than Fouquet, whose impatience had hardly been
able to wait for that moment, darted toward the door to close it, and
then returning to the bishop, he said, "My dear D'Herblay, I think it
now high time you should explain to me what has passed, for, in plain
and honest truth, I do not understand anything."

"We will explain all that to you," said Aramis, sitting down, and making
Fouquet sit down also. "Where shall I begin?"

"With this first of all. Why does the king set me at liberty?"

"You ought rather to ask me what was his reason for having you
arrested."

"Since my arrest I have had time to think over it, and my idea is that
it arises out of some slight feeling of jealousy. My fete put M. Colbert
out of temper, and M. Colbert discovered some cause of complaint against
me; Belle-Isle, for instance."

"No; there is no question at all just now of Belle-Isle."

"What is it, then?"

"Do you remember those receipts for thirteen millions which M. de
Mazarin contrived to get stolen from you?"

"Yes, of course."

"Well, you are already pronounced to be a public robber."

"Good heavens!"

"Oh! that is not all. Do you also remember that letter you wrote to La
Valliere?"

"Alas! yes."

"And that proclaims you a traitor and a suborner."

"Why should he have pardoned me, then?"

"We have not yet arrived at that part of our argument. I wish you to be
quite convinced of the fact itself. Observe this well; the king knows
you to be guilty of an appropriation of public funds. Oh! of course _I_
know that you have done nothing of the kind; but at all events the king
has not seen the receipts, and he cannot do otherwise than believe you
criminal."

"I beg your pardon, I do not see--"

"You will see presently, though. The king, moreover, having read your
love-letter to La Valliere, and the offers you there made her, cannot
retain any doubt of your intentions with regard to that young lady; you
will admit that, I suppose?"

"Certainly; but conclude."

"In a few words. The king is, therefore, a powerful, implacable, and
eternal enemy for you."

"Agreed. But am I, then, so powerful that he has not dared to sacrifice
me, notwithstanding his hatred, with all the means which my weakness, or
my misfortunes, may have given him as a hold upon me?"

"It is clear, beyond all doubt," pursued Aramis, coldly, "that the king
has quarreled irreconcilably with you."

"But, since he absolves me--"

"Do you believe it likely?" asked the bishop, with a searching look.

"Without believing in his sincerity of heart, I believe in the truth of
the fact."

Aramis slightly shrugged his shoulders.

"But why, then, should Louis XIV. have commissioned you to tell me what
you have just stated?"

"The king charged me with nothing for you."

"With nothing!" said the surintendant, stupefied. "But that order,
then--"

"Oh! yes. You are quite right. There is an order, certainly;" and these
words were pronounced by Aramis in so strange a tone that Fouquet could
not resist starting.

"You are concealing something from me, I see. What is it?"

Aramis softly rubbed his white fingers over his chin, but said nothing.

"Does the king exile me?"

"Do not act as if you were playing at the game children play at when
they have to try and guess where a thing has been hidden, and are
informed by a bell being rung, when they are approaching near to it, or
going away from it."

"Speak, then."

"Guess."

"You alarm me."

"Bah! that is because you have not guessed, then."

"What did the king say to you? In the name of our friendship, do not
deceive me."

"The king has not said a word to me."

"You are killing me with impatience, D'Herblay. Am I still
surintendant?"

"As long as you like."

"But what extraordinary empire have you so suddenly acquired over his
majesty's mind?"

"Ah! that is it."

"You make him do as you like."

"I believe so."

"It is hardly credible."

"So any one would say."

"D'Herblay, by our alliance, by our friendship, by everything you hold
the dearest in the world, speak openly, I implore you. By what means
have you succeeded in overcoming Louis XIV.'s prejudices, for he did not
like you, I know?"

"The king will like me _now_," said Aramis, laying a stress upon the
last word.

"You have something particular, then, between you?"

"Yes."

"A secret, perhaps?"

"Yes, a secret."

"A secret of such a nature as to change his majesty's interests?"

"You are, indeed, a man of superior intelligence, monseigneur, and have
made a very accurate guess. I have, in fact, discovered a secret of a
nature to change the interests of the king of France."

"Ah!" said Fouquet, with the reserve of a man who does not wish to ask
any questions.

"And you shall judge of it yourself," pursued Aramis; "and you shall
tell me if I am mistaken with regard to the importance of this secret."

"I am listening, since you are good enough to unbosom yourself to me;
only do not forget that I have asked you nothing which may be indiscreet
in you to communicate."

Aramis seemed for a moment as if he were collecting himself.

"Do not speak!" said Fouquet; "there is still time enough."

"Do you remember," said the bishop, casting down his eyes, "the birth of
Louis XIV.?"

"As it were yesterday."

"Have you ever heard anything particular respecting his birth?"

"Nothing; except that the king was not really the son of Louis XIII."

"That does not matter to us, or the kingdom either; he is the son of his
father, says the French law, whose father is recognized by the law."

"True; but it is a grave matter when the quality of races is called into
question."

"A merely secondary question, after all. So that, in fact, you have
never learned or heard anything particular?"

"Nothing."

"That is where my secret begins. The queen, you must know, instead of
being delivered of one son, was delivered of two children."

Fouquet looked up suddenly as he replied, "And the second is dead?"

"You will see. These twins seemed likely to be regarded as the pride of
their mother, and the hope of France; but the weak nature of the king,
his superstitious feelings, made him apprehend a series of conflicts
between two children whose rights were equal; so he put out of the
way--he suppressed--one of the twins."

"Suppressed, do you say?"

"Be patient. Both the children grew up; the one on the throne, whose
minister you are--the other, who is my friend, in gloom and isolation."

"Good heavens! What are you saying, Monsieur d'Herblay? And what is this
poor prince doing?"

"Ask me, rather, what he has done?"

"Yes, yes."

"He was brought up in the country, and then thrown into a fortress which
goes by the name of the Bastille."

"Is it possible?" cried the surintendant, clasping his hands.

"The one was the most fortunate of men; the other the most unhappy and
most miserable of all living beings."

"Does his mother not know this?"

"Anne of Austria knows it all."

"And the king?"

"Knows absolutely nothing."

"So much the better!" said Fouquet.

This remark seemed to make a great impression on Aramis; he looked at
Fouquet with the most anxious expression of countenance.

"I beg your pardon; I interrupted you," said Fouquet.

"I was saying," resumed Aramis, "that this poor prince was the
unhappiest of human beings, when Heaven, whose thoughts are over all his
creatures, undertook to come to his assistance."

"Oh! in what way? tell me."

"You will see. The reigning king--I say the reigning king--you can guess
very well why?"

"No. Why?"

"Because both of them, being legitimately entitled from their birth,
ought both to have been kings. Is not that your opinion?"

"It is, certainly."

"Unreservedly so?"

"Most unreservedly; twins are one person in two bodies."

"I am pleased that a legist of your learning and authority should have
pronounced such an opinion. It is agreed, then, that both of them
possessed the same rights, is it not?"

"Incontestably so! but, gracious heavens, what an extraordinary
circumstance."

"We are not at the end of it yet.--Patience."

"Oh! I shall find 'patience' enough."

"Heaven wished to raise up for that oppressed child an avenger, or a
supporter, or vindicator, if you prefer it. It happened that the
reigning king, the usurper--(you are quite of my opinion, I believe,
that it is an act of usurpation quietly to enjoy, and selfishly to
assume the right over, an inheritance to which a man has only the right
of one half?)--"

"Yes, usurpation is the word."

"In that case, I continue. It was Heaven's will that the usurper should
possess, in the person of his first minister, a man of great talent, of
large and generous nature."

"Well, well," said Fouquet, "I understand; you have relied upon me to
repair the wrong which has been done to this unhappy brother of Louis
XIV. You have thought well; I will help you. I thank you, D'Herblay, I
thank you."

"Oh, no, it is not that at all; you have not allowed me to finish," said
Aramis, perfectly unmoved.

"I will not say another word, then."

"M. Fouquet, I was observing, the minister of the reigning sovereign was
suddenly taken into the greatest aversion and menaced with the ruin of
his fortune, with loss of liberty, with loss of life even, by intrigue
and personal hatred, to which the king gave too readily an attentive
ear. But Heaven permits (still, however, out of consideration for the
unhappy prince who had been sacrificed) that M. Fouquet should in his
turn have a devoted friend who knew this state secret, and felt that he
possessed strength and courage enough to divulge this secret, after
having had the strength to carry it locked up in his own heart for
twenty years."

"Do not go on any farther," said Fouquet, full of generous feelings, "I
understand you, and can guess everything now. You went to see the king
when the intelligence of my arrest reached you; you implored him, he
refused to listen to you; then you threatened him with that secret,
threatened to reveal it, and Louis XIV., alarmed at the risk of its
betrayal, granted to the terror of your indiscretion what he refused to
your generous intercession. I understand, I understand; you have the
king in your power; I understand."

"You understand nothing as yet," replied Aramis, "and again you have
interrupted me. And then, too, allow me to observe that you pay no
attention to logical reasoning, and seem to forget what you ought most
to remember."

"What do you mean?"

"You know upon what I laid the greatest stress at the beginning of our
conversation?"

"Yes, his majesty's hate, invincible hate for me; yes, but what feeling
of hate could resist the threat, of such a revelation?"

"Such a revelation, do you say? that is the very point where your logic
fails you. What! do you suppose that if I had made such a revelation to
the king I should have been alive now?"

"It is not ten minutes ago since you were with the king?"

"That may be. He might not have had the time to get me killed outright,
but he would have had the time to get me gagged and thrown into a
dungeon. Come, come, show a little consistency in your reasoning,
mordieu!"

And by the mere use of this word, which was so thoroughly his old
musketeer's expression, forgotten by one who never seemed to forget
anything, Fouquet could not but understand to what a pitch of exaltation
the calm, impenetrable bishop of Vannes had wrought himself. He
shuddered at it.

"And then," replied the latter, after having mastered his feelings,
"should I be the man I really am, should I be the true friend you regard
me as, if I were to expose you, you whom the king hates already bitterly
enough, to a feeling still more than ever to be dreaded in that young
man? To have robbed him, is nothing; to have addressed the woman he
loves, is not much; but to hold in your keeping both his crown and his
honor, why, he would rather pluck out your heart with his own hands."

"You have not allowed him to penetrate your secret, then?"

"I would sooner, far sooner, have swallowed at one draught all the
poisons that Mithridates drank in twenty years, in order to try and
avoid death, than have betrayed my secret to the king."

"What have you done, then?"

"Ah! now we are coming to the point, monseigneur. I think I shall not
fail to excite a little interest in you. You are listening, I hope?"

"How can you ask me if I am listening? Go on."

Aramis walked softly all round the room, satisfied himself that they
were alone, and that all was silent, and then returned and placed
himself close to the armchair in which Fouquet was seated, awaiting with
the deepest anxiety the revelations he had to make.

"I forgot to tell you," resumed Aramis, addressing himself to Fouquet,
who listened to him with the most absorbed attention--"I forgot to
mention a most remarkable circumstance respecting these twins, namely,
that God had formed them so startlingly, so miraculously, like each
other, that it would be utterly impossible to distinguish the one from
the other. Their own mother would not be able to distinguish them."

"Is it possible?" exclaimed Fouquet.

"The same noble character in their features, the same carriage, the same
stature, the same voice."

"But their thoughts? degree of intelligence; their knowledge of human
life?"

"There is inequality there, I admit, monseigneur. Yes; for the prisoner
of the Bastille is, most incontestable, superior in every way to his
brother; and if, from his prison, this unhappy victim were to pass to
the throne, France would not, from the earliest period of its history,
perhaps, have had a master more powerful by his genius and true
nobleness of character."

Fouquet buried his face in his hands, as if he were overwhelmed by the
weight of this immense secret. Aramis approached him.

"There is a further inequality," he said, continuing his work of
temptation, "an inequality which concerns yourself, monseigneur, between
the twins, both sons of Louis XIII., namely, the last comer does not
know M. Colbert."

Fouquet raised his head immediately--his features were pale and
distorted. The bolt had hit its mark--not his heart, but his mind and
comprehension.

"I understand you," he said to Aramis; "you are proposing a conspiracy
to me?"

"Something like it."

"One of those attempts, which, as you said at the beginning of this
conversation, alters the fate of empires?"

"And of the surintendant too; yes, monseigneur."

"In a word, you propose that I should agree to the substitution of the
son of Louis XIII., who is now a prisoner in the Bastille, for the son
of Louis XIII., who is now at this moment asleep in the Chamber of
Morpheus?"

Aramis smiled with the sinister expression of the sinister thought which
was passing through his brain. "Exactly," he said.

"Have you thought," Fouquet then continued, becoming animated with that
strength of talent which in a few seconds originates and matures the
conception of a plan, and with that largeness of view which foresees all
its consequences, and embraces all its results at a glance--"have you
thought that we must assemble the nobility, the clergy, and the third
estate of the realm; that we shall have to depose the reigning
sovereign, to disturb by so frightful a scandal the tomb of their dead
father, to sacrifice the life, the honor of a woman, Anne of Austria,
the life and peace of mind and heart of another woman, Maria Theresa;
and suppose that all were done, if we were to succeed in doing it--"

"I do not understand you," continued Aramis coldly. "There is not a
single word of the slightest use in what you have just said."

"What!" said the surintendant, surprised, "a man like you refuse to view
the practical bearings of the case. Do you confine yourself to the
childish delight of a political illusion, and neglect the chances of its
being carried into execution; in other words, the reality itself, is it
possible?"

"My friend," said Aramis, emphasizing the word with a kind of disdainful
familiarity, "what does Heaven do in order to substitute one king for
another?"

"Heaven!" exclaimed Fouquet--"Heaven gives directions to its agent, who
seizes upon the doomed victim, hurries him away, and seats the
triumphant rival on the empty throne. But you forget that this agent is
called death. Oh! Monsieur d'Herblay, in Heaven's name, tell me, if you
have had the idea--"

"There is no question of that, monseigneur; you are going beyond the
object in view. Who spoke of Louis XIV.'s death? who spoke of adopting
the example which Heaven sets in following out the strict execution of
its decrees? No, I wish you to understand that Heaven effects its
purposes without confusion or disturbance, without exciting comment or
remark, without difficulty or exertion; and that men inspired by
Heaven--succeed like Heaven itself in all their undertakings, in all
they attempt, in all they do."

"What do you mean?"

"I mean, my _friend_," returned Aramis, with the same intonation on the
word friend that he had applied to it the first time--"I mean that if
there has been any confusion, scandal, and even effort in the
substitution of the prisoner for the king, I defy you to prove it."

"What!" cried Fouquet, whiter than the handkerchief with which he wiped
his temples, "what do you say?"

"Go to the king's apartment," continued Aramis, tranquilly, "and you who
know the mystery, I defy even you to perceive that the prisoner of the
Bastille is lying in his brother's bed."

"But the king?" stammered Fouquet, seized with horror at the
intelligence.

"What king?" said Aramis, in his gentlest tone; "the one who hates you,
or the one who likes you?"

"The king--of yesterday?"

"The king of yesterday! be quite easy on that score; he has gone to take
the place in the Bastille which his victim has occupied for such a long
time past."

"Great God! And who took him there?"

"I!"

"You?"

"Yes; and in the simplest way. I carried him away last night; and while
he was descending into gloom, the other was ascending into light. I do
not think there has been any disturbance created in any way. A flash of
lightning without thunder never awakens any one."

Fouquet uttered a thick, smothered cry, as if he had been struck by some
invisible blow, and clasping his head between his clenched hands, he
murmured: "You did that?"

"Cleverly enough, too; what do you think of it?"

"You dethroned the king? imprisoned him, too?"

"Yes, that has been done."

"And such an action has been committed here at Vaux?"

"Yes, here, at Vaux, in the Chamber of Morpheus. It would almost seem
that it had been built in anticipation of such an act."

"And at what time did it occur?"

"Last night, between twelve and one o'clock."

Fouquet made a movement, as if he were on the point of springing upon
Aramis; he restrained himself. "At Vaux; under my roof!" he said, in a
half-strangled voice.

"I believe so! for it is still your house, and is likely to continue so,
since M. Colbert cannot rob you of it now."

"It was under my roof, then, monsieur, that you committed this crime?"

"This crime!" said Aramis, stupefied.

"This abominable crime!" pursued Fouquet, becoming more and more
excited; "this crime more execrable than an assassination! this crime
which dishonors my name forever, and entails upon me the horror of
posterity."

"You are not in your senses, monsieur," replied Aramis, in an irresolute
tone of voice; "you are speaking too loudly; take care!"

"I will call out so loudly, that the whole world shall hear me."

"Monsieur Fouquet, take care!"

Fouquet turned round toward the prelate, whom he looked at full in the
face. "You have dishonored me," he said, "in committing so foul an act
of treason, so heinous a crime upon my guest, upon one who was
peacefully reposing beneath my roof. Oh! woe, woe, is me!"

"Woe to the man, rather, who beneath your roof meditated the ruin of
your fortune, your life. Do you forget that?"

"He was my guest, my sovereign."

Aramis rose, his eyes literally bloodshot, his mouth trembling
convulsively.

"Have I a man out of his senses to deal with?" he said.

"You have an honorable man to deal with."

"You are mad."

"A man who will prevent you consummating your crime."

"You are mad, I say."

"A man who would sooner, oh! far sooner die; who would kill you even,
rather than allow you to complete his dishonor."

And Fouquet snatched up his sword, which D'Artagnan had placed at the
head of his bed, and clenched it resolutely in his hand. Aramis frowned,
and thrust his hand into his breast, as if in search of a weapon. This
movement did not escape Fouquet, who, full of nobleness and pride in his
magnanimity, threw his sword to a distance from him, and approached
Aramis so close as to touch his shoulder with his disarmed hand.
"Monsieur," he said, "I would sooner die here on the spot than survive
this terrible disgrace; and if you have any pity left for me I entreat
you to take my life."

Aramis remained silent and motionless.

"You do not reply?" said Fouquet.

Aramis raised his head gently, and a glimmer of hope might be seen once
more to animate his eyes. "Reflect, monseigneur," he said, "upon
everything we have to expect. As the matter now stands, the king is
still alive, and his imprisonment saves your life."

"Yes," replied Fouquet, "you may have been acting on my behalf, but I
will not, do not, accept your services. But, first of all, I do not wish
your ruin. You will leave this house."

Aramis stifled the exclamation which almost escaped his broken heart.

"I am hospitable toward all who are dwellers beneath my roof," continued
Fouquet, with an air of inexpressible majesty; "you will not be more
fatally lost than he whose ruin you have consummated."

"You will be so," said Aramis, in a hoarse, prophetic voice, "you will
be so, believe me."

"I accept the augury, Monsieur d'Herblay; but nothing shall prevent me,
nothing shall stop me. You will leave Vaux--you must leave France; I
give you four hours to place yourself out of the king's reach."

"Four hours?" said Aramis, scornfully and incredulously.

"Upon the word of Fouquet, no one shall follow you before the expiration
of that time. You will therefore have four hours' advance of those whom
the king may wish to dispatch after you."

"Four hours!" repeated Aramis, in a thick smothered voice.

"It is more than you will need to get on board a vessel and flee to
Belle-Isle, which I give you as a place of refuge."

"Ah!" murmured Aramis.

"Belle-Isle is as much mine for you as Vaux is mine for the king. Go,
D'Herblay, go! as long as I live, not a hair of your head shall be
injured."

"Thank you," said Aramis, with a cold irony of manner.

"Go at once, then, and give me your hand, before we both hasten away;
you to save your life, I to save my honor."

Aramis withdrew from his breast the hand he had concealed there; it was
stained with his blood. He had dug his nails into his flesh, as if in
punishment for having nursed so many projects, more vain, insensate,
and fleeting than the life of man himself. Fouquet was horror-stricken,
and then his heart smote him with pity. He threw open his arms as if to
embrace him.

"I had no arms," murmured Aramis, as wild and terrible in his wrath as
the shade of Dido. And then, without touching Fouquet's hand, he turned
his head aside, and stepped back a pace or two. His last word was an
imprecation, his last gesture a curse, which his bloodstained hand
seemed to invoke, as it sprinkled on Fouquet's face a few drops of blood
which flowed from his breast. And both of them darted out of the room by
the secret staircase which led down to the inner courtyard. Fouquet
ordered his best horses, while Aramis paused at the foot of the
staircase which led to Porthos' apartment. He reflected profoundly and
for some time, while Fouquet's carriage left the stone-paved courtyard
at full gallop.

"Shall I go alone," said Aramis to himself, "or warn the prince? Oh!
fury! Warn the prince, and then--do what? Take him with me? To carry
this accusing witness about with me everywhere? War, too, would
follow--civil war, implacable in its nature! And without any resource
save myself--it is impossible! What could he do without me? Oh! without
me he would be utterly destroyed. Yet who knows--let destiny be
fulfilled--condemned he was, let him remain so then! Good or evil
spirit--gloomy and scornful power, whom men call the Genius of man, thou
art a power more restlessly uncertain, more baselessly useless, than the
wild wind in the mountains; Chance thou term'st thyself, but thou art
nothing; thou inflamest everything with thy breath, crumblest mountains
at thy approach, and suddenly art thyself destroyed at the presence of
the Cross of dead wood, behind which stands another Power invisible like
thyself--whom thou deniest, perhaps, but whose avenging hand is on thee,
and hurls thee in the dust dishonored and unnamed! Lost! I am lost! What
can be done? Flee to Belle-Isle? Yes, and leave Porthos behind me, to
talk and relate the whole affair to every one! Porthos, too, who will
have to suffer for what he has done. I will not let poor Porthos suffer.
He seems like one of the members of my own frame; and his grief or
misfortune would be mine as well. Porthos shall leave with me, and shall
follow my destiny. It must be so."

And Aramis, apprehensive of meeting any one to whom his hurried
movements might appear suspicious ascended the staircase without being
perceived. Porthos, so recently returned from Paris, was already in a
profound sleep; his huge body forgot its fatigue, as his mind forgot its
thoughts. Aramis entered, light as a shadow, and placed his nervous
grasp on the giant's shoulder. "Come, Porthos," he cried, "come."

Porthos obeyed, rose from his bed, opened his eyes, even before his
intelligence seemed to be aroused.

"We are going off," said Aramis.

"Ah!" returned Porthos.

"We shall go mounted, and faster than we have ever gone in our lives."

"Ah!" repeated Porthos.

"Dress yourself, my friend."

And he helped the giant to dress himself and thrust his gold and
diamonds into his pocket. While he was thus engaged, a slight noise
attracted his attention, and on looking up, he saw D'Artagnan watching
them through the half-opened door. Aramis started.

"What the devil are you doing there in such an agitated manner?" said
the musketeer.

"Hush!" said Porthos. "We are going off on a mission of great
importance," added the bishop.

"You are very fortunate," said the musketeer.

"Oh, dear me!" said Porthos, "I feel so wearied; I would far sooner have
been fast asleep. But the service of the king...."

"Have you seen M. Fouquet?" said Aramis to D'Artagnan.

"Yes; this very minute, in a carriage."

"What did he say to you?"

"'Adieu;' nothing more."

"Was that all?"

"What else do you think he could say? Am I worth anything now since you
have all got into such high favor?"

"Listen," said Aramis, embracing the musketeer; "your good times are
returning again. You will have no occasion to be jealous of any one."

"Ah! bah!"

"I predict that something will happen to you to-day which will increase
your importance more than ever."

"Really?"

"You know that I know all the news?"

"Oh, yes!"

"Come, Porthos, are you ready? Let us go."

"I am quite ready, Aramis."

"Let us embrace D'Artagnan first."

"Most certainly."

"But the horses?"

"Oh! there is no want of them here. Will you have mine?"

"No; Porthos has his own stud. So adieu! adieu!"

The two fugitives mounted their horses beneath the captain of the
musketeer's eyes, who held Porthos' stirrup for him, and gazed after
them until they were out of sight.

"On any other occasion," thought the Gascon, "I should say that those
gentlemen are making their escape; but in these days politics seem so
changed that that is what is termed going on a mission. I have no
objection; let me attend to my own affairs, that is quite enough;" and
he philosophically entered his apartments.




CHAPTER XCVI.

SHOWING HOW THE COUNTERSIGN WAS RESPECTED AT THE BASTILLE.


Fouquet tore along as fast as his horses could drag him. On the way he
trembled with horror at the idea of what had just been revealed to him.

"What must have been," he thought, "the youth of those extraordinary
men, who, even as age is stealing fast upon them, still are able to
conceive such plans and can carry them out without flinching?"

At one moment he could not resist the idea that all that Aramis had just
been recounting to him was nothing more than a dream, and whether the
fable itself was not the snare; so that when Fouquet arrived at the
Bastille, he might possibly find an order of arrest, which would send
him to join the dethroned king. Strongly impressed with this idea, he
gave certain sealed orders on his route, while fresh horses were being
harnessed to his carriage. These orders were addressed to M. d'Artagnan,
and to certain others whose fidelity to the king was far above
suspicion.

"In this way," said Fouquet to himself, "prisoner or not, I shall have
performed the duty which I owe to my honor. The orders will not reach
them until after my return, if I should return free, and consequently
they will not have been unsealed. I shall take them back again. If I am
delayed, it will be because some misfortune will have befallen me; and
in that case assistance will be sent for me as well as for the king."

Prepared in this manner, the surintendant arrived at the Bastille; he
had traveled at the rate of five leagues and a half the hour. Every
circumstance of delay which Aramis had escaped in his visit to the
Bastille befell Fouquet. It was useless his giving his name, equally
useless his being recognized; he could not succeed in obtaining an
entrance. By dint of entreaties, threats, commands, he succeeded in
inducing a sentinel to speak to one of the subalterns, who went and told
the major. As for the governor, they did not even dare to disturb him.
Fouquet sat in his carriage, at the outer gate of the fortress, chafing
with rage and impatience, awaiting the return of the officers, who at
last reappeared with a sufficiently sulky air.

"Well," said Fouquet, impatiently, "what did the major say?"

"Well, monsieur," replied the soldier, "the major laughed in my face.
He told me that M. Fouquet was at Vaux, and that even were he at Paris,
M. Fouquet would not get up at so early an hour as the present."

"Mordieu! You are a perfect set of fools," cried the minister, darting
out of the carriage; and before the subaltern had had time to shut the
gate Fouquet sprang through it, and ran forward in spite of the soldier,
who cried out for assistance. Fouquet gained ground, regardless of the
cries of the man, who, however, having at last come up with Fouquet,
called out to the sentinel of the second gate, "Look out, look out,
sentinel!" The man crossed his pike before the minister; but the latter,
robust and active, and hurried away, too, by his passion, wrested the
pike from the soldier and struck him a violent blow on the shoulder with
it. The subaltern, who approached too closely, received his part of the
blows as well. Both of them uttered loud and furious cries, at the sound
of which the whole of the first body of the advanced guard poured out of
the guard-house. Among them there was one, however, who recognized the
surintendant, and who called out, "Monseigneur, ah! monseigneur. Stop,
stop, you fellows!" And he effectually checked the soldiers, who were on
the point of revenging their companions. Fouquet desired them to open
the gate; but they refused to do so without the countersign; he desired
them to inform the governor of his presence; but the latter had already
heard the disturbance at the gate. He ran forward, followed by his
major, and accompanied by a picket of twenty men, persuaded that an
attack was being made on the Bastille. Baisemeaux also recognized
Fouquet immediately, and dropped his sword, which he had held
brandishing about in his hand.

"Ah! monseigneur," he stammered, "how can I excuse--"

"Monsieur," said the surintendant, flushed with anger, and heated by his
exertions, "I congratulate you. Your watch and ward are admirably kept."

Baisemeaux turned pale, thinking that this remark was said ironically,
and portended a furious burst of anger. But Fouquet had recovered his
breath, and, beckoning the sentinel and the subaltern, who were rubbing
their shoulders, toward him, he said, "There are twenty pistoles for the
sentinel, and fifty for the officer. Pray receive my compliments,
gentlemen. I will not fail to speak to his majesty about you. And now,
M. Baisemeaux, a word with you."

And he followed the governor to his official residence, accompanied by a
murmur of general satisfaction. Baisemeaux was already trembling with
shame and uneasiness. Aramis' early visit, from that moment, seemed to
possess consequences which a functionary such as he (Baisemeaux) was,
was perfectly justified in apprehending. It was quite another thing,
however, when Fouquet, in a sharp tone of voice, and with an imperious
look, said, "You have seen M. d'Herblay this morning?"

"Yes, monseigneur."

"And are you not horrified at the crime of which you have made yourself
an accomplice?"

"Well," thought Baisemeaux, "good so far;" and then he added aloud, "But
what crime, monseigneur, do you allude to?"

"That for which you can be quartered alive, monsieur--do not forget
that! But this is not a time to show anger. Conduct me immediately to
the prisoner."

"To what prisoner?" said Baisemeaux, tremblingly.

"You pretend to be ignorant? Very good--it is the best thing for you
perhaps, to do; for if, in fact, you were to admit your participation in
it, it would be all over with you. I wish, therefore, to seem to believe
in your assumption of ignorance."

"I entreat you, monseigneur--"

"That will do. Lead me to the prisoner."

"To Marchiali?"

"Who is Marchiali?"

"The prisoner who was brought back this morning by M. d'Herblay."

"He is called Marchiali," said the surintendant, his conviction
somewhat shaken by Baisemeaux's cool manner.

"Yes, monseigneur; that is the name under which he was inscribed here."

Fouquet looked steadily at Baisemeaux, as if he would read his very
heart; and perceived, with that clear-sightedness which men possess who
are accustomed to the exercise of power, that the man was speaking with
the most perfect sincerity. Besides, in observing his face for a few
moments, he could not believe that Aramis would have chosen such a
confidant.

"It is the prisoner," said the surintendant to him, "whom M. d'Herblay
carried away the day before yesterday?"

"Yes, monseigneur."

"And whom he brought back this morning?" added Fouquet, quickly; for he
understood immediately the mechanism of Aramis' plan.

"Precisely, monseigneur."

"And his name is Marchiali, you say?"

"Yes, Marchiali. If monseigneur has come here to remove him, so much the
better, for I was going to write about him."

"What has he done, then?"

"Ever since this morning he has annoyed me extremely. He has had such
terrible fits of passion as almost to make me believe that he would
bring the Bastille itself down about our ears."

"I will soon relieve you of his presence," said Fouquet.

"Ah! so much the better."

"Conduct me to his prison."

"Will monseigneur give me the order?"

"What order?"

"An order from the king."

"Wait until I sign you one."

"That will not be sufficient, monseigneur. I must have an order from the
king."

Fouquet assumed an irritated expression. "As you are so scrupulous," he
said, "with regard to allowing prisoners to leave, show me the order by
which this one was set at liberty." Baisemeaux showed him the order to
release Seldon.

"Very good," said Fouquet; "but Seldon is not Marchiali."

"But Marchiali is not at liberty, monseigneur he is here."

"But you said that M. d'Herblay carried him away and brought him back
again."

"I did not say so."

"So surely did you say it, that I almost seem to hear it now."

"It was a slip of my tongue, then, monseigneur."

"Take care, M. de Baisemeaux, take care."

"I have nothing to fear, monseigneur; I am acting according to strict
regulation."

"Do you dare to say so?"

"I would say so in the presence of an apostle himself. M. d'Herblay
brought me an order to set Seldon at liberty; and Seldon is free."

"I tell you that Marchiali has left the Bastille."

"You must prove that, monseigneur."

"Let me see him."

"You, monseigneur, who govern this kingdom, know very well that no one
can see any of the prisoners without an express order from the king."

"M. d'Herblay has entered, however."

"That is to be proved, monseigneur."

"M. de Baisemeaux, once more I warn you to pay particular attention to
what you are saying."

"All the documents are there, monseigneur."

"M. d'Herblay is overthrown."

"Overthrown?--M. d'Herblay! Impossible!"

"You see that he has undoubtedly influenced you."

"No, monseigneur; what does, in fact, influence me, is the king's
service. I am doing my duty. Give me an order from him, and you shall
enter."

"Stay, M. le Gouverneur, I give you my word that if you allow me to see
the prisoner, I will give you an order from the king at once."

"Give it me now, monseigneur."

"And that, if you refuse me, I will have you and all your officers
arrested on the spot."

"Before you commit such an act of violence, monseigneur, you will
reflect," said Baisemeaux, who had turned very pale, "that we will only
obey an order signed by the king; and that it will be just as easy for
you to obtain one to see Marchiali as to obtain one to do me so much
injury; me, too, who am perfectly innocent."

"True, true!" cried Fouquet, furiously; "perfectly true. M. de
Baisemeaux," he added, in a sonorous voice, drawing the unhappy governor
toward him, "do you know why I am so anxious to speak to the prisoner?"

"No, monseigneur; and allow me to observe that you are terrifying me out
of my senses; I am trembling all over, and feel as if I were going to
faint."

"You will stand a better chance of fainting outright, M. Baisemeaux,
when I return here at the head of ten thousand men and thirty pieces of
cannon."

"Good heavens, monseigneur, you are losing your senses."

"When I have roused the whole population of Paris against you and your
cursed towers, and have battered open the gates of this place, and
hanged you up to the bars of that tower in the corner there."

"Monseigneur! monseigneur! for pity's sake."

"I give you ten minutes to make up your mind," added Fouquet, in a calm
voice. "I will sit down here in this armchair and wait for you; if, in
ten minutes' time, you still persist, I leave this place, and you may
think me as mad as you like; but you will see!"

Baisemeaux stamped his foot on the ground like a man in a state of
despair, but he did not reply a single syllable: whereupon Fouquet
seized a pen and ink, and wrote:

"Order for M. le Prevot des Marchands to assemble the municipal guard
and to march upon the Bastille for the king's service."

Baisemeaux shrugged his shoulders. Fouquet wrote:

"Order for the Duc de Bouillon and M. le Prince de Conde to assume the
command of the Swiss guards, of the king's guards, and to march upon the
Bastille for the king's service."

Baisemeaux reflected. Fouquet still wrote:

"Order for every soldier, citizen, or gentleman to seize and apprehend,
wherever he may be found, le Chevalier d'Herblay, Eveque de Vannes, and
his accomplices, who are: 1st, M. de Baisemeaux, governor of the
Bastille, suspected of the crimes of high treason and rebellion--"

"Stop, monseigneur!" cried Baisemeaux; "I do not understand a single
thing of the whole matter; but so many misfortunes, even were it madness
itself that had set them at work, might happen here in a couple of
hours, that the king, by whom I shall be judged, will see whether I have
been wrong in withdrawing the countersign before so many imminent
catastrophes. Come with me to the keep, monseigneur; you shall see
Marchiali."

Fouquet darted out of the room, followed by Baisemeaux as he wiped the
perspiration from his face. "What a terrible morning!" he said; "what a
disgrace!"

"Walk faster," replied Fouquet.

Baisemeaux made a sign to the jailer to precede them. He was afraid of
his companion, which the latter could not fail to perceive.

"A truce to this child's play," he said, roughly. "Let the man remain
here, take the keys yourself, and show me the way. Not a single person,
do you understand, must hear what is going to take place here."

"Ah!" said Baisemeaux, undecided.

"Again," cried Fouquet. "Ah! say 'no' at once, and I will leave the
Bastille and will myself carry my own dispatches."

Baisemeaux bowed his head, took the keys, and unaccompanied, except by
the minister, ascended the staircase. The higher they advanced up the
spiral staircase, certain smothered murmurs became distinct cries and
fearful imprecations. "What is that?" asked Fouquet.

"That is your Marchiali," said the governor; "that is the way these
madmen call out."

And he accompanied that reply with a glance more indicative of injurious
illusions, as far as Fouquet was concerned, than of politeness. The
latter trembled; he had just recognized in one cry, more terrible than
any that had preceded it, the king's voice. He paused on the staircase,
snatching the bunch of keys from Baisemeaux, who thought this new madman
was going to dash out his brains with one of them. "Ah!" he cried, "M.
d'Herblay did not say a word about that."

"Give me the keys at once!" cried Fouquet, tearing them from his hand.
"Which is the key of the door I am to open."

"That one."

A fearful cry, followed by a violent blow against the door, made the
whole staircase resound with the echo. "Leave this place," said Fouquet
to Baisemeaux, in a threatening voice.

"I ask nothing better," murmured the latter, "there will be a couple of
madmen face to face, and the one will kill the other, I am sure."

"Go!" repeated Fouquet. "If you place your foot in this staircase before
I call you, remember that you shall take the place of the meanest
prisoner in the Bastille."

"This job will kill me, I am sure it will," muttered Baisemeaux, as he
withdrew with tottering steps.

The prisoner's cries became more and more terrible. When Fouquet had
satisfied himself that Baisemeaux had reached the bottom of the
staircase, he inserted the key in the first lock. It was then that he
heard the hoarse, choking voice of the king, crying out, in a frenzy of
rage, "Help, help! I am the king." The key of the second door was not
the same as the first, and Fouquet was obliged to look for it on the
bunch. The king, however, furious and almost mad with rage and passion,
shouted at the top of his voice, "It was M. Fouquet who brought me here.
Help me against M. Fouquet! I am the king! Help the king against M.
Fouquet!"

These cries tore the minister's heart with mingled emotions. They were
followed by a shower of terrible blows leveled against the door with a
part of the broken chair with which the king had armed himself. Fouquet
at last succeeded in finding the key. The king was almost exhausted; he
could hardly articulate distinctly as he shouted, "Death to Fouquet!
death to the traitor Fouquet!" The door flew open.




CHAPTER XCVII.

THE KING'S GRATITUDE.


The two men were on the point of darting toward each other when they
suddenly and abruptly stopped, as a mutual recognition took place, and
each uttered a cry of horror.

"Have you come to assassinate me, monsieur?" said the king when he
recognized Fouquet.

"The king in this state!" murmured the minister.

Nothing could be more terrible indeed than the appearance of the young
prince at the moment Fouquet had surprised him; his clothes were in
tatters; his shirt, open and torn to rags, was stained with sweat, and
with the blood which streamed from his lacerated breast and arms.
Haggard, ghastly pale, his hair in disheveled masses, Louis XIV.
presented the most perfect picture of despair, hunger, and fear
combined, that could possibly be united in one figure. Fouquet was so
touched, so affected and disturbed by it, that he ran toward him with
his arms stretched out and his eyes filled with tears. Louis held up the
massive piece of wood of which he had made such a furious use.

"Sire," said Fouquet, in a voice trembling with emotion, "do you not
recognize the most faithful of your friends?"

"A friend--you!" repeated Louis, gnashing his teeth in a manner which
betrayed his hate and desire for speedy vengeance.

"The most respectful of your servants," added Fouquet, throwing himself
on his knees. The king let the rude weapon fall from his grasp. Fouquet
approached him, kissed his knees, and took him in his arms with
inconceivable tenderness.

"My king, my child," he said, "how you must have suffered!"

Louis, recalled to himself by the change of situation, looked at
himself, and ashamed of the disordered state of his apparel, ashamed of
his conduct, and ashamed of the air of pity and protection that was
shown toward him, drew back. Fouquet did not understand this movement;
he did not perceive that the king's feeling of pride would never forgive
him for having been a witness of such an exhibition of weakness.

"Come, sire," he said, "you are free."

"Free?" repeated the king. "Oh! you set me at liberty, then, after
having dared to lift up your hand against me."

"You do not believe that!" exclaimed Fouquet, indignantly; "you cannot
believe me to be guilty of such an act."

And rapidly, warmly even, he related the whole particulars of the
intrigue, the details of which are already known to the reader. While
the recital continued, Louis suffered the most horrible anguish of mind;
and when it was finished, the magnitude of the danger he had run struck
him far more than the importance of the secret relative to his twin
brother.

"Monsieur," he said suddenly to Fouquet, "this double birth is a
falsehood; it is impossible--you cannot have been the dupe of it."

"Sire!"

"It is impossible, I tell you, that the honor, the virtue of my mother
can be suspected. And my first minister has not yet done justice on the
criminals?"

"Reflect, sire, before you are hurried away by your anger," replied
Fouquet. "The birth of your brother--"

"I have only one brother--and that is _Monsieur_. You know it as well as
myself. There is a plot, I tell you, beginning with the governor of the
Bastille."

"Be careful, sire, for this man has been deceived as every one else has
by the prince's likeness to yourself."

"Likeness? Absurd!"

"This Marchiali must be singularly like your majesty to be able to
deceive every one's eye," Fouquet persisted.

"Ridiculous!"

"Do not say so, sire; those who had prepared everything in order to face
and deceive your ministers, your mother, your officers of state, the
members of your family, must be quite confident of the resemblance
between you."

"But where are these persons, then!" murmured the king.

"At Vaux."

"At Vaux! and you suffer them to remain there!"

"My most present duty seemed to be your majesty's release. I have
accomplished that duty; and now, whatever your majesty may command shall
be done. I await your orders."

Louis reflected for a few minutes.

"Muster all the troops in Paris," he said.

"All the necessary orders are given for that purpose," replied Fouquet.

"You have given orders!" exclaimed the king.

"For that purpose, yes, sire! your majesty will be at the head of ten
thousand men in less than an hour."

The only reply the king made was to take hold of Fouquet's hand with
such an expression of feeling, that it was very easy to perceive how
strongly he had, until that remark, maintained his suspicions of the
minister, notwithstanding the latter's intervention.

"And with these troops," he said, "we shall go at once and besiege in
your house the rebels who, by this time, will have established and
entrenched themselves there."

"I should be surprised if that were the case," replied Fouquet.

"Why?"

"Because their chief--the very soul of the enterprise having been
unmasked by me, the whole plan seems to me to have miscarried."

"You have unmasked this false prince also?"

"No, I have not seen him."

"Whom have you seen, then?"

"The leader of the enterprise, not that unhappy young man; the latter
is merely an instrument, destined through his whole life to
wretchedness, I plainly perceive."

"Most certainly."

"It is M. l'Abbe d'Herblay, eveque de Vannes."

"Your friend."

"He was my friend, sire," replied Fouquet, nobly.

"An unfortunate circumstance for you," said the king in a less generous
tone of voice.

"Such friendships, sire, had nothing dishonorable in them so long as I
was ignorant of the crime."

"You should have foreseen it."

"If I am guilty, I place myself in your majesty's hands."

"Ah! Monsieur Fouquet, it was not that I meant," returned the king,
sorry to have shown the bitterness of his thought in such a manner.
"Well! I assure you that, notwithstanding the mask with which the
villain covered his face, I had something like a vague suspicion that it
might be he. But with this chief of the enterprise there was a man of
prodigious strength, the one who menaced me with a force almost
herculean, what is he?"

"It must be his friend the Baron de Valon, formerly one of the
musketeers."

"The friend of D'Artagnan? the friend of the Comte de la Fere. Ah!"
exclaimed the king, as he paused at the name of the latter, "we must not
forget the connection that existed between the conspirators and M. de
Bragelonne."

"Sire, sire, do not go too far! M. de la Fere is the most honorable man
in France. Be satisfied with those whom I deliver up to you."

"With those whom you deliver up to me, you say? Very good, for you will
deliver up those who are guilty to me."

"What does your majesty understand by that?" inquired Fouquet.

"I understand," replied the king, "that we shall soon arrive at Vaux
with a large body of troops, that we will lay violent hands upon that
nest of vipers, and that not a soul shall escape."

"Your majesty will put these men to death!" cried Fouquet.

