It was by degrees that Tristram learnt all this, as during the week
that followed he found time to chat with the Huguenot and improve his
acquaintance with the French tongue.  By night he was provided with a
board, a foot and a half wide, on which to stretch himself; and as he
lay pretty far aft, was warned against scratching himself, lest the
rattle of his chains should disturb the officers, whose quarters were
divided from the slaves' by the thinnest of wooden partitions.
By day, indeed, these officers, as well as the chaplain, had the use
of the Commodore's room, a fairly spacious chamber in the stern,
shaped on the outside like a big cradle, with bulging windows and a
couple of lanterns on the taffrail above, that were lit when evening
closed in.  But at night, or in foul weather, M. de la Pailletine
reserved this apartment for his own use.

At six o'clock every morning the slaves were roused up and began
their day with prayers, which the chaplain conducted, taking
particular care that the Huguenots were hearty in their responses.
The Turks--or _Vogue-avants_ as they were called--were never molested
on the score of religion; but while Mass was being said were put out
of the galley into a long-boat, where they diverted themselves by
smoking and talking till the Christians were through with their
exercises.

When these were done the daily portion of biscuit--pretty good,
though coarse--was doled out to each man, and at ten o'clock a
porringer of soup.  Also, on days when the galleys were taken for a
cruise, each slave received something less than a pint of wine,
morning and evening, to keep up his strength.  But it must not be
imagined from this that their work was light during the rest of the
week.  When the weather kept them in harbour, all such as knew any
useful trade were taken off the galley to the town of Dunkirk, and
there set to work under guard, some at the making of new clothes or
the repairing of old ones; others at carpentry, plumbing, or
shoemaking; others, again, at repairing the fortifications, and so
on--thus allowing room for the residue to scrub out the galley, wash
down the benches and decks, and set all ship-shape and in order: of
which residue Tristram was one, being versed in no trade but that of
gardening, for which there seemed to be no demand.  But at length,
having an eye for colour, he was given a paint-pot and brushes,
slung over the galley's stern, and set to work to touch up the
window-frames of the Commodore's cabin.  The position was
uncomfortable at first, since the board on which he was slung was but
eight inches wide, and the galley's stern rose to a considerable
height above the water.  Looking down, he reflected that, with the
heavy chain on his leg, he was safe to drown if he slipped; and in
spite of his miserable situation, he had not the least desire to die,
being full of trust in Providence and assured that, so long as he
lived, there would always be a chance of regaining his beloved
Sophia.  And pretty soon he grew to delight in the work, not for its
own sake alone, but because it separated him for a time from the
sight of his companions and their misery.  The paint was blue, which
reminded him of the Pavilions at home, and he began to throw his soul
into the job, with the result that the Commodore expressed much
satisfaction with it, and gave him instructions to repaint the whole
of the stern, including the magnificent board with the inscription
_L'HEUREUSE_ in gilt letters, and the royal arms of France surrounded
with decorations in the flamboyant style.

Thus it happened that, one fine morning in the middle of June, he was
hanging out over the stern in his usual posture, and, having finished
the letters _L'HEU_, took a look around on the brightness of the day
before dipping his brush and starting again.  The galley with her
five consorts lay in the Royal Basin under the citadel, and a mile in
from the open sea, towards which the long line of the pier extended,
its tall forts dominating the sand-dunes that stretched away to right
and left.  The sands shone; the sea was a silvery blue, edged with a
dazzle where its breakers touched the shore; a clear northerly breeze
came sweeping inland and hummed in the galley's rigging as it flew
by.  From the streets of Dunkirk sounded the cheerful bustle of the
morning's business; and as Tristram glanced up at the glistening
spire of the Jesuits' church, its clock struck out eleven o'clock as
merrily as if it played a tune.

It was just at this moment, as he turned to dip his brush, that he
caught sight of a small boat approaching across the basin.  It was
rowed by a waterman, and in the stern-sheets there sat a figure the
sight of which caused Tristram's heart to stop beating for a moment,
and then to resume at a gallop.  He caught hold of the rope by which
he hung, and looked again.

Beyond a doubt it was his father, Roderick Salt!

Now just as Tristram underwent this shock of surprise, from a point
about three yards above his head another person was watching the boat
with some curiosity.  This was the Commodore, M.  de la Pailletine,
who stood on the poop with his feet planted wide and his hands
clasped beneath his coat-tails.  He was wondering who this visitor
could be.

Captain Salt was elegantly dressed, and the cloak thrown back from
his broad chest revealed a green suit, thick with gold lace, and a
white waistcoat also embroidered with gold.  The bullion twinkled in
the sunshine as the boat drew near and, crossing under Tristram's
dangling heels, dropped alongside the galley.  And as it passed, the
son, looking straight beneath him, determined in his heart that, bad
as his present plight might be, he would endure it rather than trust
himself in his father's hands again.  The Captain stepped briskly up
the ladder and gained the galley's deck.  He had given the young man
a glance and no more.  It was not wonderful that he had failed to
recognise in the young _forcat_ with the shaven head and rough,
stubbly beard the son whom he had abandoned more than a month before.
Besides, he was busy composing in his mind an introductory speech to
be let off on M. de la Pailletine, in whose manner of receiving him
he anticipated some little frigidity.

However, he stepped on deck and advanced towards the officer on the
poop with a pleasant smile, doffing his laced hat with one hand and
holding forward a letter in the other.  M. de la Pailletine took his
hands from beneath his coat-tails and also advanced, returning the
salute very politely.

"The Commodore de la Pailletine, I believe?"

"The same, monsieur."

The two gentlemen regarded each other narrowly for an instant; then,
still smiling, Captain Salt presented his letter, and stood tapping
the deck with the toe of his square-pointed shoe and looking amiably
about him while the Commodore glanced at the seal, broke it, and
began to read.

At the first sentence the muscles of M. de la Pailletine's forehead
contracted slightly.

"Just as I expected," said the Englishman to himself, as he stole a
glance.  But he continued to wear his air of good-fellowship, and his
teeth, which were white as milk and quite even, showed all the time.

Meanwhile the Commodore's brow did not clear.  He was a wiry, tall
man, of beautiful manners and a singularly urbane demeanour, but he
could not hide the annoyance which this letter caused him.
He finished it, turned abruptly to the beginning, and read it through
again; then looked at Captain Salt with a shade of severity on his
face.  "Sir," he said, in a carefully regulated voice, "you may count
on my obeying his Majesty's commands to the letter."  He laid some
stress on the two words "commands" and "letter."

"I thank you, monsieur," answered the Englishman, without allowing
himself to show that he perceived this.

"I am ordered"--again the word "ordered" was slightly emphasised--"I
am ordered to make you welcome on board my galley.  Therefore I must
ask you to consider yourself at home here for so long as it may
please you to stay."

He bowed again, but very stiffly, nor did he offer to shake hands.
Captain Salt regarded him with his head tilted a little to one side,
and his lips pursed up as if he were whistling silently.  As a matter
of fact he was whispering to himself, "You shall rue this, my
gentleman!"  But aloud he asked the somewhat puzzling question:

"Is that all, monsieur?"

"Why, yes," answered M. de la Pailletine, "except that you need have
no doubt I shall treat you with the respect which is your due, or
rather--"

"Pray proceed."

"--Or rather, with the respect which his Majesty thinks is your due."

"And which you do not."

"Excuse me, sir; I do not venture to set up my opinion against that
of King Lewis."

"Yes, yes, of course; but, monsieur, I was trying to get at your own
feelings.  You do not think that a man who enlists against his own
country, even on the side of his rightful King, can be entitled to
any respect?"

"Excuse me--" began the Commodore; but Captain Salt interrupted with
a gentle wave of the hand.

"Tut, tut, my dear sir! Pray do not imagine that I resent this
expression of your feelings.  On the contrary, I am grateful to you
for treating me so frankly.  I have consolations.  Your sovereign"--
he pointed to the letter which M. de la Pailletine was folding up and
placing in his breast-pocket--"has a more intelligent sense of my
merits and my honour."

"Doubtless, monsieur," the Commodore answered; "but permit me to
suggest that the discussion of these matters is out of place on deck.
Suffer me, therefore, to conduct you to my cabin, which is at your
disposal while you choose to honour us."

The Englishman bowed and followed his host below.  Nor could
Tristram, who had heard every sentence of their conversation, feel
sufficiently thankful that he had finished painting the cabin windows
three days before, and was not obliged to expose his face to the
chance of recognition.  And yet it is doubtful if he would have been
recognised, so direly had tribulation altered him.  He finished his
work for the morning with less artistry than usual, and was drawn
upon deck shortly before the dinner-hour, by which time the galley's
complement was brought on board for a short cruise.  As Tristram rose
and fell to his oar, that afternoon, he heard his father's voice just
over his head, and then the Commodore's answering it.  Their tones
were not cordial; but their feet were pacing side by side, and it was
obvious that the Englishman had already in some measure abated the
Commodore's dislike.

Indeed, in the course of the next week Tristram learnt enough to be
sure that his father was making steady progress in the affections of
the officers of the galley.  At first there is little doubt that the
Captain was moved to capture their good will from a merely vague
desire, common to all men of his character, to stand well in the
opinion of everybody he met.  He had arrived at Saint Germains, and
had ridden thence to meet King James, who was returning from Calais
in a dog's temper over the failure of the mutinous ships to meet him
at that port.  Captain Salt presented the Earl's letter, and by
depicting the mutiny in colours which his imagination supplied,
laying stress on the enthusiasm of the crews, and declaring that the
success of their plot was delayed rather than destroyed by the
cunning of the usurper, he contrived to inspire hope again in the
breast of the cantankerous and exiled monarch, who kept him at his
side during the rest of the journey back to Paris, and there
introduced him to the favour of King Lewis.  The latter monarch, who
happened to be bored, asked Captain Salt what he could do for him.

Captain Salt, remembering the Earl's promise, suggested that a
descent on the English coast might be made from Dunkirk, if his
Majesty were still disposed to befriend the unfortunate House of
Stuart.

King Lewis yawned, remembered that he had a certain number of galleys
languishing at Dunkirk for want of exercise, and suggested that
Captain Salt had better go and see for himself what they were likely
to effect.

Captain Salt went.  His main purpose was to live in comfortable
quarters at the King's expense, while awaiting for the promised
letter from the Earl of Marlborough.  On the eighth day after his
arrival, a small fishing-smack with a green pennant came racing past
the two castles at the entrance of Dunkirk pier, slackened her
main-sheet, spun down between the forts with the wind astern,
rounded, and cast anchor in the Royal Basin.  Her crew then lowered a
little cockleshell of a dinghy, which she carried inboard, and a
tanned, red-bearded man pulled straight for the Commodore's galley.

He bore a letter addressed to Captain Roderick Salt.  It was written
in cipher, but read as follows:

    Dear S.,--Portland suspected you and had you followed.  I saw his
    eye upon you during your last interview with William.  It was
    clever to get through, nor can I discover how you managed it: for
    the account given by your pursuers is plainly absurd.  I've been
    turning over their cock-and-bull story, which finds credence
    here, and cannot fit it with the probabilities.  Yet they seem
    William's men.  I find that the horse on which one of them
    returned is not the same as that upon which he rode away; nor
    does their narrative account for this.  But the main point is
    that you are safe.  By the way, I hope you have kept your son at
    your side; for I have now received the information about which I
    dropped you some hints.  It appears that he inherits from a
    great-uncle (one Silvanus Tellworthy) certain American estates,
    of which you and a Captain Runacles, of Harwich, are the legal
    administrators.  I fancy this has been kept from you; and, if so,
    a descent upon Harwich may be used to furnish you with a
    provision for your old age.  Still, there is a present danger
    that you may be declared a traitor, and your goods confiscate,
    which would spoil all.  This (since naught has been proved
    against you, and the aim of your journey not known) you may avert
    by keeping your eyes open at Dunquerque, and writing a report of
    it to Wm.  Such a report, aptly drawn, may not only check
    Portland, but justify me, as knowing your intent from the start,
    and that it was a move for Wm's, good.--M.

On reading this Captain Salt cursed several times; and paced the deck
in meditation for a whole afternoon.  Then an idea struck him.

During the week that followed he made excellent progress in the
affections of the officers of _L'Heureuse_.  He had a face full of
_bonhomie_, an engaging knack of seeming to flatter his companions
while he merely listened to their talk, a fund of anecdote, and
(as we know) a voice for singing that conciliated all who had an ear
for music.  All these advantages he used.  For the next few days the
officers came late to bed, and Tristram and his companions could
allay the irritation of their skins as they listed.  Night after
night shouts of laughter came from the Commodore's room: and with the
savour of delicate meats there now reached them the notes of a tenor
voice that moved many of the most abandoned to tears.

The end was that the officers admitted him to their counsels, which
may have been the reason that the galleys, that until now had taken
but the shortest cruises, began to risk more daring expeditions, and
once or twice adventured within a league of the English coast.
But no occasion was found for landing and burning a town--which was
the object continually debated at the officers' board.  In fact, the
weather did not favour it; and, moreover, the whole line of coast was
guarded by patrolling parties, ready to give warning to the
train-bands stationed at convenient distances, so that the crews ran
no inconsiderable risk of being surprised and cut to pieces if they
landed, not to speak of having their galleys taken behind them by the
British cruisers.  And none knew better than M. de la Pailletine that
the slaves, if left without sufficient guard to coerce them, were as
likely as not to murder their overseers and hand their galleys over
to the first enemy they met.

Nothing of any consequence, therefore, was done for six weeks; and at
the end of that time Captain Salt sought out the Commodore, and
announced that he had received a letter from a friend in Paris
summoning him thither on private business.  The Commodore, who had
really grown to like the Englishman, expressed his regret.
