word as a gentleman that I shall, in due course of time, obtain the
place of Master of Woods and Waters in France, the devil take me if I
will risk my neck any longer. To conquer Normandy for the king is not
an easy matter, and I demand the Order for it. But," he added, coloring,
"there's time enough to think of that. God forbid that I should imitate
these poor mercenaries and harass you. Speak to the king for me, and
that's enough."

Each of the chiefs found means to let the marquis know, in a more
or less ingenious manner, the exaggerated price they set upon their
services. One modestly demanded the governorship of Brittany; another
a barony; this one a promotion; that one a command; and all wanted
pensions.

"Well, baron," said the marquis to Monsieur du Guenic, "don't you want
anything?"

"These gentlemen have left me nothing but the crown of France, marquis,
but I might manage to put up with that--"

"Gentlemen!" cried the Abbe Gudin, in a loud voice, "remember that if
you are too eager you will spoil everything in the day of victory. The
king will then be compelled to make concessions to the revolutionists."

"To those Jacobins!" shouted the smuggler. "Ha! if the king would let me
have my way, I'd answer for my thousand men; we'd soon wring their necks
and be rid of them."

"Monsieur _de_ Cottereau," said the marquis, "I see some of our invited
guests arriving. We must all do our best by attention and courtesy to
make them share our sacred enterprise; you will agree, I am sure, that
this is not the moment to bring forward your demands, however just they
may be."

So saying, the marquis went to the door, as if to meet certain of the
country nobles who were entering the room, but the bold smuggler barred
his way in a respectful manner.

"No, no, monsieur le marquis, excuse me," he said; "the Jacobins taught
me too well in 1793 that it is not he who sows and reaps who eats the
bread. Sign this bit of paper for me, and to-morrow I'll bring you
fifteen hundred gars. If not, I'll treat with the First Consul."

Looking haughtily about him, the marquis saw plainly that the boldness
of the old partisan and his resolute air were not displeasing to any of
the spectators of this debate. One man alone, sitting by himself in a
corner of the room, appeared to take no part in the scene, and to be
chiefly occupied in filling his pipe. The contemptuous air with which
he glanced at the speakers, his modest demeanor, and a look of sympathy
which the marquis encountered in his eyes, made the young leader observe
the man, whom he then recognized as Major Brigaut, and he went suddenly
up to him.

"And you, what do you want?" he said.

"Oh, monsieur le marquis, if the king comes back that's all I want."

"But for yourself?"

"For myself? are you joking?"

The marquis pressed the horny hand of the Breton, and said to Madame du
Gua, who was near them: "Madame, I may perish in this enterprise before
I have time to make a faithful report to the king on the Catholic armies
of Brittany. I charge you, in case you live to see the Restoration,
not to forget this honorable man nor the Baron du Guenic. There is more
devotion in them than in all those other men put together."

He pointed to the chiefs, who were waiting with some impatience till the
marquis should reply to their demands. They were all holding papers in
their hands, on which, no doubt, their services were recorded over
the signatures of the various generals of the former war; and all were
murmuring. The Abbe Gudin, the Comte de Bauvan, and the Baron du
Guenic were consulting how best to help the marquis in rejecting these
extravagant demands, for they felt the position of the young leader to
be extremely delicate.

Suddenly the marquis ran his blue eyes, gleaming with satire, over the
whole assembly, and said in a clear voice: "Gentlemen, I do not know
whether the powers which the king has graciously assigned to me are such
that I am able to satisfy your demands. He doubtless did not foresee
such zeal, such devotion, on your part. You shall judge yourselves of
the duties put upon me,--duties which I shall know how to accomplish."

So saying, he left the room and returned immediately holding in his hand
an open letter bearing the royal seal and signature.

"These are the letters-patent in virtue of which you are to obey me," he
said. "They authorize me to govern the provinces of Brittany, Normandy,
Maine, and Anjou, in the king's name, and to recognize the services of
such officers as may distinguish themselves in his armies."

A movement of satisfaction ran through the assembly. The Chouans
approached the marquis and made a respectful circle round him. All eyes
fastened on the king's signature. The young chief, who was standing near
the chimney, suddenly threw the letters into the fire, and they were
burned in a second.

"I do not choose to command any," cried the young man, "but those who
see a king in the king, and not a prey to prey upon. You are free,
gentlemen, to leave me."

Madame du Gua, the Abbe Gudin, Major Brigaut, the Chevalier du Vissard,
the Baron du Guenic, and the Comte de Bauvan raised the cry of "Vive le
roi!" For a moment the other leaders hesitated; then, carried away by
the noble action of the marquis, they begged him to forget what had
passed, assuring him that, letters-patent or not, he must always be
their leader.

"Come and dance," cried the Comte de Bauvan, "and happen what will!
After all," he added, gaily, "it is better, my friends, to pray to God
than the saints. Let us fight first, and see what comes of it."

"Ha! that's good advice," said Brigaut. "I have never yet known a day's
pay drawn in the morning."

The assembly dispersed about the rooms, where the guests were now
arriving. The marquis tried in vain to shake off the gloom which
darkened his face. The chiefs perceived the unfavorable impression
made upon a young man whose devotion was still surrounded by all the
beautiful illusions of youth, and they were ashamed of their action.

However, a joyous gaiety soon enlivened the opening of the ball, at
which were present the most important personages of the royalist party,
who, unable to judge rightly, in the depths of a rebellious province, of
the actual events of the Revolution, mistook their hopes for realities.
The bold operations already begun by Montauran, his name, his
fortune, his capacity, raised their courage and caused that political
intoxication, the most dangerous of all excitements, which does not cool
till torrents of blood have been uselessly shed. In the minds of all
present the Revolution was nothing more than a passing trouble to the
kingdom of France, where, to their belated eyes, nothing was changed.
The country belonged as it ever did to the house of Bourbon. The
royalists were the lords of the soil as completely as they were four
years earlier, when Hoche obtained less a peace than an armistice. The
nobles made light of the revolutionists; for them Bonaparte was another,
but more fortunate, Marceau. So gaiety reigned. The women had come to
dance. A few only of the chiefs, who had fought the Blues, knew the
gravity of the situation; but they were well aware that if they talked
of the First Consul and his power to their benighted companions, they
could not make themselves understood. These men stood apart and looked
at the women with indifference. Madame du Gua, who seemed to do the
honors of the ball, endeavored to quiet the impatience of the dancers by
dispensing flatteries to each in turn. The musicians were tuning their
instruments and the dancing was about to begin, when Madame du Gua
noticed the gloom on de Montauran's face and went hurriedly up to him.

"I hope it is not that vulgar scene you have just had with those
clodhoppers which depresses you?" she said.

She got no answer; the marquis, absorbed in thought, was listening in
fancy to the prophetic reasons which Marie had given him in the midst of
the same chiefs at La Vivetiere, urging him to abandon the struggle
of kings against peoples. But the young man's soul was too proud, too
lofty, too full perhaps of conviction, to abandon an enterprise he had
once begun, and he decided at this moment, to continue it boldly in the
face of all obstacles. He raised his head haughtily, and for the first
time noticed that Madame du Gua was speaking to him.

"Your mind is no doubt at Fougeres," she remarked bitterly, seeing how
useless her efforts to attract his attention had been. "Ah, monsieur,
I would give my life to put _her_ within your power, and see you happy
with her."

"Then why have you done all you could to kill her?"

"Because I wish her dead or in your arms. Yes, I may have loved the
Marquis de Montauran when I thought him a hero, but now I feel only a
pitying friendship for him; I see him shorn of all his glory by a fickle
love for a worthless woman."

"As for love," said the marquis, in a sarcastic tone, "you judge me
wrong. If I loved that girl, madame, I might desire her less; if it were
not for you, perhaps I should not think of her at all."

"Here she is!" exclaimed Madame du Gua, abruptly.

The haste with which the marquis looked round went to the heart of the
woman; but the clear light of the wax candles enabled her to see every
change on the face of the man she loved so violently, and when he turned
back his face, smiling at her woman's trick, she fancied there was still
some hope of recovering him.

"What are you laughing at?" asked the Comte de Bauvan.

"At a soap-bubble which has burst," interposed Madame du Gua, gaily.
"The marquis, if we are now to believe him, is astonished that his
heart ever beat the faster for that girl who presumes to call herself
Mademoiselle de Verneuil. You know who I mean."

"That girl!" echoed the count. "Madame, the author of a wrong is
bound to repair it. I give you my word of honor that she is really the
daughter of the Duc de Verneuil."

"Monsieur le comte," said the marquis, in a changed voice, "which of
your statements am I to believe,--that of La Vivetiere, or that now
made?"

The loud voice of a servant at the door announced Mademoiselle de
Verneuil. The count sprang forward instantly, offered his hand to the
beautiful woman with every mark of profound respect, and led her through
the inquisitive crowd to the marquis and Madame du Gua. "Believe the one
now made," he replied to the astonished young leader.

Madame du Gua turned pale at the unwelcome sight of the girl, who stood
for a moment, glancing proudly over the assembled company, among whom
she sought to find the guests at La Vivetiere. She awaited the forced
salutation of her rival, and, without even looking at the marquis, she
allowed the count to lead her to the place of honor beside Madame du
Gua, whose bow she returned with an air that was slightly protecting.
But the latter, with a woman's instinct, took no offense; on the
contrary, she immediately assumed a smiling, friendly manner. The
extraordinary dress and beauty of Mademoiselle de Verneuil caused a
murmur throughout the ballroom. When the marquis and Madame du Gua
looked towards the late guests at La Vivetiere they saw them in an
attitude of respectful admiration which was not assumed; each seemed
desirous of recovering favor with the misjudged young woman. The enemies
were in presence of each other.

"This is really magic, mademoiselle," said Madame du Gua; "there is no
one like you for surprises. Have you come all alone?"

"All alone," replied Mademoiselle de Verneuil. "So you have only one to
kill to-night, madame."

"Be merciful," said Madame du Gua. "I cannot express to you the pleasure
I have in seeing you again. I have truly been overwhelmed by the
remembrance of the wrongs I have done you, and am most anxious for an
occasion to repair them."

"As for those wrongs, madame, I readily pardon those you did to me, but
my heart bleeds for the Blues whom you murdered. However, I excuse all,
in return for the service you have done me."

Madame du Gua lost countenance as she felt her hand pressed by her
beautiful rival with insulting courtesy. The marquis had hitherto stood
motionless, but he now seized the arm of the count.

"You have shamefully misled me," he said; "you have compromised my
honor. I am not a Geronte of comedy, and I shall have your life or you
will have mine."

"Marquis," said the count, haughtily, "I am ready to give you all the
explanations you desire."

They passed into the next room. The witnesses of this scene, even those
least initiated into the secret, began to understand its nature, so
that when the musicians gave the signal for the dancing to begin no one
moved.

"Mademoiselle, what service have I rendered you that deserves a return?"
said Madame du Gua, biting her lips in a sort of rage.

"Did you not enlighten me as to the true character of the Marquis de
Montauran, madame? With what utter indifference that man allowed me to
go to my death! I give him up to you willingly!"

"Then why are you here?" asked Madame du Gua, eagerly.

"To recover the respect and consideration you took from me at La
Vivetiere, madame. As for all the rest, make yourself easy. Even if the
marquis returned to me, you know very well that a return is never love."

Madame du Gua took Mademoiselle de Verneuil's hand with that
affectionate touch and motion which women practise to each other,
especially in the presence of men.

"Well, my poor dear child," she said, "I am glad to find you so
reasonable. If the service I did you was rather harsh," she added,
pressing the hand she held, and feeling a desire to rend it as her
fingers felt its softness and delicacy, "it shall at least be thorough.
Listen to me, I know the character of the Gars; he meant to deceive you;
he neither can nor will marry any woman except--"

"Ah!"

"Yes, mademoiselle, he has accepted his dangerous mission to win the
hand of Mademoiselle d'Uxelles, a marriage to which his Majesty has
promised his countenance."

"Ah! ah!"

Mademoiselle de Verneuil added not a word to that scornful ejaculation.
The young and handsome Chevalier du Vissard, eager to be forgiven for
the joke which had led to the insults at La Vivetiere, now came up to
her and respectfully invited her to dance. She placed her hand in his,
and they took their places in a quadrille opposite to Madame du Gua. The
gowns of the royalist women, which recalled the fashions of the exiled
court, and their creped and powdered hair seemed absurd as soon as they
were contrasted with the attire which republican fashions authorized
Mademoiselle de Verneuil to wear. This attire, which was elegant, rich,
and yet severe, was loudly condemned but inwardly envied by all the
women present. The men could not restrain their admiration for the
beauty of her natural hair and the adjustment of a dress the charm of
which was in the proportions of the form which it revealed.

At that moment the marquis and the count re-entered the ballroom behind
Mademoiselle de Verneuil, who did not turn her head. If a mirror had not
been there to inform her of Montauran's presence, she would have
known it from Madame du Gua's face, which scarcely concealed, under an
apparently indifferent air, the impatience with which she awaited the
conflict which must, sooner or later, take place between the lovers.
Though the marquis talked with the count and other persons, he heard
the remarks of all the dancers who from time to time in the mazes of the
quadrille took the place of Mademoiselle de Verneuil and her partner.

"Positively, madame, she came alone," said one.

"She must be a bold woman," replied the lady.

"If I were dressed like that I should feel myself naked," said another
woman.

"Oh, the gown is not decent, certainly," replied her partner; "but it is
so becoming, and she is so handsome."

"I am ashamed to look at such perfect dancing, for her sake; isn't it
exactly that of an opera girl?" said the envious woman.

"Do you suppose that she has come here to intrigue for the First
Consul?" said another.

"A joke if she has," replied the partner.

"Well, she can't offer innocence as a dowry," said the lady, laughing.

The Gars turned abruptly to see the lady who uttered this sarcasm, and
Madame du Gua looked at him as if to say, "You see what people think of
her."

"Madame," said the count, laughing, "so far, it is only women who have
taken her innocence away from her."

The marquis privately forgave the count. When he ventured to look at his
mistress, whose beauty was, like that of most women, brought into relief
by the light of the wax candles, she turned her back upon him as she
resumed her place, and went on talking to her partner in a way to let
the marquis hear the sweetest and most caressing tones of her voice.

"The First Consul sends dangerous ambassadors," her partner was saying.

"Monsieur," she replied, "you all said that at La Vivetiere."

"You have the memory of a king," replied he, disconcerted at his own
awkwardness.

"To forgive injuries one must needs remember them," she said quickly,
relieving his embarrassment with a smile.

"Are we all included in that amnesty?" said the marquis, approaching
her.

But she darted away in the dance, with the gaiety of a child, leaving
him without an answer. He watched her coldly and sadly; she saw it, and
bent her head with one of those coquettish motions which the graceful
lines of her throat enabled her to make, omitting no movement or
attitude which could prove to him the perfection of her figure. She
attracted him like hope, and eluded him like a memory. To see her thus
was to desire to possess her at any cost. She knew that, and the
sense it gave her of her own beauty shed upon her whole person an
inexpressible charm. The marquis felt the storm of love, of rage, of
madness, rising in his heart; he wrung the count's hand violently, and
left the room.

"Is he gone?" said Mademoiselle de Verneuil, returning to her place.

The count gave her a glance and passed into the next room, from which he
presently returned accompanied by the Gars.

"He is mine!" she thought, observing his face in the mirror.

She received the young leader with a displeased air and said nothing,
but she smiled as she turned away from him; he was so superior to all
about him that she was proud of being able to rule him; and obeying an
instinct which sways all women more or less, she resolved to let him
know the value of a few gracious words by making him pay dear for them.
As soon as the quadrille was over, all the gentlemen who had been at
La Vivetiere surrounded Mademoiselle de Verneuil, wishing by their
flattering attentions to obtain her pardon for the mistake they had
made; but he whom she longed to see at her feet did not approach the
circle over which she now reigned a queen.

"He thinks I still love him," she thought, "and does not wish to be
confounded with mere flatterers."

She refused to dance again. Then, as if the ball were given for her, she
walked about on the arm of the Comte de Bauvan, to whom she was pleased
to show some familiarity. The affair at La Vivetiere was by this time
known to all present, thanks to Madame du Gua, and the lovers were the
object of general attention. The marquis dared not again address his
mistress; a sense of the wrong he had done her and the violence of his
returning passion made her seem to him actually terrible. On her side
Marie watched his apparently calm face while she seemed to be observing
the ball.

"It is fearfully hot here," she said to the count. "Take me to the other
side where I can breathe; I am stifling here."

And she motioned towards a small room where a few card-players were
assembled. The marquis followed her. He ventured to hope she had left
the crowd to receive him, and this supposed favor roused his passion to
extreme violence; for his love had only increased through the resistance
he had made to it during the last few days. Mademoiselle de Verneuil
still tormented him; her eyes, so soft and velvety for the count, were
hard and stern when, as if by accident, they met his. Montauran at last
made a painful effort and said, in a muffled voice, "Will you never
forgive me?"

"Love forgives nothing, or it forgives all," she said, coldly. "But,"
she added, noticing his joyful look, "it must be love."

She took the count's arm once more and moved forward into a small
