
[124] See the _Corpus inscriptionum latinarum_, vol. vi., part 2, nos.
4327-5886.

[125] See Walch: _Ad Gorii Xenia_, p. 98.--Orelli-Henzen: vol. 2, no.
4789, etc.

[126] _Monumenti inediti dell' Instituto di correspondenza
archeologica_, Supplemento, 1891.

[127] _Titus_, 4.

[128] See:--Pietro Sante Bartoli: _Gli antichi sepolcri_. Roma: de
Rossi, 1727.--_Corpus inscriptionum latinarum_, vol. vi., part ii.,
pp. 1073, 1076.--_Villa Pamphylia, ejusque palatium cum suis
prospectibus: statuae, fontes, vivaria_. Romae: fol. max.--Ignazio
Ciampi: _Innocenzo X Pamfili e la sua corte_. Roma: Galeati, 1878.

[129] See:--Otto Jahn: _Die Wandgemaelde des Columbariums in der Villa
Pamfili_, in the _Abhandlungen der bayerischen Akademie_, 1857.--Eugen
Petersen: _Sitzungsberichte des Archaeologischen Instituts_, Roemische
Abtheilung, March 18, 1892.

[130] A discovery of the same kind has come within my experience. In
1885, while excavating near the city walls, between the Porta S.
Lorenzo and the Porta Maggiore, we found an amphora of great size,
containing the corpse of a little child embedded in lime. He had
probably died of a contagious disease. The corpse had been reduced to
a handful of tiny bones; and the impression of them was so spoiled by
dampness and age that it was found impossible to cast the form of the
infant.

[131] _Digest_, ix., 2, 5, Sec. 3.

[132] See:--_Notizie degli Scavi_, 1884, p. 393.--Henzen: _Bullettino
dell' Instituto_, 1885, p. 9.--Stevenson: _idem_, 1885, p.
22.--Geffroy: _Melanges de l'Ecole francaise de Rome_, 1885, p. 318,
pl. vii-xiii.

[133] See C. Ludovico Visconti: _Il sepolcro del fanciullo Quinto
Sulpicio Massimo._ Roma, 1871.--Wilhelm Henzen: _Sepolcri antichi
rinvenuti alla porta salaria_, in the _Bullettino dell' Instituto_,
1871, p. 98.--Luigi Ciofi: _Inscriptiones latinae et graecae, cum carmine
graeco extemporali Quinti Sulpicii Maximi_. Roma, 1871.--J. Henry
Parker: _Tombs in and near Rome_. Oxford, 1877. (Plate X.)

[134] On the subject of this competition see:--Suetonius: _Domitian_,
4.--Stefano Morcelli: _Sull' Agone Capitolino_. Dissertazione postuma.
Milano, 1816.--Joachim Marquardt: _Handbuch der roemischen
Alterthuemer_, iv., 453.

[135] See Cesare Lucchesini: _Esame della questione se i latini
avessero veri poeti improvvisatori_. Lucca, 1828.

[136] The bibliography on Herodes Atticus and his villa at the second
milestone of the Appian Way is so rich that I can mention but a few of
the leading works, besides Visconti's.--Claude Saumaise: _Memoires sur
la vie d'Herodes Atticus_, in _Academie des inscriptions et belles
lettres_, xxx. p. 25; _Corpus inscriptionum graecarum_: vol. iii.
no. 6280, p. 924.--Wilhelm Dittenberger: _Die Familie des Herodes
Atticus_.--Richard Burgess: _Description of the Circus on the Via
Appia_. Italian translation, p. 89. Rome, 1829.--Ludovico Bianconi:
_Descrizione dei circhi e particolarmente di quello di Caracalla_.
Roma, 1786.--Antonio Nibby: _Del circo volgarmente detto di
Caracalla_. Roma, 1825.

[137] When Maxentius repaired the Appian Way in 309, one of these
commemorative columns was converted into a milestone, the seventh from
the Porta Capena. The column was removed in the Middle Ages to the
Church of S. Eusebio on the Esquiline, where it was seen and
purchased, at the beginning of the last century, by cardinal
Alessandro Albani. It now belongs to the Capitoline Museum.

[138] _I comentari di Frontino intorno le acque e gli acquedotti_:
Opera premiata dalla r. Accademia dei Lincei col premio reale di lire
10,000. Roma, Salviucci, 1880.

[139] Among the modern writers on the subject are:--Christian Huelsen:
_Die Auffindung der roemischen Leiche vom Jahre_ 1485, in the
_Mittheilungen des Instituts fuer oesterreichische Geschichtforschung_,
Band iv., Heft 3.--J. Addington Symonds: _History of the Renaissance_,
i. 23.--Giovanni Antonio Riccy: _Dell' antico pago Lemonio_. Roma,
1802 (p. 109).--Gregorovius: _Geschichte der Stadt Rom im
Mittelalter_, vii., 3, p. 571.--_Corpus inscriptionum latinarum_, vol.
vi., no. 20,634.

Contemporary documents:--Stefano Infessura: _Diario_, edited by
Tommasini. Rome, 1890.--Notarius a Nantiportu: in _Cod. Vatic._,
6,823, f. 250.--Raffaele Maffei da Volterra (Volterranus, born 1451,
died 1522): _Commentarii rerum Urbanarum_, column 954 of the Lyons
edition, 1552.--Bartolomeo Fonte (Humanist, born 1445, died 1513):
letter to Francesco Sassetto, published by Janitschek: _Gesells. der
Renaissance_, p. 120.--Letter from Laur Pehem, dated April 15, 1475,
in the _Cod. Munich_, 716 (among the papers collected by Hartman
Schedel).--Copy of a letter from messer Daniele da San Sebastiano to
Giacomo di Maphei, citizen of Verona, in the _Cod. Marciano_ (Venice),
xiv. 267.--Alexander ab Alexandro (born at Naples, 1461, died in Rome,
1523): _Genialium Dierum_, iii. 2.--Fragment of the diary of Antonio
di Vaseli (1481-1486), in the _Archives of the Vatican_, Armar. XV.
fasc. 41.--Fragment of the diary of Corona (first entry Jan. 30, 1481;
last July 25, 1492) in the possession of H. D. Grissel, Esq.--Anonym
ap. Mountfaucon, _Diarium Italicum_, xi. 157.

[140] Sponges are most frequently found in the _cistae_ at Palestrina,
which were nothing else but toilet-boxes. I have had the opportunity
of examining the contents of twelve of them, lately discovered. These
include sponges, combs of various kinds and shapes, hairpins, wooden
boxes with movable lids, still full of excellent powders, cosmetics,
and ointments, and other articles of the _mundus muliebris_.




CHAPTER VII.

CHRISTIAN CEMETERIES.[141]

     Sanctity of tombs guaranteed to all creeds alike.--The
     Christians' preference for underground cemeteries not due to fear
     at first.--Origin and cause of the first persecutions.--The
     attitude of Trajan towards the Christians, and its results.--The
     persecution of Diocletian.--The history of the early Christians
     illustrated by their graves.--The tombs of the first
     century.--The catacombs.--How they were named.--The security they
     offered against attack.--Their enormous extent.--Their gradual
     abandonment in the fourth century.--Open-air cemeteries developed
     in proportion.--The Goths in Rome.--Their pillage of the
     catacombs.--Thereafter burial within the city walls became
     common.--The translation of the bodies of martyrs.--Pilgrims and
     their itineraries.--The catacombs neglected from the ninth to the
     sixteenth century.--Their discovery in 1578.--Their wanton
     treatment by scholars of that time.--Artistic treasures found in
     them.--The catacombs of Generosa.--The story of Simplicius,
     Faustina and Viatrix.--The cemetery of Domitilla.--The Christian
     Flavii buried there.--The basilica of Nereus, Achilleus and
     Petronilla.--The tomb of Ampliatus.--Was this S. Paul's
     friend?--The cemetery "ad catacumbas."--The translation of the
     bodies of SS. Peter and Paul.--The types of the Saviour in early
     art.--The cemetery of Cyriaca.--Discoveries made
     there.--Inscriptions and works of art.--The cemetery "ad duas
     Lauros."--Frescoes in it.--The symbolic supper.--The discoveries
     of Monsignor Wilpert.--The Academy of Pomponio Leto.


The Roman law which established the inviolability of tombs did not
make exceptions either of persons or creeds. Whether the deceased had
been pious or impious, a worshipper of Roman or foreign gods, or a
follower of Eastern or barbaric religions, his burial-place was
considered by law a _locus religiosus_, as inviolable as a temple. In
this respect there was no distinction between Christians, pagans, and
Jews; all enjoyed the same privileges, and were subject to the same
rules. It is not easy to decide whether this condition of things was
an advantage to the faithful. It was certainly advantageous to the
Church that her cemeteries should be considered sacred by the law, and
that the State itself should enforce and guarantee the observance of
the rules (_lex monumenti_) made by the deceased in connection with
his interment, and tomb; but as the police of cemeteries, and the
enforcement of the _leges monumentorum_, was intrusted to the college
of high priests, who were stern champions of paganism, the church was
liable to be embarrassed in many ways. When, for instance, a body had
to be transferred from its temporary repository to the tomb, it was
necessary to obtain the consent of the _pontifices_; which was also
required in case of subsequent removals, and even of simple repairs
to the building. Roman epitaphs constantly refer to this authority of
the pontiffs, and one of them, discovered by Ficoroni in July, 1730,
near the Porta Metronia, contains the correspondence exchanged on the
subject between the two parties. The petitioner, Arrius Alphius, a
favorite freedman of the mother of Antoninus Pius, writes to the high
priests: "Having lost at the same time wife and son, I buried them
temporarily in a terra-cotta coffin. I have since purchased a burial
lot on the left side of the Via Flaminia, between the second and the
third milestones, and near the mausoleum of Silius Orcilus, and
furnished it with marble sarcophagi. I beg permission of you, my
Lords, to transfer the said bodies to the new family vault, so that
when my hour shall come, I may be laid to rest beside the dear ones."
The answer was: "Granted (_fieri placet_). Signed by me, Juventius
Celsus, vice-president [of the college of pontiffs], on the 3d day of
November [A. D. 155]."

The greatest difficulty with which the Christians had to deal was the
obligation to perform expiatory sacrifices in given circumstances; as,
for instance, when a corpse was removed from one place to another, or
when a coffin, damaged by any accidental cause, such as lightning,
inundation, fire, earthquake, or violence, had to be opened and the
bones exposed to view. But these were exceptional cases; and there is
no doubt that the magistrates of Rome were naturally lenient and
forbearing in religious matters, except in time of persecution. The
partiality shown by early Christians for underground cemeteries is due
to two causes: the influence which Eastern customs and the example of
the burial of Christ must necessarily have exercised on them, and the
security and freedom which they enjoyed in the darkness and solitude
of their crypts. Catacombs, however, could not be excavated
everywhere, the presence of veins or beds of soft volcanic stone being
a condition _sine qua non_ of their existence. Cities and villages
built on alluvial or marshy soil, or on hills of limestone and lava,
were obliged to resort to open-air cemeteries. In Rome itself these
were not uncommon. Certainly there was no reason why Christians should
object to the authority of the pontiffs in hygienic and civic matters.
This authority was so deeply rooted and respected, that the emperor
Constans (346-350), although a stanch Christian and anxious to abolish
idolatry, left the pontiffs full jurisdiction over Christian and pagan
cemeteries, by a constitution issued in 349.[142]

From apostolic times to the persecution of Domitian, the faithful were
buried, separately or collectively, in private tombs which did not
have the character of a Church institution. These early tombs, whether
above or below ground, display a sense of perfect security, and an
absence of all fear or solicitude. This feeling arose from two facts:
the small extent of the cemeteries, which secured to them the rights
of private property, and the protection and freedom which the Jewish
colony in Rome enjoyed from time immemorial. The Romans of the first
century, populace as well as government officials, made no distinction
between the proselytes of the Old Testament and those of the New.

Julius Caesar and Augustus treated the Jews with kindness, and when S.
Paul arrived in Rome the colony was living in peace and prosperity,
practising religion openly in its Transtiberine synagogues.[143] The
same state of things prevailed throughout the peninsula. Thus the
rabbi or archon of the synagogue at Pompeii called the _Synagoga
Libertinorum_ (the existence of which was discovered in September,
1764), could take, in virtue of his office, an active part in city
politics and petty municipal quarrels, and in his official capacity
could sign a document recommending the election of a candidate for
political honors, as is shown by one of the Pompeian inscriptions:--

CUSPIUM PANSAM AED[_ilem fieri rogat_] FABIUS EUPOR
                 PRINCEPS LIBERTINORUM.[144]

The persecution which took place under Claudius was really the first
connected with the preaching of the gospel. According to Suetonius
(Claud. 25) the Jews themselves were the cause of it, having suddenly
become uneasy, troublesome, and offensive, _impulsore Chresto_, that
is to say, on account of Christ's doctrine, which was beginning to be
preached in their synagogues. The expression used by Suetonius shows
how very little was known at the time about the new religion. Although
Christ's name was not unknown to him, he speaks of this outbreak under
Claudius as having been stirred up personally by a certain Chrestus,
as though he were a living member of the Jewish colony. At that early
stage the converts to the gospel were identified by the Romans with
the Jews, not by mistake or error of judgment, but because they were
legally and actually Jews, or rather one Jewish sect which was
carrying on a dogmatic war against the others, on a point which had no
interest whatever in the eyes of the Romans,--that is, the advent of
the Messiah. This statement is corroborated by many passages in the
Acts, such as xviii. 15; xxiii. 29; xxv. 9; xxvi. 28, 32; xxviii. 31.
Claudius Lysias writes to the governor of Judaea that Paul was accused
by his fellow-citizens, not of crimes deserving punishment, but on
some controversial point concerning their law. In Rome itself the
apostle could preach the gospel with freedom, even when in custody, or
under police supervision.[145] And as it was lawful for a Roman
citizen to embrace the Jewish persuasion, and give up the religion of
his fathers, he was equally free to embrace the Evangelic faith, which
was considered by the pagans a Jewish sect, not a new belief.

The pagans despised them both, and mixed themselves up with their
affairs only from a fiscal point of view, because the Jews were
subject to a tax of two drachms per head, and the treasury officials
were obliged to keep themselves acquainted with the statistics of the
colony.

This state of things did not last very long, it being of vital
importance for the Jews to separate their cause from that of the
new-comers. The responsibility for the persecutions which took place
in the first century must be attributed to them, not to the Romans,
whose tolerance in religious matters had become almost a state rule.
The first attempt, made under Claudius, was not a success: it ended,
in fact, with the banishment from the capital of every Jew, no matter
whether he believed in the Old or the New Testament. _Judaeos,
impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes, Claudius Romae expulit_
(Suetonius: Claud. 25). It was, however, a passing cloud. As soon as
they were allowed to come back to their Transtiberine haunts, the
Jews set to work again, exciting the feelings of the populace, and
denouncing the Christians as conspiring against the State and the
gods, under the protection of the law which guaranteed to the Jews the
free exercise of their religion. The populace, impressed by the
conquests made by the gospel among all classes of citizens, was only
too ready to believe the calumny. The Church, repudiated by her mother
the Synagogue, could no longer share the privileges of the Jewish
community. As for the State, it became a necessity either to recognize
Christianity as a new legal religion, or to proscribe and condemn it.
The great fire, which destroyed half of Rome under Nero, and which was
purposely attributed to the Christians, brought the situation to a
crisis. The first persecution began. Had the magistrate who conducted
the inquiry been able to prove the indictment of arson, perhaps the
storm would have been short, and confined to Rome; but as the
Christians could easily exculpate themselves, the trial was changed
from a criminal into a politico-religious one. The Christians were
convicted not so much of arson (_non tam crimine incendii_) as of a
hatred of mankind (_odio generis humani_); a formula which includes
anarchism, atheism, and high treason. This monstrous accusation once
admitted, the persecution could not be limited to Rome; it necessarily
became general, and more violent in one place or another, according to
the impulse of the magistrate who investigated this entirely
unprecedented case.

Was the hope of a legal existence lost forever to the Church? After
Nero's death, and the condemnation of his acts and memory, the
Christians enjoyed thirty years of peace. Domitian broke it, first, by
claiming with unprecedented severity the tribute from the Jews and
those "living a Jewish life;"[146] secondly, by putting the
"atheists," that is, the Christians, to the alternative of giving up
their faith or their life. These measures were abolished shortly after
by Nerva, who sanctioned the rule that in future no one should be
brought to justice under the plea of impiety or Judaism. The answer
given by Trajan to Pliny the younger, when governor of Bithynia, is
famous in the annals of persecutions. To the inquiries made by the
governor, as to the best way of dealing with those "adoring Christ for
their God," Trajan replied, that the magistrate should not molest them
at his own initiative; but if others should bring them to justice, and
convict them of impiety and atheism, they deserved punishment.[147]
These words contain the solemn recognition of the illegality of
Christian worship; they make persecution a rule of state. The faithful
were doomed to have no respite for the next two centuries, except what
they could obtain at intervals from the personal kindness and
tolerance of emperors and magistrates. Those of the Jewish religion
continued to enjoy protection and privileges, but Christianity was
either persecuted or tolerated, as it happened; so that, even under
emperors who abhorred severity and bloodshed, the faithful were at the
mercy of the first vagrant who chanced to accuse them of impiety.

Strange to say, more clemency was shown towards them by emperors whom
we are accustomed to call tyrants, than by those who are considered
models of virtue. The author of the "Philosophumena" (book ix., ch.
11) says that Commodus granted to Pope Victor the liberation of the
Christians who had been condemned to the mines of Sardinia by Marcus
Aurelius. Thus that profligate emperor was really more merciful to the
Church than the philosophic author of the "Meditations," who, in the
year 174, had witnessed the miracle of the Thundering Legion. The
reason is evident. The wise rulers foresaw the destructive effect of
the new doctrines on pagan society, and indirectly on the empire
itself; whereas those who were given over to dissipation were
indifferent to the danger; "after them, the deluge!"

At the beginning of the third century, under the rule of Caracalla and
Elagabalus, the Church enjoyed nearly thirty years of peace,
interrupted only by the short persecution of Maximus, and by
occasional outbreaks of popular hostility here and there.[148]

In 249 the "days of terror" returned, and continued fiercer than ever
under the rules of Decius, Gallus, and Valerianus. The last
persecution, that of Diocletian and his colleagues, was the longest
and most cruel of all. For the space of ten years not a day of mercy
shone over the _ecclesia fidelium_. The historian Eusebius, an
eye-witness, says that when the persecutors became tired of bloodshed,
they contrived a new form of cruelty. They put out the right eyes of
the confessors, cut the tendon of their left legs, and then sent them
to the mines, lame, half blind, half starved, and flogged nearly to
death. In book VIII., chapter 12, the historian says that the number
of sufferers was so great that no account could be kept of them in the
archives of the Church. The memory of this decade of horrors has never
died out in Rome. We have still a local tradition, not altogether
unfounded, of ten thousand Christians who were condemned to quarry
materials for Diocletian's Baths, and who were put to death after the
dedication of the building.

Towards the end of 306, Maxentius stopped the persecution, but the
true era of peace did not begin before 312, which is the date of
Constantine's famous "edict of Milan," granting to the Church liberty
and free possession of her places of worship and cemeteries forever.

The events of which I have given a summary sketch are beautifully
illustrated by the discoveries which have been made in early Christian
cemeteries, from May 31, 1578, which is the date of the discovery of
the first catacomb, to the present day.

From the time of the apostles to the first persecution of Domitian,
Christian tombs, whether above or below ground, were built with
perfect impunity and in defiance of public opinion. We have been
accustomed to consider the catacombs of Rome as crypts plunged in
total darkness, and penetrating the bowels of the earth at
unfathomable depths. This is, in a certain measure, the case with
those catacombs, or sections of catacombs, which were excavated in
times of persecution; but not with those belonging to the first
century. The cemetery of these members of Domitian's family who had
embraced the gospel--such as Flavius Clemens, Flavia Domitilla,
Plautilla, Petronilla, and others--reveals a bold example of
publicity.

The entrance to the crypt, discovered in 1714 and again in 1865, near
the farmhouse of Tor Marancia, at the first milestone of the Via
Ardeatina, is hewn out of a perpendicular cliff, which is conspicuous
from the high road (the modern Via delle Sette Chiese). The crypt is
approached through a vestibule, which was richly decorated with
terra-cotta carvings, and, on the frieze, a monumental inscription
enclosed by an elaborate frame. No pagan mausolea of the Via Appia or
the Via Latina show a greater sense of security or are placed more
conspicuously than this early Christian tomb. The frescoes on the
ceiling of the vestibule, representing biblical scenes, such as Daniel
in the lions' den, the history of Jonah, etc., were exposed to
daylight, and through the open door could be seen by the passer. No
precaution was taken to conceal these symbolic scenes from profane or
hostile eyes. We regret the loss of the inscription above the
entrance, which, besides the name of the owner of the crypt, probably
contained the _lex monumenti_, and a formula specifying the religion
of those buried within. In this very catacomb, a few steps from the
vestibule, an inscription has been found, in which a Marcus Aurelius
Restitutus declares that he has built a tomb for himself and his
relatives (_sibi et suis_), provided they were believers in Christ
(_fidentes in Domino_). Another tombstone, discovered in 1864, in the
Villa Patrizi, near the catacombs of Nicomedes, states that none might
be buried in the tomb to which it was attached except those who
belonged to the creed (_pertinentes ad religionem_) of the founder.

[Illustration: Entrance to the Crypt of the Flavians.]

The time soon came when these frank avowals of Christianity were
either impossible or extremely hazardous; and although legally a tomb
continued to be a _locus religiosus_, no matter what the creed of the
deceased had been, a vague sense of anxiety was felt by the Church,
lest even these last refuges should be violated by the mob and its
leaders. Hence the extraordinary development which underground
cemeteries underwent towards the end of the first and the beginning of
the second century. These catacombs were considered by the law to be
the property of the citizen who owned the ground above, and who either
excavated them at his own cost, or gave the privilege of doing so to
the Church. This is the reason why the names of our oldest suburban
cemeteries are derived, not from the illustrious saints buried in
them, but from the owner of the property under which the catacomb was
first excavated. Balbina, Callixtus, Domitilla were never laid to rest
in the catacombs which bear their names. Praetextatus, Apronianus, the
Jordans, Novella, Pontianus, and Maximus, after whom other cemeteries
were named, are all totally unknown persons. When these cemeteries
became places of worship and pilgrimage, after the Peace of
Constantine, the old names which had sheltered them from the violence
of persecutors were abandoned, and replaced by those of local martyrs.
Thus the catacomb of Domitilla became that of Nereus and Achilleus;
that of Balbina was named for S. Mark; that of Callixtus for SS.
Sixtus and Caecilia; and that of Maximus for S. Felicitas.

One characteristic of Christian epigraphy shows what a comparatively
safe place the catacombs were. Inscriptions belonging to them never
contain those requests to the passer to respect the tomb, which are so
frequent in sepulchral inscriptions from tombs above-ground, and which
