Come!'

Esclairmonde could only hurry away at this; while Alice, grasping her
hand, continued:

'Oh, have they been persecuting you?  I dreaded it when I saw yon little
wretch; but--oh, Esclairmonde, what is this?' in an utterly changed
voice.

'He holds my faith in trust.  He will restore it,' said Esclairmonde,
hurriedly.

But Lady Montagu spoke not another word; and, indeed, they were hard upon
the English queen's rooms, whence they already heard hysterical screams
of passion.

Jaqueline had immediately set forth in the same direction out of
curiosity; and Malcolm in much anxiety, since the mission that he had
been cautioned to guard so jealously seemed in danger of being known
everywhere.  He had himself been allowed to stand by the Queen's bedside,
and rehearse James's message; but when he had further hinted of his being
sent by Bedford to bring the ring, the Queen, perhaps at the mention of
the brother-in-law, pouted, knew nothing of any ring, and supposed M. le
Duc meant to strip her, a poor desolate widow, of all her jewels.

Then Malcolm had spoken in private with Sir Lewis Robsart, who knew the
ring was among her jewels, and promised to get it for him as soon as was
possible; and it was while waiting for this that Malcolm had been
summoned to the Countess of Hainault's apartments.

But ere Sir Lewis could get the ear of the Queen, as he now told Malcolm,
her mother had been with her.  Catherine was dull, jealous, unwilling to
part with anything, but always easily coaxed over.  Her mother Isabeau
had, on the other hand, a good deal of low cunning and selfishness, and
understood how valuable an instrument might be a duplicate seal of a
deceased monarch.  Therefore she instigated her daughter to deny that she
possessed it, and worked her up into a state of impracticability, in
which Sir Lewis Robsart was unable to deal with her, and only produced so
wild a tempest of passion as perfectly to appal both him and her ladies.

That the Duke of Bedford had sent for a ring, which she would not give
up, was known over the whole palace; the only matter still not perhaps
known was, what was the value of that individual ring.

Robsart, however, promised to exonerate Malcolm from having shown any
indiscretion; he charged it all on himself for having left his Queen for
an instant to Isabeau.

Meanwhile, Malcolm and he, with other nobles and ladies, waited, waited
in the outer chamber, listening to the fearful storm of shrieks and
cries, till they began to spend themselves and die away; and then they
heard Esclairmonde's low voice singing her lullaby, and every one
breathed freer, as though relieved, and murmurs of conversation rose
again.  Malcolm moved across to greet the Lady Montagu; and though she
looked at him with all the disdain her little gentle face could
accomplish, he had somehow a spring and strength in him that could not
now be brow-beaten.

He bent over her, and said, 'Lady, I see you know all.  It is but a
trust.'

'If you so treat it, Sir, you will do well,' responded the young matron,
with as much stern gravity as she could assume; the fact being that she
longed to break down and cry heartily, that Esclairmonde should so far
have failed, and become like other people.

Long, long they waited--Malcolm with a strange dreamy feeling at his
heart, neither triumph nor disappointment, but something between both,
and peace above all.  Dinner was served in the hall; the company returned
to the outer apartment, yet still all was silent within; till at last,
late in the afternoon, there came a black figure forth from under the
black hangings, and Esclairmonde, turning to Lady Warwick, said, 'The
Queen is awake, and desires her ladies' presence.'  And then coming
towards Malcolm, who was standing near Sir Lewis Robsart, she placed in
his hand the signet-ring.

Both, while the attendants of the Queen filed back into her chamber,
eagerly demanded how the ring had been obtained.

'Poor lady!' said Esclairmonde, 'she was too much spent to withhold
anything.  She was weak and exhausted with cries and tears; and when she
had slept, she was as meek as a lamb; and there was no more ado but to
bid her remember that the blessed King her lord would have bidden her let
the ring be broken up at once, lest it should be used so as to harm her
son.'

That Esclairmonde had prevailed by that gentle force of character which
no one could easily resist, could not, however, be doubted for a moment;
and a fresh thrill of amazement, and almost of joy, came over Malcolm at
the sense that he had become the protector of such a being, and that in a
sort she belonged to him, and was in his power, having trusted herself to
him.

Robsart advised, and Esclairmonde concurred in the counsel, that Lord
Glenuskie should set forth for Vincennes immediately, before there should
be time for any more cabals, or for Queen Isabeau to have made her
daughter repent of having delivered up the signet-ring.

Malcolm therefore at once took leave of his affianced, venturing to kiss
her hand as he looked wistfully in her face, and said, 'Dear lady, how
shall I thank you for this trust?'

Esclairmonde gave her sweet grave smile, as she said, 'To God's keeping I
commend you, Sir.'  She would not even bid him be true to his trust; it
would have seemed to her to insult him in whom her confidence was placed,
and she only added: 'I shall ever bless you for having saved me.
Farewell!  Now am I bound for ever to pray for you and your sister.'

And it would be impossible to tell how the sense of Esclairmonde's trust,
and of the resolute self-denial it would require of him, elevated
Malcolm's whole tone, and braced his mind.  The taking away of his
original high purpose had rendered him as aimless and pleasure-loving as
any ordinary lad; but the situation in which he now stood--guarding this
saintly being for her chosen destiny, at the expense of all possible
earthly projects for his own happiness or ambition--was such as to bring
out that higher side of his nature that had well-nigh collapsed.  As he
stood alone in the ante-room, waiting until his horse and escort should
be ready for his return, a flood of happiness seemed to gush over him.
Esclairmonde was no more his own, indeed, than was King Henry's signet;
but the trust was very precious, and gave him at least the power of
thinking of her as joined by a closer link than even his sister Lilias.
And towards her his conscience was again clear, for this very betrothal
put marriage out of the question for him, and was a real seal of his
dedication.  He only felt as if his heart ought not to be so light and
peaceful, while his penance was still unsaid, his absolution not yet
pronounced.




CHAPTER XV: THE TRUST


James of Scotland and John of Bedford sat together in the twilight of a
long and weary day, spent by the one in standing like a statue at the
head of his deceased friend as a part of the pageant of the
lying-in-state in the chapel, whither multitudes had crowded throughout
the day to see the 'mighty victor, mighty lord, lie low on his funeral
couch;' the nobles gazing with a certain silent and bitter satisfaction
at him who had not only broken the pride of their country, but had with
his iron hand repressed their own private exactions, while the poor and
the peasants openly bewailed him as the father and the friend who had
stood between them and their harsh feudal lords.  By the other, the hours
had passed in the press of toil and perplexity that had fallen on him as
the yet unaccredited representative of English power in France, and in
writing letters to those persons at home from whom he must derive his
authority.  The hour of rest and relaxation was welcome to both, though
they chiefly spent it each leaning back in his chair in silence.

'Your messenger is not come back,' said Bedford, presently, rousing
himself.

'It may have been no easy task,' replied James, not however without
uneasiness.

'I would,' said Bedford, presently, 'that I had writ the matter straight
to Robsart.  The lad is weak, and may be tampered with.'

'He knows that I have pledged my honour for him,' said James.

Bedford's thin lips moved at the corners.

'Nay,' said James, not angrily, 'the youth hath in some measure
disappointed me.  The evil in him shot forth faster than the good under
this camp life; but methinks there is in him a certain rare quality of
soul that I loved him for at the first, and though it hath lain asleep
all this time, yet what he hath now seen seemed to me about to work the
change in him.'

'It may be so,' said Bedford; 'and yet I would I had not consented to his
going where that woman of Hainault might work on him to fret the Lady
Esclairmonde.'

James started somewhat as he remembered overruling this objection of
Malcolm's own making.  'She cannot have the insolence,' he said.

At that moment a hasty step approached; the door was opened with scant
ceremony, and Ralf Percy, covered from head to foot with blood, hurried
in breathless and panting.

'My lord Duke, your license!  Here is Malcolm Stewart set upon in the
forest by robbers and stabbed!'

'Slain?  Dead?' cried both princes, springing up in horror.

'Alive still--in the chapel--asking for you, my lord,' said Percy.  'He
bade us lay him there at the King's feet; and as it was the readiest way
to a priest, we did his bidding.'

'My poor Malcolm!' sighed James; and he and Bedford hastened to obey the
summons.

There was time on the way for Ralf Percy to give them the particulars.
'We had gone forth--Trenton, Kitson, altogether some half-dozen of us--for
a mouthful of air in the forest after our guard all day in the chapel,
when about a mile from the Castle we heard a scuffle, and clashing of
arms.  So breaking through the thicket, we saw a score of fellows on
horseback fully armed, and in the midst poor Glenuskie dragged to the
ground and struggling hard with two of them.  We drew our swords,
hallooed, and leapt out; and the knaves never stayed to see how many of
us there were, but made off like the dastards they were, but not till one
had dealt poor Stewart this parting stroke.  He hath been bleeding like a
sheep all the way home, and hath scarce spoken but a thanksgiving for our
having come in time, as he called it, and to ask for Dr. Bennet and the
Duke.'

The words brought them to the door of the chapel, where for a time the
chants around King Henry had paused in the agitation of the new arrival.
As the black and white crowd of priests and monks opened and made way for
the King and Duke, they saw, in the full light of the wax tapers, laid on
a pile of cushions not far from King Henry's feet, the figure of Malcolm,
his riding-gown open at the breast, and kerchiefs dyed and soaked with
blood upon it; the black of his garments and hair enhancing the ghastly
whiteness of his face, and yet an air of peace and joy in the eyes and in
the folded hands, as Dr. Bennet and another priest stood over him,
administering those abbreviated rites of farewell blessing which the
Church sanctioned in cases of sudden and violent death.  The princes both
stood aside, and presently Malcolm faintly said, 'Thank God!  I trusted
to His mercy to pardon!  Now all would be well could I but see the Duke.'

'I am here, dear youth,' said Bedford, kneeling on one side of him; while
James, coming to the other side, spoke to him affectionately; but to him
Malcolm only replied by a fond clasp of the hand, giving his sole
attention to Bedford, to whom he held the signet.

'It has cost too much,' said Bedford, sadly.

'Oh, Sir, this would be naught, save that I am all that lies between
her--the Lady Esclairmonde--and Boemond of Burgundy;' and as at that
moment Bedford saw the gold betrothal ring on the finger, his countenance
lost something of the pitying concern it had worn.  Malcolm detected the
expression, and rallying his powers the more, continued: 'Sir, there was
no help--they vowed that she must choose between Boemond and me.  On the
faith of a dying man, I hold her troth but in trust; I pledged myself to
her to restore it when her way is clear to her purpose.  She would never
be mine but in name.  And now who will save her?  My life alone is
between her and yonder wolf.  Oh, Sir Duke, promise me to save her, and I
die content.'

'This is mere waste of time!' broke in the Duke.  'Where are the knave
chirurgeons?--See, James, if the lad dies, 'twill be from mere loss of
blood; there is no inward bleeding; and if there be no more loitering, he
will do well.'

And seeing the surgeons at hand, he would have risen to make way, but
Malcolm held him fast, reiterating, 'Save her, Sir.'

'If your life guards her, throw it not away by thus dallying,' said
Bedford, disengaging himself; while Malcolm groaned heavily, and turned
his heavy eyes to his royal friend, who said kindly, 'Fear not, dear
cousin; either thou wilt live, or he will be better than his word.'

'God will guard her, I know,' said Malcolm; 'and oh! my own dear lord, I
need not ask you to be the brother to my poor sister you have been to me.
At least all will be clear for her and Patie!'

'I trust not yet,' said James, smiling in encouragement.  'Thou wilt
live, my faithful laddie.'

Malcolm was spent and nearly fainting by this time, and all his reply was
a few gasps of 'Only say you pardon me all, my lord, and will speak for
_her_ to the Duke! ask _her_ prayers for me!' and as James sealed his few
words of reply with a kiss, he closed his eyes, and became unconscious;
in which state he was conveyed to his bed.

'You might have set his mind at rest,' said James, somewhat hurt, to the
Duke.

'Who?  I!' said Bedford.  'I cannot stir a finger that could set us at
enmity with Burgundy, for any lady in the land.  Moreover, if she have
found means to secure herself once, she can do so again.'

'I would you could have been more kind to my poor boy,' said James.

'Methought I was the most reasonably kind of you all!  Had it not been
mere murder to keep him there prating and bleeding, I had asked of him
what indiscretion had blown the secret and perilled the signet.  No
robbers were those between Paris and Vincennes in our midst, but men who
knew what he bore.  I'll never--'

Bedford just restrained himself from saying, 'trust a Scot again;' but
his manner had vexed and pained James, who returned to Malcolm, and left
him no more till called by necessity to his post as King Henry's chief
mourner, when the care of him was left to Patrick Drummond and old
Bairdsbrae; and Malcolm was a very tranquil patient, who seemed to need
nothing but the pleasure of looking at the ring on his finger.  The
weapon had evidently touched no vital part, and he was decidedly on the
way to recovery, when on the second evening Bedford met James, saying: 'I
have seen Robsart.  It was no indiscretion of young Glenuskie's.  It was
only what comes of dealing with women.  Can I see the boy without peril
to him?'

Malcolm was so much better, that there was no reason against the Duke's
admission, and soon Bedford's falcon-face looked down on him in all its
melancholy.

'Thanks, my Lord Glenuskie,' he said; 'I thought not to be sending you on
a service of such risk.'

'It was a welcome service,' said Malcolm.

Bedford's brows knitted themselves for a moment as he said, 'I came to
ask whether you deem that this hurt was from a common robber or
_routier_.'

'Assuredly not,' said Malcolm, but very low; and looking up into his
face, as he added, 'This should be for your ear alone, Sir.'

They were left alone, and the Duke said: 'I have heard from Robsart how
the ring was obtained.  You may spare that part of the story.'

'Sir,' said Malcolm, 'when the Lady Esclairmonde' (for he was not to be
balked of dwelling on that name with prolonged delight) 'had brought me
the ring, Sir Lewis Robsart advised my setting forth without loss of
time.'

'So he told me,' said the Duke; 'and likewise that you took his words so
literally as to set out with only three followers.'

'Ay, Sir; but he knew not wherefore.  My escort had gone forth into the
city, and while they were being collected, a message bade me to the Lady
Esclairmonde's presence.  I went, suspecting naught, but I found myself
in presence of Madame of Hainault, and of a veiled lady--who, my Lord--'
He paused.  'She was broad in form, and had a trick of gasping as though
over-fat.'

Bedford nodded.  Every one knew Queen Isabeau by these tokens.

'She scarce spoke, my Lord; but the Countess Jaqueline pretended to be in
one of her merry moods.  She told me one good turn deserved another, and
that, as in gratitude and courtesy bound, I must do her the favour of
either lending her the signet, or, if I would not let it out of my hands,
of setting it to a couple of parchments, which she declared King Henry
had promised to grant.'

'The false woman!'

'Sir, words told not on her.  She laughed and clapped her hands at
whatever I said of honour, faith, or trust.  She would have it that it
was a jest--nay, romping fashion, she seized my hand, which I let her
have, knowing it was only my own seal that was on it.  Never was I so
glad that the signet being too small for my fingers, it was in my bosom.'

'Knew you what the parchments bore?' asked, Bedford, anxiously.

'One--so far as I could see--was of the Duke of Orleans' liberty,' said
Malcolm.  'The other--pardon me, Sir--it bore the names of Duke Humfrey
and Countess Jaqueline.'

'The shameless wanton!' broke forth Bedford.  'How did you escape her at
last, boy?'

'Sir,' said Malcolm, turning as red as loss of blood permitted, 'she had
not kept her hands off me; therefore when she stood between me and the
door, I told her that discourtesy was better than trust-breaking, and
while she jeered at my talking out of a book of chivalry, I e'en took her
by the hands, lifted her aside, opened the door, ran down-stairs, and so
to the stables, where I mounted with the only three men I could get
together.'

Bedford could not but laugh, as he added, 'Bravely done, Lord Malcolm;
but, I fear me, she will never forgive you.  What next?'

'I left word for the other fellows to join us at the hostel by the gate,
and tarried for them till I feared being here after the gates were fast;
then set out without them, and rode till, just within the forest, a band
of men, how many I cannot tell, were on us, and before my sword was well
drawn they had surrounded me, and seized my bridle.  One of them bade me
submit quietly, and they would not harm me, if I would yield up that
which I wist of.  I said I would sooner yield my life than my trust;
whereupon they mastered me, and dragged me off my horse, and were rifling
me, when I--knowing the Flemish accent of that drunken fellow of the
Countess's--called out, "Shame on you, Ghisbert!"  Then it was that he
stabbed me, even at the moment when the holy Saints sent brave Percy and
the rest to rush in upon them.'

'You are sure it was Ghisbert?' repeated Bedford, anxiously.

'As certain as a man's voice can make me,' said Malcolm.  'Methinks, had
I not named him, he would perhaps have bound me to a tree, and left it to
be thought that they were but common thieves.'

'Belike,' said Bedford, thoughtfully.  'We are beholden to you, my Lord
Glenuskie; the whole state of England is beholden to you for the saving
of the confusion and evils the loss of that ring would have caused.  You
can keep counsel, I wot well.  Then let all this matter of the Queen and
Countess rest a secret.'
