
"Sorry, sorry, sorry!" he panted fiercely; "ay, that indeed I am. Sorry
that I did not wring her neck as the fowler wrings the neck of the bird
his shaft hath brought down; sorry I did not cast her headlong down the
steep precipice, that there might be one less of the hated race
contaminating the air of our pure Wales with their poisonous breath.
Sorry! ay, that I am! I would my hand had done a deed which should have
set proud Edward's forces in battle array against us. I would that this
tampering with traitors were at an end, and that we warriors of South
Wales might stand shoulder to shoulder, firmly banded against the
foreign foe. I would plunge a dagger in the false heart of yon proud
Englishman as he lies sleeping in his bed tonight, if by doing so I
could set light to the smouldering flame of national hatred.

"What sayest thou? Can we do nought to bring upon us an open war, which
is a thousand times better than this treacherous, hollow peace? Our
father and mother are half won over to the cause of slavery. They --"

Llewelyn paused, choking back the fierce tide of passion which went far
to unman him. He had not forgotten the humiliation placed upon him so
recently, when his father had compelled him to sue for pardon to an
English maiden. His heart was burning, his soul was stirred to its
depths. He had to stop short lest his passion should carry him away.

Howel seemed to understand him without the medium of words. The links
which bound the twin brothers together were very subtle and very strong.
If Llewelyn were the more violent and headstrong, Howel was more than
his equal in diplomacy. He shared every feeling of his brother's heart,
but he was less outspoken and less rash.

"I know what thou wouldst do," he said thoughtfully: "thou wouldst force
upon our father a step which shall make a rupture with the English
inevitable. Thou wouldst do a thing which should bring upon us the wrath
of the mighty Edward, and force both ourselves and our neighbours to
take arms against him. Is not that so?"

"Ay, truly; and could such a thing be, gladly would I lay down my life
in the cause of liberty and freedom."

Howel was pondering deeply.

"Perchance it might be done," he said.

Llewelyn eagerly raised his head.

"Thinkest thou so? How?"

"I know not yet, but we shall have time for thought. Knowest thou that
the maid will remain here beneath our mother's charge for a while,
whilst our father goes forward as far as the Abbey of Strata Florida
with yon stranger, to guide him on his way? The maid will remain here
until her father's return."

"How knowest thou that?"

"I had it from Wenwynwyn's lips. He heard the discussion in the hall,
and it seems that this Lord Montacute would be glad to be free of the
care of the child for a while. Our mother delights in the charge of a
little maid, and thus it will be as I have said."

A strange fire gleamed in Llewelyn's eyes. The brothers looked at each
other a good while in silence.

"And thou thinkest --" said Llewelyn at last.

Howel was some time in replying, and his answer was a little
indeterminate, although sufficiently significant.

"Why, the maid will be left here; but when her father returns to claim
her, perchance she will not be found. If that were so, thinkest thou not
that nought but open war would lie before us?"

Llewelyn's eyes glowed. He said not a word, and the darkness gathered
round the boys in the narrow chamber. They thought not of descending or
of asking for food, even after their day's hunting in the hills. They
were hardy, and seasoned to abstemious ways, and had no room for
thoughts of such a kind. Silence was settling down upon the castle, and
they had no intention of leaving their room again that night. Dark
thoughts were their companions as they undressed and made ready for bed;
and hardly were they settled there before the door opened, and the old
bard Wenwynwyn entered.

This old man was almost like a father to these boys, and Llewelyn and
Howel were particularly attached to him and he to them. He shared to the
full their ardent love for their country and their untempered hatred of
the English race. He saw, as they did, nothing but ill in the
temporizing attitude now to be found amongst the smaller Welsh
chieftains with regard to the claims made by the English monarch; and
much of the fierce hostility to be found in the boys had been the result
of the lessons instilled into their mind by the wild-eyed, passionate
old bard, one of the last of a doomed race.

"Wenwynwyn, is it thou?"

"Ay, boys, it is I. You did well to abstain from sitting at meat with
the stranger tonight. The meat went nigh to choke me that was swallowed
in his presence."

"How long stays he, contaminating our pure air?"

"He himself is off by sunrise tomorrow, and Res Vychan goes with him. He
leaves behind the little maid in the care of thy mother."

A strange smile crossed the face of the old man, invisible in the darkness.

"Strange for the parent bird to leave the dove in the nest of the hawk
-- the eyry of the eagle."

"Ha!" quoth Llewelyn quickly, "that thought hath likewise come to thee,
good Wenwynwyn."

The old man made no direct response, but went on speaking in low even tones.

"The maid has dwelt in the household of the great king. She has played
with his children, been the companion of the young princesses. She is
beloved of them and of the monarch and his wife. Let them but hear that
she is lost in the fastness of Dynevor, and the royal Edward will march
in person to her rescue. All the country will rise in arms to defend
itself. The north will join with the south, and Wales will shake off the
hated foreign yoke banded as one man against the foreign foe."

The boys listened spellbound. They had often talked together of some
step which might kindle the conflagration, but had never yet seen the
occasion. Hot-headed, rash, reckless as were the youths; wild, tameless,
and fearless as was the ancient bard; they had still been unable to hit
upon any device which might set a light to the train. Discontent and
resentment were rife all over the country, but it was the fashion rather
to temporize with the invader than to defy him. There was a strong party
gathering in the country whose policy was that of paying homage to
Edward and retaining their lands under his protection and countenance,
as being more truly patriotic and farsighted than continuing the old
struggle for supremacy among themselves. This was a policy utterly
incomprehensible both to the boys and the old man, and stirred the blood
of the lads to boiling pitch.

"What can we do?" asked Llewelyn hoarsely.

"I will tell you," whispered the old man, approaching close to the bed
whereon the brothers lay wide-eyed and broad awake. "This very night I
leave the castle by the postern door, and in the moonlight I make my way
to the commot of Llanymddyvri, where dwells that bold patriot Maelgon ap
Caradoc. To him I tell all, and he will risk everything in the cause. It
will be very simply done. You boys must feign a while -- must feign
friendship for the maid thus left behind. Your brothers have won her
heart already; you must not be behind them. The dove must have no fear
of the young eaglets. She has a high courage of her own; she loves
adventure and frolic; she will long to stretch her wings, and wander
amid the mountain heights, under the stanch protection of her comrades
of Dynevor.

"Then listen, boys. The day will come when the thing is to be done. In
some of the wild fastnesses of the upper Towy will be lurking the bold
bands of Maelgon ap Caradoc. Thither you must lead the unsuspicious
maid, first by some device getting rid of your brothers, who might try
to thwart the scheme. These bold fellows will carry off the maid to the
safe keeping of Maelgon, and once let her be his prisoner, there is no
fear of her escaping from his hands. Edward himself and all his forces
at his back will scarce wrest away the prize, and the whole country will
be united and in arms ere it suffer the tyrant to march through our fair
vales."

Whilst within this upper turret chamber this plot was being concocted
against the innocent child by two passionate, hot-headed boys and one of
the ancient race of bards, the little maiden was herself sleeping
soundly and peacefully within a small inner closet, close to the room
where Gladys, the lady of the castle, reposed; and with the earliest
streak of dawn, when the child opened her eyes upon the strange bare
walls of the Welsh stronghold, the first thing that met her eyes was the
sweet and gentle face of the chatelaine bending tenderly over her.

Although the present lady of Dynevor was the sister of the bold and
fierce Llewelyn, Prince of North Wales, who gave more trouble to the
King of England than did anybody else, she was herself of a gentle and
thoughtful disposition, more inclined to advocate peace than war, and
more far-seeing, temperate, and well-informed than most persons of her
time, and especially than the women, who for the most part had but very
vague ideas as to what was going on in the country.

She had had many thoughts herself during the still hours of this summer
night, and when she bent over the sleeping child and wakened her by a
kiss, she felt a strange tenderness towards her, which seemed to be
reciprocated by the little one, who suddenly flung her arms about her
neck and kissed her passionately.

"Is my father gone?" she asked, recollection coming back.

"Not gone, but going soon," answered the Lady of Dynevor, smiling; "that
is why I have come to waken thee early, little Gertrude, that thou
mayest receive his farewell kiss and see him ride away. Thou wilt not be
grieved to be left with us for a while, little one? Thou wilt not pine
in his absence?"

"Not if I have you to take care of me," answered the child confidingly
-- "you and Wendot and Griffeth. I am weary of always travelling on
rough roads. I will gladly stay here a while with you."

There was the bustle of preparation going on in the hall when the lady
descended with the child hanging on to her hand. Gertrude broke away and
ran to her father, who was sitting at the board, with Wendot standing
beside him listening eagerly to his talk. The boy's handsome face was
alight, and he seemed full of eager interest in what was being said.
Lord Montacute frequently raised his head and gave the lad a look of
keen scrutiny. Even whilst caressing his little daughter his interest
seemed to be centred in Wendot, and when at parting the lad held his
stirrup for him, and gently restrained little Gertrude, who was in
danger of being trampled on by the pawing charger, Lord Montacute looked
for a moment very intently at the pair, and then let his glance wander
for a moment over the grand fortress of Dynevor and the beautiful valley
it commanded.

Then he turned once more to Wendot with a kindly though penetrating smile.

"In the absence of your father, Wendot, you are the master and guardian
of this castle, its occupants and its treasures. I render my little
daughter into your safe keeping. Of your hands I shall ask her back when
I return in a week's time."

Wendot flushed with pleasure and gratification. What boy does not like
the thought of being looked upon as his father's substitute? He raised
his head with a gesture of pride, and clasped the little soft hand of
Gertrude more closely in his.

"I will take the trust, Lord Montacute," he said. "I will hold myself
responsible for the safety of Lady Gertrude. At my hands demand her when
you return. If she is not safe and well, take my life as the forfeit."

Lord Montacute smiled slightly at the manly words and bearing of the
lad, but he did not like him the less for either. As for little
Gertrude, she gazed up into the bold bright face of Wendot, and clasping
his hand in hers, she said:

"Am I to belong to you now? I think I shall like that, you are so brave
and so kind to me."

The father gave the pair another of his keen looks, and rode off in the
bright morning sunshine, promising not to be very long away.

"I shan't fret, now that I have you and the Lady of Dynevor," said the
child confidingly to Wendot. "I've often been left for a long time at
the palace with the ladies Eleanor and Joanna, and with Alphonso and
Britton, but I shall like this much better. There is no governess here,
and we can do as we like. I want to know everything you do, and go
everywhere with you."

Wendot promised to show the little lady everything she wanted, and led
her in to breakfast, which was a very important meal in those days. All
the four brothers were gathered at the board, and the child looked
rather shyly at the dark-browed twins, whom she hardly knew one from the
other, and whom she regarded with a certain amount of awe. But there was
nothing hostile in the manner of any of the party. Llewelyn was silent,
but when he did speak it was in very different tones from those of last
night; and Howel was almost brilliant in his sallies, and evoked many a
peal of laughter from the lighthearted little maiden. Partings with her
father were of too common occurrence to cause her much distress, and she
was too well used to strange places to feel lost in these new
surroundings, and she had her own nurse and attendant left with her.

Full of natural curiosity, the child was eager to see everything of
interest near her temporary home, and the brothers were her very devoted
servants, taking her everywhere she wished to go, helping her over every
difficult place, and teaching her to have such confidence in them, and
such trust in their guidance, that she soon ceased to feel fear however
wild was the ascent or descent, however lonely the region in which she
found herself.

Although Wendot continued her favourite, and Griffeth stood next, owing
to his likeness to his eldest brother, the twins soon won her favour
also. They were in some respects more interesting, as they were less
easily understood, wilder and stranger in their ways, and always full of
stories of adventure and warfare, which fascinated her imagination even
when she knew that they spoke of the strife between England and Wales.
She had a high spirit and a love of adventure, which association with
these stalwart boys rapidly developed.

One thing about Llewelyn and Howel gratified her childlike vanity, and
gave her considerable pleasure. They would praise her agility and
courage, and urge her on to make trial of her strength and nerve, when
the more careful Wendot would beg her to be careful and not risk herself
by too great recklessness. A few days spent in this pure, free air
seemed to infuse new life into her frame, and the colour in her cheeks
and the light in her eyes deepened day by day, to the motherly
satisfaction of the Lady of Dynevor and the pride of Wendot, who
regarded the child as his especial charge.

But in his father's absence many duties fell upon Wendot, and there came
a bright evening when he and Griffeth were occupied about the castle,
and only Llewelyn and Howel had leisure to wander with the little guest
to her favourite spot to see the red sun set.

Llewelyn was full of talk that evening, and spoke with a rude eloquence
and fire that always riveted the attention of the child. He told of the
wild, lonely beauty of a certain mountain peak which he pointed out up
the valley, of the weird charm of the road thither, and above all of the
eagle's nest which was to be found there, and the young eaglets being
now reared therein, which he and Howel meant to capture and keep as
their own, and which they purposed to visit the very next day to see if
they were fit yet to leave the nest.

Gertrude sat entranced as the boy talked, and when she heard of the
eagle's nest she gave a little cry of delight.

"O Llewelyn, take me with you. Let me see the eagle's nest and the
little eaglets."

But the boy shook his head doubtfully.

