bellwether.

After mass I mingled with the dispersing congregation. The weather was
very gloomy--the faces of the congregation yet more so. All seemed to
apprehend coming evil. Instead of returning cheerfully home they stood
together in groups, talking in low tones, as if they feared to speak
their thoughts aloud.

Most of them evidently were men of peace, but not all, as I have
already hinted; and, as I drew near a group standing behind the great
yew tree, I heard one of these latter discoursing to his fellows.

"Heard you the prior's sermon?" said Siric, for that was the fellow,
Siric of the Wold; "a fine homily he gave us on St. Brice--that man
of peace."

"It was easy for him to be a man of peace," returned another; "he
hadn't got Danes for his neighbours."

"Holy Job himself would have turned cutthroat if he had."

"Then they have been insulting, robbing, and murdering all over the
country."

Just then I interrupted them, for I could no longer hear the
blasphemy.

"How now, Siric," said I; "hast thou come to Aescendune to revile the
saints?"

"Nay, Father," said he, with a mocking smile; "I was only rejoicing
that they were not exposed to such trials as we. Job's Chaldeans were
gentlefolk in comparison with our Danes."

"Thou blasphemest; and what didst thou say of the blessed St. Brice?"

"Only that I wished he were living now to tame the cutthroats who live
in our midst, and who murder and rob daily, just in mere sport, or to
keep their hands in."

"What new outrages have occurred?" I asked.

"A party of the heathen carried off the cattle from my farm down the
water early this morning, and slew the herdsman."

"Dost thou know who the fellows were?"

"All too well; they were Anlaf's men."

I hardly knew what to answer, the outrage was so recent, and the
excitement of the speaker so pardonable, as I could but feel.

Well, at this moment my brother Elfwyn came out of the church, where
he had lingered to pray, as he generally does, at his brother's tomb,
and, noticing us, came and joined the group. He seemed much concerned
when he heard the details.

"Siric," he said, with his usual kind way of speaking, "do not
distress yourself unduly; you know I am rich in flocks and herds. I
will make up the loss of the cattle, my brother the prior will have a
mass said for poor Guthred, and he shall have the last rites performed
at our expense; it is all we can do for him; the rest we must leave to
the mercy of God."

"Nay, Thane," said Siric; "I thank you for your goodwill, but I may
not stand thus indebted to any man. I will repay myself at the expense
of the robbers. Still you may remember Guthred at God's altar."

And he strode away.

My brother was now joined by his children Bertric and Ethelgiva, and
his wife, the Lady Hilda. I saw that he was ill at ease, but we did
not mention the subject, which I am sure was uppermost in both our
minds, lest we should alarm the gentle ones.

Just then I remembered that I had promised to meet Alfgar in the pine
wood, and I hastened to the spot.

I found him seated again on the fallen tree. He rose at my approach,
and saluted me with some emotion, as if some inward excitement made
itself visible in spite of his efforts to suppress it.

"My son," said I, "have you pondered my words of last Sunday?"

"I have, and I am come to put myself under your instruction. I will be
guided by you in all things, and fulfil thus the dying wish of the
only being who ever loved me."

"But, my boy, there must be yet a higher, a holier motive."

"I trust it is not wanting, my father."

"Are you able to stay long today?"

"O yes, my father is keeping high festival; a number of his countrymen
are visiting him and holding revel; this morning they drove in a
number of oxen, I know not whence, and slaughtered two on the spot,
and they have broached several barrels of mead; they will keep the
feast all day, and before night my father will not be in a state to
miss me; I always absent myself if I can on such occasions."

"Then you must come home with me, and share the noon meat, after which
I can give you my time until evensong."

He made no objection, and we returned to the Priory together, where he
took his noon meat in the guest chamber, and I devoted all the time
between the meal and nones to an examination of my catechumen.

I found that poor Kyneswith had impressed all the primary truths of
our holy faith deeply upon his mind, although he wanted much building
up, and needed instruction in details; he seemed deeply impressed by
the main facts of the life and teaching of our blessed Lord,
particularly His message of peace on earth, good will towards men,
contrasting so forcibly with the faith of his own people.

The time passed rapidly away, and we went to the minster church at
three, when nones and evensong were said together, for we could not
keep the people till the proper hour for the latter office, owing to
the darkness of November.

When the holy office was over, I accompanied my brother part of the
way home, for I wanted to communicate my suspicions, and to learn
whether he shared them.

It was a dark and gloomy eventide: the sun, which had only made its
appearance at intervals during the day, was fast sinking behind a
heavy bank of clouds which filled the western horizon; and the wind,
which was freshening to a gale, seemed to bear the storm onward in its
track, while it tore the few surviving leaves rudely from the trees,
and whirled them in mazy windings.

"Elfwyn," said I, "what do you suppose was the true object of the
sheriff in bidding folks keep indoors tonight?"

"I cannot divine, unless he has some deed of blood on hand which he
wishes to have undisturbed, all to himself and his underlings."

"Siric spoke mysteriously."

"Yes; if there is aught going on amiss, he has a hand in it."

Here I communicated my fears respecting Alfgar, whom I had invited,
with my brother's permission, to sup at the hall.

"Could you not keep the poor fellow with you all night? I fear his
father is in some danger, as well he may be, acting as wickedly as he
did this very morn."

"I will try to persuade him to stay, he is along with Bertric and
Ethelgiva; they are only a few steps behind. Cuthbert, I have ordered
every one of my theows and ceorls to be obedient to your warning if
they wish to preserve their allegiance to Aescendune, or to escape
chastisement, and I think none of them are likely to be abroad
tonight."

"Can you not find out what the sheriff has told them? I saw him
speaking to one or two."

"I will try. You must be my guest tonight, or at least for a few
hours."

"Nay, I must return to compline; I may be wanted tonight, and ought to
be at my post," said I.

We arrived at the old home, dear familiar place! stronger and better
built than most such houses, because, being burnt down in my father's
younger days, it had been rebuilt in a more substantial manner, and
was capable of sustaining a formidable attack successfully.

We crossed the drawbridge, and entered the courtyard under the
gateway; before us was the door of the great hall, merrily illumined
by its blazing fire.

There, then, was the supper table bountifully spread, and the theows
and ceorls awaiting the arrival of their lord. We entered, Elfwyn and
I, and soon after Bertric, Ethelgiva, and Alfgar followed.

A loud horn was blown upon the battlements. Stragglers made their
entrance good; the drawbridge was drawn up, the doors closed, and I
blessed the meat.



CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF ST. BRICE.


Monday, November 14th, 1002.--

I hardly know how to write the events of last night, my pen almost
refuses to begin. I feel thoroughly sickened by the very remembrance
of the bloodshed and treachery which have disgraced Christian England,
and which will assuredly bring down God's judgment upon us.

But I will do violence to myself, and will write all things
accurately, in order it may serve to show that there were those
amongst us who were not consenting parties, who entered not into the
counsels of those men of blood, whom may God "reward after their
deeds, and according to the wickedness of their own inventions."

Well, to begin. When supper was ended at the hall last night, my
brother bade his wife and children seek their bower, and Alfgar went
with them; then he addressed his people with that confidence and
affection he not only shows in his outward speech, but really feels in
his heart.

"Are all the folk present within the gates?" he asked.

"We are all here, my lord," replied they; "none have been wanting in
their duty."

"It is well; and now, my people, I ask you, whom I have ever trusted,
and to whom I have tried to be a friend as well as a master, have you
any of you a suspicion what the sheriff is about tonight, and why he
desired the prior to tell good Christians to keep within doors?"

There was a dead silence. At last one of the ceorls rose up, and spoke
with some hesitation:

"I think, my lord, that they intend to avenge themselves upon the Dane
folk."

"Did they say anything about it to you or any other of my people?"

"Yes; they tried to get two or three of us to join in the work, but
when they found we would do nothing without your knowledge, they told
us no more."

"Then you do not know what is the exact work they have in hand?"

"No. But I heard something which made me think that plunder and
massacre were both likely to be committed."

"Did you hear any particular names mentioned?"

"Yes. That of Anlaf."

"This explains Siric's insolence, Cuthbert."

"It does," I replied.

"But surely they cannot intend to do anything tonight. They would not
choose Sunday for a deed of darkness. Men who have attended mass
during the day, surely would not so forget their God as to go through
the country like cowardly wolves, pulling down the prey in company
which they dare not attack singly."

"I should hope the same; but then the looks and words of today," said
I.

"Did they say what authority they had for their projected scheme?"

"They dared to say," replied the ceorl who had before spoken, "they
had the sanction of the king."

There was again a painful silence. We groaned in the bitterness of our
hearts--O Ethelred, son of Edgar, hast thou forgotten all truth and
mercy?--thou, the son of Edgar the Magnanimous?

Every impulse of our hearts led us to detest the cruel deed of
treachery about to be consummated, but which we could not prevent.

At least there was one whom we could save from the general
destruction, the young Alfgar, and we determined to detain him if
possible by persuasion, keeping the truth from him, but in any case to
detain him at the hall during the night.

I could not remain at the hall myself, for, on such a night, it seemed
necessary to be with my own people, and to be ready to seize any
opportunity of saving the effusion of blood, or of giving protection
to any who might seek refuge under the shelter of our roof, where
murder would be sacrilege, a consideration of some importance where
Christians, shame to say, were the murderers.

But before I went my brother and I sent to Alfgar that we might speak
to him, and prevail upon him to stay with us the night.

"Alfgar," said Elfwyn, "the night is very stormy and blustering, and
we wish you to remain with us, and share our hospitality till the
morn. Your father will not miss you?"

"I do not think he will; for after one of these debauches he generally
sleeps far into the next day. But the domestic serfs may remark my
absence."

"There is another reason, my boy, why we wish you to stay. Wild men
who hate your father's race are abroad, and did you fall into their
hands while returning home it might fare hard with you."

"I can imagine that. I marked the looks they cast upon me in God's
house, even there, this day. They cannot forgive me my Danish blood,
although my mother was one of themselves, and a Christian."

"They have suffered much, my lad; and suffering, as is often the case,
has blunted their feelings. But you will stay with us, will you not?"

"I will stay; many thanks for your kindness."

After this I had nothing further to detain me at the castle, so I left
for the priory.

It was a black dark night. The violence of the wind almost lifted me
from my feet; not a star could be seen but occasionally a sharp
hailstorm pelted down. Glad was I, although the distance was not
great, to see the lights of the priory, and to dry my chilled limbs
and wet garments before the fire in the common room while I told my
brethren the tidings of the night, and the suspicions which we
entertained.

When I had finished there was a dead pause, during which the howling
blast without, as it dashed the hail against the casement, seemed a
fitting accompaniment to our sombre thoughts.

The compline bell rang.

This office is always full of heavenly comfort, but there seemed a
special meaning tonight in one verse--"A thousand shall fall beside
thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh
thee."

Yet the thousands were heavy on our hearts, and I meditated some means
of carrying tidings of their danger to our pagan neighbours; but I
knew nothing of the details of the plot, only that there was a plot,
and I knew that if I sent a brother, the Danes, in their hatred to
monks, would probably set their huge dogs at him before he could
speak, and perhaps worry him to death. Neither could any other
messenger approach their dwellings safely at night.

I tried to hope, but against reason, that we had perhaps exaggerated
the danger. Still, after the compline was over, we sat in deliberation
a long time in the hall. The novices and lay brothers, ignorant of the
