her supple bow and goes to the great house of her dear brother Phoebus
Apollo, to the rich land of Delphi, there to order the lovely dance of
the Muses and Graces. There she hangs up her curved bow and her arrows,
and heads and leads the dances, gracefully arrayed, while all they utter
their heavenly voice, singing how neat-ankled Leto bare children supreme
among the immortals both in thought and in deed.

(ll. 21-22) Hail to you, children of Zeus and rich-haired Leto! And now
I will remember you and another song also.




XXVIII. TO ATHENA (18 lines)

(ll. 1-16) I begin to sing of Pallas Athene, the glorious goddess,
bright-eyed, inventive, unbending of heart, pure virgin, saviour of
cities, courageous, Tritogeneia. From his awful head wise Zeus himself
bare her arrayed in warlike arms of flashing gold, and awe seized all
the gods as they gazed. But Athena sprang quickly from the immortal head
and stood before Zeus who holds the aegis, shaking a sharp spear: great
Olympus began to reel horribly at the might of the bright-eyed goddess,
and earth round about cried fearfully, and the sea was moved and tossed
with dark waves, while foam burst forth suddenly: the bright Son of
Hyperion stopped his swift-footed horses a long while, until the
maiden Pallas Athene had stripped the heavenly armour from her immortal
shoulders. And wise Zeus was glad.

(ll. 17-18) And so hail to you, daughter of Zeus who holds the aegis!
Now I will remember you and another song as well.




XXIX. TO HESTIA (13 lines)

(ll. 1-6) Hestia, in the high dwellings of all, both deathless gods and
men who walk on earth, you have gained an everlasting abode and highest
honour: glorious is your portion and your right. For without you mortals
hold no banquet,--where one does not duly pour sweet wine in offering to
Hestia both first and last.

(ll. 7-10) [2533] And you, slayer of Argus, Son of Zeus and Maia,
messenger of the blessed gods, bearer of the golden rod, giver of good,
be favourable and help us, you and Hestia, the worshipful and dear. Come
and dwell in this glorious house in friendship together; for you two,
well knowing the noble actions of men, aid on their wisdom and their
strength.

(ll. 12-13) Hail, Daughter of Cronos, and you also, Hermes, bearer of
the golden rod! Now I will remember you and another song also.




XXX. TO EARTH THE MOTHER OF ALL (19 lines)

(ll. 1-16) I will sing of well-founded Earth, mother of all, eldest of
all beings. She feeds all creatures that are in the world, all that go
upon the goodly land, and all that are in the paths of the seas, and all
that fly: all these are fed of her store. Through you, O queen, men are
blessed in their children and blessed in their harvests, and to you it
belongs to give means of life to mortal men and to take it away. Happy
is the man whom you delight to honour! He has all things abundantly: his
fruitful land is laden with corn, his pastures are covered with cattle,
and his house is filled with good things. Such men rule orderly in their
cities of fair women: great riches and wealth follow them: their sons
exult with ever-fresh delight, and their daughters in flower-laden bands
play and skip merrily over the soft flowers of the field. Thus is it
with those whom you honour O holy goddess, bountiful spirit.

(ll. 17-19) Hail, Mother of the gods, wife of starry Heaven; freely
bestow upon me for this my song substance that cheers the heart! And now
I will remember you and another song also.




XXXI. TO HELIOS (20 lines)

(ll. 1-16) [2534] And now, O Muse Calliope, daughter of Zeus, begin to
sing of glowing Helios whom mild-eyed Euryphaessa, the far-shining one,
bare to the Son of Earth and starry Heaven. For Hyperion wedded glorious
Euryphaessa, his own sister, who bare him lovely children, rosy-armed
Eos and rich-tressed Selene and tireless Helios who is like the
deathless gods. As he rides in his chariot, he shines upon men and
deathless gods, and piercingly he gazes with his eyes from his golden
helmet. Bright rays beam dazzlingly from him, and his bright locks
streaming from the temples of his head gracefully enclose his far-seen
face: a rich, fine-spun garment glows upon his body and flutters in the
wind: and stallions carry him. Then, when he has stayed his golden-yoked
chariot and horses, he rests there upon the highest point of heaven,
until he marvellously drives them down again through heaven to Ocean.

(ll. 17-19) Hail to you, lord! Freely bestow on me substance that cheers
the heart. And now that I have begun with you, I will celebrate the race
of mortal men half-divine whose deeds the Muses have showed to mankind.




XXXII. TO SELENE (20 lines)

(ll. 1-13) And next, sweet voiced Muses, daughters of Zeus, well-skilled
in song, tell of the long-winged [2535] Moon. From her immortal head
a radiance is shown from heaven and embraces earth; and great is the
beauty that ariseth from her shining light. The air, unlit before, glows
with the light of her golden crown, and her rays beam clear, whensoever
bright Selene having bathed her lovely body in the waters of Ocean, and
donned her far-gleaming, shining team, drives on her long-maned horses
at full speed, at eventime in the mid-month: then her great orbit is
full and then her beams shine brightest as she increases. So she is a
sure token and a sign to mortal men.

(ll. 14-16) Once the Son of Cronos was joined with her in love; and
she conceived and bare a daughter Pandia, exceeding lovely amongst the
deathless gods.

(ll. 17-20) Hail, white-armed goddess, bright Selene, mild,
bright-tressed queen! And now I will leave you and sing the glories
of men half-divine, whose deeds minstrels, the servants of the Muses,
celebrate with lovely lips.




XXXIII. TO THE DIOSCURI (19 lines)

(ll. 1-17) Bright-eyed Muses, tell of the Tyndaridae, the Sons of Zeus,
glorious children of neat-ankled Leda, Castor the tamer of horses, and
blameless Polydeuces. When Leda had lain with the dark-clouded Son
of Cronos, she bare them beneath the peak of the great hill
Taygetus,--children who are delivers of men on earth and of swift-going
ships when stormy gales rage over the ruthless sea. Then the shipmen
call upon the sons of great Zeus with vows of white lambs, going to the
forepart of the prow; but the strong wind and the waves of the sea lay
the ship under water, until suddenly these two are seen darting through
the air on tawny wings. Forthwith they allay the blasts of the cruel
winds and still the waves upon the surface of the white sea: fair signs
are they and deliverance from toil. And when the shipmen see them they
are glad and have rest from their pain and labour.

(ll. 18-19) Hail, Tyndaridae, riders upon swift horses! Now I will
remember you and another song also.




HOMER'S EPIGRAMS [2601]


I. (5 lines) (ll. 1-5) Have reverence for him who needs a home and
stranger's dole, all ye who dwell in the high city of Cyme, the lovely
maiden, hard by the foothills of lofty Sardene, ye who drink the
heavenly water of the divine stream, eddying Hermus, whom deathless Zeus
begot.


II. (2 lines) (ll. 1-2) Speedily may my feet bear me to some town of
righteous men; for their hearts are generous and their wit is best.


III. (6 lines) (ll. 1-6) I am a maiden of bronze and am set upon the
tomb of Midas. While the waters flow and tall trees flourish, and the
sun rises and shines and the bright moon also; while rivers run and the
sea breaks on the shore, ever remaining on this mournful tomb, I tell
the passer-by that Midas here lies buried.


IV. (17 lines) (ll. 1-17) To what a fate did Zeus the Father give me a
prey even while he made me to grow, a babe at my mother's knee! By the
will of Zeus who holds the aegis the people of Phricon, riders on wanton
horses, more active than raging fire in the test of war, once built
the towers of Aeolian Smyrna, wave-shaken neighbour to the sea, through
which glides the pleasant stream of sacred Meles; thence [2602] arose the
daughters of Zeus, glorious children, and would fain have made famous
that fair country and the city of its people. But in their folly those
men scorned the divine voice and renown of song, and in trouble shall
one of them remember this hereafter--he who with scornful words to them
[2603] contrived my fate. Yet I will endure the lot which heaven gave me
even at my birth, bearing my disappointment with a patient heart. My
dear limbs yearn not to stay in the sacred streets of Cyme, but rather
my great heart urges me to go unto another country, small though I am.


V. (2 lines) (ll. 1-2) Thestorides, full many things there are that
mortals cannot sound; but there is nothing more unfathomable than the
heart of man.


VI. (8 lines) (ll. 1-8) Hear me, Poseidon, strong shaker of the earth,
ruler of wide-spread, tawny Helicon! Give a fair wind and sight of safe
return to the shipmen who speed and govern this ship. And grant
that when I come to the nether slopes of towering Mimas I may find
honourable, god-fearing men. Also may I avenge me on the wretch who
deceived me and grieved Zeus the lord of guests and his own guest-table.


VII. (3 lines) (ll. 1-3) Queen Earth, all bounteous giver of
honey-hearted wealth, how kindly, it seems, you are to some, and how
intractable and rough for those with whom you are angry.


VIII. (4 lines) (ll. 1-4) Sailors, who rove the seas and whom a hateful
fate has made as the shy sea-fowl, living an unenviable life, observe
the reverence due to Zeus who rules on high, the god of strangers;
for terrible is the vengeance of this god afterwards for whosoever has
sinned.


IX. (2 lines) (ll. 1-2) Strangers, a contrary wind has caught you: but
even now take me aboard and you shall make your voyage.


X. (4 lines) (ll. 1-4) Another sort of pine shall bear a better fruit
[2604] than you upon the heights of furrowed, windy Ida. For there shall
mortal men get the iron that Ares loves so soon as the Cebrenians shall
hold the land.


XI. (4 lines) (ll. 1-4) Glaucus, watchman of flocks, a word will I put
in your heart. First give the dogs their dinner at the courtyard
gate, for this is well. The dog first hears a man approaching and the
wild-beast coming to the fence.


XII. (4 lines) (ll. 1-4) Goddess-nurse of the young [2605], give ear to my
prayer, and grant that this woman may reject the love-embraces of youth
and dote on grey-haired old men whose powers are dulled, but whose
hearts still desire.


XIII. (6 lines) (ll. 1-6) Children are a man's crown, towers of a city;
horses are the glory of a plain, and so are ships of the sea; wealth
will make a house great, and reverend princes seated in assembly are a
goodly sight for the folk to see. But a blazing fire makes a house look
more comely upon a winter's day, when the Son of Cronos sends down snow.


XIV. (23 lines) (ll. 1-23) Potters, if you will give me a reward, I will
sing for you. Come, then, Athena, with hand upraised [2606] over the kiln.
Let the pots and all the dishes turn out well and be well fired: let
them fetch good prices and be sold in plenty in the market, and plenty
in the streets. Grant that the potters may get great gain and grant me
so to sing to them. But if you turn shameless and make false promises,
then I call together the destroyers of kilns, Shatter and Smash and
Charr and Crash and Crudebake who can work this craft much mischief.
Come all of you and sack the kiln-yard and the buildings: let the whole
kiln be shaken up to the potter's loud lament. As a horse's jaw grinds,
so let the kiln grind to powder all the pots inside. And you, too,
daughter of the Sun, Circe the witch, come and cast cruel spells; hurt
both these men and their handiwork. Let Chiron also come and bring
many Centaurs--all that escaped the hands of Heracles and all that were
destroyed: let them make sad havoc of the pots and overthrow the kiln,
and let the potters see the mischief and be grieved; but I will gloat as
I behold their luckless craft. And if anyone of them stoops to peer in,
let all his face be burned up, that all men may learn to deal honestly.


XV. (13 lines) [2607] (ll. 1-7) Let us betake us to the house of some man
of great power,--one who bears great power and is greatly prosperous
always. Open of yourselves, you doors, for mighty Wealth will enter
in, and with Wealth comes jolly Mirth and gentle Peace. May all
the corn-bins be full and the mass of dough always overflow the
kneading-trough. Now (set before us) cheerful barley-pottage, full of
sesame....

((LACUNA))

(ll. 8-10) Your son's wife, driving to this house with strong-hoofed
mules, shall dismount from her carriage to greet you; may she be shod
with golden shoes as she stands weaving at the loom.

(ll. 11-13) I come, and I come yearly, like the swallow that perches
light-footed in the fore-part of your house. But quickly bring....


XVI. (2 lines) (ll. 1-2) If you will give us anything (well). But if
not, we will not wait, for we are not come here to dwell with you.


XVII. HOMER: Hunters of deep sea prey, have we caught anything?

FISHERMAN: All that we caught we left behind, and all that we did not
catch we carry home. [2608]

HOMER: Ay, for of such fathers you are sprung as neither hold rich lands
nor tend countless sheep.




FRAGMENTS OF THE EPIC CYCLE




THE WAR OF THE TITANS (fragments)

Fragment #1--Photius, Epitome of the Chrestomathy of Proclus: The Epic
Cycle begins with the fabled union of Heaven and Earth, by which they
make three hundred-handed sons and three Cyclopes to be born to him.


Fragment #2--Anecdota Oxon. (Cramer) i. 75: According to the writer of
the "War of the Titans" Heaven was the son of Aether.


Fragment #3--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 1165: Eumelus says
that Aegaeon was the son of Earth and Sea and, having his dwelling in
the sea, was an ally of the Titans.


Fragment #4--Athenaeus, vii. 277 D: The poet of the "War of the Titans",
whether Eumelus of Corinth or Arctinus, writes thus in his second book:
'Upon the shield were dumb fish afloat, with golden faces, swimming and
sporting through the heavenly water.'


Fragment #5--Athenaeus, i. 22 C: Eumelus somewhere introduces Zeus
dancing: he says--'In the midst of them danced the Father of men and
gods.'


Fragment #6--Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, Arg. i. 554: The author of
the "War of the Giants" says that Cronos took the shape of a horse and
lay with Philyra, the daughter of Ocean. Through this cause Cheiron was
born a centaur: his wife was Chariclo.


Fragment #7--Athenaeus, xi. 470 B: Theolytus says that he (Heracles)
sailed across the sea in a cauldron [2701]; but the first to give this
story is the author of the "War of the Titans".


Fragment #8--Philodemus, On Piety: The author of the "War of the Titans"
says that the apples (of the Hesperides) were guarded.




THE STORY OF OEDIPUS (fragments)

Fragment #1--C.I.G. Ital. et Sic. 1292. ii. 11: ....the "Story of
Oedipus" by Cinaethon in six thousand six hundred verses.


Fragment #2--Pausanias, ix. 5.10: Judging by Homer I do not believe that
