
"Man alive! Can't you open your great jaws, and just speak a wench's
name plain out to oblige three people?"

"I'd do a great deal more to oblige one of you than that, burgomaster.
If it isn't as natural as life!"

"Curse the man! he won't, he won't--curse him!"

"Why, what have I done now?"

"Oh, sir!" said little Kate, "for pity's sake tell us; are these the
features of a living woman, of--of--Margaret Brandt?"

"A mirror is not truer, my little maid."

"But is it she, sir, for very certain?"

"Why, who else should it be?"

"Now, why couldn't you say so at once?" snarled Ghysbrecht.

"I did say so, as plain as I could speak," snapped Peter; and they
growled over this small bone of contention so zealously, that they did
not see Catherine and her daughter had thrown their aprons over their
heads, and were rocking to and fro in deep distress. The next moment
Elias came in from the shop, and stood aghast. Catherine, though her
face was covered, knew his footstep.

"That is my poor man," she sobbed. "Tell him, good Peter Buyskens, for I
have not the courage."

Elias turned pale. The presence of the burgomaster in his house, after
so many years of coolness, coupled with his wife's and daughter's
distress, made him fear some heavy misfortune.

"Richart! Jacob!" he gasped.

"No, no!" said the burgomaster; "it is nearer home, and nobody is dead
or dying, old friend."

"God bless you, burgomaster! Ah! something has gone off my breast that
was like to choke me. Now, what is the matter?"

Ghysbrecht then told him all that he told the women, and showed the
picture in evidence.

"Is that all?" said Eli, profoundly relieved. "What are ye roaring and
bellowing for? It is vexing--it is angering, but it is not like death,
not even sickness. Boys will be boys. He will outgrow that disease: 'tis
but skin-deep."

But when Ghysbrecht told him that Margaret was a girl of good character;
that it was not to be supposed she would be so intimate if marriage had
not been spoken of between them, his brow darkened.

"Marriage! that shall never be," said he sternly. "I'll stay that; ay,
by force, if need be--as I would his hand lifted to cut his throat. I'd
do what old John Koestein did t'other day."

"And what is that, in Heaven's name?" asked the mother, suddenly
removing her apron.

It was the burgomaster who replied:

"He made me shut young Albert Koestein up in the prison of the
Stadthouse till he knocked under. It was not long: forty-eight hours,
all alone, on bread and water, cooled his hot stomach. 'Tell my father I
am his humble servant,' says he, 'and let me into the sun once more--the
sun is worth all the wenches in the world.'"

"Oh, the cruelty of men!" sighed Catherine.

"As to that, the burgomaster has no choice: it is the law. And if a
father says, 'Burgomaster, lock up my son,' he must do it. A fine thing
it would be if a father might not lock up his own son."

"Well, well! it won't come to that with me and my son. He never
disobeyed me in his life: he never shall, Where is he? It is past
supper-time. Where is he, Kate?"

"Alas! I know not, father."

"I know," said Ghysbrecht; "he is at Sevenbergen. My servant met him on
the road."

Supper passed in gloomy silence. Evening descended--no Gerard! Eight
o'clock came--no Gerard! Then the father sent all to bed, except
Catherine.

"You and I will walk abroad, wife, and talk over this new care."

"Abroad, my man, at this time? Whither?"

"Why, on the road to Sevenbergen."

"Oh no; no hasty words, father. Poor Gerard! he never vexed you before."

"Fear me not. But it must end; and I am not one that trusts to-morrow
with to-day's work."

The old pair walked hand in hand; for, strange is it may appear to
some of my readers, the use of the elbow to couples walking was not
discovered in Europe till centuries after this. They sauntered on a long
time in silence. The night was clear and balmy. Such nights, calm and
silent, recall the past from the dead.

"It is a many years since we walked so late, my man," said Catherine
softly.

"Ay, sweetheart, more than we shall see again (is he never coming, I
wonder?)"

"Not since our courting days, Eli."

"No. Ay, you were a buxom lass then."

"And you were a comely lad, as ever a girl's eye stole a look at. I do
suppose Gerard is with her now, as you used to be with me. Nature is
strong, and the same in all our generations."

"Nay, I hope he has left her by now, confound her, or we shall be here
all night."

"Eli!"

"Well, Kate?"

"I have been happy with you, sweetheart, for all our rubs--much happier,
I trow, than if I had--been--a--a--nun. You won't speak harshly to the
poor child? One can be firm without being harsh."

"Surely."

"Have you been happy with me, my poor Eli?"

"Why, you know I have. Friends I have known, but none like thee. Buss
me, wife!"

"A heart to share joy and grief with is a great comfort to man or woman.
Isn't it, Eli?"

"It is so, my lass.

     'It doth joy double,
     And halveth trouble,'

runs the byword. And so I have found it, sweetheart. Ah! here comes the
young fool."

Catherine trembled, and held her husband's hand tight.

The moon was bright, but they were in the shadow of some trees, and
their son did not see them. He came singing in the moonlight, and his
face shining.



CHAPTER VIII

While the burgomaster was exposing Gerard at Tergou, Margaret had a
trouble of her own at Sevenbergen. It was a housewife's distress, but
deeper than we can well conceive. She came to Martin Wittenhaagen, the
old soldier, with tears in her eyes.

"Martin, there's nothing in the house, and Gerard is coming, and he is
so thoughtless. He forgets to sup at home. When he gives over work, then
he runs to me straight, poor soul; and often he comes quite faint. And
to think I have nothing to set before my servant that loves me so dear."

Martin scratched his head. "What can I do?"

"It is Thursday; it is your day to shoot; sooth to Say, I counted on you
to-day."

"Nay," said the soldier, "I may not shoot when the Duke or his friends
are at the chase; read else. I am no scholar." And he took out of his
pouch a parchment with a grand seal. It purported to be a stipend and a
licence given by Philip, Duke of Burgundy, to Martin Wittenhaagen, one
of his archers, in return for services in the wars, and for a wound
received at the Dukes side. The stipend was four merks yearly, to be
paid by the Duke's almoner, and the licence was to shoot three arrows
once a week, viz., on Thursday, and no other day, in any of the Duke's
forests in Holland, at any game but a seven-year-old buck or a doe
carrying fawn; proviso, that the Duke should not be hunting on that day,
or any of his friends. In this case Martin was not to go and disturb the
woods on peril of his salary and his head, and a fine of a penny.

Margaret sighed and was silent.

"Come, cheer up, mistress," said he; "for your sake I'll peril my
carcass; I have done that for many a one that was not worth your
forefinger. It is no such mighty risk either. I'll but step into the
skirts of the forest here. It is odds but they drive a hare or a fawn
within reach of my arrow."

"Well, if I let you go, you must promise me not to go far, and not to
be seen; far better Gerard went supperless than ill should come to you,
faithful Martin."

The required promise given, Martin took his bow and three arrows, and
stole cautiously into the wood: it was scarce a furlong distant. The
horns were heard faintly in the distance, and all the game was afoot.
"Come," thought Martin, "I shall soon fill the pot, and no one be the
wiser." He took his stand behind a thick oak that commanded a view of
an open glade, and strung his bow, a truly formidable weapon. It was
of English yew, six feet two inches high, and thick in proportion; and
Martin, broad-chested, with arms all iron and cord, and used to the bow
from infancy, could draw a three-foot arrow to the head, and, when
it flew, the eye could scarce follow it, and the bowstring twanged as
musical as a harp. This bow had laid many a stout soldier low in the
wars of the Hoecks and Cabbel-jaws. In those days a battlefield was not
a cloud of smoke; the combatants were few, but the deaths many--for they
saw what they were about; and fewer bloodless arrows flew than bloodless
bullets now. A hare came cantering, then sat sprightly, and her ears
made a capital V. Martin levelled his tremendous weapon at her. The
arrow flew, the string twanged; but Martin had been in a hurry to pot
her, and lost her by an inch: the arrow seemed to hit her, but it struck
the ground close to her, and passed under her belly like a flash, and
hissed along the short grass and disappeared. She jumped three feet
perpendicular and away at the top of her speed. "Bungler!" said Martin.
A sure proof he was not an habitual bungler, or he would have blamed
the hare. He had scarcely fitted another arrow to his string when a
wood-pigeon settled on the very tree he stood under. "Aha!" thought he,
"you are small, but dainty." This time he took more pains; drew his arrow
carefully, loosed it smoothly, and saw it, to all appearance, go clean
through the bird, carrying feathers skyward like dust. Instead of
falling at his feet, the bird, whose breast was torn, not fairly
pierced, fluttered feebly away, and, by a great effort, rose above the
trees, flew some fifty yards and dead at last; but where, he could not
see for the thick foliage.

"Luck is against me," said he despondingly. But he fitted another arrow,
and eyed the glade keenly. Presently he heard a bustle behind him, and
turned round just in time to see a noble buck cross the open, but too
late to shoot at him. He dashed his bow down with an imprecation. At
that moment a long spotted animal glided swiftly across after the deer;
its belly seemed to touch the ground as it went. Martin took up his bow
hastily: he recognized the Duke's leopard. "The hunters will not be far
from her," said he, "and I must not be seen. Gerard must go supperless
this night."

He plunged into the wood, following the buck and leopard, for that was
his way home. He had not gone far when he heard an unusual sound ahead
of him--leaves rustling violently and the ground trampled. He hurried in
the direction. He found the leopard on the buck's back, tearing him
with teeth and claw, and the buck running in a circle and bounding
convulsively, with the blood pouring down his hide. Then Martin formed a
desperate resolution to have the venison for Margaret. He drew his arrow
to the head, and buried it in the deer, who, spite of the creature on
his back, bounded high into the air, and fell dead. The leopard went on
tearing him as if nothing had happened.

Martin hoped that the creature would gorge itself with blood, and then
let him take the meat. He waited some minutes, then walked resolutely
up, and laid his hand on the buck's leg. The leopard gave a frightful
growl, and left off sucking blood. She saw Martin's game, and was
sulky and on her guard. What was to be done? Martin had heard that wild
creatures cannot stand the human eye. Accordingly, he stood erect, and
fixed his on the leopard: the leopard returned a savage glance, and
never took her eye off Martin. Then Martin continuing to look the beast
down, the leopard, brutally ignorant of natural history, flew at his
head with a frightful yell, flaming eyes, and jaws and distended. He had
but just time to catch her by the throat, before her teeth could crush
his face; one of her claws seized his shoulder and rent it, the other,
aimed at his cheek, would have been more deadly still, but Martin was
old-fashioned, and wore no hat, but a scapulary of the same stuff as his
jerkin, and this scapulary he had brought over his head like a hood; the
brute's claw caught in the loose leather. Martin kept her teeth off his
face with great difficulty, and griped her throat fiercely, and she
kept rending his shoulder. It was like blunt reaping-hooks grinding and
tearing. The pain was fearful; but, instead of cowing the old soldier,
it put his blood up, and he gnashed his teeth with rage almost as fierce
as hers, and squeezed her neck with iron force. The two pair of eyes
flared at one another--and now the man's were almost as furious as the
brute's. She found he was throttling her, and made a wild attempt
to free herself, in which she dragged his cowl all over his face and
blinded him, and tore her claw out of his shoulder, flesh and all; but
still he throttled her with hand and arm of iron. Presently her
long tail, that was high in the air, went down. "Aha!" cried Martin,
joyfully, and gripped her like death; next, her body lost its
elasticity, and he held a choked and powerless thing: he gripped it
still, till all motion ceased, then dashed it to the earth; then,
panting, removed his cowl: the leopard lay mute at his feet with tongue
protruding and bloody paw; and for the first time terror fell on Martin.
"I am a dead man: I have slain the Duke's leopard." He hastily seized
a few handfuls of leaves and threw them over her; then shouldered the
buck, and staggered away, leaving a trail of blood all the way his own
and the buck's. He burst into Peter's house a horrible figure, bleeding
and bloodstained, and flung the deer's carcass down.

"There--no questions," said he, "but broil me a steak on't, for I am
faint."

Margaret did not see he was wounded; she thought the blood was all from
the deer.

She busied herself at the fire, and the stout soldier stanched and bound
his own wound apart; and soon he and Gerard and Margaret were supping
royally on broiled venison.

They were very merry; and Gerard, with wonderful thoughtfulness, had
brought a flask of Schiedam, and under its influence Martin revived,
and told them how the venison was got; and they all made merry over the
exploit.

Their mirth was strangely interrupted. Margaret's eye became fixed and
fascinated, and her cheek pale with fear. She gasped, and could not
speak, but pointed to the window with trembling finger. Their eyes
followed hers, and there in the twilight crouched a dark form with eyes
like glowworms.

It was the leopard.

While they stood petrified, fascinated by the eyes of green fire, there
sounded in the wood a single deep bay. Martin trembled at it.

"They have lost her, and laid muzzled bloodhounds on her scent;
they will find her here, and the venison. Good-bye, friends, Martin
Wittenhaagen ends here."

Gerard seized his bow, and put it into the soldier's hands.

"Be a man," he cried; "shoot her, and fling her into the wood ere they
come up. Who will know?"

More voices of hounds broke out, and nearer.

"Curse her!" cried Martin; "I spared her once; now she must die, or I,
or both more likely;" and he reared his bow, and drew his arrow to the
head.

"Nay! nay!" cried Margaret, and seized the arrow. It broke in half: the
pieces fell on each side the bow. The air at the same time filled with
the tongues of the hounds: they were hot upon the scent.

"What have you done, wench? You have put the halter round my throat."

"No!" cried Margaret. "I have saved you: stand back from the window,
both! Your knife, quick!"

She seized his long-pointed knife, almost tore it out of his girdle, and
darted from the room. The house was now surrounded with baying dogs and
shouting men.

The glowworm eyes moved not.



CHAPTER IX

Margaret cut off a huge piece of venison, and ran to the window and
threw it out to the green eyes of fire. They darted on to it with a
savage snarl; and there was a sound of rending and crunching: at this
moment, a hound uttered a bay so near and loud it rang through the
house; and the three at the window shrank together. Then the leopard
feared for her supper, and glided swiftly and stealthily away with it
towards the woods, and the very next moment horses and men and dogs came
helter-skelter past the window, and followed her full cry. Martin and
his companions breathed again: the leopard was swift, and would not
be caught within a league of their house. They grasped hands. Margaret
seized this opportunity, and cried a little; Gerard kissed the tears
away.

To table once more, and Gerard drank to woman's wit: "'Tis stronger than
man's force," said he.

"Ay," said Margaret, "when those she loves are in danger; not else."

To-night Gerard stayed with her longer than usual, and went home prouder
than ever of her, and happy as a prince. Some little distance from home,
under the shadow of some trees, he encountered two figures: they almost
barred his way.

It was his father and mother.

Out so late! what could be the cause?

A chill fell on him.

He stopped and looked at them: they stood grim and silent. He stammered
out some words of inquiry.

"Why ask?" said the father; "you know why we are here."

"Oh, Gerard!" said his mother, with a voice full of reproach yet of
affection.

Gerard's heart quaked: he was silent.

Then his father pitied his confusion, and said to him:

"Nay, you need not to hang your head. You are not the first young fool
that has been caught by a red cheek and a pair of blue eyes."

"Nay, nay!" put in Catherine, "it was witchcraft; Peter the Magician is
well known for that."

"Come, Sir Priest," resumed his father, "you know you must not meddle
with women folk. But give us your promise to go no more to Sevenbergen,
and here all ends: we won't be hard on you for one fault."

"I cannot promise that, father."

"Not promise it, you young hypocrite!"

"Nay, father, miscall me not: I lacked courage to tell you what I knew
would vex you; and right grateful am I to that good friend, whoever he
be, that has let you wot. 'Tis a load off my mind. Yes, father, I love
Margaret; and call me not a priest, for a priest I will never be. I will
die sooner."

"That we shall see, young man. Come, gainsay me no more; you will learn
what 'tis to disrespect a father."

Gerard held his peace, and the three walked home in gloomy silence,
broken only by a deep sigh or two from Catherine.

From that hour the little house at Tergou was no longer the abode of
peace. Gerard was taken to task next day before the whole family; and
every voice was loud against him, except little Kate's and the dwarf's,
who was apt to take his cue from her without knowing why. As for
Cornelis and Sybrandt, they were bitterer than their father. Gerard
was dismayed at finding so many enemies, and looked wistfully into his
little sister's face: her eyes were brimming at the harsh words showered
on one who but yesterday was the universal pet. But she gave him no
encouragement: she turned her head away from him and said:

"Dear, dear Gerard, pray to Heaven to cure you of this folly!"

"What, are you against me too?" said Gerard, sadly; and he rose with a
deep sigh, and left the house and went to Sevenbergen.

The beginning of a quarrel, where the parties are bound by affection
though opposed in interest and sentiment, is comparatively innocent:
both are perhaps in the right at first starting, and then it is that
a calm, judicious friend, capable of seeing both sides, is a gift from
Heaven. For the longer the dissension endures, the wider and deeper it
grows by the fallibility and irascibility of human nature: these are
not confined to either side, and finally the invariable end is
reached--both in the wrong.

The combatants were unequally matched: Elias was angry, Cornelis and
Sybrandt spiteful; but Gerard, having a larger and more cultivated mind,
saw both sides where they saw but one, and had fits of irresolution,
and was not wroth, but unhappy. He was lonely, too, in this struggle.
He could open his heart to no one. Margaret was a high-spirited girl:
he dared not tell her what he had to endure at home; she was capable of
siding with his relations by resigning him, though at the cost of her
own happiness. Margaret Van Eyck had been a great comfort to him on
another occasion; but now he dared not make her his confidant. Her own
history was well known. In early life she had many offers of marriage;
but refused them all for the sake of that art, to which a wife's and
mother's duties are so fatal: thus she remained single and painted with
her brothers. How could he tell her that he declined the benefice she
had got him, and declined it for the sake of that which at his age she
had despised and sacrificed so lightly?

Gerard at this period bade fair to succumb. But the other side had a
horrible ally in Catherine, senior. This good-hearted but uneducated
woman could not, like her daughter, act quietly and firmly: still less
could she act upon a plan. She irritated Gerard at times, and so helped
him; for anger is a great sustainer of the courage: at others she turned
round in a moment and made onslaughts on her own forces. To take
a single instance out of many: one day that they were all at home,
Catherine and all, Cornelis said: "Our Gerard wed Margaret Brandt? Why,
it is hunger marrying thirst."

"And what will it be when you marry?" cried Catherine. "Gerard can
paint, Gerard can write, but what can you do to keep a woman, ye lazy
loon? Nought but wait for your father's shoon. Oh we can see why you and
Sybrandt would not have the poor boy to marry. You are afraid he will
come to us for a share of our substance. And say that he does, and say
that we give it him, it isn't yourn we part from, and mayhap never will
be."

On these occasions Gerard smiled slily, and picked up heart, and
temporary confusion fell on Catherine's unfortunate allies. But at last,
after more than six months of irritation, came the climax. The father
told the son before the whole family he had ordered the burgomaster
to imprison him in the Stadthouse rather than let him marry Margaret.
Gerard turned pale with anger at this, but by a great effort held his
peace. His father went on to say, "And a priest you shall be before the
year is out, nilly-willy."

"Is it so?" cried Gerard. "Then, hear me, all. By God and St. Bavon I
swear I will never be a priest while Margaret lives. Since force is to
decide it, and not love and duty, try force, father; but force shall not
serve you, for the day I see the burgomaster come for me, I leave Tergou
for ever, and Holland too, and my father's house, where it seems I have
been valued all these years, not for myself, but for what is to be got
out of me."

And he flung out of the room white with anger and desperation.

"There!" cried Catherine, "that comes of driving young folks too hard.
But men are crueller than tigers, even to their own flesh and blood.
Now, Heaven forbid he should ever leave us, married or single."

As Gerard came out of the house, his cheeks pale and his heart panting,
he met Reicht Heynes: she had a message for him: Margaret Van Eyck
desired to see him. He found the old lady seated grim as a judge. She
wasted no time in preliminaries, but inquired coldly why he had not
visited her of late: before he could answer, she said in a sarcastic
tone, "I thought we had been friends, young sir."

At this Gerard looked the picture of doubt and consternation.

"It is because you never told her you were in love," said Reicht Heynes,
pitying his confusion.

"Silence, wench! Why should he tell us his affairs? We are not his
friends: we have not deserved his confidence."

"Alas! my second mother," said Gerard, "I did not dare to tell you my
folly."

"What folly? Is it folly to love?"

"I am told so every day of my life."

"You need not have been afraid to tell my mistress; she is always kind
to true lovers."

"Madam--Reicht I was afraid because I was told..."

"Well, you were told--?"

"That in your youth you scorned love, preferring art."

"I did, boy; and what is the end of it? Behold me here a barren stock,
while the women of my youth have a troop of children at their side, and
grandchildren at their knee I gave up the sweet joys of wifehood and
motherhood for what? For my dear brothers. They have gone and left me
long ago. For my art. It has all but left me too. I have the knowledge
still, but what avails that when the hand trembles. No, Gerard; I look
on you as my son. You are good, you are handsome, you are a painter,
though not like some I have known. I will not let you throw your youth
away as I did mine: you shall marry this Margaret. I have inquired, and
she is a good daughter. Reicht here is a gossip. She has told me all
about it. But that need not hinder you to tell me."

Poor Gerard was overjoyed to be permitted to praise Margaret aloud, and
to one who could understand what he loved in her.

Soon there were two pair of wet eyes over his story; and when the poor
boy saw that, there were three.

Women are creatures brimful of courage. Theirs is not exactly the same
quality as manly courage; that would never do, hang it all; we should
have to give up trampling on them. No; it is a vicarious courage. They
never take part in a bull-fight by any chance; but it is remarked that
they sit at one unshaken by those tremors and apprehensions for the
combatants to which the male spectator--feeble-minded wretch!--is
subject. Nothing can exceed the resolution with which they have been
known to send forth men to battle: as some witty dog says,

"Les femmes sont tres braves avec le peur d'autrui."

By this trait Gerard now profited. Margaret and Reicht were agreed that
a man should always take the bull by the horns. Gerard's only course was
to marry Margaret Brandt off-hand; the old people would come to after
a while, the deed once done. Whereas, the longer this misunderstanding
continued on its present footing, the worse for all parties, especially
for Gerard.

"See how pale and thin they have made him amongst them."

"Indeed you are, Master Gerard," said Reicht. "It makes a body sad to
see a young man so wasted and worn. Mistress, when I met him in the
street to-day, I had liked to have burst out crying: he was so changed.

"And I'll be bound the others keep their colour; ah, Reicht? such as it
is."

"Oh, I see no odds in them."

"Of course not. We painters are no match for boors. We are glass, they
are stone. We can't stand the worry, worry, worry of little minds; and
it is not for the good of mankind we should be exposed to it. It is hard
enough, Heaven knows, to design and paint a masterpiece, without having
gnats and flies stinging us to death into the bargain."

Exasperated as Gerard was by his father's threat of violence, he
listened to these friendly voices telling him the prudent course was
rebellion. But though he listened, he was not convinced.

"I do not fear my father's violence," he said, "but I do fear his
anger. When it came to the point he would not imprison me. I would marry
Margaret to-morrow if that was my only fear. No; he would disown me. I
should take Margaret from her father, and give her a poor husband,
who would never thrive, weighed down by his parent's curse. Madam! I
sometimes think if I could marry her secretly, and then take her away
to some country where my craft is better paid than in this; and after
a year or two, when the storm had blown over, you know, could come back
with money in my purse, and say, 'My dear parents, we do not seek your
substance, we but ask you to love us once more as you used, and as we
have never ceased to love you'--but, alas! I shall be told these are the
dreams of an inexperienced young man."

The old lady's eyes sparkled.

"It is no dream, but a piece of wonderful common-sense in a boy;
it remains to be seen whether you have spirit to carry out your own
thought. There is a country, Gerard, where certain fortune awaits you
at this moment. Here the arts freeze, but there they flourish, as they
never yet flourished in any age or land."

"It is Italy!" cried Gerard. "It is Italy!"

"Ay, Italy! where painters are honoured like princes, and scribes are
paid three hundred crowns for copying a single manuscript. Know you not
that his Holiness the Pope has written to every land for skilful scribes
to copy the hundreds of precious manuscripts that are pouring into that
favoured land from Constantinople, whence learning and learned men are
driven by the barbarian Turks?"

"Nay, I know not that; but it has been the dream and hope of my life to
visit Italy, the queen of all the arts; oh, madam! But the journey, and
we are all so poor."

"Find you the heart to go, I'll find the means. I know where to lay my
hand on ten golden angels: they will take you to Rome: and the girl with
you, if she loves you as she ought."

They sat till midnight over this theme. And, after that day, Gerard
recovered his spirits, and seemed to carry a secret talisman against all
the gibes and the harsh words that flew about his ears at home.

Besides the money she procured him for the journey, Margaret Van Eyck
gave him money's worth. Said she, "I will tell you secrets that I
learned from masters that are gone from me, and have left no fellow
behind. Even the Italians know them not; and what I tell you now in
Tergou you shall sell here in Florence. Note my brother Jan's pictures:
time, which fades all other paintings, leaves his colours bright as the
day they left the easel. The reason is, he did nothing blindly, in
a hurry. He trusted to no hireling to grind his colours; he did it
himself, or saw it done. His panel was prepared and prepared again--I
will show you how--a year before he laid his colour on. Most of them are
quite content to have their work sucked up and lost, sooner than not
be in a hurry. Bad painters are always in a hurry. Above all, Gerard,
I warn you use but little oil, and never boil it: boiling it melts that
vegetable dross into its heart which it is our business to clear away;
for impure oil is death to colour. No; take your oil and pour it into
a bottle with water. In a day or two the water will turn muddy: that is
muck from the oil. Pour the dirty water carefully away and add fresh.
When that is poured away, you will fancy the oil is clear. You're
mistaken. Reicht, fetch me that!" Reicht brought a glass trough with a
glass lid fitting tight. "When your oil has been washed in bottle, put
it into this trough with water, and put the trough in the sun all day.
You will soon see the water turbid again. But mark, you must not carry
this game too far, or the sun will turn your oil to varnish. When it is
as clear as crystal, not too luscious, drain carefully, and cork it up
tight. Grind your own prime colours, and lay them on with this oil, and
they shall live. Hubert would put sand or salt in the water to clear the
oil quicker. But Jan used to say, 'Water will do it best; give water
time.' Jan Van Eyck was never in a hurry, and that is why the world will
not forget him in a hurry."

This and several other receipts, quae nunc perscribere longum est,
Margaret gave him with sparkling eyes, and Gerard received them like
a legacy from Heaven, so interesting are some things that read
uninteresting. Thus provided with money and knowledge, Gerard decided to
marry and fly with his wife to Italy. Nothing remained now but to inform
Margaret Brandt of his resolution, and to publish the banns as quietly
as possible. He went to Sevenbergen earlier than usual on both these
errands. He began with Margaret; told her of the Dame Van Eyck's
goodness, and the resolution he had come to at last, and invited her
co-operation.

She refused it plump.

"No, Gerard; you and I have never spoken of your family, but when you
come to marriage--" She stopped, then began again. "I do think your
father has no ill-will to me more than to another. He told Peter
Buyskens as much, and Peter told me. But so long as he is bent on your
being a priest (you ought have told me this instead of I you), I could
not marry you, Gerard, dearly as I love you."

Gerard strove in vain to shake this resolution. He found it very easy
to make her cry, but impossible to make her yield. Then Gerard was
impatient and unjust.

"Very well!" he cried; "then you are on their side, and you will drive
me to be a priest, for this must end one way or another. My parents hate
me in earnest, but my lover only loves me in jest."

And with this wild, bitter speech, he flung away home again, and left
Margaret weeping.

When a man misbehaves, the effect is curious on a girl who loves him
sincerely. It makes her pity him. This, to some of us males, seems
anything but logical. The fault is in our own eye; the logic is too
swift for us. The girl argues thus:--"How unhappy, how vexed, how poor
he must be to misbehave! Poor thing!"

Margaret was full of this sweet womanly pity, when, to her great
surprise, scarce an hour and a half after he left her, Gerard came
running back to her with the fragments of a picture in his hand, and
panting with anger and grief.

"There, Margaret! see! see! the wretches! Look at their spite! They have
cut your portrait to pieces."

Margaret looked, and, sure enough, some malicious hand had cut her
portrait into five pieces. She was a good girl, but she was not ice; she
turned red to her very forehead.

"Who did it?"

"Nay, I know not. I dared not ask; for I should hate the hand that did
it, ay, till my dying day. My poor Margaret! The butchers, the ruffians!
Six months' work cut out of my life, and nothing to show for it now.
See, they have hacked through your very face; the sweet face that every
one loves who knows it. Oh, heartless, merciless vipers!"

"Never mind, Gerard," said Margaret, panting. "Since this is how they
treat you for my sake--Ye rob him of my portrait, do ye? Well, then, he
shall have the face itself, such as it is."

"Oh, Margaret!"

"Yes, Gerard; since they are so cruel, I will be the kinder: forgive
me for refusing you. I will be your wife: to-morrow, if it is your
pleasure."

Gerard kissed her hands with rapture, and then her lips; and in a tumult
of joy ran for Peter and Martin. They came and witnessed the betrothal;
a solemn ceremony in those days, and indeed for more than a century
later, though now abolished.



CHAPTER X

The banns of marriage had to be read three times, as in our days; with
this difference, that they were commonly read on week-days, and the
young couple easily persuaded the cure to do the three readings in
twenty-four hours: he was new to the place, and their looks spoke
volumes in their favour. They were cried on Monday at matins and at
vespers; and, to their great delight, nobody from Tergou was in the
church. The next morning they were both there, palpitating with anxiety,
when, to their horror, a stranger stood up and forbade the banns, On
the score that the parties were not of age, and their parents not
consenting.

Outside the church door Margaret and Gerard held a trembling, and almost
despairing consultation; but, before they could settle anything, the man
who had done them so ill a turn approached, and gave them to understand
that he was very sorry to interfere: that his inclination was to further
the happiness of the young; but that in point of fact his only means of
getting a living was by forbidding banns: what then? "The young people
give me a crown, and I undo my work handsomely; tell the cure I was
misinformed, and all goes smoothly."

"A crown! I will give you a golden angel to do this," said Gerard
eagerly; the man consented as eagerly, and went with Gerard to the cure,
and told him he had made a ridiculous mistake, which a sight of the
parties had rectified. On this the cure agreed to marry the young couple
next day at ten: and the professional obstructor of bliss went home with
Gerard's angel. Like most of these very clever knaves, he was a fool,
and proceeded to drink his angel at a certain hostelry in Tergou where
was a green devoted to archery and the common sports of the day. There,
being drunk, he bragged of his day's exploit; and who should be
there, imbibing every word, but a great frequenter of the spot, the
ne'er-do-weel Sybrandt. Sybrandt ran home to tell his father; his father
was not at home; he was gone to Rotterdam to buy cloth of the merchants.
Catching his elder brother's eye, he made him a signal to come out, and
told him what he had heard.

There are black sheep in nearly every large family; and these two were
Gerard's black brothers. Idleness is vitiating: waiting for the death of
those we ought to love is vitiating; and these two one-idea'd curs were
ready to tear any one to death that should interfere with that miserable
inheritance which was their thought by day and their dream by night.
Their parents' parsimony was a virtue; it was accompanied by industry,
and its motive was love of their offspring; but in these perverse and
selfish hearts that homely virtue was perverted into avarice, than which
no more fruitful source of crimes is to be found in nature.

They put their heads together, and agreed not to tell their mother,
whose sentiments were so uncertain, but to go first to the burgomaster.
They were cunning enough to see that he was averse to the match, though
they could not divine why.

Ghysbrecht Van Swieten saw through them at once; but he took care not
to let them see through him. He heard their story, and putting on
magisterial dignity and coldness, he said;

"Since the father of the family is not here, his duty falleth on me, who
am the father of the town. I know your father's mind; leave all to me;
and, above all, tell not a woman a word of this, least of all the women
that are in your own house: for chattering tongues mar wisest counsels."

So he dismissed them, a little superciliously: he was ashamed of his
confederates.

On their return home they found their brother Gerard seated on a low
stool at their mother's knee: she was caressing his hair with her hand,
speaking very kindly to him, and promising to take his part with his
father and thwart his love no more. The main cause of this change of
mind was characteristic of the woman. She it was who in a moment of
female irritation had cut Margaret's picture to pieces. She had watched
the effect with some misgivings, and had seen Gerard turn pale as death,
and sit motionless like a bereaved creature, with the pieces in his
hands, and his eyes fixed on them till tears came and blinded them. Then
she was terrified at what she had done; and next her heart smote her
bitterly; and she wept sore apart; but, being what she was, dared not
own it, but said to herself, "I'll not say a word, but I'll make it up
to him." And her bowels yearned over her son, and her feeble violence
died a natural death, and she was transferring her fatal alliance to
Gerard when the two black sheep came in. Gerard knew nothing of the
immediate cause; on the contrary, inexperienced as he was in the ins
and outs of females, her kindness made him ashamed of a suspicion he
had entertained that she was the depredator, and he kissed her again
and again, and went to bed happy as a prince to think his mother was his
mother once more at the very crisis of his fate.

The next morning, at ten o'clock, Gerard and Margaret were in the church
at Sevenbergen, he radiant with joy, she with blushes. Peter was
also there, and Martin Wittenhaagen, but no other friend. Secrecy was
everything. Margaret had declined Italy. She could not leave her father;
he was too learned and too helpless. But it was settled they should
retire into Flanders for a few weeks until the storm should be blown
over at Tergou. The cure did not keep them waiting long, though it
seemed an age. Presently he stood at the altar, and called them to him.
They went hand in hand, the happiest in Holland. The cure opened his
book.

But ere he uttered a single word of the sacred rite, a harsh voice cried
"Forbear!" And the constables of Tergou came up the aisle and seized
Gerard in the name of the law. Martin's long knife flashed out directly.

"Forbear, man!" cried the priest. "What! draw your weapon in a church,
and ye who interrupt this holy sacrament, what means this impiety?"

"There is no impiety, father," said the burgomaster's servant
respectfully. "This young man would marry against his father's will, and
his father has prayed our burgomaster to deal with him according to the
law. Let him deny it if he can."

"Is this so, young man?"

Gerard hung his head.

"We take him to Rotterdam to abide the sentence of the Duke."

At this Margaret uttered a cry of despair, and the young creatures, who
were so happy a moment ago, fell to sobbing in one another's arms so
piteously, that the instruments of oppression drew back a step and were
ashamed; but one of them that was good-natured stepped up under pretence
of separating them, and whispered to Margaret:

"Rotterdam? it is a lie. We but take him to our Stadthouse."

They took him away on horseback, on the road to Rotterdam; and, after a
dozen halts, and by sly detours, to Tergou. Just outside the town they
were met by a rude vehicle covered with canvas. Gerard was put into
this, and about five in the evening was secretly conveyed into the
prison of the Stadthouse. He was taken up several flights of stairs
and thrust into a small room lighted only by a narrow window, with a
vertical iron bar. The whole furniture was a huge oak chest.

Imprisonment in that age was one of the highroads to death. It is
horrible in its mildest form; but in those days it implied cold,
unbroken solitude, torture, starvation, and often poison. Gerard felt he
was in the hands of an enemy.

"Oh, the look that man gave me on the road to Rotterdam. There is more
here than my father's wrath. I doubt I shall see no more the light of
day." And he kneeled down and commended his soul to God.

Presently he rose and sprang at the iron bar of the window, and clutched
it. This enabled him to look out by pressing his knees against the wall.
It was but for a minute; but in that minute he saw a sight such as none
but a captive can appreciate.

Martin Wittenhaagen's back.

Martin was sitting, quietly fishing in the brook near the Stadthouse.

Gerard sprang again at the window, and whistled. Martin instantly showed
that he was watching much harder than fishing. He turned hastily round
and saw Gerard--made him a signal, and taking up his line and bow, went
quickly off.

Gerard saw by this that his friends were not idle: yet had rather Martin
had stayed. The very sight of him was a comfort. He held on, looking
at the soldier's retiring form as long as he could, then falling back
somewhat heavily wrenched the rusty iron bar, held only by rusty nails,
away from the stone-work just as Ghysbrecht Van Swieten opened the door
stealthily behind him. The burgomaster's eye fell instantly on the iron,
and then glanced at the window; but he said nothing. The window was a
hundred feet from the ground; and if Gerard had a fancy for jumping out,
why should he balk it? He brought a brown loaf and a pitcher of water,
and set them on the chest in solemn silence. Gerard's first impulse
was to brain him with the iron bar and fly down the stairs; but the
burgomaster seeing something wicked in his eye, gave a little cough, and
three stout fellows, armed, showed themselves directly at the door.

"My orders are to keep you thus until you shall bind yourself by an oath
to leave Margaret Brandt, and return to the Church, to which you have
belonged from your cradle."

"Death sooner."

"With all my heart." And the burgomaster retired.

Martin went with all speed to Sevenbergen; there he found Margaret pale
and agitated, but full of resolution and energy. She was just finishing
a letter to the Countess Charolois, appealing to her against the
violence and treachery of Ghysbrecht.

"Courage!" cried Martin on entering. "I have found him. He is in the
haunted tower, right at the top of it. Ay, I know the place: many a poor
fellow has gone up there straight, and come down feet foremost."

He then told them how he had looked up and seen Gerard's face at a
window that was like a slit in the wall.

"Oh, Martin! how did he look?"

"What mean you? He looked like Gerard Eliassoen."

"But was he pale?"

"A little."

"Looked he anxious? Looked he like one doomed?"

"Nay, nay; as bright as a pewter pot."

"You mock me. Stay! then that must have been at sight of you. He counts
on us. Oh, what shall we do? Martin, good friend, take this at once to
Rotterdam."

Martin held out his hand for the letter.

Peter had sat silent all this time, but pondering, and yet, contrary to
custom, keenly attentive to what was going on around him.

"Put not your trust in princes," said he.

"Alas! what else have we to trust in?"

"Knowledge."

"Well-a-day, father! your learning will not serve us here."

"How know you that? Wit has been too strong for iron bars ere to-day.

"Ay, father; but nature is stronger than wit, and she is against us.
Think of the height! No ladder in Holland might reach him."

"I need no ladder; what I need is a gold crown."

"Nay, I have money, for that matter. I have nine angels. Gerard gave
them me to keep; but what do they avail? The burgomaster will not be
bribed to let Gerard free."

"What do they avail? Give me but one crown, and the young man shall sup
with us this night."

Peter spoke so eagerly and confidently, that for a moment Margaret
felt hopeful; but she caught Martin's eye dwelling upon him with an
expression of benevolent contempt.

"It passes the powers of man's invention," said she, with a deep sigh.

"Invention!" cried the old man. "A fig for invention. What need we
invention at this time of day? Everything has been said that is to be
said, and done that ever will be done. I shall tell you how a Florentine
knight was shut up in a tower higher than Gerard's; yet did his faithful
squire stand at the tower foot and get him out, with no other engine
than that in your hand, Martin, and certain kickshaws I shall buy for a
crown."

Martin looked at his bow, and turned it round in his hand, and seemed to
interrogate it. But the examination left him as incredulous as before.

Then Peter told them his story, how the faithful squire got the knight
out of a high tower at Brescia. The manoeuvre, like most things that
are really scientific, was so simple, that now their wonder was they had
taken for impossible what was not even difficult.

The letter never went to Rotterdam. They trusted to Peter's learning and
their own dexterity.

It was nine o'clock on a clear moonlight night; Gerard, senior, was
still away; the rest of his little family had been some time abed.

A figure stood by the dwarf's bed. It was white, and the moonlight shone
on it.

With an unearthly noise, between a yell and a snarl, the gymnast rolled
off his bed and under it by a single unbroken movement. A soft voice
followed him in his retreat.

"Why, Giles, are you afeard of me?"

At this, Giles's head peeped cautiously up, and he saw it was only his
sister Kate.

She put her finger to her lips. "Hush! lest the wicked Cornelis or the
wicked Sybrandt hear us." Giles's claws seized the side of the bed, and
he returned to his place by one undivided gymnastic.

Kate then revealed to Giles that she had heard Cornelis and Sybrandt
mention Gerard's name; and being herself in great anxiety at his not
coming home all day, had listened at their door, and had made a fearful
discovery. Gerard was in prison, in the haunted tower of the Stadthouse.
He was there, it seemed, by their father's authority. But here must be
some treachery; for how could their father have ordered this cruel act?
He was at Rotterdam. She ended by entreating Giles to bear her company
to the foot of the haunted tower, to say a word of comfort to poor
Gerard, and let him know their father was absent, and would be sure to
release him on his return.

"Dear Giles, I would go alone, but I am afeard of the spirits that men
say do haunt the tower; but with you I shall not be afeard."

"Nor I with you," said Giles. "I don't believe there are any spirits in
Tergou. I never saw one. This last was the likest one ever I saw; and it
was but you, Kate, after all."

In less than half an hour Giles and Kate opened the housedoor cautiously
and issued forth. She made him carry a lantern, though the night was
bright. "The lantern gives me more courage against the evil spirits,"
said she.

The first day of imprisonment is very trying, especially if to the
horror of captivity is added the horror of utter solitude. I observe
that in our own day a great many persons commit suicide during the first
twenty-four hours of the solitary cell. This is doubtless why our Jairi
abstain so carefully from the impertinence of watching their little
experiment upon the human soul at that particular stage of it.

As the sun declined, Gerard's heart too sank and sank; with the waning
light even the embers of hope went out. He was faint, too, with hunger;
for he was afraid to eat the food Ghysbrecht had brought him; and hunger
alone cows men. He sat upon the chest, his arms and his head drooping
before him, a picture of despondency. Suddenly something struck the wall
beyond him very sharply, and then rattled on the floor at his feet. It
was an arrow; he saw the white feather. A chill ran through him--they
meant then to assassinate him from the outside. He crouched. No more
missiles came. He crawled on all fours, and took up the arrow; there was
no head to it. He uttered a cry of hope: had a friendly hand shot it? He
took it up, and felt it all over: he found a soft substance attached
to it. Then one of his eccentricities was of grand use to him. His
tinder-box enabled him to strike a light: it showed him two things that
made his heart bound with delight, none the less thrilling for being
somewhat vague. Attached to the arrow was a skein of silk, and on the
arrow itself were words written.

How his eyes devoured them, his heart panting the while!

Well beloved, make fast the silk to thy knife and lower to us: but hold
thine end fast: then count an hundred and draw up.

Gerard seized the oak chest, and with almost superhuman energy dragged
it to the window: a moment ago he could not have moved it. Standing on
the chest and looking down, he saw figures at the tower foot. They were
so indistinct, they looked like one huge form. He waved his bonnet to
them with trembling hand: then he undid the silk rapidly but carefully,
and made one end fast to his knife and lowered it till it ceased to
draw. Then he counted a hundred. Then pulled the silk carefully up: it
came up a little heavier. At last he came to a large knot, and by that
knot a stout whipcord was attached to the silk. What could this mean?
While he was puzzling himself Margaret's voice came up to him, low but
clear. "Draw up, Gerard, till you see liberty." At the word Gerard drew
the whipcord line up, and drew and drew till he came to another knot,
and found a cord of some thickness take the place of the whipcord. He
had no sooner begun to draw this up, than he found that he had now a
heavy weight to deal with. Then the truth suddenly flashed on him, and
he went to work and pulled and pulled till the perspiration rolled down
him: the weight got heavier and heavier, and at last he was well-nigh
exhausted: looking down, he saw in the moonlight a sight that revived
him: it was as it were a great snake coming up to him out of the deep
shadow cast by the tower. He gave a shout of joy, and a score more wild
pulls, and lo! a stout new rope touched his hand: he hauled and hauled,
and dragged the end into his prison, and instantly passed it through
both handles of the chest in succession, and knotted it firmly; then sat
for a moment to recover his breath and collect his courage. The
first thing was to make sure that the chest was sound, and capable of
resisting his weight poised in mid-air. He jumped with all his force
upon it. At the third jump the whole side burst open, and out scuttled
the contents, a host of parchments.

After the first start and misgiving this gave him, Gerard comprehended
that the chest had not burst, but opened: he had doubtless jumped upon
some secret spring. Still it shook in some degree his confidence in the
chest's powers of resistance; so he gave it an ally: he took the iron
bar and fastened it with the small rope across the large rope, and
across the window. He now mounted the chest, and from the chest put his
foot through the window, and sat half in and half out, with one hand on
that part of the rope which was inside. In the silent night he heard his
own heart beat.

The free air breathed on his face, and gave him the courage to risk what
we must all lose one day--for liberty. Many dangers awaited him, but the
greatest was the first getting on to the rope outside. Gerard reflected.
Finally, he put himself in the attitude of a swimmer, his body to the
