oyster-shells, where an Indian village had been. This place was called
Kalch-hook, or Shell-point. Afterward it was shortened to The Kalch, and
in time was called The Collect. The lake was called Collect Lake. There
is no trace of it to-day, for it was filled in, and the Tombs Prison now
stands upon the spot.

The entire province was in a flourishing condition, but danger was near.
The English had long looked with covetous eye upon the possessions of
the Dutch in America. The English, it must be remembered, claimed not
only New Netherland, but a great part of the American continent, on the
plea that the Cabots had discovered it.

After all this long time, when the Cabots had been forgotten by most
persons, in the year 1664, Charles II. decided that the English claim
was just, and gave New Netherland to his brother James, Duke of York.
The Duke of York at once sent four ships filled with soldiers to take
possession of his property.

[Illustration: Stuyvesant Leaving Fort Amsterdam.]

When the English war-ships sailed up the bay, the town was
ill-protected, and the people had no desire to resist, for Stuyvesant
and the West India Company had been most strict, and they hoped to be
more free under English rule. Stuyvesant, with scarcely a supporter,
stood firm and unyielding. He had no thought of submitting to superior
force. "I would rather be carried out dead," he exclaimed. But when at
length he realized that he was absolutely alone, and that there were no
means of defence for the city, he surrendered.

On this same morning of September 8, 1664, Stuyvesant, with his head
bowed sadly, marched at the head of his soldiers out of Fort Amsterdam,
with flags flying and drums beating. And the English soldiers, who had
landed, and were waiting a little way off, entered the fort with _their_
flags flying and _their_ drums beating.

So the city of New Amsterdam became the city of New York, and the
province of New Netherland became the province of New York, and Fort
Amsterdam became Fort James--all this in honor of James, Duke of York,
who now came into possession.

Stuyvesant went to Holland to explain why he had surrendered New
Netherland. But he came back again, and years after he died in the
little Bouwerie Village which he had built. In St. Mark's Church to this
day may be seen a tablet which tells that the body of the last Dutch
Governor lies buried there.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER VII

NEW YORK under the ENGLISH and the DUTCH


So now the conquered province had come into the possession of the Duke
of York, and Colonel Richard Nicolls, who was in command of the English
soldiers, took charge. This first English Governor appeared anxious to
make all the people his friends. He made Thomas Willett Mayor, and
Willett being very popular, all the citizens rejoiced, and said the new
Governor was a fine man. During three years Colonel Nicolls humored the
people so much that they were well satisfied. At the end of that time he
had grown tired of the new country, and asked to be relieved. The people
were really sorry when he returned to England and Francis Lovelace took
his place.

Governor Lovelace did not get along so well. He was a man of harsh
manner, who did not have the patience or the inclination to flatter with
fine promises. Lovelace wanted everyone to understand that he was
master. Very soon, when the people said they thought they should have
the right to control their own affairs, the Governor told them that he
did not think it was best for them to have too much to do with the
governing of the city. But he did some things that pleased the people.
For one thing, he brought about the custom of having merchants meet
once a week at a bridge which crossed Broad Street at the present
Exchange Place. There is no bridge there now, but in those days it was
necessary, for Broad Street was a ditch which extended from the river
almost to Wall Street. But though the ditch has been filled up, and the
bridge is gone, the locality has ever since been one where merchants
have gathered.

[Illustration: Departure of Nicolls.]

The Governor also had a messenger make regular trips to Boston with
letters, which was the first mail route from the city. Matters were
going along nicely when trouble arose between England and Holland again.
Then the Dutch decided that it would be a good time to get back their
lost province of New Netherland. The English in New York heard of this,
and made all sorts of warlike preparations. But the Dutch were so long
in coming that the preparations for war were given up. Finally the Dutch
ships did arrive unexpectedly, sailing up the bay one morning in the
month of July, in the year 1673. Governor Lovelace was in a distant
part of the colony, and the city had been left under the care of Captain
John Manning.

Manning was in despair. He knew full well that there was no hope of
defending the city successfully. He sent a messenger dashing off to the
Governor, and he sent another to the Dutch ships to ask what they were
doing in the bay, just as though he did not know. The Dutch sent word
back that the city must be surrendered to them that same day. And to
show they meant what was said, the Dutch admiral despatched one of his
captains, Anthony Colve by name, who landed with 600 men. The Dutch
captain agreed that if the English left the fort without a show of
resistance, they could do so with the honors of war and without
interference. Then he and his soldiers tramped down the road that is now
Broadway. The English marched out of the fort, and the Dutch marched in;
just as nine years before the Dutch had marched out and the English had
marched in.

When the King in England heard that New York had been so easily
captured, all the blame was placed on Captain Manning, and after a time
you will see what became of him.

[Illustration: The Dutch Ultimatum.]

Captain Colve took charge of the reconquered province. He began
industriously to undo all that the English had done. The province was
again named New Netherland. The city was called New Orange, in honor of
the Prince of Orange--a prince of Holland, who in a few years was to
marry a daughter of the Duke of York, and who in a few more years was
to be King of England under the title of William III.

Captain Colve put the fort in good condition, repaired the city wall,
made a soldier of every man and drilled them every day. He had the city
gates locked at night, and put a guard at them to see that no one came
in or passed out.

In less than a year, when the city was in shape to be defended, the
English and the Dutch made up their quarrel. The province of New
Netherland was returned to the English, and became again the province of
New York, and the Dutch soldiers left the Island of Manhattan, never
again to return to it in warlike array.




CHAPTER VIII

SOMETHING about the BOLTING ACT


Edmund Andros was sent to govern New York for the Duke of York.
The people complained a good deal because he acted as though he were a
king with absolute power. They asked that they have some voice in the
direction of their affairs. They got up a petition and sent it to the
Duke in England.

"What do the people want?" said the Duke. "If they are not satisfied,
they can always appeal to me." He did not see that they had just
appealed to him, and in vain.

Captain Manning, who had been in charge of the province when the Dutch
recaptured it, came again to New York with Andros. Many who had lost
their property by the coming of the Dutch, complained bitterly to
Andros. So the Governor, and his council, and the officers of the
city held many conferences, with the result that Captain Manning was
arrested. He was found guilty of cowardice, and his sword was broken
in front of the Stadt Huys in the presence of the citizens, and he was
declared, on the good authority of King Charles II., unfit ever again
to hold public office.

Although disgraced, Captain Manning did not seem to care much. He owned
a beautiful wooded island in the East River, to which he now retired.
He was wealthy, and there he lived and entertained royally during the
remainder of his life.

Andros did many things for the general good. When he had been Governor
four years, and when the most important product of trade was flour, a
law was made by which no one was permitted to make flour outside of the
city. This was called the Bolting Act. Flour cannot be made unless it
is "bolted"--or has the bran taken from it--and so the act came by its
name. The right to grind all the grain into flour may not now seem very
important, but it really was, for it brought all the trade to the city.
So you see the Bolting Act was a very good thing for the city, and very
bad for the people who did not live in the city. The city folks became
very prosperous indeed, but the others, because they could not make or
sell flour, became poorer day by day.

This went on for sixteen years, and then the law came to an end. But by
that time all the business of the entire province had centred in the
city so firmly that it could not be drawn away.

[Illustration]

So, after this, when you look at a picture of the Seal of New York,
and see a windmill and two barrels of flour, you will remember that the
windmill sails worked the mill, and the barrels were filled with flour
which laid the foundation of the city's fortunes; and were put on the
seal so that this fact would always be remembered. The beavers on the
seal suggest the early days when the trade in beaver skins made a city
possible. At one time there was a crown on the seal--a king's crown--but
that gave way to an eagle when the English King no longer had a claim on
New York.

Now that the province was prosperous, one would think that the people
would have been quite happy. But they were not. They did not like
Governor Andros because they thought that he taxed them too heavily, and
they sent so many petitions to the Duke of York that, in 1681, Andros
was recalled, and Colonel Thomas Dongan was appointed the new Governor.
A few years later, when the Duke of York became King James II., he
remembered how carefully Andros had carried out his orders, and
appointed him Governor of New England; where he conducted matters so
much to the satisfaction of his King that he earned the title of "The
Tyrant of New England."

When Governor Dongan reached the city and announced that the Duke had
instructed him to let the people have something to say as to how they
should be governed, he was joyfully received. It really seemed now that
everything was going to be satisfactory. But there came a sudden check.
Two years after Dongan became Governor, the Duke of York was made King
of England. He thereupon ordered Dongan to make all the laws himself,
without regard to what the people did or did not want. The power to make
the laws was a great power, but Governor Dongan was a fair and just man
and did not abuse it. The year after this he granted a charter to the
city, known ever since as the Dongan Charter, which was so just that it
is still the base on which the rights of citizens rest.

But while Dongan was popular with the King's subjects, he became
unpopular with the King. This was because he stood in the way of the
plans of his royal master whenever those plans interfered with the good
of the people. He must have known what the result would be. Whether he
knew it or not, it came in the year 1688. The King joined the colony of
New England and the colony of New York, and called this united territory
New England. Dongan then ceased to be Governor, having ruled the
province well.




CHAPTER IX

THE STIRRING TIMES of JACOB LEISLER


Sir Edmund Andros, who, you will remember, had been appointed Governor
of New England, had been knighted for obeying the King's commands. He
now became Governor of the united provinces. He made his home in Boston,
and left the care of New York to his deputy, Francis Nicholson. In this
year a son was born to the English King, and the people rejoiced. But
these were stormy times in England, for King James II. was a tyrant who
ordered a great many of his subjects killed when they refused to believe
in what he believed. And the people, grown weary and heartsick,
overthrew King James and put William III. on the throne. So the sights
and sounds of rejoicing over the birth of a prince were scarcely over,
when the news came that James was no longer King, and New York was soon
in a state of confusion.

In what had been New England before the provinces were united, the
people hated Andros. They arrested him. And as they had never been in
favor of uniting New England and New York, they restored their old
officers and disunited the two provinces, Andros was sent a prisoner to
England to give an account of his doings to King William, and New York
was left without a Governor. The men who had served under King James
insisted that they remain in charge of the province until King William
sent new officers to replace them. But most of them wanted to have all
who had had anything to do with King James put out of office at once. So
those who wanted this change took charge of the city, and chose as their
leader a citizen named Jacob Leisler. More than twenty years before,
this Jacob Leisler had come from Holland as a soldier of the West India
Company. He had left the service and had become a wealthy merchant. He
had a rude manner, and but little education. He looked upon as an enemy,
and as an enemy of King William, every man who did not think as he did.

The mass of the people now gathered around Leisler and became known as
the Leislerian party. They selected a number of citizens, calling them
the Committee of Safety, and the committee gave Leisler power to see
that peace was preserved. Those who were opposed to Leisler, but who,
just as strongly as he, favored King William, were called the
anti-Leislerian party. These last were headed by Francis Nicholson, who
had watched over the colony for Governor Andros. Nicholson finding that
he had few followers, sailed for England.

Leisler had the fortifications repaired, and a battery of guns set up
outside the fort. This is the battery which gave to the present locality
its name, though all signs of guns have disappeared.

Leisler had an adviser in Jacob Milborne, his son-in-law, who wrote his
letters, and counselled him in every way.

In December came a messenger from King William, with a commission for
whoever was in charge of the city, to act until further orders. Leisler
obtained possession of the commission. He became bolder after this, and
showed such a disposition to do just as he pleased, that he made enemies
of a great many of his friends. Advised by Milborne, he made laws, and
imprisoned all those who refused to obey them or to recognize his
authority. Day by day those who were opposed to Leisler and Milborne
grew in numbers. Street riots occurred, and several persons were
injured. Leisler's life was threatened, and he went about attended by a
guard of soldiers. Finally Nicholas Bayard, who had been Mayor, and who
was looked upon as leader of the anti-Leislerian party, was put in
prison with some others. Bayard would doubtless have been executed had
he not written an humble letter to Leisler saying that he had been in
the wrong and Leisler in the right. But he wrote to save his life, not
that he really believed himself to be in the wrong. He did save his
life, but he was kept in jail.

Leisler's enemies continued active. They had a powerful friend in
Francis Nicholson, who had reached England and had been received with
favor there. He hated Leisler, and denounced him as a traitor before
King William.

Leisler, after he had taken charge of the province, wrote to the King,
but his letter was written in imperfect English and was not understood.
Matters were in a bad state, and were daily becoming worse, when the
King appointed Henry Sloughter Governor of New York.

[Illustration: New York in 1700.]




CHAPTER X

THE SAD END of JACOB LEISLER


This Henry Sloughter was not a good choice. He was a worthless man, who
had travelled a great deal, and had spent other people's money whenever
he could get it. Now, when he could find no one in England to supply him
with money, he took the post of Governor of New York, and his only
thought was how much money he could wring from the people. The enemies
of Leisler rejoiced at his coming, for they knew that it meant the
downfall of Leisler.

Sloughter sailed for New York with a body of soldiers, but his ship was
tossed about by the sea, and carried far out of its course, so that the
ship of his assistant, Major Richard Ingoldsby, arrived first. But
Leisler refused to give up command until Sloughter came. This was three
months later, and during that time Ingoldsby and his soldiers did all
they could to harass Leisler, who held possession of the little fort,
and refused to give it up until he saw the King's order.

When Sloughter arrived, members of the party opposed to Leisler hurried
on board the vessel, and escorted him to the City Hall, where at
midnight he took the oath of office.

Within a few days Governor Sloughter and his friends met in the City
Hall, where the council of the new Governor was sworn in--a council
every member of which was an enemy of Leisler. Then Leisler was
arrested, with his son-in-law, Milborne, and both were condemned to
death as rebels. But the Governor was afraid of displeasing the King by
putting Leisler to death, for, after all, Leisler was the man who had
been the first to recognize the authority of King William in New York.
He refused to sign the death-warrant. But the enemies of Leisler were
not content. Nicholas Bayard, who had become more than ever bitter
because he had been kept for thirteen months in prison, was anxious for
revenge. The council urged the Governor to carry out the sentence, and
he finally signed the death-warrant. Two days later Leisler and Milborne
were led to execution. The scaffold had been erected in Leisler's own
garden, close by where the post-office is now. The people thronged about
it, standing in the cold, drizzling rain. They wept, for many of them
had been on the side of Leisler.

[Illustration: Sloughter Signing Leisler's Death-warrant.]

Leisler ascended the scaffold with firm step, and looked at the people
he had tried to serve.

"What I have done has been for the good of my country," he said, sadly.
"I forgive my enemies, as I hope to be forgiven."

And so he died; believing that he had done his duty.

Milborne was full of hate for those who caused his death. Close by the
scaffold stood Robert Livingston, a citizen who had always been strongly
opposed to Leisler. To this man Milborne pointed, and fiercely cried:

"You have caused my death. For this I will impeach you before the Bar of
God." And so he died.

The bodies of both men were interred close by the scaffold.

Four years later the English Parliament declared that Leisler had acted
under the King's command, and had therefore been in the right, after
all. So tardy justice was done to Leisler's memory.

After the death of Leisler, there was an end of open revolt, and affairs
were reasonably quiet, although it was many a long year before the
rancor of the late struggle and the bitter hatred of the friends and
enemies of Leisler died out.

Order was restored, and attention was turned to public improvement.
New streets were laid out, and markets were built. In front of the
City Hall, by the water-side of Coenties Slip, there were set up a
whipping-post, a cage, a pillory, and a ducking-block; which were to
serve as warnings to evil-doers, and to be used in case the warning
was not effective.

But Sloughter did not live to see these improvements completed. A few
months after his arrival he died suddenly, so suddenly that there was a
suggestion that he had been poisoned by some friend of Leisler. But it
was proven that his death was a natural one, and his body was placed in
a vault next to that of Peter Stuyvesant, in the Bouwerie Village
church-yard.




CHAPTER XI

GOVERNOR FLETCHER and the PRIVATEERS


When Benjamin Fletcher became the next Governor of New York, in the
month of August, 1692, the people gave a great public dinner in his
honor, and there were expressions of deep joy that so wise and good
and pious a man had been sent to rule over them.

But Governor Fletcher soon came to be disliked. He tried by every means
to enrich himself at the public expense. More than that, he wished to
make the Church of England the only church of the province, and to have
the English language the only language spoken. All of which the people
did not like, for the majority of them still spoke the Dutch language
and attended the Dutch church.

Governor Fletcher had great trouble in getting the Assembly (the body
of men who helped him to govern the province) to agree with him, but he
finally won them over in the matter of the Church of England. One of the
churches built at this time was Trinity Church. It was a quaint, square
building, with a tall spire--not the Trinity Church of this day,
although it stood on the same spot.

[Illustration: Bradford's Tombstone.]

In the year after Fletcher came, the first printing-press was set up
in the city by William Bradford, who came from Philadelphia for that
purpose. He became the public printer, and afterward issued the first
newspaper. He did a great deal for the general good, and when he died he
was buried in Trinity Church-yard. Even now you can see the stone that
marks his grave, close by the side-entrance of the present church.

During much of the time that Fletcher governed, the French in Canada
were continually threatening to fight with the English in New York.
There were fierce and bloody conflicts on the border, but no enemy
reached the city. There was also another danger that grew stronger day
by day. It came about as the result of privateering.

A privateer was a vessel which under commission from one country,
carried on war with the ships of other countries. The captains were
called privateers, as were the ships. These privateers were so
successful that they grew bold, and instead of attacking only the ships
of enemies of their country, they threw away their commissions and
attacked ships of all countries for their private gain. Then they were
called pirates. They became robbers and murderers, for they murdered as
well as robbed. These pirates bore down upon the ships of all nations,
carried off their cargoes, then sunk the vessels without knowing or
caring how many were on board, that none might escape to tell the tale.

Nowhere were the pirates more daring than near the American coast. The
vessels of New York merchants were burned within sight of shore, and the
pirates were even bold enough to enter the harbor and seize the ships as
they lay at anchor.

The officials of the province made no apparent effort to suppress these
pirates. It was thought then, and has since been believed, that they
assisted them, and were well paid for such help. Governor Fletcher
himself was suspected of sharing in the pirate booty. Merchants who
feared to carry on regular trade, as their ships were almost sure to be
seized, came, after a time, to lend their aid also to the pirates, by
buying their cargoes.

[Illustration: The Reading of Fletcher's Commission.]

Finally, very few ships dared to cross the ocean. Then the English
Government became alarmed. A new Governor was searched for--a man strong
enough to resist the bribery of pirate crews, and able to drive them off
the seas. And just such a man was found.




CHAPTER XII

CONTAINING the TRUE LIFE of CAPTAIN KIDD


In England there lived a man who had been a great friend of King
William; who had been his friend even before he had become King. This
man was Lord Bellomont. It was he who was chosen Governor in the year
1696. But it was two years after this that he reached New York. During
these two years he worked hard in the interests of the province. He knew
all about the pirates, and knew that it would take a strong force to
subdue them. He called upon the English Government to fit out men for
this purpose. But the Government had neither men, nor ships, nor guns
