call softly:

"Jarl Sigurd, here is one, a friend's son, who will learn what you
will."

My voice seemed to fill all the ring of mountains with echoes, but
there was no answer. All was still again when the last voice came
back from the hillsides.

Then I went nearer yet, and passed to the waterside, where I could
look slantwise across the doorway. And again I called, and waited
for an answer that did not come.

"It seems that I must go even to the door, and maybe into the
mound," I said, whispering.

"Not inside," said Kolgrim, taking hold of my arm.

But I had grown bolder with the thought that the hero seemed not
angry, and now I had set my heart on winning the sword of which the
jarl had told me, and I thought that I dared go even inside the
tomb to speak with Sigurd.

"Bide here, and I will go at least to the door," said I.

So I stepped boldly before it, standing on the heap of newly-fallen
earth that had slipped from across it. The posts and lintel of the
door were of stone slabs such as lay everywhere on the hillsides,
and I stood so close that I could touch them. The doorway was not
so high that I could see into it without stooping, for it was
partly choked with the fallen earth, and I bent to look in. But I
could only see for a few feet into the passage, as I looked from
light to darkness.

"Ho, Jarl Sigurd! what would you? Why have you opened your door
thus?"

Very hollow my voice sounded, and that was all.

"Sigurd of Orkney--Sigurd, son of Rognvald--I am the son of Vemund
your friend. Speak to me!"

There was no answer. A bit of earth crumbled from the broken side
of the mound and made me start, but I saw nothing. So I stepped
away from the door and back to my comrade, who had edged nearer the
place, though his face showed that he feared greatly.

"I think that the mound has been rifled," I said. "Sigurd would
have us know it and take revenge."

"No man has dared to go near that doorway till you came, Ranald
Vemundsson," Kolgrim answered. "Now I fear that he plans to lure
you into the mound, and slay you there without light to help you.
Go no further, maybe you will be closed up with the ghost."

That was not pleasant to think of, but I had seen nought to make me
fear to go in. There was no such unearthly light shining within the
mound as I had heard of in many tales of those who sought to speak
with dead chiefs.

"Well, I am going in," I said stoutly; "but do you hide here, and
make some noise that I may know you are near me. It is the silence
that frays me.

"What can I do?" he said. "I know no runes that are of avail. It
would be ill to disturb this place with idle sounds."

That seemed right, but I thought I could not bear the silence--silence
of the grave. I must know that he was close at hand. Then a thought
came to me, and I unfastened the silver-mounted whetstone that hung
from my belt and gave it him.

"Whet your sword edge sharply," I said. "That is a sound a hero
loves, for it speaks of deeds to be done."

"Ay, that is no idle sound," he said, and drew his sword gladly.
The haft of the well-known blade brought the light into his eyes
again. I drew my own sword also.

"If you need me, call, and I think I shall not fail you," he
whispered. "It shall not be said that I failed you in peril."

"I know it," I answered, putting my hand on his shoulder.

Then I went boldly, and stepped into the passage. The whetstone
sang shrill on the sword edge as it kissed the steel behind me, and
the sound was good to hear as I went into darkness with my weapon
ready.

I half feared that my first step would be my last, but it was made
in safety. Very black seemed the low stone-walled passage before
me, and I had to stoop as I went on, feeling with my left hand
along the wall. The way was so narrow that little light could pass
my body, and therefore it seemed to grow darker as I went deeper
into the mound's heart.

Five steps I took, and then my outstretched hand was on the post
that ended the passage, and beyond that I felt nothing. I had come
to the inner doorway, and before me was the place where Sigurd lay.
Yet no fiery eyes glared on me, and nothing stirred. The air was
heavy with a scent as of peat, and the sound of the whetstone
seemed loud as I stood peering into the darkness.

I moved forward, and somewhat rattled under my foot, and I started.
Then my fear left me altogether, for I had trodden on dry bones,
and shuddered at the first touch of them in that place. I had faced
fear, and had overcome it; maybe it was desperation that made me
cool then, for it was certain now that I must be slain or else
victor over I knew not what.

So I took one pace forward into the chamber, and stood aside from
the doorway; and the grey light from the passage came in and filled
all the place, so that it fell first on him whom I had come to
seek--Jarl Sigurd of Orkney.

And when I saw, a great awe fell upon me, and a sadness, but no
terror; and in my heart I would that hereafter I might rest as
slept the hero where the hands that had loved him had placed him.

Into the silent place came once more with me the clank of mail and
weapons that he had loved, and from without the song of the keen
sword edge whispered to him; but these could not wake him.
Peacefully he seemed to sleep as I stood by his side, and I thought
that I should take back no word of his to the jarl, his brother,
whom both he and I loved.

They had brought the great carven chair on which he was wont to sit
on his ship's quarterdeck, and thereon had set the jarl, as though
he yet lived, and did but sleep as he sat from weariness after
fight, with helm and mail upon him. Shield and axe rested on either
side of him, ready to hand, against the chair; and behind him,
along the wall, were his spears, ashen shafted and rune graven.

His blue, fur-trimmed cloak was round him, and before him was a
little table, heavy and carved, whereon were vessels for food,
empty now save for dust that showed that they had been full. And
across his knees was his sword, golden hilted, with a great yellow
cairngorm in the pommel, and with gold-wrought patterns from end to
end of the scabbard--such a sword as I had never seen before. His
right hand held the hilt, and his left rested on the shield's rim
beside him; and so Sigurd slept with his head bowed on his breast,
waiting for Ragnaroek and the last great fight of all.

The light seemed to grow stronger as I looked, or my eyes grew used
to it, and then I saw that the narrow chamber was full of things,
though I minded them afterwards, for now I was as in a dream,
noting only the jarl himself. Costly stuffs were on the floor, and
mail and helms and more weapons. Gold work there was also, and in
one corner lay the dried-up body of a great wolf hound, coiled as
in sleep where it had been chained. Another had been tied by the
passage doorway, where I had stepped on it; and below a spar that
stood across a corner lay a tumbled heap of feathers that had been
a falcon.

Many more things there were maybe, but this I saw at last--that the
jarl's right foot rested on the skull of a man whose teeth had been
long and tusk-like. It was the head of the Scot whose teeth had
been his death.

Now the sword drew my eyes, for Einar bade me ask for it, else I
think I had gone softly hence without a word, so peaceful seemed
the dead. And as I looked again, I saw that the hand holding the
hilt was dry and brown and shrunken, so that one might see all the
bones through the skin, and at first I was afraid to ask.

At last I said, and my mouth was dry:

"Jarl Einar, your brother, bids me ask for sword Helmbiter, great
Sigurd. Let me take it, that he may know how you rest in peace."

But Sigurd stirred not nor spoke; and slowly I put out my hand on
the sword to take it very gently, but his grasp was yet firm on it.
Then, as I bent to see if it had tightened when I would draw the
sword away, I could see beneath the helm the face of the dead,
shrunken indeed and brown, but as of one at rest and beyond anger.

Once more then I took the jarl's sword in my right hand, and raised
his hand with my left, putting my own weapon by against the wall.
And then the hilt slipped from the half-open fingers, and the sword
was mine, and my hand held the jarl's. And it seemed to me that he
gave it me, and that I must thank him for such a gift. The sword
though it was sheathed, was not girt to him, and its golden-studded
belt was twisted about it, and it was no imperfect giving.

So I spoke in a low voice:

"Jarl Sigurd, I thank you. If my might is aught, the sword will be
used as you would have used it. Surely I will say to Einar that you
rest in peace, and we will come here and close your mound again in
all honour."

I set back his hand then, and it seemed empty and helpless, not as
a warrior's should be. So I ungirt my own weapon--a good plain
sword that I had won from a viking in Caithness--and laid it in the
place of that he had given me. And as I put the thin fingers on its
hilt, almost thinking that they would chose around it, a ring
slipped from them into my hand, as if he would give that also, and
I kept it therefore.

Then for a minute I stood before Jarl Sigurd, waiting to see if he
had any word; but when he spoke not, I lifted the sword and saluted
him.

"Skoal to Jarl Sigurd; rest in peace, and farewell."

Then I went forth softly, and came out into sunshine; for the wind
was singing round the hilltops, and the dun mist had gone. Then I
was ware that the sound of the stone on the sword edge had long
ceased, and I looked for Kolgrim.

He was lying on the grass in the place where I had left him, but he
was on his face, and the sword and whetstone were flung aside from
him. At first I feared that he had been in some way slain because
of his terror; but when I came near, I saw that his shoulders
heaved as if he wept. Then I stood over him, treading softly.

"Kolgrim," I said.

At that he looked up, and a great light came into his face, and he
sprang to his feet and threw his arms round me, weeping, yet with a
strong man's weeping that does but come from bitter grief.

"Master," he cried, "O master I thought you lost--and I dared not
follow you."

"I have met with no peril," I said, "nor have I been long gone."

"More than two hours, master, have you been in that place--two long
hours. See how the sun has sunk since you left me!"

So indeed it seemed, though I knew not that I had been so long. I
had stayed still and gazed on that strange sight without stirring
for what seemed but a little while. Yet I had thought long thoughts
in that time, and I mind every single thing in that dim chamber,
even to the markings on the stones that made its walls and roof and
floor.

"See," I said, "Jarl Sigurd has given me the sword!"

Kolgrim gazed in wonder. There was no speck of dust on the broad
blade as I drew it, and the waving lines of the dwarf-wrought steel
and gold-inlaid runes were clear and bright along its middle for
half its length. For the mound was very dry, and they had covered
all the chamber with peat before piling the earth over it.

"Let us go back to Jarl Einar; he will fear for us," I said,
sheathing the sword and girding it to me.

So we went across the meadow, and even as we went a blast of cold
wind came from, over the mountains, and with it whirled the black
thunderclouds of the storm that had been gathering all day. We ran
to an overhanging rock on the hillside and crept beneath it, while
the thunder crashed and the lightning struck from side to side of
the firth, and smote the wind-swept water that was white with foam.

"Master," said Kolgrim, "the Jarl Sigurd is wroth; he repents the
sword gift."

But I did not think that he had aught to do with this. For, as any
hill-bred man could tell, the storm had been brewing in the heat,
and was bound to come, and would pass to and fro among the hills
till it was worn out.

Nevertheless, when it passed away in pouring rain that swept like a
hanging sheet of moving mist down the glens from the half-hidden
mountains, and the sun shone out brightly again over the clear-cut
purple hillsides and rippling water, I looked at the mound in
wonder. For it was closed. We had sought shelter in a place near
that whence we saw the mound in coming, and could see the fallen
side, though not the doorway, looking across its front. And now the
slope of the bank seemed to have been made afresh, as on the day
when Sigurd had been closed in, years ago. None could say, save
those who had seen it, where the opening into the grave-chamber
might be.

Now both the opening and closing of Sigurd's grave mound seem very
strange to me. Thord and the scalds will have it that he himself
wrought both. As for me, I know not. In after days I told this to
Alfred the king when he wondered at my sword, and he said that he
thought an earthquake opened and washing rain closed the mound, but
that it happened strangely for me. I cannot gainsay his wise words,
and I will leave the matter so.

Thereafter Kolgrim and I went back to Einar, who yet waited for us.
Glad was he to see us return in safety; but both he and Thord were
speechless when they saw the jarl's sword girt to me and the jarl's
golden ring on my hand. Neither they nor any one else will believe
that I met with no peril; and the tale that the scalds made
hereafter of the matter is over wonderful, in spite of all I may
say. For they think it but right that I should not be over boastful
of my deeds.

But Jarl Einar looked on sword and ring, and said:

"Well have you won these gifts. My brother is in peace in his
resting place now. I hold that he called for you."

So we went back to the ships, and there for many days the men
stared at Kolgrim and me strangely. They say I was very silent for
long, and it is likely enough. Moreover, Einar was wont to say that
I seemed five years older from that day forward.

We went no more to the place of the mound, for it seemed to need no
care of earthly hands. Nor were any wishing to go to so awesome a
place, and we left the firth next day, for the men waxed uneasy
there.

But on that day Einar gave me the great ship that we had taken from
Halfdan, the king's son, saying that he would add to Sigurd's
giving. Also he bade me choose what men I would for her crew,
bidding me thank him not at all, for I was his foster son, and a
king by birth moreover.

So when I knew that this would please him, I chose Thord for my
shipmaster, and Kolgrim for marshal, as we call the one who has
