'If I hae time?' said Dandie, with an accent on the word that sounded
like a howl of derision. 'Ou, what the deevil am I come here for, man,
but just ance errand to see about it? But ye'll no be the waur o'
something to eat, I trow; it's getting late at e'en. I tell'd the folk
at the Change, where I put up Dumple, to send ower my supper here, and
the chield Mac-Guffog is agreeable to let it in; I hae settled a' that.
And now let's hear your story. Whisht, Wasp, man! wow, but he's glad to
see you, poor thing!'

Bertram's story, being confined to the accident of Hazlewood, and the
confusion made between his own identity and that of one of the
smugglers who had been active in the assault of Woodbourne, and chanced
to bear the same name, was soon told. Dinmont listened very
attentively. 'Aweel,' he said, 'this suld be nae sic dooms desperate
business surely; the lad's doing weel again that was hurt, and what
signifies twa or three lead draps in his shouther? if ye had putten out
his ee it would hae been another case. But eh, as I wuss auld Sherra
Pleydell was to the fore here! Od, he was the man for sorting them, and
the queerest rough-spoken deevil too that ever ye heard!'

'But now tell me, my excellent friend, how did you find out I was here?'

'Od, lad, queerly eneugh,' said Dandie; 'but I'll tell ye that after we
are done wi' our supper, for it will maybe no be sae weel to speak
about it while that lang-lugged limmer o' a lass is gaun flisking in
and out o' the room.'

Bertram's curiosity was in some degree put to rest by the appearance of
the supper which his friend had ordered, which, although homely enough,
had the appetising cleanliness in which Mrs. Mac-Guffog's cookery was
so eminently deficient. Dinmont also, premising he had ridden the whole
day since breakfast-time without tasting anything 'to speak of,' which
qualifying phrase related to about three pounds of cold roast mutton
which he had discussed at his mid-day stage--Dinmont, I say, fell
stoutly upon the good cheer, and, like one of Homer's heroes, said
little, either good or bad, till the rage of thirst and hunger was
appeased. At length, after a draught of home-brewed ale, he began by
observing, 'Aweel, aweel, that hen,' looking upon the lamentable relics
of what had been once a large fowl, 'wasna a bad ane to be bred at a
town end, though it's no like our barn-door chuckies at Charlie's Hope;
and I am glad to see that this vexing job hasna taen awa your appetite,
Captain.'

'Why, really, my dinner was not so excellent, Mr. Dinmont, as to spoil
my supper.'

'I daresay no, I daresay no,' said Dandie. 'But now, hinny, that ye hae
brought us the brandy, and the mug wi' the het water, and the sugar,
and a' right, ye may steek the door, ye see, for we wad hae some o' our
ain cracks.' The damsel accordingly retired and shut the door of the
apartment, to which she added the precaution of drawing a large bolt on
the outside.

As soon as she was gone Dandie reconnoitred the premises, listened at
the key-hole as if he had been listening for the blowing of an otter,
and, having satisfied himself that there were no eavesdroppers,
returned to the table; and, making himself what he called a gey stiff
cheerer, poked the fire, and began his story in an undertone of gravity
and importance not very usual with him.

'Ye see, Captain, I had been in Edinbro' for twa or three days, looking
after the burial of a friend that we hae lost, and maybe I suld hae had
something for my ride; but there's disappointments in a' things, and
wha can help the like o' that? And I had a wee bit law business
besides, but that's neither here nor there. In short, I had got my
matters settled, and hame I cam; and the morn awa to the muirs to see
what the herds had been about, and I thought I might as weel gie a look
to the Touthope Head, where Jock o' Dawston and me has the outcast
about a march. Weel, just as I was coming upon the bit, I saw a man
afore me that I kenn'd was nane o' our herds, and it's a wild bit to
meet ony other body, so when I cam up to him it was Tod Gabriel, the
fox-hunter. So I says to him, rather surprised like, "What are ye doing
up amang the craws here, without your hounds, man? are ye seeking the
fox without the dogs?" So he said, "Na, gudeman, but I wanted to see
yoursell."

'"Ay," said I, "and ye'll be wanting eilding now, or something to pit
ower the winter?"

'"Na, na," quo' he, "it's no that I'm seeking; but ye tak an unco
concern in that Captain Brown that was staying wi' you, d'ye no?"

'"Troth do I, Gabriel," says I; "and what about him, lad?"

'Says he, "There's mair tak an interest in him than you, and some that
I am bound to obey; and it's no just on my ain will that I'm here to
tell you something about him that will no please you."

'"Faith, naething will please me," quo' I, "that's no pleasing to him."

'"And then," quo' he, "ye'll be ill-sorted to hear that he's like to be
in the prison at Portanferry, if he disna tak a' the better care o'
himsell, for there's been warrants out to tak him as soon as he comes
ower the water frae Allonby. And now, gudeman, an ever ye wish him
weel, ye maun ride down to Portanferry, and let nae grass grow at the
nag's heels; and if ye find him in confinement, ye maun stay beside him
night and day for a day or twa, for he'll want friends that hae baith
heart and hand; and if ye neglect this ye'll never rue but ance, for it
will be for a' your life."

'"But, safe us, man," quo' I, "how did ye learn a' this? it's an unco
way between this and Portanferry."

'"Never ye mind that," quo' he, "them that brought us the news rade
night and day, and ye maun be aff instantly if ye wad do ony gude; and
sae I have naething mair to tell ye." Sae he sat himsell doun and
hirselled doun into the glen, where it wad hae been ill following him
wi' the beast, and I cam back to Charlie's Hope to tell the gudewife,
for I was uncertain what to do. It wad look unco-like, I thought, just
to be sent out on a hunt-the-gowk errand wi' a landlouper like that.
But, Lord! as the gudewife set up her throat about it, and said what a
shame it wad be if ye was to come to ony wrang, an I could help ye; and
then in cam your letter that confirmed it. So I took to the kist, and
out wi' the pickle notes in case they should be needed, and a' the
bairns ran to saddle Dumple. By great luck I had taen the other beast
to Edinbro', sae Dumple was as fresh as a rose. Sae aff I set, and Wasp
wi' me, for ye wad really hae thought he kenn'd where I was gaun, puir
beast; and here I am after a trot o' sixty mile or near by. But Wasp
rade thirty o' them afore me on the saddle, and the puir doggie
balanced itsell as ane of the weans wad hae dune, whether I trotted or
cantered.'

In this strange story Bertram obviously saw, supposing the warning to
be true, some intimation of danger more violent and imminent than could
be likely to arise from a few days' imprisonment. At the same time it
was equally evident that some unknown friend was working in his behalf.
'Did you not say,' he asked Dinmont, 'that this man Gabriel was of
gipsy blood?'

'It was e'en judged sae,' said Dinmont, 'and I think this maks it
likely; for they aye ken where the gangs o' ilk ither are to be found,
and they can gar news flee like a footba' through the country an they
like. An' I forgat to tell ye, there's been an unco inquiry after the
auld wife that we saw in Bewcastle; the Sheriff's had folk ower the
Limestane Edge after her, and down the Hermitage and Liddel, and a'
gates, and a reward offered for her to appear o' fifty pound sterling,
nae less; and Justice Forster, he's had out warrants, as I am tell'd,
in Cumberland; and an unco ranging and ripeing they have had a' gates
seeking for her; but she'll no be taen wi' them unless she likes, for
a' that.'

'And how comes that?' said Bertram.

'Ou, I dinna ken; I daur say it's nonsense, but they say she has
gathered the fern-seed, and can gang ony gate she likes, like Jock the
Giant-killer in the ballant, wi' his coat o' darkness and his shoon o'
swiftness. Ony way she's a kind o' queen amang the gipsies; she is mair
than a hundred year auld, folk say, and minds the coming in o' the
moss-troopers in the troublesome times when the Stuarts were put awa.
Sae, if she canna hide hersell, she kens them that can hide her weel
eneugh, ye needna doubt that. Od, an I had kenn'd it had been Meg
Merrilies yon night at Tibb Mumps's, I wad taen care how I crossed her.'

Bertram listened with great attention to this account, which tallied so
well in many points with what he had himself seen of this gipsy sibyl.
After a moment's consideration he concluded it would be no breach of
faith to mention what he had seen at Derncleugh to a person who held
Meg in such reverence as Dinmont obviously did. He told his story
accordingly, often interrupted by ejaculations, such as, 'Weel, the
like o' that now!' or, 'Na, deil an that's no something now!'

When our Liddesdale friend had heard the whole to an end, he shook his
great black head--'Weel, I'll uphaud there's baith gude and ill amang
the gipsies, and if they deal wi' the Enemy, it's a' their ain business
and no ours. I ken what the streeking the corpse wad be, weel eneugh.
Thae smuggler deevils, when ony o' them's killed in a fray, they 'll
send for a wife like Meg far eneugh to dress the corpse; od, it's a'
the burial they ever think o'! and then to be put into the ground
without ony decency, just like dogs. But they stick to it, that they
'll be streekit, and hae an auld wife when they're dying to rhyme ower
prayers, and ballants, and charms, as they ca' them, rather than
they'll hae a minister to come and pray wi' them--that's an auld threep
o' theirs; and I am thinking the man that died will hae been ane o' the
folk that was shot when they burnt Woodbourne.'

'But, my good friend, Woodbourne is not burnt,' said Bertram.

'Weel, the better for them that bides in't,' answered the store-farmer.
'Od, we had it up the water wi' us that there wasna a stane on the tap
o' anither. But there was fighting, ony way; I daur to say it would be
fine fun! And, as I said, ye may take it on trust that that's been ane
o' the men killed there, and that it's been the gipsies that took your
pockmanky when they fand the chaise stickin' in the snaw; they wadna
pass the like o' that, it wad just come to their hand like the bowl o'
a pint stoup.'

'But if this woman is a sovereign among them, why was she not able to
afford me open protection, and to get me back my property?'

'Ou, wha kens? she has muckle to say wi' them, but whiles they'll tak
their ain way for a' that, when they're under temptation. And then
there's the smugglers that they're aye leagued wi', she maybe couldna
manage them sae weel. They're aye banded thegither; I've heard that the
gipsies ken when the smugglers will come aff, and where they're to
land, better than the very merchants that deal wi' them. And then, to
the boot o' that, she's whiles cracked-brained, and has a bee in her
head; they say that, whether her spaeings and fortune-tellings be true
or no, for certain she believes in them a' hersell, and is aye guiding
hersell by some queer prophecy or anither. So she disna aye gang the
straight road to the well. But deil o' sic a story as yours, wi'
glamour and dead folk and losing ane's gate, I ever heard out o' the
tale-books! But whisht, I hear the keeper coming.'

Mac-Guffog accordingly interrupted their discourse by the harsh harmony
of the bolts and bars, and showed his bloated visage at the opening
door. 'Come, Mr. Dinmont, we have put off locking up for an hour to
oblige ye; ye must go to your quarters.'

'Quarters, man? I intend to sleep here the night. There's a spare bed
in the Captain's room.'

'It's impossible!' answered the keeper.

'But I say it IS possible, and that I winna stir; and there's a dram t'
ye.'

Mac-Guffog drank off the spirits and resumed his objection. 'But it's
against rule, sir; ye have committed nae malefaction.'

'I'll break your head,' said the sturdy Liddesdale man, 'if ye say ony
mair about it, and that will be malefaction eneugh to entitle me to ae
night's lodging wi' you, ony way.'

'But I tell ye, Mr. Dinmont,' reiterated the keeper, 'it's against
rule, and I behoved to lose my post.'

'Weel, Mac-Guffog,' said Dandie, 'I hae just twa things to say. Ye ken
wha I am weel eneugh, and that I wadna loose a prisoner.'

'And how do I ken that?' answered the jailor.

'Weel, if ye dinna ken that,' said the resolute farmer, 'ye ken this:
ye ken ye're whiles obliged to be up our water in the way o' your
business. Now, if ye let me stay quietly here the night wi' the
Captain, I'se pay ye double fees for the room; and if ye say no, ye
shall hae the best sark-fu' o' sair banes that ever ye had in your life
the first time ye set a foot by Liddel Moat!'

'Aweel, aweel, gudeman,' said Mac-Guffog, 'a wilfu' man maun hae his
way; but if I am challenged for it by the justices, I ken wha sall bear
the wyte,' and, having sealed this observation with a deep oath or two,
he retired to bed, after carefully securing all the doors of the
bridewell. The bell from the town steeple tolled nine just as the
ceremony was concluded.

'Although it's but early hours,' said the farmer, who had observed that
his friend looked somewhat pale and fatigued, 'I think we had better
lie down, Captain, if ye're no agreeable to another cheerer. But troth,
ye're nae glass-breaker; and neither am I, unless it be a screed wi'
the neighbours, or when I'm on a ramble.'

Bertram readily assented to the motion of his faithful friend, but, on
looking at the bed, felt repugnance to trust himself undressed to Mrs.
Mac-Guffog's clean sheets.

'I'm muckle o' your opinion, Captain,' said Dandie. 'Od, this bed looks
as if a' the colliers in Sanquhar had been in't thegither. But it'll no
win through my muckle coat.' So saying, he flung himself upon the frail
bed with a force that made all its timbers crack, and in a few moments
gave audible signal that he was fast asleep. Bertram slipped off his
coat and boots and occupied the other dormitory. The strangeness of his
destiny, and the mysteries which appeared to thicken around him, while
he seemed alike to be persecuted and protected by secret enemies and
friends, arising out of a class of people with whom he had no previous
connexion, for some time occupied his thoughts. Fatigue, however,
gradually composed his mind, and in a short time he was as fast asleep
as his companion. And in this comfortable state of oblivion we must
leave them until we acquaint the reader with some other circumstances
which occurred about the same period.




CHAPTER XLVI

     Say from whence
     You owe this strange intelligence? or why
     Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
     With such prophetic greeting?
     Speak, I charge you.

          Macbeth.


Upon the evening of the day when Bertram's examination had taken place,
Colonel Mannering arrived at Woodbourne from Edinburgh. He found his
family in their usual state, which probably, so far as Julia was
concerned, would not have been the case had she learned the news of
Bertram's arrest. But as, during the Colonel's absence, the two young
ladies lived much retired, this circumstance fortunately had not
reached Woodbourne. A letter had already made Miss Bertram acquainted
with the downfall of the expectations which had been formed upon the
bequest of her kinswoman. Whatever hopes that news might have
dispelled, the disappointment did not prevent her from joining her
friend in affording a cheerful reception to the Colonel, to whom she
thus endeavoured to express the deep sense she entertained of his
paternal kindness. She touched on her regret that at such a season of
the year he should have made, upon her account, a journey so fruitless.

'That it was fruitless to you, my dear,' said the Colonel, 'I do most
deeply lament; but for my own share, I have made some valuable
acquaintances, and have spent the time I have been absent in Edinburgh
with peculiar satisfaction; so that on that score there is nothing to
be regretted. Even our friend the Dominie is returned thrice the man he
was, from having sharpened his wits in controversy with the geniuses of
the northern metropolis.'

'Of a surety,' said the Dominie, with great complacency, 'I did
wrestle, and was not overcome, though my adversary was cunning in his
art.'

'I presume,' said Miss Mannering, 'the contest was somewhat fatiguing,
Mr. Sampson?'

'Very much, young lady; howbeit I girded up my loins and strove against
him.'

'I can bear witness,' said the Colonel; 'I never saw an affair better
contested. The enemy was like the Mahratta cavalry: he assailed on all
sides, and presented no fair mark for artillery; but Mr. Sampson stood
to his guns notwithstanding, and fired away, now upon the enemy and now
upon the dust which he had raised. But we must not fight our battles
over again to-night; to-morrow we shall have the whole at breakfast.'

The next morning at breakfast, however, the Dominie did not make his
appearance. He had walked out, a servant said, early in the morning. It
was so common for him to forget his meals that his absence never
deranged the family. The housekeeper, a decent old-fashioned
Presbyterian matron, having, as such, the highest respect for Sampson's
theological acquisitions, had it in charge on these occasions to take
care that he was no sufferer by his absence of mind, and therefore
usually waylaid him on his return, to remind him of his sublunary
wants, and to minister to their relief. It seldom, however, happened
that he was absent from two meals together, as was the case in the
present instance. We must explain the cause of this unusual occurrence.

The conversation which Mr. Pleydell had held with Mr. Mannering on the
subject of the loss of Harry Bertram had awakened all the painful
sensations which that event had inflicted upon Sampson. The
affectionate heart of the poor Dominie had always reproached him that
his negligence in leaving the child in the care of Frank Kennedy had
been the proximate cause of the murder of the one, the loss of the
other, the death of Mrs. Bertram, and the ruin of the family of his
patron. It was a subject which he never conversed upon, if indeed his
mode of speech could be called conversation at any time; but it was
often present to his imagination. The sort of hope so strongly affirmed
and asserted in Mrs. Bertram's last settlement had excited a
corresponding feeling in the Dominie's bosom, which was exasperated
into a sort of sickening anxiety by the discredit with which Pleydell
had treated it. 'Assuredly,' thought Sampson to himself, 'he is a man
of erudition, and well skilled in the weighty matters of the law; but
he is also a man of humorous levity and inconsistency of speech, and
wherefore should he pronounce ex cathedra, as it were, on the hope
expressed by worthy Madam Margaret Bertram of Singleside?'

All this, I say, the Dominie THOUGHT to himself; for had he uttered
half the sentence, his jaws would have ached for a month under the
unusual fatigue of such a continued exertion. The result of these
cogitations was a resolution to go and visit the scene of the tragedy
at Warroch Point, where he had not been for many years; not, indeed,
since the fatal accident had happened. The walk was a long one, for the
Point of Warroch lay on the farther side of the Ellangowan property,
which was interposed between it and Woodbourne. Besides, the Dominie
went astray more than once, and met with brooks swoln into torrents by
the melting of the snow, where he, honest man, had only the summer
recollection of little trickling rills.

At length, however, he reached the woods which he had made the object
of his excursion, and traversed them with care, muddling his disturbed
brains with vague efforts to recall every circumstance of the
catastrophe. It will readily be supposed that the influence of local
situation and association was inadequate to produce conclusions
different from those which he had formed under the immediate pressure
of the occurrences themselves. 'With many a weary sigh, therefore, and
many a groan,' the poor Dominie returned from his hopeless pilgrimage,
and weariedly plodded his way towards Woodbourne, debating at times in
his altered mind a question which was forced upon him by the cravings
of an appetite rather of the keenest, namely, whether he had
breakfasted that morning or no? It was in this twilight humour, now
thinking of the loss of the child, then involuntarily compelled to
meditate upon the somewhat incongruous subject of hung beef, rolls, and
butter, that his route, which was different from that which he had
taken in the morning, conducted him past the small ruined tower, or
rather vestige of a tower, called by the country people the Kaim of
Derncleugh.

The reader may recollect the description of this ruin in the
twenty-seventh chapter, as the vault in which young Bertram, under the
auspices of Meg Merrilies, witnessed the death of Hatteraick's
lieutenant. The tradition of the country added ghostly terrors to the
natural awe inspired by the situation of this place, which terrors the
gipsies who so long inhabited the vicinity had probably invented, or at
least propagated, for their own advantage. It was said that, during the
times of the Galwegian independence, one Hanlon Mac-Dingawaie, brother
to the reigning chief, Knarth Mac-Dingawaie, murdered his brother and
sovereign, in order to usurp the principality from his infant nephew,
and that, being pursued for vengeance by the faithful allies and
retainers of the house, who espoused the cause of the lawful heir, he
was compelled to retreat, with a few followers whom he had involved in
his crime, to this impregnable tower called the Kaim of Derucleugh,
where he defended himself until nearly reduced by famine, when, setting
fire to the place, he and the small remaining garrison desperately
perished by their own swords, rather than fall into the hands of their
exasperated enemies. This tragedy, which, considering the wild times
wherein it was placed, might have some foundation in truth, was larded
with many legends of superstition and diablerie, so that most of the
peasants of the neighbourhood, if benighted, would rather have chosen
to make a considerable circuit than pass these haunted walls. The
lights, often seen around the tower, when used as the rendezvous of the
lawless characters by whom it was occasionally frequented, were
accounted for, under authority of these tales of witchery, in a manner
at once convenient for the private parties concerned and satisfactory
to the public.

Now it must be confessed that our friend Sampson, although a profound
scholar and mathematician, had not travelled so far in philosophy as to
doubt the reality of witchcraft or apparitions. Born, indeed, at a time
when a doubt in the existence of witches was interpreted as equivalent
to a justification of their infernal practices, a belief of such
legends had been impressed upon the Dominie as an article indivisible
from his religious faith, and perhaps it would have been equally
difficult to have induced him to doubt the one as the other. With these
feelings, and in a thick misty day, which was already drawing to its
close, Dominie Sampson did not pass the Kaim of Derncleugh without some
feelings of tacit horror.

What, then, was his astonishment when, on passing the door--that door
which was supposed to have been placed there by one of the latter
Lairds of Ellangowan to prevent presumptuous strangers from incurring
the dangers of the haunted vault--that door, supposed to be always
locked, and the key of which was popularly said to be deposited with
the presbytery--that door, that very door, opened suddenly, and the
figure of Meg Merrilies, well known, though not seen for many a
revolving year, was placed at once before the eyes of the startled
Dominie! She stood immediately before him in the footpath, confronting
him so absolutely that he could not avoid her except by fairly turning
back, which his manhood prevented him from thinking of.

'I kenn'd ye wad be here,' she said, with her harsh and hollow voice;
'I ken wha ye seek; but ye maun do my bidding.'

'Get thee behind me!' said the alarmed Dominie. 'Avoid ye! Conjuro te,
scelestissima, nequissima, spurcissima, iniquissima atque miserrima,
conjuro te!!!'

Meg stood her ground against this tremendous volley of superlatives,
which Sampson hawked up from the pit of his stomach and hurled at her
in thunder. 'Is the carl daft,' she said, 'wi' his glamour?'

'Conjuro,' continued the Dominie, 'abjuro, contestor atque viriliter
impero tibi!'

'What, in the name of Sathan, are ye feared for, wi' your French
gibberish, that would make a dog sick? Listen, ye stickit stibbler, to
what I tell ye, or ye sail rue it while there's a limb o' ye hings to
anither! Tell Colonel Mannering that I ken he's seeking me. He kens,
and I ken, that the blood will be wiped out, and the lost will be found,

     And Bertram's right and Bertram's might
     Shall meet on Ellangowan height.

Hae, there's a letter to him; I was gaun to send it in another way. I
canna write mysell; but I hae them that will baith write and read, and
ride and rin for me. Tell him the time's coming now, and the weird's
dreed, and the wheel's turning. Bid him look at the stars as he has
looked at them before. Will ye mind a' this?'

'Assuredly,' said the Dominie, 'I am dubious; for, woman, I am
perturbed at thy words, and my flesh quakes to hear thee.'

'They'll do you nae ill though, and maybe muckle gude.'

'Avoid ye! I desire no good that comes by unlawful means.'

'Fule body that thou art,' said Meg, stepping up to him, with a frown
of indignation that made her dark eyes flash like lamps from under her
bent brows--'Fule body! if I meant ye wrang, couldna I clod ye ower
that craig, and wad man ken how ye cam by your end mair than Frank
Kennedy? Hear ye that, ye worricow?'

'In the name of all that is good,' said the Dominie, recoiling, and
pointing his long pewter-headed walking cane like a javelin at the
supposed sorceress--'in the name of all that is good, bide off hands! I
will not be handled; woman, stand off, upon thine own proper peril!
Desist, I say; I am strong; lo, I will resist!' Here his speech was cut
short; for Meg, armed with supernatural strength (as the Dominie
asserted), broke in upon his guard, put by a thrust which he made at
her with his cane, and lifted him into the vault, 'as easily,' said he,
'as I could sway a Kitchen's Atlas.'

'Sit down there,' she said, pushing the half-throttled preacher with
some violence against a broken chair--'sit down there and gather your
wind and your senses, ye black barrow-tram o' the kirk that ye are. Are
ye fou or fasting?'

'Fasting, from all but sin,' answered the Dominie, who, recovering his
voice, and finding his exorcisms only served to exasperate the
intractable sorceress, thought it best to affect complaisance and
submission, inwardly conning over, however, the wholesome conjurations
which he durst no longer utter aloud. But as the Dominie's brain was by
no means equal to carry on two trains of ideas at the same time, a word
or two of his mental exercise sometimes escaped and mingled with his
uttered speech in a manner ludicrous enough, especially as the poor man
shrunk himself together after every escape of the kind, from terror of
the effect it might produce upon the irritable feelings of the witch.

Meg in the meanwhile went to a great black cauldron that was boiling on
a fire on the floor, and, lifting the lid, an odour was diffused
through the vault which, if the vapours of a witch's cauldron could in
aught be trusted, promised better things than the hell-broth which such
vessels are usually supposed to contain. It was, in fact, the savour of
a goodly stew, composed of fowls, hares, partridges, and moor-game
boiled in a large mess with potatoes, onions, and leeks, and from the
size of the cauldron appeared to be prepared for half a dozen of people
at least. 'So ye hae eat naething a' day?' said Meg, heaving a large
portion of this mess into a brown dish and strewing it savourily with
salt and pepper. [Footnote: See Note 4.]

'Nothing,' answered the Dominie, 'scelestissima!--that is, gudewife.'

'Hae then,' said she, placing the dish before him, 'there's what will
warm your heart.'

'I do not hunger, malefica--that is to say, Mrs. Merrilies!' for he
said unto himself,' the savour is sweet, but it hath been cooked by a
Canidia or an Ericthoe.'

'If ye dinna eat instantly and put some saul in ye, by the bread and
the salt, I'll put it down your throat wi' the cutty spoon, scaulding
as it is, and whether ye will or no. Gape, sinner, and swallow!'

Sampson, afraid of eye of newt, and toe of frog, tigers' chaudrons, and
so forth, had determined not to venture; but the smell of the stew was
fast melting his obstinacy, which flowed from his chops as it were in
streams of water, and the witch's threats decided him to feed. Hunger
and fear are excellent casuists.

'Saul,' said Hunger, 'feasted with the witch of Endor.' 'And,' quoth
Fear, 'the salt which she sprinkled upon the food showeth plainly it is
not a necromantic banquet, in which that seasoning never occurs.' 'And,
besides,' says Hunger, after the first spoonful, 'it is savoury and
refreshing viands.'

'So ye like the meat?' said the hostess.

'Yea,' answered the Dominie, 'and I give thee thanks,
sceleratissima!--which means, Mrs. Margaret.'

'Aweel, eat your fill; but an ye kenn'd how it was gotten ye maybe
wadna like it sae weel.' Sampson's spoon dropped in the act of
conveying its load to his mouth. 'There's been mony a moonlight watch
to bring a' that trade thegither,' continued Meg; 'the folk that are to
eat that dinner thought little o' your game laws.'

'Is that all?' thought Sampson, resuming his spoon and shovelling away
manfully; 'I will not lack my food upon that argument.'

'Now ye maun tak a dram?'

'I will,' quoth Sampson, 'conjuro te--that is, I thank you heartily,'
for he thought to himself, in for a penny in for a pound; and he fairly
drank the witch's health in a cupful of brandy. When he had put this
copestone upon Meg's good cheer, he felt, as he said, 'mightily
elevated, and afraid of no evil which could befall unto him.'

'Will ye remember my errand now?' said Meg Merrilies; 'I ken by the
cast o' your ee that ye're anither man than when you cam in.'

'I will, Mrs. Margaret,' repeated Sampson, stoutly; 'I will deliver
unto him the sealed yepistle, and will add what you please to send by
word of mouth.'

'Then I'll make it short,' says Meg. 'Tell him to look at the stars
without fail this night, and to do what I desire him in that letter, as
he would wish

     That Bertram's right and Bertram's might
     Should meet on Ellangowan height.

I have seen him twice when he saw na me; I ken when he was in this
country first, and I ken what's brought him back again. Up an' to the
gate! ye're ower lang here; follow me.'

Sampson followed the sibyl accordingly, who guided him about a quarter
of a mile through the woods, by a shorter cut than he could have found
for himself; then they entered upon the common, Meg still marching
before him at a great pace, until she gained the top of a small hillock
which overhung the road.

'Here,' she said, 'stand still here. Look how the setting sun breaks
through yon cloud that's been darkening the lift a' day. See where the
first stream o' light fa's: it's upon Donagild's round tower, the
auldest tower in the Castle o' Ellangowan; that's no for naething! See
as it's glooming to seaward abune yon sloop in the bay; that's no for
naething neither. Here I stood on this very spot,' said she, drawing
herself up so as not to lose one hair-breadth of her uncommon height,
and stretching out her long sinewy arm and clenched hand--'here I stood
when I tauld the last Laird o' Ellangowan what was coming on his house;
and did that fa' to the ground? na, it hit even ower sair! And here,
where I brake the wand of peace ower him, here I stand again, to bid
God bless and prosper the just heir of Ellangowan that will sune be
brought to his ain; and the best laird he shall be that Ellangowan has
seen for three hundred years. I'll no live to see it, maybe; but there
will be mony a blythe ee see it though mine be closed. And now, Abel
Sampson, as ever ye lo'ed the house of Ellangowan, away wi' my message
to the English Colonel, as if life and death were upon your haste!'

So saying, she turned suddenly from the amazed Dominie and regained
with swift and long strides the shelter of the wood from which she had
issued at the point where it most encroached upon the common. Sampson
gazed after her for a moment in utter astonishment, and then obeyed her
directions, hurrying to Woodbourne at a pace very unusual for him,
exclaiming three times, 'Prodigious! prodigious! pro-di-gi-ous!'




CHAPTER XLVII

     It is not madness
     That I have utter'd, bring me to the test,
     And I the matter will re-word, which madness
     Would gambol from.
          Hamlet.


As Mr. Sampson crossed the hall with a bewildered look, Mrs. Allan, the
good housekeeper, who, with the reverent attention which is usually
rendered to the clergy in Scotland, was on the watch for his return,
sallied forth to meet him--'What's this o't now, Mr. Sampson, this is
waur than ever! Ye'll really do yoursell some injury wi' these lang
fasts; naething's sae hurtful to the stamach, Mr. Sampson. If ye would
but put some peppermint draps in your pocket, or let Barnes cut ye a
sandwich.'

'Avoid thee!' quoth the Dominie, his mind running still upon his
interview with Meg Merrilies, and making for the dining-parlour.

'Na, ye needna gang in there, the cloth's been removed an hour syne,
and the Colonel's at his wine; but just step into my room, I have a
nice steak that the cook will do in a moment.'

'Exorciso te!' said Sampson; 'that is, I have dined.'

'Dined! it's impossible; wha can ye hae dined wi', you that gangs out
nae gate?'

