some property in England she has gone. If it is not that, of nothing
else can I think but Captain Jacobus. But my sister Angelica had ever
two ways--nothing at all she would say about her money or her business;
but constantly, to every one, she would talk of her husband. I think
then it is money or property that has taken her to England. For if it
had been Jacobus, to the whole town she would have told it." Then he
took both Cornelia's hands in his, and looking at her earnestly said--

"Poor Rem! Impossible is it?"

"Quite impossible, sir," she answered.

"When he got thy letter refusing his love and offer, he went to Boston.
I think he will not come back to me. I am very sorry," he said simply,
and he let her hands drop.

"I am sorry also--for your sake. I hear however that Rem is doing well
in Boston."

"Better than his hopes. Very good fortune has come to him."

"And you, sir?"

"I am not doing much at present--but Smith and Warren do less. In an
hour or two to your house I will come. There is plenty to talk about."

The next day Cornelia walked down Broadway to Madame Jacobus' house. It
was closed and desolate looking, and she sighed as she compared its old
bright spotless comfort, with its present empty forlornness. The change
typified the change in her heart and love, but ere she could entertain
the thought, her eyes fell upon the trees in the garden, full of the
pale crinkled leaves of spring, and she saw the early flowers breaking
through the dark earth, and the early shrubs bursting into white and
golden blooms. In some way they had a message for her; and she went
home with hope budding in her heart. Soon after Mrs. Moran heard her
singing at her work,

                "The far east glows,
 The morning wind blows fresh and free;
 Should not the hour that wakes the rose
                 Awaken thee?
                    No longer sleep--
                      Oh listen now!
                    I wait and weep,
                      But where art thou?"

From one to another song she went, simple melodies all of them,
delightful little warblings of love, which except for their gladness
and loyalty, had nothing in them to charm.

She was a deserted maiden. Her lover had palpably and with extreme
cruelty deceived her; but she had grieved, and forgiven. And love
brings its reward, even if unrequited. Those who love, and have loved,
are the better for the revelation; for love for love's sake enriches
and blesses the lover to the very end of life. She did not forget, for
love has everlasting remembrance; and she did not wish to forget, for a
great affection is a great happiness, and the whole soul can find
shelter in it.

Neither were her days monotonous or unhappy. All the real pleasures of
life lie in narrow compass; and she found herself very often a little
hurried for want of time. She had not, it is true, the resources of the
woman of to-day--no literary, musical, social, or sporting clubs
existed for Cornelia; but she had duties and devices that made every
moment pleasant or profitable. Many hours daily were given to fine
needlework--calm quiet hours full of thought as well as work; she had
her music to practice, new books and papers to read, calls to make,
mantua makers and milliners to interview, dinners and dances and
tea-parties to attend, shopping to look after, delicate bits of darning
and mending to exercise her skill on, creams and pasties and cakes to
prepare, visitors to welcome and entertain, and many other duties which
sprang up--as extras do--unexpectedly, and yet which opened the door
for very pleasant surprises and events.

Besides which, there was her father. After her return from school she
had always driven with him to some extent; but his claim on her now was
often a little exacting. He said the fresh spring winds were good for
her, and that she stayed in the house too much, and there was no
evading the dictum that came with both parental and medical authority.
Perhaps this demand upon her time would not have been made if the Hydes
had been in New York; but Doctor Moran by frequent inquiries satisfied
himself that they were yet in Philadelphia; and for his daughter's
satisfaction he frequently said as they drove up Maiden Lane, "We will
take the Greenwich Road, there is no fear of our meeting any one we do
not wish to see." She understood the allusion, and was satisfied to
escape meetings that promised her nothing but pain.

In the month of May there occurred one of those wet spells which are so
irritating "growing weather" of course, but very tiresome to those who
felt the joy of spring escaping them. Week after week it was too damp,
or the winds were too sharp, or the roads too heavy for quick driving,
and thus the month of all months went out of the calendar with few red
letter days to brighten it. Then June came in royally, and Cornelia was
glad of the sunshine and the breeze and the rapid canter; and for a
week or two she was much out with her father. But he was now ever on
the watch, and she judged from the circumstance that the Hydes were
back in New York. Besides which, he did not any longer give her the
assurance of not meeting any one they did not wish to see.

One exquisite day as they went up Maiden Lane the Doctor said--"My
friend General Hewitt sails for England to-day, and we will go and wish
him a good voyage." So to the pier they went, and the Doctor left his
carriage, and taking Cornelia on his arm walked down to where the
English packet was lying. They were a little too late to go on board,
for the shoremen were taking away the gang-plank, and the sailors
preparing to lift the anchor; but the General stood leaning over the
side of the vessel, and exchanged some last words with his friend.

 [Illustration: "SHE WAVED HIM AN ADIEU"]

While Cornelia listened, she became suddenly conscious of the powerful
magnetism of some human eye, and obeying its irresistible attraction
she saw George Hyde steadily regarding her. He stood by the side of his
father, as handsome as on that May morning when he had first looked
love into her heart. She was enthralled again by his glance, and never
for one moment thought of resisting the appeal it made to her. With a
conscious tenderness she waved him an adieu whose spirit he could not
but feel. In the same moment he lifted his hat and stood bareheaded
looking at her with a pathetic inquiry, which made her inwardly cry
out, "Oh, what does he mean?" The packet was moving--the wind filled
the blowing sails--the hoarse crying of the sailormen blended with the
"good-byes" of the passengers--and the Earl, aware of the sad and
silent parting within his sight--moved away as Cornelia again waved a
mute farewell to her lost lover. Then the Doctor touched her--

"Why do you do that?" he asked angrily.

"Because I must do it, father; I cannot help it. I desire to do it."

"I am in a hurry; let us go home."

Filling her eyes with the beauty of the splendid looking youth still
standing bareheaded watching her, seeing even such trivial things as
his long cloak thrown backward over his shoulder, his white hand
holding his lifted hat, and the wind-tossed curls of his handsome head,
she turned away with a sigh. The Doctor drove rapidly to Maiden Lane
and did not on the way speak a word; and Cornelia was glad of it. That
image of her lover standing on the moving ship watching her with his
heart in his eyes, filled her whole consciousness. Never would it be
possible for her to forget it, or to put any other image in its place.
She thanked her good angel for giving her such a comforting memory; it
seemed as if the sting had been taken out of her sorrow. Henceforward
she was resolved to love without a doubt. She would believe in Joris,
no matter what she had seen, or what she had heard. There were places
in life to which alas! truth could not come; and this might be one of
them. Though all the world blamed her lover, she would excuse him. Her
heart might ache, her eyes might weep, but in that aching heart and in
those weeping eyes, his splendid image would live in that radiant
dimness which makes the unseen face, often more real than the present
one.

Doctor Moran divined something of this resolute temper, and it made him
silent. He felt that his daughter had come to a place where she had put
reason firmly aside, and given her whole assent to the assurances of
her intuition. He had no arguments for an antagonism of this kind. What
could he say to a soul that presaged a something, and then believed it?
His instinctive sagacity told him that silence was now the part of
wisdom. But though he took her silently home he was conscious of a
great relief. His watch was over.

Now a woman's intuition is like a leopard's spring, it seizes the
truth--if it seize it at all--at the first bound; and it was by this
unaccountable mental agility Cornelia had arrived at the conviction of
her lover's fidelity. At any rate, she felt confident, that if
circumstances had compelled him to be false to her, the wrong had been
sincerely mourned; and she was able to forgive the offence that was
blotted out with tears. She reflected also, that now he was so far
away, it would be possible for her to call upon Madame Van Heemskirk,
and also upon Madame Jacobus as soon as she returned; but if Hyde had
remained in New York, these houses would necessarily be closed to her,
for he was a constant visitor at both.

She resolved therefore to call upon Madame Van Heemskirk the following
week. She expected the old lady might treat her a little formally,
perhaps even with some coldness, but she thought it worth while to test
her kindness. Joris had once told her that his grandfather and
grandmother both approved their love, and they must know of his
desertion, and also of the reason for it. Yet there was in her heart
such a reluctance to take any step that had the appearance of seeking
her lost lover, that she put off this visit day after day, finding in
the weather or in some household duty always a fair excuse for doing
so, until one morning the Doctor said at breakfast:

"Councillor De Vrees died yesterday, and there is to be a great
funeral. Every Dutchman in town will be there, and many others beside,
He has left an immense fortune."

"Who told you this?" asked Mrs. Moran.

"I met Van Heemskirk and his wife going there. Madame De Vrees is their
daughter. Now you will see great changes take place."

"What do you mean, John?"

"Madame De Vrees has long wanted to build a mansion equal to their
wealth, but the Councillor would never leave the house he built at
their marriage. Madame will now build, and her children take their
places among the great ones of the city. De Vrees was an oddity; very
few people will be sorry to lose him. He had no good quality but money,
and he was the most unhappy of men about its future disposal. I never
understood until I knew him, how wretched a thing it is to be merely
rich."

This conversation again put off Cornelia's visit, and she virtually
abandoned the idea. Then one morning Mrs. Moran said, "Cornelia, I wish
you to go to William Irvin's for some hosiery and Kendal cottons. It is
a new store down the Lane at number ninety, and I hear his cloths are
strangely cheap. Go and examine them for me."

"Very well, mother. I will also look in at Fisher's;" and it was at
Fisher's that she saw Madame Van Heemskirk. She was talking to Mr.
Henry Fisher as they advanced from the back of the store, and Cornelia
had time to observe that madame was in deep mourning, and that she had
grown older looking since she had last seen her. As they came forward
madame raised her eyes and saw Cornelia, and then hastily leaving the
merchant, she approached her.

"Good-morning, madame," said Cornelia, with a cheerful smile.

"Good-morning, miss. Step aside once with me. A few words I have to say
to you;" and as she spoke she drew Cornelia a little apart from the
crowd at the counter, and looking at her sternly, said--

"One question only--why then did you treat my grandson so badly? A
shameful thing it is to be a flirt."

"I am not a flirt, madame. And I did not treat your grandson badly. No,
indeed!"

"Yes, indeed! He told me so himself."

"He told you so?"

"He told me so. Surely he did."

"That I treated him badly?"

"Pray then what else? You let a young man love you--you let him tell
you so--you tell him 'yes, I love you' and then when he says marry me,
you say, 'no.' Such ways I call bad, very bad! Not worthy of my Joris
are you, and so then, I am glad you said 'no.'"

"I do not understand you."

"Neither did you understand my Joris--a great mistake he made--and he
did not understand you; and I do not understand such ways of the girls
of this day. They are shameless, and I am ashamed for you."

"Madame, you are very rude."

"And very false are you."

"I am not false."

"My Joris told me so. Truth itself is Joris. He would not lie. He would
not deceive."

"If your grandson told you I had deceived him, and refused to marry
him,--let it be so. I have no wish to contradict your grandson."

"That you cannot do. I am ashamed--"

"Madame, I wish you good morning;" and with these words Cornelia left
the store. Her cheeks were burning; the old lady's angry voice was in
her ears, she felt the eyes of every one in the store upon her, and she
was indignant and mortified at a meeting so inopportune. Her heart had
also received a new stab; and she had not at the moment any philosophy
to meet it. Joris had evidently told his grandmother exactly what the
old lady affirmed. She had not a doubt of that, but why? Why had he
lied about her? Was there no other way out of his entanglement with
her? She walked home in a hurry, and as soon as possible shut herself
in her room to consider this fresh wrong and injustice.

She could arrive at only one conclusion--Annie's most unexpected
appearance had happened immediately after his proposal to herself. He
was pressed for time, his grandparents would be especially likely to
embarrass him concerning her claims, and of course the quickest and
surest way to prevent questioning on the matter, was to tell them that
she had refused him. That fact would close their mouths in sympathy for
his disappointment, and there would be no further circumstances to
clear up. It was the only explanation of madame's attitude that was
possible, and she was compelled to accept it, much as it humiliated
her. And then after it had been accepted and sorrowed over, there came
back to her those deeper assurances, those soul assertions, which she
could not either examine or define, but which she felt compelled to
receive--He loves me! I feel it! It is not his fault! I must not think
wrong of him.

There was still Madame Jacobus to hope for. She was so shrewd and so
kindly, that Cornelia felt certain of her sympathy and wise advice. But
month after month passed away and madame's house remained empty and
forlorn-looking. Now and then there came short fateful letters from
Arenta, and Van Ariens--utterly miserable--visited them frequently that
he might be comforted with their assurances of his child's ability to
manage the very worst circumstances in which she could be placed.

And so the long summer days passed and the winter approached again; but
before that time Cornelia had at least attained to the wisest of all
the virtues--that calm, hushed contentment, which is only another name
for happiness--that contentment which accepts the fact that there is a
chain of causes linked to effects by an invincible necessity; and that
whatever is, could not have wisely been but so. And if this was
fatalism, it was at least a brighter thing than the languid pessimism,
which would have led her life among quicksands, to end it in wreck.

One day at the close of October she put down her needlework with a
little impatience. "I am tired of sewing, mother," she said, "and I
will walk down to the Battery and get a breath of the sea. I shall not
