As the hunters traversed the spots which separated the field from the
wood, there was always a stimulating uncertainty what sort of game was
to be found, and the marksman, with his bow ready bent, or his javelin
poised, and his good and well-bitted horse thrown upon its haunches,
ready for a sudden start, observed watchfully what should rush from the
covert, so that, were it deer, boar, wolf, wild cattle, or any other
species of game, he might be in readiness.

The wolf, which, on account of its ravages, was the most obnoxious of
the beasts of prey, did not, however, supply the degree of diversion
which his name promised; he usually fled far--in some instances many
miles--before he took courage to turn to bay, and though formidable at
such moments, destroying both dogs and men by his terrible bite, yet at
other times was rather despised for his cowardice. The boar, on the
other hand, was a much more irascible and courageous animal.

The wild cattle, the most formidable of all the tenants of the ancient
Caledonian forest, were, however, to the English cavaliers, by far the
most interesting objects of pursuit. [Footnote: These Bulls are thus
described by Hector Boetius, concerning whom he says--"In this wood
(namely the Caledonian wood) were sometime white bulls, with crisp and
curling manes, like fierce lions; and though they seemed meek and tame
in the remanent figure of their bodies, they were more wild than any
other beasts, and had such hatred against the society and company of
men, that they never came in the woods nor lesuries where they found
any foot or hand thereof, and many days after they eat not of the herbs
that were touched or handled by man. These bulls were so wild, that
they were never taken but by slight and crafty labour, and so
impatient, that after they were taken they died from insupportable
dolour. As soon as any man, invaded these bulls, they rushed with such,
terrible press upon him that they struck him to the earth, taking no
fear of hounds, sharp lances, or other most penetrative
weapons."--_Boetius, Chron. Scot_. Vol. I. page xxxix.

The wild cattle of this breed, which are now only known in one manor in
England, that of Chillingham Castle, in Northumberland, (the seat of
the Earl of Tankerville,) were, in the memory of man, still preserved
in three places in Scotland, namely, Drumlanrig, Cumbernauld, and the
upper park at Hamilton Palace, at all of which places, except the last,
I believe, they have now been destroyed, on account of their ferocity.
But though those of modern days are remarkable for their white colour,
with black muzzles, and exhibiting, in a small degree, the black mane,
about three or four inches long, by which the bulls in particular are
distinguished, they do not by any means come near the terrific
description given us by the ancient authors, which has made some
naturalists think that these animals should probably be referred to a
different species, though possessing the same general habits, and
included in the same genus. The bones, which are often discovered in
Scottish mosses, belong certainly to a race of animals much larger than
those of Chillingham, which seldom grow to above 80 stone (of 14 lbs.),
the general weight varying from 60 to 80 stone. We should be accounted
very negligent by one class of readers, did we not record that the beef
furnished by those cattle is of excellent flavour, and finely marbled.

[The following is an extract from, a letter received by Sir Walter
Scott, some time after the publication of the novel.--

"When it is wished to kill any of the cattle at Chillingham, the keeper
goes into the herd on horseback, in which way they are quite
accessible, and singling out his victim, takes aim with a large
rifle-gun, and seldom fails in bringing him down. If the poor animal
makes much bellowing in his agony, and especially if the ground be
stained with his blood, his companions become very furious, and are
themselves, I believe, accessory to his death. After which, they fly
off to a distant part of the park, and he is drawn away on a sledge.
Lord Tankerville is very tenacious of these singular animals; he will
on no account part with a living one, and hardly allows of a sufficient
number being killed, to leave pasturage for those that remain.

"It happened on one occasion, three or four years ago, that a party
visiting at the castle, among whom were some men of war, who had hunted
buffaloes in foreign parts, obtained permission to do the keeper's
work, and shoot one of the wild cattle. They sallied out on horseback,
and duly equipped for the enterprise, attacked their object. The poor
animal received several wounds, but none of them proving fatal, he
retired before his pursuers, roaring with pain and rage, till, planting
himself against a wall or tree, he stood at bay, offering a front of
defiance. In this position the youthful heir of the castle, Lord
Ossulston, rode up to give him the fatal shot. Though warned of the
danger of approaching near to the enraged animal, and especially of
firing without first having turned his horse's head in a direction to
be ready for flight, he discharged his piece; but ere he could turn his
horse round to make his retreat, the raging beast had plunged his
immense horns into its flank. The horse staggered and was near falling,
but recovering by a violent effort, he extricated himself from his
infuriated pursuer, making off with all the speed his wasting strength
supplied, his entrails meanwhile dragging on the ground, till at length
he fell, and died at the same moment. The animal was now close upon his
rear, and the young Lord would unquestionably have shared the fate of
his unhappy steed, had not the keeper, deeming it full time to conclude
the day's diversion, fired at the instant. His shot brought the beast
to the ground, and running in with his large knife, he put a period to
his existence.

"This scene of gentlemanly pastime was viewed from a turret of the
castle by Lady Tankerville and her female visitors. Such a situation
for the mother of the young hero, was anything but enviable."]]
Altogether, the ringing of bugles, the clattering of horses' hoofs, the
lowing and bellowing of the enraged mountain cattle, the sobs of deer
mingled by throttling dogs, the wild shouts of exultation of the
men,--made a chorus which extended far through the scene in which it
arose, and seemed to threaten the inhabitants of the valley even in its
inmost recesses.

During the course of the hunting, when a stag or a boar was expected,
one of the wild cattle often came rushing forward, bearing down the
young trees, crashing the branches in its progress, and in general
dispersing whatever opposition was presented to it by the hunters. Sir
John de Walton was the only one of the chivalry of the party who
individually succeeded in mastering one of these powerful animals. Like
a Spanish tauridor, he bore down and killed with his lance a ferocious
bull; two well-grown calves and three kine were also slain, being
unable to carry off the quantity of arrows, javelins, and other
missiles, directed against them by the archers and drivers; but many
others, in spite of every endeavour to intercept them, escaped to their
gloomy haunts in the remote skirts of the mountain called Cairntable,
with their hides well feathered with those marks of human enmity.

A large portion of the morning was spent in this way, until a
particular blast from the master of the hunt announced that he had not
forgot the discreet custom of the repast, which, on such occasions, was
provided for upon a scale proportioned to the multitude who had been
convened to attend the sport.

The blast peculiar to the time, assembled the whole party in an open
space in a wood, where their numbers had room and accommodation to sit
down upon the green turf, the slain game affording a plentiful supply
for roasting or broiling, an employment in which the lower class were
all immediately engaged; while puncheons and pipes, placed in
readiness, and scientifically opened, supplied Gascoigne wine, and
mighty ale, at the pleasure of those who chose to appeal to them.

The knights, whose rank did not admit of interference, were seated by
themselves, and ministered to by their squires and pages, to whom such
menial services were not accounted disgraceful, but, on the contrary, a
proper step of their education. The number of those distinguished
persons seated upon the present occasion at the table of dais, as it
was called, (in virtue of a canopy of green boughs with which it was
overshadowed,) comprehended Sir John de Walton, Sir Aymer de Valance,
and some reverend brethren dedicated to the service of Saint Bride,
who, though Scottish ecclesiastics, were treated with becoming respect
by the English soldiers. One or two Scottish retainers, or vavasours,
maintaining, perhaps in prudence, a suitable deference to the English
knights, sat at the bottom of the table, and as many English archers,
peculiarly respected by their superiors, were invited, according to the
modern phrase, to the honours of the sitting.

Sir John de Walton sat at the head of the table; his eye, though it
seemed to have no certain object, yet never for a moment remained
stationary, but glanced from one countenance to another of the ring
formed by his guests, for such they all were, no doubt, though he
himself could hardly have told upon what principle he had issued the
invitations; and even apparently was at a loss to think what, in one or
two cases, had procured him the honour of their presence.

One person in particular caught De Walton's eye, as having the air of a
redoubted man-at-arms, although it seemed as if fortune had not of late
smiled upon his enterprises. He was a tall raw-boned man, of an
extremely rugged countenance, and his skin, which showed itself through
many a loophole in his dress, exhibited a complexion which must have
endured all the varieties of an outlawed life; and akin to one who had,
according to the customary phrase, "ta'en the bent with Robin Bruce,"
in other words occupied the moors with him as an insurgent. Some such
idea certainly crossed De Walton's mind. Yet the apparent coolness, and
absence of alarm, with which the stranger sat at the board of an
English officer, at the same time being wholly in his power, had much
in it which was irreconcilable with any such suggestion. De Walton, and
several of those about him, had in the course of the day observed that
this tattered cavalier, the most remarkable parts of whose garb and
equipments consisted of an old coat-of-mail and a rusted yet massive
partisan about eight feet long, was possessed of superior skill in the
art of hunting to any individual of their numerous party. The governor
having looked at this suspicious figure until he had rendered the
stranger aware of the special interest which he attracted, at length
filled a goblet of choice wine, and requested him, as one of the best
pupils of Sir Tristem who had attended upon the day's chase, to pledge
him in a vintage superior to that supplied to the general company.

"I suppose, however, sir," said De Walton, "you will have no objections
to put off my challenge of a brimmer, until you can answer my pledge in
Gascoigne wine, which grew in the king's own demesne, was pressed for
his own lip, and is therefore fittest to be emptied to his majesty's
health and prosperity."

"One half of the island of Britain," said the woodsman, with great
composure, "will be of your honour's opinion; but as I belong to the
other half, even the choicest liquor in Gascony cannot render that
health acceptable to me."

A murmur of disapprobation ran through the warriors present; the
priests hung their heads, looked deadly grave, and muttered their
pater-nosters.

"You see, stranger," said De Walton sternly, "that your speech
discomposes the company."

"It may be so," replied the man, in the same blunt tone; "and it may
happen that there is no harm in the speech notwithstanding."

"Do you consider that it is made in my presence?" answered De Walton.

"Yes, Sir Governor."

"And have you thought what must be the necessary inference?" continued
De Walton.

"I may form a round guess," answered the stranger, "what I might have
to fear, if your safe conduct and word of honour, when inviting me to
this hunting, were less trustworthy than I know full well it really is.
But I am your guest--your meat is even now passing my throat--your cup,
filled with right good wine, I have just now quaffed off--and I would
not fear the rankest Paynim infidel, if we stood in such relation
together, much less an English knight. I tell you, besides, Sir Knight,
you undervalue the wine we have quaffed. The high flavour and contents
of your cup, grow where it will, give me spirit to tell you one or two
circumstances, which cold cautious sobriety would, in a moment like
this, have left unsaid. You wish, I doubt not, to know who I am? My
Christian name is Michael--my surname is that of Turnbull, a redoubted
clan, to whose honours, even in the field of hunting or of battle, I
have added something. My abode is beneath the mountain of Rubieslaw, by
the fair streams of Teviot. You are surprised that I know how to hunt
the wild cattle,--I, who have made them my sport from infancy in the
lonely forests of Jed and Southdean, and have killed more of them than
you or any Englishman in your host ever saw, even if you include the
doughty deeds of this day."

The bold borderer made this declaration with the same provoking degree
of coolness which predominated in his whole demeanour, and was indeed
his principal attribute. His effrontery did not fail to produce its
effect upon Sir John De Walton, who instantly called out, "To arms! to
arms!--Secure the spy and traitor! Ho! pages and yeomen--William,
Anthony, Bend-the-bow, and Greenleaf--seize the traitor, and bind him
with your bow-strings and dog-leashes--bind him, I say, until the blood
start from beneath his nails!"

"Here is a goodly summons!" said Turnbull, with a sort of horselaugh.
"Were I as sure of being answered by twenty men I could name, there
would be small doubt of the upshot of this day."

The archers thickened around the hunter, yet laid no hold on him, none
of them being willing to be the first who broke the peace proper to the
occasion.

"Tell me," said De Walton, "thou traitor, for what waitest thou here?"

"Simply and solely," said the Jed forester, "that I may deliver up to
the Douglas the castle of his ancestors, and that I may ensure thee,
Sir Englishman, the payment of thy deserts, by cutting that very throat
which thou makest such a brawling use of."

At the same time, perceiving that the yeomen were crowding behind him
to carry their lord's commands into execution so soon as they should be
reiterated, the huntsman turned himself short round upon those who
appeared about to surprise him, and having, by the suddenness of the
action, induced them to step back a pace, he proceeded--"Yes, John de
Walton, my purpose was ere now to have put thee to death, as one whom I
find in possession of that castle and territory which belong to my
master, a knight much more worthy than thyself; but I know not why I
have paused--thou hast given me food when I have hungered for
twenty-four hours, I have not therefore had the heart to pay thee at
advantage as thou hast deserved. Begone from this place and country,
and take the fair warning of a foe; thou hast constituted thyself the
mortal enemy of this people, and there are those among them who have
seldom been injured or defied with impunity. Take no care in searching
after me, it will be in vain,--until I meet thee at a time which will
come at my pleasure, not thine. Push not your inquisition into cruelty,
to discover by what means I have deceived you, for it is impossible for
you to learn; and with this friendly advice, look at me and take your
leave, for although we shall one day meet, it may be long ere I see you
again."

De Walton remained silent, hoping that his prisoner, (for he saw no
chance of his escaping,) might, in his communicative humour, drop some
more information, and was not desirous to precipitate a fray with which
the scene was likely to conclude, unconscious at the same time of the
advantage which he thereby gave the daring hunter.

As Turnbull concluded his sentence, he made a sudden spring backwards,
which carried him out of the circle formed around him, and before they
were aware of his intentions, at once disappeared among the underwood.

"Seize him--seize him!" repeated De Walton: "let us have him at least
at our discretion, unless the earth has actually swallowed him."

This indeed appeared not unlikely, for near the place where Turnbull
had made the spring, there yawned a steep ravine, into which he
plunged, and descended by the assistance of branches, bushes, and
copsewood, until he reached the bottom, where he found some road to the
outskirts of the forest, through which he made his escape, leaving the
most expert woodsmen among the pursuers totally at fault, and unable to
trace his footsteps.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.


This interlude carried some confusion into the proceedings of the hunt,
thus suddenly surprised by the apparition of Michael Turnbull, an armed
and avowed follower of the House of Douglas, a sight so little to be
expected in the territory where his master was held a rebel and a
bandit, and where he himself must have been well known to most of the
peasantry present. The circumstance made an obvious impression on the
English chivalry. Sir John de Walton looked grave and thoughtful,
ordered the hunters to be assembled on the spot, and directed his
soldiers to commence a strict search among the persons who had attended
the chase, so as to discover whether Turnbull had any companions among
them; but it was too late to make that enquiry in the strict fashion
which De Walton directed.

The Scottish attendants on the chase, when they beheld that the
hunting, under pretence of which they were called together, was
interrupted for the purpose of laying hands upon their persons, and
subjecting them to examination, took care to suit their answers to the
questions put to them; in a word, they kept their own secret, if they
had any. Many of them, conscious of being the weaker party, became
afraid of foul play, slipt away from the places to which they had been
appointed, and left the hunting-match like men who conceived they had
been invited with no friendly intent. Sir John de Walton became aware
of the decreasing numbers of the Scottish--their gradual disappearance
awakening in the English knight that degree of suspicion which had of
late become his peculiar characteristic.

"Take, I pray thee," said he to Sir Aymer de Valence, "as many
men-at-arms as thou canst get together in five minutes' space, and at
least a hundred of the mounted archers, and ride as fast as thou canst,
without permitting them to straggle from thy standard, to reinforce the
garrison of Douglas; for I have my own thoughts what may have been
attempted on the castle, when we observe with our own eyes such a nest
of traitors here assembled."

"With reverence, Sir John," replied Aymer, "you shoot in this matter
rather beyond the mark. That the Scottish peasants have had bad
thoughts against us, I will be the last to deny; but, long debarred
from any silvan sport, you cannot wonder at their crowding to any
diversion by wood or river, and still less at their being easily
alarmed as to the certainty of the safe footing on which they stand
with us. The least rough usage is likely to strike them with fear, and
with the desire of escape, and so"--

"And so," said Sir John de Walton, who had listened with a degree of
impatience scarce consistent with the grave and formal politeness which
one knight was accustomed to bestow upon another, "and so I would
rather see Sir Aymer de Valence busy his horse's heels to execute my
orders, than give his tongue the trouble of impugning them."

At this sharp reprimand, all present looked at each other with
indications of marked displeasure. Sir Aymer was highly offended, but
saw it was no time to indulge in reprisal. He bowed until the feather
which was in his barret-cap mingled with his horse's mane, and without
reply--for he did not even choose to trust his voice in reply at the
moment--headed a considerable body of cavalry by the straightest road
back to the Castle of Douglas.

When he came to one of those eminences from which he could observe the
massive and complicated towers and walls of the old fortress, with the
glitter of the broad lake which surrounded it on three sides, he felt
much pleasure at the sight of the great banner of England, which
streamed from the highest part of the building. "I knew it," he
internally said; "I was certain that Sir John de Walton had become a
very woman in the indulgence of his fears and suspicions. Alas! that a
situation of responsibility should so much have altered a disposition
which I have known so noble and so knightly! By this good day, I scarce
know in what manner I should demean me when thus publicly rebuked
before the garrison. Certainly he deserves that I should, at some time
or other, let him understand, that however he may triumph in the
exercise of his short-lived command, yet, when man is to meet with man,
it will puzzle Sir John de Walton to show himself the superior of Aymer
de Valence, or perhaps to establish himself as his equal. But if, on
the contrary, his fears, however fantastic, are sincere at the moment
he expresses them, it becomes me to obey punctually commands which,
however absurd, are imposed in consequence of the governor's belief
that they are rendered necessary by the times, and not inventions
designed to vex and domineer over his officers in the indulgence of his
official powers. I would I knew which is the true statement of the
case, and whether the once famed De Walton is become afraid of his
enemies more than fits a knight, or makes imaginary doubts the pretext
of tyrannizing over his friend. I cannot say it would make much
difference to me, but I would rather have it that the man I once loved
had turned a petty tyrant than a weak-spirited coward; and I would be
content that he should study to vex me, rather than be afraid of his
own shadow."

With these ideas passing in his mind, the young knight crossed the
causeway which traversed the piece of water that fed the moat, and,
passing under the strongly fortified gateway, gave strict orders for
letting down the portcullis, and elevating the drawbridge, even at the
appearance of De Walton's own standard before it.

A slow and guarded movement from the hunting-ground to the Castle of
Douglas, gave the governor ample time to recover his temper, and to
forget that his young friend had shown less alacrity than usual in
obeying his commands. He was even disposed to treat as a jest the
length of time and extreme degree of ceremony with which every point of
martial discipline was observed on his own re-admission to the castle,
though the raw air of a wet spring evening whistled around his own
unsheltered person, and those of his followers, as they waited before
the castle gate for the exchange of pass-words, the delivery of keys,
and all the slow minutiae attendant upon the movements of a garrison in
a well-guarded fortress.

"Come," said he to an old knight, who was peevishly blaming the
lieutenant-governor, "it was my own fault; I spoke but now to Aymer de
Valence with more authoritative emphasis than his newly-dubbed dignity
was pleased with, and this precise style of obedience is a piece of not
unnatural and very pardonable revenge. Well, we will owe him a return,
Sir Philip--shall we not? This is not a night to keep a man at the
gate."

This dialogue, overheard by some of the squires and pages, was bandied
about from one to another, until it entirely lost the tone of
good-humour in which it was spoken, and the offence was one for which
Sir John de Walton and old Sir Philip were to meditate revenge, and was
said to have been represented by the governor as a piece of mortal and
intentional offence on the part of his subordinate officer.

Thus an increasing feud went on from day to day between two warriors,
who, with no just cause of quarrel, had at heart every reason to esteem
and love each other. It became visible in the fortress even to those of
the lower rank, who hoped to gain some consequence by intermingling in
the species of emulation produced by the jealousy of the commanding
officers--an emulation which may take place, indeed, in the present
day, but can hardly have the same sense of wounded pride and jealous
dignity attached to it, which existed in times when the personal honour
of knighthood rendered those who possessed it jealous of every
punctilio.

So many little debates took place between the two knights, that Sir
Aymer de Valence thought himself under the necessity of writing to his
uncle and namesake, the Earl of Pembroke, stating that his officer, Sir
John de Walton, had unfortunately of late taken some degree of
prejudice against him, and that after having borne with many provoking
instances of his displeasure, he was now compelled to request that his
place of service should be changed from the Castle of Douglas, to
wherever honour could be acquired, and time might be given to put an
end to his present cause of complaint against his commanding officer.
Through the whole letter, young Sir Aymer was particularly cautious how
he expressed his sense of Sir John de Walton's jealousy or severe
usage: but such sentiments are not easily concealed, and in spite of
him an air of displeasure glanced out from several passages, and
indicated his discontent with his uncle's old friend and companion in
arms, and with the sphere of military duty which his uncle had himself
assigned him. An accidental movement among the English troops brought
Sir Aymer an answer to his letter sooner than he could have hoped for
at that time of day, in the ordinary course of correspondence, which
was then extremely slow and interrupted.

Pembroke, a rigid old warrior, entertained the most partial opinion of
Sir John de Walton, who was a work as it were of his own hands, and was
indignant to find that his nephew, whom he considered as a mere boy,
elated by having had the dignity of knighthood conferred upon him at an
age unusually early, did not absolutely coincide with him in this
opinion. He replied to him, accordingly, in a tone of high displeasure,
and expressed himself as a person of rank would write to a young and
dependent kinsman upon the duties of his profession; and, as he
gathered his nephew's cause of complaint from his own letter, he
conceived that he did him no injustice in making it slighter than it
really was. He reminded the young man that the study of chivalry
consisted in the faithful and patient discharge of military service,
whether of high or low degree, according to the circumstances in which
war placed the champion. That above all, the post of danger, which
Douglas Castle had been termed by common consent, was also the post of
honour; and that a young man should be cautious how he incurred the
supposition of being desirous of quitting his present honourable
command, because he was tired of the discipline of a military director
so renowned as Sir John de Walton. Much also there was, as was natural
in a letter of that time, concerning the duty of young men, whether in
council or in arms, to be guided implicitly by their elders; and it was
observed, with justice, that the commanding officer, who had put
himself into the situation of being responsible with his honour, if not
his life, for the event of the siege or blockade, might, justly, and in
a degree more than common, claim the implicit direction of the whole
defence. Lastly, Pembroke reminded his nephew that he was, in a great
measure, dependent upon the report of Sir John de Walton for the
character which he was to sustain in after life; and reminded him, that
a few actions of headlong and inconsiderate valour would not so firmly
found his military reputation, as months and years spent in regular,
humble, and steady obedience to the commands which the governor of
Douglas Castle might think necessary in so dangerous a conjuncture.

This missive arrived within so short a time after the despatch of the
letter to which it was a reply, that Sir Aymer was almost tempted to
suppose that his uncle had some mode of corresponding with De Walton,
unknown to the young knight himself, and to the rest of the garrison.
And as the earl alluded to some particular displeasure which had been
exhibited by De Valence on a late trivial occasion, his uncle's
knowledge of this, and other minutiae, seemed to confirm his idea that
his own conduct was watched in a manner which he did not feel
honourable to himself, or dignified on the part of his relative; in a
word, he conceived himself exposed to that sort of surveillance of
which, in all ages, the young have accused the old. It hardly needs to
say that the admonition of the Earl of Pembroke greatly chafed the
fiery spirit of his nephew; insomuch, that if the earl had wished to
write a letter purposely to increase the prejudices which he desired to
put an end to, he could not have made use of terms better calculated
for that effect.

The truth was, that the old archer, Gilbert Greenleaf, had, without the
knowledge of the young knight, gone to Pembroke's camp, in Ayrshire,
and was recommended by Sir John de Walton to the earl, as a person who
could give such minute information respecting Aymer de Valence, as he
might desire to receive. The old archer was, as we have seen, a
formalist, and when pressed on some points of Sir Aymer de Valence's
discipline, he did not hesitate to throw out hints, which, connected
with those in the knight's letter to his uncle, made the severe old
earl adopt too implicitly the idea that his nephew was indulging a
spirit of insubordination, and a sense of impatience under authority,
most dangerous to the character of a young soldier. A little
explanation might have produced a complete agreement in the sentiments
of both; but for this, fate allowed neither time nor opportunity; and
the old earl was unfortunately induced to become a party, instead of a
negotiator, in the quarrel,

    "And by decision more embroil'd the fray."

Sir John de Walton soon perceived, that the receipt of Pembroke's
letter did not in any respect alter the cold ceremonious conduct of his
lieutenant towards him, which limited their intercourse to what their
situation rendered indispensable, and exhibited no advances to any more
frank or intimate connexion. Thus, as may sometimes be the case between
officers in their relative situations even at the present day, they
remained in that cold stiff degree of official communication, in which
their intercourse was limited to as few expressions as the respective
duties of their situation absolutely demanded. Such a state of
misunderstanding is, in fact, worse than a downright quarrel;--the
latter may be explained or apologized for, or become the subject of
mediation; but in such a case as the former, an _eclaircissement_ is as
unlikely to take place as a general engagement between two armies which
have taken up strong defensive positions on both sides. Duty, however,
obliged the two principal persons in the garrison of Douglas Castle to
be often together, when they were so far from seeking an opportunity of
making up matters, that they usually revived ancient subjects of debate.

It was upon such an occasion that De Walton, in a very formal manner,
asked De Valence in what capacity, and for how long time, it was his
pleasure that the minstrel, called Bertram, should remain at the castle.

"A week," said the governor, "is certainly long enough, in this time
and place, to express the hospitality due to a minstrel."

"Certainly," replied the young man, "I have not interest enough in the
subject to form a single wish upon it."

"In that case," resumed De Walton, "I shall request of this person to
cut short his visit at the Castle of Douglas."

"I know no particular interest," replied Aymer de Valence, "which I can
possibly have in this man's motions. He is here under pretence of
making some researches after the writings of Thomas of Erceldoun,
called the Rhymer, which he says are infinitely curious, and of which
there is a volume in the old Baron's study, saved somehow from the
flames at the last conflagration. This told, you know as much of his
errand as I do; and if you hold the presence of a wandering old man,
and the neighbourhood of a boy, dangerous to the castle under your
charge, you will no doubt do well to dismiss them--it will cost but a
word of your mouth."

"Pardon me," said De Walton; "the minstrel came here as one of your
retinue, and I could not, in fitting courtesy, send him away without
your leave."

"I am sorry, then," answered Sir Aymer, "in my turn, that you did not
mention your purpose sooner. I never entertained a dependent, vassal or
servant, whose residence in the castle I would wish to have prolonged a
moment beyond your honourable pleasure."

"I am sorry," said Sir John de Walton, "that we two have of late grown
so extremely courteous that it is difficult for us to understand each
other. This minstrel and his son come from we know not where, and are
bound we know not whither. There is a report among some of your escort,
that this fellow Bertram upon the way had the audacity to impugn, even
to your face, the King of England's right to the crown of Scotland, and
that he debated the point with you, while your other attendants were
desired by you to keep behind and out of hearing."

"Hah!" said Sir Aymer, "do you mean to found on that circumstance any
charge against my loyalty? I pray you to observe, that such an averment
would touch mine honour, which I am ready and willing to defend to the
last gasp."

"No doubt of it, Sir Knight," answered the governor; "but it is the
strolling minstrel, and not the high-born English knight, against whom
the charge is brought. Well! the minstrel comes to this castle, and he
intimates a wish that his son should be allowed to take up his quarters
at the little old convent of Saint Bride, where two or three Scottish
nuns and friars are still permitted to reside, most of them rather out
of respect to their order, than for any good will which they are
supposed to bear the English or their sovereign. It may also be noticed
that his leave was purchased by a larger sum of money, if my
information be correct, than is usually to be found in the purses of
travelling minstrels, a class of wanderers alike remarkable for their
poverty and for their genius. What do you think of all this?"

"I?"--replied De Valence; "I am happy that my situation, as a soldier,
under command, altogether dispenses with my thinking of it at all. My
post, as lieutenant of your castle, is such, that if I can manage
matters so as to call my honour and my soul my own, I must think that
quite enough of free-will is left at my command; and I promise you
shall not have again to reprove, or send a bad report of me to my
uncle, on that account."

"This is beyond sufferance!" said Sir John de Walton half aside, and
then proceeded aloud--"Do not, for Heaven's sake, do yourself and me
the injustice of supposing that I am endeavouring to gain an advantage
over you by these questions. Recollect, young knight, that when you
evade giving your commanding officer your advice when required, you
fail as much in point of duty, as if you declined affording him the
assistance of your sword and lance."

"Such being the case," answered De Valence, "let me know plainly on
what matter it is that you require my opinion? I will deliver it
plainly, and stand by the result, even if I should have the misfortune
(a crime unpardonable in so young a man, and so inferior an officer) to
differ from that of Sir John de Walton."

"I would ask you then. Sir Knight of Valence," answered the governor,
"what is your opinion with respect to this minstrel, Bertram, and
whether the suspicions respecting him and his son are not such as to
call upon me, in performance of my duty, to put them to a close
examination, with the question ordinary and extraordinary, as is usual
in such cases, and to expel them not only from the castle, but from the
whole territory of Douglas Dale, under pain of scourging, if they be
again found wandering in these parts?"

"You ask me my opinion," said De Valence, "and you shall have it, Sir
Knight of Walton, and freely and fairly, as if matters stood betwixt us
on a footing as friendly as they ever did. I agree with you, that most
of those who in this day profess the science of minstrelsy, are
altogether unqualified to support the higher pretensions of that noble
order. Minstrels by right, are men who have dedicated themselves to the
noble occupation of celebrating knightly deeds and generous principles;
it is in their verse that the valiant knight is handed down to fame,
and the poet has a right, nay is bound, to emulate the virtues which he
praises. The looseness of the times has diminished the consequence, and
impaired the morality of this class of wanderers; their satire and
their praise are now too often distributed on no other principle than
love of gain; yet let us hope that there are still among them some who
know, and also willingly perform, their duty. My own opinion is that
this Bertram holds himself as one who has not shared in the degradation
of his brethren, nor bent the knee to the mammon of the times; it must
remain with you, sir, to judge whether such a person, honourably and
morally disposed, can cause any danger to the Castle of Douglas. But
believing, from the sentiments he has manifested to me, that he is
incapable of playing the part of a traitor, I must strongly remonstrate
against his being punished as one, or subjected to the torture within
the walls of an English garrison. I should blush for my country, if it
required of us to inflict such wanton misery upon wanderers, whose sole
fault is poverty; and your own knightly sentiments will suggest more
than would become me to state to Sir John de Walton, unless in so far
as is necessary to apologize for retaining my own opinion."

Sir John de Walton's dark brow was stricken with red when he heard an
opinion delivered in opposition to his own, which plainly went to
stigmatize his advice as ungenerous, unfeeling, and unknightly. He made
an effort to preserve his temper while he thus replied with a degree of
calmness. "You have given your opinion, Sir Aymer de Valence; and that
you have given it openly and boldly, without regard to my own, I thank
you. It is not quite so clear that I am obliged to defer my own
sentiments to yours, in case the rules on which I hold my office--the
commands of the king--and the observations which I may personally have
made, shall recommend to me a different line of conduct from that which
you think it right to suggest."

De Walton bowed, in conclusion, with great gravity; and the young
knight returning the reverence with exactly the same degree of stiff
formality, asked whether there were any particular orders respecting
his duty in the castle; and having received an answer in the negative
took his departure.

Sir John de Walton, after an expression of impatience, as if
disappointed at finding that the advance which he had made towards an
explanation with his young friend had proved unexpectedly abortive,
composed his brow as if to deep thought, and walked several times to
and fro in the apartment, considering what course he was to take in
these circumstances. "It is hard to censure him severely," he said,
"when I recollect that, on first entering upon life, my own thoughts
and feelings would have been the same with those of this giddy and
hot-headed, but generous boy. Now prudence teaches me to suspect
mankind in a thousand instances where perhaps there is not sufficient
ground. If I am disposed to venture my own honour and fortune, rather
than an idle travelling minstrel should suffer a little pain, which at
all events I might make up to him by money, still, have I a right to
run the risk of a conspiracy against the king, and thus advance the
treasonable surrender of the Castle of Douglas, for which I know so
many schemes are formed; for which, too, none can be imagined so
desperate but agents will be found bold enough to undertake the
execution? A man who holds my situation, although the slave of
conscience, ought to learn to set aside those false scruples which
assume the appearance of flowing from our own moral feeling, whereas
they are in fact instilled by the suggestion of affected delicacy. I
will not, I swear by Heaven, be infected by the follies of a boy, such
as Aymer; I will not, that I may defer to his caprices, lose all that
love, honour, and ambition can propose, for the reward of twelve
months' service, of a nature the most watchful and unpleasant. I--will
go straight to my point, and use the ordinary precautions in Scotland
which I should employ in Normandy or Gascoigny.--What ho! page! who
waits there?"

One of his attendants replied to his summons--"Seek me out Gilbert
Greenleaf the archer, and tell him I would speak with him touching the
two bows and the sheaf of arrows, concerning which I gave him a
commission to Ayr."

A few minutes intervened after the order was given, when the archer
entered, holding in his hand two bow-staves, not yet fashioned, and a
number of arrows secured together with a thong. He bore the mysterious
looks of one whose apparent business is not of very great consequence,
but is meant as a passport for other affairs which are in themselves of
a secret nature. Accordingly, as the knight was silent, and afforded no
other opening for Greenleaf, that judicious negotiator proceeded to
enter upon such as was open to him.

"Here are the bow-staves, noble sir, which you desired me to obtain
while I was at Ayr with the Earl of Pembroke's army. They are not so
good as I could have wished, yet are perhaps of better quality than
could have been procured by any other than a fair judge of the weapon.
The Earl of Pembroke's whole camp are frantic mad in order to procure
real Spanish staves from the Groyne, and other ports in Spain; but
though two vessels laden with such came into the port of Ayr, said to
be for the King's army, yet I believe never one half of them have come
into English hands. These two grew in Sherwood, which having been
seasoned since the time of Robin Hood, are not likely to fail either in
strength or in aim, in so strong a hand, and with so just an eye, as
those of the men who wait on your worship."

"And who has got the rest, since two ships' cargoes of new bow-staves
are arrived at Ayr, and thou with difficulty hast only procured me two
old ones?" said the governor.

"Faith, I pretend not skill enough to know," answered Greenleaf,
shrugging his shoulders. "Talk there is of plots in that country as
well as here. It is said that their Bruce, and the rest of his kinsmen,
intend a new May-game, and that the outlawed king proposes to land near
Turnberry, early in summer, with a number of stout kernes from Ireland;
and no doubt the men of his mock earldom of Garrick are getting them
ready with bow and spear for so hopeful an undertaking. I reckon that
it will not cost us the expense of more than a few score of sheaves of
arrows to put all that matter to rights."

"Do you talk then of conspiracies in this part of the country,
Greenleaf?" said De Walton. "I know you are a sagacious fellow, well
bred for many a day to the use of the bent stick and string, and will
not allow such a practice to go on under thy nose, without taking
notice of it."

"I am old enough, Heaven knows," said Greenleaf, "and have had good
experience of these Scottish wars, and know well whether these native
Scots are a people to be trusted to by knight or yeoman. Say they are a
false generation, and say a good archer told you so, who, with a fair
aim, seldom missed a handsbreadth of the white. Ah! sir, your honour
knows how to deal with them---ride them strongly, and rein them
hard,--you are not like those simple novices who imagine that all is to
be done by gentleness, and wish to parade themselves as courteous and
generous to those faithless mountaineers, who never, in the course of
their lives, knew any tincture either of courteousness or generosity."

"Thou alludest to some one," said the governor, "and I charge thee,
Gilbert, to be plain and sincere with me. Thou knowest, methinks, that
in trusting me thou wilt come to no harm?"

"It is true, it is true, sir," said the old remnant of the wars,
carrying his hand to his brow, "but it were imprudent to communicate
all the remarks which float through an old man's brain in the idle
moments of such a garrison as this. One stumbles unawares on fantasies,
as well as realities, and thus one gets, not altogether undeservedly,
the character of a tale-bearer and mischief-maker among his comrades,
and methinks I would not willingly fall under that accusation."

"Speak frankly to me," answered De Walton, "and have no fear of being
misconstrued, whosoever the conversation may concern."

"Nay, in plain truth," answered Gilbert, "I fear not the greatness of
this young knight, being, as I am, the oldest soldier in the garrison,
and having drawn a bow-string long and many a day ere he was weaned
from his nurse's breast."

"It is, then." said De Walton, "my lieutenant and friend, Aymer de
Valence, at whom your suspicions point?"

"At nothing," replied the archer, "touching the honour of the young
knight himself, who is as brave as the sword he wears, and, his youth
considered, stands high in the roll of English chivalry; but he is
young, as your worship knows, and I own that in the choice of his
company he disturbs and alarms me."

"Why, you know, Greenleaf," answered the governor, "that in the leisure
of a garrison a knight cannot always confine his sports and pleasures
among those of his own rank, who are not numerous, and may not be so
gamesome or fond of frolic, as he would desire them to be."

"I know that well," answered the archer, "nor would I say a word
concerning your honour's lieutenant for joining any honest fellows,
however inferior their rank, in the wrestling ring, or at a bout of
quarterstaff. But if Sir Aymer de Valence has a fondness for martial
tales of former days, methinks he had better learn them from the
ancient soldiers who have followed Edward the First, whom God
assoilzie, and who have known before his time the Barons' wars and
Other onslaughts, in which the knights and archers of merry England
transmitted so many gallant actions to be recorded by fame; this truly,
I say, were more beseeming the Earl of Pembroke's nephew, than to see
him closet himself day after day with a strolling minstrel, who gains
his livelihood by reciting nonsense and lies to such young men as are
fond enough to believe him, of whom hardly any one knows whether he be
English or Scottish in his opinions, and still less can any one pretend
to say whether he is of English or Scottish birth, or with what purpose
he lies lounging about this castle, and is left free to communicate
every thing which passes within it to those old mutterers of matins at
St. Bride's, who say with their tongues God save King Edward, but pray
in their hearts God save King Robert the Bruce. Such a communication he
can easily carry on by means of his son, who lies at Saint Bride's
cell, as your worship knows, under pretence of illness."

"How do you say?" exclaimed the governor, "under pretence?--is he not
then really indisposed?"

"Nay, he may be sick to the death for aught I know," said the archer;
"but if so, were it not then more natural that the father should attend
his son's sick-bed, than that he should be ranging about this castle,
where one eternally meets him in the old Baron's study, or in some
corner, where you least expect to find him?"

"If he has no lawful object," replied the knight, "it might be as you
say; but he is said to be in quest of ancient poems or prophecies of
Merlin, of the Rhymer, or some other old bard; and in truth it is
natural for him to wish to enlarge his stock of knowledge and power of
giving amusement, and where should he find the means save in a study
filled with ancient books?"

"No doubt," replied the Archer, with a sort of dry civil sneer of
incredulity; "I have seldom known an insurrection in Scotland but that
it was prophesied by some old forgotten rhyme, conjured out of dust and
cobwebs, for the sake of giving courage to these North Country rebels,
who durst not otherwise have abidden the whistling of the grey-goose
shaft; but curled heads are hasty, and, with license, even your own
train, Sir Knight, retains too much of the fire of youth for such
uncertain times as the present."

"Thou hast convinced me, Gilbert Greenleaf, and I will look into this
man's business and occupation more closely than hitherto. This is no
time to peril the safety of a royal castle for the sake of affecting
generosity towards a man of whom we know so little, and to whom, till
we receive a very full explanation, we may, without doing him
injustice, attach grave suspicions. Is he now in the apartment called
the Baron's study?"

"Your worship will be certain to find him there," replied Greenleaf.

"Then follow me, with two or three of thy comrades, and keep out of
sight, but within hearing; it may be necessary to arrest this man."

"My assistance," said the old archer, "shall be at hand when you call,
but"--

"But what?" said the knight; "I hope I am not to find doubts and
disobedience on all hands?"

"Certainly not on mine," replied Greenleaf; "I would only remind your
worship that what I have said was a sincere opinion expressed in answer
to your worship's question; and that, as Sir Aymer de Valence has
avowed himself the patron of this man, I would not willingly be left to
the hazard of his revenge."

"Pshaw" answered De Walton, "is Aymer de Valence governor of this
castle, or am I? or to whom do you imagine you are responsible for
answering such questions as I may put to you?"

"Nay," replied the archer, secretly not displeased at seeing De Walton
show some little jealousy of his own authority, "believe me, Sir
Knight, that I know my own station and your worship's, and that I am
not now to be told to whom I owe obedience."

"To the study, then, and let us find the man," said the governor.

"A fine matter, indeed," subjoined Greenleaf, following him, "that your
worship should have to go in person to look after the arrest of so mean
an individual. But your honour is right; these minstrels are often
jugglers, and possess the power of making their escape by means which
borrel [Footnote: Unlearned.] folk like myself are disposed to
attribute to necromancy."

Without attending to these last words, Sir John de Walton set forth
towards the study, walking at a quick pace, as if this conversation had
augmented his desire to find himself in possession of the person of the
suspected minstrel.

Traversing the ancient passages of the castle, the governor had no
difficulty in reaching the study, which was strongly vaulted with
stone, and furnished with a sort of iron cabinet, intended for the
preservation of articles and papers of value, in case of fire. Here he
found the minstrel seated at a small table, sustaining before him a
manuscript, apparently of great antiquity, from which he seemed engaged
in making extracts. The windows of the room were very small, and still
showed some traces that they had originally been glazed with a painted
history of Saint Bride--another mark of the devotion of the great
family of Douglas to their tutelar saint.

The minstrel, who had seemed deeply wrapped in the contemplation of his
task, on being disturbed by the unlooked-for entrance of Sir John de
Walton, rose with every mark of respect and humility, and, remaining
standing in the governor's presence, appeared to wait for his
interrogations, as if he had anticipated that the visit concerned
himself particularly.

"I am to suppose, Sir Minstrel," said Sir John de Walton, "that you
have been successful in your search, and have found the roll of poetry
or prophecies that you proposed to seek after amongst these broken
shelves and tattered volumes?"

"More successful than I could have expected," replied the minstrel,
"considering the effects of the conflagration. This, Sir Knight, is
apparently the fatal volume for which I sought, and strange it is,
considering the heavy chance of other books contained in this library,
that I have been able to find a few though imperfect fragments of it."

"Since, therefore, you have been permitted to indulge your curiosity,"
said the governor, "I trust, minstrel, you will have no objection to
satisfy mine?"

The minstrel replied with the same humility, "that if there was any
thing within the poor compass of his skill which could gratify Sir John
de Walton in any degree, he would but reach his lute, and presently
obey his commands."

"You mistake, Sir," said Sir John, somewhat harshly. "I am none of
those who have hours to spend in listening to tales or music of former
days; my life has hardly given me time enough for learning the duties
of my profession, far less has it allowed me leisure for such twangling
follies. I care not who knows it, but my ear is so incapable judging of
your art, which you doubtless think a noble one, that I can scarcely
tell the modulation of one tune from another."

"In that case," replied the minstrel composedly, "I can hardly promise
myself the pleasure of affording your worship the amusement which I
might otherwise have done."

"Nor do I look for any from your hand," said the governor, advancing a
step nearer to him, and speaking in a sterner tone. "I want
