Such guilty unions seldom prosper.  This husband and wife had lived
together but a month, when they were separated for ever by the successes
of a band of Scotch nobles who associated against them for the protection
of the young Prince: whom Bothwell had vainly endeavoured to lay hold of,
and whom he would certainly have murdered, if the EARL OF MAR, in whose
hands the boy was, had not been firmly and honourably faithful to his
trust.  Before this angry power, Bothwell fled abroad, where he died, a
prisoner and mad, nine miserable years afterwards.  Mary being found by
the associated lords to deceive them at every turn, was sent a prisoner
to Lochleven Castle; which, as it stood in the midst of a lake, could
only be approached by boat.  Here, one LORD LINDSAY, who was so much of a
brute that the nobles would have done better if they had chosen a mere
gentleman for their messenger, made her sign her abdication, and appoint
Murray, Regent of Scotland.  Here, too, Murray saw her in a sorrowing and
humbled state.

She had better have remained in the castle of Lochleven, dull prison as
it was, with the rippling of the lake against it, and the moving shadows
of the water on the room walls; but she could not rest there, and more
than once tried to escape.  The first time she had nearly succeeded,
dressed in the clothes of her own washer-woman, but, putting up her hand
to prevent one of the boatmen from lifting her veil, the men suspected
her, seeing how white it was, and rowed her back again.  A short time
afterwards, her fascinating manners enlisted in her cause a boy in the
Castle, called the little DOUGLAS, who, while the family were at supper,
stole the keys of the great gate, went softly out with the Queen, locked
the gate on the outside, and rowed her away across the lake, sinking the
keys as they went along.  On the opposite shore she was met by another
Douglas, and some few lords; and, so accompanied, rode away on horseback
to Hamilton, where they raised three thousand men.  Here, she issued a
proclamation declaring that the abdication she had signed in her prison
was illegal, and requiring the Regent to yield to his lawful Queen.  Being
a steady soldier, and in no way discomposed although he was without an
army, Murray pretended to treat with her, until he had collected a force
about half equal to her own, and then he gave her battle.  In one quarter
of an hour he cut down all her hopes.  She had another weary ride on
horse-back of sixty long Scotch miles, and took shelter at Dundrennan
Abbey, whence she fled for safety to Elizabeth's dominions.

Mary Queen of Scots came to England--to her own ruin, the trouble of the
kingdom, and the misery and death of many--in the year one thousand five
hundred and sixty-eight.  How she left it and the world, nineteen years
afterwards, we have now to see.



SECOND PART


When Mary Queen of Scots arrived in England, without money and even
without any other clothes than those she wore, she wrote to Elizabeth,
representing herself as an innocent and injured piece of Royalty, and
entreating her assistance to oblige her Scottish subjects to take her
back again and obey her.  But, as her character was already known in
England to be a very different one from what she made it out to be, she
was told in answer that she must first clear herself.  Made uneasy by
this condition, Mary, rather than stay in England, would have gone to
Spain, or to France, or would even have gone back to Scotland.  But, as
her doing either would have been likely to trouble England afresh, it was
decided that she should be detained here.  She first came to Carlisle,
and, after that, was moved about from castle to castle, as was considered
necessary; but England she never left again.

After trying very hard to get rid of the necessity of clearing herself,
Mary, advised by LORD HERRIES, her best friend in England, agreed to
answer the charges against her, if the Scottish noblemen who made them
would attend to maintain them before such English noblemen as Elizabeth
might appoint for that purpose.  Accordingly, such an assembly, under the
name of a conference, met, first at York, and afterwards at Hampton
Court.  In its presence Lord Lennox, Darnley's father, openly charged
Mary with the murder of his son; and whatever Mary's friends may now say
or write in her behalf, there is no doubt that, when her brother Murray
produced against her a casket containing certain guilty letters and
verses which he stated to have passed between her and Bothwell, she
withdrew from the inquiry.  Consequently, it is to be supposed that she
was then considered guilty by those who had the best opportunities of
judging of the truth, and that the feeling which afterwards arose in her
behalf was a very generous but not a very reasonable one.

However, the DUKE OF NORFOLK, an honourable but rather weak nobleman,
partly because Mary was captivating, partly because he was ambitious,
partly because he was over-persuaded by artful plotters against
Elizabeth, conceived a strong idea that he would like to marry the Queen
of Scots--though he was a little frightened, too, by the letters in the
casket.  This idea being secretly encouraged by some of the noblemen of
Elizabeth's court, and even by the favourite Earl of Leicester (because
it was objected to by other favourites who were his rivals), Mary
expressed her approval of it, and the King of France and the King of
Spain are supposed to have done the same.  It was not so quietly planned,
though, but that it came to Elizabeth's ears, who warned the Duke 'to be
careful what sort of pillow he was going to lay his head upon.'  He made
a humble reply at the time; but turned sulky soon afterwards, and, being
considered dangerous, was sent to the Tower.

Thus, from the moment of Mary's coming to England she began to be the
centre of plots and miseries.

A rise of the Catholics in the north was the next of these, and it was
only checked by many executions and much bloodshed.  It was followed by a
great conspiracy of the Pope and some of the Catholic sovereigns of
Europe to depose Elizabeth, place Mary on the throne, and restore the
unreformed religion.  It is almost impossible to doubt that Mary knew and
approved of this; and the Pope himself was so hot in the matter that he
issued a bull, in which he openly called Elizabeth the 'pretended Queen'
of England, excommunicated her, and excommunicated all her subjects who
should continue to obey her.  A copy of this miserable paper got into
London, and was found one morning publicly posted on the Bishop of
London's gate.  A great hue and cry being raised, another copy was found
in the chamber of a student of Lincoln's Inn, who confessed, being put
upon the rack, that he had received it from one JOHN FELTON, a rich
gentleman who lived across the Thames, near Southwark.  This John Felton,
being put upon the rack too, confessed that he had posted the placard on
the Bishop's gate.  For this offence he was, within four days, taken to
St. Paul's Churchyard, and there hanged and quartered.  As to the Pope's
bull, the people by the reformation having thrown off the Pope, did not
care much, you may suppose, for the Pope's throwing off them.  It was a
mere dirty piece of paper, and not half so powerful as a street ballad.

On the very day when Felton was brought to his trial, the poor Duke of
Norfolk was released.  It would have been well for him if he had kept
away from the Tower evermore, and from the snares that had taken him
there.  But, even while he was in that dismal place he corresponded with
Mary, and as soon as he was out of it, he began to plot again.  Being
discovered in correspondence with the Pope, with a view to a rising in
England which should force Elizabeth to consent to his marriage with Mary
and to repeal the laws against the Catholics, he was re-committed to the
Tower and brought to trial.  He was found guilty by the unanimous verdict
of the Lords who tried him, and was sentenced to the block.

It is very difficult to make out, at this distance of time, and between
opposite accounts, whether Elizabeth really was a humane woman, or
desired to appear so, or was fearful of shedding the blood of people of
great name who were popular in the country.  Twice she commanded and
countermanded the execution of this Duke, and it did not take place until
five months after his trial.  The scaffold was erected on Tower Hill, and
there he died like a brave man.  He refused to have his eyes bandaged,
saying that he was not at all afraid of death; and he admitted the
justice of his sentence, and was much regretted by the people.

Although Mary had shrunk at the most important time from disproving her
guilt, she was very careful never to do anything that would admit it.  All
such proposals as were made to her by Elizabeth for her release, required
that admission in some form or other, and therefore came to nothing.
Moreover, both women being artful and treacherous, and neither ever
trusting the other, it was not likely that they could ever make an
agreement.  So, the Parliament, aggravated by what the Pope had done,
made new and strong laws against the spreading of the Catholic religion
in England, and declared it treason in any one to say that the Queen and
her successors were not the lawful sovereigns of England.  It would have
done more than this, but for Elizabeth's moderation.

Since the Reformation, there had come to be three great sects of
religious people--or people who called themselves so--in England; that is
to say, those who belonged to the Reformed Church, those who belonged to
the Unreformed Church, and those who were called the Puritans, because
they said that they wanted to have everything very pure and plain in all
the Church service.  These last were for the most part an uncomfortable
people, who thought it highly meritorious to dress in a hideous manner,
talk through their noses, and oppose all harmless enjoyments.  But they
were powerful too, and very much in earnest, and they were one and all
the determined enemies of the Queen of Scots.  The Protestant feeling in
England was further strengthened by the tremendous cruelties to which
Protestants were exposed in France and in the Netherlands.  Scores of
thousands of them were put to death in those countries with every cruelty
that can be imagined, and at last, in the autumn of the year one thousand
five hundred and seventy-two, one of the greatest barbarities ever
committed in the world took place at Paris.

It is called in history, THE MASSACRE OF SAINT BARTHOLOMEW, because it
took place on Saint Bartholomew's Eve.  The day fell on Saturday the
twenty-third of August.  On that day all the great leaders of the
Protestants (who were there called HUGUENOTS) were assembled together,
for the purpose, as was represented to them, of doing honour to the
marriage of their chief, the young King of Navarre, with the sister of
CHARLES THE NINTH: a miserable young King who then occupied the French
throne.  This dull creature was made to believe by his mother and other
fierce Catholics about him that the Huguenots meant to take his life; and
he was persuaded to give secret orders that, on the tolling of a great
bell, they should be fallen upon by an overpowering force of armed men,
and slaughtered wherever they could be found.  When the appointed hour
was close at hand, the stupid wretch, trembling from head to foot, was
taken into a balcony by his mother to see the atrocious work begun.  The
moment the bell tolled, the murderers broke forth.  During all that night
and the two next days, they broke into the houses, fired the houses, shot
and stabbed the Protestants, men, women, and children, and flung their
bodies into the streets.  They were shot at in the streets as they passed
along, and their blood ran down the gutters.  Upwards of ten thousand
Protestants were killed in Paris alone; in all France four or five times
that number.  To return thanks to Heaven for these diabolical murders,
the Pope and his train actually went in public procession at Rome, and as
if this were not shame enough for them, they had a medal struck to
commemorate the event.  But, however comfortable the wholesale murders
were to these high authorities, they had not that soothing effect upon
the doll-King.  I am happy to state that he never knew a moment's peace
afterwards; that he was continually crying out that he saw the Huguenots
covered with blood and wounds falling dead before him; and that he died
within a year, shrieking and yelling and raving to that degree, that if
all the Popes who had ever lived had been rolled into one, they would not
have afforded His guilty Majesty the slightest consolation.

When the terrible news of the massacre arrived in England, it made a
powerful impression indeed upon the people.  If they began to run a
little wild against the Catholics at about this time, this fearful reason
for it, coming so soon after the days of bloody Queen Mary, must be
remembered in their excuse.  The Court was not quite so honest as the
people--but perhaps it sometimes is not.  It received the French
ambassador, with all the lords and ladies dressed in deep mourning, and
keeping a profound silence.  Nevertheless, a proposal of marriage which
he had made to Elizabeth only two days before the eve of Saint
Bartholomew, on behalf of the Duke of Alencon, the French King's brother,
a boy of seventeen, still went on; while on the other hand, in her usual
crafty way, the Queen secretly supplied the Huguenots with money and
weapons.

I must say that for a Queen who made all those fine speeches, of which I
have confessed myself to be rather tired, about living and dying a Maiden
Queen, Elizabeth was 'going' to be married pretty often.  Besides always
having some English favourite or other whom she by turns encouraged and
swore at and knocked about--for the maiden Queen was very free with her
fists--she held this French Duke off and on through several years.  When
he at last came over to England, the marriage articles were actually
drawn up, and it was settled that the wedding should take place in six
weeks.  The Queen was then so bent upon it, that she prosecuted a poor
Puritan named STUBBS, and a poor bookseller named PAGE, for writing and
publishing a pamphlet against it.  Their right hands were chopped off for
this crime; and poor Stubbs--more loyal than I should have been myself
under the circumstances--immediately pulled off his hat with his left
hand, and cried, 'God save the Queen!'  Stubbs was cruelly treated; for
the marriage never took place after all, though the Queen pledged herself
to the Duke with a ring from her own finger.  He went away, no better
than he came, when the courtship had lasted some ten years altogether;
and he died a couple of years afterwards, mourned by Elizabeth, who
appears to have been really fond of him.  It is not much to her credit,
for he was a bad enough member of a bad family.

To return to the Catholics.  There arose two orders of priests, who were
very busy in England, and who were much dreaded.  These were the JESUITS
(who were everywhere in all sorts of disguises), and the SEMINARY
PRIESTS.  The people had a great horror of the first, because they were
known to have taught that murder was lawful if it were done with an
object of which they approved; and they had a great horror of the second,
because they came to teach the old religion, and to be the successors of
'Queen Mary's priests,' as those yet lingering in England were called,
when they should die out.  The severest laws were made against them, and
were most unmercifully executed.  Those who sheltered them in their
houses often suffered heavily for what was an act of humanity; and the
rack, that cruel torture which tore men's limbs asunder, was constantly
kept going.  What these unhappy men confessed, or what was ever confessed
by any one under that agony, must always be received with great doubt, as
it is certain that people have frequently owned to the most absurd and
impossible crimes to escape such dreadful suffering.  But I cannot doubt
it to have been proved by papers, that there were many plots, both among
the Jesuits, and with France, and with Scotland, and with Spain, for the
destruction of Queen Elizabeth, for the placing of Mary on the throne,
and for the revival of the old religion.

If the English people were too ready to believe in plots, there were, as
I have said, good reasons for it.  When the massacre of Saint Bartholomew
was yet fresh in their recollection, a great Protestant Dutch hero, the
PRINCE OF ORANGE, was shot by an assassin, who confessed that he had been
kept and trained for the purpose in a college of Jesuits.  The Dutch, in
this surprise and distress, offered to make Elizabeth their sovereign,
but she declined the honour, and sent them a small army instead, under
the command of the Earl of Leicester, who, although a capital Court
favourite, was not much of a general.  He did so little in Holland, that
his campaign there would probably have been forgotten, but for its
occasioning the death of one of the best writers, the best knights, and
the best gentlemen, of that or any age.  This was SIR PHILIP SIDNEY, who
was wounded by a musket ball in the thigh as he mounted a fresh horse,
after having had his own killed under him.  He had to ride back wounded,
a long distance, and was very faint with fatigue and loss of blood, when
some water, for which he had eagerly asked, was handed to him.  But he
was so good and gentle even then, that seeing a poor badly wounded common
soldier lying on the ground, looking at the water with longing eyes, he
said, 'Thy necessity is greater than mine,' and gave it up to him.  This
touching action of a noble heart is perhaps as well known as any incident
in history--is as famous far and wide as the blood-stained Tower of
London, with its axe, and block, and murders out of number.  So
delightful is an act of true humanity, and so glad are mankind to
remember it.

At home, intelligence of plots began to thicken every day.  I suppose the
people never did live under such continual terrors as those by which they
were possessed now, of Catholic risings, and burnings, and poisonings,
and I don't know what.  Still, we must always remember that they lived
near and close to awful realities of that kind, and that with their
experience it was not difficult to believe in any enormity.  The
government had the same fear, and did not take the best means of
discovering the truth--for, besides torturing the suspected, it employed
paid spies, who will always lie for their own profit.  It even made some
of the conspiracies it brought to light, by sending false letters to
disaffected people, inviting them to join in pretended plots, which they
too readily did.

But, one great real plot was at length discovered, and it ended the
career of Mary, Queen of Scots.  A seminary priest named BALLARD, and a
Spanish soldier named SAVAGE, set on and encouraged by certain French
priests, imparted a design to one ANTONY BABINGTON--a gentleman of
fortune in Derbyshire, who had been for some time a secret agent of
Mary's--for murdering the Queen.  Babington then confided the scheme to
some other Catholic gentlemen who were his friends, and they joined in it
heartily.  They were vain, weak-headed young men, ridiculously confident,
and preposterously proud of their plan; for they got a gimcrack painting
made, of the six choice spirits who were to murder Elizabeth, with
Babington in an attitude for the centre figure.  Two of their number,
however, one of whom was a priest, kept Elizabeth's wisest minister, SIR
FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, acquainted with the whole project from the first.  The
conspirators were completely deceived to the final point, when Babington
gave Savage, because he was shabby, a ring from his finger, and some
money from his purse, wherewith to buy himself new clothes in which to
kill the Queen.  Walsingham, having then full evidence against the whole
band, and two letters of Mary's besides, resolved to seize them.
Suspecting something wrong, they stole out of the city, one by one, and
hid themselves in St. John's Wood, and other places which really were
hiding places then; but they were all taken, and all executed.  When they
were seized, a gentleman was sent from Court to inform Mary of the fact,
and of her being involved in the discovery.  Her friends have complained
that she was kept in very hard and severe custody.  It does not appear
very likely, for she was going out a hunting that very morning.

Queen Elizabeth had been warned long ago, by one in France who had good
information of what was secretly doing, that in holding Mary alive, she
held 'the wolf who would devour her.'  The Bishop of London had, more
lately, given the Queen's favourite minister the advice in writing,
'forthwith to cut off the Scottish Queen's head.'  The question now was,
what to do with her?  The Earl of Leicester wrote a little note home from
Holland, recommending that she should be quietly poisoned; that noble
favourite having accustomed his mind, it is possible, to remedies of that
nature.  His black advice, however, was disregarded, and she was brought
to trial at Fotheringay Castle in Northamptonshire, before a tribunal of
forty, composed of both religions.  There, and in the Star Chamber at
Westminster, the trial lasted a fortnight.  She defended herself with
great ability, but could only deny the confessions that had been made by
Babington and others; could only call her own letters, produced against
her by her own secretaries, forgeries; and, in short, could only deny
everything.  She was found guilty, and declared to have incurred the
penalty of death.  The Parliament met, approved the sentence, and prayed
the Queen to have it executed.  The Queen replied that she requested them
to consider whether no means could be found of saving Mary's life without
endangering her own.  The Parliament rejoined, No; and the citizens
illuminated their houses and lighted bonfires, in token of their joy that
all these plots and troubles were to be ended by the death of the Queen
of Scots.

{Mary Queen of Scots Reading the death warrant: p240.jpg}

She, feeling sure that her time was now come, wrote a letter to the Queen
of England, making three entreaties; first, that she might be buried in
France; secondly, that she might not be executed in secret, but before
her servants and some others; thirdly, that after her death, her servants
should not be molested, but should be suffered to go home with the
legacies she left them.  It was an affecting letter, and Elizabeth shed
tears over it, but sent no answer.  Then came a special ambassador from
France, and another from Scotland, to intercede for Mary's life; and then
the nation began to clamour, more and more, for her death.

What the real feelings or intentions of Elizabeth were, can never be
known now; but I strongly suspect her of only wishing one thing more than
Mary's death, and that was to keep free of the blame of it.  On the first
of February, one thousand five hundred and eighty-seven, Lord Burleigh
having drawn out the warrant for the execution, the Queen sent to the
secretary DAVISON to bring it to her, that she might sign it: which she
did.  Next day, when Davison told her it was sealed, she angrily asked
him why such haste was necessary?  Next day but one, she joked about it,
and swore a little.  Again, next day but one, she seemed to complain that
it was not yet done, but still she would not be plain with those about
her.  So, on the seventh, the Earls of Kent and Shrewsbury, with the
Sheriff of Northamptonshire, came with the warrant to Fotheringay, to
tell the Queen of Scots to prepare for death.

When those messengers of ill omen were gone, Mary made a frugal supper,
drank to her servants, read over her will, went to bed, slept for some
hours, and then arose and passed the remainder of the night saying
prayers.  In the morning she dressed herself in her best clothes; and, at
eight o'clock when the sheriff came for her to her chapel, took leave of
her servants who were there assembled praying with her, and went down-
stairs, carrying a Bible in one hand and a crucifix in the other.  Two of
her women and four of her men were allowed to be present in the hall;
where a low scaffold, only two feet from the ground, was erected and
covered with black; and where the executioner from the Tower, and his
assistant, stood, dressed in black velvet.  The hall was full of people.
While the sentence was being read she sat upon a stool; and, when it was
finished, she again denied her guilt, as she had done before.  The Earl
of Kent and the Dean of Peterborough, in their Protestant zeal, made some
very unnecessary speeches to her; to which she replied that she died in
the Catholic religion, and they need not trouble themselves about that
matter.  When her head and neck were uncovered by the executioners, she
said that she had not been used to be undressed by such hands, or before
so much company.  Finally, one of her women fastened a cloth over her
face, and she laid her neck upon the block, and repeated more than once
in Latin, 'Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit!'  Some say her
head was struck off in two blows, some say in three.  However that be,
when it was held up, streaming with blood, the real hair beneath the
false hair she had long worn was seen to be as grey as that of a woman of
seventy, though she was at that time only in her forty-sixth year.  All
her beauty was gone.

But she was beautiful enough to her little dog, who cowered under her
dress, frightened, when she went upon the scaffold, and who lay down
beside her headless body when all her earthly sorrows were over.



THIRD PART


On its being formally made known to Elizabeth that the sentence had been
executed on the Queen of Scots, she showed the utmost grief and rage,
drove her favourites from her with violent indignation, and sent Davison
to the Tower; from which place he was only released in the end by paying
an immense fine which completely ruined him.  Elizabeth not only over-
acted her part in making these pretences, but most basely reduced to
poverty one of her faithful servants for no other fault than obeying her
commands.

James, King of Scotland, Mary's son, made a show likewise of being very
angry on the occasion; but he was a pensioner of England to the amount of
five thousand pounds a year, and he had known very little of his mother,
and he possibly regarded her as the murderer of his father, and he soon
took it quietly.

Philip, King of Spain, however, threatened to do greater things than ever
had been done yet, to set up the Catholic religion and punish Protestant
England.  Elizabeth, hearing that he and the Prince of Parma were making
great preparations for this purpose, in order to be beforehand with them
sent out ADMIRAL DRAKE (a famous navigator, who had sailed about the
world, and had already brought great plunder from Spain) to the port of
Cadiz, where he burnt a hundred vessels full of stores.  This great loss
obliged the Spaniards to put off the invasion for a year; but it was none
the less formidable for that, amounting to one hundred and thirty ships,
nineteen thousand soldiers, eight thousand sailors, two thousand slaves,
and between two and three thousand great guns.  England was not idle in
making ready to resist this great force.  All the men between sixteen
years old and sixty, were trained and drilled; the national fleet of
ships (in number only thirty-four at first) was enlarged by public
contributions and by private ships, fitted out by noblemen; the city of
London, of its own accord, furnished double the number of ships and men
that it was required to provide; and, if ever the national spirit was up
in England, it was up all through the country to resist the Spaniards.
Some of the Queen's advisers were for seizing the principal English
Catholics, and putting them to death; but the Queen--who, to her honour,
used to say, that she would never believe any ill of her subjects, which
a parent would not believe of her own children--rejected the advice, and
only confined a few of those who were the most suspected, in the fens in
Lincolnshire.  The great body of Catholics deserved this confidence; for
they behaved most loyally, nobly, and bravely.

So, with all England firing up like one strong, angry man, and with both
sides of the Thames fortified, and with the soldiers under arms, and with
the sailors in their ships, the country waited for the coming of the
proud Spanish fleet, which was called THE INVINCIBLE ARMADA.  The Queen
herself, riding in armour on a white horse, and the Earl of Essex and the
Earl of Leicester holding her bridal rein, made a brave speech to the
troops at Tilbury Fort opposite Gravesend, which was received with such
enthusiasm as is seldom known.  Then came the Spanish Armada into the
English Channel, sailing along in the form of a half moon, of such great
size that it was seven miles broad.  But the English were quickly upon
it, and woe then to all the Spanish ships that dropped a little out of
the half moon, for the English took them instantly!  And it soon appeared
that the great Armada was anything but invincible, for on a summer night,
bold Drake sent eight blazing fire-ships right into the midst of it.  In
terrible consternation the Spaniards tried to get out to sea, and so
became dispersed; the English pursued them at a great advantage; a storm
came on, and drove the Spaniards among rocks and shoals; and the swift
end of the Invincible fleet was, that it lost thirty great ships and ten
thousand men, and, defeated and disgraced, sailed home again.  Being
afraid to go by the English Channel, it sailed all round Scotland and
Ireland; some of the ships getting cast away on the latter coast in bad
weather, the Irish, who were a kind of savages, plundered those vessels
and killed their crews.  So ended this great attempt to invade and
conquer England.  And I think it will be a long time before any other
invincible fleet coming to England with the same object, will fare much
better than the Spanish Armada.

Though the Spanish king had had this bitter taste of English bravery, he
was so little the wiser for it, as still to entertain his old designs,
and even to conceive the absurd idea of placing his daughter on the
English throne.  But the Earl of Essex, SIR WALTER RALEIGH, SIR THOMAS
HOWARD, and some other distinguished leaders, put to sea from Plymouth,
entered the port of Cadiz once more, obtained a complete victory over the
shipping assembled there, and got possession of the town.  In obedience
to the Queen's express instructions, they behaved with great humanity;
and the principal loss of the Spaniards was a vast sum of money which
they had to pay for ransom.  This was one of many gallant achievements on
the sea, effected in this reign.  Sir Walter Raleigh himself, after
marrying a maid of honour and giving offence to the Maiden Queen thereby,
had already sailed to South America in search of gold.

The Earl of Leicester was now dead, and so was Sir Thomas Walsingham,
whom Lord Burleigh was soon to follow.  The principal favourite was the
EARL OF ESSEX, a spirited and handsome man, a favourite with the people
too as well as with the Queen, and possessed of many admirable qualities.
It was much debated at Court whether there should be peace with Spain or
no, and he was very urgent for war.  He also tried hard to have his own
way in the appointment of a deputy to govern in Ireland.  One day, while
this question was in dispute, he hastily took offence, and turned his
back upon the Queen; as a gentle reminder of which impropriety, the Queen
