
On examining a large and varied collection of this pottery, one would
naturally regard it either as the product of four distinct peoples or
as belonging to four different eras, with an inclination to the
chronologic division.

When we see the reasonable probability that the architecture, the
primeval arts and industries, and the culture of the Pueblos are
mainly indigenous to the desert and semi-desert regions of North
America, we are in the way towards an understanding of the origin and
remarkable degree of development in the ceramic art.

In these regions water not only occurs in small quantities, but is
obtainable only at points separated by great distances, hence to the
Pueblos the first necessity of life is the transportation and
preservation of water. The skins and paunches of animals could be used
in the effort to meet this want with but small success, as the heat
and aridity of the atmosphere would in a short time render water thus
kept unfit for use, and the membranes once empty would be liable to
destruction by drying. So far as language indicates the character of
the earliest water vessels which to any extent met the requirements of
the Zuni ancestry, they were tubes of wood or sections of canes. The
latter, in ritualistic recitation, are said to have been the
receptacles that the creation-priests filled with the sacred water
from the ocean of the cave-wombs of earth, whence men and creatures
were born, and the name for one of these cane water vessels is _sho
tom me_, from _sho e_, cane or canes, and _tom me_, a wooden tube.
Yet, although in the extreme western borders of the deserts, which
were probably the first penetrated by the Pueblos, the cane grows to
great size and in abundance along the two rivers of that country, its
use, if ever extensive, must have speedily given way to the use of
gourds, which grew luxuriantly at these places and were of better
shapes and of larger capacity. The name of the gourd as a vessel is
_shop tom me_, from _sho e_, canes, _po pon nai e_, bladder-shaped,
and _tom me_, a wooden tube; a seeming derivation (with the exception
of the interpolated sound significant of form) from _sho tom me_. The
gourd itself is called _mo thla a_, "hard fruit." The inference is
that when used as a vessel, and called _shopi tom me_, it must have
been named after an older form of vessel, instead of after the plant
or fruit which produced it.

While the gourd was large and convenient in form, it was difficult of
transportation owing to its fragility. To overcome this it was encased
in a coarse sort of wicker-work, composed of fibrous yucca leaves or
of flexible splints. Of this we have evidence in a series of
gourd-vessels among the Zunis, into which the sacred water is said to
have been transferred from the tubes, and a pair of which one of the
priests, who came east with me two years ago, brought from New Mexico
to Boston in his hands--so precious were they considered as
relics--for the purpose of replenishing them with water from the
Atlantic. These vessels are encased rudely but strongly in a meshing
of splints (see Fig. 500), and while I do not positively claim that
they have been piously preserved since the time of the universal use
of gourds as water-vessels by the ancestry of this people, they are
nevertheless of considerable antiquity. Their origin is attributed to
the priest-gods, and they show that it must have once been a common
practice to encase gourds, as above described, in osiery.

[Illustration: FIG. 500.--Gourd vessel enclosed in wicker.]


POTTERY ANTICIPATED BY BASKETRY.

This crude beginning of the wicker-art in connection with
water-vessels points toward the development of the wonderful
water-tight basketry of the southwest, explaining, too, the
resemblance of many of its typical forms to the shapes of
gourd-vessels. Were we uncertain of this, we might again turn to
language, which designates the impervious wicker water-receptacle of
whatever outline as _tom ma_, an evident derivation from the
restricted use of the word _tom me_ in connection with gourd or cane
vessels, since a basket of any other kind is called _tsi i le_.

It is readily conceivable that water-tight osiery, once known, however
difficult of manufacture, would displace the general use of
gourd-vessels. While the growth of the gourd was restricted to limited
areas, the materials for basketry were everywhere at hand. Not only
so, but basket-vessels were far stronger and more durable, hence more
readily transported full of water, to any distance. By virtue of their
rough surfaces, any leakage in such vessels was instantly stopped by a
daubing of pitch or mineral asphaltum, coated externally with sand or
coarse clay to harden it and overcome its adhesiveness.

[Illustration: FIG. 501.--Havasupai clay-lined roasting-tray.]

We may conclude, then, that so long as the Pueblo ancestry were
semi-nomadic, basketry supplied the place of pottery, as it still does
for the less advanced tribes of the Southwest, except in cookery.
Possibly for a time basketry of this kind served in place of pottery
even for cookery, as with one of the above-mentioned tribes, the _Ha
va su pai_ or Coconinos, of Cataract Canon, Arizona. These people,
until recently, were cut off from the rest of the world by their
almost impenetrable canon, nearly half a mile in depth at the point
where they inhabit it. For example, when I visited them in 1881, they
still hafted sharpened bits of iron, like celts, in wood. They had not
yet forgotten how to boil food in water-tight basketry, by means of
hot stones, and continued to roast seeds, crickets, and bits of meat
in wicker-trays, coated inside with gritty clay. (See Fig. 501.) The
method of preparing and using these roasting-trays has an important
bearing on several questions to which reference will be made further
on. A round basket-tray, either loosely or closely woven, is evenly
coated inside with clay, into which has been kneaded a very large
proportion of sand, to prevent contraction and consequent cracking
from drying. This lining of clay is pressed, while still soft, into
the basket as closely as possible with the hands and then allowed to
dry. The tray is thus made ready for use. The seeds or other
substances to be parched are placed inside of it, together with a
quantity of glowing wood-coals. The operator, quickly squatting,
grasps the tray at opposite edges, and, by a rapid spiral motion up
and down, succeeds in keeping the coals and seeds constantly shifting
places and turning over as they dance after one another around and
around the tray, meanwhile blowing or puffing, the embers with every
breath to keep them free from ashes and glowing at their hottest.

That this clay lining should grow hard from continual heating, and in
some instances separate from its matrix of osiers, is apparent. The
clay form thus detached would itself be a perfect roasting-vessel.


POTTERY SUGGESTED BY CLAY-LINED BASKETRY.

This would suggest the agency of gradual heat in rendering clay fit
for use in cookery and preferable to any previous makeshift. The
modern Zuni name for a parching-pan, which is a shallow bowl of
black-ware, is _thle mon ne_, the name for a basket-tray being _thlae'
lin ne_. The latter name signifies a shallow vessel of twigs, or _thla
we_; the former etymologically interpreted, although of earthenware,
is a hemispherical vessel of the same kind and _material_. All this
would indicate that the _thlae' lin ne_, coated with clay for roasting,
had given birth to the _thle mon ne_, or parching-pan of earthenware.
(See Fig. 502.)

[Illustration: FIG. 502.--Zuni earthenware roasting tray.]

Among the Havasupai, still surviving as a sort of bucket, is the
basket-pot or boiling-basket, for use with hot stones, which form I
have also found in some of the cave deposits throughout the ancient
Zuni country. These vessels (see Fig. 503) were bottle-shaped and
provided near the rims of their rather narrow mouths with a sort of
cord or strap-handle, attached to two loops or eyes (Fig. 503 _a_)
woven into the basket, to facilitate handling when the vessel was
filled with hot water. In the manufacture of one of these vessels,
which are good examples of the helix or spirally-coiled type of
basket, the beginning was made at the center of the bottom. A small
wisp of fine, flexible grass stems or osiers softened in water was
first spirally wrapped a little at one end with a flat, limber splint
of tough wood, usually willow (see Fig. 504). This wrapped portion was
then wound upon itself; the outer coil thus formed (see Fig. 505)
being firmly fastened as it progressed to the one already made by
passing the splint wrapping of the wisp each time it was wound around
the latter through some strands of the contiguous inner coil, with the
aid of a bodkin. (See Fig. 506.) The bottom was rounded upward and the
sides were made by coiling the wisp higher and higher, first outward,
to produce the bulge of the vessel, then inward, to form the tapering
upper part and neck, into which, the two little twigs or splint
loop-eyes were firmly woven. (See again Fig. 503 _a_.)

[Illustration: FIG. 503.--Havasupai boiling-basket.]

[Illustration: FIG. 504. FIG. 505. FIG. 506.
               Sketches illustrating manufacture of
               spirally-coiled basketry.]

[Illustration: FIG. 507.--Typical basket decoration.]

[Illustration: FIG. 508.--Typical basket decoration.]

[Illustration: FIG. 509.--Typical basket decoration.]

These and especially kindred forms of basket-vessels were often quite
elaborately ornamented, either by the insertion at proper points of
dyed wrapping-splints, singly, in pairs, or in sets, or by the
alternate painting of pairs, sets, or series of stitches. Thus were
produced angular devices, like serrated bands, diagonal or zigzag
lines, chevrons, even terraces and frets. (See Figs. 507, 508, 509.)
There can be no doubt that these styles and ways of decoration were
developed, along with the weaving of baskets, simply by elaborating on
suggestions of the lines and figures unavoidably produced in
wicker-work of any kind when strands of different colors happened to
be employed together. Even slight discolorations in occasional splints
would result in such suggestions, for the stitches would here show,
there disappear. The probability of this view of the accidental origin
of basket-ornamentation may be enhanced by a consideration of the
etymology of a few Zuni decorative terms, more of which might be given
did space admit. A terraced lozenge (see Figs. 510, 511), instead of
being named after the abstract word _a wi thlui ap i pae tchi na_,
which signifies a double terrace or two terraces joined together at
the base, is designated _shu k'u tu li a tsi' nan_, from _shu e_,
splints or fibers; _k'u tsu_, a double fold, space, or stitch (see
Figs. 512, 513); _li a_, an interpolation referring to form; and _tsi'
nan_, mark; in other words, the "double splint-stitch-form mark."
Likewise, a pattern, composed principally of a series of diagonal or
oblique parallel lines _en masse_ (see Fig. 514), is called _shu'
k'ish pa tsi nan_, from _shu e_, splints; _k'i'sh pai e_, tapering
(_k'ish pon ne_, neck or smaller part of anything); and _tsi nan_,
mark; that is, "tapering" or "neck-splint mark." Curiously enough, in
a bottle-shaped basket as it approaches completion the splints of the
tapering part or neck all lean spirally side by side of one another
(see Fig. 515), and a term descriptive of this has come to be used as
that applied to lines resembling it, instead of a derivative from _ae's
sel lai e_, signifying an oblique or leaning line. Where splints
variously arranged, or stitches, have given names to decorations--applied
even to painted and embroidered designs--it is not difficult for us to
see that these same combinations, at first unintentional, must have
suggested the forms to which they gave names as decorations.

[Illustration: FIG. 510. FIG. 511.
               Terraced lozenge decoration, or
               "double-splint-stitch-forms."]

[Illustration: FIG. 512. FIG. 513.
               Double-splint-stitch.]

[Illustration: FIG. 514.--Diagonal parallel-line decoration.]

[Illustration: FIG. 515.--Splints at neck of unfinished basket.]
