bodies of the lackey and coachman. With him I will send a note to
my lord, asking that no stir be made in the matter. We need not set
the world talking as to my visit to his house; but lest any
magistrate stir in the matter, I will leave a letter for him,
saying that the coach in which I travelled was attacked by
highwaymen, and that two of them, as well as the two servants, were
killed, and that no further inquisition need be made into the
matter. You may be sure that the other side will say naught, and
they will likely enough go back and carry off their dead tonight,
and bury them quietly."

"Very well, sir," Colonel Holliday said. "My grandson will ride
over with you in the morning to Ashby-de-la-Zouche. Two well-armed
lackeys shall accompany you."

"Oh, there is no fear of another attempt," the earl said, smiling.
"Besides, your grandson and I could fight a whole troop of
cutthroats by daylight. What a swordsman that boy is! And as cool
as a veteran! He is your pupil with the sword, I presume?"

"Only partly; he owes most of his skill to a French emigre, who
calls himself Monsieur Dessin, but who had, I suspect, a far higher
title across the water. He is a magnificent swordsman; and as I was
able to teach the lad a few thrusts which in their time did me good
service, and the boy has a clear eye, a cool head, and a firm
wrist, he can, young as he is, hold his own, go where he will."

"What do you mean to do with him? You ought to make a soldier of
him. It is the career of a gentleman, and we shall have a stirring
campaign on the Rhine next spring. He will have plenty of
opportunities to distinguish himself, and I need not say he will
have my best favour and protection!"

"I thank you heartily," the colonel said, "and doubt not that one
day the lad may claim the fulfilment of your promise. At present
his mother dreams of his being a Parliament man, and shining at
court. But you might as well expect to teach a falcon to dance.
Besides, the lad is a soldier heart and soul, and has, saving your
presence, little of the whig in him; and his mother will find ere
long, that if he goes to Parliament it will not be to vote as she
wishes.

"Besides," he said, moodily, "I foresee changes here which he,
young as he is, will not brook. If then at present I decline your
kind offer in his name, I think that the time is not far off when
he may remind you of it."

"Let him do so," the earl said, "and a commission in horse, foot,
or artillery is at his service. And now, with your permission, I
will to bed, for my eyelids are consumedly heavy."

Colonel Holliday rang a hand bell, and a lackey appeared with
lighted candles. Preceded by him the old cavalier accompanied his
guest to the door of his apartment, and seeing that a posset cup of
spiced cordial was steaming on the table, and that everything else
was properly prepared, left him to repose.



Chapter 3: A Kiss and its Consequences.

Three months have passed since the Earl of Marlborough's visit to
the Chace. Changes have taken place in England, for on the eighth
of March King William died from the effects of a fall from his
horse, and the Princess Anne ascended the throne. After her
accession, one of her first steps had been to shower honour upon
the Earl of Marlborough. A whig cabinet was formed, of which he and
Lord Godolphin were the leading spirits, two tories however--Harley
and Saint John--having seats in the ministry.

The Earl of Marlborough was her most trusted adviser. He had during
the reign of the late monarch been always a firm friend of the
Princess Anne, and was at one time regarded almost as a tory. He
had indeed plotted for the restoration of the Stuarts, and had
entered into negotiation with the French king for that purpose. The
plot having been discovered, he had with other noblemen been sent
to the Tower, and had continued in disgrace until a year after the
death of William.

Anne appointed him one of her ministers, and made the duchess her
most intimate friend. In fact, in politics the Duke of Marlborough
took no very strong part. He was attached to the Stuarts, for under
them he had at first risen to rank and honour; but he was a strong
Protestant, and therefore in favour of the maintenance of the Act
of Succession, fixing the reversion of the throne on the Elector of
Hanover, who, although not the nearest in the line of succession,
had been selected because the nearest heirs to the throne were
Catholics.

At the Chace things have gone on as before. Rupert has worked hard
at his lessons and his fencing, and Monsieur Dessin allows that,
save for his extra length of reach, he should have no advantage now
over his pupil. In the afternoon the lad spent his time with his
hawks, or practised firing with pistol or carbine, or roamed over
the country with Hugh.

Nevertheless, things had somehow changed. Colonel Holliday had
become gloomy and silent; and although he and his daughter-in-law
were studiously ceremonious and polite to each other, it was clear
that a cloud had risen between them. Rupert saw but little of this,
however, and was surprised one day when, as he was going out for a
ride, his grandfather said to him gravely:

"Take a turn in the garden with me, Rupert. I want to have a talk
with you.

"I think it well, Rupert," he said, after walking for some time in
silence, "to prepare you for what, if you have not guessed already,
you will be told ere long. Madam will no doubt herself inform you
of it; and it is as well, my lad, that you should be prepared, for
you might in your surprise say something hasty, and so cause a
breach which it would take long to heal."

Rupert looked in astonishment at his grandfather. He had not the
most remote idea of what was coming.

"You have doubtless noticed," Colonel Holliday went on, "the
frequency of Sir William Brownlow's visits here?"

"Yes, sir, I have noticed that, but I do not often see him. I keep
out of his way, for in truth I like him not, nor that son of his,
who, on the strength of his three years' seniority, looks down upon
me, and gives himself as many airs as madam my mother's peacock."

"And you have never even thought why he comes here so frequently?"

"No, sir," Rupert said, surprised; "it was no business of mine, and
I gave no single thought to it."

"He is a suitor for your lady mother's hand," Colonel Holliday
said, gravely.

"What!" almost shouted Rupert; "What, sir! He, with his sneering
face, dares to think--"

"My dear boy, he not only dares to think, but madam approves of the
thought, and has promised him her hand."

Rupert stood motionless.

"It shall not be," he burst out. "We must stop it, sir. Why do not
you?"

"I have no shadow of authority over Mistress Holliday," the old
colonel said. "As far as I could go, for your sake I have
gone--farther, perhaps, than was wise. It has been a great blow for
me, Rupert. I had hoped that in the time to come you would be
master of the Chace, and of all the broad acres I owned when young;
now it will never be. This house and the home farm are mine, and
will be yours, lad; but the outlying land will never come back to
the Chace again, but will go to swell the Haugh estate on the other
side. My lady can leave it as she likes. I have begged her to have
it settled upon you, but she has declined. She may have another
family, and, infatuated as she is with her suitor, she is more
likely to leave it to them than to you, especially as I fear that
you will not take kindly to the new arrangement."

"I will not submit to it, sir; I will not have it. I will insult
him, and force him to fight me," the lad gasped, his face white
with passion.

"No, Rupert, it won't do, lad. Were you four or five years older
you might interfere; now he would laugh at you for a headstrong
boy. You would gain his hate, and forfeit your mother's favour
utterly. It was because I feared an outbreak like this that I told
you today what you will in a few hours learn from her."

"What is to be done?" Rupert said, despairingly.

"Nothing, my boy. At her marriage, your mother will of course live
at the Haugh with Sir William. This house is mine, and if you
cannot get on at the Haugh, it will be always open to you."

"I will never set my foot inside the Haugh," Rupert said, firmly.
"My lady mother may leave her lands where she will; but if I am to
have them only at the price of being the humble servant of this new
father-in-law, I care not for them. He has an evil face,
grandfather, and I hated him before I knew what he came for."

"My boy," Colonel Holliday said, "we have all many things to go
through in life that we like not. This is your trial, and I trust
that you will come out of it worthily. Your respect and duty are
due to your mother. If you will not feign gladness that you do not
feel, I do not blame you; but when she tells you the news, answer
her with that respect which you owe her. She has a clear right to
choose for herself. She is still a comely dame, and no one will
blame her for taking another husband. To me and to you the thing
may seem hard, even unnatural, but it is not so. I like Sir William
no more than you do. Report says that he has deeply dipped into his
estates over the dice box; and your lady mother's estates, and the
sum that many years of quiet living has enabled her to save, are
doubtless items which he has not overlooked."

Rupert remained for some time silent.

"I will be perfectly respectful to my mother," he said, "but I will
not disguise my feelings. If I did so at first, it would in the end
be useless, for Sir William I could never treat with respect.
Sooner or later a quarrel would come, and I may therefore as well
have it understood first as last. The estates I care for only
because they were part of the Chace, and I know that they will
never be mine if this match is made. You feel that yourself, do you
not, sir?"

"Yes," the colonel said, reluctantly, "I have felt that all along."

"Very well, sir," Rupert said; "in that case I have nothing to gain
by affecting a satisfaction at this match. I shall respectfully but
firmly warn my mother against it, and tell her that if she persists
in it I will never put my foot under the roof of Sir William
Brownlow."

The next morning the servant brought word to Rupert, that Mistress
Holliday wished to speak to him in her room. Knowing what was
coming, Rupert went with slow steps and a heavy heart to the little
drawing room which was known as madam's room.

"Rupert," she said, as he stood respectfully before her, "I have
sent for you to tell you that I have accepted the offer of marriage
of Sir William Brownlow. Sir William has much court influence, and
will be able to do you much service, and he has promised me to look
upon you as a son of his own."

"Madam." Rupert said, calmly and respectfully, "that you should
marry Sir William Brownlow is a matter as to which, alas! I have no
right to say aught. I trust that the marriage will bring you
happiness, although my mind sorely misgives me as to whether it
will be so. As to myself, I decline Sir William's offer of
protection. It is enough for me that my fathers have for
generations owned Windthorpe Chace. Come what may, madam, I neither
acknowledge Sir William as my father, nor do I put a foot under his
roof."

"Malapert boy!" Mistress Holliday said angrily, "this is the
teaching of Colonel Holliday."

"Pardon me," Rupert said quietly. "Colonel Holliday begged me to
submit to what could not be helped; but I declined. This man is not
worthy of you, madam. Were you about to marry a good man, I would
gladly receive him as my father. I should be glad to know when out
in the world that you were cared for and happy; but this is not a
good man."

"Hush, sir," Mistress Holliday said. "I will not suffer you to
speak thus. And know, Rupert, if you do not know it already, that I
have absolute power over the estates of the Chace, and that if you
defy me I can leave them where I will."

"I know it, madam," Rupert said, sadly; "but this will in no way
alter my determination. If when you marry you give me your
permission to remain here with my grandfather, I will do so. If
not, I will go forth into the world to seek my fortune."

"Insolent boy!" Mistress Holliday said, furiously, "I have a mind
to call the lackeys in and bid them beat you."

"Madam," Rupert said, drawing himself up and touching his sword
lightly, "if you value your lackeys you will give no such order;
for the first man, lackey or lord, who lays his hand on me, I would
kill like a dog. With your permission, madam, I will retire, since
this morning I take my dancing lesson."

So saying, with a ceremonious bow Rupert left his mother's
presence. Monsieur Dessin and his daughter were already with
Colonel Holliday when Rupert joined them, and he went through his
dancing lesson as usual. Then Adele went as usual out into the
garden, and the fencing lesson began. When it was half over,
Rupert's brow clouded angrily, for he heard horsemen ride up to the
door, and felt sure who they were.

"Steady, my dear pupil, steady," Monsieur Dessin cried, as with
knitted brow Rupert pressed him hotly, fancying at the moment that
Sir William Brownlow stood in front of him.

"Peste!" he exclaimed, as the lad lunged and touched him in the
chest, "you are terrible, Monsieur!

"Colonel," he went on, dropping his sword, "I resign my post. I
have seen it coming for some time, and now it has arrived. Your
grandson is more than a match for me. He has all my skill, some of
yours, and has besides an activity and suppleness greater, I think,
than I ever had. You young islanders are trained to use hand and
eye; and although French lads may have as much activity, they have
far less strength, far less aptitude for such exercises. Besides,
there are other reasons.

"Go, Monsieur Rupert, and take care of my daughter; I would talk
with monsieur your grandfather."

Slowly, and brooding over the change which the late twenty-four
hours had made in his fortune, Rupert sought the garden. As he
sauntered along the walks he heard a cry, and looking up saw Adele
struggling in the arms of James Brownlow, who was trying to kiss
her, while a young fellow his own age stood by laughing. Rupert's
pent-up fury found a vent at last, and rushing forward, he struck
the aggressor so violent a blow between the eyes that, loosing his
hold of Adele, he fell to the ground.

"Thunder and lightning," the other young man exclaimed, drawing his
sword, "what means this, young cockerel?"

Rupert's sword flew from its sheath, but before he could cross it,
James Brownlow sprang to his feet and crying to his friend, "Stand
back! I will spit the saucy knave!" rushed upon Rupert.

The swords clashed, and almost simultaneously Brownlow's weapon
flew far through the air.

With a cry of fury he ran to fetch it, while his companion burst
into a coarse laugh.

Rupert did not move from his position, but stood passive, until his
antagonist again rushed at him.

"Mind this time," Rupert said, between his teeth, "for I will kill
you like a dog."

Warned by the lesson, James Brownlow fought more carefully; but he
was too enraged to continue these tactics long, and after a short
bout he lunged furiously. Rupert turned aside the point and
straightened his arm, and his antagonist fell to the ground, run
completely through the body.

"You are a witness that I killed him in fair fight," Rupert said,
turning to the young man, who gazed stupefied at the body of his
comrade, and then sheathing his sword bounded away to the stables.

Hugh was there.

"Quick, Hugh; saddle Ronald. I have just killed young Brownlow, and
must ride for it."

Hugh stood for a moment astonished, and then calling a helper ran
into the stables. In a minute he came out with two horses saddled.
Without a word Rupert leapt on one, while he vaulted on the other,
and the two dashed off at full speed.

"Where are you going, Master Rupert?"

"To London," Rupert said. "This is no place for me now. I killed
him in fair fight, and after warning; still, what with Sir William
and my lady mother, there will be no stopping here. You had better
ride back, Hugh, and tell my grandfather, privately, that I am
going to the Earl of Marlborough, to ask him to give me the
cornetcy he promised me."

"With your leave, Master Rupert, I shall do nothing of the sort.
Where you go, I go. My grandfather rode out with yours to Naseby,
and died there. My people have been the tenants of the Chace as
long as the Hollidays have been its lords, and have always followed
their master to the field. My old father would beat me out of the
house with a broom handle, if I went back and said I had let you go
to the wars alone. No, master Rupert, wherever you go, Hugh Parsons
goes too."

Rupert held out his hand, which his companion grasped, and the two
galloped rapidly along the road towards London.

In the meantime all was consternation at the Chace.

Colonel Holliday and Monsieur Dessin were deeply engaged in
conversation when Adele burst in upon them.

"Quick, quick!" she exclaimed, "Monsieur Rupert is fighting with a
wicked young man!"

"Then," said Monsieur Dessin grimly, "it will be very bad for the
wicked young man, whoever he is."

"Where are they?" exclaimed Colonel Holliday.

"In the garden," the girl said, bursting into tears. "The wicked
young man was rude to me, and wanted to kiss me, and Monsieur
Rupert knocked him down, and then they began to fight, and I ran
away."

Monsieur Dessin swore a very deep oath in French, and was about to
hurry out with Colonel Holliday. Then he stopped, and putting his
hand on the colonel's shoulder, said coldly:

"Do not let us hurry, sir. Monsieur Rupert has taken the matter in
his hands. It is as well that he should kill this fellow as that I
should have to do so."

Just at this moment they reached the door, and a young man came
running up to the house shouting:

"Young Mr. Brownlow is killed. Help! help!"

"I think, Monsieur Dessin," Colonel Holliday said, stopping, "it
would be as well if you and mademoiselle were for the present to
leave us. There will be trouble enough, and the fewer in it the
better. Sir William is a hot man, and you are not a cool one.
Enough mischief has been done."

"You are right," Monsieur Dessin said. "Will you tell Monsieur
Rupert that so long as my arm can lift a sword it is at his
service, and that I am his debtor for life.

"Come, Adele, let us leave by the front of the house."

Colonel Holliday now hurried out into the garden, just as Sir
William Brownlow, accompanied by his son's friend, rushed out of
the house, followed by some lackeys with scared faces.

Not a word was spoken as they ran to the spot where young Brownlow
was lying.

Sir William and Colonel Holliday both knelt beside him, and the
latter put his finger to his pulse.
