With two strokes of his oar, therefore, he swept the boat's head round,
thereby throwing their pursuers directly astern of them; then he and
Giuseppi threw their whole weight into the stroke, and the boat danced
over the water at a pace very different to that at which it had
hitherto proceeded.

But, fast as they went, the galley travelled somewhat faster, the
rowers doing their utmost in obedience to the angry orders of their
officer; and had the race been continued on a broad stretch of water,
it would sooner or later have overhauled the gondola. But Francis was
perfectly aware of this, and edged the boat away towards the end of the
Piazzetta, and then, shooting her head round, dashed at full speed
along the canal by the side of the ducal palace, the galley being at
the time some forty yards behind.

"The first to the right," Francis said, and with scarce a pause in
their speed, they turned off at right angles up the first canal they
came to. Again and again they turned and twisted, regardless of the
direction in which the canals took them, their only object being to
gain on their pursuers, who lost considerably at each turn, being
obliged always to check their speed, before arriving at each angle, to
allow the boat to go round.

In ten minutes she was far behind, and they then abated their speed,
and turned the boat's head in the direction in which they wished to go.

"By San Paolo," the stranger said, "that was well done! You are masters
of your craft, and sent your boat along at a pace which must have
astonished those fellows in that lumbering galley. I had no reason to
fear them, but I do not care to be interfered with and questioned by
these jacks-in-office of the republic."

A few minutes later they reached the place where he embarked, and as he
got out he handed the money he had promised to Giuseppi.

"Next Thursday night," he said, "at half past ten."

"It seems a dangerous sort of service, signor," Giuseppi said
hesitatingly. "It is no joke to disobey the officers of the republic,
and next time we may not be so fortunate."

"It's worth taking a little risk when you are well paid," the other
said, turning away, "and it is not likely we shall run against one of
the state galleys another night."

"Home, now, Giuseppi," Francis said, "we can talk about it tomorrow.
It's the best night's work you ever did in your life, and as I have had
a grand excitement we are both contented."

During the next few days Francis debated seriously with himself whether
to follow up the adventure; but he finally decided on doing so, feeling
convinced that there could be no real danger, even were the boat seized
by one of the state galleys; as his story, that he had gone into the
matter simply to discover whether any plot was intended against the
republic, would finally be believed, as it would be beyond the bounds
of probability that a lad of his age could himself have been concerned
in such a conspiracy. As to Giuseppi, he offered no remonstrance when
Francis told him that he intended to go out to San Nicolo on the
following Thursday, for the ten ducats he had received were a sum
larger than he could have saved in a couple of years' steady work, and
were indeed quite a fortune in his eyes. Another such a sum, and he
would be able, when the time came, to buy a gondola of his own, to
marry, and set up housekeeping in grand style. As for the danger, if
Francis was willing to run it he could do the same; for after all, a
few months' imprisonment was the worst that could befall him for his
share in the business.

Before the day came Matteo Giustiniani told Francis a piece of news
which interested him.

"You remember my cousin Maria Polani, whom we met the other evening on
the Grand Canal?"

"Of course I do, Matteo. What of her?"

"Well, what do you think? Ruggiero Mocenigo, whom I pointed out to you
on the Piazza--the man who had been banished for two years--has asked
for her hand in marriage."

"He is not going to have it, I hope," Francis said indignantly. "It
would be a shame, indeed, to give her to such a man as that."

"That is just what her father thought, Francisco, and he refused
Ruggiero pretty curtly, and told him, I believe, he would rather see
her in her grave than married to him; and I hear there was a regular
scene, and Ruggiero went away swearing Polani should regret his
refusal."

"I suppose your cousin does not care much about his threats," Francis
said.

"I don't suppose he cares much about them," Matteo replied; "but
Ruggiero is very powerfully connected, and may do him damage, not to
speak of the chance of his hiring a bravo to stab him on the first
opportunity. I know my father advised Polani to be very cautious where
he went at night for a time. This fellow, Ruggiero, is a dangerous
enemy. If he were to get Polani stabbed, it would be next to impossible
to prove that it was his doing, however strong the suspicion might be;
for mere suspicion goes for nothing against a man with his influence
and connections. He has two near relations on the council, and if he
were to burn down Polani's mansion, and to carry off Maria, the chances
are against his being punished, if he did but keep out of the way for a
few months."

As in England powerful barons were in the habit of waging private wars
with each other, and the carrying off a bride by force was no very rare
event, this state of things did not appear, to Francis, as outrageous
as it would do to an English lad of the present day, but he shook his
head.

"Of course one understands, Matteo, that everywhere powerful nobles do
things which would be regarded as crimes if done by others; but,
elsewhere, people can fortify their houses, and call out and arm their
retainers, and stand on their guard. But that here, in a city like
this, private feuds should be carried on, and men stabbed when
unconscious of danger, seems to me detestable."

"Of course it isn't right," Matteo said carelessly, "but I don't know
how you are going to put a stop to it; and after all, our quarrels here
only involve a life or two, while in other countries nobles go to war
with each other, and hundreds of lives, of people who have nothing to
do with the quarrel, may be sacrificed."

This was a light in which Francis had hardly looked upon the matter
before, and he was obliged to own that even private assassination,
detestable as it was, yet caused much less suffering than feudal war.
Still, he was not disposed entirely to give in to his friend's opinion.

"That is true, Matteo; but at the same time, in a war it is fair
fighting, while a stab in the back is a cowardly business."

"It is not always fair fighting," Matteo replied. "You hear of castles
being surprised, and the people massacred without a chance of
resistance; of villages being burned, and the people butchered
unresistingly. I don't think there is so much more fairness one way
than the other. Polani knows he will have to be careful, and if he
likes he can hire bravos to put Ruggiero out of the way, just as
Ruggiero can do to remove him. There's a good deal to be said for both
sides of the question."

Francis felt this was so, and that although he had an abhorrence of the
Venetian method of settling quarrels, he saw that as far as the public
were concerned, it was really preferable to the feudal method, of both
parties calling out their retainers and going to war with each other,
especially as assassinations played no inconsiderable part in the
feudal struggles of the time.

On the Thursday night the gondola was in waiting at the agreed spot.
Francis had thought it probable that the stranger might this time ask
some questions as to where they lived and their usual place of plying
for hire, and would endeavour to find out as much as he could about
them, as they could not but suspect that he was engaged in some very
unusual enterprise. He had therefore warned Giuseppi to be very careful
in his replies. He knew that it was not necessary to say more, for
Giuseppi had plenty of shrewdness, and would, he was sure, invent some
plausible story without the least difficulty, possessing, as he did,
plenty of the easy mendacity so general among the lower classes of the
races inhabiting countries bordering on the Mediterranean. Their fare
came down to the gondola a few minutes after the clock had tolled the
half hour.

"I see you are punctual," he said, "which is more than most of you men
are."

Francis was rowing the bow oar, and therefore stood with his back to
the passenger, and was not likely to be addressed by him, as he would
naturally turn to Giuseppi, who stood close behind him. As Francis had
expected, as soon as they were out on the lagoon the passenger turned
to his companion and began to question him.

"I cannot see your faces," he said; "but by your figures you are both
young, are you not?"

"I am but twenty-two," Giuseppi said, "and my brother is a year
younger."

"And what are your names?"

"Giovanni and Beppo Morani."

"And is this boat your own?"

"It is, signor. Our father died three years ago, leaving us his boat."

"And where do you usually ply?"

"Anywhere, signor, just as the fancy seizes us. Sometimes one place is
good, sometimes another."

"And where do you live?"

"We don't live anywhere, signor. When night comes, and business is
over, we tie up the boat to a post, wrap ourselves up, and go to sleep
at the bottom. It costs nothing, and we are just as comfortable there
as we should be on straw in a room."

"Then you must be saving money."

"Yes; we are laying money by. Some day, I suppose, we shall marry, and
our wives must have homes. Besides, sometimes we are lazy and don't
work. One must have some pleasure, you know."

"Would you like to enter service?"

"No, signor. We prefer being our own masters; to take a fare or leave
it as we please."

"Your boat is a very fast one. You went at a tremendous rate when the
galley was after us the other night."

"The boat is like others," Giuseppi said carelessly; "but most men can
row fast when the alternative is ten ducats one way or a prison the
other."

"Then there would be no place where I could always find you in the
daytime if I wanted you?"

"No, signor; there would be no saying where we might be. We have
sometimes regular customers, and it would not pay us to disappoint
them, even if you paid us five times the ordinary fare. But we could
always meet you at night anywhere, when you choose to appoint."

"But how can I appoint," the passenger said irritably, "if I don't know
where to find you?"

Giuseppi was silent for a stroke or two.

"If your excellency would write in figures, half past ten or eleven, or
whatever time we should meet you, just at the base of the column of the
palace--the corner one on the Piazzetta--we should be sure to be there
sometime or other during the day, and would look for it."

"You can read and write, then?" the passenger asked.

"I cannot do that, signor," Giuseppi said, "but I can make out figures.
That is necessary to us, as how else could we keep time with our
customers? We can read the sundials, as everyone else can; but as to
reading and writing, that is not for poor lads like us."

The stranger was satisfied. Certainly every one could read the
sundials; and the gondoliers would, as they said, understand his
figures if he wrote them.

"Very well," he said. "It is probable I shall generally know, each time
I discharge you, when I shall want you again; but should there be any
change, I will make the figures on the base of the column at the corner
of the Piazzetta, and that will mean the hour at which you are to meet
me that night at the usual place."

Nothing more was said, until the gondola arrived at the same spot at
which it had landed the passenger on the previous occasion.

"I shall be back in about the same time as before," the fare said when
he alighted.

As he strode away into the darkness, Francis followed him. He was
shoeless, for at that time the lower class seldom wore any protection
to the feet, unless when going a journey over rough ground. Among the
gondoliers shoes were unknown; and Francis himself generally took his
off, for coolness and comfort, when out for the evening in his boat.

He kept some distance behind the man he was following, for as there
were no hedges or inclosures, he could make out his figure against the
sky at a considerable distance. As Francis had expected, he did not
make towards the village, but kept along the island at a short distance
from the edge of the water.

Presently Francis heard the dip of oars, and a gondola ran up on the
sands halfway between himself and the man he was following. He threw
himself down on the ground. Two men alighted, and went in the same
direction as the one who had gone ahead.

Francis made a detour, so as to avoid being noticed by the gondoliers,
and then again followed. After keeping more than a quarter of a mile
near the water, the two figures ahead struck inshore. Francis followed
them, and in a few minutes they stopped at a black mass, rising above
the sand. He heard them knock, and then a low murmur, as if they were
answering some question from within. Then they entered, and a door
closed.

He moved up to the building. It was a hut of some size, but had a
deserted appearance. It stood between two ridges of low sand hills, and
the sand had drifted till it was halfway up the walls. There was no
garden or inclosure round it, and any passerby would have concluded
that it was uninhabited. The shutters were closed, and no gleam of
light showed from within.

After stepping carefully round it, Francis took his post round the
angle close to the door, and waited. Presently he heard footsteps
approaching--three knocks were given on the door, and a voice within
asked, "Who is there?"

The reply was, "One who is in distress."

The question came, "What ails you?"

And the answer, "All is wrong within."

Then there was a sound of bars being withdrawn, and the door opened and
closed again.

There were four other arrivals. The same questions were asked and
answered each time. Then some minutes elapsed without any fresh comers,
and Francis thought that the number was probably complete. He lay down
on the sand, and with his dagger began to make a hole through the wood,
which was old and rotten, and gave him no difficulty in piercing it.

He applied his eye to the orifice, and saw that there were some twelve
men seated round a table. Of those facing him he knew three or four by
sight; all were men of good family. Two of them belonged to the
council, but not to the inner Council of Ten. One, sitting at the top
of the table, was speaking; but although Francis applied his ear to the
hole he had made, he could hear but a confused murmur, and could not
catch the words. He now rose cautiously, scooped up the sand so as to
cover the hole in the wall, and swept a little down over the spot where
he had been lying, although he had no doubt that the breeze, which
would spring up before morning, would soon drift the light shifting
sand over it, and obliterate the mark of his recumbent figure. Then he
went round to the other side of the hut and bored another hole, so as
to obtain a view of the faces of those whose backs had before been
towards him.

One of these was Ruggiero Mocenigo. Another was a stranger to Francis,
and some difference in the fashion of his garments indicated that he
was not a Venetian, but, Francis thought, a Hungarian. The other three
were not nobles. One of them Francis recognized, as being a man of much
influence among the fishermen and sailors. The other two were unknown
to him.

As upwards of an hour had been spent in making the two holes and taking
observations, Francis thought it better now to make his way back to his
boat, especially as it was evident that he would gain nothing by
remaining longer. Therefore, after taking the same precautions as
before, to conceal all signs of his presence, he made his way across
the sands back to his gondola.

"Heaven be praised, you are back again!" Giuseppi said, when he heard
his low whistle, as he came down to the boat. "I have been in a fever
ever since I lost sight of you. Have you succeeded?"

"I have found out that there is certainly a plot of some sort being got
up, and I know some of those concerned in it, but I could hear nothing
that went on. Still, I have succeeded better than I expected, and I am
well satisfied with the night's work."

"I hope you won't come again, Messer Francisco. In the first place, you
may not always have the fortune to get away unseen. In the next place,
it is a dangerous matter to have to do with conspiracies, whichever
side you are on. The way to live long in Venice is to make no enemies."

"Yes, I know that, Giuseppi, and I haven't decided yet what to do in
the matter."

A quarter of an hour later, their fare returned to the boat. This time
they took a long detour, and, entering Venice by one of the many
canals, reached the landing place without adventure. The stranger
handed Giuseppi a ducat.

"I do not know when I shall want you again; but I will mark the hour,
as agreed, on the pillar. Do not fail to go there every afternoon; and
even if you don't see it, you might as well come round here at half
past ten of a night. I may want you suddenly."

Before going to sleep that night, Francis thought the matter over
seriously, and finally concluded that he would have no more to do with
it. No doubt, by crossing over to San Nicolo in the daytime, he might
be able to loosen a plank at the back of the hut, or to cut so large an
opening that he could hear, as well as see, what was going on within;
but supposing he discovered that a plot was on hand in favour of the
enemies of Venice, such as Padua or Hungary, what was he to do next? At
the best, if he denounced it, and the officers of the republic
surrounded the hut when the conspirators were gathered there, arrested
them, and found upon them, or in their houses, proofs sufficient to
condemn them, his own position would not be enviable. He would gain,
indeed, the gratitude of the republic; but as for rewards, he had no
need of them. On the other hand, he would draw upon himself the enmity
of some eight or ten important families, and all their connections and
followers, and his life would be placed in imminent danger. They would
be all the more bitter against him, inasmuch as the discovery would not
have been made by accident, but by an act of deliberate prying into
matters which concerned him in no way, he not being a citizen of the
republic.

So far his action in the matter had been a mere boyish freak; and now
that he saw it was likely to become an affair of grave importance,
involving the lives of many persons, he determined to have nothing
further to do with it.



Chapter 3: On The Grand Canal.


Giuseppi, next morning, heard the announcement of the determination of
Francis, to interfere no further in the matter of the conspiracy at San
Nicolo, with immense satisfaction. For the last few nights he had
scarcely slept, and whenever he dozed off, dreamed either of being
tortured in dungeons, or of being murdered in his gondola; and no money
could make up for the constant terrors which assailed him. In his
waking moments he was more anxious for his employer than for himself,
for it was upon him that the vengeance of the conspirators would fall,
rather than upon a young gondolier, who was only obeying the orders of
his master.

It was, then, with unbounded relief that he heard Francis had decided
to go no more out to San Nicolo.

During the next few days Francis went more frequently than usual to the
Piazza of Saint Mark, and had no difficulty in recognizing there the
various persons he had seen in the hut, and in ascertaining their names
and families. One of the citizens he had failed to recognize was a
large contractor in the salt works on the mainland. The other was the
largest importer of beasts for the supply of meat to the markets of the
city.

Francis was well satisfied with the knowledge he had gained. It might
never be of any use to him, but it might, on the other hand, be of
importance when least expected.

As a matter of precaution he drew up an exact account of the
proceedings of the two nights on the lagoons, giving an account of the
meeting, and the names of the persons present, and placed it in a
drawer in his room. He told Giuseppi what he had done.

"I do not think there is the least chance of our ever being recognized,
Giuseppi. There was not enough light for the man to have made out our
features. Still there is nothing like taking precautions, and if--I
don't think it is likely, mind--but if anything should ever happen to
me--if I should be missing, for example, and not return by the
following morning--you take that paper out of my drawer and drop it
into the Lion's Mouth. Then, if you are questioned, tell the whole
story."

"But they will never believe me, Messer Francisco," Giuseppi said in
alarm.

"They will believe you, because it will be a confirmation of my story;
