story. The whirlicote jolted and rattled into the yard. Sibyll and
her father were assisted out of the vehicle, and, after a few words
interchanged with the host, conducted by Master Porpustone himself up
the spacious stairs into a chamber, well furnished and fresh littered,
with repeated assurances of safety, provided they maintained silence,
and attempted no escape.

"Ye are in time," said Ned Porpustone to the captain. "Lord Hastings
made proclamation at daybreak that he gave the rebels two hours to
disperse."

"Pest! I like not those proclamations. And the fellows stood their
ground?"

"No; for Sir Geoffrey, like a wise soldier, mended the ground by
retreating a mile to the left, and placing the wood between the Yorkists
and himself. Hastings, by this, must have remarshalled his men. But to
pass the wood is slow work, and Sir Geoffrey's crossbows are no doubt
doing damage in the covert. Come in, while your fellows snatch a morsel
without; five minutes are not thrown away on filling their bellies."

"Thanks, Ned, thou art a good fellow; and if all else fail, why, Sir
John's ransom shall pay the reckoning. Any news of bold Robin?"

"Ay, he has 'scaped with a whole skin, and gone back to the North,"
answered the host, leading the way to his parlour, where a flask of
strong wine and some cold meat awaited his guest. "If Sir Geoffrey Gates
can beat off the York troopers, tell him, from me, not to venture to
London, but to fall back into the marshes. He will be welcome there, I
foreguess; for every northman is either for Warwick or for Lancaster,
and the two must unite now, I trow."

"But Warwick is flown!" quoth the captain.

"Tush! he has only flown as the falcon flies when he has a heron to
fight with,--wheeling and soaring. Woe to the heron when the falcon
swoops! But you drink not!"

"No; I must keep the head cool to-day; for Hastings is a perilous
captain. Thy fist, friend! If I fall, I leave you Sir John and his girl
to wipe off old scores; if we beat off the Yorkists I vow to Our Lady of
Walsingham an image of wax of the weight of myself." The marauder then
started up, and strode to his men, who were snatching a hasty meal on
the space before the hostel. He paused a moment or so, while his host
whispered,--

"Hastings was here before daybreak: but his men only got the sour beer;
yours fight upon huffcap."

"Up, men! to your pikes! Dress to the right!" thundered the captain,
with a sufficient pause between each sentence. "The York lozels have
starved on stale beer,--shall they beat huffcap and Lancaster? Frisk
and fresh-up with the Antelope banner [The antelope was one of the
Lancastrian badges. The special cognizance of Henry VI. was two feathers
in saltire.], and long live Henry the Sixth!"

The sound of the shout that answered this harangue shook the thin walls
of the chamber in which the prisoners were confined, and they heard
with joy the departing tramp of the soldiers. In a short time, Master
Porpustone himself, a corpulent, burly fellow, with a face by no
means unprepossessing, mounted to the chamber, accompanied by a comely
housekeeper, linked to him, as scandal said, by ties less irksome than
Hymen's, and both bearing ample provisions, with rich pigment and lucid
clary [clary was wine clarified], which they spread with great formality
on an oak table before their involuntary guest.

"Eat, your worship, eat!" cried mine host, heartily. "Eat,
lady-bird,--nothing like eating to kill time and banish care. Fortune
of war, Sir John,--fortune of war, never be daunted! Up to-day, down
to-morrow. Come what may--York or Lancaster--still a rich man always
falls on his legs. Five hundred or so to the captain; a noble or two,
out of pure generosity, to Ned Porpustone (I scorn extortion), and you
and the fair young dame may breakfast at home to-morrow, unless the
captain or his favourite lieutenant is taken prisoner; and then, you
see, they will buy off their necks by letting you out of the bag. Eat, I
say,--eat!"

"Verily," said Adam, seating himself solemnly, and preparing to obey, "I
confess I'm a hungered, and the pasty hath a savoury odour; but I pray
thee to tell me why I am called Sir John. Adam is my baptismal name."

"Ha! ha! good--very good, your honour--to be sure, and your father's
name before you. We are all sons of Adam, and every son, I trow, has a
just right and a lawful to his father's name."

With that, followed by the housekeeper, the honest landlord, chuckling
heartily, rolled his goodly bulk from the chamber, which he carefully
locked.

"Comprehendest thou yet, Sibyll?"

"Yes, dear sir and father, they mistake us for fugitives of mark and
importance; and when they discover their error, no doubt we shall go
free. Courage, dear father!"

"Me seemeth," quoth Adam, almost merrily, as the good man filled his cup
from the wine flagon, "me seemeth that, if the mistake could continue,
it would be no weighty misfortune; ha! ha!" He stopped abruptly in the
unwonted laughter, put down the cup; his face fell. "Ah, Heaven forgive
me!--and the poor Eureka and faithful Madge!"

"Oh, Father! fear not; we are not without protection. Lord Hastings is
returned to London,--we will seek him; he will make our cruel neighbours
respect thee. And Madge--poor Madge!--will be so happy at our return,
for they could not harm her,--a woman, old and alone; no, no, man is not
fierce enough for that."

"Let us so pray; but thou eatest not, child."

"Anon, Father, anon; I am sick and weary. But, nay--nay, I am better
now,--better. Smile again, Father. I am hungered, too; yes, indeed and
in sooth, yes. Ah, sweet Saint Mary, give me life and strength, and hope
and patience, for his dear sake!"

The stirring events which had within the last few weeks diversified
the quiet life of the scholar had somewhat roused him from his wonted
abstraction, and made the actual world a more sensible and living thing
than it had hitherto seemed to his mind; but now, his repast ended, the
quiet of the place (for the inn was silent and almost deserted) with the
fumes of the wine--a luxury he rarely tasted--operated soothingly upon
his thought and fancy, and plunged him into those reveries, so dear
alike to poet and mathematician. To the thinker the most trifling
external object often suggests ideas, which, like Homer's chain, extend,
link after link; from earth to heaven. The sunny motes, that in a
glancing column came through the lattice, called Warner from the real
day,--the day of strife and blood, with thousands hard by driving each
other to the Hades,--and led his scheming fancy into the ideal and
abstract day,--the theory of light itself; and the theory suggested
mechanism, and mechanism called up the memory of his oracle, old Roger
Bacon; and that memory revived the great friar's hints in the Opus
magnus,--hints which outlined the grand invention of the telescope; and
so, as over some dismal precipice a bird swings itself to and fro upon
the airy bough, the schoolman's mind played with its quivering fancy,
and folded its calm wings above the verge of terror.

Occupied with her own dreams, Sibyll respected those of her father; and
so in silence, not altogether mournful, the morning and the noon passed,
and the sun was sloping westward, when a confused sound below called
Sibyll's gaze to the lattice, which looked over the balustrade of the
staircase into the vast yard. She saw several armed men, their harness
hewed and battered, quaffing ale or wine in haste, and heard one of them
say to the landlord,--

"All is lost! Sir Geoffrey Gates still holds out, but it is butcher
work. The troops of Lord Hastings gather round him as a net round the
fish!"

Hastings!--that name!--he was at hand! he was near! they would be saved!
Sibyll's heart beat loudly.

"And the captain?" asked Porpustone.

"Alive, when I last saw him; but we must be off. In another hour all
will be hurry and skurry, flight and chase." At this moment from one of
the barns there emerged, one by one, the female vultures of the battle.
The tymbesteres, who had tramped all night to the spot, had slept
off their fatigue during the day, and appeared on the scene as the
neighbouring strife waxed low, and the dead and dying began to cumber
the gory ground. Graul Skellet, tossing up her timbrel, darted to the
fugitives and grinned a ghastly grin when she heard the news,--for the
tymbesteres were all loyal to a king who loved women, and who had a wink
and a jest for every tramping wench! The troopers tarried not, however,
for further converse, but, having satisfied their thirst, hurried and
clattered from the yard. At the sight of the ominous tymbesteres Sibyll
had drawn back, without daring to close the lattice she had opened; and
the women, seating themselves on a bench, began sleeking their long hair
and smoothing their garments from the scraps of straw and litter which
betokened the nature of their resting-place.

"Ho, girls!" said the fat landlord, "ye will pay me for board and bed,
I trust, by a show of your craft. I have two right worshipful lodgers
up yonder, whose lattice looks on the yard, and whom ye may serve to
divert."

Sibyll trembled, and crept to her father's side.

"And," continued the landlord, "if they like the clash of your musicals,
it may bring ye a groat or so, to help ye on your journey. By the way,
whither wend ye, wenches?"

"To a bonny, jolly fair," answered the sinister voice of Graul,--

    "Where a mighty SHOWMAN dyes
       The greenery into red;
     Where, presto! at the word
       Lies his Fool without a head;
     Where he gathers in the crowd
       To the trumpet and the drum,
     With a jingle and a tinkle,
       Graul's merry lasses come!"

As the two closing lines were caught by the rest of the tymbesteres,
striking their timbrels, the crew formed themselves into a semicircle,
and commenced their dance. Their movements, though wanton and fantastic,
were not without a certain wild grace; and the address with which,
from time to time, they cast up their instruments and caught them
in descending, joined to the surprising agility with which, in the
evolutions of the dance, one seemed now to chase, now to fly from, the
other, darting to and fro through the ranks of her companions, winding
and wheeling,--the chain now seemingly broken in disorder, now
united link to link, as the whole force of the instruments clashed in
chorus,--made an exhibition inexpressibly attractive to the vulgar.

The tymbesteres, however, as may well be supposed, failed to draw
Sibyll or Warner to the window; and they exchanged glances of spite and
disappointment.

"Marry," quoth the landlord, after a hearty laugh at the diversion, "I
do wrong to be so gay, when so many good friends perhaps are lying stark
and cold. But what then? Life is short,--laugh while we can!"

"Hist!" whispered his housekeeper; "art wode, Ned? Wouldst thou have
it discovered that thou hast such quality birds in the cage--noble
Yorkists--at the very time when Lord Hastings himself may be riding this
way after the victory?"

"Always right, Meg,--and I'm an ass!" answered the host, in the same
undertone. "But my good nature will be the death of me some day. Poor
gentlefolks, they must be unked dull, yonder!"

"If the Yorkists come hither,--which we shall soon know by the
scouts,--we must shift Sir John and the damsel to the back of the house,
over thy tap-room."

"Manage it as thou wilt, Meg; but thou seest they keep quiet and snug.
Ho, ho, ho! that tall tymbestere is supple enough to make an owl hold
his sides with laughing. Ah! hollo, there, tymbesteres, ribaudes,
tramps, the devil's chickens,--down, down!"

The host was too late in his order. With a sudden spring, Graul, who had
long fixed her eye on the open lattice of the prisoners, had wreathed
herself round one of the pillars that supported the stairs, swung
lightly over the balustrade; and with a faint shriek the startled Sibyll
beheld the tymbestere's hard, fierce eyes, glaring upon her through the
lattice, as her long arm extended the timbrel for largess. But no sooner
had Sibyll raised her face than she was recognized.

"Ho, the wizard and the wizard's daughter! Ho, the girl who glamours
lords, and wears sarcenet and lawn! Ho, the nigromancer who starves the
poor!"

At the sound of their leader's cry, up sprang, up climbed the hellish
sisters! One after the other, they darted through the lattice into the
chamber.

"The ronions! the foul fiend has distraught them!" groaned the landlord,
motionless with astonishment; but the more active Meg, calling to the
varlets and scullions, whom the tymbesteres had collected in the yard,
to follow her, bounded up the stairs, unlocked the door, and arrived
in time to throw herself between the captives and the harpies, whom
Sibyll's rich super-tunic and Adam's costly gown had inflamed into all
the rage of appropriation.

"What mean ye, wretches?" cried the bold Meg, purple with anger. "Do
ye come for this into honest folk's hostelries, to rob their guests in
broad day--noble guests--guests of mark! Oh, Sir John! Sir John! what
will ye think of us?"

"Oh, Sir John! Sir John!" groaned the landlord, who had now moved his
slow bulk into the room. "They shall be scourged, Sir John! They shall
be put in the stocks, they shall be brent with hot iron, they--"

"Ha, ha!" interrupted the terrible Graul, "guests of mark! noble guests,
trow ye! Adam Warner, the wizard, and his daughter, whom we drove last
night from their den, as many a time, sisters, and many, we have driven
the rats from charnel and cave."

"Wizard! Adam! Blood of my life!" stammered the landlord, "is his name
Adam after all?"

"My name is Adam Warner," said the old man, with dignity, "no wizard--a
humble scholar, and a poor gentleman, who has injured no one. Wherefore,
women--if women ye are--would ye injure mine and me?"

"Faugh, wizard!" returned Graul, folding her arms. "Didst thou not send
thy spawn, yonder, to spoil our mart with her gittern? Hast thou not
taught her the spells to win love from the noble and young? Ho, how
daintily the young witch robes herself! Ho, laces and satins, and we
shiver with the cold, and parch with the heat--and--doff thy tunic,
minion!"

And Graul's fierce gripe was on the robe, when the landlord interposed
his huge arm, and held her at bay.

"Softly, my sucking dove, softly! Clear the room and be off!"

"Look to thyself, man. If thou harbourest a wizard against law,--a
wizard whom King Edward hath given up to the people,--look to thy
barns,--they shall burn; look to thy cattle,--they shall rot; look to
thy secrets,--they shall be told. Lancastrian, thou shalt hang! We go!
we go! We have friends amongst the mailed men of York. We go,--we will
return! Woe to thee, if thou harbourest the wizard and the succuba!"

With that Graul moved slowly to the door. Host and housekeeper, varlet,
groom, and scullion made way for her in terror; and still, as she moved,
she kept her eyes on Sibyll, till her sisters, following in successive
file, shut out the hideous aspect: and Meg, ordering away her gaping
train, closed the door.

The host and the housekeeper then gazed gravely at each other. Sibyll
lay in her father's arms breathing hard and convulsively. The old man's
face bent over her in silence. Meg drew aside her master. "You must rid
the house at once of these folks. I have heard talk of yon tymbesteres;
they are awsome in spite and malice. Every man to himself!"

"But the poor old gentleman, so mild, and the maid, so winsome!"

The last remark did not over-please the comely Meg. She advanced at once
to Adam, and said shortly,--

"Master, whether wizard or not is no affair of a poor landlord, whose
house is open to all; but ye have had food and wine,--please to pay the
reckoning, and God speed ye; ye are free to depart."

"We can pay you, mistress!" exclaimed Sibyll, springing up. "We have
moneys yet. Here, here!" and she took from her gipsire the broad pieces
which poor Madge's precaution had placed therein, and which the bravoes
had fortunately spared.

The sight of the gold somewhat softened the housewife. "Lord Hastings is
known to us," continued Sibyll, perceiving the impression she had
made; "suffer us to rest here till he pass this way, and ye will find
yourselves repaid for the kindness."

"By my troth," said the landlord, "ye are most welcome to all my poor
house containeth; and as for these tymbesteres, I value them not a
straw. No one can say Ned Porpustone is an ill man or inhospitable.
Whoever can pay reasonably is sure of good wine and civility at the
Talbot."

With these and many similar protestations and assurances, which were
less heartily re-echoed by the housewife, the landlord begged to conduct
them to an apartment not so liable to molestation; and after having led
them down the principal stairs, through the bar, and thence up a narrow
flight of steps, deposited them in a chamber at the back of the house,
and lighted a sconce therein, for it was now near the twilight. He
then insisted on seeing after their evening meal, and vanished with his
assistant. The worthy pair were now of the same mind; for guests known
to Lord Hastings it was worth braving the threats of the tymbesteres;
especially since Lord Hastings, it seems, had just beaten the
Lancastrians.

But alas! while the active Meg was busy on the hippocras, and the worthy
landlord was inspecting the savoury operations of the kitchen, a vast
uproar was heard without. A troop of disorderly Yorkist soldiers, who
had been employed in dispersing the flying rebels, rushed helter-skelter
into the house, and poured into the kitchen, bearing with them the
detested tymbesteres, who had encountered them on their way. Among these
soldiers were those who had congregated at Master Sancroft's the day
before, and they were well prepared to support the cause of their
griesly paramours. Lord Hastings himself had retired for the night to
a farmhouse nearer the field of battle than the hostel; and as in those
days discipline was lax enough after a victory, the soldiers had a right
to license. Master Porpustone found himself completely at the mercy
of these brawling customers, the more rude and disorderly from the
remembrance of the sour beer in the morning, and Graul Skellet's
assurances that Master Porpustone was a malignant Lancastrian. They laid
hands on all the provisions in the house, tore the meats from the spit,
devouring them half raw; set the casks running over the floors; and
while they swilled and swore, and filled the place with the uproar of a
hell broke loose, Graul Skellet, whom the lust for the rich garments of
Sibyll still fired and stung, led her followers up the stairs towards
the deserted chamber. Mine host perceived, but did not dare openly to
resist the foray; but as he was really a good-natured knave, and as,
moreover, he feared ill consequences might ensue if any friends of Lord
Hastings were spoiled, outraged,--nay, peradventure murdered,--in his
house, he resolved, at all events, to assist the escape of his guests.
Seeing the ground thus clear of the tymbesteres, he therefore stole from
the riotous scene, crept up the back stairs, gained the chamber to which
he had so happily removed his persecuted lodgers, and making them, in a
few words, sensible that he was no longer able to protect them, and
that the tymbesteres were now returned with an armed force to back their
malice, conducted them safely to a wide casement only some three or four
feet from the soil of the solitary garden, and bade them escape and save
themselves.

"The farm," he whispered, "where they say my Lord Hastings is quartered
is scarcely a mile and a half away; pass the garden wicket, leave
Gladsmore Chase to the left hand, take the path to the right, through
the wood, and you will see its roof among the apple-blossoms. Our Lady
protect you, and say a word to my lord on behalf of poor Ned."

Scarce had he seen his guests descend into the garden before he heard
the yell of the tymbesteres, in the opposite part of the house, as
they ran from room to room after their prey. He hastened to regain the
kitchen; and presently the tymbesteres, breathless and panting, rushed
in, and demanded their victims.

"Marry," quoth the landlord, with the self-possession of a cunning old
soldier-"think ye I cumbered my house with such cattle after pretty
lasses like you had given me the inkling of what they were? No wizard
shall fly away with the sign of the Talbot, if I can help it. They
skulked off I can promise ye, and did not even mount a couple of
broomsticks which I handsomely offered for their ride up to London."

"Thunder and bombards!" cried a trooper, already half-drunk, and seizing
Graul in his iron arms, "put the conjuror out of thine head now, and
buss me, Graul, buss me!"

Then the riot became hideous; the soldiers, following their comrade's
example, embraced the grim glee-women, tearing and hauling them to and
fro, one from the other, round and round, dancing, hallooing, chanting,
howling, by the blaze of a mighty fire,--many a rough face and hard hand
smeared with blood still wet, communicating the stain to the cheeks and
garb of those foul feres, and the whole revel becoming so unutterably
horrible and ghastly, that even the veteran landlord fled from the spot,
trembling and crossing himself. And so, streaming athwart the lattice,
and silvering over that fearful merry-making, rose the moon.

But when fatigue and drunkenness had done their work, and the soldiers
fell one over the other upon the floor, the tables, the benches, into
the heavy sleep of riot, Graul suddenly rose from amidst the huddled
bodies, and then, silently as ghouls from a burial-ground, her sisters
emerged also from their resting-places beside the sleepers. The dying
light of the fire contended but feebly with the livid rays of the moon,
and played fantastically over the gleaming robes of the tymbesteres.
They stood erect for a moment, listening, Graul with her finger on
her lips; then they glided to the door, opened and reclosed it, darted
across the yard, scaring the beasts that slept there; the watch-dog
barked, but drew back, bristling, and showing his fangs, as Red Grisell,
undaunted, pointed her knife, and Graul flung him a red peace-sop of
meat. They launched themselves through the open entrance, gained the
space beyond, and scoured away to the battlefield.

Meanwhile, Sibyll and her father were still under the canopy of heaven,
they had scarcely passed the garden and entered the fields, when they
saw horsemen riding to and fro in all directions. Sir Geoffrey Gates,
the rebel leader, had escaped; the reward of three hundred marks was set
on his head, and the riders were in search of the fugitive. The human
form itself had become a terror to the hunted outcasts; they crept under
a thick hedge till the horsemen had disappeared, and then resumed their
way. They gained the wood; but there again they halted at the sound
of voices, and withdrew themselves under covert of some entangled
and trampled bushes. This time it was but a party of peasants, whom
curiosity had led to see the field of battle, and who were now returning
home. Peasants and soldiers both were human, and therefore to be shunned
by those whom the age itself put out of the pale of law. At last the
party also left the path free; and now it was full night. They pursued
their way, they cleared the wood; before them lay the field of battle;
and a deeper silence seemed to fall over the world! The first stars had
risen, but not yet the moon. The gleam of armour from prostrate bodies,
which it had mailed in vain, reflected the quiet rays; here and there
flickered watchfires, where sentinels were set, but they were scattered
and remote. The outcasts paused and shuddered, but there seemed no
holier way for their feet; and the roof of the farmer's homestead
slept on the opposite side of the field, amidst white orchard blossoms,
whitened still more by the stars. They went on, hand in hand,--the
dead, after all, were less terrible than the living. Sometimes a stern,
upturned face, distorted by the last violent agony, the eyes unclosed
and glazed, encountered them with its stony stare; but the weapon was
powerless in the stiff hand, the menace and the insult came not from
the hueless lips; persecution reposed, at last, in the lap of slaughter.
They had gone midway through the field, when they heard from a spot
where the corpses lay thickest piled, a faint voice calling upon God for
pardon; and, suddenly, it was answered by a tone of fiercer agony,--that
did not pray, but curse.

By a common impulse, the gentle wanderers moved silently to the spot.

The sufferer in prayer was a youth scarcely passed from boyhood: his
helm had been cloven, his head was bare, and his long light hair,
clotted with gore, fell over his shoulders. Beside him lay a
strong-built, powerful form, which writhed in torture, pierced under
the arm by a Yorkist arrow, and the shaft still projecting from the
wound,--and the man's curse answered the boy's prayer.

"Peace to thy parting soul, brother!" said Warner, bending over the man.

"Poor sufferer!" said Sibyll to the boy; "cheer thee, we will send
succour; thou mayest live yet!"

"Water! water!--hell and torture!--water, I say!" groaned the man; "one
drop of water!"

It was the captain of the maurauders who had captured the wanderers.

"Thine arm! lift me! move me! That evil man scares my soul from heaven!"
gasped the boy.

And Adam preached penitence to the one that cursed, and Sibyll knelt
down and prayed with the one that prayed. And up rose the moon!

Lord Hastings sat with his victorious captains--over mead, morat, and
wine--in the humble hall of the farm.

"So," said he, "we have crushed the last embers of the rebellion! This
Sir Geoffrey Gates is a restless and resolute spirit; pity he escapes
again for further mischief. But the House of Nevile, that overshadowed
the rising race, hath fallen at last,--a waisall, brave sirs, to the new
men!"

The door was thrown open, and an old soldier entered abruptly.

"My lord! my lord! Oh, my poor son! he cannot be found! The women, who
ever follow the march of soldiers, will be on the ground to despatch the
wounded, that they may rifle the corpses! O God! if my son, my boy, my
only son--"

"I wist not, my brave Mervil, that thou hadst a son in our bands; yet I
know each man by name and sight. Courage! Our wounded have been removed,
and sentries are placed to guard the field."

"Sentries! O my lord, knowest thou not that they wink at the crime that
plunders the dead? Moreover, these corpse-riflers creep stealthily and
unseen, as the red earth-worms, to the carcass. Give me some few of thy
men, give me warrant to search the field! My son, my boy--not sixteen
summers--and his mother!"

The man stopped, and sobbed.

"Willingly!" said the gentle Hastings, "willingly! And woe to the
sentries if it be as thou sayest! I will go myself and see! Torches
there--what ho!--the good captain careth even for his dead!--Thy son! I
marvel I knew him not! Whom served he under?"

"My lord! my lord! pardon him! He is but a boy--they misled him! he
fought for the rebels. He crossed my path to-day, my arm was raised; we
knew each other, and he fled from his father's sword! Just as the strife
was ended I saw him again, I saw him fall!--Oh, mercy, mercy! do not let
him perish of his wounds or by the rifler's knife, even though a rebel!"

"Homo sum!" quoth the noble chief; "I am a man; and, even in these
bloody times, Nature commands when she speaks in a father's voice!
Mervil, I marked thee to-day! Thou art a brave fellow. I meant thee
advancement; I give thee, instead, thy son's pardon, if he lives; ten
Masses if he died as a soldier's son should die, no matter under what
flag,--antelope or lion, pierced manfully in the breast, his feet to the
foe! Come, I will search with thee!"

The boy yielded up his soul while Sibyll prayed, and her sweet voice
soothed the last pang; and the man ceased to curse while Adam spoke of
God's power and mercy, and his breath ebbed, gasp upon gasp, away. While
thus detained, the wanderers saw not pale, fleeting figures, that had
glided to the ground, and moved, gleaming, irregular, and rapid, as
marsh-fed vapours, from heap to heap of the slain. With a loud, wild
cry, the robber Lancastrian half sprung to his feet, in the paroxysm of
the last struggle, and then fell on his face, a corpse!

The cry reached the tymbesteres, and Graul rose from a body from which
she had extracted a few coins smeared with blood, and darted to the
spot; and so, as Adam raised his face from contemplating the dead, whose
last moments he had sought to soothe, the Alecto of the battlefield
stood before him, her knife bare in her gory arm. Red Grisell, who had
just left (with a spurn of wrath--for the pouch was empty) the corpse of
a soldier, round whose neck she had twined her hot clasp the day before,
sprang towards Sibyll; the rest of the sisterhood flocked to the place,
and laughed in glee as they beheld their unexpected prey. The danger
was horrible and imminent; no pity was seen in those savage eyes. The
wanderers prepared for death--when, suddenly, torches flashed over
the ground. A cry was heard, "See, the riflers of the dead!" Armed men
bounded forward, and the startled wretches uttered a shrill, unearthly
scream, and fled from the spot, leaping over the carcasses, and doubling
and winding, till they had vanished into the darkness of the wood.

"Provost!" said a commanding voice, "hang me up those sentinels at
day-break!"

"My son! my boy! speak, Hal,--speak to me. He is here, he is found!"
exclaimed the old soldier, kneeling beside the corpse at Sibyll's feet.

"My lord! my beloved! my Hastings!" And Sibyll fell insensible before
the chief.




CHAPTER VI. THE SUBTLE CRAFT OF RICHARD OF GLOUCESTER.

It was some weeks after the defeat of Sir Geoffrey Gates, and Edward
was at Shene, with his gay court. Reclined at length within a pavilion
placed before a cool fountain, in the royal gardens, and surrounded
by his favourites, the king listened indolently to the music of his
minstrels, and sleeked the plumage of his favourite falcon, perched upon
his wrist. And scarcely would it have been possible to recognize in
that lazy voluptuary the dauntless soldier, before whose lance, as deer
before the hound, had so lately fled, at bloody Erpingham, the chivalry
of the Lancastrian Rose; but remote from the pavilion, and in one of the
deserted bowling alleys, Prince Richard and Lord Montagu walked apart,
in earnest conversation. The last of these noble personages had remained
inactive during these disturbances, and Edward had not seemed to
entertain any suspicion of his participation in the anger and revenge
of Warwick. The king took from him, it is true, the lands and earldom of
Northumberland, and restored them to the Percy, but he had accompanied
this act with gracious excuses, alleging the necessity of conciliating
the head of an illustrious House, which had formally entered into
allegiance to the dynasty of York, and bestowed upon his early
favourite, in compensation, the dignity of marquis. [Montagu said
bitterly of this new dignity, "He takes from me the Earldom and domains
of Northumberland, and makes me a Marquis, with a pie's nest to maintain
it withal."--STOWE: Edward IV.--Warkworth Chronicle.] The politic king,
in thus depriving Montagu of the wealth and the retainers of the
Percy, reduced him, as a younger brother, to a comparative poverty
and insignificance, which left him dependent on Edward's favour, and
deprived him, as he thought, of the power of active mischief; at the
same time more than ever he insisted on Montagu's society, and
summoning his attendance at the court, kept his movements in watchful
surveillance.

"Nay, my lord," said Richard, pursuing with much unction the
conversation he had commenced, "you wrong me much, Holy Paul be my
witness, if you doubt the deep sorrow I feel at the unhappy events which
have led to the severance of my kinsmen! England seems to me to have
lost its smile in losing the glory of Earl Warwick's presence, and
Clarence is my brother, and was my friend; and thou knowest, Montagu,
thou knowest, how dear to my heart was the hope to win for my wife and
lady the gentle Anne."

"Prince," said Montagu, abruptly, "though the pride of Warwick and the
honour of our House may have forbidden the public revelation of the
cause which fired my brother to rebellion, thou, at least, art privy to
a secret--"

"Cease!" exclaimed Richard, in great emotion, probably sincere, for his
face grew livid, and its muscles were nervously convulsed. "I would not
have that remembrance stirred from its dark repose. I would fain forget
a brother's hasty frenzy, in the belief of his lasting penitence." He
paused and turned his face, gasped for breath, and resumed: "The cause
justified the father; it had justified me in the father's cause, had
Warwick listened to my suit, and given me the right to deem insult to
his daughter injury to myself."

"And if, my prince," returned Montagu, looking round him, and in a
subdued whisper, "if yet the hand of Lady Anne were pledged to you?"

"Tempt me not, tempt me not!" cried the prince, crossing himself.
Montagu continued,--

"Our cause, I mean Lord Warwick's cause, is not lost, as the king deems
it."

"Proceed," said Richard, casting down his eyes, while his countenance
settled back into its thoughtful calm.

"I mean," renewed Montagu, "that in my brother's flight, his retainers
were taken by surprise. In vain the king would confiscate his lands,--he
cannot confiscate men's hearts. If Warwick to-morrow set his armed heel
upon the soil, trowest thou, sagacious and clear-judging prince, that
the strife which would follow would be but another field of Losecote?
[The battle of Erpingham, so popularly called, in contempt of the rebel
lions runaways.] Thou hast heard of the honours with which King Louis
has received the earl. Will that king grudge him ships and moneys? And
meanwhile, thinkest thou that his favourers sleep?"

"But if he land, Montagu," said Richard, who seemed to listen with an
attention that awoke all the hopes of Montagu, coveting so powerful an
ally--"if he land, and make open war on Edward--we must say the word
boldly--what intent can he proclaim? It is not enough to say King Edward
shall not reign; the earl must say also what king England should elect!"

"Prince," answered Montagu, "before I reply to that question, vouchsafe
to hear my own hearty desire and wish. Though the king has deeply
wronged my brother, though he has despoiled me of the lands, which were,
peradventure, not too large a reward for twenty victories in his cause,
and restored them to the House that ever ranked amongst the strongholds
of his Lancastrian foe, yet often when I am most resentful, the memory
of my royal seigneur's past love and kindness comes over me,--above all,
the thought of the solemn contract between his daughter and my son; and
I feel (now the first heat of natural anger at an insult offered to
my niece is somewhat cooled) that if Warwick did land, I could almost
forget my brother for my king."

"Almost!" repeated Richard, smiling.

"I am plain with your Highness, and say but what I feel. I would even
now fain trust that, by your mediation, the king may be persuaded to
make such concessions and excuses as in truth would not misbeseem him,
to the father of Lady Anne, and his own kinsman; and that yet, ere it
be too late, I may be spared the bitter choice between the ties of blood
and my allegiance to the king."

"But failing this hope (which I devoutly share),--and Edward, it must be
owned, could scarcely trust to a letter,--still less to a messenger, the
confession of a crime,--failing this, and your brother land, and I side
with him for love of Anne, pledged to me as a bride,--what king would he
ask England to elect?"

"The Duke of Clarence loves you dearly, Lord Richard," replied Montagu.
"Knowest thou not how often he hath said, 'By sweet Saint George, if
Gloucester would join me, I would make Edward know we were all one man's
sons, who should be more preferred and promoted than strangers of his
wife's blood?'" [Hall.]

Richard's countenance for a moment evinced disappointment; but he said
dryly: "Then Warwick would propose that Clarence should be king?--and
the great barons and the honest burghers and the sturdy yeomen would,
you think, not stand aghast at the manifesto which declares, not that
the dynasty of York is corrupt and faulty, but that the younger son
should depose the elder,--that younger son, mark me! not only unknown in
war and green in council, but gay, giddy, vacillating; not subtle of wit
and resolute of deed, as he who so aspires should be!--Montagu, a vain
dream!"--Richard paused and then resumed, in a low tone, as to himself,
"Oh, not so--not so are kings cozened from their thrones! a pretext
must blind men,--say they are illegitimate, say they are too young, too
feeble, too anything, glide into their place, and then, not war--not
war. You slay them not,--they disappear!" The duke's face, as he
muttered, took a sinister and a dark expression, his eyes seemed to gaze
on space. Suddenly recovering himself as from a revery, he turned, with
his wonted sleek and gracious aspect, to the startled Montagu, and said,
"I was but quoting from Italian history, good my lord,--wise lore, but
terrible and murderous. Return we to the point. Thou seest Clarence
could not reign, and as well," added the prince, with a slight
sigh,--"as well or better (for, without vanity, I have more of a king's
mettle in me), might I--even I--aspire to my brother's crown!" Here he
paused, and glanced rapidly and keenly at the marquis; but whether
or not in these words he had sought to sound Montagu, and that glance
sufficed to show him it were bootless or dangerous to speak more
plainly, he resumed with an altered voice, "Enough of this: Warwick will
discover the idleness of such design; and if he land, his trumpets
must ring to a more kindling measure. John Montagu, thinkest thou that
Margaret of Anjou and the Lancastrians will not rather win thy brother
to their side? There is the true danger to Edward,--none elsewhere."

"And if so?" said Montagu, watching his listener's countenance. Richard
started, and gnawed his lip. "Mark me," continued the marquis, "I repeat
that I would fain hope yet that Edward may appease the earl; but if not,
and, rather than rest dishonoured and aggrieved, Warwick link himself
with Lancaster, and thou join him as Anne's betrothed and lord, what
matters who the puppet on the throne?--we and thou shall be the rulers;
or, if thou reject," added the marquis, artfully, as he supposed,
exciting the jealousy of the duke, "Henry has a son--a fair, and they
say, a gallant prince--carefully tutored in the knowledge of our English
laws, and who my lord of Oxford, somewhat in the confidence of the
Lancastrians, assures me would rejoice to forget old feuds, and call
Warwick 'father,' and my niece 'Lady and Princess of Wales.'"

With all his dissimulation, Richard could ill conceal the emotions of
fear, of jealousy, of dismay, which these words excited.

"Lord Oxford!" he cried, stamping his foot. "Ha, John de Vere, pestilent
traitor, plottest thou thus? But we can yet seize thy person, and will
have thy head."

Alarmed at this burst, and suddenly made aware that he had laid his
breast too bare to the boy, whom he had thought to dazzle and seduce to
his designs, Montagu said falteringly, "But, my lord, our talk is but
in confidence: at your own prayer, with your own plighted word of prince
and of kinsman, that whatever my frankness may utter should not pass
farther. Take," added the nobleman, with proud dignity--"take my head
rather than Lord Oxford's; for I deserve death, if I reveal to one who
can betray the loose words of another's intimacy and trust!"

"Forgive me, my cousin," said Richard, meekly; "my love to Anne
transported me too far. Lord Oxford's words, as you report them, had
conjured up a rival, and--but enough of this. And now," added the
prince, gravely, and with a steadiness of voice and manner that gave a
certain majesty to his small stature, "now as thou hast spoken openly,
openly also will I reply. I feel the wrong to the Lady Anne as to
myself; deeply, burningly, and lastingly, will it live in my mind; it
may be, sooner or later, to rise to gloomy deeds, even against Edward
and Edward's blood. But no, I have the king's solemn protestations
of repentance; his guilty passion has burned into ashes, and he now
sighs--gay Edward--for a lighter fere. I cannot join with Clarence,
less can I join with the Lancastrians. My birth makes me the prop of the
throne of York,--to guard it as a heritage (who knows?) that may descend
to mine,--nay, to me! And, mark me well if Warwick attempt a war of
fratricide, he is lost; if, on the other hand, he can submit himself to
the hands of Margaret, stained with his father's gore, the success of an
hour will close in the humiliation of a life. There is a third way
left, and that way thou hast piously and wisely shown. Let him, like
me, resign revenge, and, not exacting a confession and a cry of peccavi,
which no king, much less King Edward the Plantagenet, can whimper forth,
let him accept such overtures as his liege can make. His titles and
castles shall be restored, equal possessions to those thou hast lost
assigned to thee, and all my guerdon (if I can so negotiate) as all my
ambition, his daughter's hand. Muse on this, and for the peace and weal
of the realm so limit all thy schemes, my lord and cousin!"

With these words the prince pressed the hand of the marquis, and walked
slowly towards the king's pavilion.

"Shame on my ripe manhood and lore of life," muttered Montagu, enraged
against himself, and deeply mortified. "How sentence by sentence and
step by step yon crafty pigmy led me on, till all our projects, all our
fears and hopes, are revealed to him who but views them as a foe. Anne
betrothed to one who even in fiery youth can thus beguile and dupe!
Warwick decoyed hither upon fair words, at the will of one whom Italy
(boy, there thou didst forget thy fence of cunning!) has taught how the
great are slain not, but disappear! no, even this defeat instructs me
now. But right, right! the reign of Clarence is impossible, and that
of Lancaster is ill-omened and portentous; and after all, my son stands
nearer to the throne than any subject, in his alliance with the Lady
Elizabeth. Would to Heaven the king could yet--But out on me! this is
no hour for musing on mine own aggrandizement; rather let me fly at
once and warn Oxford--imperilled by my imprudence--against that dark eye
which hath set watch upon his life."

At that thought, which showed that Montagu, with all his worldliness,
was not forgetful of one of the first duties of knight and gentleman,
the marquis hastened up the alley, in the opposite direction to that
taken by Gloucester, and soon found himself in the courtyard, where a
goodly company were mounting their haquenees and palfreys, to enjoy a
summer ride through the neighbouring chase. The cold and half-slighting
salutations of these minions of the hour, which now mortified the
Nevile, despoiled of the possessions that had rewarded his long and
brilliant services, contrasting forcibly the reverential homage he had
formerly enjoyed, stung Montagu to the quick.

"Whither ride you, brother Marquis?" said young Lord Dorset (Elizabeth's
son by her first marriage), as Montagu called to his single squire, who
was in waiting with his horse. "Some secret expedition, methinks, for
I have known the day when the Lord Montagu never rode from his king's
palace with less than thirty squires."

"Since my Lord Dorset prides himself on his memory," answered the
scornful lord, "he may remember also the day when, if a Nevile mounted
in haste, he bade the first Woodville he saw hold the stirrup."

And regarding "the brother marquis" with a stately eye that silenced and
awed retort, the long-descended Montagu passed the courtiers, and
rode slowly on till out of sight of the palace; he then pushed into a
hand-gallop, and halted not till he had reached London, and gained the
house in which then dwelt the Earl of Oxford, the most powerful of all
the Lancastrian nobles not in exile, and who had hitherto temporized
with the reigning House.

Two days afterwards the news reached Edward that Lord Oxford and Jasper
of Pembroke--uncle to the boy afterwards Henry VII.--had sailed from
England.

The tidings reached the king in his chamber, where he was closeted with
Gloucester. The conference between them seemed to have been warm and
earnest, for Edward's face was flushed, and Gloucester's brow was
perturbed and sullen.

"Now Heaven be praised!" cried the king, extending to Richard the letter
which communicated the flight of the disaffected lords. "We have
two enemies the less in our roiaulme, and many a barony the more to
confiscate to our kingly wants. Ha, ha! these Lancastrians only serve to
enrich us. Frowning still, Richard? smile, boy!"

"Foi de mon ame, Edward," said Richard, with a bitter energy, strangely
at variance with his usual unctious deference to the king, "your
Highness's gayety is ill-seasoned; you reject all the means to assure
your throne, you rejoice in all the events that imperil it. I prayed you
to lose not a moment in conciliating, if possible, the great lord whom
you own you have wronged, and you replied that you would rather lose
your crown than win back the arm that gave it you."

"Gave it me! an error, Richard! that crown was at once the heritage of
my own birth and the achievement of my own sword. But were it as you
say, it is not in a king's nature to bear the presence of a power more
formidable than his own, to submit to a voice that commands rather than
counsels; and the happiest chance that ever befell me is the exile of
this earl. How, after what hath chanced, can I ever see his face again
without humiliation, or he mine without resentment?"

"So you told me anon, and I answered, if that be so, and your Highness
shrinks from the man you have injured, beware at least that Warwick, if
he may not return as a friend, come not back as an irresistible foe. If
you will not conciliate, crush! Hasten by all arts to separate Clarence
from Warwick. Hasten to prevent the union of the earl's popularity and
Henry's rights. Keep eye upon all the Lancastrian lords, and see that
none quit the realm where they are captives, to join a camp where they
can rise into leaders. And at the very moment I urge you to place strict
watch upon Oxford, to send your swiftest riders to seize Jasper of
Pembroke, you laugh with glee to hear that Oxford and Pembroke are gone
to swell the army of your foes!"

"Better foes out of my realm than in it," answered Edward, dryly.

"My liege, I say no more," and Richard rose. "I would forestall a
danger; it but remains for me to share it."

The king was touched. "Tarry yet, Richard," he said; and then, fixing
his brother's eye, he continued, with a half smile and a heightened
colour, "though we knew thee true and leal to us, we yet know also,
Richard, that thou hast personal interest in thy counsels. Thou wouldst
by one means or another soften or constrain the earl into giving thee
the hand of Anne. Well, then, grant that Warwick and Clarence expel King
Edward from his throne, they may bring a bride to console thee for the
ruin of a brother."

"Thou hast no right to taunt or to suspect me, my liege," returned
Richard, with a quiver in his lip. "Thou hast included me in thy
meditated wrong to Warwick; and had that wrong been done--"

"Peradventure it had made thee espouse Warwick's quarrel?"

"Bluntly, yes!" exclaimed Richard, almost fiercely, and playing with his
dagger. "But" (he added, with a sudden change of voice) "I understand
and know thee better than the earl did or could. I know what in thee
is but thoughtless impulse, haste of passion, the habit kings form of
forgetting all things save the love or hate, the desire or anger, of a
moment. Thou hast told me thyself, and with tears, of thy offence; thou
hast pardoned my boy's burst of anger; I have pardoned thy evil thought;
thou hast told me thyself that another face has succeeded to the brief
empire of Anne's blue eye, and hast further pledged me thy kingly
word, that if I can yet compass the hand of a cousin dear to me from
childhood, thou wilt confirm the union."

"It is true," said Edward. "But if thou wed thy bride, keep her aloof
from the court,--nay, frown not, my boy, I mean simply that I would not
blush before my brother's wife!"

Richard bowed low in order to conceal the expression of his face,
and went on without further notice of the explanation. "And all
this considered, Edward, I swear by Saint Paul, the holiest saint to
thoughtful men, and by Saint George, the noblest patron to high-born
warriors, that thy crown and thine honour are as dear to me as if they
were mine own. Whatever sins Richard of Gloucester may live to harbour
and repent, no man shall ever say of him that he was a recreant to the
honour of his country [so Lord Bacon observes of Richard, with that
discrimination, even in the strongest censure, of which profound judges
of mankind are alone capable, that he was "a king jealous of the honor
of the English nation"], or slow to defend the rights of his ancestors
from the treason of a vassal or the sword of a foreign foe. Therefore, I
say again, if thou reject my honest counsels; if thou suffer Warwick
to unite with Lancaster and France; if the ships of Louis bear to your
shores an enemy, the might of whom your reckless daring undervalues,
foremost in the field in battle, nearest to your side in exile,
shall Richard Plantagenet be found!" These words, being uttered with
sincerity, and conveying a promise never forfeited, were more impressive
than the subtlest eloquence the wily and accomplished Gloucester ever
employed as the cloak to guile, and they so affected Edward, that he
threw his arms around his brother; and after one of those bursts of
