"That will be a bad day for old and young," says the General, "Let us
rather say, suppose she consents, my love?--I can't fancy anybody in the
world refusing Theo anything she has set her heart on," adds the father:
"and I am sure 'tis bent upon this match."

So they all waited with the utmost anxiety until an answer from Madam
Esmond should arrive; and trembled lest the French privateers should
take the packet-ship by which the precious letter was conveyed.




CHAPTER LXVII. In which a Tragedy is acted, and two more are begun


James Wolfe, Harry's new Colonel, came back from America a few weeks
after our Virginian had joined his regiment. Wolfe had previously been
Lieutenant-Colonel of Kingsley's, and a second battalion of the regiment
had been formed and given to him in reward for his distinguished
gallantry and services at Cape Breton. Harry went with quite unfeigned
respect and cordiality to pay his duty to his new commander, on whom the
eyes of the world began to be turned now,--the common opinion being that
he was likely to become a great general. In the late affairs in France,
several officers of great previous repute had been tried and found
lamentably wanting. The Duke of Marlborough had shown himself no worthy
descendant of his great ancestor. About my Lord George Sackville's
military genius there were doubts, even before his unhappy behaviour at
Minden prevented a great victory. The nation was longing for military
glory, and the Minister was anxious to find a general who might gratify
the eager desire of the people. Mr. Wolfe's and Mr. Lambert's business
keeping them both in London, the friendly intercourse between those
officers was renewed, no one being more delighted than Lambert at his
younger friend's good fortune.

Harry, when he was away from his duty, was never tired of hearing Mr.
Wolfe's details of the military operations of the last year, about which
Wolfe talked very freely and openly. Whatever thought was in his
mind, he appears to have spoken it out generously. He had that heroic
simplicity which distinguished Nelson afterwards: he talked frankly of
his actions. Some of the fine gentlemen at St. James's might wonder and
sneer at him; but amongst our little circle of friends we may be sure he
found admiring listeners. The young General had the romance of a boy on
many matters. He delighted in music and poetry. On the last day of his
life he said he would rather have written Gray's Elegy than have won a
battle. We may be sure that with a gentleman of such literary tastes our
friend George would become familiar; and as they were both in love, and
both accepted lovers, and both eager for happiness, no doubt they must
have had many sentimental conversations together which would be very
interesting to report could we only have accurate accounts of them. In
one of his later letters, Warrington writes:

"I had the honour of knowing the famous General Wolfe, and seeing much
of him during his last stay in London. We had a subject of conversation
then which was of unfailing interest to both of us, and I could not but
admire Mr. Wolfe's simplicity, his frankness, and a sort of glorious
bravery which characterised him. He was much in love, and he wanted
heaps and heaps of laurels to take to his mistress. 'If it be a sin to
covet honour,' he used to say with Harry the Fifth (he was passionately
fond of plays and poetry), 'I am the most offending soul alive.' Surely
on his last day he had a feast which was enough to satisfy the greediest
appetite for glory. He hungered after it. He seemed to me not merely
like a soldier going resolutely to do his duty, but rather like a knight
in quest of dragons and giants. My own country has furnished of late a
chief of a very different order, and quite an opposite genius. I scarce
know which to admire most. The Briton's chivalrous ardour, or the more
than Roman constancy of our great Virginian."

As Mr. Lambert's official duties detained him in London, his family
remained contentedly with him, and I suppose Mr. Warrington was so
satisfied with the rural quiet of Southampton Row and the beautiful
flowers and trees of Bedford Gardens, that he did not care to quit
London for any long period. He made his pilgrimage to Castlewood, and
passed a few days there, occupying the chamber of which he had often
heard his grandfather talk, and which Colonel Esmond had occupied as a
boy and he was received kindly enough by such members of the family as
happened to be at home. But no doubt he loved better to be in London by
the side of a young person in whose society he found greater pleasure
than any which my Lord Castlewood's circle could afford him, though all
the ladies were civil, and Lady Maria especially gracious, and enchanted
with the tragedy which George and Parson Sampson read out to the ladies.
The chaplain was enthusiastic in its praises, and indeed it was
through his interest and not through Mr. Johnson's after all, that Mr.
Warrington's piece ever came on the stage. Mr. Johnson, it is true,
pressed the play on his friend Mr. Garrick for Drury Lane, but Garrick
had just made an arrangement with the famous Mr. Home for a tragedy from
the pen of the author of Douglas. Accordingly, Carpezan was carried to
Mr. Rich at Covent Garden, and accepted by that manager.

On the night of the production of the piece, Mr. Warrington gave an
elegant entertainment to his friends at the Bedford Head, in Covent
Garden, whence they adjourned in a body to the theatre; leaving only one
or two with our young author, who remained at the coffee-house,
where friends from time to time came to him with an account of the
performance. The part of Carpezan was filled by Barry, Shuter was the
old nobleman, Reddish, I need scarcely say, made an excellent Ulric, and
the King of Bohemia was by a young actor from Dublin, Mr. Geoghegan, or
Hagan as he was called on the stage, and who looked and performed the
part to admiration. Mrs. Woffington looked too old in the first act as
the heroine, but her murder in the fourth act, about which great doubts
were expressed, went off to the terror and delight of the audience. Miss
Wayn sang the ballad which is supposed to be sung by the king's page,
just at the moment of the unhappy wife's execution, and all agreed that
Barry was very terrible and pathetic as Carpezan, especially in the
execution scene. The grace and elegance of the young actor, Hagan, won
general applause. The piece was put very elegantly on the stage by Mr.
Rich, though there was some doubt whether, in the march of Janissaries
in the last, the manager was correct in introducing a favourite
elephant, which had figured in various pantomimes, and by which one of
Mr. Warrington's black servants marched in a Turkish habit. The other
sate in the footman's gallery, and uproariously wept and applauded at
the proper intervals.

The execution of Sybilla was the turning-point of the piece. Her head
off, George's friends breathed freely, and one messenger after another
came to him at the coffee-house, to announce the complete success of
the tragedy. Mr. Barry, amidst general applause, announced the play for
repetition, and that it was the work of a young gentleman of Virginia,
his first attempt in the dramatic style.

We should like to have been in the box where all our friends were seated
during the performance, to have watched Theo's flutter and anxiety
whilst the success of the play seemed dubious, and have beheld the
blushes and the sparkles in her eyes, when the victory was assured.
Harry, during the little trouble in the fourth act, was deadly
pale--whiter, Mrs. Lambert said, than Barry, with all his chalk. But
if Briareus could have clapped hands, he could scarcely have made more
noise than Harry at the end of the piece. Mr. Wolfe and General Lambert
huzzayed enthusiastically. Mrs. Lambert, of course, cried: and though
Hetty said, "Why do you cry, mamma? I you don't want any of them alive
again; you know it serves them all right"--the girl was really as much
delighted as any person present, including little Charley from the
Chartreux, who had leave from Dr. Crusius for that evening, and Miss
Lucy, who had been brought from boarding-school on purpose to be present
on the great occasion. My Lord Castlewood and his sister, Lady Maria,
were present; and his lordship went from his box and complimented
Mr. Barry and the other actors on the stage; and Parson Sampson was
invaluable in the pit, where he led the applause, having, I believe,
given previous instructions to Gumbo to keep an eye upon him from the
gallery, and do as he did.

Be sure there was a very jolly supper of Mr. Warrington's friends that
night--much more jolly than Mr. Garrick's, for example, who made but a
very poor success with his Agis and its dreary choruses, and who must
have again felt that he had missed a good chance, in preferring Mr.
Home's tragedy to our young author's. A jolly supper, did we say?--Many
jolly suppers. Mr. Gumbo gave an entertainment to several gentlemen
of the shoulder-knot, who had concurred in supporting his master's
masterpiece: Mr. Henry Warrington gave a supper at the Star and Garter,
in Pall Mall, to ten officers of his new regiment, who had come up for
the express purpose of backing Carpezan; and finally, Mr. Warrington
received the three principal actors of the tragedy, our family party
from the side box, Mr. Johnson and his ingenious friend, Mr. Reynolds
the painter, my Lord Castlewood and his sister, and one or two more. My
Lady Maria happened to sit next to the young actor who had performed the
part of the King. Mr. Warrington somehow had Miss Theo for a neighbour,
and no doubt passed a pleasant evening beside her. The greatest
animation and cordiality prevailed, and when toasts were called, Lady
Maria gaily gave "The King of Hungary" for hers. That gentleman, who had
plenty of eloquence and fire, and excellent manners, on as well as off
the stage, protested that he had already suffered death in the course of
the evening, hoped that he should die a hundred times more on the same
field; but, dead or living, vowed he knew whose humble servant he ever
should be. Ah, if he had but a real crown in place of his diadem of
pasteboard and tinsel, with what joy would he lay it at her ladyship's
feet! Neither my lord nor Mr. Esmond were over well pleased with the
gentleman's exceeding gallantry--a part of which they attributed, no
doubt justly, to the wine and punch, of which he had been partaking very
freely. Theo and her sister, who were quite new to the world, were a
little frightened by the exceeding energy of Mr. Hagan's manner--but
Lady Maria, much more experienced, took it in perfectly good part. At
a late hour coaches were called, to which the gentlemen attended the
ladies, after whose departure some of them returned to the supper-room,
and the end was that Carpezan had to be carried away in a chair, and
that the King of Hungary had a severe headache; and that the Poet,
though he remembered making a great number of speeches, was quite
astounded when half a dozen of his guests appeared at his house the next
day, whom he had invited overnight to come and sup with him once more.

As he put Mrs. Lambert and her daughters into their coach on the night
previous, all the ladies were flurried, delighted, excited; and you may
be sure our gentleman was with them the next day, to talk of the play
and the audience, and the actors, and the beauties of the piece, over
and over again. Mrs. Lambert had heard that the ladies of the theatre
were dangerous company for young men. She hoped George would have a
care, and not frequent the greenroom too much.

George smiled, and said he had a preventive against all greenroom
temptations, of which he was not in the least afraid; and as he spoke he
looked in Theo's face, as if in those eyes lay the amulet which was to
preserve him from all danger.

"Why should he be afraid, mamma?" asks the maiden simply. She had no
idea of danger or of guile.

"No, my darling, I don't think he need be afraid," says the mother,
kissing her.

"You don't suppose Mr. George would fall in love with that painted old
creature who performed the chief part?" asks Miss Hetty, with a toss of
her head. "She must be old enough to be his mother."

"Pray, do you suppose that at our age nobody can care for us, or that we
have no hearts left?" asks mamma, very tartly. "I believe, or I may
say, I hope and trust, your father thinks otherwise. He is, I imagine,
perfectly satisfied, miss. He does not sneer at age, whatever little
girls out of the schoolroom may do. And they had much better be back
there, and they had much better remember what the fifth commandment
is--that they had, Hetty!"

"I didn't think I was breaking it by saying that an actress was as old
as George's mother," pleaded Hetty.

"George's mother is as old as I am, miss!--at least she was when we were
at school. And Fanny Parker--Mrs. Mountain who now is--was seven months
older, and we were in the French class together; and I have no idea
that our age is to be made the subject of remarks and ridicule by
our children, and I will thank you to spare it, if you please! Do you
consider your mother too old, George?"

"I am glad my mother is of your age, Aunt Lambert," says George, in the
most sentimental manner.

Strange infatuation of passion--singular perversity of reason! At some
period before his marriage, it not unfrequently happens that a man
actually is fond of his mother-in-law! At this time our good General
vowed, and with some reason, that he was jealous. Mrs. Lambert made much
more of George than of any other person in the family. She dressed up
Theo to the utmost advantage in order to meet him; she was for ever
caressing her, and appealing to her when he spoke. It was, "Don't
you think he looks well?"--"Don't you think he looks pale, Theo,
to-day?"--"Don't you think he has been sitting up over his books too
much at night?" and so forth. If he had a cold, she would have liked to
make gruel for him and see his feet in hot water. She sent him recipes
of her own for his health. When he was away, she never ceased talking
about him to her daughter. I dare say Miss Theo liked the subject well
enough. When he came, she was sure to be wanted in some other part of
the house, and would bid Theo take care of him till she returned. Why,
before she returned to the room, could you hear her talking outside the
door to her youngest innocent children, to her servants in the upper
regions, and so forth? When she reappeared, was not Mr. George always
standing or sitting at a considerable distance from Miss Theo--except,
to be sure, on that one day when she had just happened to drop her
scissors, and he had naturally stooped down to pick them up? Why was she
blushing? Were not youthful cheeks made to blush, and roses to bloom in
the spring? Not that mamma ever noted the blushes, but began quite an
artless conversation about this or that, as she sate down brimful of
happiness to her worktable.

And at last there came a letter from Virginia in Madam Esmond's neat,
well-known hand, and over which George trembled and blushed before he
broke the seal. It was in answer to the letter which he had sent home,
respecting his brother's commission and his own attachment to Miss
Lambert. Of his intentions respecting Harry, Madam Esmond fully
approved. As for his marriage, she was not against early marriages. She
would take his picture of Miss Lambert with the allowance that was to be
made for lovers' portraits, and hope, for his sake, that the young lady
was all he described her to be. With money, as Madam Esmond gathered
from her son's letter, she did not appear to be provided at all, which
was a pity, as, though wealthy in land, their family had but little
ready-money. However, by Heaven's blessing, there was plenty at home for
children and children's children, and the wives of her sons should share
all she had. When she heard more at length from Mr. and Mrs. Lambert,
she would reply for her part more fully. She did not pretend to say that
she had not greater hopes for her son, as a gentleman of his name and
prospects might pretend to the hand of the first lady of the land; but
as Heaven had willed that her son's choice should fall upon her old
friend's daughter, she acquiesced, and would welcome George's wife as
her own child. This letter was brought by Mr. Van den Bosch of Albany,
who had lately bought a very large estate in Virginia, and who was bound
for England to put his granddaughter to a boarding-school. She, Madam
Esmond, was not mercenary, nor was it because this young lady was
heiress of a very great fortune that she desired her sons to pay Mr. Van
d. B. every attention. Their properties lay close together, and could
Harry find in the young lady those qualities of person and mind suitable
for a companion for life, at least she would have the satisfaction of
seeing both her children near her in her declining years. Madam Esmond
concluded by sending her affectionate compliments to Mrs. Lambert, from
whom she begged to hear further, and her blessing to the young lady who
was to be her daughter-in-law.

The letter was not cordial, and the writer evidently but half satisfied;
but, such as it was, her consent was here formally announced. How
eagerly George ran away to Soho with the long-desired news in his
pocket! I suppose our worthy friends there must have read his news in
his countenance--else why should Mrs. Lambert take her daughter's hand
and kiss her with such uncommon warmth, when George announced that
he had received letters from home? Then, with a break in his voice, a
pallid face, and a considerable tremor, turning to Mr. Lambert, he said:
"Madam Esmond's letter, sir, is in reply to one of mine, in which I
acquainted her that I had formed an attachment in England, for which I
asked my mother's approval. She gives her consent, I am grateful to say,
and I have to pray my dear friends to be equally kind to me."

"God bless thee, my dear boy!" says the good General, laying a hand on
the young man's head. "I am glad to have thee for a son, George. There,
there, don't go down on your knees, young folks! George may, to be sure,
and thank God for giving him the best little wife in all England. Yes,
my dear, except when you were ill, you never caused me a heartache--and
happy is the man, I say, who wins thee!"

I have no doubt the young people knelt before their parents, as was the
fashion in those days; and am perfectly certain that Mrs. Lambert kissed
both of them, and likewise bedewed her pocket-handkerchief in the most
plentiful manner. Hetty was not present at this sentimental scene, and
when she heard of it, spoke with considerable asperity, and a laugh that
was by no means pleasant, saying: "Is this all the news you have to give
me? Why, I have known it these months past. Do you think I have no eyes
to see, and no ears to hear, indeed?" But in private she was much
more gentle. She flung herself on her sister's neck, embracing her
passionately, and vowing that never, never would Theo find any one to
love her like her sister. With Theo she became entirely mild and humble.
She could not abstain from her jokes and satire with George, but he was
too happy to heed her much, and too generous not to see the cause of her
jealousy.

When all parties concerned came to read Madam Esmond's letter, that
document, it is true, appeared rather vague. It contained only a promise
that she would receive the young people at her house, and no sort
of proposal for a settlement. The General shook his head over the
letter--he did not think of examining it until some days after the
engagement had been made between George and his daughter: but now he
read Madam Esmond's words, they gave him but small encouragement.

"Bah!" says George. "I shall have three hundred pounds for my tragedy. I
can easily write a play a year; and if the worst comes to the worst, we
can live on that."

"On that and your patrimony," says Theo's father.

George now had to explain, with some hesitation, that what with paying
bills for his mother, and Harry's commission and debts, and his own
ransom--George's patrimony proper was well-nigh spent.

Mr. Lambert's countenance looked graver still at this announcement, but
he saw his girl's eyes turned towards him with an alarm so tender, that
he took her in his arms and vowed that, let the worst come to the worst,
his darling should not be balked of her wish.

About the going back to Virginia, George frankly owned that he little
liked the notion of returning to be entirely dependent on his mother.
He gave General Lambert an idea of his life at home, and explained how
little to his taste that slavery was. No. Why should he not stay in
England, write more tragedies, study for the bar, get a place, perhaps?
Why, indeed? He straightway began to form a plan for another tragedy.
He brought portions of his work, from time to time, to Miss Theo and her
sister: Hetty yawned over the work, but Theo pronounced it to be still
more beautiful and admirable than the last, which was perfect.

The engagement of our young friends was made known to the members of
their respective families, and announced to Sir Miles Warrington, in
a ceremonious letter from his nephew. For a while Sir Miles saw no
particular objection to the marriage; though, to be sure, considering
his name and prospects, Mr. Warrington might have looked higher. The
truth was, that Sir Miles imagined that Madam Esmond had made some
considerable settlement on her son, and that his circumstances were more
than easy. But when he heard that George was entirely dependent on his
mother, and that his own small patrimony was dissipated, as Harry's had
been before, Sir Miles's indignation at his nephew's imprudence knew no
bounds; he could not find words to express his horror and anger at the
want of principle exhibited by both these unhappy young men: he thought
it his duty to speak his mind about them, and wrote his opinion to his
sister Esmond in Virginia. As for General and Mrs. Lambert, who passed
for respectable persons, was it to be borne that such people should
inveigle a penniless young man into a marriage with their penniless
daughter? Regarding them, and George's behaviour, Sir Miles fully
explained his views to Madam Esmond, gave half a finger to George
whenever his nephew called on him in town, and did not even invite him
to partake of the famous family small-beer. Towards Harry his uncle
somewhat unbent; Harry had done his duty in the campaign, and was
mentioned with praise in high quarters. He had sown his wild oats,--he
at least was endeavouring to amend; but George was a young prodigal,
fast careering to ruin, and his name was only mentioned in the family
with a groan. Are there any poor fellows nowadays, I wonder, whose
polite families fall on them and persecute them; groan over them
and stone them, and hand stones to their neighbours that they may do
likewise? All the patrimony spent! Gracious heavens! Sir Miles turned
pale when he saw his nephew coming. Lady Warrington prayed for him as a
dangerous reprobate; and, in the meantime, George was walking the town,
quite unconscious that he was occasioning so much wrath and so much
devotion. He took little Miley to the play and brought him back again.
He sent tickets to his aunt and cousins which they could not refuse, you
know; it would look too marked were they to break altogether. So they
not only took the tickets, but whenever country constituents came to
town they asked for more, taking care to give the very worst motives
to George's intimacy with the theatre, and to suppose that he and the
actresses were on terms of the most disgraceful intimacy. An august
personage having been to the theatre, and expressed his approbation
of Mr. Warrington's drama to Sir Miles, when he attended his R-y-l
H-ghn-ss's levee at Saville House, Sir Miles, to be sure, modified his
opinion regarding the piece, and spoke henceforth more respectfully of
it. Meanwhile, as we have said, George was passing his life entirely
careless of the opinion of all the uncles, aunts, and cousins in the
world.

Most of the Esmond cousins were at least more polite and cordial than
George's kinsfolk of the Warrington side. In spite of his behaviour over
the cards, Lord Castlewood, George always maintained, had a liking for
our Virginians, and George was pleased enough to be in his company. He
was a far abler man than many who succeeded in life. He had a good name,
and somehow only stained it; a considerable wit, and nobody trusted it;
and a very shrewd experience and knowledge of mankind, which made him
mistrust them, and himself most of all, and which perhaps was the bar
to his own advancement. My Lady Castlewood, a woman of the world, wore
always a bland mask, and received Mr. George with perfect civility,
and welcomed him to lose as many guineas as he liked at her ladyship's
card-tables. Between Mr. William and the Virginian brothers there never
was any love lost; but, as for Lady Maria, though her love affair was
over, she had no rancour; she professed for her cousins a very
great regard and affection, a part of which the young gentlemen very
gratefully returned. She was charmed to hear of Harry's valour in the
campaign; she was delighted with George's success at the theatre; she
was for ever going to the play, and had all the favourite passages of
Carpezan by heart. One day, as Mr. George and Miss Theo were taking a
sentimental walk in Kensington Gardens, whom should they light upon
but their cousin Maria in company with a gentleman in a smart suit and
handsome laced hat, and who should the gentleman be but his Majesty
King Louis of Hungary, Mr. Hagan? He saluted the party, and left them
presently. Lady Maria had only just happened to meet him. Mr. Hagan came
sometimes, he said, for quiet, to study his parts in Kensington Gardens,
and George and the two ladies walked together to Lord Castlewood's door
in Kensington Square, Lady Maria uttering a thousand compliments to Theo
upon her good looks, upon her virtue, upon her future happiness, upon
her papa and mamma, upon her destined husband, upon her paduasoy cloak
and dear little feet and shoe-buckles.

Harry happened to come to London that evening, and slept at his
accustomed quarters. When George appeared at breakfast, the Captain
was already in the room (the custom of that day was to call all army
gentlemen Captains), and looking at the letters on the breakfast-table.

"Why, George," he cries, "there is a letter from Maria!"

"Little boy bring it from Common Garden last night--Master George
asleep," says Gumbo.

"What can it be about?" asks Harry, as George peruses his letter with a
queer expression of face.

"About my play, to be sure," George answers, tearing up the paper, and
still wearing his queer look.

"What, she is not writing love-letters to you, is she, Georgy?"

"No, certainly not to me," replies the other. But he spoke no word more
about the letter; and when at dinner in Dean Street Mrs. Lambert said,
"So you met somebody walking with the King of Hungary yesterday in
Kensington Gardens?"

"What little tell-tale told you? A mere casual rencontre--the King goes
there to study his parts, and Lady Maria happened to be crossing the
garden to visit some of the other King's servants at Kensington Palace."
And so there was an end to that matter for the time being.

Other events were at hand fraught with interest to our Virginians. One
evening after Christmas, the two gentlemen, with a few more friends,
were met round General Lambert's supper-table; and among the company was
Harry's new Colonel of the 67th, Major-General Wolfe. The young General
was more than ordinarily grave. The conversation all related to the war.
Events of great importance were pending. The great minister now in power
was determined to carry on the war on a much more extended scale than
had been attempted hitherto: an army was ordered to Germany to help
Prince Ferdinand, another great expedition was preparing for America,
and here, says Mr. Lambert, "I will give you the health of the
Commander--a glorious campaign, and a happy return to him!"

"Why do you not drink the toast, General James!" asked the hostess of
her guest.

"He must not drink his own toast," says General Lambert; "it is we must
do that!"

What? was James appointed?--All the ladies must drink such a toast as
that, and they mingled their kind voices with the applause of the rest
of the company.

Why did he look so melancholy? the ladies asked of one another when they
withdrew. In after days they remembered his pale face.

"Perhaps he has been parting from his sweetheart," suggests
tender-hearted Mrs. Lambert. And at this sentimental notion, no doubt
all the ladies looked sad.

The gentlemen, meanwhile, continued their talk about the war and its
chances. Mr. Wolfe did not contradict the speakers when they said that
the expedition was to be directed against Canada.

"Ah, sir," says Harry, "I wish your regiment was going with you, and
that I might pay another visit to my old friends at Quebec."

What, had Harry been there? Yes. He described his visit to the place
five years before, and knew the city, and the neighbourhood, well. He
lays a number of bits of biscuit on the table before him, and makes
a couple of rivulets of punch on each side. "This fork is the Isle
d'Orleans," says he, "with the north and south branches of St. Lawrence
on each side. Here's the Low Town, with a battery--how many guns was
mounted there in our time, brother?--but at long shots from the St.
Joseph shore you might play the same game. Here's what they call the
little river, the St. Charles, and a bridge of boats with a tete du pont
over to the place of arms. Here's the citadel, and here's convents--ever
so many convents--and the cathedral; and here, outside the lines to the
west and south, is what they call the Plains of Abraham--where a certain
little affair took place, do you remember, brother? He and a young
officer of the Rousillon regiment ca ca'd at each other for twenty
minutes, and George pinked him, and then they jure'd each other an
amitie eternelle. Well it was for George: for his second saved his life
on that awful day of Braddock's defeat. He was a fine little fellow, and
I give his toast: Je bois a la sante du Chevalier de Florac!"

"What, can you speak French, too, Harry?" asks Mr. Wolfe. The young man
looked at the General with eager eyes.

"Yes," says he, "I can speak, but not so well as George."

"But he remembers the city, and can place the batteries, you see, and
knows the ground a thousand times better than I do!" cries the elder
brother.

The two elder officers exchanged looks with one another; Mr. Lambert
smiled and nodded, as if in reply to the mute queries of his comrade: on
which the other spoke. "Mr. Harry," he said, "if you have had enough of
fine folks, and White's, and horse-racing----"

"Oh, sir!" says the young man, turning very red.

"And if you have a mind to a sea voyage at a short notice, come and see
me at my lodgings to-morrow."

What was that sudden uproar of cheers which the ladies heard in their
drawing-room? It was the hurrah which Harry Warrington gave when he
leaped up at hearing the General's invitation.

The women saw no more of the gentlemen that night. General Lambert had
to be away upon his business early next morning, before seeing any
of his family; nor had he mentioned a word of Harry's outbreak on the
previous evening. But when he rejoined his folks at dinner, a look at
Miss Hetty's face informed the worthy gentleman that she knew what had
passed on the night previous, and what was about to happen to the young
Virginian. After dinner Mrs. Lambert sat demurely at her work, Miss
Theo took her book of Italian Poetry. Neither of the General's customary
guests happened to be present that evening.

He took little Hetty's hand in his, and began to talk with her. He
did not allude to the subject which he knew was uppermost in her mind,
except that by a more than ordinary gentleness and kindness he perhaps
caused her to understand that her thoughts were known to him.

"I have breakfasted," says he, "with James Wolfe this morning, and our
friend Harry was of the party. When he and the other guests were gone, I
remained and talked with James about the great expedition on which he is
going to sail. Would that his brave father had lived a few months longer
to see him come back covered with honours from Louisbourg, and knowing
that all England was looking to him to achieve still greater glory!
James is dreadfully ill in body--so ill that I am frightened for
him--and not a little depressed in mind at having to part from the young
lady whom he has loved so long. A little rest, he thinks, might have set
his shattered frame up; and to call her his has been the object of his
life. But, great as his love is (and he is as romantic as one of you
young folks of seventeen), honour and duty are greater, and he leaves
home, and wife, and ease, and health, at their bidding. Every man of
honour would do the like; every woman who loves him truly would buckle
on his armour for him. James goes to take leave of his mother to-night;
and though she loves him devotedly, and is one of the tenderest women
in the world, I am sure she will show no sign of weakness at his going
away."

"When does he sail, papa?" the girl asked.

"He will be on board in five days." And Hetty knew quite well who sailed
with him.




CHAPTER LXVIII. In which Harry goes westward


Our tender hearts are averse to all ideas and descriptions of parting;
and I shall therefore say nothing of Harry Warrington's feelings at
taking leave of his brother and friends. Were not thousands of men in
the same plight? Had not Mr. Wolfe his mother to kiss (his brave father
had quitted life during his son's absence on the glorious Louisbourg
campaign), and his sweetheart to clasp in a farewell embrace? Had not
stout Admiral Holmes, before sailing westward with his squadron, The
Somerset, The Terrible, The Northumberland, The Royal William, The
Trident, The Diana, The Seahorse--his own flag being hoisted on board
The Dublin--to take leave of Mrs. and the Misses Holmes? Was Admiral
Saunders, who sailed the day after him, exempt from human feeling?
Away go William and his crew of jovial sailors, ploughing through the
tumbling waves, and poor Black-eyed Susan on shore watches the ship as
it dwindles in the sunset.

It dwindles in the West. The night falls darkling over the ocean. They
are gone: but their hearts are at home yet a while. In silence, with a
heart inexpressibly soft and tender, how each man thinks of those he has
left! What a chorus of pitiful prayer rises up to the Father, at sea and
on shore, on that parting night at home by the vacant bedside, where
the wife kneels in tears; round the fire, where the mother and children
together pour out their supplications: or on deck, where the seafarer
looks up to the stars of heaven, as the ship cleaves through the roaring
midnight waters! To-morrow the sun rises upon our common life again, and
we commence our daily task of toil and duty.

George accompanies his brother, and stays a while with him at Portsmouth
whilst they are waiting for a wind. He shakes Mr. Wolfe's hand, looks
at his pale face for the last time, and sees the vessels depart amid the
clangour of bells, and the thunder of cannon from the shore. Next day he
is back at his home, and at that business which is sure one of the most
selfish and absorbing of the world's occupations, to which almost every
man who is thirty years old has served ere this his apprenticeship. He
has a pang of sadness, as he looks in at the lodgings to the little room
which Harry used to occupy, and sees his half-burned papers still in
the grate. In a few minutes he is on his way to Dean Street again,
and whispering by the fitful firelight in the ear of the clinging
sweetheart. She is very happy--oh, so happy! at his return. She is
ashamed of being so. Is it not heartless to be so, when poor Hetty is so
melancholy? Poor little Hetty! Indeed, it is selfish to be glad when she
is in such a sad way. It makes one quite wretched to see her. "Don't,
sir! Well, I ought to be wretched, and it's very, very wicked of me if
I'm not," says Theo; and one can understand her soft-hearted repentance.
What she means by "Don't" who can tell? I have said the room was dark,
and the fire burned fitfully--and "Don't" is no doubt uttered in one
of the dark fits. Enter servants with supper and lights. The family
arrives; the conversation becomes general. The destination of the fleet
is known everywhere now. The force on board is sufficient to beat all
the French in Canada; and, under such an officer as Wolfe, to repair the
blunders and disasters of previous campaigns. He looked dreadfully ill,
indeed. But he has a great soul in a feeble body. The ministers, the
country hope the utmost from him. After supper, according to custom, Mr.
Lambert assembles his modest household, of whom George Warrington may
be said quite to form a part; and as he prays for all travellers by land
and water, Theo and her sister are kneeling together. And so, as the
ship speeds farther and farther into the West, the fond thoughts pursue
it; and the night passes, and the sun rises.

A day or two more, and everybody is at his books or his usual work. As
for George Warrington, that celebrated dramatist is busy about another
composition. When the tragedy of Carpezan had run some thirty or
twoscore nights, other persons of genius took possession of the theatre.

There may have been persons who wondered how the town could be so fickle
as ever to tire of such a masterpiece as the Tragedy--who could not bear
to see the actors dressed in other habits, reciting other men's verses;
but George, of a sceptical turn of mind, took the fate of his Tragedy
very philosophically, and pocketed the proceeds with much quiet
satisfaction. From Mr. Dodsley, the bookseller, he had the usual
complement of a hundred pounds; from the manager of the theatre two
hundred or more; and such praises from the critics and his friends, that
he set to work to prepare another piece, with which he hoped to achieve
even greater successes than by his first performance.

Over these studies, and the other charming business which occupies him,
months pass away. Happy business! Happiest time of youth and life,
when love is first spoken and returned; when the dearest eyes are daily
shining welcome, and the fondest lips never tire of whispering their
sweet secrets; when the parting look that accompanies "Good night!"
gives delightful warning of to-morrow; when the heart is so overflowing
with love and happiness, that it has to spare for all the world; when
the day closes with glad prayers, and opens with joyful hopes; when
doubt seems cowardice, misfortune impossible, poverty only a sweet trial
of constancy! Theo's elders, thankfully remembering their own prime,
sit softly by and witness this pretty comedy performed by their young
people. And in one of his later letters, dutifully written to his wife
during a temporary absence from home, George Warrington records how he
had been to look up at the windows of the dear old house in Dean Street,
and wondered who was sitting in the chamber where he and Theo had been
so happy.

Meanwhile we can learn how the time passes, and our friends are engaged,
by some extracts from George's letters to his brother.


"From the old window opposite Bedford Gardens, this 20th August 1759.

"Why are you gone back to rugged rocks, bleak shores, burning summers,
nipping winters, at home, when you might have been cropping ever so many
laurels in Germany? Kingsley's are coming back as covered with 'em as
Jack-a-Green on May-day. Our six regiments did wonders; and our horse
would have done if my Lord George Sackville only had let them. But when
Prince Ferdinand said 'Charge!' his lordship could not hear, or could
not translate the German word for 'Forward;' and so we only beat the
French, without utterly annihilating them, as we might, had Lord Granby
or Mr. Warrington had the command. My lord is come back to town, and
is shouting for a Court-Martial. He held his head high enough in
prosperity: in misfortune he shows such a constancy of arrogance that
one almost admires him. He looks as if he rather envied poor Mr. Byng,
and the not shooting him were a manque d'egards towards him.

"The Duke has had notice to get himself in readiness for departing
from this world of grandeurs and victories, and downfalls and
disappointments. An attack of palsy has visited his Royal Highness; and
pallida mors has just peeped in at his door, as it were, and said,
'I will call again.' Tyrant as he was, this prince has been noble in
disgrace; and no king has ever had a truer servant than ours has found
in his son. Why do I like the losing side always, and am I disposed to
revolt against the winners? Your famous Mr. P----, your chief's patron
and discoverer, I have been to hear in the House of Commons twice or
thrice. I revolt against his magniloquence. I wish some little David
would topple over that swelling giant. His thoughts and his language are
always attitudinising. I like Barry's manner best, though the other is
the more awful actor.

"Pocahontas gets on apace. Barry likes his part of Captain Smith; and,
though he will have him wear a red coat and blue facings and an epaulet,
I have a fancy to dress him exactly like one of the pictures of Queen
Elizabeth's gentlemen at Hampton Court: with a ruff and a square beard
and square shoes. 'And Pocahontas--would you like her to be tattooed?'
asks Uncle Lambert. Hagan's part as the warrior who is in love with
her, and, seeing her partiality for the captain, nobly rescues him from
death, I trust will prove a hit. A strange fish is this Hagan: his mouth
full of stage-plays and rant, but good, honest, and brave, if I don't
err. He is angry at having been cast lately for Sir O'Brallaghan, in Mr.
Macklin's new farce of Love A-la-mode. He says that he does not keer to
disgreece his tongue with imiteetions of that rascal brogue. As if there
was any call for imiteetions, when he has such an admirable twang of his
own!

"Shall I tell you? Shall I hide the circumstance? Shall I hurt your
feelings? Shall I set you in a rage of jealousy, and cause you to ask
for leave to return to Europe? Know, then, that though Carpezan is
long since dead, cousin Maria is for ever coming to the playhouse. Tom
Spencer has spied her out night after night in the gallery, and
she comes on the nights when Hagan performs. Quick, Burroughs, Mr.
Warrington's boots and portmanteau! Order a chaise and four for
Portsmouth immediately! The letter which I burned one morning when we
were at breakfast (I may let the cat out of the bag, now puss has such a
prodigious way to run) was from cousin M., hinting that she wished me
to tell no tales about her: but I can't help just whispering to you
that Maria at this moment is busy consoling herself as fast as possible.
Shall I spoil sport? Shall I tell her brother? Is the affair any
business of mine? What have the Esmonds done for you and me but win
our money at cards? Yet I like our noble cousin. It seems to me that he
would be good if he could--or rather, he would have been once. He has
been set on a wrong way of life, from which 'tis now probably too late
to rescue him. O beati agricolae! Our Virginia was dull, but let us
thank Heaven we were bred there. We were made little slaves, but not
slaves to wickedness, gambling, bad male and female company. It was not
until my poor Harry left home that he fell among thieves. I mean thieves
en grand, such as waylaid him and stripped him on English highroads. I
consider you none the worse because you were the unlucky one, and had
to deliver your purse up. And now you are going to retrieve, and make
a good name for yourself; and kill more 'French dragons,' and become a
great commander. And our mother will talk of her son the Captain, the
Colonel, the General, and have his picture painted with all his stars
and epaulets, when poor I shall be but a dawdling poetaster, or, if we
may hope for the best, a snug placeman, with a little box at Richmond
or Kew, and a half-score of little picaninnies, that will come and bob
curtseys at the garden-gate when their uncle the General rides up on his
great charger, with his aide-de-camp's pockets filled with gingerbread
for the nephews and nieces. 'Tis for you to brandish the sword of Mars.
As for me, I look forward to a quiet life: a quiet little home, a quiet
little library full of books, and a little Some one dulce ridentem,
dulce loquentem, on t'other side of the fire, as I scribble away at my
papers. I am so pleased with this prospect, so utterly contented and
happy, that I feel afraid as I think of it, lest it should escape me;
and, even to my dearest Hal, am shy of speaking of my happiness. What is
ambition to me, with this certainty? What do I care for wars, with this
beatific peace smiling near?

"Our mother's friend, Mynheer Van den Bosch, has been away on a tour to
discover his family in Holland, and, strange to say, has found one. Miss
(who was intended by maternal solicitude to be a wife for your worship)
has had six months at Kensington School, and is coming out with a
hundred pretty accomplishments, which are to complete her a perfect
fine lady. Her papa brought her to make a curtsey in Dean Street, and
a mighty elegant curtsey she made. Though she is scarce seventeen,
no dowager of sixty can be more at her ease. She conversed with Aunt
Lambert on an equal footing; she treated the girls as chits--to Hetty's
wrath and Theo's amusement. She talked politics with the General, and
the last routs, dresses, operas, fashions, scandal, with such perfect
ease that, but for a blunder or two, you might have fancied Miss Lydia
was born in Mayfair. At the Court end of the town she will live, she
says; and has no patience with her father, who has a lodging in Monument
Yard. For those who love a brown beauty, a prettier little mignonne
creature cannot be seen. But my taste, you know, dearest brother,
and..."


Here follows a page of raptures and quotations of verse, which, out of
a regard for the reader, and the writer's memory, the editor of the
present pages declines to reprint. Gentlemen and ladies of a certain age
may remember the time when they indulged in these rapturous follies
on their own accounts; when the praises of the charmer were for ever
warbling from their lips or trickling from their pens; when the flowers
of life were in full bloom, and all the birds of spring were singing.
The twigs are now bare, perhaps, and the leaves have fallen; but, for
all that, shall we not,--remember the vernal time? As for you, young
people, whose May (or April, is it?) has not commenced yet, you need not
be detained over other folks' love-rhapsodies; depend on it, when your
spring-season arrives, kindly Nature will warm all your flowers into
bloom, and rouse your glad bosoms to pour out their full song.




CHAPTER LXIX. A Little Innocent


George Warrington has mentioned in the letter just quoted, that in spite
of my Lord Castlewood's previous play transactions with Harry, my lord
and George remained friends, and met on terms of good kinsmanship. Did
George want franks, or an introduction at court, or a place in the House
of Lords to hear a debate, his cousin was always ready to serve him,
was a pleasant and witty companion, and would do anything which might
promote his relative's interests, provided his own were not prejudiced.

Now he even went so far as to promise that he would do his best with the
people in power to provide a place for Mr. George Warrington, who daily
showed a greater disinclination to return to his native country, and
place himself once more under the maternal servitude. George had not
merely a sentimental motive for remaining in England: the pursuits and
society of London pleased him infinitely better than any which he could
have at home. A planter's life of idleness might have suited him, could
he have enjoyed independence with it. But in Virginia he was only the
first, and, as he thought, the worst treated, of his mother's subjects.
He dreaded to think of returning with his young bride to his home, and
of the life which she would be destined to lead there. Better freedom
and poverty in England, with congenial society, and a hope perchance of
future distinction, than the wearisome routine of home life, the tedious
subordination, the frequent bickerings, the certain jealousies and
differences of opinion, to which he must subject his wife so soon as
they turned their faces homeward.

So Lord Castlewood's promise to provide for George was very eagerly
accepted by the Virginian. My lord had not provided very well for
his own brother to be sure, and his own position, peer as he was, was
anything but enviable; but we believe what we wish to believe, and
George Warrington chose to put great stress upon his kinsman's offer
of patronage. Unlike the Warrington family, Lord Castlewood was quite
gracious when he was made acquainted with George's engagement to Miss
Lambert; came to wait upon her parents; praised George to them and the
young lady to George, and made himself so prodigiously agreeable in
their company that these charitable folk forgot his bad reputation, and
thought it must be a very wicked and scandalous world which maligned
him. He said, indeed, that he was improved in their society, as every
man must be who came into it. Among them he was witty, lively, good for
the time being. He left his wickedness and worldliness with his cloak
in the hall, and only put them on again when he stepped into his chair.
What worldling on life's voyage does not know of some such harbour of
rest and calm, some haven where he puts in out of the storm? Very likely
Lord Castlewood was actually better whilst he stayed with those good
people, and for the time being at least no hypocrite.

And, I dare say, the Lambert elders thought no worse of his lordship for
openly proclaiming his admiration for Miss Theo. It was quite genuine,
and he did not profess it was very deep.

"It don't affect my sleep, and I am not going to break my heart because
Miss Lambert prefers somebody else," he remarked. Only I wish when I was
a young man, madam, I had had the good fortune to meet with somebody so
innocent and good as your daughter. I might have been kept out of a deal
of harm's way: but innocent and good young women did not fall into mine,
or they would have made me better than I am."

"Sure, my lord, it is not too late!" says Mrs. Lambert, very softly.

Castlewood started back, misunderstanding her.

"Not too late, madam?" he inquired.

She blushed. "It is too late to court my dear daughter, my lord, but not
too late to repent. We read, 'tis never too late to do that. If others
have been received at the eleventh hour, is there any reason why you
should give up hope?"

"Perhaps I know my own heart better than you," he says in a plaintive
tone. "I can speak French and German very well, and why? because I was
taught both in the nursery. A man who learns them late can never get the
practice of them on his tongue. And so 'tis the case with goodness, I
can't learn it at my age. I can only see others practise it, and admire
them. When I am on--on the side opposite to Lazarus, will Miss Theo give
me a drop of water? Don't frown! I know I shall be there, Mrs. Lambert.
Some folks are doomed so; and I think some of our family are amongst
these. Some people are vacillating, and one hardly knows which way
the scale will turn. Whereas some are predestined angels, and fly
Heavenwards naturally, and do what they will."

"Oh, my lord, and why should you not be of the predestined? Whilst there
is a day left--whilst there is an hour--there is hope!" says the fond
matron.

"I know what is passing in your mind, my dear madam--nay, I read your
prayers in your looks; but how can they avail?" Lord Castlewood asked
sadly. "You don't know all, my good lady. You don't know what a life
ours is of the world; how early it began; how selfish Nature, and then
necessity and education, have made us. It is Fate holds the reins of
the chariot, and we can't escape our doom. I know better: I see better
people: I go my own way. My own? No, not mine--Fate's: and it is not
altogether without pity for us, since it allows us, from time to time,
to see such people as you." And he took her hand and looked her full
in the face, and bowed with a melancholy grace. Every word he said
was true. No greater error than to suppose that weak and bad men are
strangers to good feelings, or deficient of sensibility. Only the
good feeling does not last--nay, the tears are a kind of debauch of
sentiment, as old libertines are said to find that the tears and grief
of their victims add a zest to their pleasure. But Mrs. Lambert knew
little of what was passing in this man's mind (how should she?), and
so prayed for him with the fond persistence of woman. He was much
better--yes, much better than he was supposed to be. He was a most
interesting man. There were hopes, why should there not be the most
precious hopes for him still?

It remains to be seen which of the two speakers formed the correct
estimate of my lord's character. Meanwhile, if the gentleman was
right, the lady was mollified, and her kind wishes and prayers for
this experienced sinner's repentance, if they were of no avail for his
amendment, at least could do him no harm. Kind-souled doctors (and what
good woman is not of the faculty?) look after a reprobate as physicians
after a perilous case. When the patient is converted to health their
interest ceases in him, and they drive to feel pulses and prescribe
medicines elsewhere.

But, while the malady was under treatment, our kind lady could not see
too much of her sick man. Quite an intimacy sprung up between my Lord
Castlewood and the Lamberts. I am not sure that some worldly views might
not suit even with good Mrs. Lambert's spiritual plans (for who
knows into what pure Eden, though guarded by flaming-sworded angels,
worldliness will not creep?). Her son was about to take orders. My Lord
Castlewood feared very much that his present chaplain's, Mr. Sampson's,
careless life and heterodox conversations might lead him to give up his
chaplaincy: in which case, my lord hinted the little modest cure would
be vacant, and at the service of some young divine of good principles
and good manners, who would be content with a small stipend, and a small
but friendly congregation.

Thus an acquaintance was established between the two families, and the
ladies of Castlewood, always on their good behaviour, came more than
once to make their curtseys in Mrs. Lambert's drawing-room. They were
civil to the parents and the young ladies. My Lady Castlewood's card
assemblies were open to Mrs. Lambert and her family. There was play,
certainly--all the world played--his Majesty, the Bishops, every Peer
and Peeress in the land. But nobody need play who did not like; and
surely nobody need have scruples regarding the practice, when such
august and venerable personages were daily found to abet it. More than
once Mrs. Lambert made her appearance at her ladyship's routs, and
was grateful for the welcome which she received, and pleased with the
admiration which her daughters excited.

Mention has been made, in a foregoing page and letter, of an American
family of Dutch extraction, who had come to England very strongly
recommended by Madam Esmond, their Virginian neighbour, to her sons in
Europe. The views expressed in Madam Esmond's letter were so clear, that
that arch match-maker, Mrs. Lambert, could not but understand them. As
for George, he was engaged already; as for poor Hetty's flame, Harry, he
was gone on service, for which circumstance Hetty's mother was not very
sorry perhaps. She laughingly told George that he ought to obey his
mamma's injunctions, break off his engagement with Theo, and make up to
Miss Lydia, who was ten times--ten times! a hundred times as rich as
her poor girl, and certainly much handsomer. "Yes, indeed," says George,
"that I own: she is handsomer, and she is richer, and perhaps even
cleverer." (All which praises Mrs. Lambert but half liked.) "But say
she is all these? So is Mr. Johnson much cleverer than I am: so is, whom
shall we say?--so is Mr. Hagan the actor much taller and handsomer: so
is Sir James Lowther much richer: yet pray, ma'am, do you suppose I am
going to be jealous of any one of these three, or think my Theo would
jilt me for their sakes? Why should I not allow that Miss Lydia is
handsomer, then? and richer, and clever, too, and lively, and well bred,
if you insist on it, and an angel if you will have it so? Theo is not
afraid: art thou, child?"

"No, George," says Theo, with such an honest look of the eyes as would
convince any scepticism, or shame any jealousy. And if, after this pair
of speeches, mamma takes occasion to leave the room for a minute to
fetch her scissors, or her thimble, or a bootjack and slippers, or the
cross and ball on the top of St. Paul's, or her pocket-handkerchief
which she has forgotten in the parlour--if, I say, Mrs. Lambert quits
the room on any errand or pretext, natural or preposterous, I shall not
be in the least surprised, if, at her return in a couple of minutes, she
finds George in near proximity to Theo, who has a heightened colour, and
whose hand George is just dropping--I shall not have the least idea of
what they have been doing. Have you, madam? Have you any remembrance of
what used to happen when Mr. Grundy came a-courting? Are you, who, after
all, were not in the room with our young people, going to cry out fie
and for shame? Then fie and for shame upon you, Mrs. Grundy!

Well, Harry being away, and Theo and George irrevocably engaged, so
that there was no possibility of bringing Madam Esmond's little plans to
bear, why should not Mrs. Lambert have plans of her own; and if a rich,
handsome, beautiful little wife should fall in his way, why should
not Jack Lambert from Oxford have her? So thinks mamma, who was always
thinking of marrying and giving in marriage, and so she prattles to
General Lambert, who, as usual, calls her a goose for her pains. At any
rate, Mrs. Lambert says beauty and riches are no objection; at any rate,
Madam Esmond desired that this family should be hospitably entertained,
and it was not her fault that Harry was gone away to Canada. Would
the General wish him to come back; leave the army and his reputation,
perhaps; yes, and come to England and marry this American, and break
poor Hetty's heart--would her father wish that? Let us spare further
arguments, and not be so rude as to hint that Mr. Lambert was in the
right in calling a fond wife by the name of that absurd splay-footed
bird, annually sacrificed at the Feast of St. Michael.

In those early days, there were vast distinctions of rank drawn between
the court and city people: and Mr. Van den Bosch, when he first came
to London, scarcely associated with any but the latter sort. He had a
lodging near his agent's in the city. When his pretty girl came from
school for a holiday, he took her an airing to Islington or Highgate, or
an occasional promenade in the Artillery Ground in Bunhill Fields. They
went to that Baptist meeting-house in Finsbury Fields, and on the sly
to see Mr. Garrick once or twice, or that funny rogue Mr. Foote, at
the Little Theatre. To go to a Lord Mayor's feast was a treat to the
gentleman of the highest order: and to dance with a young mercer at
Hampstead Assembly. gave the utmost delight to the young lady. When
George first went to wait upon his mother's friends, he found our old
acquaintance, Mr. Draper, of the Temple, sedulous in his attentions to
her; and the lawyer, who was married, told Mr. Warrington to look out,
as the young lady had a plumb to her fortune. Mr. Drabshaw, a young
Quaker gentleman, and nephew of Mr. Trail, Madam Esmond's Bristol agent,
was also in constant attendance upon the young lady, and in dreadful
alarm and suspicion when Mr. Warrington first made his appearance.
Wishing to do honour to his mother's neighbours, Mr. Warrington invited
them to an entertainment at his own apartments; and who should so
naturally meet them as his friends from Soho? Not one of them but was
forced to own little Miss Lydia's beauty. She had the foot of a fairy:
the arms, neck, flashing eyes of a little brown huntress of Diana. She
had brought a little plaintive accent from home with her--of which I,
moi qui vous parle, have heard a hundred gross Cockney imitations, and
watched as many absurd disguises, and which I say (in moderation)
is charming in the mouth of a charming woman. Who sets up to say No,
forsooth? You dear Miss Whittington, with whose h's fate has dealt so
unkindly?--you lovely Miss Nicol Jarvie, with your northern burr?--you
beautiful Miss Molony, with your Dame Street warble? All accents are
pretty from pretty lips, and who shall set the standard up? Shall it be
a rose, or a thistle, or a shamrock, or a star and stripe? As for Miss
Lydia's accent, I have no doubt it was not odious even from the first
day when she set foot on these polite shores, otherwise Mr. Warrington,
as a man of taste, had certainly disapproved of her manner of talking,
and her schoolmistress at Kensington had not done her duty by her pupil.

After the six months were over, during which, according to her father's
calculation, she was to learn all the accomplishments procurable at the
Kensington Academy, Miss Lydia returned nothing loth to her grandfather,
and took her place in the world. A narrow world at first it was to her;
but she was a resolute little person, and resolved to enlarge her
sphere in society; and whither she chose to lead the way, the obedient
grandfather followed her. He had been thwarted himself in early life, he
said, and little good came of the severity he underwent. He had thwarted
his own son, who had turned out but ill. As for little Lyddy, he was
determined she should have as pleasant a life as was possible. Did not
Mr. George think he was right? 'Twas said in Virginia--he did not
know with what reason--that the young gentlemen of Castlewood had been
happier if Madam Esmond had allowed them a little of their own way.
George could not gainsay this public rumour, or think of inducing
the benevolent old gentleman to alter his plans respecting his
granddaughter. As for the Lambert family, how could they do otherwise
than welcome the kind old man, the parent so tender and liberal, Madam
Esmond's good friend?

When Miss came from school, grandpapa removed from Monument Yard to
an elegant house in Bloomsbury; whither they were followed at first by
their city friends. There were merchants from Virginia Walk; there were
worthy tradesmen, with whom the worthy old merchant had dealings; there
were their ladies and daughters and sons, who were all highly gracious
to Miss Lyddy. It would be a long task to describe how these disappeared
one by one--how there were no more junketings at Belsize, or trips
to Highgate, or Saturday jaunts to Deputy Higgs' villa, Highbury, or
country-dances at honest Mr. Lutestring's house at Hackney. Even the
Sunday practice was changed; and, oh, abomination of abominations! Mr.
Van den Bosch left Bethesda Chapel in Bunhill Row, and actually took a
pew in Queen Square Church!

Queen Square Church, and Mr. George Warrington lived hard by in
Southampton Row! 'Twas easy to see at whom Miss Lyddy was setting her
cap, and Mr. Draper, who had been full of her and her grandfather's
praises before, now took occasion to warn Mr. George, and gave him very
different reports regarding Mr. Van den Bosch to those which had
first been current. Mr. Van d. B., for all he bragged so of his Dutch
parentage, came from Albany, and was nobody's son at all. He had made
his money by land speculation, or by privateering (which was uncommonly
like piracy), and by the Guinea trade. His son had married--if marriage
it could be called, which was very doubtful--an assigned servant, and
had been cut off by his father, and had taken to bad courses, and had
died, luckily for himself, in his own bed.

"Mr. Draper has told you bad tales about me," said the placid old
gentleman to George. "Very likely we are all sinners, and some evil may
be truly said of all of us, with a great deal more that is untrue. Did
he tell you that my son was unhappy with me? I told you so too. Did he
bring you wicked stories about my family? He liked it so well that he
wanted to marry my Lyddy to his brother. Heaven bless her! I have had a
many offers for her. And you are the young gentleman I should have chose
for her, and I like you none the worse because you prefer somebody else;
though what you can see in your Miss, as compared to my Lyddy, begging
your honour's pardon, I am at a loss to understand."

"There is no accounting for tastes, my good sir," said Mr. George, with
his most superb air.

"No, sir; 'tis a wonder of nature, and daily happens. When I kept store
to Albany, there was one of your tiptop gentry there that might have
married my dear daughter that was alive then, and with a pretty piece
of money, whereby--for her father and I had quarrelled--Miss Lyddy would
have been a pauper, you see: and in place of my beautiful Bella, my
gentleman chooses a little homely creature, no prettier than your Miss,
and without a dollar to her fortune. The more fool he, saving your
presence, Mr. George."

"Pray don't save my presence, my good sir," says George, laughing. "I
suppose the gentleman's word was given to the other lady, and he had
seen her first, and hence was indifferent to your charming daughter."

"I suppose when a young fellow gives his word to perform a cursed piece
of folly, he always sticks to it, my dear sir, begging your pardon. But
Lord, Lord, what am I speaking of? I am aspeaking of twenty year ago. I
was well-to-do then, but I may say Heaven has blessed my store, and I am
three times as well off now. Ask my agents how much they will give for
Joseph Van den Bosch's bill at six months on New York--or at sight may
be for forty thousand pound? I warrant they will discount the paper."

"Happy he who has the bill, sir!" says George, with a bow, not a little
amused with the candour of the old gentleman.

"Lord, Lord, how mercenary you young men are!" cries the elder, simply.
"Always thinking about money nowadays! Happy he who has the girl, I
should say--the money ain't the question, my dear sir, when it goes
along with such a lovely young thing as that--though I humbly say it,
who oughtn't, and who am her fond silly old grandfather. We were talking
about you, Lyddy darling--come, give me a kiss, my blessing! We were
talking about you, and Mr. George said he wouldn't take you with all the
money your poor old grandfather can give you."

"Nay, sir," says George.

"Well, you are right to say nay, for I didn't say all, that's the truth.
My Blessing will have a deal more than that trifle I spoke of, when it
shall please Heaven to remove me out of this world to a better--when
poor old Gappy is gone, Lyddy will be a rich little Lyddy, that she
will. But she don't wish me to go yet, does she?"

"Oh, you darling dear grandpapa!" says Lyddy.

"This young gentleman won't have you." (Lyddy looks an arch "Thank you,
sir," from her brown eyes.) "But at any rate he is honest, and that
is more than we can say of some folks in this wicked London. Oh, Lord,
Lord, how mercenary they are! Do you know that yonder, in Monument Yard,
they were all at my poor little Blessing for her money? There was
Tom Lutestring; there was Mr. Draper, your precious lawyer; there was
actually Mr. Tubbs, of Bethesda Chapel; and they must all come buzzing
like flies round the honey-pot. That is why we came out of the quarter
where my brother-tradesmen live."

"To avoid the flies,--to be sure!" says Miss Lydia, tossing up her
little head.

"Where my brother-tradesmen live," continues the old gentleman. "Else
who am I to think of consorting with your grandees and fine folk? I
don't care for the fashions, Mr. George; I don't care for plays and
poetry, begging your honour's pardon; I never went to a play in my life,
but to please this little minx."

"Oh, sir, 'twas lovely! and I cried so, didn't I, grandpapa?" says the
child.

"At what, my dear?"

"At--at Mr. Warrington's play, grandpapa."

"Did you, my dear? I dare say; I dare say! It was mail day: and my
letters had come in: and my ship the Lovely Lyddy had just come into
Falmouth; and Captain Joyce reported how he had mercifully escaped a
French privateer; and my head was so full of thanks for that escape,
which saved me a deal of money, Mr. George--for the rate at which ships
is underwrote this war-time is so scandalous that I often prefer to
venture than to insure--that I confess I didn't listen much to the play,
sir, and only went to please this little Lyddy."

"And you did please me, dearest Gappy!" cries the young lady.

"Bless you! then it's all I want. What does a man want more here below
than to please his children, Mr. George? especially me, who knew what
was to be unhappy when I was young, and to repent of having treated this
darling's father too hard."

"Oh, grandpapa!" cries the child, with more caresses.

"Yes, I was too hard with him, dear; and that's why I spoil my little
Lydkin so!"

More kisses ensue between Lyddy and Gappy. The little creature flings
the pretty polished arms round the old man's neck, presses the dark red
lips on his withered cheek, surrounds the venerable head with a halo of
powder beaten out of his wig by her caresses; and eyes Mr. George the
while, as much as to say, There, sir! should you not like me to do as
much for you?

We confess;--but do we confess all? George certainly told the story of
his interview with Lyddy and Gappy, and the old man's news regarding his
