and her king, and behaved so as to occasion no unpleasant comparison
between them and former superiors, all went on smoothly; but the haughty
and often outrageous conduct of the present earl, his utter neglect of
their interests, his treasonous politics, speedily roused the slumbering
fire into flame. A secret yet solemn oath went round the clan, by which
every fighting man bound himself to rebel against their master, rather
than betray their country by siding with a foreign tyrant; to desert
their homes, their all, and disperse singly midst the fastnesses and
rocks of Scotland, than lift up a sword against her freedom. The
sentiments of the countess were very soon discovered; and even yet
stronger than the contempt and loathing with which they looked upon the
earl was the love, the veneration they bore to her and to her children.
If his mother's lips had been silent, the youthful heir would have
learned loyalty and patriotism from his brave though unlettered
retainers, as it was to them he owed the skin and grace with which he
sate his fiery steed, and poised his heavy lance, and wielded his
stainless brand--to them he owed all the chivalric accomplishments of
the day; and though he had never quitted the territories of Buchan, he
would have found few to compete with him in his high and gallant spirit.

Dark and troubled was the political aspect of unhappy Scotland, at the
eventful period at which our tale commences. The barbarous and most
unjust execution of Sir William Wallace had struck the whole country as
with a deadly panic, from which it seemed there was not one to rise to
cast aside the heavy chains, whose weight it seemed had crushed the
whole kingdom, and taken from it the last gleams of patriotism and of
hope. Every fortress of strength and consequence was in possession of
the English. English soldiers, English commissioners, English judges,
laws, and regulations now filled and governed Scotland. The abrogation
of all those ancient customs, which had descended from the Celts and
Picts, and Scots, fell upon the hearts of all true Scottish men as the
tearing asunder the last links of freedom, and branding them as slaves.
Her principal nobles, strangely and traitorously, preferred safety and
wealth, in the acknowledgment and servitude of Edward, to glory and
honor in the service of their country; and the spirits of the middle
ranks yet spurned the inglorious yoke, and throbbed but for one to lead
them on, if not to victory, at least to an honorable death. That one
seemed not to rise; it was as if the mighty soul of Scotland had
departed, when Wallace slept in death.




CHAPTER III.


A bustling and joyous aspect did the ancient town of Scone present near
the end of March, 1306. Subdued indeed, and evidently under some
restraint and mystery, which might be accounted for by the near vicinity
of the English, who were quartered in large numbers over almost the
whole of Perthshire; some, however, appeared exempt from these most
unwelcome guests. The nobles, esquires, yeomen, and peasants--all, by
their national garb and eager yet suppressed voices, might be known at
once as Scotsmen right and true.

It had been long, very long since the old quiet town had witnessed such
busy groups and such eager tongues as on all sides thronged it now; the
very burghers and men of handicraft wore on their countenances tokens of
something momentous. There were smiths' shops opening on every side,
armorers at work, anvils clanging, spears sharpening, shields
burnishing, bits and steel saddles and sharp spurs meeting the eye at
every turn. Ever and anon, came a burst of enlivening music, and well
mounted and gallantly attired, attended by some twenty or fifty
followers, as may be, would gallop down some knight or noble, his armor
flashing back a hundred fold the rays of the setting sun; his silken
pennon displayed, the device of which seldom failed to excite a hearty
cheer from the excited crowds; his stainless shield and heavy spear
borne by his attendant esquires; his vizor up, as if he courted and
dared recognition; his surcoat, curiously and tastefully embroidered;
his gold or silver-sheathed and hilted sword suspended by the silken
sash of many folds and brilliant coloring. On foot or on horseback,
these noble cavaliers were continually passing and repassing the ancient
streets, singly or in groups; then there were their followers, all
carefully and strictly armed, in the buff coat plaited with steel, the
well-quilted bonnet, the huge broadsword; Highlanders in their peculiar
and graceful costume; even the stout farmers, who might also be found
amongst this motley assemblage, wearing the iron hauberk and sharp sword
beneath their apparently peaceful garb. Friars in their gray frocks and
black cowls, and stately burghers and magistrates, in their velvet
cloaks and gold chains, continually mingled their peaceful forms with
their more warlike brethren, and lent a yet more varied character to the
stirring picture.

Varied as were the features of this moving multitude, the expression on
every countenance, noble and follower, yeoman and peasant, burgher and
even monk, was invariably the same--a species of strong yet suppressed
excitement, sometimes shaded by anxiety, sometimes lighted by hope,
almost amounting to triumph; sometimes the dark frown of scorn and hate
would pass like a thunder-cloud over noble brows, and the mailed hand
unconsciously clutched the sword; and then the low thrilling laugh of
derisive contempt would disperse the shade, and the muttered oath of
vengeance drown the voice of execration. It would have been a strange
yet mighty study, the face of man in that old town; but men were all too
much excited to observe their fellows, to them it was enough--unspoken,
unimparted wisdom as it was--to know, to feel, one common feeling bound
that varied mass of men, one mighty interest made them brothers.

The ancient Palace of Scone, so long unused, was now evidently the
head-quarters of the noblemen hovering about the town, for whatever
purpose they were there assembled. The heavy flag of Scotland, in all
its massive quarterings, as the symbol of a free unfettered kingdom,
waved from the centre tower; archers and spearmen lined the courts,
sentinels were at their posts, giving and receiving the watchword from
all who passed and repassed the heavy gates, which from dawn till
nightfall were flung wide open, as if the inmates of that regal dwelling
were ever ready to receive their friends, and feared not the approach of
foes.

The sun, though sinking, was still bright, when the slow and dignified
approach of the venerable abbot of Scone occasioned some stir and bustle
amidst the joyous occupants of the palace yard; the wild joke was
hushed, the noisy brawl subsided, the games of quoit and hurling the bar
a while suspended, and the silence of unaffected reverence awaited the
good old man's approach and kindly-given benediction. Leaving his
attendants in one of the lower rooms, the abbot proceeded up the massive
stone staircase, and along a broad and lengthy passage, darkly panelled
with thick oak, then pushing aside some heavy arras, stood within one of
the state chambers, and gave his fervent benison on one within. This was
a man in the earliest and freshest prime of life, that period uniting
all the grace and beauty of youth with the mature thought, and steady
wisdom, and calmer views of manhood. That he was of noble birth and
blood and training one glance sufficed; peculiarly and gloriously
distinguished in the quiet majesty of his figure, in the mild attempered
gravity of his commanding features. Nature herself seemed to have marked
him out for the distinguished part it was his to play. Already there
were lines of thought upon the clear and open brow, and round the mouth;
and the blue eye shone with that calm, steady lustre, which seldom comes
till the changeful fire and wild visions of dreamy youth have departed.
His hair, of rich and glossy brown, fell in loose natural curls on
either side his face, somewhat lower than his throat, shading his
cheeks, which, rather pale than otherwise, added to the somewhat grave
aspect of his countenance; his armor of steel, richly and curiously
inlaid with burnished gold, sat lightly and easily upon his peculiarly
tall and manly figure; a sash, of azure silk and gold, suspended his
sword, whose sheath was in unison with the rest of his armor, though the
hilt was studded with gems. His collar was also of gold, as were his
gauntlets, which with his helmet rested on a table near him; a coronet
of plain gold surmounted his helmet, and on his surcoat, which lay on a
seat at the further end of the room, might be discerned the rampant lion
of Scotland, surmounted by a crown.

The apartment in which he stood, though shorn of much of that splendor
which, ere the usurping invasion of Edward of England, had distinguished
it, still bore evidence of being a chamber of some state. The hangings
were of dark-green velvet embroidered, and with a very broad fringe of
gold; drapery of the same costly material adorned the broad casements,
which stood in heavy frames of oak, black as ebony. Large folding-doors,
with panels of the same beautiful material, richly carved, opened into
an ante-chamber, and thence to the grand staircase and more public parts
of the building. In this ante-chamber were now assembled pages,
esquires, and other officers bespeaking a royal household, though much
less numerous than is generally the case.

"Sir Edward and the young Lord of Douglas have not returned, sayest
thou, good Athelbert? Knowest thou when and for what went they forth?"
were the words which were spoken by the noble we have described, as the
abbot entered, unperceived at first, from his having avoided the public
entrance to the state rooms; they were addressed to an esquire, who,
with cap in hand and head somewhat lowered, respectfully awaited the
commands of his master.

"They said not the direction of their course, my liege; 'tis thought to
reconnoitre either the movements of the English, or to ascertain the
cause of the delay of the Lord of Fife. They departed at sunrise, with
but few followers."

"On but a useless errand, good Athelbert, methinks, an they hope to
greet Earl Duncan, save with a host of English at his back. Bid Sir
Edward hither, should he return ere nightfall, and see to the instant
delivery of those papers; I fear me, the good lord bishop has waited for
them; and stay--Sir Robert Keith, hath he not yet returned?"

"No, good my lord."

"Ha! he tarrieth long," answered the noble, musingly. "Now heaven
forefend no evil hath befallen him; but to thy mission, Athelbert, I
must not detain thee with doubts and cavil. Ha! reverend father, right
welcome," he added, perceiving him as he turned again to the table, on
the esquire reverentially withdrawing from his presence, and bending his
head humbly in acknowledgment of the abbot's benediction. "Thou findest
me busied as usual. Seest thou," he pointed to a rough map of Scotland
lying before him, curiously intersected with mystic lines and crosses,
"Edinburgh, Berwick, Roxburgh, Lanark, Stirling, Dumbarton, in the power
of, nay peopled, by English. Argyle on the west, Elgin, Aberdeen, with
Banff eastward, teeming with proud, false Scots, hereditary foes to the
Bruce, false traitors to their land; the north--why, 'tis the same foul
tale; and yet I dare to raise my banner, dare to wear the crown, and
fling defiance in the teeth of all. What sayest thou, father--is't not a
madman's deed?"

All appearance of gravity vanished from his features as he spoke. His
eye, seemingly so mild, flashed till its very color could not have been
distinguished, his cheek glowed, his lip curled, and his voice, ever
peculiarly rich and sonorous, deepened with the excitement of soul.

"Were the fate of man in his own hands, were it his and his alone to
make or mar his destiny, I should e'en proclaim thee mad, my son, and
seek to turn thee from thy desperate purpose; but it is not so. Man is
but an instrument, and He who urged thee to this deed, who wills not
this poor land to rest enslaved, will give thee strength and wisdom for
its freedom. His ways are not as man's; and circled as thou seemest with
foes, His strength shall bring thee forth and gird thee with His glory.
Thou wouldst not turn aside, my son--thou fearest not thy foes?"

"Fear! holy father: it is a word unknown to the children of the Bruce! I
do but smile at mine extensive kingdom--of some hundred acres square;
smile at the eagerness with which they greet me liege and king, as if
the words, so long unused, should now do double duty for long absence."

"And better so, my son," answered the old man, cheerfully. "Devotion to
her destined savior argues well for bonny Scotland; better do homage
unto thee as liege and king, though usurpation hath abridged thy
kingdom, than to the hireling of England's Edward, all Scotland at his
feet. Men will not kneel to sceptred slaves, nor freemen fight for
tyrants' tools. Sovereign of Scotland thou art, thou shalt be, Robert
the Bruce! Too long hast thou kept back; but now, if arms can fight and
hearts can pray, thou shalt be king of Scotland."

The abbot spoke with a fervor, a spirit which, though perhaps little
accordant with his clerical character, thrilled to the Bruce's heart. He
grasped the old man's hand.

"Holy father," he said, "thou wouldst inspire hearts with ardor needing
inspiration more than mine; and to me thou givest hope, and confidence,
and strength. Too long have I slept and dreamed," his countenance
darkened, and his voice was sadder; "fickle in purpose, uncertain in
accomplishment; permitting my youth to moulder 'neath the blasting
atmosphere of tyranny. Yet will I now atone for the neglected past.
Atone! aye, banish it from the minds of men. My country hath a claim, a
double claim upon me; she calls upon me, trumpet-tongued, to arise,
avenge her, and redeem my misspent youth. Nor shall she call on me in
vain, so help me, gracious heaven!"

"Amen," fervently responded the abbot; and the king continued more
hurriedly--

"And that stain, that blot, father? Is there mercy in heaven to wash its
darkness from my soul, or must it linger there forever preying on my
spirit, dashing e'en its highest hopes and noblest dreams with poison,
whispering its still voice of accusation, even when loudest rings the
praise and love of men? Is there no rest for this, no silence for that
whisper? Penitence, atonement, any thing thou wilt, let but my soul be
free!" Hastily, and with step and countenance disordered, he traversed
the chamber, his expressive countenance denoting the strife within.

"It was, in truth, a rash and guilty deed, my son," answered the abbot,
gravely, yet mildly, "and one that heaven in its justice will scarce
pass unavenged. Man hath given thee the absolution accorded to the true
and faithful penitent, for such thou art; yet scarcely dare we hope
offended heaven is appeased. Justice will visit thee with trouble--sore,
oppressing, grievous trouble. Yet despair not: thou wilt come forth the
purer, nobler, brighter, from the fire; despair not, but as a child
receive a father's chastening; lean upon that love, which wills not
death, but penitence and life; that love, which yet will bring thee
forth and bless this land in thee. My son, be comforted; His mercy is
yet greater than thy sin."

"And blest art thou, my father, for these _blessed_ words; a messenger
in truth thou art of peace and love; and oh, if prayers and penitence
avail, if sore temptation may be pleaded, I shall, I shall be pardoned.
Yet would I give my dearest hopes of life, of fame, of all--save
Scotland's freedom--that this evil had not chanced; that blood, his
blood--base traitor as he was--was not upon my hand."

"And can it be thou art such craven, Robert, as to repent a Comyn's
death--a Comyn, and a traitor--e'en though his dastard blood be on thy
hand?--bah! An' such deeds weigh heavy on thy mind, a friar's cowl were
better suited to thy brow than Scotland's diadem."

The speaker was a tall, powerful man, somewhat younger in appearance
than the king, but with an expression of fierceness and haughty pride,
contrasting powerfully with the benevolent and native dignity which so
characterized the Bruce. His voice was as harsh as his manner was
abrupt; yet that he was brave, nay, rash in his unthinking daring, a
very transient glance would suffice to discover.

"I forgive thee thine undeserved taunt, Edward," answered the king,
calmly, though the hot blood rushed up to his cheek and brow. "I trust,
ere long, to prove thy words are as idle as the mood which prompted
them. I feel not that repentance cools the patriot fire which urges me
to strike for Scotland's weal--that sorrow for a hated crime unfits me
for a warrior. I would not Comyn lived, but that he had met a traitor's
fate by other hands than mine; been judged--condemned, as his black
treachery called for; even for our country's sake, it had been better
thus."

"Thou art over-scrupulous, my liege and brother, and I too hasty,"
replied Sir Edward Bruce, in the same bold, careless tone. "Yet beshrew
me, but I think that in these times a sudden blow and hasty fate the
only judgment for a traitor. The miscreant were too richly honored, that
by thy royal hand he fell."

"My son, my son, I pray thee, peace," urged the abbot, in accents of
calm, yet grave authority. "As minister of heaven, I may not list such
words. Bend not thy brow in wrath, clad as thou art in mail, in youthful
might; yet in my Maker's cause this withered frame is stronger yet than
thou art. Enough of that which hath been. Thy sovereign spoke in lowly
penitence to me--to me, who frail and lowly unto thee, am yet the
minister of Him whom sin offends. To thee he stands a warrior and a
king, who rude irreverence may brook not, even from his brother. Be
peace between us, then, my son; an old man's blessing on thy fierce yet
knightly spirit rest."

With a muttered oath Sir Edward had strode away at the abbot's first
words, but the cloud passed from his brow as he concluded, and slightly,
yet with something of reverence, he bowed his head.

"And whither didst thou wend thy way, my fiery brother?" demanded
Robert. "Bringest thou aught of news, or didst thou and Douglas but set
foot in stirrup and hand on rein simply from weariness of quiet?"

"In sober truth, 'twas even so; partly to mark the movements of the
English, an they make a movement, which, till Pembroke come, they are
all too much amazed to do; partly to see if in truth that poltroon
Duncan of Fife yet hangs back and still persists in forswearing the
loyalty of his ancestors, and leaving to better hands the proud task of
placing the crown of Scotland on thy head."

"And thou art convinced at last that such and such only is his
intention?" The knight nodded assent, and Bruce continued, jestingly,
"And so thou mightst have been long ago, my sage brother, hadst thou
listened to me. I tell thee Earl Duncan hath a spite against me, not for
daring to raise the standard of freedom and proclaim myself a king, but
for very hatred of myself. Nay, hast thou not seen it thyself, when,
fellow-soldiers, fellow-seekers of the banquet, tournay, or ball, he
hath avoided, shunned me? and why should he seek me now?"

"Why? does not Scotland call him, Scotland bid him gird his sword and
don his mail? Will not the dim spectres of his loyal line start from
their very tombs to call him to thy side, or brand him traitor and
poltroon, with naught of Duff about him but the name? Thou smilest."

"At thy violence, good brother. Duncan of Fife loves better the silken
cords of peace and pleasure, e'en though those silken threads hide
chains, than the trumpet's voice and weight of mail. In England bred,
courted, flattered by her king, 'twere much too sore a trouble to excite
his anger and lose his favor; and for whom, for what?--to crown the man
he hateth from his soul?"

"And knowest thou wherefore, good my son, in what thou hast offended?"

"Offended, holy father? Nay, in naught unless perchance a service
rendered when a boy--a simple service, merely that of saving life--hath
rendered him the touchy fool he is. But hark! who comes?"

The tramping of many horses, mingled with the eager voices of men,
resounded from the courtyard as he spoke, and Sir Edward strode hastily
to the casement. "Sir Robert Keith returned!" he exclaimed, joyfully;
"and seemingly right well attended. Litters too--bah! we want no more
women. 'Tis somewhat new for Keith to be a squire of dames. Why, what
banner is this? The black bear of Buchan--impossible! the earl is a foul
Comyn. I'll to the court, for this passes my poor wits." He turned
hastily to quit the chamber, as a youth entered, not without some
opposition, it appeared, from the attendants without, but eagerly he had
burst through them, and flung his plumed helmet from his beautiful brow,
and, after glancing hastily round the room, bounded to the side of
Robert, knelt at his feet, and clasped his knees without uttering a
syllable, voiceless from an emotion whose index was stamped upon his
glowing features.

"Nigel, by all that's marvellous, and as moon-stricken as his wont! Why,
where the foul fiend hast thou sprung from? Art dumb, thou foolish boy?
By St. Andrew, these are times to act and speak, not think and feel!
Whence comest thou?"

So spoke the impatient Edward, to whom the character of his youngest
brother had ever been a riddle, which it had been too much trouble to
expound, and that which it _seemed_ to his too careless thought he ever
looked upon with scorn and contempt. Not so, King Robert; he raised him
affectionately in his arms, and pressed him to his heart.

"Thou'rt welcome, most, most welcome, Nigel; as welcome as unlooked for.
But why this quick return from scenes and studies more congenial to thy
gentle nature, my young brother? this fettered land is scarce a home for
thee; thy free, thy fond imaginings can scarce have resting here." He
spoke sadly, and his smile unwittingly was sorrowful.

"And thinkest thou, Robert--nay, forgive me, good my liege--thinkest
thou, because I loved the poet's dream, because I turned, in sad and
lonely musing, from King Edward's court, I loved the cloister better
than the camp? Oh, do me not such wrong! thou knowest not the guidings
of my heart; nor needs it now, my sword shall better plead my cause than
can my tongue." He turned away deeply and evidently pained, and a half
laugh from Sir Edward prevented the king's reply.

"Well crowed, my pretty fledgling," he said, half jesting, half in
scorn. "But knowest thou, to fight in very earnest is something
different than to read and chant it in a minstrel's lay? Better hie thee
back to Florence, boy; the mail suit and crested helm are not for such
as thee--better shun them now, than after they are donned."

"How! darest thou, Edward? Edward, tempt me not too far," exclaimed
Nigel, his cheek flushing, and springing towards him, his hand upon his
half-drawn sword. "By heaven, wert thou not my mother's son, I would
compel thee to retract these words, injurious, unjust! How darest thou
judge me coward, till my cowardice is proved? Thy blood is not more red
than mine."

"Peace, peace! what meaneth this unseemly broil?" said Robert, hastily
advancing between them, for the dark features of Edward were lowering in
wrath, and Nigel was excited to unwonted fierceness. "Edward, begone!
and as thou saidst, see to Sir Robert Keith--what news he brings. Nigel,
on thy love, thy allegiance so lately proffered, if I read thy greeting
right, I pray thee heed not his taunting words. I do not doubt thee;
'twas for thy happiness, not for thy gallantry, I trembled. Look not
thus dejected;" he held out his hand, which his brother knelt to salute.
"Nay, nay, thou foolish boy, forget my new dignity a while, and now that
rude brawler has departed, tell me in sober wisdom, how camest thou
here? How didst thou know I might have need of thee?" A quick blush
suffused the cheek of the young man; he hesitated, evidently confused.
"Why, what ails thee, boy? By St. Andrew, Nigel, I do believe thou hast
never quitted Scotland."

"And if I have not, my lord, what wilt thou deem me?"

"A very strangely wayward boy, not knowing his own mind," replied the
king, smiling. "Yet why should I say so? I never asked thy confidence,
never sought it, or in any way returned or appreciated thy boyish love,
and why should I deem thee wayward, never inquiring into thy
projects--passing thee by, perchance, as a wild visionary, much happier
than myself?"

"And thou wilt think me yet more a visionary, I fear me, Robert; yet
thine interest is too dear to pass unanswered," rejoined Nigel, after
glancing round and perceiving they were alone, for the abbot had
departed with Sir Edward, seeking to tame his reckless spirit.

"Know, then, to aid me in keeping aloof from the tyrant of my country,
whom instinctively I hated, I confined myself to books and such lore yet
more than my natural inclination prompted, though that was strong
enough--I had made a solemn vow, rather to take the monk's cowl and
frock, than receive knighthood from the hand of Edward of England, or
raise my sword at his bidding. My whole soul yearned towards the country
of my fathers, that country which was theirs by royal right; and when
the renown of Wallace reached my ears, when, in my waking and sleeping
dreams, I beheld the patriot struggling for freedom, peace, the only one
whose arm had struck for Scotland, whose tongue had dared to speak
resistance, I longed wildly, intensely, vainly, to burst the thraldom
which held my race, and seek for death beneath the patriot banner. I
longed, yet dared not. My own death were welcome; but mother, father,
brothers, sisters, all were perilled, had I done so. I stood, I deemed,
alone in my enthusiast dreams; those I loved best, acknowledged, bowed
before the man my very spirit loathed; and how dared I, a boy, a child,
stand forth arraigning and condemning? But wherefore art thou thus,
Robert? oh, what has thus moved thee?"

Wrapped in his own earnest words and thoughts, Nigel had failed until
that moment to perceive the effect of his words upon his brother.
Robert's head had sunk upon his hand, and his whole frame shook beneath
some strong emotion; evidently striving to subdue it, some moments
elapsed ere he could reply, and then only in accents of bitter
self-reproach. "Why, why did not such thoughts come to me, instead of
thee?" he said. "My youth had not wasted then in idle folly--worse, oh,
worse--in slavish homage, coward indecision, flitting like the moth
around the destructive flame; and while I deemed thee buried in romantic
dreams, all a patriot's blood was rushing in thy veins, while mine was
dull and stagnant."

"But to flow forth the brighter, my own brother," interrupted Nigel,
earnestly. "Oh, I have watched thee, studied thee, even as I loved thee,
long; and I have hoped, felt, _known_ that this day would dawn; that
thou _wouldst_ rise for Scotland, and she would rise for thee. Ah, now
thou smilest as thyself, and I will to my tale. The patriot died--let me
not utter how; no Scottish tongue should speak those words, save with
the upraised arm and trumpet shout of vengeance! I could not rest in
England then; I could not face the tyrant who dared proclaim and execute
as traitor the noblest hero, purest patriot, that ever walked this
earth. But men said I sought the lyric schools, the poet's haunts in
Provence, and I welcomed the delusion; but it was to Scotland that I
came, unknown, and silently, to mark if with her Wallace all life and
soul had fled. I saw enough to know that were there but a fitting head,
her hardy sons would struggle yet for freedom--but not yet; that chief
art thou, and at the close of the last year I took passage to Denmark,
intending to rest there till Scotland called me."

"And 'tis thence thou comest, Nigel? Can it be, intelligence of my
movements hath reached so far north already?" inquired the king,
somewhat surprised at the abruptness of his brother's pause.

"Not so, my liege. The vessel which bore me was wrecked off the breakers
of Buchan, and cast me back again to the arms of Scotland. I found
hospitality, shelter, kindness; nay more, were this a time and place to
speak of happy, trusting love--" he added, turning away from the Bruce's
penetrating eye, "and week after week passed, and found me still an
inmate of the Tower of Buchan."

