be so, I will go. My life matters little to any one.' Here the great
bright tears arose; but the maiden was too proud to sob.

'Sweetest of all sweet loves,' I cried, for the sign of a tear defeated
me; 'what possibility could make me ever give up Lorna?'

'Dearest of all dears,' she answered; 'if you dearly love me, what
possibility could ever make me give you up, dear?'

Upon that there was no more forbearing, but I kissed and clasped her,
whether she were Countess, or whether Queen of England; mine she was, at
least in heart; and mine she should be wholly. And she being of the same
opinion, nothing was said between us.

'Now, Lorna,' said I, as she hung on my arm, willing to trust me
anywhere, 'come to your little plant-house, and hear my moving story.'

'No story can move me much, dear,' she answered rather faintly, for any
excitement stayed with her; 'since I know your strength of kindness,
scarcely any tale can move me, unless it be of yourself, love; or of my
poor mother.'

'It is of your poor mother, darling. Can you bear to hear it?' And yet I
wondered why she did not say as much of her father.

'Yes, I can bear anything. But although I cannot see her, and have long
forgotten, I could not bear to hear ill of her.'

'There is no ill to hear, sweet child, except of evil done to her.
Lorna, you are of an ill-starred race.'

'Better that than a wicked race,' she answered with her usual quickness,
leaping at conclusion; 'tell me I am not a Doone, and I will--but I
cannot love you more.'

'You are not a Doone, my Lorna, for that, at least, I can answer; though
I know not what your name is.'

'And my father--your father--what I mean is--'

'Your father and mine never met one another. Your father was killed by
an accident in the Pyrenean mountains, and your mother by the Doones; or
at least they caused her death, and carried you away from her.'

All this, coming as in one breath upon the sensitive maiden, was more
than she could bear all at once; as any but a fool like me must of
course have known. She lay back on the garden bench, with her black hair
shed on the oaken bark, while her colour went and came and only by that,
and her quivering breath, could any one say that she lived and thought.
And yet she pressed my hand with hers, that I might tell her all of it.



CHAPTER LVI

JOHN BECOMES TOO POPULAR

No flower that I have ever seen, either in shifting of light and shade,
or in the pearly morning, may vie with a fair young woman's face when
tender thought and quick emotion vary, enrich, and beautify it. Thus my
Lorna hearkened softly, almost without word or gesture, yet with sighs
and glances telling, and the pressure of my hand, how each word was
moving her.

When at last my tale was done, she turned away, and wept bitterly for
the sad fate of her parents. But to my surprise she spoke not even a
word of wrath or rancour. She seemed to take it all as fate.

'Lorna, darling,' I said at length, for men are more impatient in trials
of time than women are, 'do you not even wish to know what your proper
name is?'

'How can it matter to me, John?' she answered, with a depth of grief
which made me seem a trifler. 'It can never matter now, when there are
none to share it.'

'Poor little soul!' was all I said in a tone of purest pity; and to my
surprise she turned upon me, caught me in her arms, and loved me as she
had never done before.

'Dearest, I have you,' she cried; 'you, and only you, love. Having you I
want no other. All my life is one with yours. Oh, John, how can I treat
you so?'

Blushing through the wet of weeping, and the gloom of pondering, yet she
would not hide her eyes, but folded me, and dwelled on me.

'I cannot believe,' in the pride of my joy, I whispered into one little
ear, 'that you could ever so love me, beauty, as to give up the world
for me.'

'Would you give up your farm for me, John?' cried Lorna, leaping back
and looking, with her wondrous power of light at me; 'would you give up
your mother, your sisters, your home, and all that you have in the world
and every hope of your life, John?'

'Of course I would. Without two thoughts. You know it; you know it,
Lorna.'

'It is true that I do, 'she answered in a tone of deepest sadness; 'and
it is this power of your love which has made me love you so. No good can
come of it, no good. God's face is set against selfishness.'

As she spoke in that low tone I gazed at the clear lines of her face
(where every curve was perfect) not with love and wonder only, but with
a strange new sense of awe.

'Darling,' I said, 'come nearer to me. Give me surety against that. For
God's sake never frighten me with the thought that He would part us.'

'Does it then so frighten you?' she whispered, coming close to me; 'I
know it, dear; I have known it long; but it never frightens me. It makes
me sad, and very lonely, till I can remember.'

'Till you can remember what?' I asked, with a long, deep shudder; for we
are so superstitious.

'Until I do remember, love, that you will soon come back to me, and be
my own for ever. This is what I always think of, this is what I hope
for.'

Although her eyes were so glorious, and beaming with eternity, this
distant sort of beatitude was not much to my liking. I wanted to have
my love on earth; and my dear wife in my own home; and children in good
time, if God should please to send us any. And then I would be to them,
exactly what my father was to me. And beside all this, I doubted much
about being fit for heaven; where no ploughs are, and no cattle, unless
sacrificed bulls went thither.

Therefore I said, 'Now kiss me, Lorna; and don't talk any nonsense.' And
the darling came and did it; being kindly obedient, as the other world
often makes us.

'You sweet love,' I said at this, being slave to her soft obedience; 'do
you suppose I should be content to leave you until Elysium?'

'How on earth can I tell, dear John, what you will be content with?'

'You, and only you,' said I; 'the whole of it lies in a syllable. Now
you know my entire want; and want must be my comfort.'

'But surely if I have money, sir, and birth, and rank, and all sorts of
grandeur, you would never dare to think of me.'

She drew herself up with an air of pride, as she gravely pronounced
these words, and gave me a scornful glance, or tried; and turned away
as if to enter some grand coach or palace; while I was so amazed and
grieved in my raw simplicity especially after the way in which she had
first received my news, so loving and warm-hearted, that I never said a
word, but stared and thought, 'How does she mean it?'

She saw the pain upon my forehead, and the wonder in my eyes, and
leaving coach and palace too, back she flew to me in a moment, as simple
as simplest milkmaid.

'Oh, you fearful stupid, John, you inexpressibly stupid, John,' she
cried with both arms round my neck, and her lips upon my forehead; 'you
have called yourself thick-headed, John, and I never would believe it.
But now I do with all my heart. Will you never know what I am, love?'

'No, Lorna, that I never shall. I can understand my mother well, and one
at least of my sisters, and both the Snowe girls very easily, but you I
never understand; only love you all the more for it.'

'Then never try to understand me, if the result is that, dear John. And
yet I am the very simplest of all foolish simple creatures. Nay, I am
wrong; therein I yield the palm to you, my dear. To think that I can
act so! No wonder they want me in London, as an ornament for the stage,
John.'

Now in after days, when I heard of Lorna as the richest, and noblest,
and loveliest lady to be found in London, I often remembered that little
scene, and recalled every word and gesture, wondering what lay under it.
Even now, while it was quite impossible once to doubt those clear deep
eyes, and the bright lips trembling so; nevertheless I felt how much
the world would have to do with it; and that the best and truest people
cannot shake themselves quite free. However, for the moment, I was very
proud and showed it.

And herein differs fact from fancy, things as they befall us from things
as we would have them, human ends from human hopes; that the first are
moved by a thousand and the last on two wheels only, which (being named)
are desire and fear. Hope of course is nothing more than desire with a
telescope, magnifying distant matters, overlooking near ones; opening
one eye on the objects, closing the other to all objections. And if hope
be the future tense of desire, the future of fear is religion--at least
with too many of us.

Whether I am right or wrong in these small moralities, one thing is sure
enough, to wit, that hope is the fastest traveller, at any rate, in the
time of youth. And so I hoped that Lorna might be proved of blameless
family, and honourable rank and fortune; and yet none the less for that,
love me and belong to me. So I led her into the house, and she fell into
my mother's arms; and I left them to have a good cry of it, with Annie
ready to help them.

If Master Stickles should not mend enough to gain his speech a little,
and declare to us all he knew, I was to set out for Watchett, riding
upon horseback, and there to hire a cart with wheels, such as we had not
begun, as yet, to use on Exmoor. For all our work went on broad wood,
with runners and with earthboards; and many of us still looked upon
wheels (though mentioned in the Bible) as the invention of the evil one,
and Pharoah's especial property.

Now, instead of getting better, Colonel Stickles grew worse and worse,
in spite of all our tendance of him, with simples and with nourishment,
and no poisonous medicine, such as doctors would have given him. And the
fault of this lay not with us, but purely with himself and his unquiet
constitution. For he roused himself up to a perfect fever, when through
Lizzie's giddiness he learned the very thing which mother and Annie were
hiding from him, with the utmost care; namely, that Sergeant Bloxham had
taken upon himself to send direct to London by the Chancery officers,
a full report of what had happened, and of the illness of his chief,
together with an urgent prayer for a full battalion of King's troops,
and a plenary commander.

This Sergeant Bloxham, being senior of the surviving soldiers, and a
very worthy man in his way, but a trifle over-zealous, had succeeded to
the captaincy upon his master's disablement. Then, with desire to serve
his country and show his education, he sat up most part of three nights,
and wrote this very wonderful report by the aid of our stable lanthorn.
It was a very fine piece of work, as three men to whom he read it (but
only one at a time) pronounced, being under seal of secrecy. And all
might have gone well with it, if the author could only have held his
tongue, when near the ears of women. But this was beyond his sense as it
seems, although so good a writer. For having heard that our Lizzie was
a famous judge of literature (as indeed she told almost every one), he
could not contain himself, but must have her opinion upon his work.

Lizzie sat on a log of wood, and listened with all her ears up, having
made proviso that no one else should be there to interrupt her. And she
put in a syllable here and there, and many a time she took out one (for
the Sergeant overloaded his gun, more often than undercharged it; like
a liberal man of letters), and then she declared the result so good,
so chaste, and the style to be so elegant, and yet so fervent, that the
Sergeant broke his pipe in three, and fell in love with her on the spot.
Now this has led me out of my way; as things are always doing, partly
through their own perverseness, partly through my kind desire to give
fair turn to all of them, and to all the people who do them. If any one
expects of me a strict and well-drilled story, standing 'at attention'
all the time, with hands at the side like two wens on my trunk, and eyes
going neither right nor left; I trow that man has been disappointed
many a page ago, and has left me to my evil ways; and if not, I love his
charity. Therefore let me seek his grace, and get back, and just begin
again.

That great despatch was sent to London by the Chancery officers, whom
we fitted up with clothes, and for three days fattened them; which in
strict justice they needed much, as well as in point of equity. They
were kind enough to be pleased with us, and accepted my new shirts
generously; and urgent as their business was, another week (as they both
declared) could do no harm to nobody, and might set them upon their legs
again. And knowing, although they were London men, that fish do live
in water, these two fellows went fishing all day, but never landed
anything. However, their holiday was cut short; for the Sergeant, having
finished now his narrative of proceedings, was not the man to let it
hang fire, and be quenched perhaps by Stickles.

Therefore, having done their business, and served both citations,
these two good men had a pannier of victuals put up by dear Annie, and
borrowing two of our horses, rode to Dunster, where they left them, and
hired on towards London. We had not time to like them much, and so we
did not miss them, especially in our great anxiety about poor Master
Stickles.

Jeremy lay between life and death, for at least a fortnight. If the link
of chain had flown upwards (for half a link of chain it was which took
him in the mouth so), even one inch upwards, the poor man could have
needed no one except Parson Bowden; for the bottom of his skull, which
holds the brain as in the egg-cup, must have clean gone from him. But
striking him horizontally, and a little upon the skew, the metal
came out at the back of his neck, and (the powder not being strong, I
suppose) it lodged in his leather collar.

Now the rust of this iron hung in the wound, or at least we thought so;
though since I have talked with a man of medicine, I am not so sure of
it. And our chief aim was to purge this rust; when rather we should have
stopped the hole, and let the oxide do its worst, with a plug of new
flesh on both sides of it.

At last I prevailed upon him by argument, that he must get better, to
save himself from being ignobly and unjustly superseded; and hereupon
I reviled Sergeant Bloxham more fiercely than Jeremy's self could have
done, and indeed to such a pitch that Jeremy almost forgave him, and
became much milder. And after that his fever and the inflammation of his
wound, diminished very rapidly.

However, not knowing what might happen, or even how soon poor Lorna
might be taken from our power, and, falling into lawyers' hands, have
cause to wish herself most heartily back among the robbers, I set forth
one day for Watchett, taking advantage of the visit of some troopers
from an outpost, who would make our house quite safe. I rode alone,
being fully primed, and having no misgivings. For it was said that even
the Doones had begun to fear me, since I cast their culverin through the
door, as above related; and they could not but believe, from my being
still untouched (although so large an object) in the thickest of their
fire, both of gun and cannon, that I must bear a charmed life, proof
against ball and bullet. However, I knew that Carver Doone was not
a likely man to hold any superstitious opinions; and of him I had an
instinctive dread, although quite ready to face him.

Riding along, I meditated upon Lorna's history; how many things were
now beginning to unfold themselves, which had been obscure and dark!
For instance, Sir Ensor Doone's consent, or to say the least his
indifference, to her marriage with a yeoman; which in a man so proud
(though dying) had greatly puzzled both of us. But now, if she not only
proved to be no grandchild of the Doone, but even descended from his
enemy, it was natural enough that he should feel no great repugnance to
her humiliation. And that Lorna's father had been a foe to the house
of Doone I gathered from her mother's cry when she beheld their leader.
Moreover that fact would supply their motive in carrying off the
unfortunate little creature, and rearing her among them, and as one of
their own family; yet hiding her true birth from her. She was a 'great
card,' as we say, when playing All-fours at Christmas-time; and if one
of them could marry her, before she learned of right and wrong, vast
property, enough to buy pardons for a thousand Doones, would be at their
mercy. And since I was come to know Lorna better, and she to know me
thoroughly--many things had been outspoken, which her early bashfulness
had kept covered from me. Attempts I mean to pledge her love to this
one, or that other; some of which perhaps might have been successful, if
there had not been too many.

And then, as her beauty grew richer and brighter, Carver Doone was
smitten strongly, and would hear of no one else as a suitor for her; and
by the terror of his claim drove off all the others. Here too may the
explanation of a thing which seemed to be against the laws of human
nature, and upon which I longed, but dared not to cross-question Lorna.
How could such a lovely girl, although so young, and brave, and distant,
have escaped the vile affections of a lawless company?

But now it was as clear as need be. For any proven violence would have
utterly vitiated all claim upon her grand estate; at least as those
claims must be urged before a court of equity. And therefore all the
elders (with views upon her real estate) kept strict watch on the
youngers, who confined their views to her personality.

Now I do not mean to say that all this, or the hundred other things
which came, crowding consideration, were half as plain to me at the
time, as I have set them down above. Far be it from me to deceive you
so. No doubt my thoughts were then dark and hazy, like an oil-lamp full
of fungus; and I have trimmed them, as when they burned, with scissors
sharpened long afterwards. All I mean to say is this, that jogging along
to a certain tune of the horse's feet, which we call 'three-halfpence
and twopence,' I saw my way a little into some things which had puzzled
me.

When I knocked at the little door, whose sill was gritty and grimed with
sand, no one came for a very long time to answer me, or to let me in.
Not wishing to be unmannerly, I waited a long time, and watched the sea,
from which the wind was blowing; and whose many lips of waves--though
the tide was half-way out--spoke to and refreshed me. After a while I
knocked again, for my horse was becoming hungry; and a good while after
that again, a voice came through the key-hole,--

'Who is that wishes to enter?'

'The boy who was at the pump,' said I, 'when the carriage broke down
at Dulverton. The boy that lives at oh--ah; and some day you would come
seek for him.'

'Oh, yes, I remember certainly. My leetle boy, with the fair white skin.
I have desired to see him, oh many, yes, many times.'

She was opening the door, while saying this, and then she started back
in affright that the little boy should have grown so.

'You cannot be that leetle boy. It is quite impossible. Why do you
impose on me?'

'Not only am I that little boy, who made the water to flow for you, till
the nebule came upon the glass; but also I am come to tell you all about
your little girl.'

'Come in, you very great leetle boy,' she answered, with her dark eyes
brightened. And I went in, and looked at her. She was altered by time,
as much as I was. The slight and graceful shape was gone; not that I
remembered anything of her figure, if you please; for boys of twelve are
not yet prone to note the shapes of women; but that her lithe straight
gait had struck me as being so unlike our people. Now her time for
walking so was past, and transmitted to her children. Yet her face was
comely still, and full of strong intelligence. I gazed at her, and she
at me; and we were sure of one another.

'Now what will ye please to eat?' she asked, with a lively glance at
the size of my mouth: 'that is always the first thing you people ask, in
these barbarous places.'

'I will tell you by-and-by,' I answered, misliking this satire upon us;
'but I might begin with a quart of ale, to enable me to speak, madam.'

'Very well. One quevart of be-or;' she called out to a little maid,
who was her eldest child, no doubt. 'It is to be expected, sir. Be-or,
be-or, be-or, all day long, with you Englishmen!'

'Nay,' I replied, 'not all day long, if madam will excuse me. Only a
pint at breakfast-time, and a pint and a half at eleven o'clock, and a
quart or so at dinner. And then no more till the afternoon; and half a
gallon at supper-time. No one can object to that.'

'Well, I suppose it is right,' she said, with an air of resignation;
'God knows. But I do not understand it. It is "good for business," as
you say, to preclude everything.'

'And it is good for us, madam,' I answered with indignation, for beer is
my favourite beverage; 'and I am a credit to beer, madam; and so are all
who trust to it.'

'At any rate, you are, young man. If beer has made you grow so large, I
will put my children upon it; it is too late for me to begin. The smell
to me is hateful.'

Now I only set down that to show how perverse those foreign people
are. They will drink their wretched heartless stuff, such as they call
claret, or wine of Medoc, or Bordeaux, or what not, with no more meaning
than sour rennet, stirred with the pulp from the cider press, and
strained through the cap of our Betty. This is very well for them; and
as good as they deserve, no doubt, and meant perhaps by the will of God,
for those unhappy natives. But to bring it over to England and set it
against our home-brewed ale (not to speak of wines from Portugal) and
sell it at ten times the price, as a cure for British bile, and a great
enlightenment; this I say is the vilest feature of the age we live in.

Madam Benita Odam--for the name of the man who turned the wheel proved
to be John Odam--showed me into a little room containing two chairs and
a fir-wood table, and sat down on a three-legged seat and studied me
very steadfastly. This she had a right to do; and I, having all my
clothes on now, was not disconcerted. It would not become me to repeat
her judgment upon my appearance, which she delivered as calmly as if I
were a pig at market, and as proudly as if her own pig. And she asked me
whether I had ever got rid of the black marks on my breast.

Not wanting to talk about myself (though very fond of doing so, when
time and season favour) I led her back to that fearful night of the day
when first I had seen her. She was not desirous to speak of it,
because of her own little children; however, I drew her gradually to
recollection of Lorna, and then of the little boy who died, and the
poor mother buried with him. And her strong hot nature kindled, as she
dwelled upon these things; and my wrath waxed within me; and we forgot
reserve and prudence under the sense of so vile a wrong. She told me
(as nearly as might be) the very same story which she had told to Master
Jeremy Stickles; only she dwelled upon it more, because of my knowing
the outset. And being a woman, with an inkling of my situation, she
enlarged upon the little maid, more than to dry Jeremy.

'Would you know her again?' I asked, being stirred by these accounts of
Lorna, when she was five years old: 'would you know her as a full-grown
maiden?'

'I think I should,' she answered; 'it is not possible to say until one
sees the person; but from the eyes of the little girl, I think that I
must know her. Oh, the poor young creature! Is it to be believed that
the cannibals devoured her! What a people you are in this country! Meat,
meat, meat!'

As she raised her hands and eyes in horror at our carnivorous
propensities, to which she clearly attributed the disappearance of
Lorna, I could scarce help laughing, even after that sad story. For
though it is said at the present day, and will doubtless be said
hereafter, that the Doones had devoured a baby once, as they came up
Porlock hill, after fighting hard in the market-place, I knew that the
tale was utterly false; for cruel and brutal as they were, their taste
was very correct and choice, and indeed one might say fastidious.
Nevertheless I could not stop to argue that matter with her.

'The little maid has not been devoured,' I said to Mistress Odam: 'and
now she is a tall young lady, and as beautiful as can be. If I sleep in
your good hostel to-night after going to Watchett town, will you come
with me to Oare to-morrow, and see your little maiden?'

'I would like--and yet I fear. This country is so barbarous. And I am
good to eat--my God, there is much picking on my bones!'

She surveyed herself with a glance so mingled of pity and admiration,
and the truth of her words was so apparent (only that it would have
taken a week to get at the bones, before picking) that I nearly lost
good manners; for she really seemed to suspect even me of cannibal
inclinations. However, at last I made her promise to come with me on the
morrow, presuming that Master Odam could by any means be persuaded to
keep her company in the cart, as propriety demanded. Having little doubt
that Master Odam was entirely at his wife's command, I looked upon that
matter as settled, and set off for Watchett, to see the grave of Lorna's
poor mother, and to hire a cart for the morrow.

And here (as so often happens with men) I succeeded without any trouble
or hindrance, where I had looked for both of them, namely, in finding a
suitable cart; whereas the other matter, in which I could have expected
no difficulty, came very near to defeat me. For when I heard that
Lorna's father was the Earl of Dugal--as Benita impressed upon me with a
strong enforcement, as much as to say, 'Who are you, young man, to come
even asking about her?'--then I never thought but that everybody in
Watchett town must know all about the tombstone of the Countess of
Dugal.

This, however, proved otherwise. For Lord Dugal had never lived at
Watchett Grange, as their place was called; neither had his name become
familiar as its owner. Because the Grange had only devolved to him by
will, at the end of a long entail, when the last of the Fitz-Pains died
out; and though he liked the idea of it, he had gone abroad, without
taking seisin. And upon news of his death, John Jones, a rich gentleman
from Llandaff, had taken possession, as next of right, and hushed up all
the story. And though, even at the worst of times, a lady of high rank
and wealth could not be robbed, and as bad as murdered, and then buried
in a little place, without moving some excitement, yet it had been given
out, on purpose and with diligence, that this was only a foreign lady
travelling for her health and pleasure, along the seacoast of England.
And as the poor thing never spoke, and several of her servants and her
baggage looked so foreign, and she herself died in a collar of lace
unlike any made in England, all Watchett, without hesitation, pronounced
her to be a foreigner. And the English serving man and maid, who might
have cleared up everything, either were bribed by Master Jones, or else
decamped of their own accord with the relics of the baggage. So the poor
Countess of Dugal, almost in sight of her own grand house, was buried in
an unknown grave, with her pair of infants, without a plate, without a
tombstone (worse than all) without a tear, except from the hired Italian
woman.

Surely my poor Lorna came of an ill-starred family.

Now in spite of all this, if I had only taken Benita with me, or even
told her what I wished, and craved her directions, there could have been
no trouble. But I do assure you that among the stupid people at Watchett
(compared with whom our folk of Oare, exceeding dense though being, are
as Hamlet against Dogberry) what with one of them and another, and the
firm conviction of all the town that I could be come only to wrestle, I
do assure you (as I said before) that my wits almost went out of me.
And what vexed me yet more about it was, that I saw my own mistake, in
coming myself to seek out the matter, instead of sending some unknown
person. For my face and form were known at that time (and still are so)
to nine people out of every ten living in forty miles of me. Not through
any excellence, or anything of good desert, in either the one or
the other, but simply because folks will be fools on the rivalry of
wrestling. The art is a fine one in itself, and demands a little wit of
brain, as well as strength of body; it binds the man who studies it to
temperance, and chastity, to self-respect, and most of all to an even
and sweet temper; for I have thrown stronger men than myself (when I was
a mere sapling, and before my strength grew hard on me) through their
loss of temper. But though the art is an honest one, surely they who
excel therein have a right (like all the rest of man-kind) to their own
private life.

Be that either way--and I will not speak too strongly, for fear of
indulging my own annoyance--anyhow, all Watchett town cared ten times as
much to see John Ridd, as to show him what he wanted. I was led to every
public-house, instead of to the churchyard; and twenty tables were ready
for me, in lieu of a single gravestone. 'Zummerzett thou bee'st, Jan
Ridd, and Zummerzett thou shalt be. Thee carl theezell a Davonsheer man!
Whoy, thee lives in Zummerzett; and in Zummerzett thee wast barn, lad.'
And so it went on, till I was weary; though very much obliged to them.

Dull and solid as I am, and with a wild duck waiting for me at good
Mistress Odam's, I saw that there was nothing for it but to yield to
these good people, and prove me a man of Somerset, by eating a dinner
at their expense. As for the churchyard, none would hear of it; and I
grieved for broaching the matter.

But how was I to meet Lorna again, without having done the thing of all
things which I had promised to see to? It would never do to tell her
that so great was my popularity, and so strong the desire to feed me,
that I could not attend to her mother. Least of all could I say that
every one in Watchett knew John Ridd; while none had heard of the
Countess of Dugal. And yet that was about the truth, as I hinted very
delicately to Mistress Odam that evening. But she (being vexed about her
wild duck, and not having English ideas on the matter of sport, and so
on) made a poor unwitting face at me. Nevertheless Master Odam restored
me to my self-respect; for he stared at me till I went to bed; and he
broke his hose with excitement. For being in the leg-line myself, I
wanted to know what the muscles were of a man who turned a wheel all
day. I had never seen a treadmill (though they have one now at Exeter),
and it touched me much to learn whether it were good exercise. And
herein, from what I saw of Odam, I incline to think that it does great
harm; as moving the muscles too much in a line, and without variety.



CHAPTER LVII

LORNA KNOWS HER NURSE

Having obtained from Benita Odam a very close and full description of
the place where her poor mistress lay, and the marks whereby to know it,
I hastened to Watchett the following morning, before the sun was up,
or any people were about. And so, without interruption, I was in the
churchyard at sunrise.

In the farthest and darkest nook, overgrown with grass, and overhung by
a weeping-tree a little bank of earth betokened the rounding off of a
hapless life. There was nothing to tell of rank, or wealth, of love, or
even pity; nameless as a peasant lay the last (as supposed) of a mighty
race. Only some unskilful hand, probably Master Odam's under his wife's
teaching, had carved a rude L., and a ruder D., upon a large pebble from
the beach, and set it up as a headstone.

I gathered a little grass for Lorna and a sprig of the weeping-tree, and
then returned to the Forest Cat, as Benita's lonely inn was called.
For the way is long from Watchett to Oare; and though you may ride
it rapidly, as the Doones had done on that fatal night, to travel
on wheels, with one horse only, is a matter of time and of prudence.
Therefore, we set out pretty early, three of us and a baby, who could
not well be left behind. The wife of the man who owned the cart had
undertaken to mind the business, and the other babies, upon condition of
having the keys of all the taps left with her.

As the manner of journeying over the moor has been described oft enough
already, I will say no more, except that we all arrived before dusk
of the summer's day, safe at Plover's Barrows. Mistress Benita was
delighted with the change from her dull hard life; and she made many
excellent observations, such as seem natural to a foreigner looking at
our country.

As luck would have it, the first who came to meet us at the gate was
Lorna, with nothing whatever upon her head (the weather being summerly)
but her beautiful hair shed round her; and wearing a sweet white frock
tucked in, and showing her figure perfectly. In her joy she ran straight
up to the cart; and then stopped and gazed at Benita. At one glance her
old nurse knew her: 'Oh, the eyes, the eyes!' she cried, and was over
the rail of the cart in a moment, in spite of all her substance. Lorna,
on the other hand, looked at her with some doubt and wonder, as though
having right to know much about her, and yet unable to do so. But when
the foreign woman said something in Roman language, and flung new hay
from the cart upon her, as if in a romp of childhood, the young maid
cried, 'Oh, Nita, Nita!' and fell upon her breast, and wept; and after
that looked round at us.

This being so, there could be no doubt as to the power of proving Lady
Lorna's birth, and rights, both by evidence and token. For though we had
not the necklace now--thanks to Annie's wisdom--we had the ring of heavy
gold, a very ancient relic, with which my maid (in her simple way) had
pledged herself to me. And Benita knew this ring as well as she knew her
own fingers, having heard a long history about it; and the effigy on it
of the wild cat was the bearing of the house of Lorne.

For though Lorna's father was a nobleman of high and goodly lineage, her
mother was of yet more ancient and renowned descent, being the last
in line direct from the great and kingly chiefs of Lorne. A wild and
headstrong race they were, and must have everything their own way. Hot
blood was ever among them, even of one household; and their sovereignty
(which more than once had defied the King of Scotland) waned and fell
among themselves, by continual quarrelling. And it was of a piece with
this, that the Doones (who were an offset, by the mother's side, holding
in co-partnership some large property, which had come by the spindle, as
we say) should fall out with the Earl of Lorne, the last but one of that
title.

The daughter of this nobleman had married Sir Ensor Doone; but this,
instead of healing matters, led to fiercer conflict. I never could quite
understand all the ins and outs of it; which none but a lawyer may go
through, and keep his head at the end of it. The motives of mankind are
plainer than the motions they produce. Especially when charity (such
as found among us) sits to judge the former, and is never weary of it;
while reason does not care to trace the latter complications, except for
fee or title.

Therefore it is enough to say, that knowing Lorna to be direct in
heirship to vast property, and bearing especial spite against the house
of which she was the last, the Doones had brought her up with full
intention of lawful marriage; and had carefully secluded her from the
wildest of their young gallants. Of course, if they had been next in
succession, the child would have gone down the waterfall, to save any
further trouble; but there was an intercepting branch of some honest
family; and they being outlaws, would have a poor chance (though the law
loves outlaws) against them. Only Lorna was of the stock; and Lorna they
must marry. And what a triumph against the old earl, for a cursed Doone
to succeed him!

As for their outlawry, great robberies, and grand murders, the veriest
child, nowadays, must know that money heals the whole of that. Even if
they had murdered people of a good position, it would only cost about
twice as much to prove their motives loyal. But they had never slain any
man above the rank of yeoman; and folk even said that my father was the
highest of their victims; for the death of Lorna's mother and brother
was never set to their account.

Pure pleasure it is to any man, to reflect upon all these things. How
truly we discern clear justice, and how well we deal it. If any poor
man steals a sheep, having ten children starving, and regarding it as
mountain game (as a rich man does a hare), to the gallows with him. If
a man of rank beats down a door, smites the owner upon the head, and
honours the wife with attention, it is a thing to be grateful for, and
to slouch smitten head the lower.

While we were full of all these things, and wondering what would happen
next, or what we ought ourselves to do, another very important matter
called for our attention. This was no less than Annie's marriage to the
Squire Faggus. We had tried to put it off again; for in spite of all
advantages, neither my mother nor myself had any real heart for it. Not
that we dwelled upon Tom's short-comings or rather perhaps his going too
far, at the time when he worked the road so. All that was covered by
the King's pardon, and universal respect of the neighbourhood. But our
scruple was this--and the more we talked the more it grew upon us--that
we both had great misgivings as to his future steadiness.

For it would be a thousand pities, we said, for a fine, well-grown, and
pretty maiden (such as our Annie was), useful too, in so many ways, and
lively, and warm-hearted, and mistress of 500 pounds, to throw herself
away on a man with a kind of a turn for drinking. If that last were even
hinted, Annie would be most indignant, and ask, with cheeks as red as
roses, who had ever seen Master Faggus any the worse for liquor indeed?
Her own opinion was, in truth, that he took a great deal too little,
after all his hard work, and hard riding, and coming over the hills to
be insulted! And if ever it lay in her power, and with no one to grudge
him his trumpery glass, she would see that poor Tom had the nourishment
which his cough and his lungs required.

His lungs being quite as sound as mine, this matter was out of all
argument; so mother and I looked at one another, as much as to say, 'let
her go upstairs, she will cry and come down more reasonable.' And while
she was gone, we used to say the same thing over and over again; but
without perceiving a cure for it. And we almost always finished up with
the following reflection, which sometimes came from mother's lips, and
sometimes from my own: 'Well, well, there is no telling. None can say
how a man may alter; when he takes to matrimony. But if we could only
make Annie promise to be a little firm with him!'

I fear that all this talk on our part only hurried matters forward,
Annie being more determined every time we pitied her. And at last Tom
Faggus came, and spoke as if he were on the King's road, with a pistol
at my head, and one at mother's. 'No more fast and loose,' he cried.
'either one thing or the other. I love the maid, and she loves me; and
we will have one another, either with your leave, or without it. How
many more times am I to dance over these vile hills, and leave my
business, and get nothing more than a sigh or a kiss, and "Tom, I must
wait for mother"? You are famous for being straightforward, you Ridds.
Just treat me as I would treat you now.'

I looked at my mother; for a glance from her would have sent Tom out of
the window; but she checked me with her hand, and said, 'You have
some ground of complaint, sir; I will not deny it. Now I will be as
straight-forward with you, as even a Ridd is supposed to be. My son and
myself have all along disliked your marriage with Annie. Not for what
you have been so much, as for what we fear you will be. Have patience,
one moment, if you please. We do not fear your taking to the highway
life again; for that you are too clever, no doubt, now that you have
property. But we fear that you will take to drinking, and to squandering
money. There are many examples of this around us; and we know what the
fate of the wife is. It has been hard to tell you this, under our own
roof, and with our own--' Here mother hesitated.

'Spirits, and cider, and beer,' I broke in; 'out with it, like a Ridd,
mother; as he will have all of it.'

'Spirits, and cider, and beer,' said mother very firmly after me; and
then she gave way and said, 'You know, Tom, you are welcome to every
drop and more of it.'

Now Tom must have had a far sweeter temper than ever I could claim; for
I should have thrust my glass away, and never have taken another drop
in the house where such a check had met me. But instead of that, Master
Faggus replied, with a pleasant smile,--

'I know that I am welcome, good mother; and to prove it, I will have
some more.'

And thereupon be mixed himself another glass of hollands with lemon and
hot water, yet pouring it very delicately.

'Oh, I have been so miserable--take a little more, Tom,' said mother,
handing the bottle.

'Yes, take a little more,' I said; 'you have mixed it over weak, Tom.'

'If ever there was a sober man,' cried Tom, complying with our request;
'if ever there was in Christendom a man of perfect sobriety, that man is
now before you. Shall we say to-morrow week, mother? It will suit your
washing day.'

'How very thoughtful you are, Tom! Now John would never have thought of
that, in spite of all his steadiness.'

'Certainly not,' I answered proudly; 'when my time comes for Lorna, I
shall not study Betty Muxworthy.'

In this way the Squire got over us; and Farmer Nicholas Snowe was
sent for, to counsel with mother about the matter and to set his two
daughters sewing.

When the time for the wedding came, there was such a stir and commotion
as had never been known in the parish of Oare since my father's
marriage. For Annie's beauty and kindliness had made her the pride of
the neighbourhood; and the presents sent her, from all around, were
enough to stock a shop with. Master Stickles, who now could walk, and
who certainly owed his recovery, with the blessing of God, to Annie,
presented her with a mighty Bible, silver-clasped, and very handsome,
beating the parson's out and out, and for which he had sent to Taunton.
Even the common troopers, having tasted her cookery many times (to help
out their poor rations), clubbed together, and must have given at least
a week's pay apiece, to have turned out what they did for her. This was
no less than a silver pot, well-designed, but suited surely rather
to the bridegroom's taste than bride's. In a word, everybody gave her
things.

And now my Lorna came to me, with a spring of tears in appealing
eyes--for she was still somewhat childish, or rather, I should say, more
childish now than when she lived in misery--and she placed her little
hand in mine, and she was half afraid to speak, and dropped her eyes for
me to ask.

'What is it, little darling?' I asked, as I saw her breath come fast;
for the smallest emotion moved her form.

'You don't think, John, you don't think, dear, that you could lend me
any money?'

'All I have got,' I answered; 'how much do you want, dear heart?'

'I have been calculating; and I fear that I cannot do any good with less
than ten pounds, John.'

Here she looked up at me, with horror at the grandeur of the sum, and
not knowing what I could think of it. But I kept my eyes from her.
'Ten pounds!' I said in my deepest voice, on purpose to have it out
in comfort, when she should be frightened; 'what can you want with ten
pounds, child?'

'That is my concern, said Lorna, plucking up her spirit at this: 'when
a lady asks for a loan, no gentleman pries into the cause of her asking
it.'

'That may be as may be,' I answered in a judicial manner; 'ten pounds,
or twenty, you shall have. But I must know the purport.'

'Then that you never shall know, John. I am very sorry for asking you.
It is not of the smallest consequence. Oh, dear, no.' Herewith she was
running away.

'Oh, dear, yes,' I replied; 'it is of very great consequence; and I
understand the whole of it. You want to give that stupid Annie, who
has lost you a hundred thousand pounds, and who is going to be married
before us, dear--God only can tell why, being my younger sister--you
want to give her a wedding present. And you shall do it, darling;
because it is so good of you. Don't you know your title, love? How
humble you are with us humble folk. You are Lady Lorna something, so far
as I can make out yet: and you ought not even to speak to us. You will
go away and disdain us.'

'If you please, talk not like that, John. I will have nothing to do with
it, if it comes between you and me, John.'

'You cannot help yourself,' said I. And then she vowed that she could
and would. And rank and birth were banished from between our lips in no
time.

'What can I get her good enough? I am sure I do not know,' she asked:
'she has been so kind and good to me, and she is such a darling. How I
shall miss her, to be sure! By the bye, you seem to think, John, that I
shall be rich some day.'

'Of course you will. As rich as the French King who keeps ours. Would
the Lord Chancellor trouble himself about you, if you were poor?'

'Then if I am rich, perhaps you would lend me twenty pounds, dear John.
Ten pounds would be very mean for a wealthy person to give her.'

To this I agreed, upon condition that I should make the purchase myself,
whatever it might be. For nothing could be easier than to cheat Lorna
about the cost, until time should come for her paying me. And this was
better than to cheat her for the benefit of our family. For this end,
and for many others, I set off to Dulverton, bearing more commissions,
more messages, and more questions than a man of thrice my memory might
carry so far as the corner where the sawpit is. And to make things
worse, one girl or other would keep on running up to me, or even after
me (when started) with something or other she had just thought of, which
she could not possibly do without, and which I must be sure to remember,
as the most important of the whole.

To my dear mother, who had partly outlived the exceeding value of
trifles, the most important matter seemed to ensure Uncle Reuben's
countenance and presence at the marriage. And if I succeeded in this,
I might well forget all the maidens' trumpery. This she would have been
wiser to tell me when they were out of hearing; for I left her to fight
