away from the Hebrides, and arrived in Norway in the autumn.[25-1] Leif
went to the court of King Olaf Tryggvason.[25-2] He was well received by
the king, who felt that he could see that Leif was a man of great
accomplishments. Upon one occasion the king came to speech with Leif, and
asks him, "Is it thy purpose to sail to Greenland in the summer?" "It is
my purpose," said Leif, "if it be your will." "I believe it will be well,"
answers the king, "and thither thou shalt go upon my errand, to proclaim
Christianity there." Leif replied that the king should decide, but gave it
as his belief that it would be difficult to carry this mission to a
successful issue in Greenland. The king replied that he knew of no man who
would be better fitted for this undertaking, "and in thy hands the cause
will surely prosper." "This can only be," said Leif, "if I enjoy the grace
of your protection." Leif put to sea when his ship was ready for the
voyage. For a long time he was tossed about upon the ocean, and came upon
lands of which he had previously had no knowledge. There were self-sown
wheat[25-3] fields and vines growing there. There were also those trees
there which are called "mausur,"[25-4] and of all these they took
specimens. Some of the timbers were so large that they were used in
building. Leif found men upon a wreck, and took them home with him, and
procured quarters for them all during the winter. In this wise he showed
his nobleness and goodness, since he introduced Christianity into the
country, and saved the men from the wreck; and he was called Leif the
Lucky ever after. Leif landed in Ericsfirth, and then went home to
Brattahlid; he was well received by every one. He soon proclaimed
Christianity throughout the land, and the Catholic faith, and announced
King Olaf Tryggvason's messages to the people, telling them how much
excellence and how great glory accompanied this faith. Eric was slow in
forming the determination to forsake his old belief, but Thiodhild[26-1]
embraced the faith promptly, and caused a church to be built at some
distance from the house. This building was called Thiodhild's Church, and
there she and those persons who had accepted Christianity, and they were
many, were wont to offer their prayers. Thiodhild would not have
intercourse with Eric after that she had received the faith, whereat he
was sorely vexed.

At this time there began to be much talk about a voyage of exploration to
that country which Leif had discovered. The leader of this expedition was
Thorstein Ericsson, who was a good man and an intelligent, and blessed
with many friends. Eric was likewise invited to join them, for the men
believed that his luck and foresight would be of great furtherance. He
was slow in deciding, but did not say nay, when his friends besought him
to go. They thereupon equipped that ship in which Thorbiorn had come out,
and twenty men were selected for the expedition. They took little cargo
with them, nought else save their weapons and provisions. On that morning
when Eric set out from his home he took with him a little chest
containing gold and silver; he hid this treasure, and then went his way.
He had proceeded but a short distance, however, when he fell from his
horse and broke his ribs and dislocated his shoulder, whereat he cried
"Ai, ai!" By reason of this accident he sent his wife word that she
should procure the treasure which he had concealed, for to the hiding of
the treasure he attributed his misfortune. Thereafter they sailed
cheerily out of Ericsfirth in high spirits over their plan. They were
long tossed about upon the ocean, and could not lay the course they
wished. They came in sight of Iceland, and likewise saw birds from the
Irish coast.[27-1] Their ship was, in sooth, driven hither and thither
over the sea. In the autumn they turned back, worn out by toil, and
exposure to the elements, and exhausted by their labors, and arrived at
Ericsfirth at the very beginning of winter. Then said Eric, "More
cheerful were we in the summer, when we put out of the firth, but we
still live, and it might have been much worse." Thorstein answers, "It
will be a princely deed to endeavor to look well after the wants of all
these men who are now in need, and to make provision for them during the
winter." Eric answers, "It is ever true, as it is said, that 'it is never
clear ere the answer comes,' and so it must be here. We will act now upon
thy counsel in this matter." All of the men, who were not otherwise
provided for, accompanied the father and son. They landed thereupon, and
went home to Brattahlid, where they remained throughout the winter.

_Thorstein Ericsson weds Gudrid; Apparitions._--Now it is to be told that
Thorstein Ericsson sought Gudrid, Thorbiorn's daughter, in wedlock. His
suit was favorably received both by herself and by her father, and it was
decided that Thorstein should marry Gudrid, and the wedding was held at
Brattahlid in the autumn. The entertainment sped well, and was very
numerously attended. Thorstein had a home in the Western Settlement at a
certain farmstead, which is called Lysufirth. A half interest in this
property belonged to a man named Thorstein, whose wife's name was Sigrid.
Thorstein went to Lysufirth, in the autumn, to his namesake, and Gudrid
bore him company. They were well received, and remained there during the
winter. It came to pass that sickness appeared in their home early in the
winter. Gard was the name of the overseer there; he had few friends; he
fell sick first, and died. It was not long before one after another fell
sick and died. Then Thorstein, Eric's son, fell sick, and Sigrid, the
wife of Thorstein, his namesake; and one evening Sigrid wished to go to
the house, which stood over against the outer-door, and Gudrid
accompanied her; they were facing the outer-door when Sigrid uttered a
loud cry. "We have acted thoughtlessly," exclaimed Gudrid, "yet thou
needest not cry, though the cold strikes thee; let us go in again as
speedily as possible." Sigrid answers, "This may not be in this present
plight. All of the dead folk are drawn up here before the door now; among
them I see thy husband, Thorstein, and I can see myself there, and it is
distressful to look upon." But directly this had passed she exclaimed,
"Let us go now, Gudrid; I no longer see the band!" The overseer had
vanished from her sight, whereas it had seemed to her before that he
stood with a whip in his hand and made as if he would scourge the flock.
So they went in, and ere the morning came she was dead, and a coffin was
made ready for the corpse; and that same day the men planned to row out
to fish, and Thorstein accompanied them to the landing-place, and in the
twilight he went down to see their catch. Thorstein, Eric's son, then
sent word to his namesake that he should come to him, saying that all was
not as it should be there, for the housewife was endeavoring to rise to
her feet, and wished to get in under the clothes beside him, and when he
entered the room she was come up on the edge of the bed. He thereupon
seized her hands and held a pole-axe[28-1] before her breast. Thorstein,
Eric's son, died before night-fall. Thorstein, the master of the house,
bade Gudrid lie down and sleep, saying that he would keep watch over the
bodies during the night; thus she did, and early in the night, Thorstein,
Eric's son, sat up and spoke saying that he desired Gudrid to be called
thither, for that it was his wish to speak to her: "It is God's will that
this hour be given me for my own and for the betterment of my condition."
Thorstein, the master, went in search of Gudrid, and waked her, and bade
her cross herself, and pray God to help her; "Thorstein, Eric's son, has
said to me that he wishes to see thee; thou must take counsel with
thyself now, what thou wilt do, for I have no advice to give thee." She
replies, "It may be that this is intended to be one of those incidents
which shall afterward be held in remembrance, this strange event, and it
is my trust that God will keep watch over me; wherefore, under God's
mercy, I shall venture to him and learn what it is that he would say, for
I may not escape this if it be designed to bring me harm. I will do this,
lest he go further, for it is my belief that the matter is a grave one."
So Gudrid went and drew near to Thorstein, and he seemed to her to be
weeping. He spoke a few words in her ear, in a low tone, so that she
alone could hear them; but this he said so that all could hear, that
those persons would be blessed who kept well the faith, and that it
carried with it all help and consolation, and yet many there were, said
he, who kept it but ill. "This is no proper usage which has obtained here
in Greenland since Christianity was introduced here, to inter men in
unconsecrated earth, with nought but a brief funeral service. It is my
wish that I be conveyed to the church, together with the others who have
died here; Gard, however, I would have you burn upon a pyre, as speedily
as possible, since he has been the cause of all of the apparitions which
have been seen here during the winter." He spoke to her also of her own
destiny, and said that she had a notable future in store for her, but he
bade her beware of marrying any Greenlander; he directed her also to give
their property to the church and to the poor, and then sank down again a
second time. It had been the custom in Greenland, after Christianity was
introduced there, to bury persons on the farmsteads where they died, in
unconsecrated earth; a pole was erected in the ground, touching the
breast of the dead, and subsequently, when the priests came thither, the
pole was withdrawn and holy water poured in [the orifice], and the
funeral service held there, although it might be long thereafter. The
bodies of the dead were conveyed to the church at Ericsfirth, and the
funeral services held there by the clergy. Thorbiorn died soon after
this, and all of his property then passed into Gudrid's possession. Eric
took her to his home and carefully looked after her affairs.

_Concerning Thord of Hoefdi._--There was a man named Thord, who lived at
Hoefdi on Hoefdi-strands. He married Fridgerd, daughter of Thori the
Loiterer and Fridgerd, daughter of Kiarval the King of the Irish. Thord
was a son of Biorn Chestbutter, son of Thorvald Spine, Asleik's son, the
son of Biorn Iron-side, the son of Ragnar Shaggy-breeks. They had a son
named Snorri. He married Thorhild Ptarmigan, daughter of Thord the
Yeller. Their son was Thord Horse-head. Thorfinn Karlsefni[30-1] was the
name of Thord's son. Thorfinn's mother's name was Thorunn. Thorfinn was
engaged in trading voyages, and was reputed to be a successful merchant.
One summer Karlsefni equipped his ship, with the intention of sailing to
Greenland. Snorri, Thorbrand's son, of Alptafirth accompanied him, and
there were forty men on board the ship with them. There was a man named
Biarni, Grimolf's son, a man from Breidafirth, and another named
Thorhall, Gamli's son, an East-firth man. They equipped their ship, the
same summer as Karlsefni, with the intention of making a voyage to
Greenland; they had also forty men in their ship. When they were ready to
sail, the two ships put to sea together. It has not been recorded how
long a voyage they had; but it is to be told, that both of the ships
arrived at Ericsfirth in the autumn. Eric and other of the inhabitants of
the country rode to the ships, and a goodly trade was soon established
between them. Gudrid was requested by the skippers to take such of their
wares as she wished, while Eric, on his part, showed great munificence in
return, in that he extended an invitation to both crews to accompany him
home for winter quarters at Brattahlid. The merchants accepted this
invitation, and went with Eric. Their wares were then conveyed to
Brattahlid; nor was there lack there of good and commodious store-houses,
in which to keep them; nor was there wanting much of that, which they
needed, and the merchants were well pleased with their entertainment at
Eric's home during that winter. Now as it drew toward Yule, Eric became
very taciturn, and less cheerful than had been his wont. On one occasion
Karlsefni entered into conversation with Eric, and said: "Hast thou aught
weighing upon thee, Eric? The folk have remarked, that thou art somewhat
more silent than thou hast been hitherto. Thou hast entertained us with
great liberality, and it behooves us to make such return as may lie
within our power. Do thou now but make known the cause of thy
melancholy." Eric answers: "Ye accept hospitality gracefully, and in
manly wise, and I am not pleased that ye should be the sufferers by
reason of our intercourse; rather am I troubled at the thought, that it
should be given out elsewhere, that ye have never passed a worse Yule
than this, now drawing nigh, when Eric the Red was your host at
Brattahlid in Greenland." "There shall be no cause for that," replies
Karlsefni, "we have malt, and meal, and corn in our ships, and you are
welcome to take of these whatsoever you wish, and to provide as liberal
an entertainment as seems fitting to you." Eric accepts this offer, and
preparations were made for the Yule feast, and it was so sumptuous, that
it seemed to the people they had scarcely ever seen so grand an
entertainment before. And after Yule, Karlsefni broached the subject of a
marriage with Gudrid to Eric, for he assumed that with him rested the
right to bestow her hand in marriage. Eric answers favorably, and says,
that she would accomplish the fate in store for her, adding that he had
heard only good reports of him. And, not to prolong this, the result was,
that Thorfinn was betrothed to Thurid,[31-1] and the banquet was
augmented, and their wedding was celebrated; and this befell at
Brattahlid during the winter.

_Beginning of the Wineland Voyages._--About this time there began to be
much talk at Brattahlid, to the effect that Wineland the Good should be
explored, for, it was said, that country must be possessed of many goodly
qualities. And so it came to pass, that Karlsefni and Snorri fitted out
their ship, for the purpose of going in search of that country in the
spring. Biarni and Thorhall joined the expedition with their ship, and
the men who had borne them company. There was a man named Thorvard; he
was wedded to Freydis, a natural daughter of Eric the Red. He also
accompanied them, together with Thorvald, Eric's son, and Thorhall, who
was called the Huntsman. He had been for a long time with Eric as his
hunter and fisherman during the summer, and as his steward during the
winter. Thorhall was stout and swarthy, and of giant stature; he was a
man of few words, though given to abusive language, when he did speak,
and he ever incited Eric to evil. He was a poor Christian; he had a wide
knowledge of the unsettled regions. He was on the same ship with Thorvard
and Thorvald. They had that ship which Thorbiorn had brought out. They
had in all one hundred and sixty men, when they sailed to the Western
Settlement,[32-1] and thence to Bear Island. Thence they bore away to the
southward two "doegr."[32-2] Then they saw land, and launched a boat,
and explored the land, and found there large flat stones [_hellur_], and
many of these were twelve ells wide; there were many Arctic foxes there.
They gave a name to the country, and called it Helluland [the land of
flat stones]. Then they sailed with northerly winds two "doegr," and
land then lay before them, and upon it was a great wood and many wild
beasts; an island lay off the land to the south-east, and there they
found a bear, and they called this Biarney [Bear Island], while the land
where the wood was they called Markland [Forest-land]. Thence they
sailed southward along the land for a long time, and came to a cape; the
land lay upon the starboard; there were long strands and sandy banks
there. They rowed to the land and found upon the cape there the keel of
a ship, and they called it there Kialarnes [Keelness]; they also called
the strands Furdustrandir [Wonder-strands], because they were so long to
sail by.[33-1] Then the country became indented with bays, and they
steered their ships into a bay. It was when Leif was with King Olaf
Tryggvason, and he bade him proclaim Christianity to Greenland, that the
king gave him two Gaels; the man's name was Haki, and the woman's
Haekia. The king advised Leif to have recourse to these people, if he
should stand in need of fleetness, for they were swifter than deer. Eric
and Leif had tendered Karlsefni the services of this couple. Now when
they had sailed past Wonder-strands, they put the Gaels ashore, and
directed them to run to the southward, and investigate the nature of the
country, and return again before the end of the third half-day. They
were each clad in a garment, which they called "kiafal,"[33-2] which was
so fashioned, that it had a hood at the top, was open at the sides, was
sleeveless, and was fastened between the legs with buttons and loops,
while elsewhere they were naked. Karlsefni and his companions cast
anchor, and lay there during their absence; and when they came again,
one of them carried a bunch of grapes, and the other an ear of new-sown
wheat. They went on board the ship, whereupon Karlsefni and his
followers held on their way, until they came to where the coast was
indented with bays. They stood into a bay with their ships. There was an
island out at the mouth of the bay, about which there were strong
currents, wherefore they called it Straumey [Stream Isle]. There were so
many birds[33-3] there, that it was scarcely possible to step between
the eggs. They sailed through the firth, and called it Straumfiord
[Streamfirth], and carried their cargoes ashore from the ships, and
established themselves there. They had brought with them all kinds of
live-stock. It was a fine country there. There were mountains
thereabouts. They occupied themselves exclusively with the exploration
of the country. They remained there during the winter, and they had
taken no thought for this during the summer. The fishing began to fail,
and they began to fall short of food. Then Thorhall the Huntsman
disappeared. They had already prayed to God for food, but it did not
come as promptly as their necessities seemed to demand. They searched
for Thorhall for three half-days, and found him on a projecting crag. He
was lying there, and looking up at the sky, with mouth and nostrils
agape, and mumbling something. They asked him why he had gone thither;
he replied, that this did not concern any one. They asked him then to go
home with them, and he did so. Soon after this a whale appeared there,
and they captured it, and flensed it, and no one could tell what manner
of whale it was; and when the cooks had prepared it, they ate of it, and
were all made ill by it. Then Thorhall, approaching them, says: "Did not
the Red-beard[34-1] prove more helpful than your Christ? This is my
reward for the verses which I composed to Thor, the Trustworthy; seldom
has he failed me." When the people heard this, they cast the whale down
into the sea, and made their appeals to God. The weather then improved,
and they could now row out to fish, and thenceforward they had no lack
of provisions, for they could hunt game on the land, gather eggs on the
island, and catch fish from the sea.

_Concerning Karlsefni and Thorhall._--It is said, that Thorhall wished to
sail to the northward beyond Wonder-strands, in search of Wineland, while
Karlsefni desired to proceed to the southward, off the coast. Thorhall
prepared for his voyage out below the island, having only nine men in his
party, for all of the remainder of the company went with Karlsefni. And
one day when Thorhall was carrying water aboard his ship, and was
drinking, he recited this ditty:[35-1]

    When I came, these brave men told me,
      Here the best of drink I'd get,
    Now with water-pail behold me,--
      Wine and I are strangers yet.
    Stooping at the spring, I've tested
      All the wine this land affords;
    Of its vaunted charms divested,
      Poor indeed are its rewards.

And when they were ready, they hoisted sail; whereupon Thorhall recited
this ditty:[35-2]

    Comrades, let us now be faring
      Homeward to our own again!
    Let us try the sea-steed's daring,
      Give the chafing courser rein.
    Those who will may bide in quiet,
      Let them praise their chosen land,
    Feasting on a whale-steak diet,
      In their home by Wonder-strand.

Then they sailed away to the northward past Wonder-strands and Keelness,
intending to cruise to the westward around the cape. They encountered
westerly gales, and were driven ashore in Ireland,[35-3] where they were
grievously maltreated and thrown into slavery. There Thorhall lost his
life, according to that which traders have related.

It is now to be told of Karlsefni, that he cruised southward off the
coast, with Snorri and Biarni, and their people. They sailed for a long
time, and until they came at last to a river, which flowed down from the
land into a lake, and so into the sea. There were great bars at the mouth
of the river, so that it could only be entered at the height of the
flood-tide. Karlsefni and his men sailed into the mouth of the river, and
called it there Hop [a small land-locked bay]. They found self-sown
wheat-fields on the land there, wherever there were hollows, and wherever
there was hilly ground, there were vines.[36-1] Every brook there was
full of fish. They dug pits, on the shore where the tide rose highest,
and when the tide fell, there were halibut in the pits. There were great
numbers of wild animals of all kinds in the woods. They remained there
half a month, and enjoyed themselves, and kept no watch. They had their
live-stock with them. Now one morning early, when they looked about them,
they saw a great number of skin-canoes,[36-2] and staves were brandished
from the boats, with a noise like flails, and they were revolved in the
same direction in which the sun moves. Then said Karlsefni: "What may
this betoken?" Snorri, Thorbrand's son, answers him: "It may be, that
this is a signal of peace, wherefore let us take a white shield and
display it." And thus they did. Thereupon the strangers rowed toward
them, and went upon the land, marvelling at those whom they saw before
them. They were swarthy men,[36-3] and ill-looking, and the hair of their
heads was ugly. They had great eyes,[36-4] and were broad of cheek. They
tarried there for a time looking curiously at the people they saw before
them, and then rowed away, and to the southward around the point.

Karlsefni and his followers had built their huts above the lake, some of
their dwellings being near the lake, and others farther away. Now they
remained there that winter. No snow came there, and all of their
live-stock lived by grazing.[37-1] And when spring opened, they
discovered, early one morning, a great number of skin-canoes, rowing from
the south past the cape, so numerous, that it looked as if coals had been
scattered broadcast out before the bay; and on every boat staves were
waved. Thereupon Karlsefni and his people displayed their shields, and
when they came together, they began to barter with each other. Especially
did the strangers wish to buy red cloth, for which they offered in
exchange peltries and quite gray skins. They also desired to buy swords
and spears, but Karlsefni and Snorri forbade this. In exchange for
perfect unsullied skins, the Skrellings would take red stuff a span in
length, which they would bind around their heads. So their trade went on
for a time, until Karlsefni and his people began to grow short of cloth,
when they divided it into such narrow pieces, that it was not more than a
finger's breadth wide, but the Skrellings still continued to give just as
much for this as before, or more.

It so happened, that a bull,[37-2] which belonged to Karlsefni and his
people, ran out from the woods, bellowing loudly. This so terrified the
Skrellings, that they sped out to their canoes, and then rowed away to
the southward along the coast. For three entire weeks nothing more was
seen of them. At the end of this time, however, a great multitude of
Skrelling boats was discovered approaching from the south, as if a stream
were pouring down, and all of their staves were waved in a direction
contrary to the course of the sun, and the Skrellings were all uttering
loud cries. Thereupon Karlsefni and his men took red shields and
displayed them. The Skrellings sprang from their boats, and they met
then, and fought together. There was a fierce shower of missiles, for the
Skrellings had war-slings. Karlsefni and Snorri observed, that the
Skrellings raised up on a pole a great ball-shaped body, almost the size
of a sheep's belly, and nearly black in color, and this they hurled from
the pole up on the land above Karlsefni's followers, and it made a
frightful noise, where it fell. Whereat a great fear seized upon
Karlsefni, and all his men, so that they could think of nought but
flight, and of making their escape up along the river bank, for it seemed
to them, that the troop of the Skrellings was rushing towards them from
every side, and they did not pause, until they came to certain jutting
crags, where they offered a stout resistance. Freydis came out, and
seeing that Karlsefni and his men were fleeing, she cried: "Why do ye
flee from these wretches, such worthy men as ye, when, meseems, ye might
slaughter them like cattle. Had I but a weapon, methinks, I would fight
better than any one of you!" They gave no heed to her words. Freydis
sought to join them, but lagged behind, for she was not hale;[38-1] she
followed them, however, into the forest, while the Skrellings pursued
her; she found a dead man in front of her; this was Thorbrand, Snorri's
son, his skull cleft by a flat stone; his naked sword lay beside him; she
took it up, and prepared to defend herself with it. The Skrellings then
approached her, whereupon she stripped down her shift, and slapped her
breast with the naked sword. At this the Skrellings were terrified and
ran down to their boats, and rowed away. Karlsefni and his companions,
however, joined her and praised her valor. Two of Karlsefni's men had
fallen, and a great number of the Skrellings. Karlsefni's party had been
overpowered by dint of superior numbers. They now returned to their
dwellings, and bound up their wounds, and weighed carefully what throng
of men that could have been, which had seemed to descend upon them from
the land; it now seemed to them, that there could have been but the one
party, that which came from the boats, and that the other troop must have
been an ocular delusion. The Skrellings, moreover, found a dead man, and
an axe lay beside him. One of their number picked up the axe, and struck
at a tree with it, and one after another [they tested it], and it seemed
to them to be a treasure, and to cut well; then one of their number
seized it, and hewed at a stone with it, so that the axe broke, whereat
they concluded that it could be of no use, since it would not withstand
stone, and they cast it away.

It now seemed clear to Karlsefni and his people, that although the
country thereabouts was attractive, their life would be one of constant
dread and turmoil by reason of the [hostility of the] inhabitants of the
country, so they forthwith prepared to leave, and determined to return to
their own country. They sailed to the northward off the coast, and found
five Skrellings, clad in skin-doublets, lying asleep near the sea. There
were vessels beside them, containing animal marrow, mixed with blood.
Karlsefni and his company concluded that they must have been banished
from their own land. They put them to death. They afterwards found a
cape, upon which there was a great number of animals, and this cape
looked as if it were one cake of dung, by reason of the animals which lay
there at night. They now arrived again at Streamfirth, where they found
great abundance of all those things of which they stood in need. Some men
say, that Biarni and Freydis remained behind here with a hundred men, and
went no further; while Karlsefni and Snorri proceeded to the southward
with forty men, tarrying at Hop barely two months, and returning again
the same summer. Karlsefni then set out with one ship, in search of
Thorhall the Huntsman, but the greater part of the company remained
behind. They sailed to the northward around Keelness, and then bore to
the westward, having land to the larboard.[40-1] The country there was a
wooded wilderness, as far as they could see, with scarcely an open space;
and when they had journeyed a considerable distance, a river flowed down
from the east toward the west. They sailed into the mouth of the river,
and lay to by the southern bank.

_The Slaying of Thorvald, Eric's son._--It happened one morning, that
Karlsefni and his companions discovered in an open space in the woods
above them, a speck, which seemed to shine toward them, and they shouted
at it: it stirred, and it was a Uniped,[40-2] who skipped down to the
bank of the river by which they were lying. Thorvald, a son of Eric the
Red, was sitting at the helm, and the Uniped shot an arrow into his
inwards. Thorvald drew out the arrow, and exclaimed: "There is fat around
my paunch; we have hit upon a fruitful country, and yet we are not like
to get much profit of it." Thorvald died soon after from this wound. Then
the Uniped ran away back toward the north. Karlsefni and his men pursued
him, and saw him from time to time. The last they saw of him, he ran down
into a creek. Then they turned back; whereupon one of the men recited
this ditty:[40-3]

    Eager, our men, up hill down dell,
      Hunted a Uniped;
    Hearken, Karlsefni, while they tell
      How swift the quarry fled!

Then they sailed away back toward the north, and believed they had got
sight of the land of the Unipeds; nor were they disposed to risk the
lives of their men any longer. They concluded that the mountains of Hop,
and those which they had now found, formed one chain, and this appeared
to be so because they were about an equal distance removed from
Streamfirth, in either direction.[41-1] They sailed back, and passed the
third winter at Streamfirth. Then the men began to divide into factions,
of which the women were the cause; and those who were without wives,
endeavored to seize upon the wives of those who were married, whence the
greatest trouble arose. Snorri, Karlsefni's son, was born the first
autumn, and he was three winters old when they took their departure. When
they sailed away from Wineland, they had a southerly wind, and so came
upon Markland, where they found five Skrellings,[41-2] of whom one was
bearded, two were women, and two were children. Karlsefni and his people
took the boys, but the others escaped, and these Skrellings sank down
into the earth. They bore the lads away with them, and taught them to
speak, and they were baptized. They said, that their mother's name was
Vaetilldi, and their father's Uvaegi. They said, that kings governed the
Skrellings, one of whom was called Avalldamon, and the other
Valldidida.[41-3] They stated, that there were no houses there, and that
the people lived in caves or holes. They said, that there was a land on
the other side over against their country, which was inhabited by people
who wore white garments, and yelled loudly, and carried poles before
them, to which rags were attached;[42-1] and people believe that this
must have been Hvitramanna-land [White-men's-land], or Ireland the
Great.[42-2] Now they arrived in Greenland, and remained during the
winter with Eric the Red.

Biarni, Grimolf's son, and his companions were driven out into the
Atlantic,[42-3] and came into a sea, which was filled with worms, and
their ship began to sink beneath them. They had a boat, which had been
coated with seal-tar; this the sea-worm does not penetrate. They took
their places in this boat, and then discovered that it would not hold
them all. Then said Biarni: "Since the boat will not hold more than half
of our men, it is my advice, that the men who are to go in the boat, be
chosen by lot, for this selection must not be made according to rank."
This seemed to them all such a manly offer, that no one opposed it. So
they adopted this plan, the men casting lots; and it fell to Biarni to go
in the boat, and half of the men with him, for it would not hold more.
But when the men were come into the boat, an Icelander, who was in the
ship, and who had accompanied Biarni from Iceland, said: "Dost thou
intend, Biarni, to forsake me here?" "It must be even so," answers
Biarni. "Not such was the promise thou gavest my father," he answers,
"when I left Iceland with thee, that thou wouldst thus part with me, when
thou saidst, that we should both share the same fate." "So be it, it
shall not rest thus," answers Biarni; "do thou come hither, and I will go
to the ship, for I see that thou art eager for life." Biarni thereupon
boarded the ship, and this man entered the boat, and they went their way,
until they came to Dublin in Ireland, and there they told this tale; now
it is the belief of most people, that Biarni and his companions perished
in the maggot-sea, for they were never heard of afterward.

_Karlsefni and his Wife Thurid's Issue._--The following summer Karlsefni
sailed to Iceland and Gudrid with him, and he went home to Reyniness. His
mother believed that he had made a poor match, and she was not at home
the first winter. However, when she became convinced that Gudrid was a
very superior woman, she returned to her home, and they lived happily
together. Hallfrid was a daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son, she was the
mother of Bishop Thorlak,[43-1] Runolf's son. They had a son named
Thorbiorn, whose daughter's name was Thorunn, [she was] Bishop
Biorn's[43-2] mother. Thorgeir was the name of a son of Snorri,
Karlsefni's son, [he was] the father of Ingveld, mother of Bishop Brand
the Elder. Steinunn was a daughter of Snorri, Karlsefni's son, who
married Einar, a son of Grundar-Ketil, a son of Thorvald Crook, a son of
Thori of Espihol. Their son was Thorstein the Unjust, he was the father
of Gudrun, who married Jorund of Keldur. Their daughter was Halla, the
mother of Flosi, the father of Valgerd, the mother of Herra Erlend the
Stout, the father of Herra Hauk the Lawman. Another daughter of Flosi was
Thordis, the mother of Fru Ingigerd the Mighty. Her daughter was Fru
Hallbera, Abbess of Reyniness at Stad. Many other great people in Iceland
are descended from Karlsefni and Thurid, who are not mentioned here. God
be with us, Amen!

FOOTNOTES:

[14-1] The translation that follows, by Arthur Middleton Reeves, is based
on the text of Hauk's Book, No. 544 of the Arna-Magnaean Collection,
collated with No. 557 of the same collection. In _Origines Islandicae_,
II. 610, this saga is called "The Story of Thorfinn Carlsemne."

[14-2] The rubrics here given in italics are found in the original
manuscript.

[14-3] In eastern Norway.

[14-4] From 853 to 871.

[15-1] A blank in the original manuscript.

[15-2] This introductory paragraph, giving at the end the ancestry of
Gudrid, the daughter of Thorbiorn Vifilson and a prominent figure in the
Vinland voyages, seems to come first on account of the earlier historical
allusions that it contains. The account of Gudrid is continued in the
third paragraph.

[15-3] In southwestern Norway.

[16-1] Movable planks used in constructing the lock-beds of the sleeping
apartment. They were often beautifully carved, and hence valuable.

[16-2] An island midway between Iceland and Greenland, discovered in the
latter part of the ninth century. Gunnbiorn was a Norwegian. This island
is no longer above the surface. See Fiske, _The Discovery of America_, p.
242.

[17-1] This should read _Eastern_ Settlement, evidently a clerical error
in an original manuscript, as both Hauk's Book and AM. 557 reproduce it.
There were two settlements in Greenland, the Eastern and Western, both,
however, to the westward of Cape Farewell, and between that cape on the
south and Disco Island on the north. Ericsey (_i.e._, Eric's Island) was
at the mouth of Ericsfirth, near the present Julianshaab. For further
details on the geography of these settlements, see Reeves, _The Finding
of Wineland the Good_, p. 166, (25), and Fiske, _The Discovery of
America_, I. 158, note.

[17-2] On the western coast of Greenland, about 70 deg. N. Lat.

[17-3] The saga up to this point is taken from Landnama-bok, the great
Icelandic authority on early genealogy and history. It might well have
included one more paragraph (the succeeding one), which gives an
approximate date to the colonization of Greenland: "Ari, Thorgil's son,
says that that summer twenty-five ships sailed to Greenland out of
Borgfirth and Broadfirth; but fourteen only reached their destination;
some were driven back, and some were lost. This was sixteen [S: fifteen]
winters before Christianity was legally adopted in Iceland." That is, in
about 985, as Christianity was accepted in 1000 (or 1001). There is a
possible variation of a year in the usually accepted date. See _Origines
Islandicae_, I. 369.

[20-1] "Winter-night-tide" was about the middle of October.

[23-1] The home of Eric the Red, in the Eastern Settlement.

[24-1] This was evidently the first time that the voyage from Greenland
to Norway was accomplished without going by way of Iceland, and was a
remarkable achievement. The aim was evidently to avoid the dangerous
passage between Greenland and Iceland.

[24-2] A reference to some strange happenings in the winter of 1000-1001
at the Icelandic farmstead Froda, as related in the Eyrbyggja Saga.

[25-1] Of the year 999. See next note.

[25-2] King Olaf ruled from 995 to 1000. He fell at the battle of Svolder
