representative of the sovereign, and possessed all his prerogatives
within his jurisdiction. His power was as supreme as that of the king
over every department, civil and military. He appointed most of the
important officers of the vice-royalty. His court was formed on the model
of Madrid, and displayed an equal and often superior degree of
magnificence and state. He had horse and foot guards, a regular household
establishment and all the ensigns and trappings of royalty. The tribunals
which assisted in the administration were similar to those of the parent
country. The Spanish-American colonies, in brief, possessed no political
privileges; the authority of the crown was absolute, but not more so than
in the parent State, and it could hardly have been expected that
liberties denied to the people at home would have been granted to
subjects in distant America.

Over the viceroys, and acting for the sovereign, was the tribunal called
the Council of the Indies, established by King Ferdinand in 1511, and
remodeled by Charles V. in 1524. This Council possessed general
jurisdiction over Spanish-America; framed laws and regulations respecting
the colonies, and made all the appointments for America reserved to the
crown. All officers, from the viceroy to the lowest in rank, could be
called to account by the Council of the Indies. The king was supposed to
be always present in the Council, and the meetings were held wherever the
monarch was residing. All appeals from the decisions of the Courts of
Audience, the highest tribunals in America, were made to the Council of
the Indies.

The absolute power of the sovereign did not stop short at the Church.
Pope Julian II. conferred on King Ferdinand and his successors the
patronage and disposal of all ecclesiastical benefices in America, and
the administration of ecclesiastical revenues--a privilege which the
crown did not possess in Spain. The bulls of the Roman pontiff could not
be admitted into Spanish America until they had been examined and
approved by the king and Council of the Indies. The hierarchy was as
imposing as in Spain, and its dominion and influence greater. The
archbishops, bishops and other dignitaries enjoyed large revenues, and
the ecclesiastical establishment was splendid and magnificent. The
Inquisition was introduced in America in 1570 by Philip II., the
oppressor of Protestant England and of the Netherlands, and patron of the
monster Alva. The native Indians, on the ground of incapacity, were
exempted from the jurisdiction of that tribunal. No scruple was shown,
however, in converting the natives to Christianity, and multitudes were
baptized who were entirely ignorant of the doctrine they professed to
embrace. In the course of a few years after the reduction of the Mexican
empire, more than four millions of the Mexicans were nominally converted,
one missionary baptizing five thousand in one day, and stopping only when
he had become so exhausted as to be unable to lift his hands.

Conversion to Christianity did not save the Indians from being reduced to
slavery. Columbus himself, in the year 1499, to avoid the consequences of
a disaffection among his followers, granted lands and distributed a
certain number of Indians among them to cultivate the soil. This system
was afterward introduced in all the Spanish settlements, the Indians
being everywhere seized upon and compelled to work in the mines, to till
the plantations, to carry burdens and to perform all menial and laborious
services. The stated tasks of the unhappy natives were often much beyond
their abilities, and multitudes sank under the hardships to which they
were subjected. Their spirit was broken, they became humble and degraded,
and the race was rapidly wasting away. The oppressions and sufferings of
the natives at length excited the sympathies of many humane persons,
particularly among the clergy, who exerted themselves with much zeal and
perseverance to ameliorate their condition. In 1542 Charles V. abolished
the enslavement of the Indians, and restored them to the position of
freemen. This caused great indignation in the colonies and in Peru
forcible resistance was offered to the royal decree. But although
relieved in some degree from the burdens of personal slavery, the natives
were required, as vassals of the crown, to pay a personal tax or tribute
in the form of personal service. They were also put under the protection
of great landholders, who treated them as serfs, although not exacting
continuous labor, so that during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
the condition of the Indians did not greatly improve.

Notwithstanding the avidity of the first Spanish adventurers for the
precious metals, and the ardor with which they pursued their researches,
their exertions were attended for a number of years with but little
success. It was not until 1545 that the rich mines of Potosi, in Peru,
were accidentally discovered by an Indian in clambering up the mountain.
This was soon followed by the discovery of other highly productive mines
of gold and silver in the various provinces, and Spanish America began to
pour a flood of wealth into the coffers of Spain. The mines were not
operated by the crown, but by individual enterprise, the crown receiving
a share of the proceeds, and alloting a certain number of Indians to the
mine-owners as laborers. These Indians did all the work of the mine
without the aid of machinery, and with very little assistance from
horse-power. Their industry enriched Spain and her colonies to a degree
unexampled in the previous experience of mankind.

                        *          *          *

Silver and gold, however, did not bring lasting prosperity. Already in
the early part of the seventeenth century Spain showed signs of decay.
Her manufactures and commerce began to decline; men could not be
recruited to keep up her fleets and armies, and even agriculture felt the
blight of national degeneracy. The great emigration to the colonies
drained off the energetic element of the population and the immense
riches which the colonies showered upon Spain intoxicated the people and
led them to desert the accustomed paths of industry. Nineteen-twentieths
of the commodities exported to the Spanish colonies were foreign fabrics,
paid for by the products of the mines, so that the gold and silver no
sooner entered Spain than they passed away into the hands of foreigners,
and the country was left without sufficient of the precious metals for a
circulating medium.

Although wholly unable to supply the wants of her colonies Spain did not
relax in the smallest degree the rigor of her colonial system, the
controlling principle of which was that the whole commerce of the
colonies should be a monopoly in the hands of the crown. The regulation
of this commerce was entrusted to the Board of Trade, established at
Seville.

This board granted a license to any vessel bound to America, and
inspected its cargo. The entire commerce with the colonies centred in
Seville, and continued there until 1720. It was carried on in a uniform
manner for more than two centuries. A fleet with a strong convoy sailed
annually for America. The fleet consisted of two divisions, one destined
for Carthagena and Porto Bello, the other for Vera Cruz. At those points
all the trade and treasure of Spanish America from California to the
Straits of Magellan, was concentrated, the products of Peru and Chili
being conveyed annually by sea to Panama, and from thence across the
isthmus to Porto Bello, part of the way on mules, and part of the way
down the Chagres river. The storehouses of Porto Bello, now a decayed and
miserable town, retaining no shadow of former greatness, were filled with
merchandise, and its streets thronged with opulent merchants drawn from
distant provinces. Upon the arrival of the fleet a fair was opened,
continuing for forty days, during which the most extensive commercial
transactions took place, and the rich cargoes of the galleons were all
marketed, and the specie and staples of the colonies received in payment
to be conveyed to Spain. The same exchange occurred at Vera Cruz, and
both squadrons having taken in their return cargoes, rendezvoused at
Havana, and sailed from thence to Europe. Such was the stinted, fettered
and restricted commerce which subsisted between Spain and her possessions
in America for more than two centuries and a half, and such were the
swaddling clothes which bound the youthful limbs of the Spanish colonies,
retarding their growth and keeping them in a condition of abject
dependence. The effect was most injurious to Spain as well as to the
colonies. The naval superiority of the English and Dutch enabled them in
time of war to cut off intercourse between Spain and America, and thereby
deprive Spanish-Americans of the necessaries as well as the luxuries for
which they depended upon Spain, and an extensive smuggling trade grew up
which no efforts on the part of the authorities could repress. Monopoly
was starved out through the very rigor exerted to make it exclusive, and
the markets were so glutted with contraband goods that the galleons could
scarcely dispose of their cargoes.

The restrictions upon the domestic intercourse and commerce of the
Spanish colonies were, if possible, more grievous and pernicious in their
consequences than those upon traffic with Europe. Inter-colonial commerce
was prohibited under the severest penalties, the crown insisting that all
trade should be carried on through Spain and made tributary to the
oppressive duties exacted by the government. While Spain received a
considerable revenue from her colonies, notwithstanding the contraband
trade, the expenses of the system were very great, and absorbed much of
the revenue. Corruption was widespread, and colonial officers looked upon
their positions chiefly with a view to their own enrichment. They had no
patriotic interest in the welfare of the colonies, and conducted
themselves like a garrison quartered upon the inhabitants. Although
salaries were high the expenses of living were great, and the salaries
were usually but a small part of the income. Viceroys who had been in
office a few years, went back to Spain with princely fortunes.

                        *          *          *

Such was the condition of affairs in Spain's vast American empire when
England, France and the United Provinces started on a career of
colonization in North America. It seems to have been providential that
the same generation which witnessed the discovery of America witnessed
the birth of Luther. In the century which followed the Theses of
Wittenberg the eyes of sufferers for conscience' sake turned eagerly and
hopefully toward the New World as a refuge from the oppression, the
scandal and the persecution of the old. The first to seek what is now the
Atlantic region of the United States with the object of making their home
here were French Huguenots, sent out by the great Admiral Coligny, who
afterward fell a victim in the massacre of Bartholomew's Day. The
Frenchmen planted a settlement first at Port Royal, which was abandoned,
and afterward built a fort about eighteen miles up the St. John's River,
Florida, and named it Fort Caroline. This was in the year 1564. In the
following year a Spanish fleet, commanded by Don Pedro Menendez de
Aviles, appeared at the mouth of the St. John's. In answer to the French
challenge as to his purpose the Spanish commander replied that he came
with orders from his king to gibbet and behead all the Protestants in
those regions. "The Frenchman, who is a Catholic," he added, "I will
spare. Every heretic shall die." The Huguenots, had they held together,
might have been able to offer a successful resistance to the Spaniards,
but Jean Ribault, the French commander, unfortunately decided to sail out
from the shelter of Fort Caroline and seek a conflict at sea with the
enemy. A storm destroyed the French fleet, but the crews succeeded in
escaping to land. Menendez marched overland with his troops to the
unprotected fort and easily captured it with its handful of defenders.
The Spaniards cruelly murdered almost the entire colony of two hundred
men, women and children, some of them being hung to trees with the
inscription: "Not as Frenchmen, but as Lutherans."

Ribault, ignorant of the tragedy at the fort, sought to return there from
the place where he had been shipwrecked. His men were divided in two
detachments. Menendez went in search of them, and meeting one party told
them that Fort Caroline, with its inmates, had been destroyed. The
Frenchmen were helpless, and pleaded for mercy. Menendez asked: "Are you
Catholics or Lutherans?" They answered: "We are of the reformed
religion." The pitiless Spaniard replied that he was under orders to
exterminate all of that faith. They offered him fifty thousand ducats if
he would spare their lives. Menendez demanded that the Frenchmen should
place themselves at his mercy. They consented to do so. A small stream
divided the Huguenots from the Spaniards. Menendez ordered that the
French should cross over in companies of ten. As they crossed they were
taken out of sight of their companions and bound with their arms behind
them. When all of the Frenchmen, about two hundred in number, had been
thus secured, Menendez again asked them: "Are you Catholics or
Lutherans?" Some twelve professed to be Catholics, and these with four
mechanics who could be made useful to the Spaniards, were led away. The
remainder of the two hundred were put to death. Menendez next intercepted
Ribault and the remnant of his men, and by similar treachery accomplished
their destruction, refusing an offer of one hundred thousand ducats to
spare their lives. Menendez wrote to King Phillip that the Huguenots
"were put to the sword, judging this to be expedient for the service of
God our Lord, and of your majesty."

Thus ended the first attempt of members of the reformed religion to
settle within the limits of what is now the United States. But the blood
of the victims did not cry in vain to Heaven for vengeance. A Frenchman,
himself a Roman Catholic, the Chevalier Dominic de Gourges, determined to
punish the Spaniards for their cruelty. He sold his property to obtain
money to fit out an expedition to Florida. Arriving in Florida in the
spring of 1568, he was joined by the natives in an attack on two forts
occupied by the Spaniards below Fort Caroline. The forts were captured
and their inmates put to the sword, except a few whom de Gourges hung to
trees with the inscription: "Not as Spaniards and mariners, but as
traitors, robbers and murderers."




CHAPTER II.

Queen Elizabeth and Sir Walter Raleigh--English Expedition to North
Carolina--Failure of Attempts to Settle There--Virginia Dare--The Lost
Colony--The Foundation of Jamestown--Captain John Smith--His Life Saved
by Pocahontas--Rolfe Marries the Indian Princess--A Key to Early Colonial
History--Women Imported to Virginia.


The lives of the hapless Huguenots who perished at the hands of Menendez
were, perhaps, not altogether wasted, for it is believed that a refugee
from the Port Royal colony, wrecked on the coast of England, gave Queen
Elizabeth interesting information about the temperate and fruitful
regions north of the Spanish territories and prepared her mind to favor
the projects of Sir Walter Raleigh. That bold and talented adventurer,
whose name will live forever in American annals, and whose monument is
North Carolina's beautiful State capital, is said in the familiar story
to have attracted the notice of Queen Elizabeth by spreading his scarlet
cloak over a miry place for the queen to walk upon. He made rapid
progress in the good graces of his sovereign, who was quick to discern
the men who could be useful to her and to her kingdom. Sir Humphrey
Gilbert, half brother to Sir Walter, had perished on an expedition to
found an English colony in America. A storm engulfed his vessel, the
Squirrel, and he went down with all his crew. Queen Elizabeth graciously
granted to Sir Walter a patent as lord proprietor of the country from
Delaware Bay to the mouth of the Santee River, and substantially
including the present States of Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina and a
large portion of South Carolina, with an indefinite extension to the
west.

Raleigh sent out an expedition of two ships under the command of Philip
Amidas and Arthur Barlow. They landed upon the coast of North Carolina at
mid-summer, in the year 1584. The scenery and climate were charming, the
natives hospitable and everything seemed to promise well for future
settlement. The adventurers reported to Raleigh, who decided to plant a
colony in the region visited by his vessels. Queen Elizabeth herself is
said to have given the name of Virginia to her dominion, to commemorate
her unmarried condition. Untaught by the experience of American colonists
from the days of Columbus, the English settlers in North Carolina had the
usual quarrel with the natives, and were saved from the usual fate only
by the timely arrival of Sir Francis Drake on his return to England from
a cruise against the Spaniards. The colonists sought refuge on Drake's
vessels and were carried back to their native country.

Subsequent attempts of Sir Walter Raleigh to establish colonies in North
Carolina also failed, but these efforts were productive of at least one
important benefit in introducing to the attention of the English and also
of the Irish, the potato, which, although previously brought to Ireland
by a slave-trader named Hawkins, and to England by Sir Francis Drake,
attracted but little notice before it was imported by John White,
Raleigh's Governor of Roanoke. At Roanoke was born, August 18, 1587, the
first white child of English parentage on the North American continent,
Virginia Dare, the daughter of William and Eleanor Dare, and
granddaughter of Governor White.

In the little wooden chapel, two or three weeks after the event, the
colonists assembled one bright day to attend the baptism and christening
of the little stranger. The font was the family's silver wash ewer, and
the sponsor was Governor White himself, the baby's grandfather.
Thereafter she was known as Virginia Dare, a sweet and appropriate name
for this pretty little wild flower that bloomed all alone on that
desolate coast. About the time that Virginia was cutting her first teeth
there came very distressing times to the colony. There was great need of
supplies, and it was determined to send to England for them. Governor
White went himself, and never saw his little granddaughter again.

It was three years before the Governor returned to Roanoke Island. He was
kept in England by the Spanish invasion, and after the winds and the
waves had shattered the dreaded Armada, it was some time before Raleigh
could get together the men and supplies that were needed by the far-off
colony. At last the ship was ready and White took his departure, but he
had not sailed far when his vessel was overtaken by a Spanish cruiser and
captured. White himself escaped in a boat, and after many days reached
England again. Then he had to wait for another ship, and the weary old
man saw day after day go by before he left the chalk cliffs of England
behind him. After long, anxious months he approached the new land. It was
near sunset and he expected to see the smoke rising from the chimneys and
the settlers hurrying in from the fields to eat their evening meal, or
crowding down to greet the long-looked for arrivals. But no such cheering
sight met his gaze. There stood the cabins, but they were deserted; not a
single human soul was visible. They landed and walked up the grass-grown
paths. Vines and climbers festooned the doorways. A dreary stillness
reigned everywhere. The colony had disappeared, and tradition has it to
this day that the settlers were absorbed in the Indian tribes and that
little Virginia Dare may have become a white Pocahontas.

Raleigh lost his best friend when Queen Elizabeth died, and her
successor, James, gave into other hands the task of establishing English
power in America. The London Company, with a patent from the king, sent a
fleet of three vessels to Virginia, which ascended the James River, and
fifty miles from its mouth laid the foundation of Jamestown, May 13,
1607.

                        *          *          *

It was a lovely day in summer, presenting a bright southern contrast to
the bitter winter weather which welcomed the Pilgrims thirteen years
later to Plymouth Rock, when the Englishmen began the erection of a fort
on the peninsula or island in the river, where they proposed to establish
the capital of their colony. They chose for their president Edward Maria
Wingfield, ignoring Captain John Smith, a gallant and resourceful soldier
of fortune who would have been invaluable as a leader against any foe.
The fort had not been completed when the Indians gathered in large
numbers and made a desperate attack on the colony. Twelve of the
colonists were killed and wounded before the savages were driven off by
the use of artillery. In the following winter Captain John Smith explored
the waters in the vicinity of Jamestown in search of a passage to the
Pacific. This may seem ridiculous in the light of present knowledge, but
