"It was a word I was commanded to deliver to the most noble Sergius,
and I doubt not it would have been well and truly delivered, but for
his springing from his horse so quickly and rushing past me.  It is
possible that I might have come to him sooner had he not left me to
take care of the animal, and it needed time to summon the groom, whose
duty such work is.  Therefore--"

"By Hercules, man, give me the message!  Do you think I can listen all
day to your gabbling?" cried the soldier, furious with impatience.

A faint laugh seemed to come from somewhere beyond the hallway.

"I was about to say, most noble lord," pursued the porter, hardly
ruffled by the outburst; "and I trust you will pardon me if I dallied
over-much; but--"

Sergius raised his hand.  Then, thinking better of the blow, he seized
the man by the throat.

"Perhaps I can shake the words out like dice from a box.  Now for the
Venus cast!" he cried, suiting the action to the speech.

"Are you making trial of your strength that you may break more readily
into Carthaginian houses?  Remember it is soldiers with whom you are to
contend."

Sergius turned quickly, to see Marcia herself standing at the entrance
to the hall.  In her eyes, on her lips, was malicious laughter; but a
little red spot on either cheek seemed to tell of some stronger feeling
behind.  He had released the porter so quickly that the latter
staggered back almost into the fountain, and Marcia smiled.

"I think I have been taking a great deal of trouble for the sake of a
very discourteous person," she said.  "I sent Minutia to tell a certain
soldier that I am willing to bid him farewell, despite his
unworthiness, and he comes and nearly strangles poor old Rhetus for
trying to say that I was awaiting him in the peristyle."

"Rhetus' attempt was not very successful, and my time was short," said
Sergius, growing alternately red and pale.

"And so you thought to hasten his speech by closing his throat?  Oh!
you are a wise man--a very logical man.  They should have made _you_
dictator, so that you could save Italy by surrendering Rome."

"Is it to say such things that you sent for me?" asked Sergius, after a
pause during which he struggled against embarrassment and wrath.

"Surely not, for how could I know that you were going to behave so
outrageously?  If you will follow me, we will go into the peristyle."

She turned back through the passage, and Sergius followed, issuing a
moment later into a large, cloister-like court, open in the middle, and
decorated with flowers and shrubs.  Four rows of columns, half plain,
half fluted, supported the shed roof that protected the frescoes.
These covered three of the walls.  On the back was a garden scene so
painted as to seem like a continuation of the court itself into the far
distance; on the right was the combat between Aeneas and Turnus, and on
the left a representation of the first Torquatus despoiling the slain
Gaul of the trophy from which the family took its name.

"And now I will tell you why I sent."

She had seated herself in a marble chair with wolf heads carved on the
arms, and her face had grown grave and thoughtful.

"It was to tell you a dream--a dream of you that I had last night."

Her cheek flushed, and Sergius' eyes sparkled.

"You dreamt of _me_?" he said in a low voice.  He half raised his arms
and came nearer; but she held up one hand in the old imperious manner.

"If you please, I have not sent for you that you should grow
presumptuous, because I was unmaidenly enough to dream of so badly
behaved a person as yourself.  It--it was because it--I thought you
should know, so that the omen might be expiated."

Sergius had halted and was standing still.  His lip curled slightly.

"I dreamt," she went on, after a short pause, "that there was a wide
plain with mountains about it and a river running through; and it was
all heaped up with dead men--thousands upon thousands--stripped of arms
and clothing, and the air was gray with vultures, and the wolves and
foxes were calling to each other back among the hills.  And I was very
sad and walked daintily so that my sandals and gown might not be
splashed with the blood that curdled in pools all about.  Suddenly I
came to a heap of slain whereon _you_ were lying, with a long javelin
through your body.  So I screamed and awoke--"

"Surely, then, you felt sorrow," cried Sergius, who had followed the
narrative with deep interest, but who seemed to consider nothing of it
save the concern she had shown at his death.

"I--I," she began; and then, as if angry with herself at the betrayal
of feeling and of her embarrassment, she burst out; "I did not send,
foolish one, that you should consider _me_.  Look rather to yourself."

But Sergius was full of the joy of his own thoughts.

"That I shall do, my Marcia, by setting my mind upon things that are
better than myself--the Republic--you--"

"Ah, but the omen?"

"I shall put it aside together with the other: that you have called me
back from the march; and I shall consider both well expiated by the
knowledge that I am not as nothing to you."

Her face grew pale, and she half rose from the chair.

"Truly, I did not think about calling you back.  It is terrible--all
this--and it is my doing--"

"Then, if you wish, I shall lay it up against you," cried he, gayly,
"unless you promise to be Caia in my house--"

"You are unfair to press me now and by such means."

"But it must be now," exclaimed the young man, springing forward and
trying to catch her in his arms.  "Do you not see I must leave you at
once?  Shall it be without a promise?"

The blush had turned again to little anger spots, as she evaded him.

"Very well," she said slowly.  "I will be Caia where thou art Caius--"

Sergius' face shone with exultation, and his lips parted.

"I will be Caia," she resumed, "upon the day when Orcus sends back the
dead from Acheron."

His expression of joy faded, and indignation took its place.  Surely
this was carrying light speech too far--and at such a time.  Suddenly
he realized that the dictator might already have ridden on, and
disgrace have fallen upon a Sergius at the very beginning of the
campaign.

"So be it!  I accept that omen--with the others," he cried sternly,
and, turning, strode out through the atrium, bounded upon his horse,
and dashed headlong down the street, before Marcia was fairly aware
that he had gone from her presence.




IV.

FABIUS.

Sergius rode back to his men, deeply wounded in love and pride.  He
tried to excuse Marcia for her treatment of him, on the score of her
youth and of youth's thoughtlessness; he blamed himself for his
abruptness and his lack of knowledge of women--failings that had
perhaps turned an impending victory into the defeat that now oppressed
him.  Worst of all, there was no hope to remedy his or her fault.  A
dangerous campaign lay before him, and the omens--but pshaw! _he_ was
not one of the rabble, to tremble at a flight of birds from the west or
an ox with a bad liver.  He had always admired the spirit of that old
sceptic, Claudius, who had drowned the chickens off Drepana, though he
admitted the faulty judgment in failing to realize the effect of such a
defiance upon ignorant seamen and marines: the hierarchy was necessary
for the State; if only to keep fools in order, but for a man of family
and education--well, he smiled.  It provoked him, amid all his
disbelief, that he could not help preferring that those same omens had
been more favourable.  Pride, pride was his last and truest safeguard.
He, a descendant of the companion of Aeneas, to fear the Carthaginian
sword! he, a Roman noble, about to face death for his country, to waste
his thoughts upon a silly girl who chose to flout him!

Then the long clarions of the cavalry rang out, and the horsemen ran to
their steeds.  Down the slope of the Viminal rode the dictator: before
him went the twenty-four axes, each in its bundle of staves, their
bearers robed in military cloaks of purple cloth; behind came a small
troop of illustrious Romans--his legati, his staff, nominated by him
and sanctioned by the Senate for their fame and skill in war; also such
senators as had elected, by way of personal compliment, to ride with
the general and to partake as volunteers in whatever share of the war
he might set for them.

Quintus Fabius Maximus seemed a man just passing the prime of life.
His figure, as he sat his horse, was squat rather than tall, though
this appearance might be due, in a measure, to the great breadth of his
shoulders; altogether his frame seemed one better adapted to feats of
strength and endurance than for those of agility.  The face, with its
grizzled hair and beard, both cut short, suited well the figure that
bore it.  Dignity, firmness, and kindliness were in its strong and
rugged outlines, with less, perhaps, of the pride of race and rank than
might have been looked for in the head of the great family whose name
he bore--he who was now twice dictator of the destinies of Rome.  For
dress, his purple cloak, similar to those of his lictors, hung loosely
from his shoulders to below his knees, and, opening in front, disclosed
a corselet of leather overlaid with metal across chest and abdomen, and
embossed with bronze designs of ancient pattern and workmanship.  The
hem of the white tunic showed below the leathern pendants that hung a
foot down from his girdle; the greaves were ornamented at the knees
with lions' heads; an armour-bearer carried his master's bronze helmet
with its crest of divergent red plumes.

Such was the man upon whom Rome now depended for her saving--"for
victory," dreamed such of the unthinking as had recovered from their
terror; "for time, time, time," reasoned the man with the deep-set,
gray eyes upon whom they had pinned their faith.

Hardly a stride behind him rode Marcus Minucius Rufus, tall and
well-built, with bold, coarse features and fierce, roving eyes.  His
red hair bristled from his brow, and he seemed to restrain with
difficulty either his steed or himself from darting forward into the
lead.

"Yonder is the sword of the Republic," said one of Sergius' men, as the
master-of-the-horse rode by the escort; but the man to whom he said
it--an old soldier of the Spanish wars--only shrugged his shoulders.  A
moment later he grunted in reply:--

"Like enough; but it is a shield that the Republic needs most of all."

Then the clarion summoned them to fall in behind the dictator's
company, and the troop rode out from the gate--out into the broad
plain--away from the protecting walls fluctuant with waving stoles, and
from which tear-dimmed eyes strove to follow them among the villas,
farms, and orchards of the country-side--away from the Forum, from the
sacred fig tree and the black stone of Romulus--away from the divine
triad that kept guard over the Capitol.  Beyond lay the Alban
Mountains, and, beyond these,--no one knew where,--the strange dangers
that awaited them: fierce Spaniards with slender blades as red as the
crimson borders of their white coats; wild Numidian riders that always
fell upon the rear of Rome's battle; serried phalanges of Africans,
veterans of fifty wars; naked Gauls with swords that lopped off a limb
at every stroke; Balearic slingers whose bullets spattered one's brains
over the ground; Cretans whose arrows could dent an aes at a hundred
yards; and above all, over all, the great mind, the unswerving,
unrelenting purpose that had blended all these elements into one
terrible engine of destruction to move and smite and burn and ravage at
the touch of a man's will.

The cavalry rode two and two, thinking of such things; picked men,
equipped in the new Greek fashion with breastplate, stout buckler, and
strong spear pointed at both ends.  What thoughts held the mind of the
general, none could fathom.  With head slightly inclined he seemed to
study, now the ribbons woven in his horse's mane, now the small,
sensitive ears that pricked backward and forward, as the Tiburtine Way
flowed sluggishly beneath.  As for Minucius, he alone seemed hopeful
and unimpressed by the dangers that menaced.  He glided here and there,
reining his horse beside this senator or that lieutenant to utter a
word of the safety assured to Rome and of the ruin that hung over the
invader, or even calling back to the foremost of the escort some rough
badinage upon their gloomy looks; for Minucius was a man of the people,
scorning patrician pride of race, and wishing it known that, however
high his rank, he held himself no whit better than any potter of the
Aventine or weaver of the Suburra.

So, riding, thinking, talking, they reached Tibur, where the new levies
lay encamped.

Thence began the march of the army--a long, weary march to strike the
line of the Carthaginian devastators; and, as it rolled onward, the
stream of war gathered volume.  At Daunia they were joined by the
legions of Servilius that had marched down from Ariminum; and, at every
point, contingents of the allies poured in, until even the most timid
began to believe it impossible that disaster could befall, and grew
first confident, then defiant, then boastful.

To the mind of the dictator himself, however, came no such change.  He
alone knew the danger, he alone knew the value of the force with which
he must meet it--soldiers in whose minds, despite all their present
spirit, lingered the tradition of defeat; raw levies not yet truly
confident of their officers or themselves, however much the sight of
their numbers and their brave show might blind them to the fact that
there was another side to the war.

And now rumours began to reach them of the enemy.  He was at Praetutia,
at Hadriana, at Marrucina, at Frentana!  He had set out toward Iapygia!
he had reached Luceria! and everywhere the country was a garden before
him and a desert behind.  Only one gleam of light shone through the
darkness,--the Apulians submitted to ravage, but they refused to save
their lands by joining fortunes with the invaders.

At last came the day of trial.  "The enemy was at hand."  Scouts poured
in with news of foraging parties, of masses of troops on the march; and
at Aecae the dictator ordered the camp to be pitched and fortified in
the order that Roman discipline prescribed, with rampart and ditch and
stakes--a city in embryo.

Now it was that the boasters must stand by their boasts.

Scarcely had the morning broke, when the distant mist of the plain
seemed to sparkle with myriads of glittering points--seemed to thicken
and become dense with clouds of dust.  Mingled noises came to the ears
of the waking legions,--the neighing of horses, the inarticulate murmur
of a multitude, the dull rumble of marching men, the ring of arms and
accoutrements.

Then came the order from the praetorium,--not to advance the standards,
but to man the rampart and to repel.  Such was not the custom of
Rome--to refuse battle amid the ravaged lands of her allies.  Had the
heart of the dictator grown cold?  Forthwith the pale cheeks of the
boasters flushed again; lips that had been compressed, before the
terrors they had so rashly invoked, parted in wonder and complaint; the
mist rose, and the sun pierced through the settling dust.  There stood
the enemy, drawn up in order of battle across the plain, and waiting;
too far away for the Romans to make out their form or equipment--just a
long, dense array that seemed dark or light in spots.  Now and again a
trumpet rang out its distant note of defiance; now and again some
portion of the line seemed to manoeuvre or change front, as if to tempt
attack, while from time to time a flurry of horsemen--dark-skinned
riders, bending low upon the necks of wiry little steeds and urging
them with shrill, barbarous cries--swept almost up to the ditch, and
brandished their darts, making obscene gestures and shouting words that
brought the blood to the faces of the garrison, though they understood
not the tongue that uttered them.

A circle of officers surrounded the dictator's tent.  Some were silent
and shamefaced; some were vociferous of their desire to be allowed to
go forth and fight, or, at least, to lead out the cavalry to chastise
the insolence of slaves and barbarians; all were wondering and
dissatisfied.  Few, however, ventured to express their full thoughts.
There was a something in the very mildness of the general that
discouraged too direct criticism.  Only Minucius, presuming, perhaps on
his position of second in command, perhaps on his contempt for the
great houses, sought the dictator's presence and spoke as if half to
him, half to the company of officers.  Even his first words but thinly
veiled his feelings.

"The enemy await us in line of battle, my master, but I do not see the
red flag above your tent.  Is it your will that the standards be
advanced?"

"No, Marcus, it is not my will, or the signal would have been
displayed," said Fabius, calmly.

"The troops are eager to be led out; the enemy insult us up to the very
ditch.  Italy is wasted," went on Minucius; but, as if slightly cowed
by the deep, gray eyes, his tone seemed less aggressive.

Fabius paused a moment, before answering, and glanced around upon the
lowering faces of legates and tribunes.  Then he said:--

"It is proper, Quirites, that I should say something to you of my
plans.  Our men are new--untried.  Those that have seen service have
seen defeat.  The enemy are flushed with victory, full of confidence in
themselves and their general, well seasoned in battle.  Has the
Republic a new army if this be lost?  But happily there is another side
to the picture.  We are in our own lands.  Our supplies are
inexhaustible; _we_ receive; _they_ must take.  We shall wear them out
in skirmishes, cut off their foragers--men whom they cannot replace,
while we replace our losses daily and season ourselves in battle and
grow to see that even Carthaginians are not immortal."

There was a moment of silence.  Then Minucius spoke again.

"And, while we pursue this prudent policy, what becomes of the spirit
of our men who see that their general dares not face the enemy?  What
becomes of the allies who see their fields wasted and cities burned,
while Rome lies silent in her camps and offers no succour?"

Fabius' brow clouded, but he spoke even more mildly than before.

"There is much of truth in what you say Marcus; but I am convinced that
there is less danger in such risks than in tempting the fate of
Flaminius; and there are many compensations, together with certain
victory in the end."

And then the master-of-the-horse lost control of his temper; his voice
rose, and he cried out:--

"You are general and you command, but you shall hear me when I say that
I had rather have perished bravely with a Flaminius than live to
conquer in such cowardly fashion with a Fabius."

A murmur of half-uttered applause ran around the circle, but Fabius did
not seem to hear it.  He eyed his lieutenant calmly for an instant.
Then he said:--

"You speak truth, Marcus, when you say that I am general;" and, turning
his back upon Minucius, he passed through the line of officers, as they
fell aside to give him way, and proceeded slowly toward the praetorian
gate.

Here, among the soldiers, discontent with the dictator's policy was as
strong as it had been in the praetorium, while its expression was less
governed by the amenities of rank.  Roman discipline, however severe as
to the acts of the legionary, put very few restrictions upon his
speech; and the general, as he watched from the rampart the lines and
movements of the enemy, heard many comments no less uncomplimentary
than those of his master-of-the-horse, and couched in language almost
as coarse as that of the Numidians themselves.  It seemed as if the
foul words of the barbarians were passed on thus to the man held
responsible for Romans being compelled to listen to such insults.

Curiously enough, the centurions and under officers appeared to be the
only ones not hostile to Fabius' policy.  These were silent or even
made some efforts to restrain the ribaldry of their men.

As for the general himself, no one could have appeared less conscious
of the storm his orders had provoked.  His eyes were still fixed upon
the distant array, and when, as the sun almost touched the meridian,
Lucius Sergius approached with despatches just arrived from Rome, he
was compelled to speak twice before the other was aware of his
presence.  Then the dictator turned quickly, and, pointing to the
Carthaginians, exclaimed:--

"See! they are withdrawing.  Do you not note how thin the centre grows?
Ah! I shall teach them new lessons of war--new lessons.  They will find
in me no Flaminius, to let my enemy choose the day and field of battle."

Leaving the ramparts, they walked back toward the praetorium, Fabius
breaking the seals and reading the letters as he walked.  When they
reached the tent, he stood still for a moment and seemed to study the
face of the young tribune who had followed, a half pace behind, to
receive any answer or order that might be forthcoming.

"What is your opinion of my refusing battle?" he asked suddenly, after
a short silence.
