but I dared not show myself at home. At length an incurable disease
seized me, and I determined to unburden my conscience, and dragged
myself here, only to learn that the sweet lady of Aescendune had
died within the year, with all the symptoms of rapid decline, and
upon my sod I charge Hugo de Malville with the murder.

Given in the infirmary of the house of St. Wilfred, in the month of
May, 1068.

This dying confession was made in our hearing this day.

Elphege, Prior.

Ceadda, Sub-Prior,

Tuesday in Oct., Asc., in the year of grace, 1068.

After a moment's silence, Odo of Bayeux, the Conqueror's half
brother, and a hateful oppressor of the poor English, rose up:

"This letter does not afford any absolute proof of the guilt of our
departed brother in arms, Hugo of Aescendune. He may have bought
the liquid; there is no proof he administered it--people die of
decline daily."

"May I produce and question a witness before the court," said
Geoffrey, "in the absence of the prisoner?"

"Certainly," replied William.

A signal was given to an expectant usher of the court. Wilfred was
led out, and in a few moments two wardens entered in charge of
another prisoner.

He was tall and haggard; a long beard descended to his waist. His
peculiar nose--the most marked characteristic of his race, long and
beak-shaped, yet not exactly aquiline--marked the Jew. He looked
anxiously around.

"Thou art Abraham of Toledo?"

The Hebrew bowed submissively.

"A compounder of poisons?"

"Say rather of medicines, lord; for the making of one is the
rule--of the other, the exception."

"Thou dost not deny the accusation, which places thy life at the
mercy of the court?"

"I will own all, and throw myself on its mercy, trusting that the
relief I have oft afforded in bodily anguish, maybe allowed to
atone, in its measure, for any aid my fears may have driven me to
lend to crime."

"It is thine only chance, Jew, to tell the truth, the whole truth,
and nothing but the truth."

"I am at your lordship's disposal."

"Didst thou ever deal with Hugo, sometime lord of Malville. and
afterwards of Aescendune?"

"Once only."

"On what occasion?"

"He sought a medicine."

"A medicine?" said Geoffrey, sternly; "thou triflest."

"Nay!--a poison, I would have said."

"Of what specific nature?"

"To produce the symptoms of decline--the patient would sink and
die."

"What was the appearance of the poison?"

"Dropped in water it diffused at first a sapphire hue, but after
exposure to the air the hue of the ruby succeeded."

"Didst thou know the purpose for which he bought the drug?"

"My lord, I did not, nor do I know now; my humble occupations do
not lead me amongst the mighty of the land, save when they seek my
humble shop."

"Still thine offence, Jew," said the stern voice of the Conqueror,
"is a damnable one, and lendest itself readily to the purposes of
crime.

"Let the unbeliever be removed in custody.

"My lord of Canterbury, he is a heretic--perchance a sorcerer; let
the Church see to him."

And so the poor Jew was removed to his dungeon.

"And now with your favour," said Geoffrey, "I would ask a few
questions of the prisoner, in your presence."

"The permission is given," said William.

Wilfred was again conducted before the court.

"Thou hast dared to brand thy late stepfather as the poisoner of
thy mother; wilt thou state any cause or justification thou mayest
have, over and above that indicated by the letter and confession we
have read?"

"I did not dream of such guilt before I heard that confession,
months after the death of my mother."

"Hadst thou ever seen medicine administered to her?"

"Frequently, by the baron her second husband himself. He called it
the elixir of life, and stated he had obtained it at a high price,
from a noted Jewish physician."

"What was its colour?"

"A drop only was let fall into water, which it tinged with a
greenish hue, as of a sapphire."

"Didst thou mark any peculiarity?"

"On one occasion, when, owing to very sudden sickness, the medicine
was not taken, my sister and I marked with surprise, that the
medicine thus diluted had changed to a crimson colour."

General sensation. Etienne hid his face in his mantle; the
churchman and nobles conferred together. William spoke:

"Thou hast thy lesson perfect, boy. Didst thou ever see this Jew
Abraham?"

"Never; or he had not lived to tell thee."

"Then there is no possible collusion between the witnesses--I
appeal to thee, my lord of Coutances?"

"None; I will answer for it as a bishop. It was a providential
thought, which led me to interrogate the Jew respecting the
appearance of the medicine, and one utterly unpremeditated."

"Remove the prisoner," said the king.

While Wilfred was absent, William conferred with his lords
spiritual and temporal. This was no court wherein the popular
element found place; the whole issue of the trial lay with the
mighty chieftain--the rest were but his consultees.

We will not record the deliberations, only their result.

After half an hour had passed--a time of dread suspense to the
prisoner--Wilfred was again summoned to the bar.

William addressed him:

"We have duly considered thy case, Wilfred of Aescendune, and fully
acquit thee of the guilt of sacrilege, while we also admit that
there were causes, which might go far to justify thy rebellion
against thy stepfather, and to mitigate the guilt of armed
resistance to thy king.

"We are not met to judge thy stepfather; he has been called to a
higher and an unerring tribunal, and there we leave him, satisfied
that the Judge of all the earth will do right.

"For thee--the guilt of rebellion and of bearing arms against thy
king for three whole years has to be expiated; but if thou art
willing to take the oath of allegiance on the spot, and bind
thyself to discharge the duties of a subject to his king, we will
consider thy case favourably, and perchance restore thee, under
certain conditions, to thy ancestral possessions. Speak, what
sayest thou--dost thou hesitate?"

Every eye was fixed on the prisoner.

He stood there, firm as a rock, and looked bravely into that face
whose frown so few could bear.

"My lord of Normandy," he said, "by birth I owe thee no allegiance,
and I cannot acknowledge that thy masterful and bloody conquest of
an unoffending people has given thee any right to demand it. I
cannot betray the cause for which my father bled and died, or ally
myself to my mother's murderers. You have acquitted me of deeper
guilt. I can now die for my country without shame."

The Conqueror heard him patiently to the end.

"Thou knowest, then, thine inevitable fate?"

"I accept it. Ye have robbed me of all which made life worth
living."

"Thou must die, then: but we spare thee torture or mutilation.
Prepare to meet the headsman within the castle yard, at the third
sun-rising after this day--

"and, my lord of Coutances, since you have taken so much interest
in this young English rebel, we charge thee with the welfare of his
soul."

And the court broke up.



CHAPTER XXIV. THE CASTLE OF OXFORD.


"It is the crime and not the scaffold makes
The headsman's death a shame."

Wilfred sat alone in an upper chamber of the donjon tower the
Conqueror had erected at Oxford, hard by the mound thrown up by
Ethelfleda, lady of the Mercians and daughter of Alfred. For
thither the king had caused him to be removed, unwilling to stain
the holy precincts of Abingdon with a deed of blood, and confiding
fully in Robert d'Oyly, the governor of his new castle.

The passage up the river had occupied two full hours, under the
care of trusty and able rowers; for the stream was swift in those
days, before locks checked its course, as we have stated elsewhere.

Under the woods of Newenham, past the old Anglo-Saxon churches of
Sandford and Iffley, up the right-hand channel of the stream just
below the city, and so to the landing place beneath the old tower
{xxv}.

William had given orders to treat our Wilfred with all possible
consideration, and to allow him every indulgence, which did not
militate against his safe keeping, for he admired, even while he
felt it necessary to slay. So he was not thrust into a dungeon, but
confined in an upper chamber, where a grated window, at a great
height, afforded him a fair view of that world he was about to
leave for ever.

"Ah! if I were but in those woods," sighed the prisoner to himself,
"I would give these Normans some trouble to catch me again; but the
poor bird can only beat himself against the cruel bars of his
cage."

He counted the hours. It was the evening of his condemnation; two
whole days, followed by a feverish night, and then when that next
sun arose--

Strange thoughts began to arise--what sort of axe would they
use?--who would be there?--would they bind his eyes?--would he have
to kneel on the stones?--what kind of block would they use?

Little trifling details like these forced themselves upon him, even
as an artist represents each humble detail in a finished picture.

Did he repent that he had refused life and Aescendune? No, he hated
the Normans with too profound a hatred.

Was he prepared to die? We are sorry to record that he shook off
every thought of the future. God had delivered the English into the
hands of the Normans--his father and mother had been good religious
people, and what had they got by it? If there was a God, why were
such cruelties allowed to exist unavenged? He and His saints must
be asleep. Such were the wicked thoughts which arose, as we grieve
to record, in poor Wilfred's mind.

But now heavy steps were heard ascending the stairs, and soon
Lanfranc, conducted by the Norman governor, entered the cell.

Against him Wilfred could not, in reason, feel the enmity he bore
to all others of Norman race; it was owing to his exertions, and to
those of Geoffrey of Coutances, that he was about to die as a
patriot, and not as a sacrilegious incendiary.

It was the object of this worthy prelate to save the soul, where he
had failed to save the body, and to direct the thoughts of the
condemned one to Him, who Himself hung like a criminal between
earth and heaven, that He might save all who would put their trust
in Him.

The great obstacle in Wilfred's mind was his inability to forgive.
This his visitor soon perceived, and by the example of those dying
words, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do," he
gently impressed upon the penitent the duty of forgiving those who
had wronged him--however deeply.

"But how can I forgive the murderers of my mother?"

"Thou believest that mother is in Paradise?"

"Indeed I do."

"Dost thou not wish to be with her at last?"

"As the hart desireth the water brooks."

"Then ask thyself what she would have thee do. Canst thou hope for
the pardon of thine own grievous sins, unless thou dost first
forgive all who have offended thee?"

"I will try. See me again tomorrow, father."

"I will do so: I remain at St. Frideswide's for--a day or two."

Wilfred understood the hesitation.

A different scene transpired simultaneously in the dungeons below,
which, with their accustomed ruthless policy, the Normans had
hollowed out of the soil.

The Jew, Abraham of Toledo, was resting uneasily, full of
fears--which experience too well justified--as to his personal
safety in this den of lions, when he also heard steps, this time
descending the stairs, and Geoffrey of Coutances was ushered in.

"Leave the cell," said the bishop to the gaoler, "but remain in the
passage. Close the door; I would speak with this penitent, as I
trust he will prove, in private."

"Never fear, your holiness," said the gaoler with somewhat undue
familiarity; "I care little for a Jew's patter, and this fellow
will need a long shrift before they make a roast of him--for that,
I suppose, will be the end of it."

The door slammed.

It was a miserable cell, composed of rough stones, lately put
together, oozing with the moisture from the damp soil around, for
the river was close by and the dungeon beneath its level.

"Art thou prepared to meet thy fitting end?"

"What crime have I committed to deserve death?"

"Thou hast knowingly and wilfully abetted, not one but many
poisoners, and the stake is the fitting doom for thee and them."

"Oh! not the stake, God of Abraham. If ye must slay, at least spare
the agonising flames; but what mercy can we hope for, we faithful
children of Abraham, from Nazarenes?"

"What price art thou willing to pay for thy forfeit life, if thy
sentence is commuted to exile from this land?"

"Price? Canst thou mean it? I will fill thy chambers with gold."
