and now all would be well, but for this sad, sad chance, which has
placed the poor lad Elfric in his power."

"But," said Alfred, "this makes the case worse than ever. Poor Elfric!
they will kill him. Oh, can this be Ragnar?"

The Benedictines expressed themselves convinced, because the supposition
explained the present circumstances so clearly, and accounted for that
hitherto unaccountable circumstance--the murder. The steward and
chamberlain both fancied they recognised the family likeness; and so the
solution at which Father Cuthbert had arrived was accepted by all.

The question was now what course to adopt, for the night was fast
wearing away.

"Two things are to be done," said Father Cuthbert. "The first is to
secure the safety of the lady Edith and her children from any sudden
attack from the castle, to which effect I propose holding all the
vassals in arms; and, in case of any force leaving the hall, I purpose
giving the lady Edith and her daughter instant sanctuary in the priory,
while the vassals gather round its precincts; for, I fear me, this
Ragnar is a heathen, and would but little respect the house of God."

"Could we not attack the hall and release Elfric? Think of Elfric," said
Alfred.

"It would be madness; Redwald has more than a hundred and fifty men of
war within it. The place is full; we could not attack with the least
chance of success. No: the second thing I meant to propose was this,
that we should send an instant message to King Edgar, who is near at
hand, and explain the whole circumstances to him. He has many causes of
enmity against Redwald, and would probably come to our aid at once, as
the safety of his realm would require him to do eventually."

"Let me be the messenger; he will surely listen to the pleadings of a
brother for a brother."

"I had so designed," said Father Cuthbert; "and in order that no chance
may be thrown away, I will adventure myself in the lion's den, and
threaten with the penalties of excommunication this vindictive Redwald
or Ragnar."

"No, father; you will never come out alive. No, no!" said they all.

The last proposal was universally discouraged. Redwald had already
special cause of enmity against Father Cuthbert, who had robbed him of
part of his destined prey; and it was ultimately settled that Father
Swithin, another of the order, should be charged with the mission, with
the power to make conciliatory offers, or to act on the other course as
he should see fit; in short, to use all his wit for Elfric.

Alfred did not delay a moment unnecessarily, but in the dawning light
set forward to seek Edgar, of whom he had no definite information, but
who was believed to linger in the neighbourhood of the battlefield,
holding council with earls and thanes as to the further steps to be
taken, and receiving the submission of the whole Mercian, East Anglian,
and Northumbrian nobility.

Therefore, mounted upon a good steed, and accompanied by Oswy, he
rapidly traversed the country over which his brother had been so
painfully borne; slowly, however, in places, for here and there large
tracts of swamp obstructed the way, and in other places the thickets
were dense and impervious; even where the country was cultivated the
unpaved roads were rough and hazardous for riders.

It was past the hour of nones, the ninth hour of the day, when the
riders reached the battlefield, which still bore frightful traces of the
recent combat; reddened with blood, which had left its dark traces on
large patches of the ground, and encumbered with the bodies of horses
and men which had not yet found sepulture, although bands of theows from
the neighbouring estates were busily engaged in the necessary toil,
excavating huge pits, and placing the dead--no longer rivals--
reverently and decently in their last long home. Several wolves could be
discerned, hanging about under the skirts of the forest, but not daring
to come out into the plain while the day lasted and the men were about;
whole flocks of ravenous birds flew about the scene, now settling down
on the spots where the strife had been hottest, now soaring away when
disturbed in their sickening feast.

It was the first time Alfred had ever gazed upon a battlefield; and now
he saw it stripped of all the romance and glamour which bards had thrown
over it, and the sight appalled him.

He drew near a large pit into which the thralls were casting the dead.
Many of the bodies presented, as we have already seen, a most ghastly
spectacle; and nearly all had begun to decompose. Mentally he thanked
God that Elfric, at least, was not there; and he turned aside his head
in horror at the sight.

He now inquired of the foreman of the labourers whether he knew where
the Etheling Edgar would be.

"You mean King Edgar, for the Mercians will acknowledge no other king.
The people of Wessex may keep the enemy of the saints, if they like."

"King Edgar, I mean. Where is he now?"

"He has been holding a council at Tamworth town, in the old palace of
King Offa; and they say all the tributary kings have come there to be
his men, and all the great earls."

"Can you tell me the nearest road to Tamworth?"

"Why, it lies through the forest there, where you see those wolves
lurking about. They will begin to be dangerous when the sun goes down,
and perhaps some of them would not mind a snap at a horse or even a man,
now."

"We must take our chance;" said Alfred: "life and death hang on our
speed," and he and Oswy rode on.

The wolves were no longer seen. In the summer they generally avoided
men, at least during the day, and they were gradually becoming more
uncommon at that date. Alfred entertained little fear as he proceeded,
until the darkening shadows showed that night was near, and they were
still in the heart of the forest, when he began to feel alarmed. The
road before them was a good wide woodland path, and easy to follow even
in the gathering darkness.

Suddenly their horses started violently, as a loud howl was heard
behind, and repeated immediately from different quarters of the forest.

Alfred felt that it was the gathering of the ferocious beasts, which had
been attracted from distant forests by the scent of the battlefield, and
had thus happened to lie in increased numbers around their path. The
howling continued to increase, and their horses sped onward as if mad
with fear--it was all they could do to guide them safely.

Nearer and nearer drew the fearful sound; and looking back they beheld
the fiery eyes swarming along the road after them. They had begun to
abandon hope, when all at once they heard the sound of advancing
horsemen in front of them, accompanied by the clank of arms. The wolves
heard it too, and with all the cunning cowardice of their race scampered
away from their intended prey, just as Alfred and Oswy avoided impaling
themselves upon the lances of the coming deliverers.

"Whom have we here, riding at this pace through the woods?" cried out a
rough, manly voice.

"The wolves were after the poor fellows," said another.

"They may speak for themselves," said the leader, confronting Alfred.
"Art thou a Mercian and a friend of King Edgar? Under which king? Speak,
or die!"

"I seek King Edgar. My name is Alfred, son of Ella of Aescendune."

"Who sheltered the men of Wessex, and entertained the impious Edwy in
his castle."

"We had no power to resist had we wished to do so."

"Which you evidently did not. May a plain soldier ask you now why you
seek King Edgar?"

"Because," said Alfred, "my father has been murdered, and my brother
made a prisoner by Redwald, the captain of King Edwy's hus-carles, who
holds our house, and has driven us all out."

"Your father murdered! Your family expelled! Your brother a prisoner!
These are strange news."

"Why this delay!" cried another speaker, riding up from behind. "The
king is impatient to get on. Ride faster."

"The king!" cried Alfred. "Oh, lead me to him."

"Who is this," demanded the second officer, "who demands speech of the
royal Edgar?"

"Alfred of Aescendune. He tells us that the infamous Redwald holds the
fortified house there, has murdered the thane Ella, and expelled the
family, save the brother, whom he holds to ransom."

"No, not to ransom," cried Alfred. "It is his life that is threatened.
Oh, take me to Edgar!"

"He is close behind, in company with the Ealdorman of Mercia and Siward
of Northumbria."

"Stay behind with him, Biorn, and let us continue our route. You may
introduce him to the king, if he will see him."

The first party--the advance guard--now passed on, and was succeeded
almost immediately by the main body, foremost amongst whom rode Prince
or rather King Edgar, then only a youth of fifteen years of age. We last
beheld him a boy of twelve, at the date of Elfric's arrival at the court
of Edred. By his side rode Siward, Ealdorman of Northumbria.

"Who is this?" cried the latter, as he saw Alfred and his attendant
waiting to receive him.

"Alfred of Aescendune, with a petition for aid against Redwald, who has
seized his father's castle."

"Alfred of Aescendune!" cried Edgar. "Halt, my friends, one moment.
Alfred of Aescendune, tell me your story; to me, Edgar, your king."

Alfred hastened to pour his tale of sorrows into an ear evidently not
unsympathising, and when he had concluded Edgar asked--"And tell me
what is your request. It shall be granted even to the uttermost."

"Only that you, my lord, would hasten to our aid and deliver my brother
for his poor widowed mother's sake."

"We should send a troop against Redwald in any case, but even had our
plans been otherwise, know this, Alfred of Aescendune, that he who by
his devoted service saved the life, or at least the liberty, of Dunstan,
the light of our realm of England, and the favourite of heaven, has a
claim to ask any favour Edgar can grant.

"Siward, my father, bid the advanced guard bend its course towards
Aescendune at once."

"My lord, the men are too weary to travel all night. We had purposed
halting when we reached the battlefield on our march southward. There is
a cross-country road thence to Aescendune, almost impassable in the night."

"Then we will travel early in the morning; and doubt not, Alfred, we
shall arrive in time to chastise this insolent aggressor. Redwald has
been my poor brother's evil spirit in all things; he shall die, I swear
it," said the precocious Edgar, a man before his time.

"But, my lord," said Alfred, "may I ask but one favour, that you will
permit me to proceed and relieve the anxiety of my people with the
tidings of your approach?"

"If you must leave our side, such an errand would seem to justify you.
Poor Elfric! I remember him well. I could not have thought him in any
danger from Redwald."

"Redwald is his, is our bitterest foe."

"Indeed," said Edgar, and proceeded to elicit the whole history of the
case from Alfred.

The sad tale was not complete till they reached the battlefield, and
encamped in the entrenchments the young prince had occupied the night
before the combat.

"We had intended," said Edgar, "to march at once for London, owing to
news we have received from the south, but we will tarry at Aescendune
until the work is completed there, even if it cost us our crown.

"Nay, Siward, I may have my way this once. I am soldier enough to know I
may not leave an enemy behind me on my march."

"But a small detachment might accomplish the work."

"Then I will go with it myself; my heart is in it. But, Alfred, you look
very ill; you cannot proceed tonight. When did you sleep last?"

"Three nights ago."

"Then it would be madness to proceed; you must sleep, and at early dawn
you shall precede us on my own charger--which has been led all the way
--if your own is too wearied, and with an attendant or two in case of
danger from man or beast. Nay, it must be so."

Alfred, who could scarcely stand for very fatigue, was forced to yield,
and that night he slept soundly in the camp of Edgar. At the first dawn
they aroused him from sleep, and he found a splendid warhorse awaiting
him--a gift, they told him, from Edgar. Two attendants, well mounted,
awaited him in company with Oswy. He would willingly have dispensed with
their company; but he was told that the king, anxious for his safety,
had insisted upon their attending him, and that they were answerable for
his safe return to Aescendune, the country being considered dangerous
for travellers in its present disturbed state.

So he yielded; and before the king had arisen he left the camp, after a
hasty meal, and rode as rapidly as the roads would permit towards his
desolated home.


    CHAPTER XXIII. LOVE STRONG AS DEATH.

Meanwhile Father Swithin had gone alone and unprotected, save by his
sacred character, into the very jaws of the lion; or rather, would have
gone, had he been suffered to do so; for when he approached the hall he
found the drawbridge up, and the whole place guarded as in a state of siege.

He advanced, nothing daunted, in front of the yawning gap where the
bridge should have been, and cried aloud--"What ho! porter; I demand
speech of my lord Redwald."

"You may demand speech--swine may demand pearls--but I don't think
you will get it. Deliver me your message."

"Tell your lord, rude churl, that I, Father Swithin, of the holy Order
of St. Benedict, have come, in the name of the rightful owners of this
house, and in the power of the Church, to demand that he deliver up
Elfric of Aescendune to the safe keeping of his friends."

"I will send your message; but keep a civil tongue in your mouth, Sir
Monk, and don't begin muttering any of your accursed Latin, or I will
see whether the Benedictine frock is proof against an arrow."

In a short time Redwald appeared on the roof, above the gateway.

"What dost thou require, Sir Monk?" said he; "thy words sound strange in
my ears."

"I am come, false traitor," said Father Swithin, waxing wroth, "to
demand the person of Elfric of Aescendune, whom thou detainest contrary
to God's law and the king's."

"Elfric of Aescendune! right glad am I to hear that he is alive; my
followers have brought me word that they saw him fall in battle."

"Nay, spare thy deceit, thou son of perdition, for well do we know that
he was brought home wounded last night. One of his bearers escaped thy
toils, even as a bird the snare of the fowler, and is now with us."

"Assuredly the loon has lied unto you. Rejoiced should I be to see the
unhappy youth, and to know that he yet lived. I but hold this place,
faithful to his lord and mine, Edwy, King of all England."

"Then why hast thou expelled the rightful dwellers therein from their
