
Again the flame shot high in air, again roared and raged, again broke
into a multitude of lambent points, after which it suddenly expired.

All was darkness on the summit of Pendle Hill.

And in silence and in gloom scarcely more profound than that Weighing in
every breast, the melancholy troop pursued its way to Whalley.


END OF THE SECOND BOOK.




BOOK THE THIRD.

Hoghton tower




CHAPTER I.--DOWNHAM MANOR-HOUSE.


On a lovely morning, about the middle of July, in the same year as the
events previously narrated, Nicholas Assheton, always astir with the
lark, issued from his own dwelling, and sauntered across the smooth lawn
in front of it. The green eminence on which he stood was sheltered on
the right by a grove of sycamores, forming the boundary of the park, and
sloped down into a valley threaded by a small clear stream, whose
murmuring, as it danced over its pebbly bed, distinctly reached his ear
in the stillness of early day. On the left, partly in the valley, and
partly on the side of the acclivity on which the hall was situated,
nestled the little village whose inhabitants owned Nicholas as lord;
and, to judge from their habitations, they had reason to rejoice in
their master; for certainly there was a cheerful air about Downham which
the neighbouring hamlets, especially those in Pendle Forest, sadly
wanted.

On the left of the mansion, and only separated from it by the garden
walls, stood the church, a venerable structure, dating back to a period
more remote even than Whalley Abbey. From the churchyard a view, almost
similar to that enjoyed by the squire, was obtained, though partially
interrupted by the thick rounded foliage of a large tree growing beneath
it; and many a traveller who came that way lingered within the hallowed
precincts to contemplate the prospect. At the foot of the hill was a
small stone bridge crossing the stream.

Across the road, and scarce thirty paces from the church-gate, stood a
little alehouse, whose comfortable fireside nook and good liquors were
not disdained by the squire. In fact, to his shame be it spoken, he was
quite as often to be found there of an evening as at the hall. This had
more particularly been the case since the house was tenanted by Richard
Baldwyn, who having given up the mill at Rough Lee, and taken to wife
Bess Whitaker of Goldshaw Booth, had removed with her to Downham, where
he now flourished under the special protection of the squire. Bess had
lost none of her old habits of command, and it must be confessed that
poor Richard played a very secondary part in the establishment.
Nicholas, as may be supposed, was permitted considerable licence by her,
but even he had limits, which she took good care he should not exceed.

The Downham domains were well cultivated; the line of demarcation
between them and the heathy wastes adjoining, being clearly traced out,
and you had only to follow the course of the brook to see at a glance
where the purlieus of the forest ended, and where Nicholas Assheton's
property commenced: the one being a dreary moor, with here and there a
thicket upon it, but more frequently a dangerous morass, covered with
sulphur-coloured moss; and the other consisting of green meadows,
bordered in most instances by magnificent timber. The contrast, however,
was not without its charm; and while the sterile wastes set off the fair
and fertile fields around them, and enhanced their beauty, they offered
a wide, uninterrupted expanse, over which the eye could range at will.

On the further side of the valley, and immediately opposite the lawn
whereon Nicholas stood, the ground gradually arose, until it reached the
foot of Pendle Hill, which here assuming its most majestic aspect,
constituted the grand and peculiar feature of the scene. Nowhere could
the lordly eminence be seen to the same advantage as from this point,
and Nicholas contemplated it with feelings of rapture, which no
familiarity could diminish. The sun shone brightly upon its rounded
summit, and upon its seamy sides, revealing all its rifts and ridges;
adding depth of tint to its dusky soil, laid bare in places by the
winter torrents; lending new beauty to its purple heath, and making its
grey sod glow as with fire. So exhilarating was the prospect, that
Nicholas felt half tempted to cross the valley and scale the hill before
breaking his fast; but other feelings checked him, and he turned towards
the right. Here, beyond a paddock and some outbuildings, lay the park,
small in extent, but beautifully diversified, well stocked with deer,
and boasting much noble timber. In the midst was an exquisite knoll,
which, besides commanding a fine view of Pendle Hill, Downham, and all
the adjacent country, brought within its scope, on the one hand, the
ancient castle of Clithero and the heights overlooking Whalley; and, on
the other, the lovely and extensive vale through which the Ribble
wandered. This, also, was a favourite point of view with the squire, and
he had some idea of walking towards it, when he was arrested by a person
who came from the house, and who shouted to him, hoarsely but blithely,
to stay.

The new-comer was a man of middle age, with a skin almost as tawny as a
gipsy's, a hooked nose, black beetling brows, and eyes so strangely set
in his head, that they communicated a sinister expression to his
countenance. He possessed a burly frame, square, and somewhat heavy,
though not so much so as to impede his activity. In deportment and
stature, though not in feature, he resembled the squire himself; and the
likeness was heightened by his habiliments being part of Nicholas's old
wardrobe, the doublet and hose, and even the green hat and boots, being
those in which Nicholas made his first appearance in this history. The
personage who thus condescended to be fed and clothed at the squire's
expense, and who filled a situation something between guest and menial,
without receiving the precise attention of the one or the wages of the
other, but who made himself so useful to Nicholas that he could not
dispense with him--neither, perhaps would he have been shaken off, even
if it had been desired--was named Lawrence Fogg, an entire stranger to
the country, whom Nicholas had picked up at Colne, and whom he had
invited to Downham for a few weeks' hunting, and had never been able to
get rid of him since.

Lawrence Fogg liked his quarters immensely, and determined to remain in
them; and as a means to so desirable an end, he studied all the squire's
weak points and peculiarities, and these not being very difficult to be
understood, he soon mastered them, and mastered the squire into the
bargain, but without allowing his success to become manifest. Nicholas
was delighted to find one with tastes so congenial to his own, who was
so willing to hunt or fish with him--who could train a hawk as well as
Phil Royle, the falconer--diet a fighting-cock as well as Tom Shaw, the
cock-master--enter a hound better than Charlie Crouch, the old
huntsman--shoot with the long-bow further than any one except himself,
and was willing to toss off a pot with him, or sing a merry stave
whenever he felt inclined. Such a companion was invaluable, and Nicholas
congratulated himself upon the discovery, especially when he found
Lawrence Fogg not unwilling to undertake some delicate commissions for
him, which he could not well execute himself, and which he was unwilling
should reach Mistress Assheton's ears. These were managed with equal
adroitness and caution. About the same time, too, Nicholas finding money
scarce, and, not liking to borrow it in person, delegated Fogg, and sent
him round to his friends to ask for a loan; but, in this instance, the
mission was attended with very indifferent success, for not one of them
would lend him so small a sum as thirty pounds, all averring they stood
in need of it quite as much as himself. Though somewhat inconvenienced
by their refusal, Nicholas bore the disappointment with his customary
equanimity, and made merry with his friend as if nothing had happened.
Fogg showed an equal accommodating spirit in all religious observances,
and, though much against his inclination, attended morning discourses
and lectures with his patron, and even made an attempt at psalm-singing;
but on one occasion, missing the tune and coming in with a bacchanalian
chorus, he was severely rebuked by the minister, and enjoined to keep
silence in future. Such was the friendly relation subsisting between
the parties when they met together on the lawn on the morning in
question.

"Well, Fogg," cried Nicholas, after exchanging salutations with his
friend, "what say you to hunting the otter in the Ribble after
breakfast? 'Tis a rare day for the sport, and the hounds are in
excellent order. There is an old dam and her litter whom we must kill,
for she has been playing the very devil with the fish for a space of
more than two miles; and if we let her off for another week, we shall
have neither salmon, trout, nor umber, as all will have passed down the
maws of her voracious brood."

"And that would be a pity, in good sooth, squire," replied Fogg; "for
there are no fish like those of the Ribble. Nothing I should prefer to
the sport you promise; but I thought you had other business for me
to-day? Another attempt to borrow money--eh?"

"Ay, from my cousin, Dick Assheton," rejoined Nicholas; "he will lend me
the thirty pounds, I am quite sure. But you had better defer the visit
till to-morrow, when his father, Sir Richard, will be at Whalley, and
when you can have him to yourself. Dick will not say you nay, depend
on't; he is too good a fellow for that. A murrain on those close-fisted
curmudgeons, Roger Nowell, Nicholas Townley, and Tom Whitaker. They
ought to be delighted to oblige me."

"But they declare they have no money," said Fogg.

"No money!--pshaw!" exclaimed Nicholas; "an idle excuse. They have
chests full. Would I had all Roger Nowell's gold, I should not require
another supply for years. But, 'sdeath! I will not trouble myself for a
paltry thirty pounds."

"If I might venture to suggest, squire, while you are about it, I would
ask for a hundred pounds, or even two or three hundred," said Fogg.
"Your friends will think all the better of you, and feel more satisfied
you intend to repay them."

"Do you think so!" cried Nicholas. "Then, by Plutus, it shall be three
hundred pounds--three hundred at interest. Dick will have to borrow the
amount to lend it to me; but, no matter, he will easily obtain it.
Harkye, Fogg, while you are at Middleton, endeavour to ascertain whether
any thing has been arranged about the marriage of a certain young lady
to a certain young gentleman. I am curious to know the precise state of
affairs in that quarter."

"I will arrive at the truth, if possible, squire," replied Fogg; "but I
should scarcely think Sir Richard would assent to his son's union with
the daughter of a notorious witch."

"Sir Richard's son is scarcely likely to ask Sir Richard's consent,"
said Nicholas; "and as to Mistress Nutter, though heavy charges have
been brought against her, nothing has been proved, for you know she
escaped, or rather was rescued, on her way to Lancaster Castle."

"I am fully aware of it, squire," replied Fogg; "and I more than
suspect a worthy friend of mine had a hand in her deliverance and could
tell where to find her if needful. But that is neither here nor there.
The lady is quite innocent, I dare say. Indeed, I am quite sure of it,
since you espouse her cause so warmly. But the world is malicious, and
strange things are reported of her."

"Heed not the world, Fogg," rejoined Nicholas. "The world speaks well of
no man, be his deserts what they may. The world says that I waste my
estate in wine, women, and horseflesh--that I spend time in pleasures
which might be profitably employed--that I neglect my wife, forget my
religious observances, am on horseback when I should be afoot, at the
alehouse when I should be at home, at a marriage when I should be at a
funeral, shooting when I should be keeping my books--in short, it has
not a good word to say for me. And as for thee, Fogg, it says thou art
an idle, good-for-nothing fellow; or, if thou art good for aught, it is
only for something that leads to evil. It says thou drinkest
prodigiously, liest confoundedly, and swearest most profanely; that thou
art ever more ready to go to the alehouse than to church, and that none
of the girls can 'scape thee. Nay, the slanderers even go so far as to
assert thou wouldst not hesitate to say, 'Stand and deliver!' to a true
man on the highway. That is what the world says of thee. But, hang it!
never look chapfallen, man. Let us go to the stables, and then we will
in to breakfast; after which we will proceed to the Ribble, and spear
the old otter."

A fine old manorial residence was Downham, and beautifully situated, as
has been shown, on a woody eminence to the north of Pendle Hill. It was
of great antiquity, and first came into the possession of the Assheton
family in 1558. Considerable additions had been made to it by its
present owner, Nicholas, and the outlay necessarily required, combined
with his lavish expenditure, had contributed to embarrass him. The
stables were large, and full of horses; the kennels on the same scale,
and equally well supplied with hounds; and there was a princely retinue
of servants in the yard--grooms, keepers, falconers, huntsmen, and their
assistants--to say nothing of their fellows within doors. In short, if
it had been your fortune to accompany the squire and his friend round
the premises--if you had walked through the stables and counted the
horses--if you had viewed the kennels and examined the various
hounds--the great Lancashire dogs, tall, shaggy, and heavy, a race now
extinct; the Worcestershire hounds, then also in much repute; the
greyhounds, the harriers, the beagles, the lurchers, and, lastly, the
verminers, or, as we should call them, the terriers,--if you had seen
all these, you would not have wondered that money was scarce with him.
Still further would your surprise at such a consequence have diminished
if you had gone on to the falconry, and seen on the perches the goshawk
and her tercel, the sparrowhawk and her musket, under the care of the
ostringer; and further on the falcon-gentle, the gerfalcon, the lanner,
the merlin, and the hobby, all of which were attended to by the head
falconer. It would have done you good to hear Nicholas inquiring from
his men if they had "set out their birds that morning, and weathered
them;" if they had mummy powder in readiness, then esteemed a sovereign
remedy; if the lures, hoods, jesses, buets, and all other needful
furniture, were in good order; and if the meat were sweet and wholesome.
You might next have followed him to the pens where the fighting cocks
were kept, and where you would have found another source of expense in
the cock-master, Tom Shaw--a knave who not only got high wages from his
master, but understood so well the dieting of his birds that he could
make them win or lose a battle as he thought proper. Here, again,
Nicholas had much to say, and was in raptures with one cock, which he
told Fogg he would back to any amount, utterly unconscious of a
significant look that passed between his friend and the cock-master.

"Look at him," cried the squire; "how proud and erect he stands! His
head is as small as that of a sparrowhawk, his eye large and quick, his
body thick, his leg strong in the beam, and his spurs long, rough, and
sharp. That is the bird for me. I will take him over to the cockpit at
Prescot next week, and match him against any bird Sir John Talbot, or my
cousin Braddyll, can bring."

"And yo'n win, squoire," replied the cock-master; "ey ha' been feedin'
him these five weeks, so he'll be i' rare condition then, and winna fail
yo. Yo may lay what yo loike upon him," he added, with a sly wink at
Fogg.

"You may win the thirty pounds you want," observed the latter, in a low
tone to the squire.

"Or, mayhap, lose it," replied Nicholas. "I shall not risk so much,
unless I get the three hundred from Dick Assheton. I have been unlucky
of late. You beat me constantly at tables now, Fogg, and when I first
knew you this was not wont to be the case. Nay, never make any excuses,
man; you cannot help it. Let us in to breakfast."

With this, he proceeded towards the house, followed by Fogg and a couple
of large Lancashire hounds, and, entering at the back of the premises,
made his way through the scullery into the kitchen. Here there were
plentiful evidences of the hospitality, not to say profusion, reigning
throughout the mansion. An open door showed a larder stocked with all
kinds of provisions, and before the fire joints of meat and poultry were
roasting. Pies were baking in the oven; and over the flames, in the
chimney, was suspended a black pot large enough for a witch's caldron.
The cook was busied in preparing for the gridiron some freshly-caught
trout, intended for the squire's own breakfast; and a kitchen-maid was
toasting oatcakes, of which there was a large supply in the bread-flake
depending from the ceiling.

Casting a look around, and exchanging a few words with the cook,
Nicholas moved on, still followed by Fogg and the hounds, and, tracking
a long stone passage, entered the great hall. Here the same disorder and
irregularity prevailed as in his own character and conduct. All was
litter and confusion. Around the walls were hung breastplates and
buff-coats, morions, shields, and two-handed swords; but they were half
hidden by fishing-nets, fowling-nets, dogs' collars, saddles and
bridles, housings, cross-bows, long-bows, quivers, baldricks, horns,
spears, guns, and every other implement then used in the sports of the
river or the field. The floor was in an equal state of disorder. The
rushes were filled with half-gnawed bones, brought thither by the
hounds; and in one corner, on a mat, was a favourite spaniel and her
whelps. The squire however was, happily, insensible to the condition of
the chamber, and looked around it with an air of satisfaction, as if he
thought it the perfection of comfort.

A table was spread for breakfast, near a window looking out upon the
lawn, and two covers only were laid, for Mistress Nicholas Assheton did
not make her appearance at this early hour. And now was exhibited one of
those strange contradictions of which the squire's character was
composed. Kneeling down by the side of the table, and without noticing
the mocking expression of Fogg's countenance as he followed his example,
Nicholas prayed loudly and fervently for upwards of ten minutes, after
which he arose and gave a shout which proved that his lungs were
unimpaired, and not only roused the whole house, but set all the dogs
barking.

Presently a couple of serving-men answered this lusty summons, and the
table was covered with good and substantial dishes, which he and his
companion attacked with a vigour such as only the most valiant
trencherman can display. Already has it been remarked that a breakfast
at the period in question resembled a modern dinner; and better proof
could not have been afforded of the correctness of the description than
the meal under discussion, which comprised fish, flesh, and fowl,
boiled, broiled, and roast, together with strong ale and sack. After an
hour thus agreeably employed, and while they were still seated, though
breakfast had pretty nearly come to an end, a serving-man entered,
announcing Master Richard Sherborne of Dunnow. The squire instantly
sprang to his feet, and hastened to welcome his brother-in-law.

"Ah! good-day to you, Dick," he cried, shaking him heartily by the hand;
"what happy chance brings you here so early? But first sit down and
eat--eat, and talk afterwards. Here, Roger, Harry, bring another platter
and napkin, and let us have more broiled trout and a cold capon, a
pasty, or whatever you can find in the larder. Try some of this gammon
meanwhile, Dick. It will help down a can of ale. And now what brings
thee hither, lad? Pressing business, no doubt. Thou mayest speak before
Fogg. I have no secrets from him. He is my second self."

"I have no secrets to divulge, Nicholas," replied Sherborne, "and I will
tell you at once what I am come about. Have you heard that the King is
about to visit Hoghton Tower in August?"

"No; this is news to me," replied Nicholas; "does your business relate
to his visit?"

"It does," replied Sherborne. "Last night a messenger came to me from
Sir Richard Hoghton, entreating me to move you to do him the favour and
courtesy to attend him at the King's coming, and wear his livery."

"I wear his livery!" exclaimed Nicholas, indignantly. "'Sdeath! what do
you take me for, cousin Dick?"

"For a right good fellow, who I am sure will comply with his friend's
request, especially when he finds there is no sort of degradation in
it," replied Sherborne. "Why, I shall wear Sir Richard's cloth, and so
will several others of our friends. There will be rare doings at
Hoghton--masquings, mummings, and all sorts of revels, besides hunting,
shooting, racing, wrestling, and the devil knows what. You may feast and
carouse to your heart's content. The Dukes of Buckingham and Richmond
will be there, and the Earls of Nottingham and Pembroke, and Sir Gilbert
Hoghton, the King's great favourite, who married the Duchess of
Buckingham's sister. Besides these, you will have all the beauty of
Lancashire. I would not miss the sight for thirty pounds."

"Thirty pounds!" echoed Nicholas, as if struck with a sudden thought.
"Do you think Sir Thomas Hoghton would lend me that sum if I consent to
wear his cloth, and attend him?"

"I have no doubt of it," replied Sherborne; "and if he won't, I will."

"Then I will put my pride in my pocket, and go," said Nicholas. "And
now, Dick, dispatch your breakfast as quickly as you can, and then I
will take you to the Ribble, and show you some sport with an otter."

Sherborne was not long in concluding his repast, and having received an
otter spear from the squire, who had already provided himself and Fogg
with like weapons, all three adjourned to the kennels, where they found
the old huntsman, Charlie Crouch, awaiting them, attended by four stout
varlets, armed with forked staves, meant for the double purpose of
beating the river's banks, and striking the poor beast they were about
to hunt, and each man having a couple of hounds, well entered for the
chase, in leash. Old Crouch was a thin, grey-bearded fellow, but
possessed of a tough, muscular frame, which served him quite as well in
the long run as the younger, and apparently more vigorous, limbs of his
assistants. His cheek was hale, and his eye still bright and quick, and
a certain fierceness was imparted to his countenance by a large
aquiline nose. He was attired in a greasy leathern jerkin, tight hose of
the same material, and had a bugle suspended from his neck, and a sharp
hunting-knife thrust into his girdle. In his hand he bore a spear like
his master, and was followed by a grey old lurcher, who, though wanting
an ear and an eye, and disfigured by sundry scars on throat and back,
was hardy, untiring, and sagacious. This ancient dog was called Grip,
from his tenacity in holding any thing he set his teeth upon, and he and
Crouch were inseparable.

Great was the clamour occasioned by the squire's appearance in the yard.
The coupled hounds gave tongue at once, and sang out most melodiously,
and all the other dogs within the kennels, or roaming at will about the
yard, joined the concert. After much swearing, cracking of whips, and
yelping consequent upon the cracking, silence was in some degree
restored, and a consultation was then held between Nicholas and Crouch
as to where their steps should first be bent. The old huntsman was for
drawing the river near a place called Bean Hill Wood, as the trees
thereabouts, growing close to the water's edge, it was pretty certain
the otter would have her couch amid the roots of some of them. This was
objected to by one of the varlets, who declared that the beast lodged in
a hollow tree, standing on a bank nearly a mile higher up the stream,
and close by the point of junction between Swanside Beck and the Ribble.
He was certain of the fact, he avouched, because he had noticed her
marks on the moist grass near the tree.

"Hoo goes theere to fish, mon?" cried Crouch, "for it is the natur o'
the wary varmint to feed at a distance fro' her lodgin; boh ey'm sure we
shan leet on her among the roots o' them big trees o'erhanging th' river
near Bean Hill Wood, an if the squire 'll tay my advice, he'n go theere
first."

"I put myself entirely under your guidance, Crouch," said Nicholas.

"An yo'n be aw reet, sir," replied the huntsman; "we'n beat the bonks
weel, an two o' these chaps shan go up the stream, an two down, one o'
one side, and one o' t'other; an i' that manner hoo canna escape us, fo'
Grip can swim an dive os weel as onny otter i' aw Englondshiar, an he'n
be efter her an her litter the moment they tak to t' wotur. Some folk,
os maybe yo ha' seen, squoire, tak howd on a cord by both eends, an
droppin it into t' river, draw it slowly along, so that they can tell by
th' jerk when th' otter touches it; boh this is an onsartin method, an
is nowt like Grip's plan, for wherever yo see him swimmin, t'other beast
yo may be sure is nah far ahead."

"A brave dog, but confoundedly ugly!" exclaimed the squire, regarding
the old one-eared, one-eyed lurcher with mingled admiration and disgust;
"and now, that all is arranged, let us be off."

Accordingly they quitted the court-yard, and, shaping their course in
the direction indicated by the huntsman, entered the park, and proceeded
along a glade, checkered by the early sunbeams. Here the noise they made
in their progress speedily disturbed a herd of deer browsing beneath the
trees, and, as the dappled foresters darted off to a thicker covert,
great difficulty was experienced by the varlets in restraining the
hounds, who struggled eagerly to follow them, and made the welkin
resound with their baying.

"Yonder is a tall fellow," cried Nicholas, pointing out a noble buck to
Crouch; "I must kill him next week, for I want to send a haunch of
venison to Middleton, and another to Whalley Abbey for Sir Ralph."

"Better hunt him, squoire," said Crouch; "he will gi' ye good sport."

Soon after this they attained an eminence, where a charming sweep of
country opened upon them, including the finest part of Ribblesdale, with
its richly-wooded plains, and the swift and beautiful river from which
it derived its name. The view was enchanting, and the squire and his
companions paused for a moment to contemplate it, and then, stepping
gleefully forward, made their way over the elastic turf towards a small
thicket skirting the park. All were in high spirits, for the freshness
and beauty of the morning had not been without effect, and the squire's
tongue kept pace with his legs as he strode briskly along; but as they
entered the thicket in question, and caught sight of the river through
the trees, the old huntsman enjoined silence, and he was obliged to put
a check upon his loquacity.

When within a bowshot from the water, the party came to a halt, and two
of the men were directed by Crouch to cross the stream at different
points, and then commence beating the banks, while the other two were
ordered to pursue a like course, but to keep on the near side of the
river. The hounds were next uncoupled, and the men set off to execute
the orders they had received, and soon afterwards the crashing of
branches, and the splashing of water, accompanied by the deep baying of
the hounds, told they were at work.

Meanwhile, Nicholas and the others had not remained idle. As the varlets
struck off in different directions, they went straight on, and forcing
their way through the brushwood, came to a high bank overlooking the
Ribble, on the top of which grew three or four large trees, whose roots,
laid bare on the further side by the swollen currents of winter, formed
a convenient resting-place for the fish-loving creature they hoped to
surprise. Receiving a hint from Crouch to make for the central tree,
Nicholas grasped his spear, and sprang forward; but, quick as he was, he
was too late, though he saw enough to convince him that the crafty old
huntsman had been correct in his judgment; for a dark, slimy object
dropped from out the roots of the tree beneath him, and glided into the
water as swiftly and as noiselessly as if its skin had been oiled. A few
bubbles rose to the surface of the water, but these were all the
indications marking the course of the wondrous diver.

But other eyes, sharper than those of Nicholas, were on the watch, and
the old huntsman shouted out, "There hoo goes, Grip--efter her, lad,
efter her!" The words were scarcely uttered when the dog sprang from the
top of the bank and sank under the water. For some seconds no trace
could be observed of either animal, and then the shaggy nose of the
lurcher was seen nearly fifty yards higher up the river, and after
sniffing around for a moment, and fixing his single eye on his master,
who was standing on the bank, and encouraging him with his voice and
gesture, he dived again.

"Station yourselves on the bank, fifty paces apart," cried Crouch; "run,
run, or yo'n be too late, an' strike os quick os leet if yo've a chance.
Stay wheere you are, squoire," he added, to Nicholas. "Yo canna be
better placed."

All was now animation and excitement. Perceiving from the noise that the
otter had been found, the four varlets hastened towards the scene of
action, and, by their shouts and the clatter of their staves,
contributed greatly to its spirit. Two were on one side of the stream,
and two on the other, and up to this moment the hounds were similarly
separated; but now most of them had taken to the water, some swimming
about, others standing up to the middle in the shallower part of the
current, watching with keen gaze for the appearance of their anticipated
victim.

Having descended the bank, Nicholas had so placed himself among the huge
twisted roots of the tree, that if the otter, alarmed by the presence of
so many foes, and unable to escape either up or down the river, should
return to her couch, he made certain of striking her. At first there
seemed little chance of such an occurrence, for Fogg, who had gone a
hundred yards higher up, suddenly dashed into the stream, and, plunging
his spear into the mud, cried out that he had hit the beast; but the
next moment, when he drew the weapon forth, and exhibited a large rat
which he had transfixed, his mistake excited much merriment.

Old Crouch, meantime, did not suffer his attention to be drawn from his
dog. Every now and then he saw him come to the surface to breathe, but
as he kept within a short distance, though rising at different points,
the old huntsman felt certain the otter had not got away, and, having
the utmost reliance upon Grip's perseverance and sagacity, he felt
confident he would bring the quarry to him if the thing were possible.
The varlets kept up an incessant clatter, beating the water with their
staves, and casting large stones into it, while the hounds bayed
furiously, so that the poor fugitive was turned on whichever side she
attempted a retreat.

While this was going on, Nicholas was cautioned by the huntsman to look
out, and scarcely had the admonition reached him than the sleek shining
body of the otter emerged from the water, and wreathed itself among the
roots. The squire instantly dealt a blow which he expected to prove
fatal, but his mortification was excessive when he found he had driven
the spear-head so deeply into the tree that he could scarcely disengage
it, while an almost noiseless plunge told that his prey had escaped.
Almost at the same moment that the poor hunted beast had sought its old
lodging, the untiring lurcher had appeared at the edge of the bank, and,
as the former again went down, he dived likewise.

Secretly laughing at the squire's failure, the old huntsman prepared to
take advantage of a similar opportunity if it should present itself, and
with this view ensconced himself behind a pollard willow, which stood
close beside the stream, and whence he could watch closely all that
passed, without being exposed to view. The prudence of the step was soon
manifest. After the lapse of a few seconds, during which neither dog nor
otter had risen to breathe, a slight, very slight, undulation was
perceptible on the surface of the water. Crouch's grasp tightened upon
his staff--he waited another moment--then dashed forward, struck down
his spear, and raised it aloft, with the poor otter transfixed and
writhing upon its point.

Loudly and exultingly did the old man shout at his triumph, and loudly
were his vociferations answered by the others. All flew to the spot
where he was standing, and the hounds, gathering round him, yelled
furiously at the otter, and showed every disposition to tear her in
pieces, if they could get at her. Kicking the noisiest and fiercest of
them out of the way, Crouch approached the river's brink, and lowered
the spear-head till it came within reach of his favourite Grip, who had
not yet come out of the water, but stood within his depth, with his one
red eye fixed on the enemy he had so hotly pursued, and fully expecting
his reward. It now came; his sharp teeth instantly met in the otter's
throat, and when Crouch swung them both in the air, he still maintained
his hold, showing how well he deserved his name, nor could he be
disengaged until long after the sufferings of the tortured animal had
ceased.

To say that Nicholas was neither chagrined at his ill success, nor
jealous of the old huntsman's superior skill, would be to affirm an
untruth; but he put the best face he could upon the matter, and praised
Grip very highly, alleging that the whole merit of the hunt rested with
him. Old Crouch let him go on, and when he had done, quietly observed
that the otter they had destroyed was not the one they came in search
of, as they had seen nothing of her litter; and that, most likely, the
beast that had done so much mischief had her lodging in the hollow tree
near the Swanside Beck, as described by the varlet, and he wished to
know whether the squire would like to go and hunt her. Nicholas replied
that he was quite willing to do so, and hoped he should have better luck
on the second occasion; and with this they set forward again, taking
their way along the side of the stream, beating the banks as they went,
but without rousing any thing beyond an occasional water-rat, which was
killed almost as soon as found by Grip.

Somehow or other, without any one being aware what led to it the
conversation fell upon the two old witches, Mothers Demdike and Chattox,
and the strange manner in which their career had terminated on the
summit of Pendle Hill--if, indeed it could be said to have terminated,
when their spirits were reported to haunt the spot, and might be seen,
it was asserted, at midnight, flitting round the beacon, and shrieking
dismally. The restless shades were pursued, it was added, by the figure
of a monk in white mouldering robes, supposed to be the ghost of Paslew.
It was difficult to understand how these apparitions could be witnessed,
since no one, even for a reward, could be prevailed upon to ascend
Pendle Hill after nightfall; but the shepherds affirmed they had seen
them from below, and that was testimony sufficient to shake the most
sceptical. One singular circumstance was mentioned, which must not be
passed by without notice; and this was, that when the cinders of the
extinct beacon-fire came to be examined, no remains whatever of the two
hags could be discovered, though the ashes were carefully sifted, and it
was quite certain that the flames had expired long before their bodies
could be consumed. The explanation attempted for this marvel was, that
Satan had carried them off while yet living, to finish their combustion
in a still more fiery region.

Mention of Mother Demdike naturally led to her grandson, Jem Device,
who, having escaped in a remarkable manner on the night in question,
notwithstanding the hue and cry made after him, had not, as yet, been
captured, though he had been occasionally seen at night, and under
peculiar circumstances, by various individuals, and amongst others by
old Crouch, who, however, declared he had been unable to lay hands upon
him.

Allusion was then made to Mistress Nutter, whereupon it was observed
that the squire changed the conversation quickly; while sundry sly winks
and shrugs were exchanged among the varlets of the kennel, seeming to
intimate that they knew more about the matter than they cared to admit.
Nothing more, however, was elicited than that the escort conducting her
to Lancaster Castle, together with the other witches, after their
examination before the magistrates at Whalley, and committal, had been
attacked, while it was passing through a woody defile in Bowland Forest,
by a party of men in the garb of foresters, and the lady set free. Nor
had she been heard of since. What made this rescue the more
extraordinary was, that none of the other witches were liberated at the
same time, but some of them who seemed disposed to take advantage of the
favourable interposition, and endeavoured to get away, were brought back
by the foresters to the officers of justice; thus clearly proving that
the attempt was solely made on Mistress Nutter's account, and must have
been undertaken by her friends. Nothing, it was asserted, could equal
the rage and mortification of Roger Nowell and Potts, on learning that
their chief prey had thus escaped them; and by their directions, for
more than a week, the strictest search was made for the fugitive
throughout the neighbourhood, but without effect--no clue could be
discovered to her retreat. Suspicion naturally fell upon the two
Asshetons, Nicholas and Richard, and Roger Nowell roundly taxed them
with contriving and executing the enterprise in person; while Potts told
them they were guilty of misprision of felony, and threatened them with
imprisonment for life, forfeiture of goods and of rents, for the
offence; but as the charge could not be proved against them,
notwithstanding all the efforts of the magistrate and attorney, it fell
to the ground; and Master Potts, full of chagrin at this unexpected and
vexatious termination of the affair, returned to London, and settled
himself in his chambers in Chancery Lane. His duties, however, as clerk
of the court, would necessarily call him to Lancaster in August, when
the assizes commenced, and when he would assist at the trials of such of
the witches as were still in durance.

From Mother Demdike it was natural that the conversation should turn to
her weird retreat, Malkin Tower; and Richard Sherborne expressed his
surprise that the unhallowed structure should be suffered to remain
standing after her removal. Nicholas said he was equally anxious with
his brother-in-law for its demolition, but it was not so easily to be
accomplished as it might appear; for the deserted structure was in such
ill repute with the common folk, as well as every one else, that no one
dared approach it, even in the daytime. A boggart, it was said, had
taken possession of its vaults, and scared away all who ventured near
it; sometimes showing himself in one frightful shape, and sometimes in
another; now as a monstrous goat, now as an equally monstrous cat,
uttering fearful cries, glaring with fiery eyes from out of the windows,
or appearing in all his terror on the summit of the tower. Moreover, the
haunted structure was frequently lighted up at dead of night, strains of
unearthly music were heard resounding from it, and wild figures were
seen flitting past the windows, as if engaged in dancing and revelry; so
that it appeared that no alteration for the better had taken place
there, and that things were still quite as improperly conducted now, as
they had been in the time of Mother Demdike, or in those of her
predecessors, Isole de Heton and Blackburn, the robber. The common
opinion was, that Satan and all his imps had taken up their abode in the
tower, and, as they liked their quarters, led a jolly life there,
dancing and drinking all night long, it would be useless at present to
give them notice to quit, still less to attempt to pull down the house
about their ears. Richard Sherborne heard this wondrous relation in
silence, but with a look of incredulity; and when it was done he winked
slily at his brother-in-law. A strange expression, half comical, half
suspicious, might also have been observed on Fogg's countenance; and he
narrowly watched the squire as the latter spoke.

"But with the disappearance of the malignant old hags who had so long
infested the neighbourhood, had all mischief and calamity ceased, or
were people as much afflicted as heretofore? Were there, in short, so
many cases of witchcraft, real or supposed?" This was the question next
addressed by Sherborne to Nicholas. The squire answered decidedly there
were not. Since the burning of the two old beldames, and the
imprisonment of the others, the whole district of Pendle had improved.
All those who had been smitten with strange illnesses had recovered; and
the inhabitants of the little village of Sabden, who had experienced the
fullest effects of their malignity, were entirely free from sickness.
And not only had they and their families suddenly regained health and
strength, but all belonging to them had undergone a similar beneficial
change. The kine that had lost their milk now yielded it abundantly; the
lame horse halted no longer; the murrain ceased among the sheep; the
pigs that had grown lean amidst abundance fattened rapidly; and though
the farrows that had perished during the evil ascendency of the witches
could not be brought back again, their place promised speedily to be
supplied by others. The corn blighted early in the year had sprung forth
anew, and the trees nipped in the bud were laden with fruit. In short,
all was as fair and as flourishing as it had recently been the reverse.
Amongst others, John Law, the pedlar, who had been deprived of the use
of his limbs by the damnable arts of Mother Demdike, had marvellously
recovered on the very night of her destruction, and was now as strong
and as active as ever. "Such happy results having followed the removal
of the witches, it was to be hoped," Sherborne said, "that the riddance
would be complete, and that none of the obnoxious brood would be left to
inflict future miseries on their fellows. This could not be the case so
long as James Device was allowed to go at large; nor while his mother,
Elizabeth Device, a notorious witch, was suffered to escape with
impunity. There was also Jennet, Elizabeth's daughter, a mischievous and
ill-favoured little creature, who inherited all the ill qualities of her
parents. These were the spawn of the old snake, and, until they were
entirely exterminated, there could be no security against a recurrence
of the evil. Again, there was Nance Redferne, old Chattox's
grand-daughter, a comely woman enough, but a reputed witch, and an
undoubted fabricator of clay images. She was still at liberty, though
she ought to be with the rest in the dungeons of Lancaster Castle. It
was useless to allege that with the destruction of the old hags all
danger had ceased. Common prudence would keep the others quiet now; but
the moment the storm passed over, they would resume their atrocious
practices, and all would be as bad as ever. No, no! the tree must be
utterly uprooted, or it would inevitably burst forth anew."

With these opinions Nicholas generally concurred; but he expressed some
sympathy for Nance Redferne, whom he thought far too good-looking to be
as wicked and malicious as represented. But however that might be, and
however much he might desire to get rid of the family of the Devices, he
feared such a step might be attended with danger to Alizon, and that she
might in some way or other be implicated with them. This last remark he
addressed in an under-tone to his brother-in-law. Sherborne did not at
first feel any apprehension on that score, but, on reflection, he
admitted that Nicholas was perhaps right; and though Alizon was now the
recognised daughter of Mistress Nutter, yet her long and intimate
connection with the Device family might operate to her prejudice, while
her near relationship to an avowed witch would not tend to remove the
unfavourable impression. Sherborne then went on to speak in the most
rapturous terms of the beauty and goodness of the young girl who formed
the subject of their conversation, and declared he was not in the least
surprised that Richard Assheton was so much in love with her. And yet,
he added, a most extraordinary change had taken place in her since the
dreadful night on Pendle Hill, when her mother's guilt had been
proclaimed, and when her arrest had taken place as an offender of the
darkest dye. Alizon, he said, had lost none of her beauty, but her light
and joyous expression of countenance had been supplanted by a look of
profound sadness, which nothing could remove. Gentle and meek in her
deportment, she seemed to look upon herself as under a ban, and as if
she were unfit to associate with the rest of the world. In vain Richard
Assheton and his sister endeavoured to remove this impression by the
tenderest assiduities; in vain they sought to induce her to enter into
amusements consistent with her years; she declined all society but their
own, and passed the greater part of her time in prayer. Sherborne had
seen her so engaged, and the expression of her countenance, he declared,
was seraphic.

On the extreme verge of a high bank situated at the point of junction
between Swanside Beck and the Ribble, stood an old, decayed oak. Little
of the once mighty tree beyond the gnarled trunk was left, and this was
completely hollow; while there was a great rift near the bottom through
which a man might easily creep, and, when once in, stand erect without
inconvenience. Beneath the bank the river was deep and still, forming a
pool, where the largest and fattest fish were to be met with. In
addition to this, the spot was extremely secluded, being rarely visited
by the angler on account of the thick copse by which it was surrounded
and which extended along the back, from the point of confluence between
the lesser and the larger stream, to Downham mill, nearly half a mile
distant.

The sides of the Ribble were here, as elsewhere, beautifully wooded, and
as the clear stream winded along through banks of every diversity of
shape and character, and covered by forest trees of every description,
and of the most luxuriant growth, the effect was enchanting; the more
so, that the sun, having now risen high in the heavens, poured down a
flood of summer heat and radiance, that rendered these cool shades
inexpressibly delightful. Pleasant was it, as the huntsmen leaped from
stone to stone, to listen to the sound of the waters rushing past them.
Pleasant as they sprang upon some green holm or fairy islet, standing in
the midst of the stream, and dividing its lucid waters, to suffer the
eye to follow the course of the rapid current, and to see it here
sparkling in the bright sunshine, there plunged in shade by the
overhanging trees--now fringed with osiers and rushes, now embanked with
smoothest sward of emerald green; anon defended by steep rocks,
sometimes bold and bare, but more frequently clothed with timber; then
sinking down by one of those sudden but exquisite transitions, which
nature alone dares display, from this savage and sombre character into
the softest and gentlest expression; every where varied, yet every where
beautiful.

Through such scenes of silvan loveliness had the huntsmen passed on
their way to the hollow oak, and they had ample leisure to enjoy them,
because the squire and his brother-in-law being engaged in conversation,
as before related, made frequent pauses, and, during these, the others
halted likewise; and even the hounds, glad of a respite, stood still, or
amused themselves by splashing about amid the shallows without any
definite object unless of cooling themselves. Then, as the leaders once
more moved forward, arose the cheering shout, the loud deep bay, the
clattering of staves, the crashing of branches, and all the other
inspiriting noises accompanying the progress of the hunt. But for some
minutes these had again ceased, and as Nicholas and Sherborne lingered
beneath the shade of a wide-spread beech-tree growing on a sandy hillock
near the stream, and seemed deeply interested in their talk--as well
they might, for it related to Alizon--the whole troop, including Fogg,
held respectfully aloof, and awaited their pleasure to go on.

The signal to move was, at length, given by the squire, who saw they
were now not more than a hundred yards from the bank on which stood the
hollow tree they were anxious to reach. As the river here made a turn,
and swept round the point in question, forming, owing to this
detention, the deep pool previously mentioned, the bank almost faced
them, and, as nothing intervened, they could almost look into the rift
near the base of the tree, forming, they supposed, the entrance to the
otter's couch. But, though this was easily distinguished, no traces of
the predatory animal could be seen; and though many sharp eyes were
fixed upon the spot during the prolonged discourse of the two gentlemen,
nothing had occurred to attract their attention, and to prove that the
object of their quest was really there.

After some little consultation between the squire and Crouch, it was
agreed that the former should alone force his way to the tree, while the
others were to station themselves with the hounds at various points of
the stream, above and below the bank, so that, if the otter and her
litter escaped their first assailant, they should infallibly perish by
the hands of some of the others. This being agreed upon, the plan was
instantly put into execution--two of the varlets remaining where they
were--two going higher up; while Sherborne and Fogg stationed themselves
on great stones in the middle of the stream, whence they could command
all around them, and Crouch, wading on with Grip, planted himself at the
entrance of Swanside Beck into the Ribble.

Meanwhile, the squire having scaled the bank, entered the thick covert
encircling it, and, not without some damage to his face and hands from
the numerous thorns and brambles growing amongst it, forced his way
upwards until he reached the bare space surrounding the hollow tree; and
this attained, his first business was to ascertain that all was in
readiness below before commencing the attack. A glance showed him on one
side old Crouch standing up to his middle in the beck, grasping his long
otter spear, and with Grip beating the water in front of him in anxious
expectation of employment; and in front Fogg, Sherborne, and two of the
varlets, with their hounds so disposed that they could immediately
advance upon the otter if it plunged into the river, while its passage
up or down would be stopped by their comrades. All this he discerned at
a glance; and comprehending from a sign made him by the old huntsman
that he should not delay, he advanced towards the tree, and was about to
plunge his spear into the hole, hoping to transfix one at least of its
occupants, when he was startled by hearing a deep voice apparently issue
from the hollows of the timber, bidding him "Beware!"

Nicholas recoiled aghast, for he thought it might be Hobthurst, or the
demon of the wood, who thus bespoke him.

"What accursed thing addresses me?" he said, standing on his guard.
"What is it? Speak!"

"Get hence, Nicholas Assheton," replied the voice; "an' meddle not wi'
them os meddles not wi' thee."

"Aha!" exclaimed the squire, recovering courage, for he thought this
did not sound like the language of a demon. "I am known am I? Why should
I go hence, and at whose bidding?"

"Ask neaw questions, mon, boh ge," replied the voice, "or it shan be
warse fo' thee. Ey am the boggart o' th' clough, an' if theaw bringst me
out, ey'n tear thee i' pieces wi' my claws, an' cast thee into t'
Ribble, so that thine own hounts shan eat thee up."

"Ha! say'st thou so, master boggart," cried Nicholas. "For a spirit,
thou usest the vernacular of the county fairly enough. But before trying
whether thy hide be proof against mortal weapons I command thee to come
forth and declare thyself, that I may judge what manner of thing thou
art."

"Thoud'st best lem me be, ey tell thee," replied the boggart gruffly.

"Ah! methinks I should know those accents," exclaimed the squire; "they
marvellously resemble the voice of an offender who has too long evaded
justice, and whom I have now fairly entrapped. Jem Device, thou art
