
GREENE, NATHANAEL. Born at Warwick, Rhode Island, May 24, 1742;
distinguished himself at Trenton, Princeton, Brandywine and Germantown,
and succeeded Gates in command of the southern army, 1780; conducted
retreat from the Catawba to the Dan, 1781; won victories of Guildford
Court House and Eutaw Springs, 1781; died near Savannah, Georgia, June
19, 1786.

MARION, FRANCIS. Born at Winyaw, South Carolina, 1732; a partisan leader
in South Carolina, 1780-82; served at Eutaw Springs, 1781; died near
Eutaw, South Carolina, February 27, 1795.

SUMTER, THOMAS. Born in Virginia in 1734; in Braddock campaign, 1755;
lieutenant-colonel of regiment of South Carolina riflemen, 1776;
defeated Tories at Hanging Rock, August 6, 1780; defeated by Tarleton at
Fishing Creek, August 18, 1780; defeated Tarleton at Blackstock Hill,
November 20, 1780; member of Congress from South Carolina, 1789-93;
senator, 1801-09; minister to Brazil, 1809-11; died near Camden, South
Carolina, June 1, 1832.

LEE, HENRY. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, January 29, 1756;
distinguished in Revolution as commander of "Lee's Legion"; governor of
Virginia, 1792-95; member of Congress, 1799-1801; died at Cumberland
Island, Georgia, March 25, 1818.

ST. CLAIR, ARTHUR. Born at Thurso, Scotland, 1734; served at Louisburg
and at Quebec, 1758; resigned from British army and settled in Ligonier
valley, Pennsylvania, 1764; appointed colonel, January 3, 1776;
brigadier-general, August 9, 1776; organized New Jersey militia and
participated in battles of Trenton and Princeton; major-general,
February 19, 1777; succeeded Gates in command at Ticonderoga, and
abandoned fort at approach of Burgoyne's army, July, 1777;
court-martialed in consequence, 1778, and acquitted "with the highest
honor"; succeeded Arnold in command of West Point, 1780; before Yorktown
at surrender of Cornwallis, and in South till close of war; delegate to
Continental Congress, 1785-87; governor of Northwest Territory,
1789-1802; defeated by Indians near Miami villages, November 4, 1791;
died at Greensburg, Pennsylvania, August 31, 1818.

WAYNE, ANTHONY. Born in Chester County, Pennsylvania, January 1, 1745;
member of Pennsylvania legislature, 1774; colonel of Pennsylvania troops
in Canada, 1776; brigadier-general, 1777; served at Brandywine,
Germantown, and Monmouth; stormed Stony Point, July 15, 1779; commanded
at Green Spring, 1781; served at Yorktown; member of Congress from
Georgia, 1791-92; appointed major-general and commander-in-chief of the
army, 1792; won the battle of Fallen Timbers, 1794; negotiated treaty
of Greenville, 1795; died at Erie, Pennsylvania, December 15, 1796.

SCOTT, WINFIELD. Born near Petersburg, Virginia, June 13, 1786; admitted
to the bar, 1806; entered United States army as captain, 1808; served in
war of 1812, distinguishing himself at Queenstown Heights, Chippewa and
Lundy's Lane; brigadier-general and brevet major-general, 1814; served
against Seminoles and Creeks, 1835-37; major-general and
commander-in-chief of the army, 1841; appointed to chief command in
Mexico, 1847; took Vera Cruz, won battles of Cerro Gordo, Contreras,
Churubusco, Molino del Rey and Chapultepec and entered City of Mexico,
September 14, 1847; unsuccessful Whig candidate for President, 1852;
retired from active service, 1861; died at West Point, New York, May 29,
1866.

MCLELLAN, GEORGE BRINTON. Born at Philadelphia, December 3, 1826;
graduated at West Point, 1846; served in Mexican war, 1846-47; sent to
Europe to observe Crimean war, 1855-56; in railroad business, 1857-61;
major-general of volunteers, April, 1861; cleared West Virginia of
Confederates, June and July, 1861; commander Department of the Potomac,
August, 1861; organized Army of the Potomac and conducted Peninsula
campaign, 1861-62; superseded by Burnside, November 7, 1862; Democratic
candidate for President, 1864; governor of New Jersey, 1878-81; died at
Orange, New Jersey, October 29, 1885.

BURNSIDE, AMBROSE EVERETT. Born at Liberty, Indiana, May 23, 1824;
captured Roanoke Island and Newbern, February-March, 1862; fought at
Antietam, September 17, 1862; commanded Army of the Potomac, November
7, 1862-January 26, 1863; defeated at Fredericksburg, December, 1862;
governor of Rhode Island, 1867-69; senator, 1875-81; died at Bristol,
Rhode Island, September 13, 1881.

HOOKER, JOSEPH. Born at Hadley, Massachusetts, November 13, 1814;
graduated at West Point, 1837; served as captain in Mexican war;
brigadier-general, 1861; corps commander at South Mountain, Antietam,
and Fredericksburg; commander of Army of the Potomac, January 25, 1863;
defeated by Lee at Chancellorsville, May 2-3, 1863; relieved of command,
June 27, 1863; served in Chattanooga campaign and with Sherman; died at
Garden City, New York, October 31, 1879.

SHERMAN, WILLIAM TECUMSEH. Born at Lancaster, Ohio, February 8, 1820;
graduated at West Point, 1840; served in California during Mexican war;
colonel in Union army, 1861; brigadier-general, 1861; was at Bull Run
and Shiloh, and made major-general of volunteers, May 1, 1862; served at
Chattanooga and Vicksburg, won battles of Dalton, Resaca, Kenesaw
Mountain, and Peachtree Creek; made major-general in regular army,
August 12, 1864; occupied Atlanta, September 2, 1864; started on march
to the sea, November 12, 1864; entered Savannah, December 21, 1864;
received surrender of Johnston's army, April 26, 1865;
lieutenant-general, 1866; general and commander of the army, 1869;
retired, 1884; died at New York City, February 14, 1891.

SHERIDAN, PHILIP HENRY. Born at Albany, New York, March 6, 1831;
graduated at West Point, 1853; captain, 1861; colonel of cavalry, 1862;
at Perryville, Murfreesboro, Chickamauga and Missionary Ridge; commander
of cavalry corps of Army of the Potomac, April, 1864; at Wilderness,
Hawe's Shop and Trevellian; won victories of Winchester, Fisher's Hill,
Cedar Creek, and devastated Shenandoah Valley, 1864; major-general,
November 8, 1864; commanded at Five Forks, March 31, April 1, 1865; took
leading part in pursuit of Lee; lieutenant-general, 1867; succeeded
Sherman as Commander-in-chief, 1883; general, 1888; died at Nonquith,
Massachusetts, August 5, 1888.

THOMAS, GEORGE HENRY. Born in Southampton County, Virginia, July 31,
1816; graduated at West Point, 1840; served in Seminole and Mexican
wars; brigadier-general of volunteers, August, 1861; at Mill Springs,
Perryville and Murfreesboro; became famous for his defense of Union
position at Chickamauga, September 19-20, 1863; with Sherman in Georgia,
1864; defeated Hood at Nashville, December 15-16, 1864; died at San
Francisco, March 28, 1870.

LEE, ROBERT EDWARD. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, January 19,
1807; graduated at West Point, 1829; served with distinction in Mexican
war; superintendent of West Point Academy, 1852-55; commanded forces
which captured John Brown, 1859; resigned commission in United States
Army, April, 1861; appointed major-general of Virginia forces, April,
1861; commander of the Army of Northern Virginia, June 3, 1862;
commanded in Seven Days' Battles, Manassas campaign, at Antietam and
Fredericksburg, 1862; Chancellorsville and Gettysburg, 1863; against
Grant at Wilderness, Spottsylvania, Cold Harbor and Petersburg, 1864-65;
surrendered to Grant at Appomattox, April 9, 1865; president of
Washington College, Lexington, Virginia, 1865-70; died at Lexington,
Virginia, October 12, 1870.

JACKSON, THOMAS JONATHAN. Born at Clarksburg, West Virginia, January 21,
1824; graduated at West Point, 1846; served through Mexican war and
resigned from army, 1851; professor of philosophy and artillery tactics
Virginia Military Institute, 1851-61; joined Confederate army at opening
of Civil War; brigadier-general at Bull Run, July 21, 1861;
major-general, November, 1861; at Winchester, Cross Keys, Gaines's Mill,
Malvern Hill, Cedar Mountain, Harper's Ferry, Antietam and
Fredericksburg, 1862; mortally wounded by his own men at
Chancellorsville, May 2, 1863; died at Chancellorsville, Virginia, May
10, 1863.

JOHNSTON, ALBERT SIDNEY. Born at Washington, Mason County, Kentucky,
February 3, 1803; graduated at West Point, 1826; served in Black Hawk
war, 1832; resigned from army, 1834; enlisted as private in Texan army,
1836; succeeded Felix Houston as commander of Texan army, 1837;
secretary of war for Republic of Texas, 1838-40; served in Mexican war,
1846-47; commanded successful expedition against revolted Mormons in
Utah, 1857; appointed commander of Department of Kentucky and Tennessee
in Confederate service, 1861; attacked Grant's army at Shiloh, April 6,
1862, and killed there while leading his men.

BEAUREGARD, PIERRE GUSTAVE TOUTANT. Born near New Orleans, May 23, 1818;
graduated at West Point, 1838; served with distinction in Mexican war;
superintendent of West Point Academy, 1860-61; resigned to accept
appointment as brigadier-general in Confederate army, 1861; bombarded
and captured Fort Sumter, April 12-14, 1861; commanded at battle of Bull
Bun, July 21, 1861; general, 1861; assumed command of army at Shiloh on
death of Johnston, April 6, 1862; surrendered to Sherman, 1865;
president of New Orleans and Jackson Railroad Company, 1865-70;
adjutant-general of Louisiana, 1878; died at New Orleans, February 20,
1893.

JOHNSTON, JOSEPH ECCLESTON. Born near Farmville, Virginia, February 3,
1807; graduated at West Point, 1829; served in Mexican war, 1846-47;
entered Confederate service as brigadier-general, 1861; took part in
battle of Bull Run, opposed McClellan in Peninsular campaign, fought
battles of Resaca and Dallas against Sherman, and surrendered to Sherman
at Durham Station, North Carolina, April 26, 1865; member of Congress,
1876-78; United States Commissioner of Railways, 1885-89; died at
Washington, D.C., March 21, 1891.

LONGSTREET, JAMES. Born in Edgefield District, South Carolina, January
8, 1821; graduated at West Point, 1842; served in Mexican war, 1846-47;
entered Confederate service as brigadier-general, 1861; promoted
major-general, 1861; was present at second battle of Bull Run, Antietam,
Gettysburg, Chickamauga, Knoxville and the Wilderness; United States
minister to Turkey, 1880-81; United States Commissioner of Pacific
Railroads, 1897; died January 2, 1904.

STUART, JAMES EWELL BROWN. Born in Patrick County, Virginia, February 6,
1833; graduated at West Point, 1854; entered Confederate service, 1861,
and became leading cavalry officer in Army of Northern Virginia; at Bull
Run, Peninsula, Manassas Junction, Antietam, Fredericksburg and
Chancellorsville; mortally wounded at battle of Yellow Tavern, and died
at Richmond, May 12, 1864.

WHEELER, JOSEPH. Born in Augusta, Georgia, September 10, 1836; graduated
at West Point, 1859; entered Confederate army as colonel; at Shiloh,
Green River, Perryville; brigadier-general, 1862; major-general, 1863;
at Murfreesboro, commanded cavalry at Chickamauga, fought Sherman almost
daily on the march to the sea; included in Johnston's surrender, April
26, 1865; member of Congress, from Alabama, 1881-99; appointed
major-general of volunteers, U.S.A., May 4, 1898; in command of cavalry
at Las Guasimas and before Santiago; in Philippine Islands, 1899-1900;
died at Brooklyn, New York, January 25, 1906.

MILES, NELSON APPLETON. Born at Westminster, Massachusetts, August 8,
1839; entered Union army as volunteer, 1861, attaining rank of
major-general of volunteers; enlisted in regular army at close of war,
rising grade by grade to major-general, and commander-in-chief,
1895-1903; conducted campaigns against Geronimo and Natchez, 1886; in
command of United States troops at Chicago strike, 1884;
lieutenant-general, June 6, 1900; retired, August 8, 1903.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER VIII

GREAT SAILORS


We have said that America has produced no soldier of commanding genius,
but her sailors outrank the world. Even Great Britain, mighty seafaring
nation as she has been, cannot, in the last hundred and fifty years,
show any brighter galaxy of stars. Just why it would be difficult to
say. Perhaps America inherited from England the traditions of that race
of heroes who made the age of Elizabeth, so memorable on the ocean, and
who started their country on her career as mistress of the
seas--Raleigh, Drake, Hawkins, Frobisher, Gilbert, and Howard of
Effingham.

Surely in direct descent from these daring adventurers was that earliest
of America's naval commanders, John Paul Jones, well called the "Founder
of the American Navy." He it was who first carried the Stars and Stripes
into foreign waters, and who made Europe to see that a new nation had
arisen, in the west. He it was who first scouted the tradition of
England's invincibility on the sea, and carried the war into her very
ports. He it was who proved that American valor yielded no whit to
British valor--who, when Captain Pearson, of the Serapis, asked if he
had struck his colors, shouted back that he had not yet begun to fight,
although his ship had been shot to pieces and was sinking; but who
thereupon did begin, and to such good purpose that he captured his
adversary and got his crew aboard her as his own ship sank. Truly a
remarkable man and one worth looking at closely.

In the middle of the eighteenth century, there lived in the county of
Kirkcudbright, Scotland, a poor gardener named John Paul. He had a large
family, and finding it no small task to feed so many mouths, accepted
the offer of a distant relative named William Jones to adopt his oldest
son, William, named in honor of that same relative. Jones owned a
plantation in Virginia, and thither the boy accompanied him, being known
thereafter as William Paul Jones. None of John Paul's numerous children,
however, would have figured on the pages of history but for the youngest
son, born in 1747, and named after his father, John Paul.

Little John Paul had a short childhood, for as soon as he could handle a
line, he was put to work with the fishermen on Solway Firth to help earn
a living for the family. By the time that he was twelve years old, he
was a first-class sailor, and had developed a love for the sea and a
disregard of its perils which never left him. Securing his father's
consent, he shipped as apprentice for a voyage to Virginia, and visited
his brother, who was managing his adopted father's estate near
Fredericksburg. The old planter took a great fancy to the boy, and
offered to adopt him also, but young John Paul preferred the
adventurous life of the ocean to humdrum existence on a Virginia
plantation. For the next fifteen years, he followed the sea, studying
navigation and naval history, French and Spanish, and fitting himself in
every way for high rank in his profession.

On the seventeenth of April, 1773, John Paul anchored his brig, the Two
Friends, in the Rappahannock just below his brother's plantation, and
rowed to shore to pay him a visit. He found him breathing his last. He
died childless, and John Paul found himself heir to the estate, which
was a considerable one. Resigning command of his vessel, he settled down
to the life of a Virginia planter, adding to his name the last name of
his family's benefactor, and being known thereafter as John Paul Jones.

Events were at this time hurrying forward toward war with Great Britain;
Virginia was in a ferment, and Paul Jones was soon caught up by this
tide of patriotism. When, in 1775, the Congress decided to "equip a navy
for the defence of American liberty," Jones at once offered his
services, and was made a senior first lieutenant. It is amusing to run
over the names of those first officers of the American navy. As was the
case with the first generals, out of the whole list only two names live
with any lustre--Paul Jones and Nicholas Biddle.

Paul Jones was the first of these officers to receive his commission,
John Hancock handing it to him in Independence Hall, Philadelphia,
shortly after noon on December 22, 1775. Immediately afterwards, the
new lieutenant, accompanied by a distinguished party, including Hancock
and Thomas Jefferson, proceeded to the Chestnut street wharf, where the
Alfred, the first American man-of-war was lying moored. Captain
Saltonstall, who was to command the ship, had not yet arrived from
Boston, and at Hancock's direction, Lieutenant Jones took command, and
ran up the first American flag ever shown from the masthead of a
man-of-war. It was not the Stars and Stripes, which had not yet been
adopted as the flag of the United States, but a flag showing a
rattlesnake coiled at the foot of a pine-tree, with the words, "Don't
tread on me."

Three other small vessels were soon placed in commission, and the
squadron started out on its first cruise on February 17, 1776. Through
the inexperience and incompetency of the officers, the cruise was a
complete failure, and resulted in the dismissal of "Commander-in-Chief"
Ezekial Hopkins, and the retirement of Jones's immediate superior,
Captain Dudley Saltonstall. It was a striking example of how the first
blast of battle winnows the wheat from the chaff, and its best result
was to give Paul Jones a command of his own. Never thereafter was he
forced to serve under an imbecile superior, but was always, to the end
of his career, the ranking officer on his station.

His first command was a small one, the sloop-of-war Providence, with
fourteen guns and 107 men, but in six weeks he had captured sixteen
prizes, of which eight were manned and sent to port, and eight
destroyed at sea; was twice chased by frigates, escaping capture only by
the most brilliant manoeuvring; and made two descents on the coast of
Nova Scotia, releasing some American prisoners, capturing arms and
ammunition, dispersing a force of Tories, and destroying a number of
fishing smacks; and finally reached port again with a crew of
forty-seven, all the rest having been told off to man his prizes.

Work of so brilliant a description won instant recognition, especially
as contrasted with the failure of the first cruise, and Jones was
promoted to a captaincy, and the Alfred, a ship mounting twenty-eight
guns, added to his command. A cruise of thirty-three days in these two
vessels resulted in seven prizes, two of them armed transports loaded
with supplies for the British army.

Fired by these successes, Jones's great ambition was for a cruise along
the coast of England. He argued that the time had come when the American
flag should be shown in European waters, and that the moral effect of a
descent upon the English coast would be tremendous. It would have this
further advantage, that England was expecting no such attack, that her
ports would be found unprepared for it, and that great damage to her
shipping could probably be done. Lafayette, who had become a warm friend
of the daring captain, heartily approved the plan, and on June 14, 1777,
the Congress passed the following resolution:

    _Resolved_, That the Flag of the Thirteen United States of America
    be Thirteen Stripes, Alternate Red and White; that the Union be
    Thirteen Stars in a Blue Field, Representing a New Constellation.

    _Resolved_, That Captain John Paul Jones be Appointed to Command
    the Ship Ranger.

That these two acts should have been joined in one resolution seems a
remarkable coincidence. "The flag and I are twins," Jones used to say;
"we cannot be parted in life or death"; and it was this flag he carried
with him when he sailed from Portsmouth in the dawn of the first day of
November, 1777. Something else he carried, too--dispatches which had
been placed in his hands only a few hours before, telling of Burgoyne's
surrender. "I will spread the news in France in thirty days," Jones
promised, as his ship cast loose, and he actually did land at Nantes
thirty-one days later. The news he brought decided France in favor of an
alliance with the United States, and the Treaty of Alliance was signed
two months later.

Jones, meanwhile, had overhauled and refitted his ship, and on the tenth
