month she came to Melun, a town some seven leagues south of Paris, that
had lately yielded to the King.  Bidding me walk with her, she went afoot
about the walls, considering what they lacked of strength, and how they
might best be repaired, and bidding me write down all in a little book.
Now we two, and no other, were walking by the dry fosse of Melun, the day
being very fair and warm for that season, the flowers blossoming, and the
birds singing so sweet and loud as never I heard them before or since
that day.

The Maid stood still to listen, holding up her hand to me for silence,
when, lo! in one moment, in the midst of merry music, the birds hushed
suddenly.

As I marvelled, for there was not a cloud in the sky, nor a breath of
cold wind, I beheld the Maid standing as I had seen her stand in the
farmyard of the mill by St. Denis.  Her head was bare, and her face was
white as snow.  So she stood while one might count a hundred, and if ever
any could say that he had seen the Maid under fear, it was now.  As I
watched and wondered, she fell on her knees, like one in prayer, and with
her eyes set and straining, and with clasped hands, she said these
words--"Tell me of that day, and that hour, or grant me, of your grace,
that in the same hour I may die."

Then she was silent for short space, and then, having drawn herself upon
her knees for three paces or four, she very reverently bowed down, and
kissed the ground.

Thereafter she arose, and beholding me wan, I doubt not, she gently laid
her hand upon my shoulder, and, smiling most sweetly, she said--

"I know not what thou hast seen or heard, but promise, on thine honour,
that thou wilt speak no word to any man, save in confession only, while I
bear arms for France."

Then humbly, and with tears, I vowed as she had bidden me, whereto she
only said--

"Come, we loiter, and I have much to do, for the day is short."

But whether the birds sang again, or stinted, I know not, for I marked it
not.

But she set herself, as before, to consider the walls and the fosses,
bidding me write down in my little book what things were needful.  Nor
was her countenance altered in any fashion, nor was her wit less clear;
but when we had seen all that was to be looked to, she bade me call the
chief men of the town to her house, after vespers, and herself went into
the Church of St. Michael to pray.

Though I pondered much on this strange matter, which I laid up in my
heart, I never knew what, belike, the import was, till nigh a year
thereafter, at Rouen.

But there one told me how the Maid, before her judges, had said that, at
Melun, by the fosse, her Saints had told her how she should be made
prisoner before the feast of St. John.  And she had prayed them to warn
her of that hour, or in that hour might she die, but they bade her endure
all things patiently, and with a willing mind.  At that coming, then, of
the Saints, I was present, though, being a sinful man, I knew not that
the Holy Ones were there.  But the birds knew, and stinted in their
singing.

Now that the Maid, knowing by inspiration her hour to be even at the
doors, and wotting well what the end of her captivity was like to be, yet
had the heart to put herself in jeopardy day by day, this I deem the most
valiant deed ever done by man or woman since the making of the world.  For
scarce even Wallace wight would have stood to his standard had he known,
by teaching of them who cannot lie, what end awaited him beyond all hope.
Nay, he would have betaken him to France, as once he did in time of less
danger.

Now, I pray you, consider who she was that showed this courage and high
heart.  She was but the daughter of a manant, a girl of eighteen years of
age.  Remember, then, what manner of creature such a girl is of her
nature; how weak and fearful; how she is discomfited and abashed by the
company of even one gentleman or lady of noble birth; how ignorant she is
of war; how fond to sport and play with wenches of her own degree; how
easily set on fire of love; and how eager to be in the society of young
men amorous.  Pondering all these things in your hearts, judge ye whether
this Maid, the bravest leader in breach, the wisest captain, having
foreknowledge of things hidden and of things to come, the most courteous
lady who ever with knights sat in hall, not knowing carnal love, nor
bodily fear, was aught but a thing miraculous, and a sister of the
Saints.




CHAPTER XXV--OF THE ONFALL AT PONT L'EVEQUE, AND HOW NORMAN LESLIE WAS
HURT


I have now shown wherefore the fighting, in this spring, was to be up and
down the water of Oise, whence the villagers had withdrawn themselves, of
necessity, into the good towns.  For the desire of the Duke of Burgundy
was to hold the Oise, and so take Compiegne, the better to hold Paris.
And on our side the skill was to cut his army in two, so that from east
of the water of Oise neither men nor victual might come to him.

Having this subtle device of war in her mind, the Maid rode north from
Melun, by the King's good towns, till she came to Compiegne, that was not
yet beleaguered.  There they did her all the honour that might be, and
thither came to her standard Messire Jacques de Chabennes, Messire
Rigault de Fontaines, Messire Poton de Xaintrailles, the best knight then
on ground, and many other gentlemen, some four hundred lances in all.
{33}  With these lances the Maid consorted to attack Pont l'Eveque by a
night onfall.  This is a small but very strong hold, on the Oise, some
six leagues from Compiegne, as you go up the river, and it lies near the
town of Noyon, which was held by the English.  In Pont l'Eveque there was
a garrison of a hundred lances of the English, and our skill was to break
on them in the grey of dawn, when men least fear a surprise, and are most
easily taken.  By this very device La Hire had seized Compiegne but six
years agone, wherefore our hope was the higher.  About five of the clock
on an April day we rode out of Compiegne, a great company,--too great,
perchance, for that we had to do.  For our army was nigh a league in
length as it went on the way, nor could we move swiftly, for there were
waggons with us and carts, drawing guns and couleuvrines and powder,
fascines wherewith to fill the fosses, and ladders and double ladders for
scaling the walls.  So the captains ordered it to be, for ever since that
day by Melun fosse, when the Saints foretold her captivity, the Maid
submitted herself in all things to the captains, which was never her
manner before.

As we rode slowly, she was now at the head of the line, now in the midst,
now at the rear, wherever was need; and as I rode at her rein, I took
heart to say--

"Madame, it is not thus that we have taken great keeps and holds, in my
country, from our enemies of England."

"Nay," said she, checking her horse to a walk, and smiling on me in the
dusk with her kind eyes.  "Then tell me how you order it in your
country."

"Madame," I said, "it was with a little force, and lightly moving, that
Messire Thomas Randolph scaled the Castle rock and took Edinburgh Castle
out of the hands of the English, a keep so strong, and set on a cliff so
perilous, that no man might deem to win it by sudden onfall.  And in like
manner the good Messire James Douglas took his own castle, more than once
or twice, by crafty stratagem of war, so that the English named it Castle
Perilous.  But in every such onfall few men fought for us, of such as
could move secretly and swiftly, not with long trains of waggons that
cover a league of road, and by their noise and number give warning to an
enemy."

"My mind is yours," she said, with a sigh, "and so I would have made this
onslaught.  But I submitted me to the will of the captains."

Through the night we pushed our way slowly, for in such a march none may
go swifter than the slowest, namely, the carts and the waggons.  Thus it
befell that the Maid and the captains were in more thoughts than one to
draw back to Compiegne, for the night was clear, and the dawn would be
bright.  And, indeed, after stumbling and wandering long, and doubting of
the way, we did, at last, see the church towers and walls of Pont
l'Eveque stand out against the clear sky of morning, a light mist
girdling the basement of the walls.  Had we been a smaller and swifter
company, we should have arrived an hour before the first greyness shows
the shapes of things.  But now, alas! we no sooner saw the town than we
heard the bells and trumpets calling the townsfolk and men-at-arms to be
on their ward.  The great guns of the keep roared at us so soon as we
were in reach of shot; nevertheless, Pothon and the Maid set companies to
carry the double ladders, for the walls were high, and others were told
off to bring up the fascines, and so, leaving our main battle to wait out
of shot, and come on as they were needed, the Maid and Pothon ran up the
first rampart, she waving her standard and crying that all was ours.  As
we ran, for I must needs be by her side, the din of bells and guns was
worse than I had heard at Orleans, and on the top of the church towers
were men-at-arms waving flags, as if for a signal.  Howbeit, we sprang
into the fosse, under shield, wary of stones cast from above, and
presently three ladders were set against the wall, and we went up, the
Maid leading the way.

Now of what befell I know but little, save that I had so climbed that I
looked down over the wall, when the ladder whereon I stood was wholly
overthrown by two great English knights, and one of them, by his coat
armour, was Messire de Montgomery himself, who commanded in Pont
l'Eveque.  Of all that came after I remember no more than a flight
through air, and the dead stroke of a fall on earth with a stone above
me.  For such is the fortune of war, whereof a man knows but his own
share for the most part, and even that dimly.  The eyes are often blinded
with swift running to be at the wall, and, what with a helm that rings to
sword-blows, and what with smoke, and dust, and crying, and clamour, and
roar of guns, it is but little that many a man-at-arms can tell
concerning the frays wherein, may be, he has borne himself not unmanly.

This was my lot at Pont l'Eveque, and I knew but little of what passed
till I found myself in very great anguish.  For I had been laid in one of
the carts, and so was borne along the way we had come, and at every turn
of the wheels a new pang ran through me.  For my life I could not choose
but groan, as others groaned that were in the same cart with me.  For my
right leg was broken, also my right arm, and my head was stounding as if
it would burst.  It was late and nigh sunset or ever we won the gates of
Compiegne, having lost, indeed, but thirty men slain, but having wholly
failed in our onfall.  For I heard in the monastery whither I was borne
that, when the Maid and Xaintrailles and their men had won their way
within the walls, and had slain certain of the English, and were pushing
the others hard, behold our main battle was fallen upon in the rear by
the English from Noyon, some two miles distant from Pont l'Eveque.
Therefore there was no help for it but retreat we must, driving back the
English to Noyon, while our wounded and all our munitions of war were
carried orderly away.

As to the pains I bore in that monastery of the Jacobins, when my broken
bones were set by a very good surgeon, there is no need that I should
write.  My fortune in war was like that of most men-at-arms, or better
than that of many who are slain outright in their first skirmish.  Some
good fortune I had, as at St. Pierre, and again, bad fortune, of which
this was the worst, that I could not be with the Maid: nay, never again
did I ride under her banner.

She, for her part, was not idle, but, after tarrying certain days in
Compiegne with Guillaume de Flavy, she rode to Lagny, "for there," she
said, "were men that warred well against the English," namely, a company
of our Scots.  And among them, as later I heard in my bed, was Randal
Rutherford, who had ransomed himself out of the hands of the French in
Paris, whereat I was right glad.  At Lagny, with her own men and the
Scots, the Maid fought and took one Franquet d'Arras, a Burgundian
"routier," or knight of the road, who plundered that country without
mercy.  Him the Maid would have exchanged for an Armagnac of Paris, the
host of the Bear Inn, then held in duresse by the English, for his share
in a plot to yield Paris to the King.  But this burgess died in the hands
of the English, and the echevins {34} of Lagny, claiming Franquet d'Arras
as a common thief, traitor, and murderer, tried him, and, on his
confession, put him to death.  This was counted a crime in the Maid by
the English and Burgundian robbers, nay, even by French and Scots.  "For,"
said they, "if a gentleman is to be judged like a manant, or a fat
burgess by burgesses, there is no more profit or glory in war."  Nay, I
have heard gentlemen of France cry out that, as the Maid gave up Franquet
to such judges as would surely condemn him, so she was rightly punished
when Jean de Luxembourg sold her into the hands of unjust judges.  But I
answer that the Maid did not sell Franquet d'Arras, as I say De
Luxembourg sold her: not a livre did she take from the folk of Lagny.  And
as for the slaying of robbers, this very Jean de Luxembourg had but just
slain many English of his own party, for that they burned and pillaged in
the Beauvais country.

Yet men murmured against the Maid not only in their hearts, but openly,
and many men-at-arms ceased to love her cause, both for the slaying of
Franquet d'Arras, and because she was for putting away the
leaguer-lasses, and, when she might, would suffer no plundering.  Whether
she was right or wrong, it behoves me not to judge, but this I know, that
the King's men fought best when she was best obeyed.  And, like Him who
sent her, she was ever of the part of the poor and the oppressed, against
strong knights who rob and ravish and burn and torture, and hold to
ransom.  Therefore the Archbishop of Reims, who was never a friend of the
Maid, said openly in a letter to the Reims folk that "she did her own
will, rather than obeyed the commandments of God."  But that God commands
knights and gentlemen to rob the poor and needy (though indeed He has set
a great gulf between a manant and a gentleman born) I can in nowise
believe.  For my part, when I have been where gentlemen and captains
lamented the slaying of Franquet d'Arras, and justified the dealings of
the English with the Maid, I have seemed to hear the clamour of the cruel
Jews: "Tolle hunc, et dimitte nobis Barabbam." {35} For Barabbas was a
robber.  Howbeit on this matter, as on all, I humbly submit me to the
judgment of my superiors and to Holy Church.

Meantime the Maid rode from Lagny, now to Soissons, now to Senlis, now to
Crepy-en-Valois, and in Crepy she was when that befell which I am about
to relate.




CHAPTER XXVI--HOW, AND BY WHOSE DEVICE, THE MAID WAS TAKEN AT COMPIEGNE


"Verily and indeed the Maid is of wonderful excellence," quoth Father
Francois to me, in my chamber at the Jacobins, where I was healing of my
hurts.

"Any man may know that, who is in your company," the father went on
speaking.

"And how, good father?" I asked him; "sure I have caught none of her
saintliness."

"A saint I do not call you, but I scarce call you a Scot.  For you are a
clerk."

"The Maid taught me none of my clergy, father, nor have I taught her any
of mine."

"She needs it not.  But you are peaceful and gentle; you brawl not, nor
drink, nor curse . . . "

"Nay, father, with whom am I to brawl, or how should I curse in your good
company?  Find you Scots so froward?"

"But now, pretending to be our friends, a band of them is harrying the
Sologne country . . . "

"They will be Johnstons and Jardines, and wild wood folk of Galloway," I
said.  "These we scarce reckon Scots, but rather Picts, and half heathen.
And the Johnstons and Jardines are here belike, because they have made
Scotland over hot to hold them.  We are a poor folk, but honest, let by
the clans of the Land Debatable and of Ettrick Forest, and the Border
freebooters, and the Galloway Picts, and Maxwells, and Glendinnings, and
the red-shanked, jabbering Highlanders and Islesmen, and some certain of
the Angus folk, and, maybe, a wild crew in Strathclyde."

"Yours, then, is a very large country?"

"About the bigness of France, or, may be, not so big.  And the main part
of it, and the most lawful and learned, is by itself, in a sort, a
separate kingdom, namely Fife, whence I come myself.  The Lothians, too,
and the shire of Ayr, if you except Carrick, are well known for the lands
of peaceful and sober men."

"Whence comes your great captain, Sir Hugh Kennedy?"

"There you name an honourable man-at-arms," I said, "the glory of
Scotland; and to show you I was right, he is none of your marchmen, or
Highlanders, but has lands in Ayrshire, and comes of a very honourable
house."

"It is Sir Hugh that hath just held to ransom the King's good town of
Tours, where is that gracious lady the mother of the King's wife, the
Queen of Sicily."

Hereat I waxed red as fire.

"He will be in arrears of his pay, no doubt," I made answer.

"It is very like," said Father Francois: "but considering all that you
tell me, I crave your pardon if I still think that the Blessed Maid has
won you from the common ways of your countrymen."

To which, in faith, I had no answer to make, but that my fortune was like
to be the happier in this world and the next.

"Much need have all men of her goodness, and we of her valour," said the
father, and he sighed.  "This is now the fourth siege of Compiegne I have
seen, and twice have the leads from our roofs and the metal of our bells
been made into munition of war.  Absit omen Domine!  And now they say the
Duke of Burgundy has sworn to slay all, and spare neither woman nor
child."

"A vaunt of war, father.  Call they not him the Good Duke?  When we lay
before Paris, the English put about a like lying tale concerning us, as
if we should sack and slay all."

"I pray that you speak sooth," said Father Francois.

On the next day, being May the twentieth, he came to me again, with a wan
face.

"Burgundians are in Claroix," said he, "across the river, and yet others,
with Jean de Luxembourg, at Margny, scarce a mile away, at the end of the
causeway through the water meadows, beyond the bridge.  And the Duke is
at Coudun, a league off to the right of Claroix, and I have clomb the
tower-top, and thence seen the English at Venette, on the left hand of
the causeway.  All is undone."

