
And among all those faces were nought but welcoming looks--save
from one only. I did not note this, being taken up with watching
how they greeted Uldra, for that seemed to me to be the only thing
that I cared about. If I had any thought of Sexberga now, it was as
if she had been my sister, and I hoped that she would be pleased
with the maiden who was thus brought to her unlooked for. I need
have troubled nought about that, however, for she and her mother
were alike in many things, and if I was sure of the one, so might I
have been of the other in all that had to do with kindness.

But if I had looked beyond Sexberga to where her young thane stood
I should have met with a black scowl enough, though I could not
have told why this should be his greeting for me. I had but seen
him once before, and that was at Earl Wulfnoth's feast to Olaf when
we first came.

That was an evening to be remembered as most pleasant when, after
the feast, we sat and spoke of all that had happened since I left
Penhurst. I told them all the tale of warfare, and of Olaf's deeds,
and of the winning back of my sword, and how that helped our
meeting with Egil.

And when Spray the smith, who sat listening, with the other men in
the hall below the high place, heard of that escape from the Danes,
he said, without ceremony:

"Master, well I knew that you would never be cast into prison."

"That was a saying of yours, Spray," said I. "May the luck last."

Then Uldra would tell the story of our journey in her way, and my
name came pretty often into her tale. So, looking about the hall
while she spoke, my eyes lit on Eldred, and it seemed that he was
ill at ease, and displeased with somewhat. I thought that he would
rather be sitting nearer Sexberga, maybe, and troubled nought about
him, though I did think that he showed his ill temper over plainly
in his face.

Now, in all this story telling there was one thing about which I
said nothing, and that was my search for Hertha. It seemed to me
that there was no need for doing so, and moreover, I would tell the
lady thereof in private at some time. And I was glad that Sexberga
asked me nought about it. I do not think that she had forgotten it,
but she had her own reasons for saying nought of the matter, which
were foolish enough when I found them out. The lady, her mother,
waited for me to say what I would in my own way when I thought
right.



Chapter 13: Jealousy.


That generous foe of mine, Egil--if indeed I should not call him my
friend, as he named me once--had set two months as the time in
which I must bide in peace, and I will not say that this space
seemed likely to go over-heavily for me. We could hear little news
except from such ships as put in from along the coast, and the
first news that came was when Godwine returned from Bosham.

The Danes had taken the queen to Winchester in high honour, and
there she was living in some sort of state, which pleased her well
enough, until word came from Cnut concerning her. It was thought
that he would let her go back to Normandy, keeping the athelings as
hostages. So concerning her and them my mind was at rest.

Now Cnut was besieging London. But before he had left Wessex, there
had been a great council of bishops and clergy at Salisbury, and at
that gathering he had been chosen as king in succession to
Ethelred, whose house was not loved. There, too, he was present,
and swore to be their faithful king and to protect Holy Church in
all things.

Then into Wessex went Eadmund, ravaging and laying waste there. One
might know what hatred of him would come from that, and my heart
sank at hearing this folly.

Two days after Godwine came, we saw the sails of a great fleet
going westward, and we thought that Cnut had been beaten off from
London. But a ship that had sprung a leak in some way put into
Wulfnoth's haven at Shoreham from this fleet, and from thence we
learnt that the Danes had halved their forces, and that Cnut and
Ulf the jarl were going again into the Severn to withstand Eadmund
in Wessex, and if possible to hem him in between two forces in the
old way of the days of Alfred. London was beset straitly, but not
taken yet.

I was more content then, for I could not have reached our king, had
I returned from Normandy, as it seemed. And now it was possible
that he might make headway against the divided forces of the Danes.
I might join him yet in time to share in some final victory.

So the early summer days at Penhurst became very pleasant to me,
for I had little care that need sit heavily on my mind. Indeed, I
think that I should almost have forgotten that I had any, but for
the foolishness of Sexberga, which bid fair to turn all things to
sadness at one time.

I had spoken with her mother about my search for Hertha, telling
her plainly all that had passed between me and Ailwin, and I asked
her to tell me what she thought I must do now.

"Wait yet longer," she answered; "peace will come, and he will
bring Hertha back to Bures."

That ought to have been my own plan, but I had rather hoped to hear
her say that I was right in holding myself free to choose afresh as
I would. The thought of being bound seemed irksome to me; though
why I, landless and luckless, should have found it so, I could not
say. It mattered not at all at present. So I said:

"That is all one can do, lady; it matters not."

"What thinks Sexberga?" I asked presently.

"You have not spoken to her of your search, then?" the lady said.
"I had thought that she would ask you of it first of all."

She had asked nothing, and I had said nothing.

Then the lady said:

"She and I spoke thereof with Uldra but yesterday, and they were
both full of your praises for wishing to seek for your Hertha. They
will be glad to hear that you have done so, and sad that you have
failed to find her."

Then there came over me a wish that Uldra knew nought about it. And
that angered me with myself, because it was plain that I cared
overmuch for the company and pleasant voice and looks of this
maiden who was friendless as I.

So that was all that was said at the time, and I met Uldra in my
foolishness as if this were going to make some difference in her
way with me. Which of course it did not. Whereupon I was angrier
yet with myself for deeming that it would.

Now, there was another person who should have known of this
betrothal of mine, and that was Edred, but Sexberga never told him,
and her mother did not, for she thought that Sexberga would do so.

Of all the foolish things that a maiden can do, the most foolish is
to try to make the man who is to wed her jealous. For it is playing
with edged tools in two ways--if the man, being an honest man and
trustful, is not jealous, the maiden thinks that he cares not, and
so is herself wretched. But if he is jealous, why, then every
thought of his towards the maiden is changed and spoilt, and it
will be long, if ever, before full trust is won again between those
two.

But this seems to be good sport to some damsels, and so it was with
Sexberga. The blacker grew the young thane's looks the more she
would praise me, and the more she would choose to speak with me
rather than to him; wherefore his life was made wretched for him,
and I think he hated the sight of me. Maybe I was blind not to see
this, but I liked him well enough, save for what I thought was his
sullen temper, and I would try to joke him into better humour at
times in all good fellowship. But I think that the trouble began
before I came back, with talk of the time when I had been at
Penhurst before.

He was ever at Penhurst--I should have thought ill of him if he had
not been--for Dallington was close at hand, and he was ever
welcome.

After that talk with the lady I must needs ask Sexberga what she
thought concerning my strange betrothal, she having had so much to
say thereon before. And so one day, as I had been with Spray to see
some traps set by the bank of the Ashbourne river for otter, and was
coming back with him, bearing a great one between us on a pole, we
met Sexberga in the woodland track to the house, and Spray went on,
while I walked back with her on her way to the old village--where
we had had the fight--and talked about my baffled search.

Now her saying was that I had no need to pay any more heed to this
betrothal after what I had said to Ailwin, and that he himself
would seem to try to break it by thus taking Hertha out of my ken.
And we talked freely of the matter, and the last thing that I said
was this, coming round to what I had made up my better mind for:

"It is not much matter either way. I can think of no maiden as
things are."

Whereon we met Eldred, and his face was not pleasant to look on,
though he said nothing at that moment, and turned and walked
silently with us on the other side of the maiden.

When we came to the village I said that we would wait outside until
she came back, and thought that Eldred would go along with her. But
he stayed with me, and I looked round for a sunny seat where one
could see all the long chain of bright hammer ponds that went in
steps, as it were, down the valley before us.

"Nay," he said in a strange voice, "come over to the other side of
the valley--there is a pleasant place there."

"The lady will miss us," said I.

"We need not be long," he said. "The place I would show you is not
far. One of us can be back before she has done with these churls."

So, as I supposed that we might have to wait for half an hour,
because every woman in the place would want to tell her ailments to
the kindly young mistress most likely, we went together, passing
over the brook, and going up the steep valley side beyond it, until
we came to the rocks of the old quarry where we had rested before
the fight with the outlaws.

A pleasant place enough it was, truly, for the rocks stood round in
a little cliff, hemming in a lawn of short grass on every side but
one, and the trees that hung on the bank of the stream closed that
in. So when we were fairly within this circle of red cliff and
green trees Eldred said:

"This will do. We will see which of us is to go back to Sexberga."

"Why, you will," said I, thinking that he had some device by which
he might be free from my presence. "I spoil company for you both,
and will go back to the hall by the lower track presently."

"You have spoilt company long enough," he said, his face growing
very savage of a sudden. "Now I will end it, one way or the other."

"What is this foolishness?" I said, seeing now what he meant.

"You know well enough," he answered with a great oath. "Pluck out
that fine sword of yours and show that you can do more than talk of
using it."

"Come, Eldred," said I, "I have not deserved this."

"You deserve all that I shall give you," he answered, drawing his
sword. "Stand up like a man."

Now it seemed very hard to me that all these friendships should be
broken and spoilt by this foolish business, as they would be if
either of us was hurt; and so I tried to quiet him yet once more.

"Eldred, listen to reason," I said. "I have done you no wrong. Tell
me of what you complain."

Thereat he only cursed, bidding me draw and cease prating.

"I will not fight you thus," I said, for he was growing over wild
to fight well for himself. "Let us find some to attend us and watch
the business, that neither of us may be blamed. It is ill to slay a
man in a hidden place like this with none to say that the fight was
fair."

"You are afraid," he said sneeringly.

"You must ask Relf if that is likely," said I, for I would not be
angered by his angry words. "But I do not care to risk blame to you
or me. Nought is gained by fighting thus."

"Ask Relf, forsooth!" he snarled. "I care not to hear again how you
lay hid in the pit yonder while others fought."

"Have a care, Eldred," I said then. "You grow heedless in your
anger, and go too far. I do not think that you mean this."

"Do you need to be called nidring {12}?" he snarled at me.

Now none heard that word pass between us, and though it made me
bitterly angry I kept my wrath back. Truly I began to think that I
was foolish to argue with him; but there would be grief, lifelong,
at Penhurst if deadly harm befell either of us where none could say
that all was fairly fought out.

"Are you not going?" he said in a choking sort of way.

"No," I said, "not until I know what all this is about."

"What good in going over that again?" he answered. "You know well
enough. Let me be--you have won."

"I know," said I; "but you have not told me aught. I can only guess
that you think that I have taken your place with Sexberga."

"Aye--and now you have won it."

"I want it not," I answered. "Had you not been so angry you would
have known that, when I bid you go back and meet her without me."

Now he looked at me with a sort of doubt, and said, in a somewhat
halting way:

"I heard you just now tell her that it could not be that you could
think of her--as things are."

Then I remembered what my last words had been, and I saw that they
might easily have misled him after all the trouble he seemed to
have had.

"You heard too much or too little," said I, being minded to laugh,
though the matter was over serious to him to let me do so. "I spoke
of my own troubles, which were the less because my fortunes prevent
my thinking of any maiden, seeing that I have no home to give a
wife when I find her. You were wrong in thinking that I spoke of
Sexberga--I spoke, as you might have known, of the one whom I have
lost."

"How should I know that? I know nought of your affairs."

Then thought I to myself that I would punish Sexberga, for she had
tortured this honest lover of hers over much.

"I will not tell you that tale. Ask Sexberga, who has known it from
the first."

Then I was sorry for what I had said, for he flushed darkly.

"I have been made a fool of," he said.

"Nay; but you should have been more trustful," said I. "Now, were I
in your place, I would go home to Dallington and bide there for a
week, and the maiden will be pleased enough to see you when you
return. And if she tries to make you jealous again, seem to mind it
not. There is little sport in it for her then."

"I suppose there would not be," said he, and he began to look more
cheerful.

"Now," said I, "I was betrothed long ago--the war time has come
between me and her who should have been my wife. I have hunted for
her and cannot find her--and that is all. Now you understand. It
was Sexberga who cheered me in my search, and so I spoke to her
thereof."

"I should not have doubted you," he said frankly; "forgive me."

I held out my hand and he took it. There was nought but
friendliness in his grasp, and I could not blame him. I blamed
Sexberga wholly.

Then he laughed a little ruefully.

"I am a fool with a sword," he said. "Will you teach me somewhat? I
think I was mad when I used those evil words to you."

"I have forgotten them," I answered; and so I had. One does not
think much of what a man says in utmost rage as his. "Come, let us
go back to the village."

So we went back together, but Sexberga had gone on her way homeward
without us. Whereat Eldred was not sorry, and said that he was
going back to his own place.

"You will see me no more for a few days," he said. "I think your
plan is good."

"Mind this," I answered, "I never tried it."

"Lookers-on see best," he answered, laughing bitterly. "But think
no more of my anger with yourself, I pray you."

I told him that I would not, and so we parted good friends enough,
though I feared that he might take this matter to heart in such
wise that he would have some ill moments presently. There was
little spring in his walk as he took the path towards Dallington.

I said nought of this affair, as one might suppose, and made little
excuse to Sexberga for leaving her. We had walked too far, and had
returned too late to find her, I said. She pouted and said nothing,
but I thought that her punishment had already begun.

Next day there were ships heading in for Pevensea, and I rode away
to find out what I could, and forgot Eldred and his troubles. For
Olaf had come, and that was luck beyond what I could have looked
for.

The ten great ships slid into the haven, and I was first on the
strand to meet the king. Wulfnoth and Godwine were riding inland,
and doubtless were returning posthaste if they knew that ships had
come. But for a little while I had my kinsman to myself, and great
was his wonder to find me in this place.

"I have thought that I should have to ransom you from Cnut's hand,"
he said, "for we have heard that Thorkel's men took the queen's
ship. Were you not taken likewise?"

So when he heard of all that had brought me here, he praised Egil
highly.

"He is a Norseman, and no Dane, by birth," he said. "One may be
proud that he is so. I would that he were my man."
