them, sent again from thence to take care of the effects which were
particularly consigned to those ports, and to bring back in other ships
such as were improper for the markets at Smyrna[292] and
Scanderoon.[293]

The inconveniences in Spain and Portugal were still greater; for they
would by no means suffer our ships, especially those from London, to
come into any of their ports, much less to unlade. There was a report
that one of our ships having by stealth delivered her cargo, among which
were some bales of English cloth, cotton, kerseys, and such like goods,
the Spaniards caused all the goods to be burned, and punished the men
with death who were concerned in carrying them on shore. This I believe
was in part true, though I do not affirm it; but it is not at all
unlikely, seeing the danger was really very great, the infection being
so violent in London.

I heard likewise that the plague was carried into those countries by
some of our ships, and particularly to the port of Faro, in the kingdom
of Algarve,[294] belonging to the King of Portugal, and that several
persons died of it there; but it was not confirmed.

On the other hand, though the Spaniards and Portuguese were so shy of
us, it is most certain that the plague, as has been said, keeping at
first much at that end of the town next Westminster, the merchandising
part of the town, such as the city and the waterside, was perfectly
sound till at least the beginning of July, and the ships in the river
till the beginning of August; for to the 1st of July there had died but
seven within the whole city, and but sixty within the liberties; but one
in all the parishes of Stepney, Aldgate, and Whitechapel, and but two in
all the eight parishes of Southwark. But it was the same thing abroad,
for the bad news was gone over the whole world, that the city of London
was infected with the plague; and there was no inquiring there how the
infection proceeded, or at which part of the town it was begun or was
reached to.

Besides, after it began to spread, it increased so fast, and the bills
grew so high all on a sudden, that it was to no purpose to lessen the
report of it, or endeavor to make the people abroad think it better than
it was. The account which the weekly bills gave in was sufficient; and
that there died two thousand to three or four thousand a week was
sufficient to alarm the whole trading part of the world: and the
following time being so dreadful also in the very city itself, put the
whole world, I say, upon their guard against it.

You may be sure also that the report of these things lost nothing in the
carriage. The plague was itself very terrible, and the distress of the
people very great, as you may observe of what I have said, but the rumor
was infinitely greater; and it must not be wondered that our friends
abroad, as my brother's correspondents in particular, were told there
(namely, in Portugal and Italy, where he chiefly traded), that in London
there died twenty thousand in a week; that the dead bodies lay unburied
by heaps; that the living were not sufficient to bury the dead, or the
sound to look after the sick; that all the kingdom was infected
likewise, so that it was an universal malady such as was never heard of
in those parts of the world. And they could hardly believe us when we
gave them an account how things really were; and how there was not above
one tenth part of the people dead; that there were five hundred thousand
left that lived all the time in the town; that now the people began to
walk the streets again, and those who were fled to return; there was no
miss of the usual throng of people in the streets, except as every
family might miss their relations and neighbors; and the like. I say,
they could not believe these things; and if inquiry were now to be made
in Naples, or in other cities on the coast of Italy, they would tell you
there was a dreadful infection in London so many years ago, in which, as
above, there died twenty thousand in a week, etc., just as we have had
it reported in London that there was a plague in the city of Naples in
the year 1656, in which there died twenty thousand people in a day, of
which I have had very good satisfaction that it was utterly false.

But these extravagant reports were very prejudicial to our trade, as
well as unjust and injurious in themselves; for it was a long time after
the plague was quite over before our trade could recover itself in those
parts of the world; and the Flemings[295] and Dutch, but especially the
last, made very great advantages of it, having all the market to
themselves, and even buying our manufactures in the several parts of
England where the plague was not, and carrying them to Holland and
Flanders, and from thence transporting them to Spain and to Italy, as if
they had been of their own making.

But they were detected sometimes, and punished, that is to say, their
goods confiscated, and ships also; for if it was true that our
manufactures as well as our people were infected, and that it was
dangerous to touch or to open and receive the smell of them, then those
people ran the hazard, by that clandestine trade, not only of carrying
the contagion into their own country, but also of infecting the nations
to whom they traded with those goods; which, considering how many lives
might be lost in consequence of such an action, must be a trade that no
men of conscience could suffer themselves to be concerned in.

I do not take upon me to say that any harm was done, I mean of that
kind, by those people; but I doubt I need not make any such proviso in
the case of our own country; for either by our people of London, or by
the commerce, which made their conversing with all sorts of people in
every county, and of every considerable town, necessary,--I say, by this
means the plague was first or last spread all over the kingdom, as well
in London as in all the cities and great towns, especially in the
trading manufacturing towns and seaports: so that first or last all the
considerable places in England were visited more or less, and the
kingdom of Ireland in some places, but not so universally. How it fared
with the people in Scotland, I had no opportunity to inquire.

It is to be observed, that, while the plague continued so violent in
London, the outports, as they are called, enjoyed a very great trade,
especially to the adjacent countries and to our own plantations.[296]
For example, the towns of Colchester, Yarmouth, and Hull, on that
side[297] of England, exported to Holland and Hamburg the manufactures
of the adjacent counties for several months after the trade with London
was, as it were, entirely shut up. Likewise the cities of Bristol[298]
and Exeter, with the port of Plymouth, had the like advantage to Spain,
to the Canaries, to Guinea, and to the West Indies, and particularly to
Ireland. But as the plague spread itself every way after it had been in
London to such a degree as it was in August and September, so all or
most of those cities and towns were infected first or last, and then
trade was, as it were, under a general embargo, or at a full stop, as I
shall observe further when I speak of our home trade.

One thing, however, must be observed, that as to ships coming in from
abroad (as many, you may be sure, did), some who were out in all parts
of the world a considerable while before, and some who, when they went
out, knew nothing of an infection, or at least of one so
terrible,--these came up the river boldly, and delivered their cargoes
as they were obliged to do, except just in the two months of August and
September, when, the weight of the infection lying, as I may say, all
below bridge, nobody durst appear in business for a while. But as this
continued but for a few weeks, the homeward-bound ships, especially such
whose cargoes were not liable to spoil, came to an anchor, for a time,
short of the Pool, or freshwater part of the river, even as low as the
river Medway, where several of them ran in; and others lay at the Nore,
and in the Hope below Gravesend: so that by the latter end of October
there was a very great fleet of homeward-bound ships to come up, such as
the like had not been known for many years.

Two particular trades were carried on by water carriage all the while of
the infection, and that with little or no interruption, very much to the
advantage and comfort of the poor distressed people of the city; and
those were the coasting trade for corn, and the Newcastle trade for
coals.

The first of these was particularly carried on by small vessels from the
port of Hull, and other places in the Humber, by which great quantities
of corn were brought in from Yorkshire and Lincolnshire; the other part
of this corn trade was from Lynn in Norfolk, from Wells, and Burnham,
and from Yarmouth, all in the same county; and the third branch was from
the river Medway, and from Milton, Feversham, Margate, and Sandwich, and
all the other little places and ports round the coast of Kent and
Essex.[299]

There was also a very good trade from the coast of Suffolk, with corn,
butter, and cheese. These vessels kept a constant course of trade, and
without interruption came up to that market known still by the name of
Bear Key, where they supplied the city plentifully with corn when land
carriage began to fail, and when the people began to be sick of coming
from many places in the country.

This also was much of it owing to the prudence and conduct of the lord
mayor, who took such care to keep the masters and seamen from danger
when they came up, causing their corn to be bought off at any time they
wanted a market (which, however, was very seldom), and causing the
cornfactors[300] immediately to unlade and deliver the vessels laden
with corn, that they had very little occasion to come out of their ships
or vessels, the money being always carried on board to them, and put it
into a pail of vinegar before it was carried.

The second trade was that of coals from Newcastle-upon-Tyne, without
which the city would have been greatly distressed; for not in the
streets only, but in private houses and families, great quantities of
coal were then burnt, even all the summer long, and when the weather was
hottest, which was done by the advice of the physicians. Some, indeed,
opposed it, and insisted that to keep the houses and rooms hot was a
means to propagate the distemper, which was a fermentation and heat
already in the blood; that it was known to spread and increase in hot
weather, and abate in cold; and therefore they alleged that all
contagious distempers are the worst for heat, because the contagion was
nourished, and gained strength, in hot weather, and was, as it were,
propagated in heat.

Others said they granted that heat in the climate might propagate
infection, as sultry hot weather fills the air with vermin, and
nourishes innumerable numbers and kinds of venomous creatures, which
breed in our food, in the plants, and even in our bodies, by the very
stench of which infection may be propagated; also that heat in the air,
or heat of weather, as we ordinarily call it, makes bodies relax and
faint, exhausts the spirits, opens the pores, and makes us more apt to
receive infection or any evil influence, be it from noxious,
pestilential vapors, or any other thing in the air; but that the heat of
fire, and especially of coal fires, kept in our houses or near us, had
quite a different operation, the heat being not of the same kind, but
quick and fierce, tending not to nourish, but to consume and dissipate,
all those noxious fumes which the other kind of heat rather exhaled, and
stagnated than separated, and burnt up. Besides, it was alleged that the
sulphureous and nitrous particles that are often found to be in the
coal, with that bituminous substance which burns, are all assisting to
clear and purge the air, and render it wholesome and safe to breathe
in, after the noxious particles (as above) are dispersed and burnt up.

The latter opinion prevailed at that time, and, as I must confess, I
think with good reason; and the experience of the citizens confirmed it,
many houses which had constant fires kept in the rooms having never been
infected at all; and I must join my experience to it, for I found the
keeping of good fires kept our rooms sweet and wholesome, and I do
verily believe made our whole family so, more than would otherwise have
been.

But I return to the coals as a trade. It was with no little difficulty
that this trade was kept open, and particularly because, as we were in
an open war with the Dutch at that time, the Dutch capers[301] at first
took a great many of our collier ships, which made the rest cautious,
and made them to stay to come in fleets together. But after some time
the capers were either afraid to take them, or their masters, the
States, were afraid they should, and forbade them, lest the plague
should be among them, which made them fare the better.

For the security of those northern traders, the coal ships were ordered
by my lord mayor not to come up into the Pool above a certain number at
a time; and[302] ordered lighters and other vessels, such as the
woodmongers (that is, the wharf keepers) or coal sellers furnished, to
go down and take out the coals as low as Deptford and Greenwich, and
some farther down.

Others delivered great quantities of coals in particular places where
the ships could come to the shore, as at Greenwich, Blackwall, and other
places, in vast heaps, as if to be kept for sale; but[303] were then
fetched away after the ships which brought them were gone; so that the
seamen had no communication with the river men, nor so much as came near
one another.[304]

Yet all this caution could not effectually prevent the distemper
getting among the colliery, that is to say, among the ships, by which a
great many seamen died of it; and that which was still worse was, that
they carried it down to Ipswich and Yarmouth, to Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
and other places on the coast, where, especially at Newcastle and at
Sunderland, it carried off a great number of people.

The making so many fires as above did indeed consume an unusual quantity
of coals; and that upon one or two stops of the ships coming up (whether
by contrary weather or by the interruption of enemies, I do not
remember); but the price of coals was exceedingly dear, even as high as
four pounds a chaldron;[305] but it soon abated when the ships came in,
and, as afterwards they had a freer passage, the price was very
reasonable all the rest of that year.

The public fires which were made on these occasions, as I have
calculated it, must necessarily have cost the city about two hundred
chaldron of coals a week, if they had continued, which was indeed a very
great quantity; but as it was thought necessary, nothing was spared.
However, as some of the physicians cried them down, they were not kept
alight above four or five days. The fires were ordered thus:--

One at the Custom House; one at Billingsgate; one at Queenhithe, and one
at the Three Cranes; one in Blackfriars, and one at the gate of
Bridewell; one at the corner of Leadenhall Street and Gracechurch; one
at the north and one at the south gate of the Royal Exchange; one at
Guildhall, and one at Blackwell Hall gate; one at the lord mayor's door
in St. Helen's; one at the west entrance into St. Paul's; and one at the
entrance into Bow Church. I do not remember whether there was any at the
city gates, but one at the bridge foot there was, just by St. Magnus
Church.

I know some have quarreled since that at the experiment, and said that
there died the more people because of those fires; but I am persuaded
those that say so offer no evidence to prove it, neither can I believe
it on any account whatever.

It remains to give some account of the state of trade at home in England
during this dreadful time, and particularly as it relates to the
manufactures and the trade in the city. At the first breaking out of the
infection there was, as it is easy to suppose, a very great fright among
the people, and consequently a general stop of trade, except in
provisions and necessaries of life; and even in those things, as there
was a vast number of people fled and a very great number always sick,
besides the number which died, so there could not be above two thirds,
if above one half, of the consumption of provisions in the city as used
to be.

It pleased God to send a very plentiful year of corn and fruit, and not
of hay or grass, by which means bread was cheap by reason of the plenty
of corn, flesh was cheap by reason of the scarcity of grass, but butter
and cheese were dear for the same reason; and hay in the market, just
beyond Whitechapel Bars, was sold at four pounds per load; but that
affected not the poor. There was a most excessive plenty of all sorts of
fruit, such as apples, pears, plums, cherries, grapes; and they were the
cheaper because of the wants of the people; but this made the poor eat
them to excess, and this brought them into surfeits and the like, which
often precipitated them into the plague.

But to come to matters of trade. First, foreign exportation being
stopped, or at least very much interrupted and rendered difficult, a
general stop of all those manufactures followed of course, which were
usually brought for exportation; and, though sometimes merchants abroad
were importunate for goods, yet little was sent, the passages being so
generally stopped that the English ships would not be admitted, as is
said already, into their port.

This put a stop to the manufactures that were for exportation in most
parts of England, except in some outports; and even that was soon
stopped, for they all had the plague in their turn. But though this was
felt all over England, yet, what was still worse, all intercourse of
trade for home consumption of manufactures, especially those which
usually circulated through the Londoners' hands, was stopped at once,
the trade of the city being stopped.

All kinds of handicrafts in the city, etc., tradesmen and mechanics,
were, as I have said before, out of employ; and this occasioned the
putting off and dismissing an innumerable number of journeymen and
workmen of all sorts, seeing nothing was done relating to such trades
but what might be said to be absolutely necessary.

This caused the multitude of single people in London to be unprovided
for, as also of families whose living depended upon the labor of the
heads of those families. I say, this reduced them to extreme misery; and
I must confess it is for the honor of the city of London, and will be
for many ages, as long as this is to be spoken of, that they were able
to supply with charitable provision the wants of so many thousands of
those as afterwards fell sick and were distressed; so that it may be
safely averred that nobody perished for want, at least that the
magistrates had any notice given them of.

This stagnation of our manufacturing trade in the country would have put
the people there to much greater difficulties, but that the master
workmen, clothiers, and others, to the uttermost of their stocks and
strength, kept on making their goods to keep the poor at work, believing
that, as soon as the sickness should abate, they would have a quick
demand in proportion to the decay of their trade at that time; but as
none but those masters that were rich could do thus, and that many were
poor and not able, the manufacturing trade in England suffered greatly,
and the poor were pinched all over England by the calamity of the city
