the casks closely. "This is an empty one, and the hoops seem quite
loose."

In a few minutes, four iron hoops were taken off the cask.

"After all," Matteo said, "they cannot be of much use. The iron is rust
eaten, and they would break in our hands before going into any one."

"They would certainly be useless as daggers, Matteo, but I think that
with care they will act as saws. Break off a length of about a foot.

"Now straighten it, and tear a piece off your doublet and wrap it round
and round one end, so that you can hold it. Now just try it on the edge
of a beam."

"It certainly cuts," Matteo announced after a trial, "but not very
fast."

"So that it cuts at all, we may be very well content," Francis said
cheerfully. "We have got a week, at least, to work in; and if the wind
is not favourable, we may have a month. Let us therefore break the
hoops up into pieces of the right length. We must use them carefully,
for we may expect to have many breakages."

"What next, captain?"

"Our object will, of course, be to cut through into the main hold,
which separates us from the crew. There we shall probably find plenty
of weapons. But to use our saws, we must first find a hole in the
bulkhead. First of all, then, let there be a strict search made for a
knothole, or any other hole through the bulkhead."

It was too dark for eyes to be of much use, but hands were run all over
the bulkhead. But no hole, however small, was discovered.

"It is clear, then," Francis said, "that the first thing to do is to
cut out some of those iron bolts. Pick out those that are nearest to
the lower side of the beam, say three of them. There are twelve of us.
That will give four to each bolt, and we can relieve each other every
few minutes. Remember, it is patience that is required, and not
strength."

The work was at once begun. The young men had, by this time, fully
entered into the spirit of the attempt. The quiet and businesslike way,
in which their leader set about it, convinced them that he at least had
a firm belief that the work was possible; and there was a hope, even if
but a remote one, of avoiding the dreaded dungeons of Genoa.

The work was slow, and two or three of the strips of iron were at first
broken, by the too great eagerness of their holders; but when it was
found that, by using them lightly, the edges gradually cut their way
into the wood, the work went on regularly. The Pluto had been hurriedly
constructed, and any timbers that were available in the emergency were
utilized. Consequently much soft wood, that at other times would never
have been found in the state dockyards, was put into her. The beam at
which they were working was of soft timber, and a fine dust fell
steadily, as the rough iron was sawed backward and forward upon it.

Two cuts were made under each bolt, wide at the base and converging
towards it. The saws were kept going the whole day, and although the
progress was slow, it was fast enough to encourage them; and just as
the light, that came through the scuttle, faded away; three of the
young men hung their weight upon one of the bolts, and the wood beneath
it, already almost severed, gave; and a suppressed cry of satisfaction
announced that one bolt was free.

The pieces of iron were two feet long, and were intended for some other
purpose, but had been driven in when, on loading the ship, some strong
pegs on which to hang carcasses were required. They were driven about
three inches into the beam, and could have been cut out with an
ordinary saw in two or three minutes.

"Try the others," Francis said. "As many of you get hold of them as can
put your hands on."

The effort was made, and the other two bolts were got out. They had
been roughly sharpened at the end, and were fully an inch across.

"They do not make bad weapons," Matteo said.

"It is not as weapons that we want them, Matteo. They will be more
useful to us than any weapons, except, indeed, a good axe. We shall
want at least three more. Therefore, I propose that we continue our
work at once. We will divide into watches now. It will be twelve hours
before we get our allowance of bread again, therefore that will give
three hours' work, and nine hours' sleep to each. They will be just
setting the first watch on deck, and, as we shall hear them changed, it
will give us a good idea how the time is passing."

"I am ready to work all night, myself," Matteo said. "At first I had
not much faith in what we were doing; but now that we have got three of
these irons out, I am ready to go on working until I drop."

"You will find, Matteo, that your arms will ache, so that you cannot
hold them up, before the end of the three hours. Sawing like that, with
your arms above your head, is most fatiguing; and even the short spells
of work we have been having made my arms ache. However, each must do as
much as he can in his three hours; and as we are working in the dark,
we must work slowly and carefully, or we shall break our tools."

"Fortunately, we can get more hoops off now if we want them," Matteo
said. "With these irons we can wrench them off the sound casks, if
necessary."

"Yes; I did not think of that, Matteo. You see we are already getting a
stock of tools. Another thing is, with the point of the irons we have
got off, we can wrench the wood out as fast as we saw it, and the saws
will not work so stiffly as they did before. But we must not do that
till the morning, for any sound like the breaking of wood might be
heard by the watch, when everything is quiet."

Although all worked their best, they made but slight progress in the
dark, and each worker was forced to take frequent rests, for the
fatigue of working with their arms above their heads was excessive. As
soon, however, as the light began to steal down, and the movement above
head told them that the crew were at work washing the decks, the points
of the irons were used to wrench away the wood between the saw cuts;
and the work then proceeded briskly, as they relieved each other every
few minutes.

At last, to their intense satisfaction, three more irons were got out.

"If anyone had told me," one of the party said, "that a man's arms
could hurt as much as mine do, from working a few hours, I should have
disbelieved him."

There was a chorus of assent, for none were accustomed to hard manual
labour, and the pain in their arms was excessive.

"Let us have half an hour's rest, Francis, before you issue your next
orders. I shall want that, at least, before I feel that I have any
power in my arms at all."

"We will have an hour's rest, Matteo, if you like. Before that time
they will be sending us down our food, and after we have breakfasted we
can set to work again."

"Breakfast!" one of the young men groaned. "I cannot call that black
bread and water breakfast. When I think of the breakfasts I have eaten,
when I think of the dishes I have refused to eat, because they were not
cooked to perfection, I groan over my folly in those days, and my
enormous stupidity in ever volunteering to come to sea."

"I should recommend you all," Francis said, "to spend the next hour in
rubbing and squeezing the muscles of your neighbours' arms and
shoulders. It is the best way for taking out stiffness, and Giuseppi
used to give me relief that way, when I was stiff with fencing."

The idea was adopted; and while the rest were at work in the manner he
suggested, Francis, taking one of the irons, went to the bulkhead. One
by one he tried the planks, from the floor boards to the beams above.

"Well, captain, what is your report?" Matteo asked as he joined the
rest.

"My report is a most favourable one," Francis said. "By great good
luck, the planks are nailed from the other side against the beams both
above and below."

"What difference does that make, Francisco?"

"All the difference in the world. Had they been nailed on this side,
there would have been nothing for it but to carry out our original
plan--that is, to make holes through the planks with these irons, large
enough for the saws to go through, and then to saw the wood out from
hole to hole. As it is, I believe that with five minutes' work we could
wrench a plank away. We have only to push the points of the irons up,
between the beams and the planks, and use them as levers. The nails
will be strong, indeed, if those irons, with two of us at each, would
not wrench them out."

The young men all leapt to their feet, pains and aches quite forgotten
in the excitement of this unexpected news, and six of them seized hold
of the irons.

"Gently!" Francis said. "You must remember, there may be people going
down there at present, getting up stores. Before we venture to disturb
a plank, we must make the hole sufficiently large for us to spy
through. This will be a very easy affair, in comparison with making a
hole large enough for a saw to go through. Still, you will find it will
take some time. However, we had better wait, as we agreed, till we have
had our food."



Chapter 16: The Recapture Of The Pluto.


As soon as the hatch had been removed, and the bread and water lowered
down, and they heard heavy weights again laid on the hatch, two of the
party took one of the irons and began to bore a hole, while the others
proceeded to eat their food. Several times, the workers had to be
relieved. The iron penetrated comparatively easily for a short
distance, but beyond that the difficulty greatly increased; and it was
fully four hours before one of the workers, applying his eye to the
hole, said that he could see a gleam of light through.

In another quarter of an hour, the orifice was sufficiently enlarged to
enable a view to be obtained of the central hold. It was comparatively
light there, for the hatch was off, and they could see two men at work,
opening a cask for some stores that were required.

"We must wait till it gets dark now," Francis said. "I do not think
that we shall make much noise, for the nails will be likely to draw
quietly; but we had better choose the time between nightfall and the
hour for the crew to turn in, as there will be a trampling of feet on
deck, and talking and singing, which would prevent any slight noise we
might make, being heard."

"The difficulty will be to force the ends of the iron down, between the
beams and the planks, so as to give us a purchase," Matteo said.

"I think we shall be able to manage that," Francis replied. "The beams
are put in in the rough, and if we hunt carefully, I think we shall
find a plank where we can get the irons in far enough, between it and
the beam, to give us a hold."

After a careful examination, they fixed upon a plank to operate upon,
and, leaving one of the irons there, so that they could find it in the
dark, they lay down to sleep, or sat talking until it was dark. Before
this, a glance, through the peephole, showed them that the hatch had
been placed over the hatchway of the next hold, so that there was
little fear of anyone coming down, unless something special was
required.

"Now I think we can begin," Francis said, at last. "Do you, Paolo
Parucchi, take one of the irons, I will take another, Matteo a third.
We cannot possibly work more than three at the foot of a plank, though
perhaps, when we have fixed them and put on the strain, two or three
more hands may get at the irons; but first we will try with three, and,
unless the nails have got a wonderfully firm hold, we shall certainly
be able to draw them."

It took some time to fix the irons, to the best advantage, between the
planks and the beam.

"Are you both ready?" Francis asked at last. "Then pull."

As Francis had anticipated, the levers did their work, and the nails
yielded a little.

"It has sprung half an inch," Francis said, feeling. "Now you keep your
irons as they are, while I thrust mine down farther. I have got a fresh
hold. Do you shift yours."

Again the effort was made, and this time the nails drew fully two
inches. Another effort, and the plank was completely free at the lower
end.

"Now do you push against it as hard as you can," Francis said, "while I
get my iron in between it and the beam above."

The upper nails yielded even more easily than those below.

"No farther," Francis said, when they had fairly started them, "or the
plank will be falling with a crash. We must push from the bottom now,
until it gives sufficiently far for you to get an iron down each side,
to prevent its closing again."

"Now," he said, "push the irons higher up. That is right. Now I will
loosen a bit farther at the top, and then you will be able to get your
hands in at the bottom to steady it, and prevent its falling when the
nails are quite drawn."

Another effort, and the plank was free, and, being drawn in, was laid
down. The delight of those who were standing in the dark, and could
only judge how matters were going on from Francis's low spoken orders,
was extreme.

"Can we get through?"

"No," Francis replied. "It will be necessary to remove another plank
first, but perhaps one of the slighter among you might manage to
squeeze through, and hold the plank at the back. We shall be able to
work with more freedom, if we know that there is no danger of its
falling."

In a few minutes, the second plank was laid beside the first.

"What is to be done next?" Matteo asked.

"We must establish a communication with the sailors. I will take a
working party of four. Paolo Parucchi, with four others, will relieve
me. You, Matteo, will with the rest take the last spell. When we have
entered the next compartment, we will put up the planks again, and
press the nails in tightly enough to prevent their falling. Should, by
some chance, anyone descend into the hold while we are working, we
shall be hidden from their view. At the other end there are a number of
sacks piled up, and we shall be working behind them."

Francis, and the men he had chosen, made their way to the pile of arms
they had observed through their peephole, moving with great precaution,
so as to avoid falling over anything. Here, with some trouble, they
succeeded in finding a dagger among the heap, and they then felt their
way on, until they reached the pile of sacks. These were packed to
within a foot of the deck beams, and there was but just room for them
to crawl in at the top.

"Whatever you do, do not bump against the beams," Francis said. "Any
noise of that sort, from below, would at once excite attention. Now do
you be quiet, while I find a spot to begin upon."

Commencing at a junction of two planks, Francis began, with the dagger,
to cut a hole of some three or four inches across, but tapering rapidly
as it went in. After waiting for some ten minutes, he touched the man
lying next to him, placed his hand on the hole he had begun, and then
moved aside to allow him to continue the work.

In an hour a hole was made in a two inch plank, and this was soon
enlarged until it was an inch in diameter. Lying along the side of the
bulkhead, so as to get his ear to the hole, Francis listened, but could
hear no sound within. Then he put his mouth to the orifice and asked:

"Are you all asleep there?"

Then he listened again. Some of the men were speaking, and asking each
other who it was that had suddenly spoken. No one replied; and some of
them gave vent to angry threats, against whoever it might be who had
just disturbed them from going off to sleep.

Directly the voices ceased again, Francis said:

"Let us have silence in there. Where is Rinaldo, the boatswain?"

"I am here," a voice replied; "but who is speaking? It sounds like the
voice of Messer Hammond."

"It is my voice, Rinaldo. We have worked through from the hold at the
other end of the ship, having removed some of the planks of the
bulkhead. Now it is for you to do the same. We will pass you some
daggers through, when we have made this hole a bit larger. You must
choose one of the planks in the corner, as this will be less likely to
be observed."

"They will not observe us, Messer Hammond. They never come down here at
all, but pass our food down in buckets."

"Nevertheless, begin at the plank next to the side," Francis said.
"Possibly someone may come down before you have finished. You will have
to remove two planks to get through. I will pass a javelin through. You
can set to work with it, and bore holes through the plank close to the
floor; and then, with the dagger, cut away the wood between them. When
you have done them, set to at the top, close to the beams, and cut the
two planks through there. There are sacks of grain piled up against
them on this side, so that there is no fear of your being observed from
here. The work must be carried on perfectly noiselessly, the men
relieving each other every few minutes.

"When the planks are cut through, replace them in their former
positions, and wedge some small pieces of wood in, so that there shall
be no chance of their falling. You ought to finish the work by
tomorrow. When you have done it, take no farther step until you get
orders from me. It would not do to rise now, for we may be surrounded
by other ships, and if we overpowered the crew, we should at once be
attacked and recaptured by them. You will, therefore, remain quiet
until you have orders, whether it be one day or ten. All the arms they
have taken from us are lying piled here, and when the time comes, we
shall have no difficulty in overpowering the Genoese, and shall, I
hope, bring the Pluto safely to anchor in the port of Venice before
long."

There was a murmur of delight among the sailors, pent up in their close
quarters. Francis listened a moment, and heard one of the men say:

"What did I tell you? Didn't I tell you that Messer Hammond got us all
out of a scrape before, when our ship was captured by the Genoese, and
that I would be bound he would do the same again, if he had but the
shadow of a chance."

"You did, Pietro, and you have turned out right. That is the sort of
fellow to have for a captain. He is not like one of those dainty young
nobles, who don't know one rope's end from another, and who turn up
their noses at the thought of dirtying their hands. See how he looked
after us through the winter. I wish we could give a cheer for him, but
that would never do. But when we are out of this, I will give him the
loudest shout I ever gave yet.

"Now then, Rinaldo, let us set to work without a moment's delay.
There's a chance we aren't going to rot in the dungeons of Genoa, after
all."

Convinced that the work would be carried on in accordance with his
orders, Francis withdrew his ear from the hole, and, crawling over the
sacks again, made his way to the pile of arms, felt about until he
found two javelins, and taking these back, passed them one after the
other through the hole.

"We have done our share now," he said to his comrades. "Paolo and his
party will find it a comparatively easy task to enlarge the hole
sufficiently to pass the daggers through."

The party returned to the other end of the hold, removed the planks,
and joined their friends. The next watch had arranged to lie down close
to the planks, so that they could be aroused without waking the others.

They were soon on their feet. Francis explained to Parucchi the
progress they had made, and the orders that had been given to the
sailors as to what they were to do.

"When the hole is large enough, pass these five daggers in to the crew,
and then come back again. I will guide you to the spot, and on my
return will pick out half a dozen more daggers, in case we want them
for further work."

When daylight made its way into the hold, Matteo and his watch woke,
and were astonished to find that all their comrades were quietly
asleep, and that they had not been awakened. Matteo could not restrain
his curiosity, but woke Francis:

"Has anything gone wrong, Francis? It is daylight, and Parucchi's
party, as well as yours, are all asleep, while we have not been
roused!"

"Everything is going on well, Matteo, and we did not wake you, because
there was nothing for you to do. We have already passed in knives and
javelins to the sailors, and they are at work cutting through two
planks in their bulkhead; after which we shall be able to meet in the
next hold, arm ourselves, and fall upon the Genoese when the
opportunity offers."

"That is excellent indeed, Francis; but I wish you had let us do our
share of the work."

"It did not take us more than two hours, Matteo, to make a hole big
enough to pass the javelins through, and I should say Parucchi's party
enlarged it sufficiently to hand in the daggers in another hour; so you
see, it would have been useless to have aroused you, and the less
movement we make after they get quiet at night, the better."

"And how long will the sailors be cutting it through, do you think?"

"I should say they would be ready by this time, Matteo, but certainly
they will be finished some time today."

"Then we shall soon be free!" Matteo exclaimed joyfully.

"That will depend, Matteo. We must wait till there is a good
