a sudden faintness seized me, and I stumbled and fell, rolling over on
to my back as I touched the earth.

'Up, friend, up!' said Otomie, with a harsh laugh. 'If you must sleep,
wait till you find some friendly bush,' and she dragged at me to lift
me. The Tlascalan, still laughing, came forward to help her, and between
them I gained my feet again, but as I rose, my cap, which fitted me but
ill, fell off. He picked it up and gave it to me and our eyes met, my
face being somewhat in the shadow. Next instant I was hobbling on, but
looking back, I saw the Tlascalan staring after us with a puzzled air,
like that of a man who is not sure of the witness of his senses.

'He knows me,' I said to Otomie, 'and presently when he has found his
wits, he will follow us.'

'On, on!' answered Otomie; 'round yonder corner are aloe bushes where we
may hide.'

'I am spent, I can no more;' and again I began to fall.

Then Otomie caught me as I fell, and of a sudden she put out her
strength, and lifting me from the ground, as a mother lifts her child,
staggered forward holding me to her breast. For fifty paces or more she
carried me thus, love and despair giving her strength, till at last we
reached the edge of the aloe plants and there we sank together to the
earth. I cast my eyes back over the path which we had travelled. Round
the corner came the Tlascalan, a spiked club in his hand, seeking us to
solve his doubts.

'It is finished,' I gasped; 'the man comes.'

For answer Otomie drew my sword from its scabbard and hid it in the
grass. 'Now feign sleep,' she said; 'it is our last chance.'

I cast my arm over my face and pretended to be asleep. Presently I heard
the sound of a man passing through the bushes, and the Tlascalan stood
over me.

'What would you?' asked Otomie. 'Can you not see that he sleeps? Let him
sleep.'

'I must look on his face first, woman,' he answered, dragging aside my
arm. 'By the gods, I thought so! This is that Teule whom we dealt with
yesterday and who escapes.'

'You are mad,' she said laughing. 'He has escaped from nowhere, save
from a brawl and a drinking bout.'

'You lie, woman, or if you do not lie, you know nothing. This man has
the secret of Montezuma's treasure, and is worth a king's ransom,' and
he lifted his club.

'And yet you wish to slay him! Well, I know nothing of him. Take him
back whence he came. He is but a drunken sot and I shall be well rid of
him.'

'Well said. It would be foolish to kill him, but by bearing him alive to
the lord Sarceda, I shall win honour and reward. Come, help me.'

'Help yourself,' she answered sullenly. 'But first search his pouch;
there may be some trifle there which we can divide.'

'Well said, again,' he answered, and kneeling down he bent over me and
began to fumble at the fastenings of the pouch.

Otomie was behind him. I saw her face change and a terrible light came
into her eyes, such a light as shines in the eyes of the priest at
sacrifice. Quick as thought she drew the sword from the grass and smote
with all her strength upon the man's bent neck. Down he fell, making
no sound, and she also fell beside him. In a moment she was on her feet
again, staring at him wildly--the naked sword in her hand.

'Up,' she said, 'before others come to seek him. Nay, you must.'

Now, again we were struggling forward through the bushes, my mind filled
with a great wonder that grew slowly to a whirling nothingness. For a
while it seemed to me as though I were lost in an evil dream and walking
on red hot irons in my dream. Then came a vision of armed men with
lifted spears, and of Otomie running towards them with outstretched
arms.

I knew no more.



CHAPTER XXXI

OTOMIE PLEADS WITH HER PEOPLE


When I awoke it was to find myself in a cave, where the light shone very
dimly. Otomie leant over me, and not far away a man was cooking a pot
over a fire made of dry aloe leaves.

'Where am I and what has happened?' I asked.

'You are safe, beloved,' she answered, 'at least for awhile. When you
have eaten I will tell you more.'

She brought me broth and food and I ate eagerly, and when I was
satisfied she spoke.

'You remember how the Tlascalan followed us and how--I was rid of him?'

'I remember, Otomie, though how you found strength to kill him I do not
understand.'

'Love and despair gave it to me, and I pray that I may never have such
another need. Do not speak of it, husband, for this is more horrible to
me than all that has been before. One thing comforts me, however; I did
not kill him, the sword twisted in my hand and I believe that he was
but stunned. Then we fled a little way, and looking back I saw that two
other Tlascalans, companions of the senseless man, were following us
and him. Presently, they came up to where he lay and stared at him. Then
they started on our tracks, running hard, and very soon they must have
caught us, for now you could scarcely stir, your mind was gone, and I
had no more strength to carry you. Still we stumbled on till presently,
when the pursuers were within fifty paces of us, I saw armed men, eight
of them, rushing at us from the bushes. They were of my own people, the
Otomies, soldiers that had served under you, who watched the Spanish
camp, and seeing a Spaniard alone they came to slay him. They very
nearly did so indeed, for at first I was so breathless that I could
scarcely speak, but at last in few words I made shift to declare my name
and rank, and your sad plight. By now the two Tlascalans were upon us,
and I called to the men of the Otomie to protect us, and falling on the
Tlascalans before they knew that enemies were there, they killed one of
them and took the other prisoner. Then they made a litter, and placing
you on it, bore you without rest twenty leagues into the mountains, till
they reached this secret hiding place, and here you have lain three days
and nights. The Teules have searched for you far and wide, but they have
searched in vain. Only yesterday two of them with ten Tlascalans, passed
within a hundred paces of this cave and I had much ado to prevent our
people from attacking them. Now they are gone whence they came, and I
think that we are safe for a time. Soon you will be better and we can go
hence.'

'Where can we go to, Otomie? We are birds without a nest.'

'We must seek shelter in the City of Pines, or fly across the water;
there is no other choice, husband.'

'We cannot try the sea, Otomie, for all the ships that come here are
Spanish, and I do not know how they will greet us in the City of Pines
now that our cause is lost, and with it so many thousands of their
warriors.'

'We must take the risk, husband. There are still true hearts in Anahuac,
who will stand by us in our sorrow and their own. At the least we have
escaped from greater dangers. Now let me dress your wounds and rest
awhile.'

So for three more days I lay in the cave of the mountains and Otomie
tended me, and at the end of that time my state was such that I could
travel in a litter, though for some weeks I was unable to set foot to
the ground. On the fourth day we started by night, and I was carried on
men's shoulders till at length we passed up the gorge that leads to the
City of Pines. Here we were stopped by sentries to whom Otomie told our
tale, bidding some of them go forward and repeat it to the captains of
the city. We followed the messengers slowly, for my bearers were weary,
and came to the gates of the beautiful town just as the red rays of
sunset struck upon the snowy pinnacle of Xaca that towers behind it,
turning her cap of smoke to a sullen red, like that of molten iron.

The news of our coming had spread about, and here and there knots of
people were gathered to watch us pass. For the most part they stood
silent, but now and again some woman whose husband or son had perished
in the siege, would hiss a curse at us.

Alas! how different was our state this day to what it had been when not
a year before we entered the City of Pines for the first time. Then we
were escorted by an army ten thousand strong, then musicians had sung
before us and our path was strewn with flowers. And now! Now we came two
fugitives from the vengeance of the Teules, I borne in a litter by four
tired soldiers, while Otomie, the princess of this people, still clad in
her wanton's robe, at which the women mocked, for she had been able to
come by no other, tramped at my side, since there were none to carry
her, and the inhabitants of the place cursed us as the authors of their
woes. Nor did we know if they would stop at words.

At length we crossed the square beneath the shadow of the teocalli, and
reached the ancient and sculptured palace as the light failed, and the
smoke on Xaca, the holy hill, began to glow with the fire in its heart.
Here small preparation had been made to receive us, and that night we
supped by the light of a torch upon tortillas or meal cakes and water,
like the humblest in the land. Then we crept to our rest, and as I lay
awake because of the pain of my hurts, I heard Otomie, who thought that
I slept, break into low sobbing at my side. Her proud spirit was humbled
at last, and she, whom I had never known to weep except once, when our
firstborn died in the siege, wept bitterly.

'Why do you sorrow thus, Otomie?' I asked at length.

'I did not know that you were awake, husband,' she sobbed in answer,
'or I would have checked my grief. Husband, I sorrow over all that has
befallen us and my people--also, though these are but little things,
because you are brought low and treated as a man of no estate, and of
the cold comfort that we find here.'

'You have cause, wife,' I answered. 'Say, what will these Otomies do
with us--kill us, or give us up to the Teules?'

'I do not know; to-morrow we shall learn, but for my part I will not be
surrendered living.'

'Nor I, wife. Death is better than the tender mercies of Cortes and his
minister, de Garcia. Is there any hope?'

'Yes, there is hope, beloved. Now the Otomie are cast down and they
remember that we led the flower of their land to death. But they are
brave and generous at heart, and if I can touch them there, all may yet
be well. Weariness, pain and memory make us weak, who should be full of
courage, having escaped so many ills. Sleep, my husband, and leave me to
think. All shall yet go well, for even misfortune has an end.'

So I slept, and woke in the morning somewhat refreshed and with a
happier mind, for who is there that is not bolder when the light shines
on him and he is renewed by rest?


When I opened my eyes the sun was already high, but Otomie had risen
with the dawn and she had not been idle during those three hours.
For one thing she had contrived to obtain food and fresh raiment more
befitting to our rank than the rags in which we were clothed. Also she
had brought together certain men of condition who were friendly and
loyal to her in misfortune, and these she sent about the city, letting
it be known that she would address the people at mid-day from the steps
of the palace, for as Otomie knew well, the heartstrings of a crowd are
touched more easily than those of cold and ancient counsellors.

'Will they come to listen?' I asked.

'Have no fear,' she answered. 'The desire to look upon us who have
survived the siege, and to know the truth of what has happened, will
bring them. Moreover, some will be there seeking vengeance on us.'

Otomie was right, for as the morning drew on towards mid-day, I saw the
dwellers in the City of Pines gathering in thousands, till the space
between the steps of the palace and the face of the pyramid was black
with them. Now Otomie combed her curling hair and placed flowers in it,
and set a gleaming feather cloak about her shoulders, so that it hung
down over her white robes, and on her breast that splendid necklace of
emeralds which Guatemoc had given to me in the treasure chamber, and
which she had preserved safely through all our evil fortune, and a
golden girdle about her waist. In her hand also she took a little
sceptre of ebony tipped with gold, that was in the palace, with other
ornaments and emblems of rank, and thus attired, though she was worn
with travel and suffering, and grief had dimmed her beauty for a while,
she seemed the queenliest woman that my eyes have seen. Next she caused
me to be laid upon my rude litter, and when the hour of noon was come,
she commanded those soldiers who had borne me across the mountains to
carry me by her side. Thus we issued from the wide doorway of the palace
and took our stand upon the platform at the head of the steps. As we
came a great cry rose from the thousands of the people, a fierce cry
like that of wild beasts howling for their prey. Higher and higher it
rose, a sound to strike terror into the bravest heart, and by degrees I
caught its purport.

'Kill them!' said the cry. 'Give the liars to the Teules.'

Otomie stepped forward to the edge of the platform, and lifting the
ebony sceptre she stood silent, the sunlight beating on her lovely face
and form. But the multitude screamed a thousand taunts and threats at
us, and still the tumult grew. Once they rushed towards her as though
to tear her to pieces, but fell back at the last stair, as a wave falls
from a rock, and once a spear was thrown that passed between her neck
and shoulder.

Now the soldiers who had carried me, making certain that our death was
at hand, and having no wish to share it, set my litter down upon the
stones and slipped back into the palace, but all this while Otomie never
so much as moved, no, not even when the spear hissed past her. She stood
before them stately and scornful, a very queen among women, and little
by little the majesty of her presence and the greatness of her courage
hushed them to silence. When there was quiet at length, she spoke in a
clear voice that carried far.

'Am I among my own people of the Otomie?' she asked bitterly, 'or have
we lost our path and wandered perchance among some savage Tlascalan
tribe? Listen, people of the Otomie. I have but one voice and none can
reason with a multitude. Choose you a tongue to speak for you, and let
him set out the desire of your hearts.'

Now the tumult began again, for some shouted one name and some another,
but in the end a priest and noble named Maxtla stepped forward, a man
of great power among the Otomie, who, above all had favoured an alliance
with the Spaniards and opposed the sending of an army to aid Guatemoc
in the defence of Tenoctitlan. Nor did he come alone, for with him were
four chiefs, whom by their dress I knew to be Tlascalans and envoys from
Cortes. Then my heart sank, for it was not difficult to guess the object
of their coming.

'Speak on, Maxtla,' said Otomie, 'for we must hear what there is for us
to answer, and you, people of the Otomie, I pray you keep silence, that
you may judge between us when there is an end of talking.'

Now a great silence fell upon the multitude, who pressed together like
sheep in a pen, and strained their ears to catch the words of Maxtla.

'My speech with you, princess, and the Teule your outlawed husband,
shall be short and sharp,' he began roughly. 'A while hence you came
hither to seek an army to aid Cuitlahua, Emperor of the Aztecs, in his
struggle with the Teules, the sons of Quetzal. That army was given you,
against the wishes of many of us, for you won over the council by the
honey of your words, and we who urged caution, or even an alliance with
the white men, the children of god, were overruled. You went hence,
and twenty thousand men, the flower of our people, followed you to
Tenoctitlan. Where are they now? I will tell you. Some two hundred of
them have crept back home, the rest fly to and fro through the air in
the gizzards of the zaphilotes, or crouch on the earth in the bellies
of jackals. Death has them all, and you led them to their deaths. Is it
then much that we should seek the lives of you two in payment for those
of twenty thousand of our sons, our husbands, and our fathers? But we do
not even ask this. Here beside me stand ambassadors from Malinche, the
captain of the Teules, who reached our city but an hour ago. This is the
demand that they bring from Malinche, and in his own words:

'"Deliver back to me Otomie, the daughter of Montezuma, and the renegade
her paramour, who is known as Teule, and who has fled from the justice
due to his crimes, and it shall be well with you, people of the Otomie.
Hide them or refuse to deliver them, and the fate of the City of Pines
shall be as the fate of Tenoctitlan, queen of the valley. Choose then
between my love and my wrath, people of the Otomie. If you obey, the
past shall be forgiven and my yoke will be light upon you; if you
refuse, your city shall be stamped flat and your very name wiped out of
the records of the world."

'Say, messengers of Malinche, are not these the words of Malinche?'

'They are his very words, Maxtla,' said the spokesman of the embassy.

Now again there was a tumult among the people, and voices cried, 'Give
them up, give them to Malinche as a peace offering.' Otomie stood
forward to speak and it died away, for all desired to hear her words.
Then she spoke:

'It seems, people of the Otomie, that I am on my trial before my own
vassals, and my husband with me. Well, I will plead our cause as well as
a woman may, and having the power, you shall judge between us and Maxtla
and his allies, Malinche and the Tlascalans. What is our offence? It is
that we came hither by the command of Cuitlahua to seek your aid in his
war with the Teules. What did I tell you then? I told you that if the
people of Anahuac would not stand together against the white men, they
must be broken one by one like the sticks of an unbound faggot, and cast
into the flames. Did I speak lies? Nay, I spoke truth, for through
the treason of her tribes, and chiefly through the treason of the
Tlascalans, Anahuac is fallen, and Tenoctitlan is a ruin sown with dead
like a field with corn.'

'It is true,' cried a voice.

'Yes, people of the Otomie, it is true, but I say that had all the
warriors of the nations of Anahuac played the part that your sons
played, the tale had run otherwise. They are dead, and because of their
death you would deliver us to our foes and yours, but I for one do not
mourn them, though among their number are many of my kin. Nay, be not
wroth, but listen. It is better that they should lie dead in honour,
having earned for themselves a wreath of fame, and an immortal dwelling
in the Houses of the Sun, than that they should live to be slaves, which
it seems is your desire, people of the Otomie. There is no false word
in what I said to you. Now the sticks that Malinche has used to beat out
the brains of Guatemoc shall be broken and burnt to cook the pot of the
Teules. Already these false children are his slaves. Have you not heard
his command, that the tribes his allies shall labour in the quarries and
the streets till the glorious city which he has burned rises afresh upon
the face of the waters? Will you not hasten to take your share in the
work, people of the Otomie, the work that knows no rest and no reward
except the lash of the overseer and the curse of the Teule? Surely you
will hasten, people of the mountains! Your hands are shaped to the spade
and the trowel, not to the bow and the spear, and it will be sweeter to
toil to do the will and swell the wealth of Malinche in the sun of the
valley or the shadow of the mine, than to bide here free upon your hills
where as yet no foe has set his foot!'

Again she paused, and a murmur of doubt and unrest went through the
thousands who listened. Maxtla stepped forward and would have spoken,
but the people shouted him down, crying: 'Otomie, Otomie! Let us hear
the words of Otomie.'

'I thank you, my people,' she said, 'for I have still much to tell you.
Our crime is then, that we drew an army after us to fight against the
Teules. And how did we draw this army? Did I command you to muster your
array? Nay, I set out my case and I said "Now choose." You chose, and of
your own free will you despatched those glorious companies that now are
dead. My crime is therefore that you chose wrongly as you say, but as I
still hold, most rightly, and because of this crime I and my husband are
to be given as a peace offering to the Teules. Listen: let me tell you
something of those wars in which we have fought before you give us to
the Teules and our mouths are silent for ever. Where shall I begin? I
know not. Stay, I bore a child--had he lived he would have been your
prince to-day. That child I saw starve to death before my eyes, inch by
inch and day by day I saw him starve. But it is nothing; who am I that
I should complain because I have lost my son, when so many of your sons
are dead and their blood is required at my hands? Listen again:' and
she went on to tell in burning words of the horrors of the siege, of the
cruelties of the Spaniards, and of the bravery of the men of the Otomie
whom I had commanded. For a full hour she spoke thus, while all that
vast audience hung upon her words. Also she told of the part that I
played in the struggle, and of the deeds which I had done, and now and
again some soldier in the crowd who served under me, and who had escaped
the famine and the massacre, cried out:

'It is true; we saw it with our eyes.'

'And so,' she said, 'at last it was finished, at last Tenoctitlan was a
ruin and my cousin and my king, the glorious Guatemoc, lay a prisoner
in the hands of Malinche, and with him my husband Teule, my sister, I
myself, and many another. Malinche swore that he would treat Guatemoc
and his following with all honour. Do you know how he treated him?
Within a few days Guatemoc our king was seated in the chair of torment,
while slaves burned him with hot irons to cause him to declare the
hiding place of the treasure of Montezuma! Ay, you may well cry "Shame
upon him," you shall cry it yet more loudly before I have done, for know
that Guatemoc did not suffer alone, one lies there who suffered with him
and spoke no word, and I also, your princess, was doomed to torment.
We escaped when death was at our door, for I told my husband that
the people of the Otomie had true hearts, and would shelter us in our
sorrow, and for his sake I, Otomie, disguised myself in the robe of a
wanton and fled with him hither. Could I have known what I should live
to see and hear, could I have dreamed that you would receive us thus, I
had died a hundred deaths before I came to stand and plead for pity at
your hands.

'Oh! my people, my people, I beseech of you, make no terms with the
false Teule, but remain bold and free. Your necks are not fitted to the
yoke of the slave, your sons and daughters are of too high a blood to
serve the foreigner in his needs and pleasures. Defy Malinche. Some of
our race are dead, but many thousands remain. Here in your mountain nest
you can beat back every Teule in Anahuac, as in bygone years the false
Tlascalans beat back the Aztecs. Then the Tlascalans were free, now they
are a race of serfs. Say, will you share their serfdom? My people, my
people, think not that I plead for myself, or even for the husband who
is more dear to me than aught save honour. Do you indeed dream that
we will suffer you to hand us living to these dogs of Tlascalans, whom
Malinche insults you by sending as his messengers? Look,' and she walked
to where the spear that had been hurled at her lay upon the pavement and
lifted it, 'here is a means of death that some friend has sent us, and
if you will not listen to my pleading you shall see it used before your
eyes. Then, if you will, you may send our bodies to Malinche as a peace
offering. But for your own sakes I plead with you. Defy Malinche, and
if you must die at last, die as free men and not as the slaves of the
Teule. Behold now his tender mercies, and see the lot that shall be
yours if you take another counsel, the counsel of Maxtla;' and coming to
the litter on which I lay, swiftly Otomie rent my robes from me leaving
me almost naked to the waist, and unwound the bandages from my wounded
limb, then lifted me up so that I rested upon my sound foot.

'Look!' she cried in a piercing voice, and pointing to the scars and
unhealed wounds upon my face and leg; 'look on the work of the Teule
and the Tlascalan, see how the foe is dealt with who surrenders to them.
Yield if you will, desert us if you will, but I say that then your own
bodies shall be marked in a like fashion, till not an ounce of gold is
left that can minister to the greed of the Teule, or a man or a maiden
who can labour to satisfy his indolence.'

Then she ceased, and letting me sink gently to the ground, for I could
not stand alone, she stood over me, the spear in her hand, as though
waiting to plunge it to my heart should the people still demand our
surrender to the messengers of Cortes.


For one instant there was silence, then of a sudden the clamour and the
tumult broke out again ten times more furiously than at first. But it
was no longer aimed at us. Otomie had conquered. Her noble words, her
beauty, the tale of our sorrows and the sight of my torments, had done
their work, and the heart of the people was filled with fury against the
Teules who had destroyed their army, and the Tlascalans that had aided
them. Never did the wit and eloquence of a woman cause a swifter change.
They screamed and tore their robes and shook their weapons in the air.
Maxtla strove to speak, but they pulled him down and presently he was
flying for his life. Then they turned upon the Tlascalan envoys and beat
them with sticks, crying:

'This is our answer to Malinche. Run, you dogs, and take it!' till they
were driven from the town.

Now at length the turmoil ceased, and some of the great chiefs came
forward and, kissing the hand of Otomie, said:

'Princess, we your children will guard you to the death, for you have
put another heart into us. You are right; it is better to die free than
to live as slaves.'

'See, my husband,' said Otomie, 'I was not mistaken when I told you that
my people were loyal and true. But now we must make ready for war, for
they have gone too far to turn back, and when this tidings comes to the
ears of Malinche he will be like a puma robbed of her young. Now, let us
rest, I am very weary.'

'Otomie,' I answered, 'there has lived no greater woman than you upon
this earth.'
