
262. Summary.--Abraham Lincoln, of Illinois, became President of the
United States in 1861. He was elected by a party in the North that
was determined that slaves should not be taken into free states or
territories, and that no more slave states should be made. On this
account most of the slave-holding states of the South resolved to
withdraw from the Union. A great war followed, and President Lincoln
gave the slaves their freedom. The North succeeded in the war, and
the Union was made stronger than ever, because the North and the South
could no longer have any dispute over slavery. Both sides now shook
hands and became friends.


Who was the tall man in Congress from Illinois? What did the people
of his state like to call him? When was Abraham Lincoln born? Where
was he born? To what state did his father move? Tell about "Abe's"
new home. Tell about the new cabin and its furniture. Tell about
"Abe's" bed. What is said about the boy's mother? What did "Abe" do?
What did he say after he became a man? What did Thomas Lincoln's new
wife say about "Abe"? Tell about "Abe's" going to school; about his
new teacher; about his books. What did he use to write on? What is
said of Abraham Lincoln at seventeen? What about him when he was
nineteen? Tell about his voyage to New Orleans.

Tell about his moving to Illinois. What did Abraham Lincoln and John
Hanks do? Tell about the hunting frolics. Tell how Lincoln chopped
in the woods. What kind of a bargain did he make for a new pair of
trousers? What did Abraham Lincoln hire out to do in New Salem? Tell
about the gang of ruffians. What is said of Jack Armstrong? Why did
Lincoln get the name of "Honest Abe"? Tell about the Black Hawk War.
What did Lincoln do in that war.

After he returned from the Black Hawk War, what did Lincoln do? Tell
how he used to read law. What did people think of him after he began
to practise law? Tell about the Armstrong murder trial. Tell about
Lincoln and the pig. To what did the people of Illinois elect Lincoln?
Did they ever elect him to the state legislature again? Then where
did they send him? Was he going any higher?

Tell about the great meeting in one of the towns of Illinois in 1860.
Can any one in the class repeat what was on the banner? What happened
at Chicago? What the next November? What happened in the spring of
1861? Who fired the first gun in the war? What was done then?

Tell why so many people in the South wished to leave the Union? What
is said about negro slaves at the time of the Revolution? What
happened in the course of eighty years? What had the North and the
South come to be like? How did most of the people at the South feel
about slavery? How did most of the people at the North feel about
it? What did the people who held slaves at the South want to do? What
did most of the people at the North think about this? What is said
about Abraham Lincoln and his party? How did most of the people of
the slave states feel when Lincoln became President?

What is said about the North and the South in the war? How long did
the war last? What is said about it? What did President Lincoln do
for the slaves? After a time what general got the command of all the
armies of the North? Who became the chief defender of the South? Where
were the last battles fought? What did the South do at last? What
happened then? What did the success of the North do? What is said
about slavery? What could the North and the South do? What was the
saddest thing which happened at the close of the war? How did the
North and the South feel about President Lincoln?




SINCE THE WAR.


263. How the North and the South have grown since the war; the great
West.--Since the war the united North and South have grown and
prospered[1] as never before. At the South many new and flourishing
towns and cities have sprung up. Mines of coal and iron have been
opened, hundreds of cotton-mills and factories have been built, and
long lines of railroads have been constructed.

At the West changes equally great have taken place. Cities have risen
up in the wilderness, mines of silver and gold have been opened, and
immense farms and cattle ranches[2] produce food enough to feed all
America. Three great lines of railroads have been built which connect
with railroads at the East, and stretch across the continent from
the Atlantic to the Pacific. Into that vast country beyond the
Mississippi hundreds of thousands of industrious people are moving
from all parts of the earth, and are building homes for themselves
and for their children.

[Illustration: THE MEETING OF THE ENGINES FROM THE EAST AND THE WEST
AFTER THE LAST SPIKE WAS DRIVEN[3] ON THE COMPLETION OF THE FIRST
RAILROAD TO THE PACIFIC IN 1869.]

[Illustration: PILING SILVER BRICKS. (From the silver mines in
Colorado.)]

[Illustration: HOW THEY USED TO SHOOT BUFFALO IN THE FAR WEST.]

[Illustration: INDIANS ATTACKING A STAGE-COACH IN THE FAR WEST FORTY
YEARS AGO; BEFORE THE FIRST PACIFIC RAILROAD WAS BUILT.]

[Footnote 1: Prospered: to prosper is to succeed, to get on in life,
to grow rich.]

[Footnote 2: Ranches (ran'chez): farms at the West for raising horses
and cattle, or sheep.]

[Footnote 3: The last spikes (one of gold from California, one of
silver from Nevada, and one made of gold, silver, and iron from
Arizona) were driven just as the clock struck twelve (noon) on May
10th, 1869, at Promontory Point, near Salt Lake, Utah. Every blow
of the hammer was telegraphed throughout the United States.]


264. Celebration of the discovery of America by Columbus; the
unfinished pyramid; making history.--Four hundred years have gone
by since the first civilized man crossed the ocean and found this
new world which we call America. We are now about to celebrate that
discovery made by Columbus, not only in the schools throughout the
country, but by a great fair--called the "World's Columbian
Exposition"--to be held at Chicago; and we shall invite all who will
to come from all parts of the globe and join us in the celebration.

[Illustration: FIRST GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES.]

[Illustration: SECOND GREAT SEAL OF THE UNITED STATES.]

On one of the two great seals[4] of the United States a pyramid is
represented partly finished. That pyramid stands for our country.
It shows how much has been done and how much still remains to be done.
The men whose lives we have read in this little book were all builders.
Little by little they added stone to stone, and so the good work grew.
Now they have gone, and it is for us to do our part and make sure
that the pyramid, as it rises, shall continue to stand square, and
strong, and true.

[Footnote 4: Seals: the first great seal, having the eagle and the
Latin motto "_E Pluribus Unum_," meaning "_Many in One_,"--or one
nation made up of many states,--was adopted June 20, 1782. The spread
eagle signifies strength; the thirteen stars above his head, and the
thirteen stripes on the shield on his breast, represent the thirteen
original states; the olive branch, held in the eagle's right talon,
shows that America seeks peace, while the bundle of arrows in his
left talon shows that we are prepared for war. This seal is used in
stamping agreements or treaties made by the United States with other
nations, and also for other important papers.

The second great seal, adopted at the same time, was never used. It
was intended for stamping the wax on a ribbon attached to a treaty
or other important paper, thus making a hanging seal. The Latin motto
"_Annuit Coeptis_," above the all-seeing eye looking down with favor
on the unfinished pyramid, means "_God has favored the Work_." The
date MDCCLXXVI, or 1776, marks the Declaration of Independence. The
Latin motto at the bottom, "_Novus Ordo Seclorum_," means "_A New
Order of Ages_"--or a new order of things, such as we have in this
New World of America.]


What is said about the North and the South since the war? Tell about
the growth of the South. What is said about the West? What about
railroads? What about people going west?

How long is it since Columbus discovered America? What is said about
the celebration of that discovery? What is said about one of the great
seals of the United States? What does the unfinished pyramid stand
for? What does it show us? What is said of the men whose lives we
have read in this book? Is anything left for us to do?




A SHORT LIST OF BOOKS OF REFERENCE
(_For the Use of Teachers._)


This brief list is arranged alphabetically. It consists, with a few
exceptions, of small, one-volume biographies; all of which are
believed to be of acknowledged merit.

A much fuller reference list will be found in the appendix to the
author's larger work, entitled _The Leading Facts of American
History_.


Balboa: Irving's Companions of Columbus, and Winsor's America, Vol.
II.

Baltimore, Lord: William H. Browne's Lords Baltimore;[3] G. W.
Burnap's Baltimore.[1]

Boone, Daniel: C. B. Hartley's Boone (including Boone's
autobiography); J. M. Peck's Boone;[1] and see the excellent sketch
of Boone's life in Theodore Roosevelt's The Winning of the West, Vol.
I.

Cabot (John and Sebastian): J. F. Nicholls's Cabot; C. Hayward's
Cabot.[1]

Clark, George Rogers: see Theodore Roosevelt's The Winning of the
West, Vol. II.

Columbus: Irving's Columbus, abridged edition; Charles K. Adams's
Columbus;[3] Edward Everett Hale's Columbus.

De Leon: Irving's Companions of Columbus, and Winsor's America, Vol.
II.

De Soto: see Winsor's America, Vol. II.

Franklin, Benjamin: D. H. Montgomery's Franklin (autobiography and
continuation of life);[2] John T. Morse's Franklin.[7]

Fulton, Robert: J. Renwick's Fulton;[1] R. H. Thurston's Fulton;[3]
Thos. W. Knox's Fulton.[4]

Gray, Robert: see H. H. Bancroft's Pacific States, Vol. XXII.

Harrison, William Henry: H. Montgomery's Harrison; S. J. Burr's
Harrison.

Houston, Sam: Henry Bruce's Houston;[3] C. E. Lester's Houston.

Hudson, Henry: H. R. Cleveland's Hudson.[1]

Jackson, Andrew: James Parton's Jackson; W. G. Sumner's Jackson.[7]

Jefferson, Thomas: James Schouler's Jefferson;[3] John T. Morse,
Jr.'s Jefferson.[7]

Lincoln, Abraham: Carl Schurz's Lincoln; Isaac N. Arnold's Lincoln;
Noah Brooks's Lincoln;[4] J. G. Holland's Lincoln; F. B. Carpenter's
Six Months at the White House with Lincoln.

Morse, Samuel F. B.: S. I. Prime's Morse; Denslow and Parke's Morse
(Cassell).

Oglethorpe, James Edward: Bruce's Oglethorpe;[3] W. B. O. Peabody's
Oglethorpe.[1]

Penn, William: G. E. Ellis's Penn;[1] W. H. Dixon's Penn; J.
Stoughton's Penn.

Philip, King: H. M. Dexter's edition of Church's King Philip's War
(2 vols.); Richard Markham's King Philip's War.

NOTE.--The story of Colonel Goffe's appearance at Hadley during the
Indian attack on that town rests on tradition. Some authorities
reject it; but Bryant and Gay say (History of the United States, II.,
410): "There is no reason for doubting its essential truth."

Putnam, Rufus: see H. B. Carrington's Battles of the Revolution,
Rufus King's History of Ohio, and Bancroft's United States.

Raleigh, Walter: L. Creighton's Raleigh; E. Gosse's Raleigh; W. M.
Towle's Raleigh.[8]

Robertson, James: see Theodore Roosevelt's The Winning of the West,
Vol. I.

Sevier John: see Theodore Roosevelt's The Winning of the West, Vol.
I.

Smith, John: G. S. Hillard's Captain John Smith;[1] C. D. Warner's
Smith.[6]

NOTE.--The truth of the story of Pocahontas has been denied by Mr.
Charles Deane and some other recent writers; but it appears never
to have been questioned until Mr. Deane attacked it in 1866 in his
notes to his reprint of Captain John Smith's _True Relation or Newes
from Virginia_. Professor Edward Arber discusses the question in his
Introduction (pp. cxv.-cxviii.) to his excellent edition of Smith's
writings. He says, "To deny the truth of this Pocahontas incident
is to create more difficulties than are involved in its acceptance."
See, too, his sketch of the life of Captain Smith in the
_Encyclopaedia Britannica_.

Standish, Myles: see J. A. Goodwin's Pilgrim Republic, and Alexander
Young's Chronicles of the Pilgrims.

Sutter, John A.: see H. H. Bancroft's Pacific States, Vol. XVIII.

Washington, George: John Fiske's Irving's Washington and his
Country;[2] E. E. Hale's Washington;[4] Horace E. Scudder's
Washington.[5]

Whitney, Eli: Denison Olmsted's Whitney.

Williams, Roger: W. R. Gammell's Williams;[1] H. M. Dexter's
Williams.

Winthrop, John: Joseph H. Twichell's Winthrop.[3]

[Footnote 1: In Sparks's _Library of American Biography_: Little,
Brown & Co., Boston.]

[Footnote 2: In _Classics for Children Series_: Ginn & Co., Boston.]

[Footnote 3: In _Makers of America Series_: Dodd, Mead & Co., New
York.]

[Footnote 4: In _Boys' and Girls' Library of American Biography_:
G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York.]

[Footnote 5: In the _Riverside Library for Young People_: Houghton,
Mifflin & Co., Boston.]

[Footnote 6: In _Lives of American Worthies_: Henry Holt & Co., New
York.]

[Footnote 7: In _The American Statesmen Series_: Houghton, Mifflin
& Co., Boston.]

[Footnote 8: In _The Heroes of History Series_: Lee & Shepard,
Boston.]




INDEX.

(_With pronunciation of difficult words._)
The numbers refer to paragraphs.

