of joy, quickened her pace into a run, and at last fell panting and
exhausted at his feet.

"I have found you!" she said; "you ran away from me, but you could not
escape me!" And she fawned round Amyas, like a dog who has found his
master, and then sat down on the bank, and burst into wild sobs.

"God help us!" said Amyas, clutching his hair, as he looked down upon
the beautiful weeper. "What am I to do with her, over and above all
these poor heathens?"

But there was no time to be lost, and over the cliff he scrambled; while
the girl, seeing that the main body of the English remained, sat down on
a point of rock to watch him.

After half-an-hour's hard work, the weapons, clothes, and armor of the
fallen Spaniards were hauled up the cliff, and distributed in bundles
among the men; the rest of the corpses were thrown over the precipice,
and they started again upon their road toward the Magdalena, while Yeo
snorted like a war-horse who smells the battle, at the delight of once
more handling powder and ball.

"We can face the world now, sir! Why not go back and try Santa Fe, after
all?"

But Amyas thought that enough was as good as a feast, and they held on
downwards, while the slaves followed, without a sign of gratitude, but
meekly obedient to their new masters, and testifying now and then by a
sign or a grunt, their surprise at not being beaten, or made to carry
their captors. Some, however, caught sight of the little calabashes of
coca which the English carried. That woke them from their torpor,
and they began coaxing abjectly (and not in vain) for a taste of that
miraculous herb, which would not only make food unnecessary, and enable
their panting lungs to endure that keen mountain air, but would rid
them, for awhile at least, of the fallen Indian's most unpitying foe,
the malady of thought.

As the cavalcade turned the corner of the mountain, they paused for one
last look at the scene of that fearful triumph. Lines of vultures were
already streaming out of infinite space, as if created suddenly for the
occasion. A few hours and there would be no trace of that fierce fray,
but a few white bones amid untrodden beds of flowers.

And now Amyas had time to ask Ayacanora the meaning of this her strange
appearance. He wished her anywhere but where she was: but now that she
was here, what heart could be so hard as not to take pity on the poor
wild thing? And Amyas as he spoke to her had, perhaps, a tenderness in
his tone, from very fear of hurting her, which he had never used before.
Passionately she told him how she had followed on their track day and
night, and had every evening made sounds, as loud as she dared, in hopes
of their hearing her, and either waiting for her, or coming back to see
what caused the noise.

Amyas now recollected the strange roaring which had followed them.

"Noises? What did you make them with?"

Ayacanora lifted her finger with an air of most self-satisfied mystery,
and then drew cautiously from under her feather cloak an object at which
Amyas had hard work to keep his countenance.

"Look!" whispered she, as if half afraid that the thing itself should
hear her. "I have it--the holy trumpet!"

There it was verily, that mysterious bone of contention; a handsome
earthen tube some two feet long, neatly glazed, and painted with quaint
grecques and figures of animals; a relic evidently of some civilization
now extinct.

Brimblecombe rubbed his little fat hands. "Brave maid! you have cheated
Satan this time," quoth he; while Yeo advised that the "idolatrous
relic" should be forthwith "hove over cliff."

"Let be," said Amyas. "What is the meaning of this, Ayacanora? And why
have you followed us?"

She told a long story, from which Amyas picked up, as far as he could
understand her, that that trumpet had been for years the torment of her
life; the one thing in the tribe superior to her; the one thing which
she was not allowed to see, because, forsooth, she was a woman. So she
determined to show them that a woman was as good as a man; and hence
her hatred of marriage, and her Amazonian exploits. But still the Piache
would not show her that trumpet, or tell her where it was; and as for
going to seek it, even she feared the superstitious wrath of the tribe
at such a profanation. But the day after the English went, the Piache
chose to express his joy at their departure; whereon, as was to be
expected, a fresh explosion between master and pupil, which ended, she
confessed, in her burning the old rogue's hut over his head, from which
he escaped with loss of all his conjuring-tackle, and fled raging into
the woods, vowing that he would carry off the trumpet to the neighboring
tribe. Whereon, by a sudden impulse, the young lady took plenty of coca,
her weapons, and her feathers, started on his trail, and ran him to
earth just as he was unveiling the precious mystery. At which sight
(she confessed) she was horribly afraid, and half inclined to run; but,
gathering courage from the thought that the white men used to laugh at
the whole matter, she rushed upon the hapless conjuror, and bore off her
prize in triumph; and there it was!

"I hope you have not killed him?" said Amyas.

"I did beat him a little; but I thought you would not let me kill him."

Amyas was half amused with her confession of his authority over her; but
she went on--

"And then I dare not go back to the Indians; so I was forced to come
after you."

"And is that, then, your only reason for coming after us?" asked stupid
Amyas.

He had touched some secret chord--though what it was he was too busy to
inquire. The girl drew herself up proudly, blushing scarlet, and said:

"You never tell lies. Do you think that I would tell lies?"

On which she fell to the rear, and followed them steadfastly, speaking
to no one, but evidently determined to follow them to the world's end.

They soon left the highroad; and for several days held on downwards,
hewing their path slowly and painfully through the thick underwood. On
the evening of the fourth day, they had reached the margin of a river,
at a point where it seemed broad and still enough for navigation. For
those three days they had not seen a trace of human beings, and the spot
seemed lonely enough for them to encamp without fear of discovery, and
begin the making of their canoes. They began to spread themselves along
the stream, in search of the soft-wooded trees proper for their purpose;
but hardly had their search begun, when, in the midst of a dense
thicket, they came upon a sight which filled them with astonishment.
Beneath a honeycombed cliff, which supported one enormous cotton-tree,
was a spot of some thirty yards square sloping down to the stream,
planted in rows with magnificent banana-plants, full twelve feet high,
and bearing among their huge waxy leaves clusters of ripening
fruit; while, under their mellow shade, yams and cassava plants were
flourishing luxuriantly, the whole being surrounded by a hedge of orange
and scarlet flowers. There it lay, streaked with long shadows from the
setting sun, while a cool southern air rustled in the cotton-tree, and
flapped to and fro the great banana-leaves; a tiny paradise of art and
care. But where was its inhabitant?

Aroused by the noise of their approach, a figure issued from a cave in
the rocks, and, after gazing at them for a moment, came down the garden
towards them. He was a tall and stately old man, whose snow-white beard
and hair covered his chest and shoulders, while his lower limbs were
wrapt in Indian-web. Slowly and solemnly he approached, a staff in one
hand, a string of beads in the other, the living likeness of some old
Hebrew prophet, or anchorite of ancient legend. He bowed courteously to
Amyas (who of course returned his salute), and was in act to speak, when
his eye fell upon the Indians, who were laying down their burdens in
a heap under the trees. His mild countenance assumed instantly an
expression of the acutest sorrow and displeasure; and, striking his
hands together, he spoke in Spanish:

"Alas! miserable me! Alas! unhappy senors! Do my old eyes deceive me,
and is it one of those evil visions of the past which haunt my dreams
by night; or has the accursed thirst of gold, the ruin of my race,
penetrated even into this my solitude? Oh, senors, senors, know you not
that you bear with you your own poison, your own familiar fiend, the
root of every evil? And is it not enough for you, senors, to load
yourselves with the wedge of Achan, and partake his doom, but you must
make these hapless heathens the victims of your greed and cruelty,
and forestall for them on earth those torments which may await their
unbaptized souls hereafter?"

"We have preserved, and not enslaved these Indians, ancient senor," said
Amyas, proudly; "and to-morrow will see them as free as the birds over
our heads."

"Free? Then you cannot be countrymen of mine! But pardon an old man,
my son, if he has spoken too hastily in the bitterness of his own
experience. But who and whence are you? And why are you bringing into
this lonely wilderness that gold--for I know too well the shape of those
accursed packets, which would God that I had never seen!"

"What we are, reverend sir, matters little, as long as we behave to you
as the young should to the old. As for our gold, it will be a curse or
a blessing to us, I conceive, just as we use it well or ill; and so is
a man's head, or his hand, or any other thing; but that is no reason for
cutting off his limbs for fear of doing harm with them; neither is it
for throwing away those packages, which, by your leave, we shall deposit
in one of these caves. We must be your neighbors, I fear, for a day
or two; but I can promise you, that your garden shall be respected, on
condition that you do not inform any human soul of our being here."

"God forbid, senor, that I should try to increase the number of my
visitors, much less to bring hither strife and blood, of which I have
seen too much already. As you have come in peace, in peace depart. Leave
me alone with God and my penitence, and may the Lord have mercy on you!"

And he was about to withdraw, when, recollecting himself, he turned
suddenly to Amyas again--

"Pardon me, senor, if, after forty years of utter solitude, I shrink at
first from the conversation of human beings, and forget, in the habitual
shyness of a recluse, the duties of a hospitable gentleman of Spain.
My garden, and all which it produces, is at your service. Only let me
entreat that these poor Indians shall have their share; for heathens
though they be, Christ died for them; and I cannot but cherish in my
soul some secret hope that He did not die in vain."

"God forbid!" said Brimblecombe. "They are no worse than we, for aught
I see, whatsoever their fathers may have been; and they have fared no
worse than we since they have been with us, nor will, I promise you."

The good fellow did not tell that he had been starving himself for the
last three days to cram the children with his own rations; and that
the sailors, and even Amyas, had been going out of their way every five
minutes, to get fruit for their new pets.

A camp was soon formed; and that evening the old hermit asked Amyas,
Cary, and Brimblecombe to come up into his cavern.

They went; and after the accustomed compliments had passed, sat down on
mats upon the ground, while the old man stood, leaning against a slab of
stone surmounted by a rude wooden cross, which evidently served him as
a place of prayer. He seemed restless and anxious, as if he waited for
them to begin the conversation; while they, in their turn, waited for
him. At last, when courtesy would not allow him to be silent any longer,
he began with a faltering voice:

"You may be equally surprised, senors, at my presence in such a spot,
and at my asking you to become my guests even for one evening, while I
have no better hospitality to offer you."

"It is superfluous, senor, to offer us food in your own habitation when
you have already put all that you possess at our command."

"True, senors: and my motive for inviting you was, perhaps, somewhat of
a selfish one. I am possessed by a longing to unburthen my heart of a
tale which I never yet told to man, and which I fear can give to you
nothing but pain; and yet I will entreat you, of your courtesy, to hear
of that which you cannot amend, simply in mercy to a man who feels that
he must confess to some one, or die as miserable as he has lived. And
I believe my confidence will not be misplaced, when it is bestowed upon
you. I have been a cavalier, even as you are; and, strange as it may
seem, that which I have to tell I would sooner impart to the ears of a
soldier than of a priest; because it will then sink into souls which can
at least sympathize, though they cannot absolve. And you, cavaliers, I
perceive to be noble, from your very looks; to be valiant, by your mere
presence in this hostile land; and to be gentle, courteous, and prudent,
by your conduct this day to me and to your captives. Will you, then,
hear an old man's tale? I am, as you see, full of words; for speech,
from long disuse, is difficult to me, and I fear at every sentence lest
my stiffened tongue should play the traitor to my worn-out brain: but
if my request seems impertinent, you have only to bid me talk as a host
should, of matters which concern his guests, and not himself."

The three young men, equally surprised and interested by this exordium,
could only entreat their host to "use their ears as those of his
slaves," on which, after fresh apologies, he began:

"Know, then, victorious cavaliers, that I, whom you now see here as a
poor hermit, was formerly one of the foremost of that terrible band who
went with Pizarro to the conquest of Peru. Eighty years old am I this
day, unless the calendar which I have carved upon yonder tree deceives
me; and twenty years old was I when I sailed with that fierce man from
Panama, to do that deed with which all earth, and heaven, and hell
itself, I fear, has rung. How we endured, suffered, and triumphed; how,
mad with success, and glutted with blood, we turned our swords against
each other, I need not tell to you. For what gentleman of Europe knows
not our glory and our shame?"

His hearers bowed assent.

"Yes; you have heard of our prowess: for glorious we were awhile, in
the sight of God and man. But I will not speak of our glory, for it is
tarnished; nor of our wealth, for it was our poison; nor of the sins of
my comrades, for they have expiated them; but of my own sins, senors,
which are more in number than the hairs of my head, and a burden too
great to bear. Miserere Domine!"

And smiting on his breast, the old warrior went on:

"As I said, we were mad with blood; and none more mad than I. Surely it
is no fable that men are possessed, even in this latter age, by devils.
Why else did I rejoice in slaying? Why else was I, the son of a noble
and truthful cavalier of Castile, among the foremost to urge upon
my general the murder of the Inca? Why did I rejoice over his dying
agonies? Why, when Don Ferdinando de Soto returned, and upbraided us
with our villainy, did I, instead of confessing the sin which that noble
cavalier set before us, withstand him to his face, ay, and would have
drawn the sword on him, but that he refused to fight a liar, as he said
that I was?"

"Then Don de Soto was against the murder? So his own grandson told me.
But I had heard of him only as a tyrant and a butcher."

"Senor, he was compact of good and evil, as are other men: he has paid
dearly for his sin; let us hope that he has been paid in turn for his
righteousness."

John Brimblecombe shook his head at this doctrine, but did not speak.

"So you know his grandson? I trust he is a noble cavalier?"

Amyas was silent; the old gentleman saw that he had touched some sore
point, and continued:

"And why, again, senors, did I after that day give myself up to cruelty
as to a sport; yea, thought that I did God service by destroying the
creatures whom He had made; I who now dare not destroy a gnat, lest I
harm a being more righteous than myself? Was I mad? If I was, how then
was I all that while as prudent as I am this day? But I am not here to
argue, senors, but to confess. In a word, there was no deed of blood
done for the next few years in which I had not my share, if it were but
within my reach. When Challcuchima was burned, I was consenting; when
that fair girl, the wife of Inca Manco, was tortured to death, I smiled
at the agonies at which she too smiled, and taunted on the soldiers, to
try if I could wring one groan from her before she died. You know what
followed, the pillage, the violence, the indignities offered to the
virgins of the Sun. Senors, I will not pollute your chaste ears with
what was done. But, senors, I had a brother."

And the old man paused awhile.

"A brother--whether better or worse than me, God knows, before whom he
has appeared ere now. At least he did not, as I did, end as a rebel
to his king! There was a maiden in one of those convents, senors, more
beautiful than day: and (I blush to tell it) the two brothers of whom
I spoke quarrelled for the possession of her. They struck each other,
senors! Who struck first I know not; but swords were drawn, and--The
cavaliers round parted them, crying shame. And one of those two
brothers--the one who speaks to you now--crying, 'If I cannot have her,
no man shall!' turned the sword which was aimed at his brother, against
that hapless maiden--and--hear me out, senors, before you flee from my
presence as from that of a monster!--stabbed her to the heart. And as
she died--one moment more, senors, that I may confess all!--she looked
up in my face with a smile as of heaven, and thanked me for having rid
her once and for all from Christians and their villainy."

The old man paused.

"God forgive you, senor!" said Jack Brimblecombe, softly.

"You do not, then, turn from me, do not curse me? Then I will try you
farther still, senors. I will know from human lips, whether man can do
such deeds as I have done, and yet be pitied by his kind; that so I may
have some hope, that where man has mercy, God may have mercy also. Do
you think that I repented at those awful words? Nothing less, senors
all. No more than I did when De Soto (on whose soul God have mercy)
called me--me, a liar! I knew myself a sinner; and for that very reason
I was determined to sin. I would go on, that I might prove myself right
to myself, by showing that I could go on, and not be struck dead from
heaven. Out of mere pride, senors, and self-will, I would fill up the
cup of my iniquity; and I filled it.

"You know, doubtless, senors, how, after the death of old Almagro, his
son's party conspired against Pizarro. Now my brother remained faithful
to his old commander; and for that very reason, if you will believe it,
did I join the opposite party, and gave myself up, body and soul, to do
Almagro's work. It was enough for me, that the brother who had struck
me thought a man right, for me to think that man a devil. What Almagro's
work was, you know. He slew Pizarro, murdered him, senors, like a dog,
or rather, like an old lion."

"He deserved his doom," said Amyas.

"Let God judge him, senor, not we; and least of all of us I, who drew
the first blood, and perhaps the last, that day. I, senors, it was
who treacherously stabbed Francisco de Chanes on the staircase, and so
opened the door which else had foiled us all; and I--But I am speaking
to men of honor, not to butchers. Suffice it that the old man died like
a lion, and that we pulled him down, young as we were, like curs.

"Well, I followed Almagro's fortunes. I helped to slay Alvarado. Call
that my third murder, if you will, for if he was traitor to a traitor, I
was traitor to a true man. Then to the war; you know how Vaca de Castro
was sent from Spain to bring order and justice where was naught but
chaos, and the dance of all devils. We met him on the hills of Chupas.
Peter of Candia, the Venetian villain, pointed our guns false, and
Almagro stabbed him to the heart. We charged with our lances, man
against man, horse against horse. All fights I ever fought" (and the old
man's eyes flashed out the ancient fire) "were child's play to that day.
Our lances shivered like reeds, and we fell on with battle-axe and mace.
None asked for quarter, and none gave it; friend to friend, cousin to
cousin--no, nor brother, O God! to brother. We were the better armed:
but numbers were on their side. Fat Carbajal charged our cannon like an
elephant, and took them; but Holguin was shot down. I was with Almagro,
and we swept all before us, inch by inch, but surely, till the night
fell. Then Vaca de Castro, the licentiate, the clerk, the schoolman,
the man of books, came down on us with his reserve like a whirlwind.
Oh! cavaliers, did not God fight against us, when He let us, the men of
iron, us, the heroes of Cuzco and Vilcaconga, be foiled by a scholar in
a black gown, with a pen behind his ear? We were beaten. Some ran; some
did not run, senors; and I did not. Geronimo de Alvarado shouted to
me, 'We slew Pizarro! We killed the tyrant!' and we rushed upon the
conqueror's lances, to die like cavaliers. There was a gallant gentleman
in front of me. His lance struck me in the crest, and bore me over my
horse's croup: but mine, senors, struck him full in the vizor. We both
went to the ground together, and the battle galloped over us.

"I know not how long I lay, for I was stunned: but after awhile I lifted
myself. My lance was still clenched in my hand, broken but not parted.
The point of it was in my foeman's brain. I crawled to him, weary and
wounded, and saw that he was a noble cavalier. He lay on his back, his
arms spread wide. I knew that he was dead: but there came over me the
strangest longing to see that dead man's face. Perhaps I knew him. At
least I could set my foot upon it, and say, 'Vanquished as I am, there
lies a foe!' I caught hold of the rivets, and tore his helmet off. The
moon shone bright, senors, as bright as she shines now--the glaring,
ghastly, tell-tale moon, which shows man all the sins which he tries to
hide; and by that moonlight, senors, I beheld the dead man's face. And
it was the face of my brother!

      *    *    *    *    *

"Did you ever guess, most noble cavaliers, what Cain's curse might be
like? Look on me, and know!

"I tore off my armor and fled, as Cain fled--northward ever, till I
should reach a land where the name of Spaniard, yea, and the name of
Christian, which the Spaniard has caused to be blasphemed from east to
west, should never come. I sank fainting, and waked beneath this rock,
this tree, forty-four years ago, and I have never left them since, save
once, to obtain seeds from Indians, who knew not that I was a Spanish
Conquistador. And may God have mercy on my soul!"

The old man ceased; and his young hearers, deeply affected by his tale,
sat silent for a few minutes. Then John Brimblecombe spoke:

"You are old, sir, and I am young; and perhaps it is not my place to
counsel you. Moreover, sir, in spite of this strange dress of mine, I am
neither more nor less than an English priest; and I suppose you will not
be willing to listen to a heretic."

"I have seen Catholics, senor, commit too many abominations even with
the name of God upon their lips, to shrink from a heretic if he speak
wisely and well. At least, you are a man; and after all, my heart yearns
more and more, the longer I sit among you, for the speech of beings of
my own race. Say what you will, in God's name!"

"I hold, sir," said Jack, modestly, "according to holy Scripture, that
whosoever repents from his heart, as God knows you seem to have done, is
forgiven there and then; and though his sins be as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow, for the sake of Him who died for all."

"Amen! Amen!" said the old man, looking lovingly at his little crucifix.
"I hope and pray--His name is Love. I know it now; who better? But, sir,
even if He have forgiven me, how can I forgive myself? In honor, sir, I
must be just, and sternly just, to myself, even if God be indulgent;
as He has been to me, who has left me here in peace for forty years,
instead of giving me a prey to the first puma or jaguar which howls
round me every night. He has given me time to work out my own salvation;
but have I done it? That doubt maddens me at whiles. When I look upon
that crucifix, I float on boundless hope: but if I take my eyes from
it for a moment, faith fails, and all is blank, and dark, and dreadful,
till the devil whispers me to plunge into yon stream, and once and for
ever wake to certainty, even though it be in hell."

What was Jack to answer? He himself knew not at first. More was wanted
than the mere repetition of free pardon.

"Heretic as I am, sir, you will not believe me when I tell you, as a
priest, that God accepts your penitence."

"My heart tells me so already, at moments. But how know I that it does
not lie?"

"Senor," said Jack, "the best way to punish oneself for doing ill, seems
to me to go and do good; and the best way to find out whether God means
you well, is to find out whether He will help you to do well. If you
have wronged Indians in time past, see whether you cannot right them
now. If you can, you are safe. For the Lord will not send the devil's
servants to do His work."

The old man held down his head.

"Right the Indians? Alas! what is done, is done!"

"Not altogether, senor," said Amyas, "as long as an Indian remains alive
in New Granada."

"Senor, shall I confess my weakness? A voice within me has bid me a
hundred times go forth and labor, for those oppressed wretches, but I
dare not obey. I dare not look them in the face. I should fancy that
they knew my story; that the very birds upon the trees would reveal my
crime, and bid them turn from me with horror."

"Senor," said Amyas, "these are but the sick fancies of a noble spirit,
feeding on itself in solitude. You have but to try to conquer."

"And look now," said Jack, "if you dare not go forth to help the
Indians, see now how God has brought the Indians to your own door. Oh,
excellent sir--"

"Call me not excellent," said the old man, smiting his breast.

"I do, and shall, sir, while I see in you an excellent repentance, an
excellent humility, and an excellent justice," said Jack. "But oh, sir,
look upon these forty souls, whom we must leave behind, like sheep which
have no shepherd. Could you not teach them to fear God and to love each
other, to live like rational men, perhaps to die like Christians? They
would obey you as a dog obeys his master. You might be their king, their
father, yea, their pope, if you would."

"You do not speak like a Lutheran."

"I am not a Lutheran, but an Englishman: but, Protestant as I am, God
knows, I had sooner see these poor souls of your creed, than of none."

"But I am no priest."

"When they are ready," said Jack, "the Lord will send a priest. If you
begin the good work, you may trust to Him to finish it."

"God help me!" said the old warrior.

The talk lasted long into the night, but Amyas was up long before
daybreak, felling the trees; and as he and Cary walked back to
breakfast, the first thing which they saw was the old man in his garden
with four or five Indian children round him, talking smilingly to them.

"The old man's heart is sound still," said Will. "No man is lost who
still is fond of little children."

"Ah, senors!" said the hermit as they came up, "you see that I have
begun already to act upon your advice."

"And you have begun at the right end," quoth Amyas; "if you win the
children, you win the mothers."

"And if you win the mothers," quoth Will, "the poor fathers must needs
obey their wives, and follow in the wake."

The old man only sighed. "The prattle of these little ones softens
my hard heart, senors, with a new pleasure; but it saddens me, when I
recollect that there may be children of mine now in the world--children
who have never known a father's love--never known aught but a master's
threats--"

"God has taken care of these little ones. Trust that He has taken care
of yours."

That day Amyas assembled the Indians, and told them that they must obey
the hermit as their king, and settle there as best they could: for if
they broke up and wandered away, nothing was left for them but to fall
one by one into the hands of the Spaniards. They heard him with their
usual melancholy and stupid acquiescence, and went and came as they were
bid, like animated machines; but the negroes were of a different temper;
and four or five stout fellows gave Amyas to understand that they had
been warriors in their own country, and that warriors they would be
still; and nothing should keep them from Spaniard-hunting. Amyas saw
that the presence of these desperadoes in the new colony would both
endanger the authority of the hermit, and bring the Spaniards down
upon it in a few weeks; so, making a virtue of necessity, he asked them
whether they would go Spaniard-hunting with him.

This was just what the bold Coromantees wished for; they grinned and
shouted their delight at serving under so great a warrior, and then set
to work most gallantly, getting through more in the day than any ten
Indians, and indeed than any two Englishmen.

So went on several days, during which the trees were felled, and the
process of digging them out began; while Ayacanora, silent and moody,
wandered into the woods all day with her blow-gun, and brought home
at evening a load of parrots, monkeys, and curassows; two or three old
hands were sent out to hunt likewise; so that, what with the game and
the fish of the river, which seemed inexhaustible, and the fruit of the
neighboring palm-trees, there was no lack of food in the camp. But what
to do with Ayacanora weighed heavily on the mind of Amyas. He opened his
heart on the matter to the old hermit, and asked him whether he would
take charge of her. The latter smiled, and shook his head at the notion.
"If your report of her be true, I may as well take in hand to tame a
jaguar." However, he promised to try; and one evening, as they were
all standing together before the mouth of the cave, Ayacanora came up
smiling with the fruit of her day's sport; and Amyas, thinking this a
fit opportunity, began a carefully prepared harangue to her, which he
intended to be altogether soothing, and even pathetic,--to the effect
that the maiden, having no parents, was to look upon this good old man
as her father; that he would instruct her in the white man's religion
(at which promise Yeo, as a good Protestant, winced a good deal), and
teach her how to be happy and good, and so forth; and that, in fine, she
was to remain there with the hermit.

She heard him quietly, her great dark eyes opening wider and wider, her
bosom swelling, her stature seeming to grow taller every moment, as she
clenched her weapons firmly in both her hands. Beautiful as she always
was, she had never looked so beautiful before; and as Amyas spoke of
parting with her, it was like throwing away a lovely toy; but it must be
done, for her sake, for his, perhaps for that of all the crew.

The last words had hardly passed his lips, when, with a shriek of
mingled scorn, rage, and fear, she dashed through the astonished group.

"Stop her!" were Amyas's first words; but his next were, "Let her
go!" for, springing like a deer through the little garden and over the
flower-fence, she turned, menacing with her blow-gun the sailors, who
had already started in her pursuit.

"Let her alone, for Heaven's sake!" shouted Amyas, who, he scarce knew
why, shrank from the thought of seeing those graceful limbs struggling
in the seamen's grasp.

She turned again, and in another minute her gaudy plumes had vanished
among the dark forest stems, as swiftly as if she had been a passing
bird.

All stood thunderstruck at this unexpected end to the conference. At
last Aymas spoke:

"There's no use in standing here idle, gentlemen. Staring after her
won't bring her back. After all, I'm glad she's gone."

But the tone of his voice belied his words. Now he had lost her, he
wanted her back; and perhaps every one present, except he, guessed why.

But Ayacanora did not return; and ten days more went on in continual
toil at the canoes without any news of her from the hunters. Amyas, by
the by, had strictly bidden these last not to follow the girl, not even
to speak to her, if they came across her in their wanderings. He was
shrewd enough to guess that the only way to cure her sulkiness was to
outsulk her; but there was no sign of her presence in any direction; and
the canoes being finished at last, the gold, and such provisions as they
could collect, were placed on board, and one evening the party prepared
for their fresh voyage. They determined to travel as much as possible by
night, for fear of discovery, especially in the neighborhood of the few
Spanish settlements which were then scattered along the banks of the
main stream. These, however, the negroes knew, so that there was no fear
of coming on them unawares; and as for falling asleep in their night
journeys, "Nobody," the negroes said, "ever slept on the Magdalena; the
mosquitoes took too good care of that." Which fact Amyas and his crew
verified afterwards as thoroughly as wretched men could do.

The sun had sunk; the night had all but fallen; the men were all on
board; Amyas in command of one canoe, Cary of the other. The Indians
were grouped on the bank, watching the party with their listless
stare, and with them the young guide, who preferred remaining among the
Indians, and was made supremely happy by the present of Spanish sword
and an English axe; while, in the midst, the old hermit, with tears in
his eyes, prayed God's blessing on them.

"I owe to you, noble cavaliers, new peace, new labor, I may say, new
life. May God be with you, and teach you to use your gold and your
swords better than I used mine."

The adventurers waved their hands to him.

"Give way, men," cried Amyas; and as he spoke the paddles dashed into
the water, to a right English hurrah! which sent the birds fluttering
from their roosts, and was answered by the yell of a hundred monkeys,
and the distant roar of the jaguar.

About twenty yards below, a wooded rock, some ten feet high, hung over
the stream. The river was not there more than fifteen yards broad; deep
near the rock, shallow on the farther side; and Amyas's canoe led the
way, within ten feet of the stone.

As he passed, a dark figure leapt from the bushes on the edge, and
plunged heavily into the water close to the boat. All started. A jaguar?
No; he would not have missed so short a spring. What, then? A human
being?

A head rose panting to the surface, and with a few strong strokes the
swimmer had clutched the gunwale. It was Ayacanora!

"Go back!" shouted Amyas. "Go back, girl!"

She uttered the same wild cry with which she had fled into the forest.

"I will die, then!" and she threw up her arms. Another moment, and she
had sunk.

To see her perish before his eyes! who could bear that? Her hands
alone were above the surface. Amyas caught convulsively at her in the
darkness, and seized her wrist.

A yell rose from the negroes: a roar from the crew as from a cage of
lions. There was a rush and a swirl along the surface of the stream; and
"Caiman! caiman!" shouted twenty voices.

Now, or never, for the strong arm! "To larboard, men, or over we go!"
cried Amyas, and with one huge heave he lifted the slender body upon
the gunwale. Her lower limbs were still in the water, when, within arm's
length, rose above the stream a huge muzzle. The lower jaw lay flat, the
upper reached as high as Amyas's head. He could see the long fangs
gleam white in the moonshine; he could see for one moment full down the
monstrous depths of that great gape, which would have crushed a buffalo.
Three inches, and no more, from that soft side, the snout surged up--

There was the gleam of an axe from above, a sharp ringing blow, and the
jaws came together with a clash which rang from bank to bank. He had
missed her! Swerving beneath the blow, his snout had passed beneath
her body, and smashed up against the side of the canoe, as the striker,
overbalanced, fell headlong overboard upon the monster's back.

"Who is it?"

"Yeo!" shouted a dozen.

Man and beast went down together, and where they sank, the moonlight
shone on a great swirling eddy, while all held their breaths, and
Ayacanora cowered down into the bottom of the canoe, her proud spirit
utterly broken, for the first time, by the terror of that great need,
and by a bitter loss. For in the struggle, the holy trumpet, companion
of all her wanderings, had fallen from her bosom; and her fond hope of
bringing magic prosperity to her English friends had sunk with it to the
bottom of the stream.

None heeded her; not even Amyas, round whose knees she clung, fawning
like a spaniel dog: for where was Yeo?

Another swirl; a shout from the canoe abreast of them, and Yeo rose,
having dived clean under his own boat, and risen between the two.

"Safe as yet, lads! Heave me a line, or he'll have me after all."

But ere the brute reappeared, the old man was safe on board.

"The Lord has stood by me," panted he, as he shot the water from
his ears. "We went down together: I knew the Indian trick, and being
uppermost, had my thumbs in his eyes before he could turn: but he
carried me down to the very mud. My breath was nigh gone, so I left go,
and struck up: but my toes tingled as I rose again, I'll warrant. There
the beggar is, looking for me, I declare!"

And, true enough, there was the huge brute swimming slowly round and
round, in search of his lost victim. It was too dark to put an arrow
into his eye; so they paddled on, while Ayacanora crouched silently at
Amyas's feet.

"Yeo!" asked he, in a low voice, "what shall we do with her?"

"Why ask me, sir?" said the old man, as he had a very good right to ask.

"Because, when one don't know oneself, one had best inquire of one's
elders. Besides, you saved her life at the risk of your own, and have a
right to a voice in the matter, if any one has, old friend."

"Then, my dear young captain, if the Lord puts a precious soul under
your care, don't you refuse to bear the burden He lays on you."

Amyas was silent awhile; while Ayacanora, who was evidently utterly
exhausted by the night's adventure, and probably by long wanderings,
watchings, and weepings which had gone before it, sank with her head
against his knee, fell fast asleep, and breathed as gently as a child.

At last he rose in the canoe, and called Cary alongside.

"Listen to me, gentlemen, and sailors all. You know that we have a
maiden on board here, by no choice of our own. Whether she will be a
blessing to us, God alone can tell: but she may turn to the greatest
curse which has befallen us ever since we came out over Bar three years
ago. Promise me one thing, or I put her ashore the next beach, and that
is, that you will treat her as if she were your own sister; and make an
agreement here and now, that if the maid comes to harm among us, the man
that is guilty shall hang for it by the neck till he's dead, even though
he be I, Captain Leigh, who speak to you. I'll hang you, as I am a
Christian; and I give you free leave to hang me."

"A very fair bargain," quoth Cary, "and I for one will see it kept to.
Lads, we'll twine a double strong halter for the captain as we go down
along."

"I am not jesting, Will."

"I know it, good old lad," said Cary, stretching out his own hand to him
across the water through the darkness, and giving him a hearty shake. "I
know it; and listen, men! So help me God! but I'll be the first to back
the Captain in being as good as his word, as I trust he never will need
to be."

"Amen!" said Brimblecombe. "Amen!" said Yeo; and many an honest voice
joined in that honest compact, and kept it too, like men.



CHAPTER XXVI

HOW THEY TOOK THE GREAT GALLEON

     "When captains courageous, whom death could not daunt,
     Did march to the siege of the city of Gaunt,
     They muster'd their soldiers by two and by three,
     But the foremost in battle was Mary Ambree.
     When brave Sir John Major was slain in her sight,
     Who was her true lover, her joy and delight,
     Because he was murther'd most treacherouslie,
     Then vow'd to avenge him fair Mary Ambree."

                                 Old Ballad, A. D. 1584.

One more glance at the golden tropic sea, and the golden tropic
evenings, by the shore of New Granada, in the golden Spanish Main.

The bay of Santa Marta is rippling before the land-breeze one sheet of
living flame. The mighty forests are sparkling with myriad fireflies.
The lazy mist which lounges round the inner hills shines golden in
the sunset rays; and, nineteen thousand feet aloft, the mighty peak of
Horqueta cleaves the abyss of air, rose-red against the dark-blue
vault of heaven. The rosy cone fades to a dull leaden hue; but only for
awhile. The stars flash out one by one, and Venus, like another moon,
tinges the eastern snows with gold, and sheds across the bay a long
yellow line of rippling light. Everywhere is glory and richness. What
wonder if the earth in that enchanted land be as rich to her inmost
depths as she is upon the surface? The heaven, the hills, the sea, are
one sparkling garland of jewels--what wonder if the soil be jewelled
also? if every watercourse and bank of earth be spangled with emeralds
and rubies, with grains of gold and feathered wreaths of native silver?

So thought, in a poetic mood, the Bishop of Cartagena, as he sat in
the state cabin of that great galleon, The City of the True Cross, and
looked pensively out of the window towards the shore. The good man was
in a state of holy calm. His stout figure rested on one easy-chair, his
stout ankles on another, beside a table spread with oranges and limes,
guavas and pine-apples, and all the fruits of Ind.

An Indian girl, bedizened with scarfs and gold chains, kept off the
flies with a fan of feathers; and by him, in a pail of ice from the
Horqueta (the gift of some pious Spanish lady, who had "spent" an Indian
or two in bringing down the precious offering), stood more than one
flask of virtuous wine of Alicant. But he was not so selfish, good man,
as to enjoy either ice or wine alone; Don Pedro, colonel of the soldiers
on board, Don Alverez, intendant of his Catholic majesty's customs at
Santa Marta, and Don Paul, captain of mariners in The City of the
True Cross, had, by his especial request, come to his assistance that
evening, and with two friars, who sat at the lower end of the table,
were doing their best to prevent the good man from taking too bitterly
to heart the present unsatisfactory state of his cathedral town, which
had just been sacked and burnt by an old friend of ours, Sir Francis
Drake.

"We have been great sufferers, senors,--ah, great sufferers," snuffled
the bishop, quoting Scripture, after the fashion of the day, glibly
enough, but often much too irreverently for me to repeat, so boldly were
his texts travestied, and so freely interlarded by grumblings at Tita
and the mosquitoes. "Great sufferers, truly; but there shall be a
remnant,--ah, a remnant like the shaking of the olive tree and the
gleaning grapes when the vintage is done.--Ah! Gold? Yes, I trust
Our Lady's mercies are not shut up, nor her arms shortened.--Look,
senors!"--and he pointed majestically out of the window. "It looks gold!
it smells of gold, as I may say, by a poetical license. Yea, the very
waves, as they ripple past us, sing of gold, gold, gold!"

"It is a great privilege," said the intendant, "to have comfort so
gracefully administered at once by a churchman and a scholar."

"A poet, too," said Don Pedro. "You have no notion what sweet sonnets--"

"Hush, Don Pedro--hush! If I, a mateless bird, have spent an idle hour
in teaching lovers how to sing, why, what of that? I am a churchman,
senors; but I am a man and I can feel, senors; I can sympathize; I can
palliate; I can excuse. Who knows better than I how much human nature
lurks in us fallen sons of Adam? Tita!"

"Um?" said the trembling girl, with a true Indian grunt.

"Fill his excellency the intendant's glass. Does much more treasure come
down, illustrious senor? May the poor of Mary hope for a few more crumbs
from their Mistress's table?"

"Not a pezo, I fear. The big white cow up there"--and he pointed to the
Horqueta--"has been milked dry for this year."

"Ah!" And he looked up at the magnificent snow peak. "Only good to cool
wine with, eh? and as safe for the time being as Solomon's birds."

"Solomon's birds? Explain your recondite allusion, my lord."

"Enlighten us, your excellency, enlighten us."

"Ah! thereby hangs a tale. You know the holy birds who run up and down
on the Prado at Seville among the ladies' pretty feet,--eh? with hooked
noses and cinnamon crests? Of course. Hoopoes--Upupa, as the classics
have it. Well, senors, once on a time, the story goes, these hoopoes
all had golden crowns on their heads; and, senors, they took the
consequences--eh? But it befell on a day that all the birds and beasts
came to do homage at the court of his most Catholic majesty King
Solomon, and among them came these same hoopoes; and they had a little
request to make, the poor rogues. And what do you think it was? Why,
that King Solomon would pray for them that they might wear any sort of
crowns but these same golden ones; for--listen, Tita, and see the snare
of riches--mankind so hunted, and shot, and trapped, and snared them,
for the sake of these same golden crowns, that life was a burden to
bear. So Solomon prayed, and instead of golden crowns, they all received
crowns of feathers; and ever since, senors, they live as merrily as
crickets in an oven, and also have the honor of bearing the name of his
most Catholic majesty King Solomon. Tita! fill the senor commandant's
glass. Fray Gerundio, what are you whispering about down there, sir?"

Fray Gerundio had merely commented to his brother on the bishop's story
of Solomon's birds with an--

"O si sic omnia!--would that all gold would turn to feathers in like
wise!"

"Then, friend," replied the other, a Dominican, like Gerundio, but of a
darker and sterner complexion, "corrupt human nature would within a week
discover some fresh bauble, for which to kill and be killed in vain."

"What is that, Fray Gerundio?" asked the bishop again.

"I merely remarked, that it were well for the world if all mankind were
to put up the same prayer as the hoopoes."

"World, sir? What do you know about the world? Convert your Indians,
sir, if you please, and leave affairs of state to your superiors. You
will excuse him, senors" (turning to the Dons, and speaking in a lower
tone). "A very worthy and pious man, but a poor peasant's son; and
beside--you understand. A little wrong here; too much fasting and
watching, I fear, good man." And the bishop touched his forehead
knowingly, to signify that Fray Gerundio's wits were in an
unsatisfactory state.

The Fray heard and saw with a quiet smile. He was one of those excellent
men whom the cruelties of his countrymen had stirred up (as the
darkness, by mere contrast, makes the light more bright), as they did
Las Casas, Gasca, and many another noble name which is written in the
book of life, to deeds of love and pious daring worthy of any creed or
age. True Protestants, they protested, even before kings, against the
evil which lay nearest them, the sin which really beset them; true
liberals, they did not disdain to call the dark-skinned heathen their
brothers; and asserted in terms which astonish us, when we recollect the
age in which they were spoken, the inherent freedom of every being who
wore the flesh and blood which their Lord wore; true martyrs, they
bore witness of Christ, and received too often the rewards of such,
in slander and contempt. Such an one was Fray Gerundio; a poor, mean,
clumsy-tongued peasant's son, who never could put three sentences
together, save when he waxed eloquent, crucifix in hand, amid some
group of Indians or negroes. He was accustomed to such rebuffs as the
bishop's; he took them for what they were worth, and sipped his wine in
silence; while the talk went on.

"They say," observed the commandant, "that a very small Plate-fleet will
