passage. The sword of Nigel was in the act of falling on a second foe,
the first lay at his feet, when his arm was caught in its descent, and
Isabella of Buchan stood at his side.

"Forbear!" she said, in those rich impressive tones that ever forced
obedience. "Nigel Bruce, brother of my sovereign, friend of my son,
forbear! strike not one blow for me. Mine honor needs no defence by
those that love me; my country will acquit me; the words of England's
monarch, angered at a woman's defiance of his power, affect me not!
Noble Nigel, excite not further wrath against thyself by this vain
struggle for my sake; put up thy sword, ere it is forced from thee. Let
go thy hold; this man is but an instrument, why wreak thy wrath on him?
Must I speak, implore in vain? Nay, then, I do command thee!"

And those who gazed on her, as she drew that stately form to its full
height, as they heard those accents of imperative command, scarce
marvelled that Edward should dread her influence, woman as she was.
Despite the increasing wrath on the Earl of Berwick's brow, the men
waited to see the effect of these words. There was still an expression
of ill-controlled passion on Nigel's features. He waited one moment when
she ceased to speak, then slowly and deliberately shook the herald by
the collar, and hurled him from his hold; snapped his sword in twain,
and flinging it from him, folded his arms on his breast, and calmly
uttering, "Pardon me, noble lady, mine honor were impugned had I
suffered that dastardly villain to pass hence unpunished--let Edward act
as he lists, it matters little now," waited with impenetrable resolve
the rage he had provoked.

"Nigel, Nigel, rash, impetuous boy, what hast thou done?" exclaimed the
countess, losing all mien and accent of command in the terror with which
she clung round him, as if to protect him from all ill, in the tone and
look of maternal tenderness with which she addressed him. "Why, why must
it be my ill fate to hurl down increase of misery and danger on all whom
I love?"

"Speak not so, noble lady, in mercy do not!" he whispered in reply;
"keep that undaunted spirit shown but now, I can better bear it than
this voice of anguish. And thou," he added, laying his hand on the
shoulder of the boy, who still clung to his knees, as if fascinated
there by speechless terror, and gazed alternately on him and the
countess with eyes glazed almost in madness, "up, up; this is no place
for thee. What can they do with me but slay--let them come on--better,
far better than a scaffold!" but the boy moved not, Nigel spoke in vain.

The fate he dared seemed indeed threatening. Wrought well-nigh to
phrensy at this daring insult to his sovereign, in whose acts of cruelty
and oppression he could far better sympathize than in his more knightly
qualities, the Earl of Berwick loudly and fiercely called on his
soldiers to advance and cut down the traitor, to bring the heaviest
fetters and bear him to the lowest dungeon. The men, roused from their
stupor of amaze, rushed on impetuously to obey him; their naked swords
already gleamed round Nigel; the Countess of Buchan was torn from his
side, her own especial guards closing darkly around her; but vainly did
they seek to unclasp the convulsive grasp of the boy from Nigel, he
neither shrieked nor spake, but he remained in that one posture, rigid
as stone.

"Fiends! monsters! would ye, dare ye touch a boy, a child as this!"
shouted Nigel, struggling with herculean strength to free himself from
the rude grasp of the soldiers, as he beheld the sharp steel pointed at
the breast of the boy, to compel him to unloose his hold. "Villains,
cowards! bear back and let me speak with him," and nerved to madness by
the violence of his emotions, he suddenly wrenched himself away, the
rapidity of the movement throwing one of the men to the earth, and bent
over the boy; again they rushed forward, they closed upon him, they tore
away the lad by force of numbers, and flung him senseless on the earth;
they sought to bear away their prisoner, but at that moment Hereford,
who had been parleying loudly and wrathfully with Berwick, spurred his
charger in the very midst of them, and compelled them to bear back.

"Back, back!" he exclaimed, making a path for himself with his drawn
sword; "how dare ye thrust yourselves betwixt me and my lawful prisoner,
captive of my sword and power? what right have ye to dare detain him?
Let go your hold, none but the men whose prowess gained this gallant
prize shall guard him till my sovereign's will be known. Back, back, I
say!"

"Traitor!" retorted Berwick, "he is no longer your prisoner. An insult
offered to King Edward, in the loyal citadel of Berwick, in my very
presence, his representative as I stand, shall meet with fit
retribution. He hath insulted his sovereign by act and word, and I
attach him of high treason and will enforce my charge. Forward, I say!"

"And I say back!" shouted the Earl of Hereford; "I tell thee, proud
earl, he is my prisoner, and mine alone. Thou mayest vaunt thy loyalty,
thy representation of majesty, as thou listeth, mine hath been proved at
the good sword's point, and Edward will deem me no traitor because I
protect a captive, who hath surrendered himself a knight to a knight,
rescue or no rescue, from this unseemly violence. I bandy no more words
with such as thee; back! the first man that dares lay hold on him I
chastise with my sword."

"Thou shalt repent this!" muttered Berwick, with a suppressed yet
terrible oath, but he dared proceed no further.

A signal from their leader brought up all Hereford's men, who, in
compact order and perfect silence, surrounded their prisoner. Sternly
the earl called for a pair of handcuffs, and with his own hands fastened
them on his captive. "It grieves me," he said, "to see a brave man thus
manacled, but thine own mad act hath brought it on thyself. And now, my
Lord of Berwick, an it please thee to proceed, we demand admission to
thy citadel in King Edward's name. Bring up the other prisoners."

Concealing his wrath with difficulty, the Earl of Berwick and his
attendants dashed forward over the drawbridge into the castle at full
speed, closing the gates and lowering the portcullis after them. After a
brief space, the portcullis was again raised, the gates flung wide
apart, and the men-at-arms were discerned lining either side, in all due
form and homage to the officers of their sovereign. During the wrathful
words passing between the two earls, the attention of the crowd had been
given alternately to them and to the Countess of Buchan, who had utterly
forgotten her own precarious situation in anxiety for Nigel, and in pity
for the unfortunate child, who had been hurled by the soldiers close to
the spot where she stood.

"Do not leave him there, he will be trampled on," she said, imploringly,
to the officers beside her. "He can do no harm, poor child, Scotch
though he be. A little water, only bring me a little water, and he will
speedily recover."

All she desired was done, the boy was tenderly raised and brought within
the circle of her guards, and laid on the ground at her feet. She knelt
down beside him, chafed his cold hands within her own, and moistened his
lips and brow with water. After a while his scattered senses returned,
he started up in a sitting posture, and gazed in wild inquiry around
him, uttering a few inarticulate words, and then saying aloud, "Sir
Nigel, my lord, my--my--master, where is he? oh! let me go to him; why
am I here?"

"Thou shalt go to him, poor boy, as soon as thy strength returns; an
they have let thee follow him from Scotland, surely they will not part
ye now," said the countess soothingly, and her voice seemed to rouse the
lad into more consciousness. He gazed long in her face, with an
expression which at that time she could not define, but which startled
and affected her, and she put her arm round him and kissed his brow. A
convulsive almost agonized sob broke from the boy's breast, and caused
his slight frame to shake as with an ague, then suddenly he knelt before
her, and, in accents barely articulate, murmured--

"Bless me, oh bless me!" while another word seemed struggling for
utterance, but checked with an effort which caused it to die on his lips
in indistinct murmurs.

"Bless thee, poor child! from my very heart I do, if the blessing of one
sorrowing and afflicted as myself can in aught avail thee. For thy
faithfulness to thy master, I bless thee, for it speaketh well for thee,
and that face would bid me love and bless thee for thyself, I know not
wherefore. Good angels keep and bless thee, gentle boy, thou hast
Isabella's prayers, and may they give thee peace."

"Pray for me, aye, pray for me," repeated the boy, in the same murmured
tones. He clasped her hands in both his, he pressed them again and again
to his lips, repeated sobs burst from his laboring breast, and then he
sprung up, darted away, and stood at Sir Nigel's side, just as the Earl
of Hereford had commanded his men to wheel a little to the right, to
permit the Countess of Buchan, her guards and officers, free passage
over the drawbridge, and first entrance within the fortress.

The brow of this noble son of chivalry darkened as, sitting motionless
on his tall steed, his gaze rested on the noble woman whom it had
originally been his painful charge to deliver over to his sovereign. He
had not dreamed of a vengeance such as this. He could not have believed
a change so dark as this had fallen on the character of a sovereign whom
he still loved, still sought to admire and revere, and his spirit sunk
'neath the sorrow this conviction caused. Almost involuntarily, as the
procession slowly proceeded, and the countess passed within three paces
of his horse's head, he bent his lordly brow in silent homage; she saw
it and returned it, more effected by the unfeigned commiseration on that
warrior's face, than at aught which had occurred to shame and humble her
that morning.

A brief pause took place in the movements of the officers and their
prisoners, when they reached the great hall of the castle. For a brief
minute Lady Seaton and the Countess of Buchan had met, had clasped
hands, in sad, yet eager greeting. "My child, mine Agnes?" had been by
the latter hurriedly whispered, and the answer, "Safe, I trust, safe,"
just permitted to reach her ear, when roughly and fiercely the Earl of
Berwick summoned the Lady of Buchan to proceed to the chamber appointed
for her use. Those simple words had, however, removed a load of anxiety
from her mind, for they appeared to confirm what she had sometimes
permitted herself to hope, that Agnes had shared King Robert's exile,
under the care of Lady Campbell; prevailed on to do so, perchance, by
the entreaties of Nigel, who in all probability had deemed that course,
though one of hardship, less perilous than remaining with him. She hoped
indeed against her better judgment, for though she knew not the depth,
the might of her daughter's feelings, she knew it must have been a
terrible trial so to part, and she absolutely shuddered when she thought
of the whelming blow it would be to that young heart when the fate of
her betrothed was ascertained.

Lady Seaton had spoken as she believed. No communication had been
permitted between the prisoners on their way to England; indeed, from
Sir Christopher's wounded and exhausted state, he had travelled more
leisurely in a litter, always in the rear of the earl's detachment, and
occupied by her close attendance upon him, his wife had scarcely been
aware of the young page ever in attendance on her brother, or deemed
him, if she did observe him, a retainer of Hereford's own. There was so
much of fearful peril and misery hovering over her in her husband's
fate, that it was not much wonder her thoughts lingered there more than
on Agnes, and that she was contented to believe as she had spoken, that
she at least was safe.

Night fell on the town of Berwick. Silence and darkness had come on her
brooding wings; the varied excitement of the day was now but a matter of
wondering commune round the many blazing hearths, where the busy crowds
of the morning had now gathered. Night came, with her closing pall, her
softened memories, her sleeping visions, and sad waking dreams. She had
come, alike to the mourned and mourner, the conqueror and his captive,
the happy and the wretched. She had found the Earl of Berwick pacing up
and down his stately chamber, his curtained couch unsought, devising
schemes to lower the haughty pride of the gallant warrior whom he yet
feared. She had looked softly within the room where that warrior lay,
and found him, too, sleepless, but not from the same dark dreams. He
grieved for his sovereign, for the fate of one noble spirit shrined in a
woman's form, and restless and fevered, turned again and again within
his mind how he might save from a yet darker doom the gallant youth his
arms had conquered. And not alone on them did night look down. She sent
her sweet, reviving influence, on the rays of a bright liquid star,
through the narrow casement which gave light to the rude unfurnished
chamber where Sir Nigel Bruce and his attendant lay. They had not torn
that poor faithful child from his side. Hereford's last commands had
been that they should not part them, and there they now lay; and sleep,
balmy sleep had for them descended on the wings of night, hovering over
that humble pallet of straw, when from the curtained couch of power, the
downy bed of luxury, she fled. There they lay; but it was the boy who
lay on the pallet of straw, his head pillowed by the arm of the knight,
who sat on a wooden settle at his side. He had watched for a brief space
those troubled slumbers, but as they grew calmer and calmer, he had
pressed one light kiss on the soft yielding cheek, and then leant his
head on his breast, and he too slept--even in sleep tending one beloved.

And in the dark, close sleeping-chamber within the prison cage of the
noble Countess of Buchan, night too looked pityingly. Sleep indeed was
not there; it had come and gone, for in a troubled slumber a dream had
come of Agnes, and she had woke to think upon her child, and pray for
her; and as she prayed, she thought of her promise to the poor boy who
had so strangely moved her. She could not trace how one thought had
sprung from the other, nor why in the darkness his features so suddenly
flashed before her; but so it was. His face seemed to gleam upon her
with the same strange, indefinable expression which, even at the time,
had startled her; and then a sudden flash appeared to illumine that
darkness of bewilderment. She started up from her reclining posture; she
pressed both hands on her throbbing eyeballs; a wild, sickening yearning
took possession of her whole soul; and then she felt, in its full
bitterness, she was a chained and guarded prisoner and the deep anguish
of her spirit found vent in the convulsive cry--

"Fool, fool that I was--my child! my child!"




CHAPTER XXII.


Leaving the goodly town of Berwick and its busy citizens, its castle and
its prisoners, for a brief space, we must now transport our readers to
a pleasant chamber overlooking the Eden, in the castle of Carlisle, now
a royal residence; a fact which, from its numerous noble inmates, its
concourse of pages, esquires, guards, and various other retainers of a
royal establishment, the constant ingress and egress of richly-attired
courtiers, the somewhat bustling, yet deferential aspect of the scene, a
very cursory glance would have been all-sufficient to prove.

It had been with a full determination to set all obstacles, even disease
itself, at defiance, King Edward, some months before, had quitted
Winchester, and directed his march towards the North, vowing vengeance
on the rebellious and disaffected Scots, and swearing death alone should
prevent the complete and terrible extermination of the traitors. He had
proceeded in this spirit to Carlisle, disregarding the threatening
violence of disease, so sustained by the spirit of disappointed ambition
within as scarcely to be conscious of an almost prostrating increase of
weakness and exhaustion. He had determined to make a halt of some weeks
at Carlisle, to wait the effect of the large armies he had sent forward
to overrun Scotland, and to receive intelligence of the measures they
had already taken. Here, then, disease, as if enraged that he should
have borne up so long, that his spirit had mastered even her, convened
the whole powers of suffering, and compelled him not alone to
acknowledge, but to writhe beneath her sway. His whole frame was shaken;
intolerable pains took possession of him, and though the virulence of
the complaint was at length so far abated as to permit him a short
continuance of life, he could never sit his horse again, or even hope to
carry on in his own person his plans for the total reduction of
Scotland. But as his frame weakened, as he became the victim of almost
continual pain, all the darker and fiercer passions of his nature gained
yet more fearful ascendency. The change had been some time gathering,
but within the last twelve months its effects were such, that his
noblest, most devoted knights, blind as their affection for his person
rendered them, could scarce recognize in the bloodthirsty, ambitious
tyrant they now beheld their gallant, generous, humane, and most
chivalric sovereign, who had won golden opinions from all sorts and
conditions of men; who had performed the duties of a son and husband so
as to fix the eyes of all Europe on him in admiration; who had swayed
the sceptre of his mighty kingdom with such a powerful and fearless
hand, it had been long since England had acquired such weight in the
scale of kingdoms. Wise, moderate, merciful even in strict justice as he
had been, could it be that ambition had wrought such change; that
disease had banished every feeling from his breast, save this one dark,
fiend-like passion, for the furtherance of which, or in revenge of its
disappointment, noble blood flowed like water--the brave, the good, the
young, the old, the noble and his follower, alike fell before the axe or
the cord of the executioner? Could it indeed be that Edward, once such a
perfect, glorious scion of chivalry, had now shut up his heart against
its every whisper, lest it should interfere with his brooding visions of
revenge; forgot each feeling, lest he should involuntarily sympathize
with the noble and knightly spirit of the patriots of Scotland, whom he
had sworn to crush? Alas! it was even so; ruthless and tyrannical, the
nobles he had once favored, once loved, now became odious to him, for
their presence made him painfully conscious of the change within
himself; and he now associated but with spirits dark, fierce, cruel as
his own--men he would once have shunned, have banished from his court,
as utterly unworthy of his favor.

It was, then, in a royally-furnished chamber, pleasantly overlooking the
river Eden and the adjoining country, that about a week after the events
narrated in the preceding chapter, King Edward reclined. His couch was
softly and luxuriously cushioned, and not a little art had been expended
in the endeavor to lighten his sufferings, and enable him to rest at
ease. The repeated contraction of his countenance, however, betrayed how
impotent was even luxury when brought in contact with disease. The
richly-furred and wadded crimson velvet robe could not conceal the
attenuation of his once peculiarly fine and noble form; his great length
of limb, which had gained him, and handed down to posterity, the
inelegant surname of Longshanks, rendered his appearance yet more gaunt
and meagre; while his features, which once, from the benignity and
nobleness of his character, had been eminently handsome, now pale, thin,
and pointed, seemed to express but the one passion of his soul--its
gratification of revenge. His expansive brow was now contracted and
stern, rendered more so perhaps by the lack of hair about the temples;
he wore a black velvet cap, circled coronet-wise with large diamonds
from which a white feather drooped to his shoulder. There was a slight,
scarcely visible, sneer resting on his features that morning, called
forth perhaps by his internal scorn of the noble with whom he had
deigned a secret conference; but the Earl of Buchan had done him good
service, had ably forwarded his revenge, and he would not therefore
listen to that still voice of scorn.

"Soh! she is secure, and your desires on that head accomplished, sir
earl," he said, in continuance of some subject they had been discussing.
"Thou hast done us good service, and by mine honor, it would seem we
have done your lordship the same."

"Aye," muttered the earl, whose dark features had not grown a whit more
amiable since we last beheld him; "aye, we are both avenged."

"How, sir I darest thou place thyself on a par with me?" angrily
retorted Edward; "thinkest thou the sovereign of England can have aught
in common with such as thee? Isabella of Buchan, or of Fife, an thou
likest that better, is debased, imprisoned, because she hath dared
insult our person, defy our authority, to act treasonably and
mischievously, and sow dissension and rebellion amid our Scottish
subjects--for this she is chastised; an it gratify your matrimonial
revenge, I am glad on't; but Edward of England brooks no equality with
Comyn of Buchan, though it be but equality in revenge."

Buchan bent his knee, and humbly apologized.

"Well, well, let it be; thou hast served us too faithfully to be
quarrelled with, for perchance unintentional irreverence. The imposition
of her child's murder, when he lives and is well, is the coinage of
thine own brain, sir earl, and thou must reconcile it to thine own
conscience. We hold ourselves exempt from all such peculiar mercy, for
we scarce see its wisdom." There was a slight bitterness in Edward's
tone.

"Wisdom, my sovereign liege, deemest thou there is no wisdom in
revenge?" and the brow of the earl grew dark with passion, as he spoke.
"Have I naught to punish, naught to avenge in this foul
traitress--naught, that her black treachery has extended to my son, my
heir, even to his tender years? I would not have her death; no, let her
live and feed on the belief that her example, her counsels have killed
her own child; that had it not been for her, he might have lived, been
prosperous, aye, and happy now. Is there no wisdom in such revenge? and
if there be none, save that which my own heart feels, I could give your
grace another and a better reason for this proceeding."

"Speak it, in St. George's name," replied the king; "of a truth thou art
of most clear conception in all schemes of vengeance. I might have
thought long enough, ere I could have lighted on such as this. What
more?"

"Simply, your grace, that by encouraging a little while the report of
his death, his friends in Scotland will forget that he ever existed, and
make no effort for his rescue; which belief, wild and unfounded as it
is, I imagine supports him in his strenuous determination to live and
die a traitor to your highness. I have no hatred to the boy; nay, an he
would let me, could love and be proud of him, now his mother cannot
cross my path, and would gladly see him devoted, as myself, to the
interests of your grace. Nor do I despair of this; he is very young, and
his character cannot be entirely formed. He will tire in time of dark
and solitary confinement, and gladly accept any conditions I may offer."

"Gives he any proof as yet of this yielding mood?"

"By mine honor, no, your highness; he is firm and steadfast as the ocean
rock."

"Then wherefore thinkest thou he will change in time?"

"Because as yet, my gracious liege, the foul, treacherous principles of
his mother have not ceased to work. An entire cessation of intercourse
between them will show him his mistake at last, and this could never be,
did she know he lived. Imprisoned, guarded as she is, she would yet find
some means of communication with him, and all my efforts would be of no
avail. Let a year roll by, and I will stake my right hand that Alan of
Buchan becomes as firm a supporter and follower of King Edward as ever
his father was. Is the boy more than mortal, and does your grace think
life, liberty, riches, honors, will not weigh against perpetual
imprisonment and daily thoughts of death?"

So spoke the Earl of Buchan, judging, as most men, others by himself,
utterly unable to comprehend the high, glorious, self-devoted, patriotic
spirit of his noble son. He persevered in his course of fiend-like
cruelty, excusing it to his own conscience, if he had any, by the
belief it would end but in his son's good--an end, indeed, he seldom
thought of attaining; but there was something in the idea of a son, an
heir, and one so prepossessing in appearance as Alan of Buchan, that
touched his pride, the only point on which his flinty heart was
vulnerable.

"So thou thinkest, sir earl?" resumed the king, who perhaps in his own
secret soul did not entirely think with him. "Meanwhile the stripling
may laugh thy parental care to scorn, by escaping from iron chains and
stone walls, and seeking out the arch rebel Bruce, make up at the
sword's point for lost time. Beware, sir earl, an he be taken again thus
in arms against us, even thy loyal services will not save his head!"

"I should not even ask your grace's clemency," replied the earl, his
features assuming a fearful expression as he spoke. "An he thus turned
traitor again to his father's house, spurning mine and your grace's
favor, to join the base murderer of his kinsman, he shall be no more to
me than others, whose treason hath cost their heads; but I have no fear
of this. He cannot escape, guarded as he is, by alike the most ruthless
and the most faithful of my followers; and while there, if all else
fail, I will publish that he lives, but so poison the ears of his rebel
Scottish friends against him, he will not, dare not join them, and in
his own despite, will be compelled to act as befitting his father's son.
Trust me, my liege. To thy royal clemency I owe his life; be it my duty,
then, to instil into him other principles than those which actuated him
before."

"But your own character, my lord, meanwhile, care ye naught for the
stain supposed to rest upon it? Thy plans sound wise, and we thank thee
for thy loyalty; but we would not ye burdened your name with a deed not
its own, an ye cared for the world's applause."

"Not a whit, not a whit, your highness; countenanced by your grace's
favor, absolved in your opinion from the barbarity others charge me
with, I care not for them, I have been too long mine own
conscience-keeper to heed the whispers of the world," he added, his dark
brows knitting closer as he spoke.

Edward smiled grimly. "Be it so, then," he said; "my Lord of Buchan, we
understand each other. An that boy escapes and rejoins the traitors, and
is taken, his head answers for it. An ye succeed in making him loyal as
yourself, as eager a pursuer of the murderous traitor, Bruce, we will
give thee the palm for policy and wisdom in our court, ourself not
excepted. And now another question; it was reported Isabella of Buchan
joined the rebel's court with her _two_ children. Who and where is the
second? we have heard but of one."

"A puny, spiritless wench, as I have heard, my liege; one little likely
to affect your highness, and not worth the seeking."

"Nay, an she hath her mother's influence, we differ from thee, sir earl,
and would rather see her within the walls of our court than in the
traitor's train. I remember not her name amid those taken with the
Bruce's wife. Hast inquired aught concerning her?"

"Not I, your grace," carelessly replied the earl; "of a truth, I had
weightier thoughts than the detention or interest of a simple wench,
who, if her mother has taught to forget me as her father, is not worth
my remembering as a child."

"I give you joy of your most fatherly indifference, sir earl," answered
the king, with an ill-suppressed sneer. "It would concern you little if
she takes unto herself a husband midst your foes; the rebel Robert hath
goodly brothers, and the feud between thy house and theirs may but
impart a double enjoyment to the union."

The earl started, as if an adder had stung him. "She dare not do this
thing," he said, fiercely; "she will not--she dare not. A thousand
curses light upon her head even if she dreams it!"

"Nay, waste not thy breath in curses, good my lord, but up an prevent
the very possibility of such a thing, an it move thee so deeply. I say
