the successive formation of States and Territories. The Seminoles of
Florida naturally objected to removal from the land of their ancestors to
a far-distant region, and under the leadership of a brave and skillful
chief named Osceola they resisted the troops sent to coerce them into
obedience. The most memorable event of the war was the massacre of Major
Dade and about one hundred soldiers in an ambuscade, December 28, 1835.
On the same day Osceola with a small party of followers killed and
scalped General Wiley Thomson, of the United States army and five of
Thomson's friends. Before the opening of hostilities Thomson had put
Osceola in irons on account of his refractory attitude, and the Indian
chief long planned the act of vengeance which he thus signally executed.
The war lasted almost seven years, and was attended with a distressing
loss of life and property. Not less than 9000 United States troops were
in the Seminole territory in the latter part of 1837, and while the
Indians were more than once severely chastised when brought to an
engagement, it was almost impossible to pursue them in their native
everglades. Osceola was taken prisoner when in conference, under a flag
of truce, with General Jesup, of the United States army, but the
Seminoles maintained the struggle under other leaders, and it was not
until 1842 that peace was established, and the Indians driven to
surrender. Osceola did not live to see the defeat of the cause for which
he had fought so resolutely. He died of fever at Fort Moultrie on the
last day of 1839.

                        *          *          *

The Black Hawk War in the Northwest was, as usual with Indian wars, a
struggle on the part of the red men to retain the lands of their fathers.
Black Hawk was a noted chief of the Sacs and Foxes, and he claimed that
the original treaty by which his tribe sold all their lands in Illinois
to the United States was made by only four chiefs, and that they were
drunk when they signed it. Assuming this charge to be true it remains
that the provisions of the first treaty were confirmed by two subsequent
treaties, the last in 1830, when the principal chief, Keokuk, made the
final cession to the United States of all the country owned by the Sacs
and Foxes east of the Mississippi River. This was done without the
knowledge of Black Hawk, whose indignation was greatly aroused upon
hearing of the negotiation. Black Hawk was yet more enraged when he
found, in April, 1831, that during the absence of himself and his people
from their village on a hunting expedition a fur-trader had purchased
from the government the ground on which the village stood, and was
preparing to cultivate the field upon which the Indians had for many
years raised their corn. This was in violation of the letter and spirit
of the treaty, which provided that the Indians could occupy their lands
until they were needed for settlement, and the frontier settlements were
yet fifty miles distant. War soon followed between the whites and
Indians, Abraham Lincoln, afterward President of the United States, being
enlisted as a volunteer. Colonel Zachary Taylor, afterward President, was
one of the officers in command of the United States troops. After
fighting with varied fortunes for several months, Black Hawk was defeated
with the loss of many warriors, and fled to a village of the Winnebagoes.
The latter escorted the fallen chieftain to the United States authorities
at Prairie du Chien. "Black Hawk is an Indian," said the captive warrior,
speaking in the third person. "He has done nothing an Indian need be
ashamed of. He has fought the battles of his country against the white
men, who come year after year to cheat them and take away their lands. He
will go to the world of spirits contented." Black Hawk was well treated
as a prisoner, taken to Washington to visit the President, and liberated
after peace had been made.

                        *          *          *

During Jackson's second term the American settlers in Texas succeeded,
after a conflict attended by signal heroism and ferocity, in securing
their independence of Mexico. The massacre of the Alamo by the Mexicans
under Santa Anna, will always be remembered in American history. The
Mission of the Alamo, which the Texans defended to the death against
overwhelming numbers, was entirely isolated from the town of San Antonio.
It consisted of several buildings, and a convent yard, surrounded by high
and thick walls, having partly, like all the old missions, the character
of a fortress. Fourteen pieces of artillery were mounted for the defence,
and the garrison, when it entered the Alamo, consisted of one hundred and
forty-five men, untrained in arms, except in the use of the rifle. Their
leader was Lieutenant Colonel William Barret Travis, a native of North
Carolina, and second in command was Colonel James Bowie, inventor of the
terrible bowie-knife. Santa Anna, the President of Mexico, was in
personal command of the attacking forces, numbering between 6000 and 7000
men. He declared that he would grant no quarter. The troops ordered to
the assault numbered 2500, or about twenty-five Mexicans to one American.
The deadly fire from the Alamo twice repelled the enemy, but they were
driven on by the blows and shouts of their officers, and at the third
attempt they scaled the wall, and carried the defences. While life lasted
the Texans fought. They had agreed to blow up the buildings in the last
extremity, but Major T. C. Evans, when about to fire the magazine, was
struck down by a bullet. Not a defender who could be found was spared.
Five Texans who had hidden themselves were taken before Santa Anna. At a
word from that monster of cruelty they were at once dispatched with
bayonets.

The Alamo was not long unavenged. The massacre took place on March 6,
1836. On April 21, the Texans, led by General Sam Houston, met the
Mexicans at San Jacinto. The Texans numbered 743; the Mexicans about
1400, with Santa Anna in command. Houston, by strategy worthy of greater
fame, had managed to come upon the Mexican President when the latter was
separated from the larger part of his forces. Determined to win or die,
Houston destroyed a bridge which afforded the only retreat for his men or
escape for the enemy. The Texans delivered one volley at close range, and
then clubbed their rifles or drew their bowie-knives, with the
cry--"Remember the Alamo!" In fifteen minutes the Mexicans were in
flight, pursued by the yelling Texans. "Me no Alamo! Me no Alamo!" cried
the terrified fugitives. The Texans did not stay their hands until they
had killed six hundred and thirty and wounded two hundred and eight of
their cowardly foes. The remainder of the Mexicans were allowed to
surrender, and were not maltreated as prisoners. Santa Anna was captured
while hiding in the grass at some distance from the battlefield, and
brought, a pallid and trembling captive, before Houston. The latter
spared the tyrant's life, and placed a guard to protect him. The battle
of San Jacinto virtually put an end to the war, and Texas remained the
Lone Star Republic, until admitted to the American Union in 1845.

                        *          *          *

This period witnessed also the successful assertion of American title to
that extensive and productive region now divided into the States of
Oregon, Washington and Idaho. President Jefferson had seen almost with
the vision of prophecy the future of that distant portion of the
Louisiana Purchase. "I looked forward with gratification," he said in his
later years, "to the time when the descendants of the settlers of Oregon
would spread themselves through the whole length of the coast, covering
it with free, independent Americans, unconnected with us but by the ties
of blood and interest, and enjoying, like us, the rights of
self-government." And yet, for forty years after the treaty which
transferred to the United States the possessions of France in America,
the leading statesmen of our republic, Jefferson excepted, remained blind
to the value of America's domain on the Pacific. In 1810, John Jacob
Astor's American Fur Company undertook to establish a post upon what they
regarded as American soil, at a place which the founders called Astoria.
The Hudson Bay Company then claimed Oregon as part of their territory,
and when the War of 1812 broke out the British attacked Astoria, took the
Americans prisoners, and changed the name of the post to Fort George. The
Astor attempt to found a settlement in Oregon was not without favorable
bearing on American claims to that territory, especially as the
enterprise had the sanction of the United States Government, and a United
States naval officer commanded the leading vessel in the expedition.
Under the treaty of Ghent, Astoria was to be restored to its original
owners, but it was not until 1846 that this act of justice was
consummated. In 1818 it was mutually agreed that each nation should
equally enjoy the privileges of all the bays and harbors on that coast
for ten years, and this agreement was renewed in 1827 for an indefinite
time. Practically this meant the occupation of the country by the Hudson
Bay Company, which found its forests and waters a mine of fur-bearing
wealth. The most eminent of America's statesmen, so far as the Pacific
Northwest was concerned, seemed to be under the spell of their own
ignorance and of the Hudson Bay Company's misrepresentations. The great
Senator Benton said that, "The ridge of the Rocky Mountains may be named
as a convenient, natural and everlasting boundary." Winthrop, of
Massachusetts, quoted and commended this statement of Benton, and
McDuffie of South Carolina declared that the wealth of the Indies would
be insufficient to pay the cost of a railroad to the mouth of the
Columbia. While the nation was stirred up over a boundary dispute
involving a comparatively small district in the Northeast--settled by the
Ashburton Treaty in 1842--Oregon, with its extensive territory and
magnificent natural wealth was treated as unworthy of controversy. But
for the patriot missionary, Marcus Whitman, who in the winter of 1842-43
made a perilous journey from his mission post in Oregon to Washington, to
stir up the American Government to a sense of its duty, and of the
imminent danger of the seizure of Oregon by the British, that valuable
region would in all probability have passed under British dominion. "All
I ask," said Doctor Whitman to President Tyler, "is that you won't barter
away Oregon or allow English interference until I can lead a band of
stalwart American settlers across the plains; for this I will try to do."
The President promised; the settlers went, and Oregon was saved.[1] For a
time it seemed that war might result, but the two nations at length
compromised on a boundary line at forty-nine north latitude.

      [1] It is sad to know that this patriot missionary and his admirable
      wife were massacred in 1847, with a number of other persons, at
      their mission station of Waiilatpwi by the very Indians they were
      educating. There is reason to believe the massacre was indirectly
      the result of Whitman's service to his country in rescuing Oregon
      from the Hudson Bay Company. The treaty of 1846 greatly irritated
      that powerful corporation, and this feeling inevitably spread to
      the Indians who depended upon the company for supplies, and who
      naturally sympathized with its policy of keeping the land for
      fur-bearing animals and savage humanity. It is unnecessary to
      suspect the company or the Roman Catholic missionaries attached to
      the company of any plot against Whitman's life. It was sufficient
      for the savages to know that the company hated Whitman, and that the
      American Protestant missionaries sought to convert them not only to
      Christianity, but also to industry.

During President Tyler's administration Rhode Island was the scene of a
commotion known as the "Dorr War." While the property qualification for
voters had been discarded in nearly every Northern State, Rhode Island
still adhered to the system of government provided in the King Charles
charter of 1663, which restricted the franchise to freeholders and their
eldest sons. This restriction gave occasion for many abuses, mortgagees
often exercising control over the votes of their debtors, and citizens
who paid taxes on mortgaged property being sometimes denied the privilege
of voting on the ground that they did not possess sufficient equity in
their estates. The majority of the people desired a frame of government
in accord with the spirit of American institutions, but were resisted by
the minority in actual power. The party of reform, therefore, held an
election in defiance of the charter, adopted a new constitution arid
chose Thomas W. Dorr governor, along with other general officers and a
General Assembly. The Dorr legislature met in a foundry and passed
various laws, which they had no power to enforce. The charter government
called out the militia, the Dorrites also took arms, and for some time
there was danger of a collision. The Dorrites were ultimately dispersed
without a battle, and the charter government remained in power. From a
sanitary standpoint it was a healthy war, as more people were probably
benefited by the outing than injured by bullets and bayonets.[2] Dorr was
afterward sentenced to State Prison for life, but was pardoned after a
few years, and his sentence expunged by vote of the legislature, from the
records of the court. A constitution embodying most of the reforms for
which the Dorrites had striven was legally adopted, and Rhode Island
settled down to its customary calm and prosperity.

      [2] The "Dorr war," however, was very real to the people of Rhode
      Island. About thirteen years ago the writer was present in the
      office of the clerk of a Rhode Island town, when an old lady
      entered, and told the clerk that she wanted to see the record of a
      deed. Upon being asked to indicate the probable date, she said it
      was "before the war." On inquiry by the clerk it appeared that she
      meant the "Dorr war."




CHAPTER XXXI.

War with Mexico--General Zachary Taylor Defeats the Mexicans--Buena
Vista--Mexicans Four to One--"A Little More Grape, Captain Bragg!"--
Glorious American Victory--General Scott's Splendid Campaign--A
Series of Victories--Cerro Gordo--Contreras--Churubusco--Molino del
Rey--Chapultepec--Stars and Stripes Float in the City of Mexico--
Generous Treatment of the Vanquished--Peace--Cession of Vast Territory
to the United States--The Gadsden Purchase.


The annexation of Texas by the United States was accepted by Mexico as an
act of war. The American Government and people were not unprepared for a
challenge from Mexico, and rather welcomed it, as, apart from the Texas
issue, Mexico had, from the time of her independence treated the United
States in a manner far from neighborly, and inflicted many injuries on
American citizens. In the West and South especially it was deemed
necessary to give Mexico a lesson; in New England the war was not
popular. Hostilities began, and two sharp battles were fought, before war
was actually declared. General Zachary Taylor, with a force much inferior
to that of the enemy, defeated the Mexicans at Palo Alto and Resaca de la
Palma, and drove them out of Texas. At Resaca the American dragoons under
Captain May charged straight upon a Mexican battery, killing the gunners
and capturing the Mexican general La Vega just as he was about to apply a
match to one of the pieces. The Mexican army was so completely scattered
that their commander Arista fled unaccompanied across the Rio Grande. At
Buena Vista Generals Taylor and Wool, with 5000 men, of whom only 500
were regular troops, confronted Santa Anna with 20,000, February 23,
1847. The Mexican chieftain expected an easy victory, and his army,
inspired with his confidence, rushed from their mountains upon the small
force of Americans drawn up in battle array on the plain of Angostura.

    "Like the fierce Northern hurricane
    That sweeps his great plateau,
    Flushed with the triumph yet to gain,
    Came down the serried foe.
    Who heard the thunder of the fray
    Break o'er the field beneath,
    Well knew the watchword of that day
    Was victory or death."[1]

      [1] "The Bivouac of the Dead."--_O'Hara._

The battle lasted all day, the American artillery being splendidly
handled, and mowing down the Mexicans at every charge. "Give 'em a little
more grape, Captain Bragg!" said Taylor quietly, as he saw Santa Anna's
lines wavering. The grape was given, and the Mexicans fled, leaving 500
of their number dead or dying on the field. The total Mexican loss,
including wounded and prisoners was about 2000; that of the Americans in
killed, wounded and missing, 746. This victory, and the successes of
Fremont and Kearney in California, completed the conquest of Northern
Mexico.

General Winfield Scott, who was in supreme command of all the American
forces, conducted a brilliant campaign from the coast. After taking Vera
Cruz and the castle of San Juan de Ulloa, General Scott advanced toward
the City of Mexico with about 10,000 men. At Cerro Gordo, a difficult
pass in the mountains, the American army encountered 12,000 Mexicans
under command of Santa Anna, who had, by extraordinary efforts, collected
this force after his defeat at Buena Vista. The battle was fought on
April 18, every movement of the American troops being directed, according
to a carefully prepared plan, by General Scott. Colonel Harvey led the
storming party into the pass, with a deep river on one side, and
batteries belching death from lofty rocks on the other side. The
Americans rushed forward with irresistible courage. They knew their
enemy. The Alamo had not been forgotten. Cerro Gordo fell, and the flight
of the Mexicans may best be described in the language of one of their own
historians: "General Santa Anna, accompanied by some of his adjutants,
was passing along the road to the left of the battery, when the enemy's
column, now out of the woods, appeared on his line of retreat and fired
upon him, forcing him back. The carriage in which he had left Jalapa was
riddled with shot, the mules killed and taken by the enemy, as well as a
wagon containing $16,000 received the day before for the pay of the
soldiers. Every tie of command and obedience now being broken among our
troops, safety alone being the object, and all being involved in a
frightful confusion, they rushed desperately to the narrow pass of the
defile that descended to the Plan del Rio, where the general-in-chief had
proceeded, with the chiefs and officers accompanying him. Horrid indeed
was the descent by that narrow and rocky path where thousands rushed,
disputing the passage with desperation, and leaving a track of blood upon
the road. All classes being confounded military distinction and respect
were lost; and badges of rank became marks of sarcasm. The enemy, now
masters of our camp, turned their guns upon the fugitives, thus
augmenting the terror of the multitude that crowded through the defile
and pressed forward every instant by a new impulse, which increased the
confusion and disgrace of that ill-fated day." Of the 12,000 Mexicans
engaged in this battle about 1200 were killed and wounded, and 3000 were
made prisoners. The captives were all paroled, and the sick and wounded
sent to Jalapa, where they were well cared for. The Castle of Perote, the
strongest fortress in Mexico, surrendered without resistance, and the
American flag was unfurled on the summit of the eastern Cordilleras.

After a rest at Puebla General Scott pushed on in the footsteps of
Cortes. Santa Anna, who would have equalled Napoleon or Caesar had his
ability and courage in the field been equal to his success in organizing
armies, made a stand with 32,000 Mexicans at Contreras and Churubusco.
The army of General Scott numbered about 9000 effective men. Both sides
knew that the battle to be fought would decide the fate of the City of
Mexico. On the nineteenth of August about one-half of the American army
attacked the fortified camp at Contreras, defended by nearly 7000
Mexicans, under General Valencia. Evening fell without victory for either
side. In the early morning, after a night of heavy rain, General P. F.
Smith, with three brigades of infantry, but without cavalry or artillery,
marched in the darkness up to the Mexican camp, discharged several
volleys in quick succession, and dashed, bayonet in hand, upon the enemy.
In fifteen minutes the Americans were victors, over 3000 Mexicans were
prisoners, and the rest of Valencia's troops were fugitives. The American
army gave the enemy no time to recover, but moved promptly forward to
more victories. The fort of San Antonio was captured, the garrison not
waiting to be attacked before taking to flight, and then began the battle
of Churubusco. This place is a small village, six miles south from the
City of Mexico, and connected with it by a spacious causeway. At the head
of the causeway, near the village, and in front of the bridge over the
Churubusco River, was a strong redoubt, mounted with batteries, and
occupied by a large force of Mexicans. The convent-church of San Pablo,
with its massive stone walls, was converted into a fort. The walls were
impervious to the attack of field pieces, and the building was defended
by a well-constructed bastion, and guns placed in the embrasure. The
church stood on an eminence, and the village which clustered about it was
