Mark grasped the idea, without explanation, and ran back with his
companion, leaving the shouting, cursing, and firing behind, to descend
with him to the mouth of the mine, and then downward to the big stone
shed, where Dummy tore open the great oaken closet, and drew out a bag
of the coarse blasting-powder used in the mine.

"Feel in that box, Master Mark; that's it.  You know.  The fuse cord."

Mark had a roll of loose twisted hemp soaked in saltpetre and powder out
of the box directly, and armed with a powder-bag each, they hurried
trembling back, to reach the gateway, peer round the corner, and see
that the attack was going on as fiercely as ever, while the defence was
very weak, and they knew that before long the door must yield.  In fact,
amidst a burst of cheers, a hole had been already driven through, to be
made use of by the defenders for sending thrusts out with their pikes.

"Up with you," whispered Mark, and the two lads hurried up a little
winding staircase on to the top of the inner gate-tower, from whence
they could go along one side of the little yard, hidden by the
crenellated battlement, till they were about five-and-twenty feet from
where the men were carrying on their attack.

"Light it, and chuck it among 'em," whispered Dummy, but he proceeded
with system.  "Put t'other inside the doorway," he whispered.  "Don't
want that to go off too."

Mark obeyed, and returned unseen by those below, or the party defending
the hall-door, to find that his companion, used to seeing such things
done, had cut a little hole in the side of the powder-bag, inserted a
piece of the fuse, and thrust the rest in his pocket.

"Here, you hold the end of the string up," whispered Dummy; and there
was a rattling noise, as he took out the flint and steel he was
carrying.

A cold chill ran through Mark.

"Mind," he whispered; "you'll blow us to pieces."

"Nay, I won't," said the lad, between his teeth.  "You hold the thing in
your hands; open it out a bit.  I won't send no sparks nigh the powder.
Aren't afeared, are you?"

"No," said Mark, setting his teeth; and stooping down, he screened the
bag by passing the fuse between his knees, holding the frayed-out end
ready while Dummy made a low clicking noise, and cleverly sent a shower
of sparks down upon the prepared hemp.

It caught directly, and began to sparkle and sputter, Mark holding it
firmly, but feeling as if he were the victim of some horrible nightmare
dream.

"That's the way," said Dummy, coolly replacing the flint and steel.  "It
won't go off yet.  I want it to burn till it's nearly ready, and then
heave it down right amongst 'em.  Make some on 'em squint."

"Throw it--throw it," panted Mark hoarsely.

"Nay, not yet.  They'd see it burning, and tread it out.  Here, you let
me have it.  I'll hold it to the last minute, and when I throw, you duck
yourself down, or you might get burnt."

Dummy took hold of the burning cord with his left hand, the bag with his
right, pressing his companion out of the road, and then standing
twitching the sparkling fuse, which was only a few inches away from the
powder in the bag.

"I've often seen it done," he whispered.

A shout came up from the little court, for the followers of Captain
Purlrose had again driven their battering ram through the great door,
and a shout of defiance came back from the hall from a few voices, among
which Mark recognised his father's; but he could not turn from that
sparkling piece of line to glance over the stony battlement to see what
was being done.  His eyes were fascinated, and nothing could have
withdrawn them then.

He had proved again and again that he was no coward, but a great terror
chained him now, and his voice trembled as he panted out:

"Quick--quick; throw--throw!"

"Nay, not yet.  I'm watching of it.  Father always waits till there's
on'y about an inch, to make sure it'll go off."

There was not much more as he spoke, and just then, in obedience to an
order from their captain, the men drew back from the doorway, balancing
the beam swung between them, as, four on each side now, it hung from
their hands, and backing till they were past the spot where the pair
were crouching.

"Now, all together, my brave boys," cried Purlrose; "a good run, and
down goes the door.  Off!"

The order answered for Dummy as well as the men, and feeling now that he
had waited too long, the boy swung the bag over the battlement.  The
passage through the air increased the sparkling of the fuse, and before
it touched the pavement, a few feet in front of the men starting for
their run, there was a wondrous flash of light, a fierce wind drove the
two lads backward, and then came a deafening roar, mingled with the
breaking of glass, a yell of horror, and as the roof still quivered
beneath the lads' feet they heard the rush of men through the gateway,
across the next court, and through the outer opening on to the bridge,
and then down the first slope.

"Come on!" cried Dummy, running to the low doorway of the gate-tower,
where he picked up the other powder-bag, and, hardly knowing what he
did, Mark followed him down the winding stair into the gateway.

"Come on!" cried Dummy again, and Mark still followed, across the outer
court and the first gateway, grasping the pick from his belt, feeling
that they were about to charge the rear of the flying enemy.

"Come on," shouted Dummy, for the third time, and they crossed the
narrow space, which brought them to the little tower and gateway by the
natural bridge, where, as Mark closed up, he could hear the babble and
growl of voices from the bottom of the first slope.

"Shied it too soon," growled the boy.  "I don't believe it's killed
one."

"They're coming back, Dummy," cried Mark, "and the gate's broken away
from the hinges."

"Then they shall have it this time," cried the lad, and cutting a hole
with his knife in one corner of the powder-bag, he held it down at one
side behind the massive wall of the little tower, and striding his legs,
walked slowly forward till he reached the middle of the bridge, where he
plumped the powder-bag down, after leaving a little train of the black
grains behind him where he walked.

Then carefully avoiding it, he stepped quickly back to where Mark was
standing, and took out and handed him the flint and steel.

"You do it this time," he said.  "We shall be in shelter here.  I'll
watch and say when."

Mark took the rough implements, and knelt down by the commencement of
the train.

"Hold it close down, quite steady, and give one good nick, and it will
set the powder off."

"Come on, you cowardly dogs," cried a now familiar voice.  "There's
everything that's good in there, and the place will be ours, I tell you.
What, going to be scared by a puff of smoke?  The place is our own now.
All here?"

"Ay," came in a growl.

"Form in good order, three abreast, and charge right across and into the
yard.  Halt!  Steady!  To think of running for a flash in the pan!"

"You ran too," growled a voice.

"You won't be happy till you're strung up, Hez Bingham," cried the
captain.  "Now then: swords.  Steady!  Forward!"

"Now!" whispered Dummy; and as the men tramped on to the bridge for
their renewed attack, Mark struck the steel with his flint, and a tiny
spark or two fell.

"Quick--another!" whispered Dummy, and the men halted in the middle of
the bridge.

"Forward!" shouted the captain from the rear; "what are you halting
for?"

"What's this here?" growled one of the men in the first line, for he had
caught sight of the powder-bag lying in the middle of the pathway, his
question taking off his comrades' attention from the two sharp clicks
which came from behind the lesser gateway.

But they saw a little line of light and smoke running over the stone
paving of the bridge, and with a yell of horror, they turned and fled
hurriedly back and down the slope.

"Don't look!" yelled Dummy, forcing Mark aside, when the flash brought
the castle and summit of the Black Tor into full view; then there was an
awful muffled roar, which went echoing away, and as it died out, the two
lads dashed across the bridge to the head of the zigzag descent, to make
out by hearing that the enemy were in full retreat.

"I think that settled 'em," said Dummy quietly.  "You did it fine,
Master Mark."

"Hoi!  Who's there?" cried a voice behind them.

"Dummy Rugg, father."

"And you, my boy?  Thank Heaven!  I was afraid something was wrong."

"Then it was you two with my powder," cried another voice out of the
darkness.

"Yes, Dan Rugg, and a splendid use they made of it," cried Sir Edward.
"Well done, my lads.  But come into shelter; they surprised us, with
everything left open.  We must lock the stable door now.  Think they'll
come again, Rugg?"

"Nay, Sir Edward; not to-night.  Those explosions will bring our lads up
to see what's the matter."

"Well, secure the gates as we go in."

Dan Rugg was right.  Within half-an-hour a dozen men had come up and
been admitted, ready to meet the enemy should he return, but the silence
up at the Black Tor was not disturbed again that night.

"Out of revenge for you boys' attack," said Sir Edward, when he had
heard his son's account of their proceedings in the mine, and Dummy's
clever thought about the powder.  "It might have meant the loss of this
place.  But there must be an end to it now.  You lads were so handy with
the powder-bags that you shall try your hands upon that wasps' nest, for
I can't rest now till I've had it well burnt out.  Pity more powder was
not used this time.  I don't believe they were more than singed, and
half my windows were smashed."

"But if we had used more powder, father," said Mark, smiling, "we might
have knocked down the place."



CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

AN ENEMY IN DISTRESS.

The rattling of a handful of tiny pebbles took Mark Eden to his window
that morning--for it was beginning to grow grey in the east when he went
to his bed, Sir Edward insisting upon his going, and announcing that he
was going to keep watch with three men.

Mark pleaded for permission to join in the vigil, but Sir Edward firmly
ordered him to go and take proper rest; so he went, feeling that after
such an exciting time sleep would be impossible, and going off directly
into a deep dreamless slumber, from which he was awakened by that shower
of pebbles.

He threw open the casement, fully expecting to find that he had been
summoned to help defend the place from a fresh attack; but only saw
Dummy Rugg below in the yard, waving his arms to him.

"Dress yourself and come down, Master Mark," cried Dummy, in a hoarse
whisper, uttered between his hands.  "What is it--the enemy?"

"Yes," said Dummy, nodding his head a great deal.  "He wants to see
you."

"Me or my father?"

"You," whispered Dummy mysteriously.  "Look sharp."

Mark did look as sharp as he could, hurriedly washing and dressing,
while still feeling stupid and thick with sleep.

As he went down he saw one of the servants, and asked for Sir Edward,
but learned that his father had not long gone to his chamber.

He went out of the battered hall-door, looked round at the shivered
casements and the walls blackened and whitened by the powder blast, and
then hurried through the gateway into the outer court.

But Dummy was not there now, so he passed through and saw the boy
waiting at the entrance of the gateway which had protected the bridge so
poorly on the previous night.

"Where is he?" cried Mark.

"Bit o' the way down the path," was the reply.

"Is it Captain Purlrose?" asked Mark.

"Yah!  No, not him.  T'other enemy."

"What enemy?  Whom do you mean?"

"Him you hate so.  Young Ralph Darley."

"Here?" cried Mark in astonishment.

"Yes; I see him coming up, and was going to heave a big stone down on
him, but he threw up his hands, and called out as he wanted you."

"Why, what can he want?" cried Mark, flushing with fresh excitement.

"I dunno, but it's some mischief, or a Darley wouldn't have come.  You
be on the look out: he's got his sword.  I'll come with you and let him
have my pick if he means anything again' you.  He's heard of the
fighting, and thinks we're beat; so just you look out."

"You stop here," said Mark sharply, for he felt that this must be an
advance toward friendship on the part of the Darleys--that on hearing of
the attack Sir Morton had sent his son as an ambassador, to offer to
join Sir Edward Eden in an expedition to crush their mutual foe.

"Stop here, Master Mark, and let you go into danger," cried Dummy.  "I
won't!"

"Stop here, sir!  How dare you!" cried Mark.  "Do you think that I
cannot defend myself against a boy like that?"

"He's as big a boy as you are, Master Mark, and I won't let you go
alone."

"Dummy, you're an insolent dog," cried Mark haughtily.  "Keep your
place, sir, or I'll never go down the mine with you again."

"Oh, very well," said the boy sulkily, "but if he cuts your head off,
don't come and howl about it to me after it's done."

"I promise you I won't," cried Mark.

"And I shall climb up yonder and watch you, Master Mark; and if he kills
you I'll follow him till I get him, and I'll take him and heave him down
that big hole in the mine, where the water falls."

Mark hardly heard this, for he was hurrying over the bridge, followed by
Dummy, who, as his young master went down the zigzag path, began to
climb up to where he could keep watch, a sentry being higher still,
where he could command the approaches to the Tor Castle.

At the bottom of the third slope, Mark came upon Ralph, who was
approaching to meet him, and at a glance he saw that something terrible
had happened, for the lad's face was haggard and wild.  There were
smears of blood about his temples, while his face looked as if it had
been washed, and some injury had bled again.  In addition, a closer
inspection showed that his hair had been singed off on one side, while
the other was matted by dry blood.

"Why, hullo!  Have you been in the wars too?"

"Help!" cried the lad, holding out his hands to him imploringly.

"Help?  You come to me!" said Mark wonderingly.

"Yes, to you, mine enemy," cried Ralph, with a wild hysterical cry.  "I
am humbled now--there is no one else to go to.  Oh, for pity's sake,
help!"

He covered his face with his hands in his shame and agony, feeling that
his manhood had gone out of him, and Mark felt that something terrible
must have occurred, for a burst of hysterical sobbing escaped from the
wounded lad, and he threw himself face downward upon the path.

For a moment shame and contempt reigned in Mark Eden's breast, but they
were chased away by a manly feeling of pity for the enemy who seemed to
be humbling himself so before him.

Then all selfishness passed away in turn, and the word enemy dropped out
of his being as the true English boy shone out of his eyes in compassion
for a lad who had evidently passed through some terrible experience.

"I say!  Darley," he said gently, "don't go on like that.  I know,
though I don't like you, that you are a brave lad, and it hurts me to
see you so.  There's a sentry up yonder, and our boy, Dummy.  Don't let
them see you cry.  It's like a woman."

Ralph sprang to his feet, with his face distorted, and his eyes flashing
wildly.

"Yes," he cried fiercely, "like a weak, pitiful girl; but I couldn't
keep it back.  If it had not come I should have gone mad, for my head
felt as if it was on fire.  That's past now, and I can talk.  You see
how I am, I have come to you and your father--to you Edens, our
enemies--to ask you by all that is holy, by all that's manly, to help
me."

He stopped, panting, and trying to speak, but the words would not come;
he was choking.  The blood seemed to rush to his temples so that the
veins stood out, and he reeled and would have fallen had not Mark
caught, supported him, and lowered him down upon the rocky path.

Then looking up, he shouted to Dummy.

"Fetch two men here--quick!" he cried.

Dummy disappeared, and Mark knelt down and unfastened the neck of the
lad's doublet, and saw that his head had received a bad cut, for the cap
had fallen off, and his face was ghastly.

"Poor lad!" said Mark softly.  "I know it's wrong, but I can't help
liking him.  Why, I know," he cried excitedly.  "That's it.  I never saw
such an enemy!  He must have known that we were being attacked, and been
coming to help us, and those fiends have served him like this.  That's
it!  He's just the fellow who would do it, for I know he likes me.  I've
seen it over and over again."

He sprang up, feeling ashamed of what he had said, and afraid of being
seen by his people, for he heard steps coming; and directly after, Dummy
came running down, followed by a couple of stout miners, each fully
armed.

"Here, Dummy," cried Mark, "run all the way to Master Rayburn, and tell
him to come here directly."
