Him then Thetis, pouring forth tears, answered: "O Vulcan, has any then,
as many as are the goddesses in Olympus, endured so many bitter griefs
in her mind, as, to me above all, Jove, the son of Saturn, has given
sorrows? Me, from among the other marine inhabitants, has he subjected
to a man, to Peleus, son of AEacus; and I have endured the couch of a man
very much against my will. He, indeed, now lies in his palaces,
afflicted with grievous old age; but now other [woes] are my lot. After
he had granted me to bring forth aud nurture a son, distinguished among
heroes, and who grew up like a plant; him having reared, as a plant in a
fertile spot of the field, I sent forth in the crooked barks to Ilium,
to fight with the Trojans; but him I shall not receive again, having
returned home to the mansion of Peleus. As long, however, as he lives to
me, and beholds the light of the sun, he suffers sorrow, nor am I, going
to him, able to avail him aught. The maid whom the sons of the Greeks
selected as a reward for him, her hath king Agamemnon taken back again
from his hands. Certainly, grieving for her, he has been wasting his
soul; whilst the Trojans were hemming in the Greeks at the ships, nor
suffered them to go beyond the gates: but the elders of the Greeks
supplicated him, and named many distinguished presents. But then he
refused to avert destruction, yet he clad Patroclus in his own armour,
and sent him forth to the battle, and he gave with him much people. All
day they fought round the Scaean gates, and certainly on that day had
overturned Troy, had not Apollo slain, among the foremost warriors, the
gallant son of Menoetius, after having done much mischief, and given
glory to Hector. On this account do I now approach thy knees, if thou
wilt give to my short-lived son a shield and helmet, and beautiful
greaves, joined with clasps, and a corslet: for what were his, his
faithful companion has lost, subdued by the Trojans; and he (Achilles)
lies upon the ground, grieving in his soul."

Her then illustrious Vulcan answered: "Take courage, nor let these
things be cause of uneasiness in thy mind; for would that I could so
surely conceal him from dread-sounding death, when grievous fate
approaches him, as that beautiful armour shall be ready for him, such as
any one of many men shall hereafter admire, whosoever may behold it."

So saying, he left her there, and went towards the bellows, which he
turned towards the fire, and commanded them to work. And full twenty
bellows blew in the furnaces, exciting a varied well-regulated[595]
blast, to be ready for him, at one time busy, at another the reverse, as
Vulcan pleased, and that the work might be complete. He cast into the
fire impenetrable brass, and tin, precious gold and silver; but next he
placed the mighty anvil on the stock, and took in [one] hand his strong
hammer, and with the other grasped the forceps.

   [Footnote 595: _I.e._ one that would either blow, or not,
   according as the progress of the work required. The student will
   do well to compare Virg. Georg. iv. 171, sqq., AEn. viii. 449,
   sqq., and Callimach. in Dian. 59, sqq.]

First of all he formed a shield,[596] both large and solid, decorating
it all over, and around it he threw a shining border, triple and
glittering, and from it [there hung] a silver belt. Of the shield
itself, there were five folds; but on it he formed many curious works,
with cunning skill. On it he wrought the earth, and the heaven, and the
sea, the unwearied sun, and the full moon. On it also [he represented]
all the constellations with which the heaven is crowned, the Pleiades,
the Hyades, and the strength of Orion, and the Bear,[597] which they
also call by the appellation of the Wain, which there revolves, and
watches Orion;[598] but it alone is free[599] from the baths of the
ocean.

   [Footnote 596: See Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 182, sqq.;
   Riccius, Dissert. Hom. t.i.p. 216; Feith, Antiq. Hom. iv. 10, 4.
   In reading this whole description, care must be taken to allow
   for the freedom of poetic description, as well as for the skill
   of the supposed artificer.]

   [Footnote 597: Cf. Virg. Georg. i. 137; AEn. i. 748, iii. 516.]

   [Footnote 598: Orion ascends above the horizon, as though in
   pursuit of the Wain, which in return seems to observe his
   movements. Manilius, i. 500: "Arctos et Orion adversis frontibus
   ibant," which is compared by Scaliger, p. 28.]

   [Footnote 599: Aratus, Dios. 48: [Greek: Arktoi kyaneou
   pephylagmenoi okeanoio]. Virg. Georg. i. 246: "Arctos Oceani
   metuentes aequore tingi." The student of ancient astronomy will do
   well to compare Scaliger on Manil. i, p. 43, 2; Casaub. on
   Strabo, i. init.]

In it likewise he wrought two fair cities[600] of articulate-speaking
men. In the one, indeed, there were marriages and feasts; and they were
conducting the brides from their chambers through the city with
brilliant torches,[601] and many a bridal song[602] was raised. The
youthful dancers were wheeling round, and amongst them pipes and lyres
uttered a sound; and the women standing, each at her portals, admired.
And people were crowded together in an assembly, and there a contest had
arisen; for two men contended for the ransom-money of a slain man: the
one affirmed that he had paid all, appealing to the people; but the
other denied, [averring] that he had received nought: and both wished to
find an end [of the dispute] before a judge.[603] The people were
applauding both,--supporters of either party, and the heralds were
keeping back the people; but the elders sat upon polished stones, in a
sacred[604] circle, and [the pleaders[605]] held in their hands the
staves of the clear-voiced heralds; with these then they arose, and
alternately pleaded their cause. Moreover, in the midst lay two talents
of gold, to give to him who should best establish his claim among them.
But round the other city sat two armies of people glittering in arms;
and one of two plans was agreeable to them,[606] either to waste it, or
to divide all things into two parts,--the wealth, whatever the pleasant
city contained within it. They, however, had not yet complied, but were
secretly arming themselves for an ambuscade. Meanwhile, their beloved
wives and young children kept watch, standing above, and amongst them
the men whom old age possessed. But they (the younger men) advanced; but
Mars was their leader, and Pallas Minerva, both golden, and clad in
golden dresses, beautiful and large, along with their armour, radiant
all round, and indeed like gods; but the people were of humbler
size.[607] But when they now had reached a place where it appeared fit
to lay an ambuscade, by a river, where there was a watering-place for
all sorts of cattle, there then they settled, clad in shining steel.
There, apart from the people, sat two spies, watching when they might
perceive the sheep and crooked-horned oxen. These, however, soon
advanced, and two shepherds accompanied them, amusing themselves with
their pipes, for they had not yet perceived the stratagem. Then they,
discerning them, ran in upon them, and immediately slaughtered on all
sides the herds of oxen, and the beautiful flocks of snow-white sheep;
and slew the shepherds besides. But they, when they heard the great
tumult amongst the oxen, previously sitting in front of the
assembly,[608] mounting their nimble-footed steeds, pursued; and soon
came up with them. Then, having marshalled themselves, they fought a
battle on the banks of the river, and wounded one another with their
brazen spears. Amongst them mingled Discord and Tumult, and destructive
Fate, holding one alive, recently wounded, another unwounded, but a
third, slain, she drew by the feet through the battle; and had the
garment around her shoulders crimsoned with the gore of men.[609] But
they turned about, like living mortals, and fought, and drew away the
slaughtered bodies of each other.

   [Footnote 600: Cf. Hesiod, Scut. Herc. 270, sqq.]

   [Footnote 601: The escort took place at even-tide.]

   [Footnote 602: On the origin of this term, see Serv. on Virg. AEn.
   i. 655.]

   [Footnote 603: Or, "on the testimony of witnesses." See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 604: See Heyne on x. 56. So [Greek: selma semnon], "the
   seat of justice."--AEsch. Ag. 183.]

   [Footnote 605: See Kennedy, who has collected the Homeric
   passages concerning lawsuits.]

   [Footnote 606: _I.e._ the enemy. The alternative was that the
   townsmen should either surrender half their possessions, or
   submit to indiscriminate pillage. See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 607: This custom of representing gods and heroes of
   larger stature than ordinary folk prevails almost universally in
   the Egyptian monuments and sculptures.]

   [Footnote 608: "[Greek: Eira nel ira] est locus concionis, et
   ipse coetus."--Heyns.]

   [Footnote 609: Cf. AEn. vi.: "Tisiphoneque sedens, palla succincta
   cruenta." Stat. Theb. i. 109: "Riget horrida tergo Palla, et
   caerulei redeunt in pectore nodi."]

On it he also placed a soft fallow field,[610] rich glebe, wide,
thrice-ploughed; and in it many ploughmen drove hither and thither,
turning round their teams. But when, returning, they reached the end of
the field, then a man, advancing, gave into their hands a cup of very
sweet wine; but they turned themselves in series,[611] eager to reach
the [other] end of the deep fallow. But it was all black behind, similar
to ploughed land, which indeed was a marvel beyond [all others].

On it likewise he placed a field of deep corn, where reapers were
cutting, having sharp sickles in their hands. Some handfuls fell one
after the other upon the ground along the furrow, and the binders of
sheaves tied others with bands. Three binders followed [the reapers],
whilst behind them boys gathering the handfuls, [and] bearing them in
their arms, continually supplied them; and amongst them the master stood
by the swathe[612] in silence, holding a sceptre, delighted in heart.
But apart, beneath an oak, servants were preparing a banquet, and
sacrificing a huge ox, they ministered; whilst women sprinkled much
white barley[613] [on the meat], as a supper for the reapers.

   [Footnote 610: With the whole of this description of the shield
   of Achilles, the lover of poetry should compare Milton, P.L. xi.
   638, sqq. with the remarks of Bishop Newton.]

   [Footnote 611: But Hesychius by [Greek: ogmous] understood
   [Greek: aulakas], "the furrows." See Schneid. on Nicand. Ther.
   371.]

   [Footnote 612: I here follow the Oxford translator. The term
   [Greek: basileus] is well in accordance with the simple manners
   of the early ages, when kings were farmers on a large scale. Many
   of our Saviour's parables present a similar association of
   agriculture with the regal dignity.]

   [Footnote 613: Probably a religious rite. Cf. i. 449, 458.]

On it likewise he placed a vineyard, heavily laden with grapes,
beautiful, golden; but the clusters throughout were black; and it was
supported throughout by silver poles. Round it he drew an azure trench,
and about it a hedge[614] of tin; but there was only one path to it, by
which the gatherers went when they collected the vintage. Young virgins
and youths, of tender minds, bore the luscious fruit in woven
baskets,[615] in the midst of whom a boy played sweetly on a shrill
harp; and with tender voice sang gracefully to the chord; whilst they,
beating [the ground] in unison with dancing and shouts, followed,
skipping with their feet.

   [Footnote 614: [Greek: Ephyteusen ampelona, kai phragmon auto
   perieteke]. Matt, xxi 33. See Rosemueller on Jer. v. 5.]

   [Footnote 615: "Vimineis calathis," Copa, 16. Propert. iii. 11,
   31.]

In it he also wrought a herd of oxen with horns erect. But the kine were
made of gold and of tin, and rushed out with a lowing from the stall to
the pasture, beside a murmuring stream, along the breeze-waving
reeds.[616] Four golden herdsmen accompanied the oxen, and nine dogs,
swift of foot, followed. But two terrible lions detained the bull,
roaring among the foremost oxen, and he was dragged away, loudly
bellowing, and the dogs and youths followed for a rescue. They indeed,
having torn off the skin of the great ox, lapped up his entrails and
black blood; and the shepherds vainly pressed upon them, urging on their
fleet dogs. These however refused to bite the lions, but, standing very
near, barked, and shunned them.

On it illustrious Vulcan also formed a pasture in a beautiful grove full
of white sheep, and folds, and covered huts and cottages.

Illustrious Vulcan likewise adorned it with a dance, like unto that
which, in wide Gnossus, Daedalus contrived for fair-haired Ariadne. There
danced youths and alluring[617] virgins, holding each other's hands at
the wrist. These wore fine linen robes, but those were dressed in
well-woven tunics, shining[618] as with oil; these also had beautiful
garlands, and those wore golden swords, [hanging] from silver belts.
Sometimes, with skilful feet, they nimbly bounded [round]; as when a
potter, sitting, shall make trial of a wheel fitted to his hands,
whether it will run: and at other times again they ran back to their
places through one another. But a great crowd surrounded the pleasing
dance, amusing themselves; and amongst them two tumblers, beginning
their song, spun round through the midst.

   [Footnote 616: See Knight and Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 617: Literally, "finders of oxen," i.e. so attractive
   as to be certain of receiving a good dowry, paid, after the
   ancient custom, in cattle.]

   [Footnote 618: This must have been some kind of oil-cloth, unless
   we read [Greek: stilbontes] with Kennedy. The meaning is very
   obscure.]

But in it he also formed the vast strength of the river Oceanus, near
the last border of the well-formed shield.

But when he had finished the shield, large and solid, he next formed for
him a corslet, brighter than the splendour of fire. He also made for him
a strong helmet, fitted to his temples, beautiful and variously
ornamented, and on it placed a golden crest; and made greaves for him of
ductile tin.

But when renowned Vulcan had with toil made all the armour, lifting it
up, he laid it before the mother of Achilles; but she, like a hawk,
darted down from snowy Olympus, bearing from Vulcan the shining armour.




                         BOOK THE NINETEENTH.


                              ARGUMENT.

Thetis, having brought Achilles his new armour, and promised to preserve
the body of Patroclus from corruption, he is reconciled to Agamemnon,
and being miraculously invigorated by Minerva, goes forth to battle,
regardless of the prediction of his fate by his horse Xanthus.


Saffron-robed Morn was rising from the streams of ocean, that she might
bear light to immortals and mortals;[619] but she (Thetis) came to the
ships, bearing the gifts from the god. Her dear son she found lying upon
Patroclus, bitterly lamenting, and his numerous companions were
lamenting around him. But near to him stood the divine of goddesses, and
hung upon his hand and spoke, and addressed him:

   [Footnote 619:

         "To resalute the world with sacred light
         Leucothea waked, and with fresh dews embalm'd
         The earth."--Par. Lost. xi. 132.]

"My son, let us suffer him now to lie, grieved although we be, since
first he has been laid low by the counsel of the gods: but do thou
receive these distinguished arms from Vulcan, very beautiful, such as no
man has ever worn upon his shoulders."

Having thus spoken, the goddess placed the armour before Achilles; and
they, all curiously wrought, clashed aloud. Then tremor seized all the
Myrmidons, nor did any one dare to look directly at them, but they fled
in fear. But when Achilles saw them, the more rage entered him; and his
eyes shone terribly beneath his eyelids, like a flame; and he was
delighted, holding in his hands the splendid gifts of the god. But after
he had delighted his mind, beholding these artificial works, he
immediately addressed to his mother winged words:

"Mother mine, the god hath indeed given arms, such as are fit to be
works of immortals, nor that a mortal man could make. Truly now will I
arm myself; but I very much fear lest, in the meantime, the flies,
having entered the gallant son of Menoetius, by his spear-inflicted
wounds, create maggots, and pollute the corse, (for life in it is
destroyed,) and all the parts of the body grow putrid."

But him the silver-footed goddess Thetis then answered:

"My child, let not these things be a care to thy mind. I will endeavour
to drive away from him the fierce swarms, the flies which devour heroes
slain in battle. For although he lie an entire year, his body shall
always be uncorrupted, or even better. But do thou, having summoned the
Grecian heroes to an assembly, having renounced thy wrath towards
Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people, arm thyself quickly for war, and
put on thy might."

Thus, therefore, having spoken, she infused into him the most daring
courage, and then instilled into Patroclus, through the nostrils,
ambrosia and ruby nectar,[620] that his body might be uncorrupted.

   [Footnote 620: Milton, P.L. v. 633: "with angels' food, and
   rubied nectar flows."]

But noble Achilles went along the shore of the sea, shouting fearfully,
and aroused the Grecian heroes; so that even those who used formerly to
remain in the assemblage of the ships, both those who were pilots, and
who held the rudders of the ships, and the pursers [who] were at the
ships, dispensers of food, even these then indeed went to the assembly,
because Achilles appeared, for he had long abstained from the grievous
battle. And two servants of Mars, the warlike son of Tydeus, and noble
Ulysses, went limping, leaning upon a spear; for they still had painful
wounds; and advancing, they sat in the front seats. But last came the
king of men, Agamemnon, having a wound; for him also, in the sharp
battle, Coon, son of Antenor, had wounded with his brazen spear. Then
when all the Greeks were assembled, swift-footed Achilles, rising up
amongst them, said:

"Son of Atreus, this would surely have been somewhat better for both
thee and me,[621] when we two, grieved at heart, raged with
soul-devouring contention for the sake of a girl. Would that Diana had
slain her with an arrow in the ships on that day, when wasting, I took
Lyrnessus; then indeed so many Greeks had not seized the mighty ground
in their teeth under the hands of the enemy, I being continually
enraged. This however was better for Hector and the Trojans, but I think
the Greeks will long remember the contention of you and me. But let us
leave these things as passed, although grieved, subduing from necessity
the soul within our bosoms. And now I terminate my wrath, nor is it at
all fit that I always obstinately be enraged; but come quickly, incite
the long-haired Achaeans to battle, in order that still I may make trial
of the Trojans, going against them; if they wish to pass the night at
the ships; but of them I think that any will very gladly bend the knee,
whoever shall escape out of the destructive fight from my spear."

   [Footnote 621: _I.e._ it would have been better for us to have
   been friends, as we now are, than enemies. The construction is
   interrupted, to suit the agitation of the speaker.]

Thus he spoke; but the well-greaved Greeks rejoiced, the magnanimous son
of Peleus renouncing his wrath. But them, the king of men, Agamemnon,
also addressed out of the same place, from his seat, nor advancing into
the midst:

"O friends! heroes of the Greeks, servants of Mars, it is becoming
indeed that ye should hearken to me, thus rising, nor is it convenient
that thou shouldst interrupt; for [it is] difficult, even for one being
skilled.[622] But in a great uproar of men, how can any one hear or
speak? but he is interrupted, although being a clear-toned orator. I
indeed will direct myself to the son of Peleus; but do ye, the other
Greeks, understand, and carefully learn my meaning. Often already have
the Greeks spoken this saying to me, and have rebuked me; but I am not
to blame,[623] but Jove, and Fate, and Erinnys, roaming amid the shades,
who, during the assembly, cast into my mind a sad injury, on that day,
when I myself took away the reward of Achilles. But what could I do? for
the deity accomplishes all things; pernicious Ate, the venerable
daughter of Jove, who injures all. Her feet are tender, for she does not
approach the ground, but she walks over the heads of men, injuring
mankind, and one at least[624] [she] fetters. For at one time she
injured even Jove, who, they say, is the most powerful of men and gods;
but him Juno, being a female, deceived by her guile on that day when
Alemene was about to bring forth mighty Hercules in well-walled Thebes.
He indeed, boasting, had said among all the gods:

"Hear me,[625] all ye gods and all ye goddesses, whilst I speak those
things which the mind within my bosom urges. This day Ilithyia,
presiding over births, shall bring into the light a certain man, who
shall be ruler over all his neighbours,--[one] of those men of the blood
of my race!"

   [Footnote 622: _I.e._ even a good speaker can do nothing without
   a fair hearing.]

   [Footnote 623: Cf. iii. 164. Seneca, (Ed. 1019) "Fati ista culpa
   est." Cf. Duport. p. 106. AEsch. Choeph. 910: [Greek: E moira
   toton, o teknon, paraitia].]

   [Footnote 624: "A delicate censure of Achilles."--Oxford Transl.]

   [Footnote 625: Cf. Pindar, Ol. iii. 50-105, and Il. v. iii. I
   have followed Heyne's construing, supplying [Greek: tina].]

But him the august Juno addressed, devising guile: "Thou shalt lie, nor
shalt thou insure accomplishment to thy speech. But come, swear a firm
oath to me, O Olympian! that he shall indeed be ruler over all his
neighbours, who shall this day fall between the feet of a woman, among
those men, who are of the blood of thy family."

Thus she spoke, but Jove perceived not her crafty design, but he swore
the mighty oath, and afterwards was much befooled.[626] Then Juno
springing forth, quitted the top of Olympus, and came speedily to
Achaean Argos, where she knew the noble spouse of Sthenelus, the son of
Perseus. And she, indeed, was pregnant of her beloved son; and the
seventh month was at hand; and she brought him into light, being
deficient the number of months; but kept back the delivery of Alemene,
and restrained the Ilithyiae; and herself bearing the message, addressed
Jove, the son of Saturn:

   [Footnote 626: Injured, vexed by his infatuation. Juno was
   thinking of Eurystheus but Jove of Hercules.]

"Father Jove, hurler of the red lightning, I will put a certain matter
in thy mind. A noble man is now born, who shall rule the Argives,
Eurystheus, the son of Perseus, thy offspring; nor is it unbecoming that
he should govern the Argives."

"Thus she spoke; but sharp grief smote him in his deep mind; and
immediately he seized Ate by her head of shining curls, enraged in his
mind, and swore a powerful oath, that Ate, who injures all, should never
again return to Olympus and the starry heaven.

"Thus saying, he cast her from the starry heaven, whirling her round in
his hand, but she quickly reached the works of men. On her account he
always groaned,[627] when he beheld his beloved son suffering unworthy
toil under the labours of[628] Eurystheus.

"So I also, when the great crest-tossing Hector was thus[629] destroying
the Greeks at the sterns of the ships, was not able to forget the wrong
which I had formerly foolishly committed. But since I have suffered
harm, and Jove has taken away my reason, I am willing again to appease
thee, and to give infinite presents. But arise to the battle, and incite
the other people, and I myself [will pledge myself] to furnish all the
presents, as many as noble Ulysses yesterday, going to thee, promised in
thy tents. Yet, if thou wilt, wait a little, although hastening to
battle, and my servants, taking the presents from my ship, shall bring
them, that thou mayest see that I will present [thee] with appeasing
offerings."

But him swift-footed Achilles answering, addressed; "Most glorious son
of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, whether thou wilt furnish gifts, as
is meet, or keep them with thee, [will be seen]; but now let us very
quickly be mindful of the contest; for it is not fitting to waste time
in idle talk,[630] nor to delay; as a mighty work is yet undone. But as
some one may again behold Achilles among the front ranks, destroying the
phalanxes of the Trojans with his brazen spear, so also let some one of
you, keeping this in mind, fight with [his] man."

   [Footnote 627: On the servitude of Hercules, see Grote, vol. i.
   p. 128.]

   [Footnote 628: _I.e._ imposed by.]

   [Footnote 629: "The parallel implied here is of the havoc
   occasioned by Hector, and the laborious tasks imposed by
   Eurystheus. Such appears to be the force of the
   particle."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 630: Hesych.; [Greek: Klotopeyein. paralogizesthai...
   otrangyesthai].]

But him Ulysses, of many wiles, answering, addressed: "Not thus, brave
as thou art, O godlike Achilles, urge on the sons of the Greeks,
fasting, towards Ilium, about to fight with the Trojans; for the
conflict will not be for a short time only, when once the phalanxes of
men shall mingle, and a god breathe might into both. But command the
Greeks to be fed at the ships with food and wine, for this is might and
vigour. For a man, unrefreshed by food, would not be able to fight
against [the enemy] all day to the setting sun; for although he might
desire in his mind to fight, yet his limbs gradually grow languid, and
thirst and hunger come upon him, and his knees fail him as he goes. The
man, on the other hand, who is satiated with wine and food, fights all
day with hostile men, the heart within his breast is daring, nor are his
limbs at all fatigued before that all retire from battle. But come,
dismiss the people, and order a repast to be made ready; and let the
king of men, Agamemnon, bring the gifts into the midst of the assembly,
that all the Greeks may see them with their eyes, and thou mayest be
delighted in thy mind. Let him, moreover, swear an oath to thee,
standing up among the Greeks, that he has never ascended her bed, nor
has been mingled with her, as is the custom, O king, of men and wives;
and to thee thyself, also, let the soul within thy breast be placid.
Then let him next conciliate thee by a rich banquet within his tents,
that thou mayest not have aught wanting of redress. And for the future,
O son of Atreus, thou wilt be more just towards another; for it is by no
means unworthy that a king should appease a man, when he[631] may first
have given offence."

   [Footnote 631: Understand [Greek: basileus].]

But him the king of men, Agamemnon, in return addressed:

"I rejoice, O son of Laertes, having heard thy speech, for with
propriety hast thou gone through and enumerated all things. These things
I am willing to swear, and my mind orders me, in presence of a god, nor
will I perjure myself. But let Achilles remain here, at least for a
little while, though hastening to battle, and do all ye others remain
assembled, until they bring the gifts from my tent, and we strike
faithful leagues. To thyself, however, [O Ulysses], I give this charge,
and order thee, selecting the principal youths of all the Greeks, to
bear from my ship the gifts, as many as we yesterday promised that we
should give to Achilles, and to lead [hither] the women. But let
Talthybius also quickly prepare for me through the wide army of the
Greeks, a boar to sacrifice to Jove and the sun."

Him answering, swift-footed Achilles then addressed:

"Most glorious son of Atreus, king of men, Agamemnon, at some other time
ought they rather to attend to these things, when any cessation of
battle hereafter be, and so much ardour be not in my bosom: but at
present those lie mangled, whom Hector, son of Priam, subdued, when Jove
gave him the glory: but ye urge [them] to food! Now indeed I should
excite the sons of the Greeks to fight, fasting, but with the setting
sun, to prepare a large supper, after we have revenged our disgrace.
Before that neither drink nor food shall pass down my throat, my
companion being slain, who lies in my tent, torn with the sharp brass,
turned towards the vestibule, whilst his comrades mourn around these
things are not a care to my mind, but slaughter and bloodshed, and the
dreadful groans of heroes."

But him much-scheming Ulysses answering, addressed:

"O Achilles, son of Peleus, by far the bravest of the Greeks, thou art
superior indeed to me, and not a little more valiant with the spear, but
I indeed excel thee much in prudence; because I was born before thee,
and know more: wherefore let thy mind be restrained by my words. Soon is
there a satiety of contest to the men, a most abundant crop of whom the
brass pours upon the earth; but the harvest is very small, when Jove,
who is the umpire of the battle of men, inclines his scales. It is by no
means fit that the Greeks should lament the dead with the stomach, for
in great numbers and one upon another are they every day falling; when
therefore could any one respire from toil? But it is necessary to bury
him, whosoever may die, having a patient mind, weeping for a day.[632]
But as many as survive the hateful combat should be mindful of drinking
and of food, in order that we may ever the more ceaselessly contend with
our enemies, clad as to our bodies in impenetrable brass; nor let any of
the troops lie by awaiting another exhortation. For evilly will that
exhortation come upon him, whoever may be left at the ships of the
Greeks; but advancing in a body, let us stir up the keen battle against
the horse-breaking Trojans."

   [Footnote 632: Libanius, Or. ix. in Julian.: [Greek: O polla
   sunkinesas epi cauto dakrya, ouk ep' emati kata to epos,
   olophymoi tychon]. See Duport, p. 111.]

He said, and chose as his companions the sons of glorious Nestor, and
Meges, son of Phyleus, Thoas, and Meriones, Lycomedes, son of Creon, and
Melanippus; and they proceeded to go towards the tent of Agamemnon, son
of Atreus. Immediately after the word was spoken, and the work was
perfected. Seven tripods they bore from the tent, which he had promised
him, and twenty splendid goblets, and twelve steeds; and straightway led
forth seven blameless women, skilled in works, but the eighth was
fair-cheeked Briseis. But Ulysses, placing[633] ten whole talents of
gold, led the way, and with him the other youths of the Greeks bore the
presents, and placed them in the midst of the assembly; but Agamemnon
rose up; and Talthybius, like unto a god in his voice, stood beside the
shepherd of the people, holding a boar in his hands. Then the son of
Atreus, drawing the knife with his hands, which always hung by the
great scabbard of his sword, cutting off the forelock of the boar,
prayed, lifting up his hands to Jove; but all the Greeks sat in silence
in the same spot, listening in a becoming manner to the king. But
praying, he spoke, looking towards the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 633: _I.e._ in the scale, in order to be weighed.]

"Now first let Jove be witness, the most supreme and best of gods, and
Earth, and Sun, and ye Furies, who beneath the earth chastise men,
whoever may swear a falsehood; never have I laid hands upon the maid
Briseis, needing her for the sake of the couch, or any other purpose;
but inviolate has she remained in my tents. But if any of these things
be false, may the gods inflict on me those very many distresses which
they inflict when men sin in swearing."

He said, and cut the throat of the boar with the ruthless brass; which
Talthybius, whirling round, cast into the mighty water of the hoary sea,
as food for fishes. But Achilles, rising, said among the war-loving
Greeks:

"O father Jove, certainly thou givest great calamities to men; for never
could Atrides have so thoroughly aroused the indignation in my bosom,
nor foolish, led away the girl, I being unwilling, but Jove for some
intent wished death should happen to many Greeks. But now go to the
repast, that we may join battle."

Thus then he spoke, and dissolved the assembly in haste.[634]

   [Footnote 634: So Od. viii. 38: [Greek: thoen alegynete daita],
   i.e. [Greek: thoos]. Virg. AEn. iv. 226: "Celeres defer mea dicta
   per auras," which Servius interprets, "celer, vel celeriter."]

They indeed were separated, each to his own ship; but the magnanimous
Myrmidons were occupied about the gifts, and, bearing them, went to the
ship of godlike Achilles. These they laid up in the tents, and placed
the women in seats; but the illustrious attendants drove the horses to
the stud. But afterwards Briseis, like unto golden Venus, when she
beheld Patroclus lacerated with the sharp spear, throwing herself about
him, wept aloud, and with her hands tore her breast and tender neck, and
fair countenance.[635] Then the woman, like unto the goddesses, weeping,
said:

"O Patroclus! most dear to my wretched soul, I left thee indeed alive,
departing from my tent, but now returning, I find thee dead, O chieftain
of the people! How in my case evil ever succeeds evil. The hero indeed
to whom my father and venerable mother had given me,[636] I saw pierced
with the sharp brass before the city; and three beloved brothers whom
the same mother had brought forth to me, all drew on the destructive
day. Nevertheless, thou didst not suffer me to weep, when swift Achilles
slew my husband, and laid waste the city of divine Mynes, but thou
saidst thou wouldst render me the wedded wife[637] of noble Achilles,
lead me in the ships to Phthia, and prepare the nuptial feast amongst
the Myrmidons. Therefore do I insatiably lament thee dead, being ever
gentle."

   [Footnote 635: On these ancient signs of lamentation cf. Virg.
   AEn. iv. 672; xii. 605; Silius, viii. 153; Tusc. Quaest. iii. 26.
   AEsch. Choeph. 22: [Greek: Prepei pareis phoiniois amygmois]. Eur.
   Hel. 1098: [Greek: Paredi t' onycha phonion embalo chroos.].
   Orest. 950: [Greek: Titheisa leykon onycha dia pareidon,
   aimateron atan]. Artemidor. i. [Greek: En tois penthesi labontai
   tas pareias oi anthropoi]. See Comm. on Petron. cxi.]

   [Footnote 636: The consent of both parents was necessary to a
   contract of marriage. See Feith, Antiq. Hom. ii. 13, 3.]

   [Footnote 637: She appears to have been, at present, only
   betrothed.]

Thus she spoke, weeping; and the women lamented for Patroclus, as a
pretext, but [really] each for her own ills. And around him (Achilles)
were collected the elders of the Greeks, entreating him to take
