Strictly it should have been Gammon; but in the hurry of the moment, my
fault (I can only hope) passed unperceived.  At the same time I caught
the eye of the postmaster.  He was long and lean, and brown and bilious;
he had the drooping nose of the humourist, and the quick attention of a
man of parts.  He read my embarrassment in a glance, stepped instantly
forward, sent the post-boy to the rightabout with half a word, and was
back next moment at my side.

'Dinner in a private room, sir?  Very well.  John, No. 4!  What wine
would you care to mention?  Very well, sir.  Will you please to order
fresh horses?  Not, sir?  Very well.'

Each of these expressions was accompanied by something in the nature of a
bow, and all were prefaced by something in the nature of a smile, which I
could very well have done without.  The man's politeness was from the
teeth outwards; behind and within, I was conscious of a perpetual
scrutiny: the scene at his doorstep, the random confidences of the
post-boy, had not been thrown away on this observer; and it was under a
strong fear of coming trouble that I was shown at last into my private
room.  I was in half a mind to have put off the whole business.  But the
truth is, now my name had got abroad, my fear of the mail that was
coming, and the handbills it should contain, had waxed inordinately, and
I felt I could never eat a meal in peace till I had severed my connection
with the claret-coloured chaise.

Accordingly, as soon as I had done with dinner, I sent my compliments to
the landlord and requested he should take a glass of wine with me.  He
came; we exchanged the necessary civilities, and presently I approached
my business.

'By the bye,' said I, 'we had a brush down the road to-day.  I dare say
you may have heard of it?'

He nodded.

'And I was so unlucky as to get a pistol ball in the panel of my chaise,'
I continued, 'which makes it simply useless to me.  Do you know any one
likely to buy?'

'I can well understand that,' said the landlord, 'I was looking at it
just now; it's as good as ruined, is that chaise.  General rule, people
don't like chaises with bullet-holes.'

'Too much _Romance of the Forest_?' I suggested, recalling my little
friend of the morning, and what I was sure had been her favourite
reading--Mrs. Radcliffe's novels.

'Just so,' said he.  'They may be right, they may be wrong; I'm not the
judge.  But I suppose it's natural, after all, for respectable people to
like things respectable about them; not bullet-holes, nor puddles of
blood, nor men with aliases.'

I took a glass of wine and held it up to the light to show that my hand
was steady.

'Yes,' said I, 'I suppose so.'

'You have papers, of course, showing you are the proper owner?' he
inquired.

'There is the bill, stamped and receipted,' said I, tossing it across to
him.

He looked at it.

'This all you have?' he asked.

'It is enough, at least,' said I.  'It shows you where I bought and what
I paid for it.'

'Well, I don't know,' he said.  'You want some paper of identification.'

'To identify the chaise?' I inquired.

'Not at all: to identify _you_,' said he.

'My good sir, remember yourself!' said I.  'The title-deeds of my estate
are in that despatch-box; but you do not seriously suppose that I should
allow you to examine them?'

'Well, you see, this paper proves that some Mr. Ramornie paid seventy
guineas for a chaise,' said the fellow.  'That's all well and good; but
who's to prove to me that you are Mr. Ramornie?'

'Fellow!' cried I.

'O, fellow as much as you please!' said he.  'Fellow, with all my heart!
That changes nothing.  I am fellow, of course--obtrusive fellow, impudent
fellow, if you like--but who are you?  I hear of you with two names; I
hear of you running away with young ladies, and getting cheered for a
Frenchman, which seems odd; and one thing I will go bail for, that you
were in a blue fright when the post-boy began to tell tales at my door.
In short, sir, you may be a very good gentleman; but I don't know enough
about you, and I'll trouble you for your papers, or to go before a
magistrate.  Take your choice; if I'm not fine enough, I hope the
magistrates are.'

'My good man,' I stammered, for though I had found my voice, I could
scarce be said to have recovered my wits, 'this is most unusual, most
rude.  Is it the custom in Westmorland that gentlemen should be
insulted?'

'That depends,' said he.  'When it's suspected that gentlemen are spies
it _is_ the custom; and a good custom, too.  No no,' he broke out,
perceiving me to make a movement.  'Both hands upon the table, my
gentleman!  I want no pistol balls in my chaise panels.'

'Surely, sir, you do me strange injustice!' said I, now the master of
myself.  'You see me sitting here, a monument of tranquillity: pray may I
help myself to wine without umbraging you?'

I took this attitude in sheer despair.  I had no plan, no hope.  The best
I could imagine was to spin the business out some minutes longer, then
capitulate.  At least, I would not capituatle one moment too soon.

'Am I to take that for _no_?' he asked.

'Referring to your former obliging proposal?' said I.  'My good sir, you
are to take it, as you say, for "No."  Certainly I will not show you my
deeds; certainly I will not rise from table and trundle out to see your
magistrates.  I have too much respect for my digestion, and too little
curiosity in justices of the peace.'

He leaned forward, looked me nearly in the face, and reached out one hand
to the bell-rope.  'See here, my fine fellow!' said he.  'Do you see that
bell-rope?  Let me tell you, there's a boy waiting below: one jingle, and
he goes to fetch the constable.'

'Do you tell me so?' said I.  'Well, there's no accounting for tastes!  I
have a prejudice against the society of constables, but if it is your
fancy to have one in for the dessert--'  I shrugged my shoulders lightly.
'Really, you know,' I added, 'this is vastly entertaining.  I assure you,
I am looking on, with all the interest of a man of the world, at the
development of your highly original character.'

He continued to study my face without speech, his hand still on the
button of the bell-rope, his eyes in mine; this was the decisive heat.
My face seemed to myself to dislimn under his gaze, my expression to
change, the smile (with which I had began) to degenerate into the grin of
the man upon the rack.  I was besides harassed with doubts.  An innocent
man, I argued, would have resented the fellow's impudence an hour ago;
and by my continued endurance of the ordeal, I was simply signing and
sealing my confession; in short, I had reached the end of my powers.

'Have you any objection to my putting my hands in my breeches pockets?' I
inquired.  'Excuse me mentioning it, but you showed yourself so extremely
nervous a moment back.'  My voice was not all I could have wished, but it
sufficed.  I could hear it tremble, but the landlord apparently could
not.  He turned away and drew a long breath, and you may be sure I was
quick to follow his example.

'You're a cool hand at least, and that's the sort I like,' said he.  'Be
you what you please, I'll deal square.  I'll take the chaise for a
hundred pound down, and throw the dinner in.'

'I beg your pardon,' I cried, wholly mystified by this form of words.

'You pay me a hundred down,' he repeated, 'and I'll take the chaise.
It's very little more than it cost,' he added, with a grin, 'and you know
you must get it off your hands somehow.'

I do not know when I have been better entertained than by this impudent
proposal.  It was broadly funny, and I suppose the least tempting offer
in the world.  For all that, it came very welcome, for it gave me the
occasion to laugh.  This I did with the most complete abandonment, till
the tears ran down my cheeks; and ever and again, as the fit abated, I
would get another view of the landlord's face, and go off into another
paroxysm.

'You droll creature, you will be the death of me yet!' I cried, drying my
eyes.

My friend was now wholly disconcerted; he knew not where to look, nor yet
what to say; and began for the first time to conceive it possible he was
mistaken.

'You seem rather to enjoy a laugh, sir,' said he.

'O, yes!  I am quite an original,' I replied, and laughed again.

Presently, in a changed voice, he offered me twenty pounds for the
chaise; I ran him up to twenty-five, and closed with the offer: indeed, I
was glad to get anything; and if I haggled, it was not in the desire of
gain, but with the view at any price of securing a safe retreat.  For
although hostilities were suspended, he was yet far from satisfied; and I
could read his continued suspicions in the cloudy eye that still hovered
about my face.  At last they took shape in words.

'This is all very well,' says he: 'you carry it off well; but for all
that, I must do my duty.'

I had my strong effect in reserve; it was to burn my ships with a
vengeance!  I rose.  'Leave the room,' said I.  'This is insuperable.  Is
the man mad?'  And then, as if already half-ashamed of my passion: 'I can
take a joke as well as any one,' I added; 'but this passes measure.  Send
my servant and the bill.'

When he had left me alone, I considered my own valour with amazement.  I
had insulted him; I had sent him away alone; now, if ever, he would take
what was the only sensible resource, and fetch the constable.  But there
was something instinctively treacherous about the man which shrank from
plain courses.  And, with all his cleverness, he missed the occasion of
fame.  Rowley and I were suffered to walk out of his door, with all our
baggage, on foot, with no destination named, except in the vague
statement that we were come 'to view the lakes'; and my friend only
watched our departure with his chin in his hand, still moodily
irresolute.

I think this one of my great successes.  I was exposed, unmasked,
summoned to do a perfectly natural act, which must prove my doom and
which I had not the slightest pretext for refusing.  I kept my head,
stuck to my guns, and, against all likelihood, here I was once more at
liberty and in the king's highway.  This was a strong lesson never to
despair; and, at the same time, how many hints to be cautious! and what a
perplexed and dubious business the whole question of my escape now
appeared!  That I should have risked perishing upon a trumpery question
of a _pourboire_, depicted in lively colours the perils that perpetually
surrounded us.  Though, to be sure, the initial mistake had been
committed before that; and if I had not suffered myself to be drawn a
little deep in confidences to the innocent Dolly, there need have been no
tumble at the inn of Kirkby-Lonsdale.  I took the lesson to heart, and
promised myself in the future to be more reserved.  It was none of my
business to attend to broken chaises or shipwrecked travellers.  I had my
hands full of my own affairs; and my best defence would be a little more
natural selfishness and a trifle less imbecile good-nature.




CHAPTER XXV--I MEET A CHEERFUL EXTRAVAGANT


I pass over the next fifty or sixty leagues of our journey without
comment.  The reader must be growing weary of scenes of travel; and for
my own part I have no cause to recall these particular miles with any
pleasure.  We were mainly occupied with attempts to obliterate our trail,
which (as the result showed) were far from successful; for, on my cousin
following, he was able to run me home with the least possible loss of
time, following the claret-coloured chaise to Kirkby-Lonsdale, where I
think the landlord must have wept to learn what he had missed, and
tracing us thereafter to the doors of the coach-office in Edinburgh
without a single check.  Fortune did not favour me, and why should I
recapitulate the details of futile precautions which deceived nobody, and
wearisome arts which proved to be artless?

The day was drawing to an end when Mr. Rowley and I bowled into Edinburgh
to the stirring sound of the guard's bugle and the clattering team.  I
was here upon my field of battle; on the scene of my former captivity,
escape and exploits; and in the same city with my love.  My heart
expanded; I have rarely felt more of a hero.  All down the Bridges I sat
by the driver with my arms folded and my face set, unflinchingly meeting
every eye, and prepared every moment for a cry of recognition.  Hundreds
of the population were in the habit of visiting the Castle, where it was
my practice (before the days of Flora) to make myself conspicuous among
the prisoners; and I think it an extraordinary thing that I should have
encountered so few to recognise me.  But doubtless a clean chin is a
disguise in itself; and the change is great from a suit of sulphur-yellow
to fine linen, a well-fitting mouse-coloured great-coat furred in black,
a pair of tight trousers of fashionable cut, and a hat of inimitable
curl.  After all, it was more likely that I should have recognised our
visitors, than that they should have identified the modish gentleman with
the miserable prisoner in the Castle.

I was glad to set foot on the flagstones, and to escape from the crowd
that had assembled to receive the mail.  Here we were, with but little
daylight before us, and that on Saturday afternoon, the eve of the famous
Scottish Sabbath, adrift in the New Town of Edinburgh, and overladen with
baggage.  We carried it ourselves.  I would not take a cab, nor so much
as hire a porter, who might afterwards serve as a link between my
lodgings and the mail, and connect me again with the claret-coloured
chaise and Aylesbury.  For I was resolved to break the chain of evidence
for good, and to begin life afresh (so far as regards caution) with a new
character.  The first step was to find lodgings, and to find them
quickly.  This was the more needful as Mr. Rowley and I, in our smart
clothes and with our cumbrous burthen, made a noticeable appearance in
the streets at that time of the day and in that quarter of the town,
which was largely given up to fine folk, bucks and dandies and young
ladies, or respectable professional men on their way home to dinner.

On the north side of St. James' Square I was so happy as to spy a bill in
a third-floor window.  I was equally indifferent to cost and convenience
in my choice of a lodging--'any port in a storm' was the principle on
which I was prepared to act; and Rowley and I made at once for the common
entrance and sealed the stair.

We were admitted by a very sour-looking female in bombazine.  I gathered
she had all her life been depressed by a series of bereavements, the last
of which might very well have befallen her the day before; and I
instinctively lowered my voice when I addressed her.  She admitted she
had rooms to let--even showed them to us--a sitting-room and bedroom in a
_suite_, commanding a fine prospect to the Firth and Fifeshire, and in
themselves well proportioned and comfortably furnished, with pictures on
the wall, shells on the mantelpiece, and several books upon the table
which I found afterwards to be all of a devotional character, and all
presentation copies, 'to my Christian friend,' or 'to my devout
acquaintance in the Lord, Bethiah McRankine.'  Beyond this my 'Christian
friend' could not be made to advance: no, not even to do that which
seemed the most natural and pleasing thing in the world--I mean to name
her price--but stood before us shaking her head, and at times mourning
like the dove, the picture of depression and defence.  She had a voice
the most querulous I have ever heard, and with this she produced a whole
regiment of difficulties and criticisms.

She could not promise an attendance.

'Well, madam,' said I, 'and what is my servant for?'

'Him?' she asked.  'Be gude to us!  Is _he_ your servant?'

'I am sorry, ma'am, he meets with your disapproval.'

'Na, I never said that.  But he's young.  He'll be a great breaker, I'm
thinkin'.  Ay! he'll be a great responsibeelity to ye, like.  Does he
attend to his releegion?'

'Yes, m'm,' returned Rowley, with admirable promptitude, and, immediately
closing his eyes, as if from habit, repeated the following distich with
more celerity than fervour:--

    'Matthew, Mark, Luke and John
    Bless the bed that I lie on!'

'Nhm!' said the lady, and maintained an awful silence.

'Well, ma'am,' said I, 'it seems we are never to hear the beginning of
your terms, let alone the end of them.  Come--a good movement! and let us
be either off or on.'

She opened her lips slowly.  'Ony raferences?' she inquired, in a voice
like a bell.

I opened my pocket-book and showed her a handful of bank bills.  'I
think, madam, that these are unexceptionable,' said I.

'Ye'll be wantin' breakfast late?' was her reply.

'Madam, we want breakfast at whatever hour it suits you to give it, from
four in the morning till four in the afternoon!' I cried.  'Only tell us
your figure, if your mouth be large enough to let it out!'

'I couldnae give ye supper the nicht,' came the echo.

'We shall go out to supper, you incorrigible female!' I vowed, between
laughter and tears.  'Here--this is going to end!  I want you for a
landlady--let me tell you that!--and I am going to have my way.  You
won't tell me what you charge?  Very well; I will do without!  I can
trust you!  You don't seem to know when you have a good lodger; but I
know perfectly when I have an honest landlady!  Rowley, unstrap the
valises!'

Will it be credited?  The monomaniac fell to rating me for my
indiscretion!  But the battle was over; these were her last guns, and
more in the nature of a salute than of renewed hostilities.  And
presently she condescended on very moderate terms, and Rowley and I were
able to escape in quest of supper.  Much time had, however, been lost;
the sun was long down, the lamps glimmered along the streets, and the
voice of a watchman already resounded in the neighbouring Leith Road.  On
our first arrival I had observed a place of entertainment not far off, in
a street behind the Register House.  Thither we found our way, and sat
down to a late dinner alone.  But we had scarce given our orders before
the door opened, and a tall young fellow entered with something of a
lurch, looked about him, and approached the same table.

'Give you good evening, most grave and reverend seniors!' said he.  'Will
