She had three others with her, slumbering around, and this was the
youngest wrapt in her only shawl.

"Madam," replied the person whom she addressed, in tolerable English,
but with a marked accent, "I have bivouacked in many lands, but never
with so young a comrade: I beg you a thousand pardons."

"Sir, you are very polite. These warm nights are a great blessing, but I
am sure I know not what we shall do in the fall of the leaf."

"Take no thought of the morrow," said the foreigner, who was a Pole; had
served as a boy beneath the suns of the Peninsula under Soult and fought
against Diebitsch on the banks of the icy Vistula. "It brings many
changes." And arranging the cloak which he had taken that day out of
pawn around him, he delivered himself up to sleep with that facility
which is not uncommon among soldiers.

Here broke out a brawl: two girls began fighting and blaspheming; a man
immediately came up, chastised and separated them. "I am the Lord Mayor
of the night," he said, "and I will have no row here. 'Tis the like of
you that makes the beaks threaten to expel us from our lodgings." His
authority seemed generally recognized, the girls were quiet, but they
had disturbed a sleeping man, who roused himself, looked around him and
said with a scared look, "Where am I? What's all this?"

"Oh! it's nothin'," said the elder of the two lads we first noticed,
"only a couple of unfortinate gals who've prigged a watch from a
cove what was lushy and fell asleep under the trees between this and
Kinsington."

"I wish they had not waked me," said the man, "I walked as far as from
Stokenchurch, and that's a matter of forty miles, this morning to see
if I could get some work, and went to bed here without any supper. I'm
blessed if I worn't dreaming of a roast leg of pork."

"It has not been a lucky day for me," rejoined the lad, "I could not
find a single gentleman's horse to hold, so help me, except one what was
at the House of Commons, and he kept me there two mortal hours and said
when he came out, that he would remember me next time. I ain't tasted no
wittals to-day except some cat's-meat and a cold potatoe what was given
me by a cabman; but I have got a quid here, and if you are very low I'll
give you half."

In the meantime Lord Valentine and the Princess Stephanie of Eurasberg
with some companions worthy of such a pair, were dancing a new Mazurka
before the admiring assembly at Deloraine House. The ball was in the
statue gallery illumined on this night in the Russian fashion, which
while it diffused a brilliant light throughout the beautiful chamber,
was peculiarly adapted to develope the contour of the marble forms of
grace and loveliness that were ranged around.

"Where is Arabella?" enquired Lord Marney of his mother, "I want to
present young Huntingford to her. He can be of great use to me, but he
bores me so, I cannot talk to him. I want to present him to Arabella."

"Arabella is in the blue drawing-room. I saw her just now with Mr Jermyn
and Charles. Count Soudriaffsky is teaching them some Russian tricks."

"What are Russian tricks to me; she must talk to young Huntingford;
everything depends on his working with me against the Cut-and-Come-again
branch-line; they have refused me my compensation, and I am not going to
have my estate cut up into ribbons without compensation."

"My dear Lady Deloraine," said Lady de Mowbray. "How beautiful your
gallery looks to-night! Certainly there is nothing in London that lights
up so well."

"Its greatest ornaments are its guests. I am charmed to see Lady Joan
looking so well."

"You think so?"

"Indeed."

"I wish--" and here Lady de Mowbray gave a smiling sigh. "What do you
think of Mr Mountchesney?"

"He is universally admired."

"So every one says, and yet--"

"Well what do you think of the Dashville, Fitz?" said Mr Berners to Lord
Fitzheron, "I saw you dancing with her."

"I can't bear her: she sets up to be natural and is only rude; mistakes
insolence for innocence; says everything which comes first to her lips
and thinks she is gay when she is only giddy."

"'Tis brilliant," said Lady Joan to Mr Mountchesney.

"When you are here," he murmured.

"And yet a ball in a gallery of art is not in my opinion in good taste.
The associations which are suggested by sculpture are not festive.
Repose is the characteristic of sculpture. Do not you think so?"

"Decidedly," said Mr Mountchesney. "We danced in the gallery at Matfield
this Christmas, and I thought all the time that a gallery is not the
place for a ball; it is too long and too narrow."

Lady Joan looked at him, and her lip rather curled.

"I wonder if Valentine has sold that bay cob of his," said Lord Milford
to Lord Eugene de Vere.

"I wonder," said Lord Eugene.

"I wish you would ask him, Eugene," said Lord Milford, "you understand,
I don't want him to know I want it."

"'Tis such a bore to ask questions," said Lord Eugene.

"Shall we carry Chichester?" asked Lady Firebrace of Lady St Julians.

"Oh! do not speak to me ever again of the House of Commons," she replied
in a tone of affected despair. "What use is winning our way by units?
It may take years. Lord Protocol says that 'one is enough.' That Jamaica
affair has really ended by greatly strengthening them."

"I do not despair," said Lady Firebrace. "The unequivocal adhesion of
the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine is a great thing. It gives us the northern
division at a dissolution."

"That is to say in five years, my dear Lady Firebrace. The country will
be ruined before that."

"We shall see. Is it a settled thing between Lady Joan and Mr
Mountchesney?"

"Not the slightest foundation. Lady Joan is a most sensible girl, as
well as a most charming person and my dear friend. She is not in a
hurry to marry, and quite right. If indeed Frederick were a little more
steady--but nothing shall ever induce me to consent to his marrying her,
unless I thought he was worthy of her."

"You are such a good mother," exclaimed Lady Firebrace, "and such a good
friend! I am glad to hear it is not true about Mr Mountchesney."

"If you could only help me, my dear Lady Firebrace, to put an end to
that affair between Frederick and Lady Wallington. It is so silly, and
getting talked about; and in his heart too he really loves Lady Joan;
only he is scarcely aware of it himself."

"We must manage it," said Lady Firebrace, with a look of encouraging
mystery.

"Do, my dear creature; speak to him; he is very much guided by your
opinion. Tell him everybody is laughing at him, and any other little
thing that occurs to you."

"I will come directly," said Lady Marney to her husband, "only let me
see this."

"Well, I will bring Huntingford here. Mind you speak to him a great
deal; take his arm, and go down to supper with him if you can. He is a
very nice sensible young fellow, and you will like him very much I am
sure; a little shy at first, but he only wants bringing out."

A dexterous description of one of the most unlicked and unlickable cubs
that ever entered society with forty thousand a year; courted by all,
and with just that degree of cunning that made him suspicious of every
attention.

"This dreadful Lord Huntingford!" said Lady Marney.

"Jermyn and I will intefere," said Egremont, "and help you."

"No, no," said Lady Marney shaking her head, "I must do it."

At this moment, a groom of the chambers advanced and drew Egremont
aside, saying in a low tone, "Your servant, Mr Egremont, is here and
wishes to see you instantly."

"My servant! Instantly! What the deuce can be the matter? I hope the
Albany is not on fire," and he quitted the room.

In the outer hall, amid a crowd of footmen, Egremont recognized his
valet who immediately came forward.

"A porter has brought this letter, sir, and I thought it best to come on
with it at once."

The letter directed to Egremont, bore also on its superscription these
words. "This letter must be instantly carried by the bearer to Mr
Egremont wherever he may be."

Egremont with some change of countenance drew aside, and opening the
letter read it by a lamp at hand. It must have been very brief; but the
face of him to whom it was addressed became, as he perused its lines,
greatly agitated. When he had finished reading it, he seemed for a
moment lost in profound thought; then looking up he dismissed his
servant without instructions, and hastening back to the assembly, he
enquired of the groom of the chambers whether Lord John Russell, whom he
had observed in the course of the evening, was still present; and he was
answered in the affirmative.

About a quarter of an hour after this incident, Lady Firebrace said to
Lady St Julians in a tone of mysterious alarm. "Do you see that?"

"No! what?"

"Do not look as if you observed them: Lord John and Mr Egremont, in
the furthest window, they have been there these ten minutes in the most
earnest conversation. I am afraid we have lost him."

"I have always been expecting it," said Lady St Julians. "He breakfasts
with that Mr Trenchard and does all those sorts of things. Men who
breakfast out are generally liberals. Have not you observed that? I
wonder why?"

"It shows a restless revolutionary mind," said Lady Firebrace, "that can
settle to nothing; but must be running after gossip the moment they are
awake."

"Yes," said Lady St Julians. "I think those men who breakfast out or who
give breakfasts are generally dangerous characters; at least, I would
not trust them. The whigs are very fond of that sort of thing. If Mr
Egremont joins them, I really do not see what shadow of a claim Lady
Deloraine can urge to have anything."

"She only wants one thing," said Lady Firebrace, "and we know she cannot
have that."

"Why?"

"Because Lady St Julians will have it."

"You are too kind," with many smiles.

"No, I assure you Lord Masque told me that her Majesty--" and here Lady
Firehrace whispered.

"Well," said Lady St Julians evidently much gratified, "I do not think I
am one who am likely to forget my friends."

"That I am sure you are not!" said Lady Firebrace.




Book 5 Chapter 8



Behind the printing office in the alley at the door of which we left
Sybil, was a yard which led to some premises that had once been used
as a work-shop, but were now generally unoccupied. In a rather spacious
chamber over which was a loft, five men, one of whom was Gerard, were
busily engaged. There was no furniture in the room except a few chairs
and a deal table, on which was a solitary light and a variety of papers.

"Depend upon it," said Gerard, "we must stick to the National Holiday:
we can do nothing effectively, unless the movement is simultaneous. They
have not troops to cope with a simultaneous movement, and the Holiday is
the only machinery to secure unity of action. No work for six weeks, and
the rights of Labour will be acknowledged!"

"We shall never be able to make the people unanimous in a cessation
of labour," said a pale young man, very thin but with a countenance of
remarkable energy. "The selfish instincts will come into play and will
baulk our political object, while a great increase of physical suffering
must be inevitable."

"It might be done," said a middle-aged, thickset man, in a thoughtful
tone. "If the Unions were really to put their shoulder to the wheel, it
might be done."

"And if it is not done," said Gerard, "what do you propose? The people
ask you to guide them. Shrink at such a conjuncture, and our influence
over them is forfeited and justly forfeited."

"I am for partial but extensive insurrections," said the young man.
"Sufficient in extent and number to demand all the troops and yet to
distract the military movements. We can count on Birmingham again, if we
act at once before their new Police Act is in force; Manchester is
ripe; and several of the cotton towns; but above all I have letters that
assure me that at this moment we can do anything in Wales."

"Glamorganshire is right to a man," said Wilkins a Baptist teacher. "And
trade is so bad that the Holiday at all events must take place there,
for the masters themselves are extinguishing their furnaces.

"All the north is seething," said Gerard.

"We must contrive to agitate the metropolis," said Maclast, a shrewd
carroty-haired paper-stainer. "We must have weekly meetings at
Kennington and demonstrations at White Conduit House: we cannot do more
here I fear than talk, but a few thousand men on Kennington Common every
Saturday and some spicy resolutions will keep the Guards in London."

"Ay, ay," said Gerard; "I wish the woollen and cotton trades were as bad
to do as the iron, and we should need no holiday as you say, Wilkins.
However it will come. In the meantime the Poor-law pinches and
terrifies, and will make even the most spiritless turn."

"The accounts to-day from the north are very encouraging though," said
the young man. "Stevens is producing a great effect, and this plan of
our people going in procession and taking possession of the churches
very much affects the imagination of the multitude."

"Ah!" said Gerard, "if we could only have the Church on our side, as
in the good old days, we would soon put an end to the demon tyranny of
Capital."

"And now," said the pale young man, taking up a manuscript paper, "to
our immediate business. Here is the draft of the projected proclamation
of the Convention on the Birmingham outbreak. It enjoins peace and
order, and counsels the people to arm themselves in order to secure
both. You understand: that they may resist if the troops and the police
endeavour to produce disturbance."

"Ay, ay," said Gerard. "Let it be stout. We will settle this at once,
and so get it out to-morrow. Then for action."

"But we must circulate this pamphlet of the Polish Count on the manner
of encountering cavalry with pikes," said Maclast.

"'Tis printed," said the stout thickset man; "we have set it up on a
broadside. We have sent ten thousand to the north and five thousand
to John Frost. We shall have another delivery tomorrow. It takes very
generally."

The pale young man read the draft of the proclamation; it was canvassed
and criticised sentence by sentence; altered, approved: finally put to
the vote, and unanimously carried. On the morrow it was to be posted in
every thoroughfare of the metropolis, and circulated in every great city
of the provinces and populous district of labour.

"And now," said Gerard, "I shall to-morrow to the north, where I am
wanted. But before I go I propose, as suggested yesterday, that we five
together with Langley, whom I counted on seeing here to-night, now
form ourselves into a committee for arming the people. Three of us are
permanent in London; Wilkins and myself will aid you in the provinces.
Nothing can be decided on this head till we see Langley, who will make
a communication from Birmingham that cannot be trusted to writing. The
seven o'clock train must have long since arrived. He is now a good hour
behind his time."

"I hear foot-steps," said Maclast.

"He comes," said Gerard.

The door of the chamber opened and a woman entered. Pale, agitated,
exhausted, she advanced to them in the glimmering light.

"What is this?" said several of the council.

"Sybil!" exclaimed the astonished Gerard, and he rose from his seat.

She caught the arm of her father, and leant on him for a moment in
silence. Then looking up with an expression that seemed to indicate she
was rallying her last energies, she said, in a voice low yet so distinct
that it reached the ear of all present, "There is not an instant to
lose: fly!"

The men rose hastily from their seats; they approached the messenger
of danger; Gerard waved them off, for he perceived his daughter was
sinking. Gently he placed her in his chair; she was sensible, for she
grasped his arm, and she murmured--still she murmured--"fly!"

"'Tis very strange," said Maclast.

"I feel queer!" said the thickset man.

"Methinks she looks like a heavenly messenger," said Wilkins. "I had
no idea that earth had anything so fair," said the youthful scribe of
proclamations.

"Hush friends!" said Gerard: and then he bent over Sybil and said in a
low soothing voice, "Tell me, my child, what is it?"

She looked up to her father; a glance as it were of devotion and
despair: her lips moved, but they refused their office and expressed no
words. There was a deep silence in the room.

"She is gone," said her father.

"Water," said the young man, and he hurried away to obtain some.

"I feel queer," said his thickset colleague to Maclast.

"I will answer for Langley as for myself." said Maclast; "and there is
not another human being aware of our purpose."

"Except Morley."

"Yes: except Morley. But I should as soon doubt Gerard as Stephen
Morley."

"Certainly."

"I cannot conceive how she traced me," said Gerard. "I have never even
breathed to her of our meeting. Would we had some water! Ah! here it
comes.

"I arrest you in the Queen's name," said a serjeant of police.
"Resistance is vain." Maclast blew out the light, and then ran up
into the loft, followed by the thickset man, who fell down the stairs:
Wilkins got up the chimney. The sergeant took a lanthorn from his
pocket, and threw a powerful light on the chamber, while his followers
entered, seized and secured all the papers, and commenced their search.

The light fell upon a group that did not move: the father holding the
hand of his insensible child, while he extended his other arm as if to
preserve her from the profanation of the touch of the invaders.

"You are Walter Gerard, I presume," said the serjeant, "six foot two
without shoes."

"Whoever I may he," he replied, "I presume you will produce your
warrant, friend, before you touch me."

"'Tis here. We want five of you, named herein, and all others that may
happen to be found in your company."

"I shall obey the warrant," said Gerard after he had examined it; "but
this maiden, my daughter, knows nothing of this meeting or its purpose.
She has but just arrived, and how she traced me I know not. You will let
me recover her, and then permit her to depart."

"Can't let no one out of my sight found in this room."

"But she is innocent, even if we were guilty; she could be nothing else
but innocent, for she knows nothing of this meeting and its business,
both of which I am prepared at the right time and place to vindicate.
She entered this room a moment only before yourself, entered and
swooned."

"Can't help that; must take her; she can tell the magistrate anything
she likes, and he must decide."

"Why you are not afraid of a young girl?"

"I am afraid of nothing; but I must do my duty. Come we have no time for
talk. I must take you both."

"By G--d you shall not take her;" and letting go her hand, Gerard
advanced before her and assumed a position of defence. "You know,
I find, my height: my strength does not shame my stature! Look to
yourself. Advance and touch this maiden, and I will fell you and your
minions like oxen at their pasture."

The inspector took a pistol from his pocket and pointed it at Gerard.
"You see," he said, "resistance is quite vain."

"For slaves and cravens, but not for us. I say you shall not touch her
till I am dead at her feet. Now, do your worst."

At this moment two policemen who had been searching the loft descended
with Maclast who had vainly attempted to effect his escape over a
neighbouring roof; the thickset man was already secured; and Wilkins had
been pulled down the chimney and made his appearance in as grimy a state
as such a shelter would naturally have occasioned. The young man too,
their first prisoner who had been captured before they had entered the
room, was also brought in; there was now abundance of light; the four
prisoners were ranged and well guarded at the end of the apartment;
Gerard standing before Sybil still maintained his position of defence,
and the serjeant was, a few yards away, in his front with his pistol in
his hand.

"Well you are a queer chap," said the serjeant; "but I must do my duty.
I shall give orders to my men to seize you, and if you resist them, I
shall shoot you through the head."

"Stop!" called out one of the prisoners, the young man who drew
proclamations, "she moves. Do with us as you think fit, but you cannot
be so harsh as to seize one that is senseless, and a woman!"

"I must do my duty," said the serjeant rather perplexed at the
situation. "Well, if you like, take steps to restore her, and when she
has come to herself, she shall be moved in a hackney coach alone with
her father."

The means at hand to recover Sybil were rude, but they assisted a
reviving nature. She breathed, she sighed, slowly opened her beautiful
dark eyes, and looked around. Her father held her death-cold hand; she
returned his pressure: her lips moved, and still she murmured "fly!"

Gerard looked at the serjeant. "I am ready," he said, "and I will carry
her." The officer nodded assent. Guarded by two policemen the tall
delegate of Mowbray bore his precious burthen out of the chamber through
the yard, the printing-offices, up the alley, till a hackney coach
received them in Hunt Street, round which a mob had already collected,
though kept at a discreet distance by the police. One officer entered
the coach with them: another mounted the box. Two other coaches carried
the rest of the prisoners and their guards, and within halt an hour from
the arrival of Sybil at the scene of the secret meeting, she was on her
way to Bow Street to be examined as a prisoner of state.

Sybil rallied quickly during their progress to the police office.
Satisfied to find herself with her father she would have enquired as to
all that had happened, but Gerard at first discouraged her; at length he
thought it wisest gradually to convey to her that they were prisoners,
but he treated the matter lightly, did not doubt that she would
immediately be discharged, and added that though he might be detained
for a day or so, his offence was at all events bailable and he had
friends on whom he could rely. When Sybil clearly comprehended that
she was a prisoner, and that her public examination was impending, she
became silent, and leaning back in the coach, covered her face with her
hands.

The prisoners arrived at Bow Street; they were hurried into a back
office, where they remained some time unnoticed, several police-men
remaining in the room. At length about twenty minutes having elapsed, a
man dressed in black and of a severe aspect entered the room accompanied
by an inspector of police. He first enquired whether these were the
prisoners, what were their names and descriptions, which each had to
give and which were written down, where they were arrested, why they
were arrested: then scrutinising them sharply he said the magistrate was
at the Home Office, and he doubted whether they could be examined until
the morrow. Upon this Gerard commenced stating the circumstances under
which Sybil had unfortunately been arrested, but the gentleman in black
with a severe aspect, immediately told him to hold his tongue, and when
Gerard persisted, declared that if Gerard did not immediately cease
he should be separated from the other prisoners and be ordered into
solitary confinement.

Another half hour of painful suspense. The prisoners were not permitted
to hold any conversation; Sybil sat half reclining on a form with her
back against the wall, and her face covered, silent and motionless. At
the end of half an hour the inspector of police who had visited them
with the gentleman in black entered and announced that the prisoners
could not be brought up for examination that evening, and they must make
themselves as comfortable as they could for the night. Gerard made a
last appeal to the inspector that Sybil might be allowed a separate
chamber and in this he was unexpectedly successful.

The inspector was a kind-hearted man: he lived at the office and his
wife was the housekeeper. He had already given her an account,
an interesting account, of his female prisoner. The good woman's
imagination was touched as well as her heart; she had herself suggested
that they ought to soften the rigour of the fair prisoner's lot; and the
inspector therefore almost anticipated the request of Gerard. He begged
Sybil to accompany him to his better half, and at once promised all the
comforts and convenience which they could command. As, attended by the
inspector, she took her way to the apartments of his family, they passed
through a room in which there were writing materials, and Sybil speaking
for the first time and in a faint voice enquired of the inspector
whether it were permitted to apprise a friend of her situation. She was
answered in the affirmative, on condition that the note was previously
perused by him.

"I will write it at once," she said, and taking up a pen she inscribed
these words,

"I followed your counsel; I entreated him to quit London this night. He
pledged himself to do so on the morrow.

"I learnt he was attending a secret meeting; that there was urgent
peril. I tracked him through scenes of terror. Alas! I arrived only in
time to be myself seized as a conspirator, and I have been arrested and
carried a prisoner to Bow Street, where I write this.

"I ask you not to interfere for him: that would be vain; but if I were
free, I might at least secure him justice. But I am not free: I am to be
brought up for public examination to-morrow, if I survive this night.

"You are powerful; you know all; you know what I say is truth. None else
will credit it. Save me!"

"And now," said Sybil to the inspector in a tone of mournful desolation
and of mild sweetness, "all depends on your faith to me," and she
extended him the letter, which he read.

"Whoever he may be and wherever he may be," said the inspector with
emotion, for the spirit of Sybil had already controlled his nature,
"provided the person to whom this letter is addressed is within possible
distance, fear not it shall reach him."

"I will seal and address it then," said Sybil, and she addressed the
letter to

"THE HON. CHARLES EGREMONT M.P."

adding that superscription the sight of which had so agitated Egremont
at Deloraine House.




Book 5 Chapter 9



Night waned: and Sybil was at length slumbering. The cold that precedes
the dawn had stolen over her senses, and calmed the excitement of her
nerves. She was lying on the ground, covered with a cloak of which
her kind hostess had prevailed on her to avail herself, and was partly
resting on a chair, at which she had been praying when exhausted nature
gave way and she slept. Her bonnet had fallen off, and her rich hair,
which had broken loose, covered her shoulder like a mantle. Her slumber
was brief and disturbed, but it had in a great degree soothed the
irritated brain. She woke however in terror from a dream in which she
had been dragged through a mob and carried before a tribunal. The coarse
jeers, the brutal threats, still echoed in her ear; and when she looked
around, she could not for some moments recall or recognise the scene.
In one corner of the room, which was sufficiently spacious, was a bed
occupied by the still sleeping wife of the inspector; there was a great
deal of heavy furniture of dark mahogany; a bureau, several chests of
drawers: over the mantel was a piece of faded embroidery framed, that
had been executed by the wife of the inspector when she was at school,
and opposite to it, on the other side, were portraits of Dick Curtis
and Dutch Sam, who had been the tutors of her husband, and now lived as
heroes in his memory.

Slowly came over Sybil the consciousness of the dreadful eve that was
past. She remained for some time on her knees in silent prayer: then
stepping lightly, she approached the window. It was barred. The room
which she inhabited was a high story of the house; it looked down upon
