
"Lady Swallow," said Sihamba gravely, "it is an army of the Zulus sent
by Dingaan to destroy us, and with them marches Bull-Head." And she told
her of the trick of the cattle and of what the messengers had seen.

Suzanne heard, and her face grew white as the goatskin cloak she wore.

"Then at last the long story is at an end," she faltered, for she knew
the terrible prowess of the Zulus, and how none could stand before their
onslaught.

"Yes, of that impi there is an end," answered Sihamba proudly, "if these
children of mine will but take heart and fight as their fathers fought.
Fear not, Lady Swallow, nothing that has not wings can storm the
mountain of Umpondwana."

But for all that she could say Suzanne still felt much afraid, which was
not strange, for she knew that the heart was out of these soldiers
of Sihamba, and knew, moreover, that a Zulu army did not dare to be
defeated, for which reason it must either take the mountain or fight
till it was destroyed.

Now all was confusion; the horns blew and women wailed, while the
captains of the Umpondwana issued their commands, and the men piled up
stones upon the brink of the precipice to roll down upon the foe, and
drove the herds of cattle into the great kraal upon the tableland.

Marching quickly, the impi drew near and the defenders could see that
it numbered about four thousand spears and was composed of two separate
regiments. At a distance of a mile it halted and throwing out horns or
wings surrounded the mountain, up the slopes of which it advanced in a
thin circle, much as beaters do who are driving game to a certain point.
As the circle drew nearer to the cliffs, it thickened, having less
ground to cover, though still there was a gap here and there.

Presently those who were watching saw a man dart through one of these
gaps and run up hill at great speed, followed by Zulu soldiers, who
tried to kill him. But he was the swifter of foot, moreover he knew the
path, so that before they could come up with him he reached the great
stone walls which were built about the source of the river, and was
dragged over them by the defenders.

A while later this man appeared upon the top of the mountain and proved
to be none other than Zinti, who had returned from his errand, and,
having news to tell, risked his life to pass through the impi before
the stronghold was altogether surrounded. Sihamba received him at once,
Suzanne standing at her side, and bade him be brief for she had little
time to listen to long stories.

"I will be brief," Zinti answered. "Lady, as you bade me I crossed the
mountains by the road of which you told me. It is a good road for men on
foot or horseback, but waggons could not travel it. Having reached
the plain on the further side I followed the bank of the river, till
suddenly I came in sight of thirty waggons drawn up in a laager upon a
knoll of ground, and among the waggons I saw Boers with their wives and
children. I tried to go up to speak to them, but a young Boer, seeing
me, shot at me with his gun, so I thought it safer to lie hid. At
nightfall, however, I met the driver of one of the waggons, a Kaffir
man, at some distance from the laager, where he was watching by a pit
made to catch bucks, and fell into talk with him. He told me that this
was a party of the Boers who had trekked from Cape Colony, and were
taking possession of Natal, and that there were other such parties
scattered about the country. He said that in this party there were
five-and-twenty men with women and children, but he did not know the
names of any of them. Also he told me that he meant to run away, as he
heard that Dingaan was going to attack the white people, and was sure
that if he did so they would be eaten up, for these Boers, thinking
themselves quite safe, had grown very careless, and neither made their
laager as strong as it should be nor set any watch at night. Having
learned this I returned at once to make report to you, nor did I come
too quickly, for the Zulus nearly caught me as I passed their ranks.
I saw Bull-Head as I ran; he is riding a brown horse, and seems quite
recovered from his wound."

"How far is the Boer laager from this place?" asked Sihamba before
Suzanne could speak.

"Lady, a man on a good horse could reach it in seven hours, nor is it
possible to mistake the way. After crossing the plain you enter the
gorge by the saw-edged rock yonder, and follow its windings across the
mountains till you come out the other side, where the river runs down to
the flat country. Then you can keep along the bank of the river as I did
when I went, or if you wish to go more quickly you must head for a large
white-topped hill, or koppie, which can be seen from the mountains, and
when you come to it you will find the Boer laager upon the knoll at its
foot, but near to the banks of the river, which winds round it."

"Oh! let us go; let us go quickly," said Suzanne springing to her feet,
for the thought even of seeing a white man again made her drunk with
hope.

"Alas! sister," answered Sihamba sadly, "an hour ago we might have gone,
or rather you might have gone, mounted on the great _schimmel_, but
now--look," and she pointed to where the Zulus clustered like bees along
the banks of the river by which the path ran. "See," she added, "there
is but one road out of this stronghold, for nowhere else can the
surest-footed climber in the world descend its cliffs, no, not with a
rope to help him, and that road is thick with Zulu spears; moreover, a
certain man whom you do not wish to see waits for you upon it."

Suzanne looked. "Too late," she moaned. "Oh! surely my God has forsaken
me! Within six hours of safety and doomed to perish here; oh! surely my
God has forsaken me!" and she burst out weeping in the bitterness of her
disappointed hope.

"Say not so," answered Sihamba gently, "for I think that the Great one
whom you worship will save you yet."

As she spoke a messenger arrived saying that the Zulus had sent forward
heralds who desired to speak with her, and that these heralds waited
within earshot of the first wall.

"I will come," said Sihamba, and she passed down the cleft and through
the man hole into the fortifications which were built about the source
of the river. But she would not allow Suzanne to accompany her.

When she reached the outer wall she climbed it and stood upon it, for
Sihamba was a woman who knew no fear, and there, about forty paces away,
she saw three great Zulus standing, and with them him whom she dreaded
more than all the Zulus on the earth--Piet Van Vooren himself. When the
Zulu captains caught sight of her upon the wall, they jeered aloud and
asked whether this was indeed Sihamba Ngenyanga, or if a she-monkey had
been sent to talk with them.

"I am Sihamba," she answered quietly, "or I am a monkey, as it may
please you, though the white man with you can tell you what I am."

"I can," said Piet with a laugh. "You are a witch and a thief, and the
fate that I promised you long ago is with you at last."

"Murderer," mocked Sihamba in answer, "I see Death standing behind you,
and with him shadows of the Fear to come. But I would speak with these
chiefs and not with an outcast half-breed. Tell me, chiefs, why do you
come up against my stronghold with so great a force?"

"Because that 'Elephant whose tread shakes the earth,' our master,
Dingaan the king, has sent us," answered the spokesman of the captains.

"Say, now, on what errand, chief?"

"On this errand; to take your stronghold and cattle, to burn your kraal,
and to kill your people, all of them save the marriageable girls and
such children as are old enough to travel, who must be brought with the
cattle to Dingaan. But you yourself and the white woman who is called
Swallow who rules with you are to be handed over to Bull-Head here to do
with as he will, for that is the bargain between him and the king."

"And why are these things to come upon us who have done no wrong?" asked
Sihamba.

"Why, little woman!" answered the chief, "because you have dared to
steal cattle from the king's herd, even the royal white cattle; yes, and
they have been traced to your mountain and seen among your oxen."

"It is true that the cattle are here," said Sihamba, "but it is not true
that we have stolen them, seeing that they were lifted by the white man,
Bull-Head, and mixed up with our herds to bring us into trouble with the
king."

"A fit tale for the king's ears," replied the captain, laughing. "Why it
was Bull-Head who told the king of the theft; but let that pass. Dingaan
the king is merciful, and he makes you this offer through my mouth: If
you will return the cattle together with all your own by way of fine,
and hand over your councillors and head men to be killed, then he will
grant the rest their lives. But all the young men and the girls must
come with me to pass into the service of the king, the married women
and the children going where they will. Perhaps Bull-Head here will
take them with yourself and White Swallow. What is your word, little
chieftainess?"

"My word is that we will have none of such mercy. It is better that we
should die together, but I tell you, men of Dingaan, that these rocks
will be white with your bones before ever you drive our cattle and
maidens back to Dingaan."

"As you will, little chieftainess. We captains of the Zulus have heard
many such proud words in our time, but ah! where are those who spoke
them? Ask the jackals and the vultures, little chieftainess."



CHAPTER XXIX

THIRST

When Sihamba finished her talk with the captains of Dingaan the sun
was already sinking. Still the Umpondwana thought that the Zulus would
attack at once, but these shouted to the defenders that they might rest
easily till the dawn, since they wished to have daylight by which to
divide the spoil. And at daylight the attack came. Driving the men of
Bull-Head in front of them much against their will, for they knew these
to be cowards, and wished to make mock of them, company by company the
Zulus rushed at the stone wall, though many of them were killed and
often they were driven back. But always they came on laughing and
shouting their war-cry till the arms of the Umpondwana grew weary with
stabbing at them as their plumed heads appeared above the level of the
wall. Still, fighting under the eye of Sihamba, whose bitter tongue
they feared, her people held their own, for indeed the place was almost
impregnable to the attacks of men armed only with spears however brave
they might be, and had it been defended by warriors of true Zulu blood
it could never have been taken.

When the fight had raged for an hour or more the Zulu captains withdrew
their men, and went apart to consult with Van Vooren, for their loss was
heavy, and they saw that if they were to capture the head waters of the
river they must seek some other plan. Very soon they found it. The river
issued from the side of the mountain not as a little stream but as a
broad fierce water. So deep and rapid was it that the triple line of
defence works of the Umpondwana were built only to its edge, for the
water ran through a rocky gorge, although thorn trees fastened by their
trunks were thrust out for ten or twelve feet over the banks of the
gorge from either side of the stream. Now, in the centre of this river,
which may have been thirty paces wide, was a long ridge or saddle of
rock over which the water boiled furiously, although here it was not
more than three feet deep. This ridge began at a point within the last
line of walls and ran down to some five-and-twenty paces below the first
wall. Swart Piet had noted the ridge.

"There is a saddle on which you may ride to victory," he said.

"How so, Bull-Head?" asked the captain.

"Thus. Yonder stand trees with tall stems and green tops; cut them down
and make a bridge from the bank to the saddle; then wade up the saddle
where the water is not more than waist deep, till you are past the third
wall and reach the bank inside it as best you can."

Now although he was a brave man, as were all the Zulus in those days,
the captain looked long and doubtfully at the white water which foamed
upon the ridge.

"There is death in that water," he said.

"Death for some and victory for others," answered Van Vooren, "but if
you fear it, go back to Dingaan and tell him so, for in no other way can
this mountain be taken, seeing that it is impregnable, and that thirst
alone can conquer it."

"I fear nothing, white man," answered the Zulu, "but if you are so
brave, why, show us black people the way along yonder ridge!"

Piet shrugged his shoulders. "I wish to keep alive for reasons of my
own; besides, I am not a soldier of Dingaan," he answered.

Then the captain turned and commanded such men as had battle axes to cut
down three of the longest trees, which they did, although the task was
difficult, for the wood was hard and their axes were light. When at
length the trees were down they rolled them uphill to a spot where the
ridge of rock ended, which was not more than thirty paces from the face
of the outer wall. Now it was that Sihamba guessed their purpose for the
first time, for until then she had believed that they were cutting the
trees to use them as battering rams against the walls.

"They are coming on us by the path of the river," she said, and called
for men to sally out and prevent them making the bridge from the bank to
the saddle. But none answered her, for they dared not face the Zulus in
the open.

"The water will sweep them away," they said; "moreover, when they try to
land we can spear them."

"Cowards," she moaned, "on your own heads be your doom."

So the Umpondwana contented themselves with standing behind the first
wall and casting volleys of spears at those who thrust out the trees
within thirty paces of them, while Zinti shot at them with his gun,
killing several. But coming between, the Zulus made a shield hedge to
protect their comrades, so that the light throwing assegais did little
hurt, and of the few that the gun killed they thought nothing.

Presently the ends of the trees lay beneath the water on the ridge
of rock, and the captain commanded a certain _induna_ to lead his men
across. Now all natives fear a wet death, and though he was a brave man
who would gladly have rushed the fortifications alone had he been so
commanded, this soldier to whom the captain spoke looked askance at the
furious torrent and hesitated. But that captain had served under Chaka,
and knew how to deal with those who showed doubt or fear. Lifting his
heavy assegai, he drove it through the man, so that he fell dead, and as
he smote cried, "Coward, take this gift from the king!"

Then, calling to the soldiers, he himself ran out upon the bridge of
tree-trunks and leaped into the water that rose to his middle. In an
instant he would have been swept away, for the current was very fierce,
had not those who followed sprang down at his side and behind him. For
a moment they managed to keep their feet till others came, giving them
support and being themselves protected by a breakwater built of the men
who had gone first. Then, forming in a double line, each man linked
his arms round the middle of his comrade in front, as Kaffir girls
link themselves in a dance, and very slowly this human chain began to
struggle forward along the back of the ridge. At times, indeed, the
weight of the stream was almost too much for them, and swept some of
them off into the deep water which ran on either side, but the strong
rope of human muscles held, and they were dragged back again. Now they
were between the lip of the first walls, and the Umpondwana soldiers
hurled spears at them from the banks, killing many. But if a man was
slain, or even badly wounded, his companions who held him let go, and,
if needful, thrust him into the water, who could no longer serve the
king. Then he gripped the soldier who stood in front of the lost one,
and the chain dragged on.

"Oh! men of the Umpondwana," cried Sihamba, "had you but half the heart
of these, who are brave, we need fear nothing from Dingaan," and the
Zulus in the stream who heard her called in answer:--

"You are right, little chieftainess, we are brave."

Slowly the black snake-like line pressed forward through the white foam,
never heeding the storm of spears that slew continually, till the point
of it was well within the third line of walls. Then the captain, who by
some chance had escaped, called an order to those behind him, and the
head of the double line leapt off the ridge of rock into deep water, and
swimming with their feet, but still gripping with their hands, suffered
themselves to be swung round by the current towards the bank, twenty
yards away. Here some rocks jutted out, and these, after a great
struggle, they were able to grasp and hold.

Then followed what Suzanne, who was watching from above, afterwards
declared to be the strangest sight she had ever seen, for these men, who
swung to and fro in the current, anchored, as it were, to the ridge and
the bank, made of their living bodies a bridge for their fellows. Yes,
their companions ran and crawled over them, springing from shoulder to
shoulder, and driving their heads beneath the water with the push of
their clinging feet. Half-drowned and almost torn in two as they were,
still they held on till enough men were safe on shore to finish the
fray. For when the Umpondwana saw that the Zulus had won the bank they
did not stay to kill them while they landed, as might easily have been
done; no, dragging Sihamba with them, they ran into the gorge leading to
the flat top of the mountain, and blocked it with great stones that were
ready. And so it came about that the Zulus won this fight, though with
great loss to themselves, and cut off the Umpondwana from their main
supply of water.

But though they had won the fight they had not won the mountain. After
resting a while they began the work of storming the narrow gorge that
led upwards to the tableland, for this gorge was its only gate, and
at first were suffered to pull down or climb over the walls which were
built across it with but little resistance. Soon, however, they found
out the reason of this, for when a number of them were in the gorge
stones began to roll upon them from the edges of the cliffs above,
crushing the life out of many, so that presently they were driven back
to the head of the river. Afterwards they searched long and earnestly
but could find no other path by which to attack, for there was none.

"Well," said the Zulu captain, "it seems that we must fight the fight of
'sit-down,' and since these rock-rabbits will not let us come to them we
must wait till they come to us to ask for water."

So they waited for seven whole days, setting guards about the mountain
in case there should be secret ways of egress of which they knew
nothing.



When they reached the tableland Sihamba spoke words so bitter to her
councillors and captains that some of them stopped their ears that they
might hear no more, while others answered that they could do nothing
against men who walked upon the boiling waters.

"Now, indeed, you can do nothing against them," Sihamba cried, "for
Thirst will fight for them, and he is the best of friends. Because of
your cowardice we must perish, everyone of us, and for my part I should
be glad of it were it not that you have given the Lady Swallow to death
also."

Then she buried her face in the ground and would say no more, even when
they told her that the Zulus had been beaten back by the rocks that were
rolled down upon them.

For some days the little spring gave enough water for the thousands of
people who were crowded upon the mountain top, though there was none
