next world?'

'I am a stranger,' I answered,' and had no other purpose than looking on
at the fishing--I am about to return to the side I came from.'

'Best make haste then,' said he. 'He that dreams on the bed of the
Solway, may wake in the next world. The sky threatens a blast that will
bring in the waves three feet abreast.'

So saying, he turned his horse and rode off, while I began to walk back
towards the Scottish shore, a little alarmed at what I had heard;
for the tide advances with such rapidity upon these fatal sands, that
well-mounted horsemen lay aside hopes of safety, if they see its white
surge advancing while they are yet at a distance from the bank.

These recollections grew more agitating, and, instead of walking
deliberately, I began a race as fast as I could, feeling, or thinking I
felt, each pool of salt water through which I splashed, grow deeper and
deeper. At length the surface of the sand did seem considerably more
intersected with pools and channels full of water--either that the tide
was really beginning to influence the bed of the estuary, or, as I must
own is equally probable, that I had, in the hurry and confusion of my
retreat, involved myself in difficulties which I had avoided in my more
deliberate advance. Either way, it was rather an unpromising state of
affairs, for the sands at the same time turned softer, and my footsteps,
so soon as I had passed, were instantly filled with water. I began to
have odd recollections concerning the snugness of your father's parlour,
and the secure footing afforded by the pavement of Brown's Square and
Scott's Close, when my better genius, the tall fisherman, appeared once
more close to my side, he and his sable horse looming gigantic in the
now darkening twilight.

'Are you mad?' he said, in the same deep tone which had before thrilled
on my ear, 'or are you weary of your life? You will be presently amongst
the quicksands.' I professed my ignorance of the way, to which he only
replied, 'There is no time for prating--get up behind me.'

He probably expected me to spring from the ground with the activity
which these Borderers have, by constant practice, acquired in everything
relating to horsemanship; but as I stood irresolute, he extended his
hand, and grasping mine, bid me place my foot on the toe of his boot,
and thus raised me in a trice to the croupe of his horse. I was scarcely
securely seated, ere he shook the reins of his horse, who instantly
sprang forward; but annoyed, doubtless, by the unusual burden, treated
us to two or three bounds, accompanied by as many flourishes of his hind
heels. The rider sat like a tower, notwithstanding that the unexpected
plunging of the animal threw me forward upon him. The horse was soon
compelled to submit to the discipline of the spur and bridle, and went
off at a steady hand gallop; thus shortening the devious, for it was
by no means a direct path, by which the rider, avoiding the loose
quicksands, made for the northern bank.

My friend, perhaps I may call him my preserver,--for, to a stranger, my
situation was fraught with real danger,--continued to press on at the
same speedy pace, but in perfect silence, and I was under too much
anxiety of mind to disturb him with any questions. At length we arrived
at a part of the shore with which I was utterly unacquainted, when I
alighted and began to return in the best fashion I could my thanks for
the important service which he had just rendered me.

The stranger only replied by an impatient 'pshaw!' and was about to ride
off, and leave me to my own resources when I implored him to complete
his work of kindness by directing me to Shepherd's Bush, which was, as I
informed him, my home for the present.

'To Shepherd's Bush?' he said; 'it is but three miles but if you know
not the land better than the sand, you may break your neck before you
get there; for it is no road for a moping boy in a dark night; and,
besides, there are the brook and the fens to cross.'

I was a little dismayed at this communication of such difficulties as my
habits had not called on me to contend with. Once more the idea of thy
father's fireside came across me; and I could have been well contented
to have swapped the romance of my situation, together with the glorious
independence of control which I possessed at the moment, for the
comforts of that chimney-corner, though I were obliged to keep my eyes
chained to Erskine's LARGER INSTITUTES.

I asked my new friend whether he could not direct me to any house of
public entertainment for the night; and supposing it probable he was
himself a poor man, I added, with the conscious dignity of a well-filled
pocket-book, that I could make it worth any man's while to oblige me.
The fisherman making no answer, I turned away from him with as gallant
an appearance of indifference as I could command, and began to take, as
I thought, the path which he had pointed out to me.

His deep voice immediately sounded after me to recall me. 'Stay, young
man, stay--you have mistaken the road already.--I wonder your friends
sent out such an inconsiderate youth, without some one wiser than
himself to take care of him.'

'Perhaps they might not have done so,' said I, 'if I had any friends who
cared about the matter.'

'Well, sir,' he said, 'it is not my custom to open my house to
strangers, but your pinch is like to be a smart one; for, besides the
risk from bad roads, fords, and broken ground, and the night,
which looks both black and gloomy, there is bad company on the road
sometimes--at least it has a bad name, and some have come to harm; so
that I think I must for once make my rule give way to your necessity,
and give you a night's lodging in my cottage.

Why was it, Alan, that I could not help giving an involuntary shudder at
receiving an invitation so seasonable in itself, and so suitable to my
naturally inquisitive disposition? I easily suppressed this untimely
sensation; and as I returned thanks, and expressed my hope that I should
not disarrange, his family, I once more dropped a hint of my desire to
make compensation for any trouble I might occasion. The man answered
very coldly, 'Your presence will no doubt give me trouble, sir, but it
is of a kind which your purse, cannot compensate; in a word, although
I am content to receive you as my guest, I am no publican to call a
reckoning.'

I begged his pardon, and, at his instance, once more seated myself
behind hint upon the good horse, which went forth steady as before--the
moon, whenever she could penetrate the clouds, throwing the huge shadow
of the animal, with its double burden, on the wild and bare ground over
which we passed.

Thou mayst laugh till thou lettest the letter fall, if thou wilt, but
it reminded me of the magician Atlantes on his hippogriff with a knight
trussed up behind him, in the manner Ariosto has depicted that matter.
Thou art I know, matter-of-fact enough to affect contempt of that
fascinating and delicious poem; but think not that, to conform with
thy bad taste, I shall forbear any suitable illustration which now or
hereafter may occur to me.

On we went, the sky blackening around us, and the wind beginning to pipe
such a wild and melancholy tune as best suited the hollow sounds of the
advancing tide, which I could hear at a distance, like the roar of some
immense monster defrauded of its prey.

At length, our course was crossed by a deep dell or dingle, such as they
call in some parts of Scotland a den, and in others a cleuch or narrow
glen. It seemed, by the broken glances which the moon continued to
throw upon it, to be steep, precipitous, and full of trees, which are,
generally speaking, rather scarce upon these shores. The descent by
which we plunged into this dell was both steep and rugged, with two
or three abrupt turnings; but neither danger nor darkness impeded the
motion of the black horse, who seemed rather to slide upon his haunches,
than to gallop down the pass, throwing me again on the shoulders of the
athletic rider, who, sustaining no inconvenience by the circumstance,
continued to press the horse forward with his heel, steadily supporting
him at the same time by raising his bridle-hand, until we stood in
safety at the bottom of the steep--not a little to my consolation, as,
friend Alan, thou mayst easily conceive.

A very short advance up the glen, the bottom of which we had attained by
this ugly descent, brought us in front of two or three cottages, one
of which another blink of moonshine enabled me to rate as rather better
than those of the Scottish peasantry in this part of the world; for the
sashes seemed glazed, and there were what are called storm-windows in
the roof, giving symptoms of the magnificence of a second story. The
scene around was very interesting; for the cottages, and the yards or
crofts annexed to them, occupied a haugh, or helm, of two acres, which
a brook of some consequence (to judge from its roar) had left upon one
side of the little glen while finding its course close to the farther
bank, and which appeared to be covered and darkened with trees, while
the level space beneath enjoyed such stormy smiles as the moon had that
night to bestow.

I had little time for observation, for my companion's loud whistle,
seconded by an equally loud halloo, speedily brought to the door of
the principal cottage a man and a woman, together with two large
Newfoundland dogs, the deep baying of which I had for some time heard. A
yelping terrier or two, which had joined the concert, were silent at
the presence of my conductor, and began to whine, jump up, and fawn upon
him. The female drew back when she beheld a stranger; the man, who had
a lighted lantern, advanced, and, without any observation, received the
horse from my host, and led him, doubtless, to stable, while I followed
my conductor into the house. When we had passed the HALLAN, [The
partition which divides a Scottish cottage.] we entered a well-sized
apartment, with a clean brick floor, where a fire blazed (much to my
contentment) in the ordinary projecting sort of a chimney, common in
Scottish houses. There were stone seats within the chimney; and ordinary
utensils, mixed with fishing-spears, nets, and similar implements of
sport, were hung around the walls of the place. The female who had first
appeared at the door, had now retreated into a side apartment. She was
presently followed by my guide, after he had silently motioned me to a
seat; and their place was supplied by an elderly woman, in a grey stuff
gown, with a check apron and toy, obviously a menial, though neater in
her dress than is usual in her apparent rank--an advantage which was
counterbalanced by a very forbidding aspect. But the most singular part
of her attire, in this very Protestant country, was a rosary, in which
the smaller beads were black oak, and those indicating the PATER-NOSTER
of silver, with a crucifix of the same metal.

This person made preparations for supper, by spreading a clean though
coarse cloth over a large oaken table, placing trenchers and salt upon
it, and arranging the fire to receive a gridiron. I observed her motions
in silence; for she took no sort of notice of me, and as her looks were
singularly forbidding, I felt no disposition to commence conversation.

When this duenna had made all preliminary arrangements, she took from
the well-filled pouch of my conductor, which he had hung up by the
door, one or two salmon, or GRILSES, as the smaller sort are termed, and
selecting that which seemed best and in highest season, began to cut
it into slices, and to prepare a GRILLADE; the savoury smell of which
affected me so powerfully that I began sincerely to hope that no delay
would intervene between the platter and the lip.

As this thought came across me, the man who had conducted the horse to
the stable entered the apartment, and discovered to me a countenance yet
more uninviting than that of the old crone who was performing with such
dexterity the office of cook to the party. He was perhaps sixty years
old; yet his brow was not much furrowed, and his jet-black hair was only
grizzled, not whitened, by the advance of age. All his motions spoke
strength unabated; and, though rather undersized, he had very broad
shoulders, was square-made, thin-flanked, and apparently combined in his
frame muscular strength and activity; the last somewhat impaired perhaps
by years, but the first remaining in full vigour. A hard and harsh
countenance--eyes far sunk under projecting eyebrows, which were
grizzled like his hair--a wide mouth, furnished from ear to ear with it
range of unimpaired teeth, of uncommon whiteness, and a size and breadth
which might have become the jaws of an ogre, completed this delightful
portrait. He was clad like a fisherman, in jacket and trousers of the
blue cloth commonly used by seamen, and had a Dutch case-knife, like
that of a Hamburgh skipper, stuck into a broad buff belt, which seemed
as if it might occasionally sustain weapons of a description still less
equivocally calculated for violence.

This man gave me an inquisitive, and, as I thought, a sinister look upon
entering the apartment; but without any further notice of me, took up
the office of arranging the table, which the old lady had abandoned for
that of cooking the fish, and, with more address than I expected from
a person of his coarse appearance, placed two chairs at the head of the
table, and two stools below; accommodating each seat to a cover, beside
which he placed an allowance of barley-bread, and a small jug, which he
replenished with ale from a large black jack. Three of these jugs
were of ordinary earthenware, but the fourth, which he placed by the
right-hand cover at, the upper end of the table, was a flagon of
silver, and displayed armorial bearings. Beside this flagon he placed a
salt-cellar of silver, handsomely wrought, containing salt of exquisite
whiteness, with pepper and other spices. A sliced lemon was also
presented on a small silver salver. The two large water-dogs, who
seemed perfectly to understand the nature of the preparations, seated
themselves one on each side of the table, to be ready to receive their
portion of the entertainment. I never saw finer animals, or which
seemed to be more influenced by a sense of decorum, excepting that they
slobbered a little as the rich scent from the chimney was wafted past
their noses. The small dogs ensconced themselves beneath the table.

I am aware that I am dwelling upon trivial and ordinary circumstances,
and that perhaps I may weary out your patience in doing so. But conceive
me alone in this strange place, which seemed, from the universal
silence, to be the very temple of Harpocrates--remember that this is
my first excursion from home--forget not that the manner in which I had
been brought hither had the dignity of danger and something the air of
an adventure, and that there was a mysterious incongruity in all I had
hitherto witnessed; and you will not, I think, be surprised that these
circumstances, though trifling, should force themselves on my notice at
the time, and dwell in my memory afterwards.

That a fisher, who pursued the sport perhaps for his amusement as well
as profit, should be well mounted and better lodged than the lower class
of peasantry, had in it nothing surprising; but there was something
about all that I saw which seemed to intimate that I was rather in
the abode of a decayed gentleman, who clung to a few of the forms and
observances of former rank, than in that of a common peasant, raised
above his fellows by comparative opulence.

Besides the articles of plate which I have already noticed, the old man
now lighted and placed on the table a silver lamp, or CRUISIE as the
Scottish term it, filled with very pure oil, which in burning diffused
an aromatic fragrance, and gave me a more perfect view of the cottage
walls, which I had hitherto only seen dimly by the light of the fire.
The BINK [The frame of wooden shelves placed in a Scottish kitchen for
holding plates.] with its usual arrangement of pewter and earthenware,
which was most strictly and critically clean, glanced back the flame of
the lamp merrily from one side of the apartment. In a recess, formed
by the small bow of a latticed window, was a large writing-desk of
walnut-tree wood, curiously carved, above which arose shelves of the
same, which supported a few books and papers. The opposite side of the
recess contained (as far as I could discern, for it lay in shadow, and
I could at any rate have seen it but imperfectly from the place where
I was seated) one or two guns, together with swords, pistols, and
other arms a collection which, in a poor cottage, and in a country so
peaceful, appeared singular at least, if not even somewhat suspicious.

All these observations, you may suppose, were made much sooner than I
have recorded, or you (if you have not skipped) have been able to read
them. They were already finished, and I was considering how I should
open some communication with the mute inhabitants of the mansion, when
my conductor re-entered from the side-door by which he had made his
exit.

He had now thrown off his rough riding-cap, and his coarse jockey-coat,
And stood before me in a grey jerkin trimmed with black, which sat close
to, and set off, his large and sinewy frame, and a pair of trousers of
a lighter colour, cut as close to the body as they are used by
Highlandmen. His whole dress was of finer cloth than that of the old
man; and his linen, so minute was my observation, clean and unsullied.
His shirt was without ruffles, and tied at the collar with a black
ribbon, which showed his strong and muscular neck rising from it like
that of an ancient Hercules. His head was small, with a large forehead,
and well-formed ears. He wore neither peruke nor hair-powder; and his
chestnut locks, curling close to his head like those of an antique
statue, showed not the least touch of time, though the owner must have
been at least fifty. His features were high and prominent in such a
degree that one knew not whether to term them harsh or handsome. In
either case, the sparkling grey eye, aquiline nose, and well-formed
mouth, combined to render his physiognomy noble and expressive. An air
of sadness, or severity, or of both, seemed to indicate a melancholy,
and, at the same time, a haughty temper. I could not help running
mentally over the ancient heroes, to whom I might assimilate the noble
form and countenance before me. He was too young, and evinced too little
resignation to his fate, to resemble Belisarius. Coriolanus, standing by
the hearth of Tullus Aufidius, came nearer the mark; yet the gloomy and
haughty look of the stranger had, perhaps, still more of Marius, seated
among the ruins of Carthage.

While I was lost in these imaginations, my host stood by the fire,
gazing on me with the same attention which I paid to him, until,
embarrassed by his look, I was about to break silence at all hazards.
But the supper, now placed upon the table, reminded me, by its
appearance, of those wants which I had almost forgotten while I was
gazing on the fine form of my conductor. He spoke at length, and I
almost started at the deep rich tone of his voice, though what he said
was but to invite me to sit down to the table. He himself assumed the
seat of honour, beside which the silver flagon was placed, and beckoned
to me to sit down beside him.

Thou knowest thy father's strict and excellent domestic discipline has
trained me to bear the invocation of a blessing before we break the
daily bread, for which we are taught to pray--I paused a moment, and,
without designing to do so, I suppose my manner made him sensible of
what I expected. The two domestics or inferiors, as I should have before
observed, were already seated at the bottom of the table, when my
host shot a glance of a very peculiar expression towards the old man,
observing, with something approaching to a sneer, 'Cristal Nixon, say
grace--the gentleman expects one.'

'The foul fiend shall be clerk, and say amen, when I turn chaplain,'
growled out the party addressed, in tones which might have become the
condition of a dying bear; 'if the gentleman is a whig, he may please
himself with his own mummery. My faith is neither in word nor writ, but
in barley-bread and brown ale.'

'Mabel Moffat,' said my guide, looking at the old woman, and raising his
sonorous voice, probably because she was hard of hearing, 'canst thou
ask a blessing upon our victuals?'

The old woman shook her head, kissed the cross which hung from her
rosary, and was silent.

'Mabel will say grace for no heretic,' said the master of the house,
with the same latent sneer on his brow and in his accent.

At the same moment, the side-door already mentioned opened, and the
young woman (so she proved) whom I had first seen at the door of the
cottage, advanced a little way into the room, then stopped bashfully, as
if she had observed that I was looking at her, and asked the master of
the house, 'if he had called?'

'Not louder than to make old Mabel hear me,' he replied; 'and yet,' be
added, as she turned to retire, 'it is a shame a stranger should see a
house where not one of the family can or will say a grace--do thou be
our chaplain.'

The girl, who was really pretty, came forward with timid modesty, and,
apparently unconscious that she was doing anything uncommon,
pronounced the benediction in a silver-toned voice, and with affecting
simplicity--her cheek colouring just so much as to show that on a less
solemn occasion she would have felt more embarrassed.

Now, if thou expectest a fine description of this young woman, Alan
Fairford, in order to entitle thee to taunt me with having found a
Dulcinea in the inhabitant of a fisherman's cottage on the Solway Firth,
thou shalt be disappointed; for, having said she seemed very pretty,
and that she was a sweet and gentle-speaking creature, I have said all
concerning her that I can tell thee. She vanished when the benediction
was spoken.

My host, with a muttered remark on the cold of our ride, and the keen
air of the Solway Sands, to which he did not seem to wish an answer,
loaded my plate from Mabel's grillade, which, with a large wooden bowl
of potatoes, formed our whole meal. A sprinkling from the lemon gave a
much higher zest than the usual condiment of vinegar; and I promise
you that whatever I might hitherto have felt, either of curiosity or
suspicion, did not prevent me from making a most excellent supper,
during which little passed betwixt me and my entertainer, unless that
he did the usual honours of the table with courtesy, indeed, but
without even the affectation of hearty hospitality, which those in his
(apparent) condition generally affect on such occasions, even when they
do not actually feel it. On the contrary, his manner seemed that of a
polished landlord towards an unexpected and unwelcome guest, whom,
for the sake of his own credit, he receives with civility, but without
either goodwill or cheerfulness.

If you ask how I learned all this, I cannot tell you; nor, were I to
write down at length the insignificant intercourse which took place
between us, would it perhaps serve to justify these observations. It is
sufficient to say, that in helping his dogs, which he did from time
to time with great liberality, he seemed to discharge a duty much more
pleasing to himself, than when he paid the same attention to his guest.
Upon the whole, the result on my mind was as I tell it you.

When supper was over, a small case-bottle of brandy, in a curious frame
of silver filigree, circulated to the guests. I had already taken a
small glass of the liquor, and, when it had passed to Mabel and to
Cristal and was again returned to the upper end of the table, I could
not help taking the bottle in my hand, to look more at the armorial
bearings which were chased with considerable taste on the silver
framework. Encountering the eye of my entertainer, I instantly saw that
my curiosity was highly distasteful; he frowned, bit his lip, and
showed such uncontrollable signs of impatience, that, setting the bottle
immediately down, I attempted some apology. To this he did not deign
either to reply, or even to listen; and Cristal, at a signal from his
master, removed the object of my curiosity, as well as the cup, upon
which the same arms were engraved.

Then ensued an awkward pause, which I endeavoured to break by observing,
that 'I feared my intrusion upon his hospitality had put his family to
some inconvenience'.

'I hope you see no appearance of it, sir,' he replied, with cold
civility. 'What inconvenience a family so retired as ours may suffer
from receiving an unexpected guest is like to be trifling, in comparison
of what the visitor himself sustains from want of his accustomed
comforts. So far, therefore, as our connexion stands, our accounts stand
clear.'

Notwithstanding this discouraging reply, I blundered on, as is usual in
such cases, wishing to appear civil, and being, perhaps, in reality the
very reverse. 'I was afraid,' I said, that my presence had banished one
of the family' (looking at the side-door) 'from his table.'

'If,' he coldly replied, 'I meant the young woman whom I had seen in the
apartment, he bid me observe that there was room enough at the table
for her to have seated herself, and meat enough, such as it was, for her
supper. I might, therefore, be assured, if she had chosen it, she would
have supped with us.'

There was no dwelling on this or any other topic longer; for my
entertainer, taking up the lamp, observed, that 'my wet clothes might
reconcile me for the night to their custom of keeping early hours; that
he was under the necessity of going abroad by peep of day to-morrow
morning, and would call me up at the same time, to point out the way by
which I was to return to the Shepherd's Bush.'

This left no opening for further explanation; nor was there room for it
on the usual terms of civility; for, as he neither asked my name, nor
expressed the least interest concerning my condition, I--the obliged
person--had no pretence to trouble him with such inquiries on my part.

He took up the lamp, and led me through the side-door into a very small
room, where a bed had been hastily arranged for my accommodation,
and, putting down the lamp, directed me to leave my wet clothes on the
outside of the door, that they might be exposed to the fire during the
night. He then left me, having muttered something which was meant to
pass for good night.

I obeyed his directions with respect to my clothes, the rather that,
in despite of the spirits which I had drunk, I felt my teeth begin
to chatter, and received various hints from an aguish feeling, that
a town-bred youth, like myself, could not at once rush into all the
hardihood of country sports with impunity. But my bed, though coarse and
hard, was dry and clean; and I soon was so little occupied with my heats
and tremors, as to listen with interest to a heavy foot, which seemed to
be that of my landlord, traversing the boards (there was no ceiling,
as you may believe) which roofed my apartment. Light, glancing through
these rude planks, became visible as soon as my lamp was extinguished;
and as the noise of the slow, solemn, and regular step continued, and I
could distinguish that the person turned and returned as he reached the
end of the apartment, it seemed clear to me that the walker was engaged
in no domestic occupation, but merely pacing to and fro for his own
pleasure. 'An odd amusement this,' I thought, 'for one who had been
engaged at least a part of the preceding day in violent exercise, and
who talked of rising by the peep of dawn on the ensuing morning.'

Meantime I heard the storm, which had been brewing during the evening,
begin to descend with a vengeance; sounds as of distant-thunder (the
noise of the more distant waves, doubtless, on the shore) mingled
with the roaring of the neighbouring torrent, and with the crashing,
groaning, and even screaming of the trees in the glen whose boughs were
tormented by the gale. Within the house, windows clattered, and doors
clapped, and the walls, though sufficiently substantial for a building
of the kind, seemed to me to totter in the tempest.

But still the heavy steps perambulating the apartment over my head were
distinctly heard amid the roar and fury of the elements. I thought more
than once I even heard a groan; but I frankly own that, placed in this
unusual situation, my fancy may have misled me. I was tempted several
times to call aloud, and ask whether the turmoil around us did not
threaten danger to the building which we inhabited; but when I thought
of the secluded and unsocial master of the dwelling, who seemed to avoid
human society, and to remain unperturbed amid the elemental war, it
seemed that to speak to him at that moment would have been to address
the spirit of the tempest himself, since no other being, I thought,
could have remained calm and tranquil while winds and waters were thus
raging around.

In process of time, fatigue prevailed over anxiety and curiosity. The
storm abated, or my senses became deadened to its terrors, and I fell
asleep ere yet the mysterious paces of my host had ceased to shake the
flooring over my head.

It might have been expected that the novelty of my situation, although
it did not prevent my slumbers, would have at least diminished their
profoundness, and shortened their duration. It proved otherwise,
however; for I never slept more soundly in my life, and only awoke when,
at morning dawn, my landlord shook me by the shoulder, and dispelled
some dream, of which, fortunately for you, I have no recollection,
otherwise you would have been favoured with it, in hopes you might have
proved a second Daniel upon the occasion.

'You sleep sound--' said his full deep voice; 'ere five years have
rolled over your head, your slumbers will be lighter--unless ere then
you are wrapped in the sleep which is never broken.'

'How!' said I, starting up in the bed; 'do you know anything of me--of
my prospects--of my views in life?'

'Nothing,' he answered, with a grim smile; 'but it is evident you are
entering upon the world young, inexperienced, and full of hopes, and I
do but prophesy to you what I would to any one in your condition. But
come; there lie your clothes--a brown crust and a draught of milk wait
you, if you choose to break your fast; but you must make haste.'

'I must first,' I said, 'take the freedom to spend a few minutes alone,
before beginning the ordinary works of the day.'

'Oh!--umph!--I cry your devotions pardon,' he replied, and left the
apartment.

Alan, there is something terrible about this man.

I joined him, as I had promised, in the kitchen where we had supped
overnight, where I found the articles which he had offered me for
breakfast, without butter or any other addition.

He walked up and down while I partook of the bread and milk; and the
slow measured weighty step seemed identified with those which I had
heard last night. His pace, from its funereal slowness, seemed to keep
time with some current of internal passion, dark, slow, and unchanged.
'We run and leap by the side of a lively and bubbling brook,' thought I,
internally, 'as if we would run a race with it; but beside waters deep,
slow, and lonely, our pace is sullen and silent as their course. What
thoughts may be now corresponding with that furrowed brow, and bearing
time with that heavy step?'

'If you have finished,' said he, looking up to me with a glance of
impatience, as he observed that I ate no longer, but remained with my
eyes fixed upon him, 'I wait to show you the way.'

We went out together, no individual of the family having been visible
excepting my landlord. I was disappointed of the opportunity which I
watched for of giving some gratuity to the domestics, as they seemed to
be. As for offering any recompense to the master of the household, it
seemed to me impossible to have attempted it.

What would I have given for a share of thy composure, who wouldst have
thrust half a crown into a man's hand whose necessities seemed to crave
it, conscious that you did right in making the proffer, and not caring
sixpence whether you hurt the feelings of him whom you meant to serve!
I saw thee once give a penny to a man with a long beard, who, from the
dignity of his exterior, might have represented Solon. I had not thy
courage, and therefore I made no tender to my mysterious host, although,
notwithstanding his display of silver utensils, all around the house
bespoke narrow circumstances, if not actual poverty.

We left the place together. But I hear thee murmur thy very new and
appropriate ejaculation, OHE, JAM SATIS!--The rest for another time.
Perhaps I may delay further communication till I learn how my favours
are valued.




LETTER V

ALAN FAIRFORD TO DARSIE LATIMER

I have thy two last epistles, my dear Darsie, and expecting the third,
have been in no hurry to answer them. Do not think my silence ought to
be ascribed to my failing to take interest in them, for, truly, they
excel (though the task was difficult) thy usual excellings. Since
the moon-calf who earliest discovered the Pandemonium of Milton in an
expiring wood-fire--since the first ingenious urchin who blew bubbles
out of soap and water, thou, my best of friends, hast the highest knack
at making histories out of nothing. Wert thou to plant the bean in the
nursery-tale, thou wouldst make out, so soon as it began to germinate,
that the castle of the giant was about to elevate its battlements on the
top of it. All that happens to thee gets a touch of the wonderful and
the sublime from thy own rich imagination. Didst ever see what artists
call a Claude Lorraine glass, which spreads its own particular hue over
the whole landscape which you see through it?--thou beholdest ordinary
events just through such a medium.

I have looked carefully at the facts of thy last long letter, and they
are just such as might have befallen any little truant of the High
School, who had got down to Leith Sands, gone beyond the PRAWN-DUB, wet
his hose and shoon, and, finally, had been carried home, in compassion,
by some high-kilted fishwife, cursing all the while the trouble which
the brat occasioned her.

I admire the figure which thou must have made, clinging for dear life
behind the old fellow's back--thy jaws chattering with fear, thy muscles
cramped with anxiety. Thy execrable supper of broiled salmon, which was
enough to ensure the nightmare's regular visits for a twelvemonth,
may be termed a real affliction; but as for the storm of Thursday
last (such, I observe, was the date), it roared, whistled, howled, and
bellowed, as fearfully amongst the old chimney-heads in the Candlemaker
Row, as it could on the Solway shore, for the very wind of it--TESTE ME
PER TOTAM NOCTEM VIGILANTE. And then in the morning again, when--Lord
help you--in your sentimental delicacy you bid the poor man adieu,
without even tendering him half a crown for supper and lodging!

You laugh at me for giving a penny (to be accurate, though, thou
shouldst have said sixpence) to an old fellow, whom thou, in thy high
flight, wouldst have sent home supperless, because he was like Solon or
Belisarius. But you forget that the affront descended like a benediction
into the pouch of the old gaberlunzie, who overflowed in blessings upon
the generous donor--long ere he would have thanked thee, Darsie, for
thy barren veneration of his beard and his bearing. Then you laugh at
my good father's retreat from Falkirk, just as if it were not time for a
man to trudge when three or four mountain knaves, with naked claymores,
and heels as light as their fingers, were scampering after him, crying
FURINISH. You remember what he said himself when the Laird of Bucklivat
told him that FURINISH signified 'stay a while'. 'What the devil,'
he said, surprised out of his Presbyterian correctness by the
unreasonableness of such a request under the circumstances, 'would the
scoundrels have had me stop to have my head cut off?'

Imagine such a train at your own heels, Darsie, and ask yourself whether
you would not exert your legs as fast as you did in flying from the
Solway tide. And yet you impeach my father's courage. I tell you he has
courage enough to do what is right, and to spurn what is wrong--courage
enough to defend a righteous cause with hand and purse, and to take
the part of the poor man against his oppressor, without fear of the
consequences to himself. This is civil courage, Darsie; and it is of
little consequence to most men in this age and country whether they ever
possess military courage or no.

Do not think I am angry with you, though I thus attempt to rectify your
opinions on my father's account. I am well aware that, upon the whole,
he is scarce regarded with more respect by me than by thee. And, while
I am in a serious humour, which it is difficult to preserve with one who
is perpetually tempting me to laugh at him, pray, dearest Darsie, let
not thy ardour for adventure carry thee into more such scrapes as that
of the Solway Sands. The rest of the story is a mere imagination; but
that stormy evening might have proved, as the clown says to Lear, 'a
naughty night to swim in.'

As for the rest, if you can work mysterious and romantic heroes out of
old cross-grained fishermen, why, I for one will reap some amusement by
the metamorphosis. Yet hold! even there, there is some need of caution.
This same female chaplain--thou sayest so little of her, and so much of
every one else, that it excites some doubt in my mind. VERY PRETTY she
is, it seems--and that is all thy discretion informs me of. There are
cases in which silence implies other things than consent. Wert thou
ashamed or afraid, Darsie, to trust thyself with the praises of the very
pretty grace-sayer?--As I live, thou blushest! Why, do I not know thee
an inveterate squire of dames? and have I not been in thy confidence?
An elegant elbow, displayed when the rest of the figure was muffled in a
cardinal, or a neat well-turned ankle and instep, seen by chance as its
owner tripped up the Old Assembly Close, [Of old this almost deserted
alley formed the most common access betwixt the High Street and the
southern suburbs.] turned thy brain for eight days. Thou wert once
