her of being capable of abetting her licentious brother in forcibly
possessing himself of the innocent daughter of a noble father. He now
purposed to make her a present--as in some degree a substitute for
the representation his friend had projected, and which had come
to nothing--of the picture which she had hoped to find pleasure in
reproducing.

Cleopatra received him on her roof, a favor of which few could boast;
she allowed him to sit at her feet while she reclined on her couch, and
gave him to understand, by every glance of her eyes and every word she
spoke, that his presence was a happiness to her, and filled her with
passionate delight. Publius soon contrived to lead the conversation to
the subject of the innocent parents of the water-bearers, who had been
sent off to the goldmines; but Cleopatra interrupted his speech in their
favor and asked him plainly, undisguisedly, and without any agitation,
whether it was true that he himself desired to win the youthful Hebe.
And she met his absolute denial with such persistent and repeated
expressions of disbelief, assuming at last a tone of reproach, that he
grew vexed and broke out into a positive declaration that he regarded
lying as unmanly and disgraceful, and could endure any insult rather
than a doubt of his veracity.

Such a vehement and energetic remonstrance from a man she had
distinguished was a novelty to Cleopatra, and she did not take it amiss,
for she might now believe--what she much wished to believe--that Publius
wanted to have nothing to do with the fair Hebe, that Eulaeus had
slandered her friend, and that Zoe had been in error when, after
her vain expedition to the temple--from which she had then just
returned--she had told her that the Roman was Irene's lover, and must at
the earliest hour have betrayed to the girl herself, or to the priests
in the Serapeum, what was their purpose regarding her.

In the soul of this noble youth there was nothing false--there could be
nothing false! And she, who was accustomed never to hear a word from
the men who surrounded her without asking herself with what aim it was
spoken, and how much of it was dissimulation or downright falsehood,
trusted the Roman, and was so happy in her trust that, full of gracious
gaiety, she herself invited Publius to give her the recluse's petition
to read. The Roman at once gave her the roll, saying that since it
contained so much that was sad, much as he hoped she would make herself
acquainted with it, he felt himself called upon also to give her
some pleasure, though in truth but a very small one. Thus speaking he
produced the gems, and she showed as much delight over this little work
of art as if, instead of being a rich queen and possessed of the finest
engraved gems in the world, she were some poor girl receiving her first
gift of some long-desired gold ornament.

"Exquisite, splendid!" she cried again and again. "And besides, they
are an imperishable memorial of you, dear friend, and of your visit to
Egypt. I will have them set with the most precious stones; even diamonds
will seem worthless to me compared with this gift from you. This has
already decided my sentence as to Eulaeus and his unhappy victims
before I read your petition. Still I will read that roll, and read
it attentively, for my husband regards Eulaeus as a useful--almost an
indispensable-tool, and I must give good reasons for my verdict and for
the pardon. I believe in the innocence of the unfortunate Philotas,
but if he had committed a hundred murders, after this present I would
procure his freedom all the same."

The words vexed the Roman, and they made her who had spoken them in
order to please him appear to him at that moment more in the light of a
corruptible official than of a queen. He found the time hang heavy
that he spent with Cleopatra, who, in spite of his reserve, gave him
to understand with more and more insistence how warmly she felt towards
him; but the more she talked and the more she told him, the more silent
he became, and he breathed a sigh of relief when her husband at last
appeared to fetch him and Cleopatra away to their mid-day meal.

At table Philometor promised to take up the cause of Philotas and his
wife, both of whom he had known, and whose fate had much grieved him;
still he begged his wife and the Roman not to bring Eulaeus to justice
till Euergetes should have left Memphis, for, during his brother's
presence, beset as he was with difficulties, he could not spare him; and
if he might judge of Publius by himself he cared far more to reinstate
the innocent in their rights, and to release them from their miserable
lot--a lot of which he had only learned the full horrors quite recently
from his tutor Agatharchides--than to drag a wretch before the judges
to-morrow or the day after, who was unworthy of his anger, and who at
any rate should not escape punishment.

Before the letter from Asclepiodorus--stating the mistaken hypothesis
entertained by the priests of Serapis that Irene had been carried off
by the king's order--could reach the palace, Publius had found an
opportunity of excusing himself and quitting the royal couple. Not even
Cleopatra herself could raise any objection to his distinct assurance
that he must write to Rome today on matters of importance. Philometor's
favor was easy to win, and as soon as he was alone with his wife he
could not find words enough in praise of the noble qualities of the
young man, who seemed destined in the future to be of the greatest
service to him and to his interests at Rome, and whose friendly attitude
towards himself was one more advantage that he owed--as he was happy to
acknowledge--to the irresistible talents and grace of his wife.

When Publius had quitted the palace and hurried back to his tent, he
felt like a journeyman returning from a hard day's labor, or a man
acquitted from a serious charge; like one who had lost his way, and has
found the right road again.

The heavy air in the arbors and alleys of the embowered gardens seemed
to him easier to breathe than the cool breeze that fanned Cleopatra's
raised roof. He felt the queen's presence to be at once exciting and
oppressive, and in spite of all that was flattering to himself in the
advances made to him by the powerful princess, it was no more gratifying
to his taste than an elegantly prepared dish served on gold plate, which
we are forced to partake of though poison may be hidden in it, and which
when at last we taste it is sickeningly sweet.

Publius was an honest man, and it seemed to him--as to all who resemble
him--that love which was forced upon him was like a decoration of honor
bestowed by a hand which we do not respect, and that we would rather
refuse than accept; or like praise out of all proportion to our merit,
which may indeed delight a fool, but rouses the indignation rather than
the gratitude of a wise man. It struck him too that Cleopatra intended
to make use of him, in the first place as a toy to amuse herself, and
then as a useful instrument or underling, and this so gravely incensed
and discomfited the serious and sensitive young man that he would
willingly have quitted Memphis and Egypt at once and without any
leave-taking. However, it was not quite easy for him to get away, for
all his thoughts of Cleopatra were mixed up with others of Klea, as
inseparably as when we picture to ourselves the shades of night, the
tender light of the calm moon rises too before our fancy.

Having saved Irene, his present desire was to restore her parents to
liberty; to quit Egypt without having seen Klea once more seemed to him
absolutely impossible. He endeavored once more to revive in his mind the
image of her proud tall figure; he felt he must tell her that she was
beautiful, a woman worthy of a king--that he was her friend and hated
injustice, and was ready to sacrifice much for justice's sake and for
her own in the service of her parents and herself. To-day again, before
the banquet, he purposed to go to the temple, and to entreat the recluse
to help him to an interview with his adopted daughter.

If only Klea could know beforehand what he had been doing for Irene and
their parents she must surely let him see that her haughty eyes could
look kindly on him, must offer him her hand in farewell, and then he
should clasp it in both his, and press it to his breast. Then would he
tell her in the warmest and most inspired words he could command how
happy he was to have seen her and known her, and how painful it was to
bid her farewell; perhaps she might leave her hand in his, and give
him some kind word in return. One kind word--one phrase of thanks from
Klea's firm but beautiful mouth--seemed to him of higher value than a
kiss or an embrace from the great and wealthy Queen of Egypt.

When Publius was excited he could be altogether carried away by a sudden
sweep of passion, but his imagination was neither particularly lively
nor glowing. While his horses were being harnessed, and then while
he was driving to the Serapeum, the tall form of the water-bearer was
constantly before him; again and again he pictured himself holding her
hand instead of the reins, and while he repeated to himself all he meant
to say at parting, and in fancy heard her thank him with a trembling
voice for his valuable help, and say that she would never forget him, he
felt his eyes moisten--unused as they had been to tears for many years.
He could not help recalling the day when he had taken leave of his
family to go to the wars for the first time. Then it had not been his
own eyes but his mother's that had sparkled through tears, and it struck
him that Klea, if she could be compared to any other woman, was most
like to that noble matron to whom he owed his life, and that she might
stand by the side of the daughter of the great Scipio Africanus like a
youthful Minerva by the side of Juno, the stately mother of the gods.

His disappointment was great when he found the door of the temple
closed, and was forced to return to Memphis without having seen either
Klea or the recluse.

He could try again to-morrow to accomplish what had been impossible
to-day, but his wish to see the girl he loved, rose to a torturing
longing, and as he sat once more in his tent to finish his second
despatch to Rome the thought of Klea came again to disturb his serious
work. Twenty times he started up to collect his thoughts, and as often
flung away his reed as the figure of the water-bearer interposed between
him and the writing under his hand; at last, out of patience with
himself, he struck the table in front of him with some force, set his
fists in his sides hard enough to hurt himself, and held them there for
a minute, ordering himself firmly and angrily to do his duty before he
thought of anything else.

His iron will won the victory; by the time it was growing dusk the
despatch was written. He was in the very act of stamping the wax of
the seal with the signet of his family--engraved on the sardonyx of his
ring--when one of his servants announced a black slave who desired to
speak with him. Publius ordered that he should be admitted, and the
negro handed him the tile on which Eulaeus had treacherously written
Klea's invitation to meet her at midnight near the Apis-tombs. His
enemy's crafty-looking emissary seemed to the young man as a messenger
from the gods; in a transport of haste and, without the faintest shadow
of a suspicion he wrote, "I will be there," on the luckless piece of
clay.

Publius was anxious to give the letter to the Senate, which he had just
finished, with his own hand, and privately, to the messenger who had
yesterday brought him the despatch from Rome; and as he would rather
have set aside an invitation to carry off a royal treasure that same
night than have neglected to meet Klea, he could not in any case be a
guest at the king's banquet, though Cleopatra would expect to see him
there in accordance with his promise. At this juncture he was annoyed to
miss his friend Lysias, for he wished to avoid offending the queen;
and the Corinthian, who at this moment was doubtless occupied in some
perfectly useless manner, was as clever in inventing plausible excuses
as he himself was dull in such matters. He hastily wrote a few lines to
the friend who shared his tent, requesting him to inform the king that
he had been prevented by urgent business from appearing among his guests
that evening; then he threw on his cloak, put on his travelling-hat
which shaded his face, and proceeded on foot and without any servant to
the harbor, with his letter in one hand and a staff in the other.

The soldiers and civic guards which filled the courts of the palace,
taking him for a messenger, did not challenge him as he walked swiftly
and firmly on, and so, without being detained or recognized, he reached
the inn by the harbor, where he was forced to wait an hour before the
messenger came home from the gay strangers' quarter where he had gone to
amuse himself. He had a great deal to talk of with this man, who was to
set out next morning for Alexandria and Rome; but Publius hardly gave
himself the necessary time, for he meant to start for the meeting place
in the Necropolis indicated by Klea, and well-known to himself, a
full hour before midnight, although he knew that he could reach his
destination in a very much shorter time.

The sun seems to move too slowly to those who long and wait, and a
planet would be more likely to fail in punctuality than a lover when
called by love.

In order to avoid observation he did not take a chariot but a strong
mule which the host of the inn lent him with pleasure; for the Roman
was so full of happy excitement in the hope of meeting Klea that he
had slipped a gold piece into the small, lightly-closed fingers of the
innkeeper's pretty child, which lay asleep on a bench by the side of the
table, besides paying double as much for the country wine he had drunk
as if it had been fine Falernian and without asking for his reckoning.
The host looked at him in astonishment when, finally, he sprang with a
grand leap on to the back of the tall beast, without laying his hand on
it; and it seemed even to Publius himself as though he had never since
boyhood felt so fresh, so extravagantly happy as at this moment.

The road to the tombs from the harbor was a different one to that which
led thither from the king's palace, and which Klea had taken, nor did it
lead past the tavern in which she had seen the murderers. By day it was
much used by pilgrims, and the Roman could not miss it even by night,
for the mule he was riding knew it well. That he had learned, for in
answer to his question as to what the innkeeper kept the beast for he
had said that it was wanted every day to carry pilgrims arriving from
Upper Egypt to the temple of Serapis and the tombs of the sacred bulls;
he could therefore very decidedly refuse the host's offer to send a
driver with the beast. All who saw him set out supposed that he was
returning to the city and the palace.

Publius rode through the streets of the city at an easy trot, and, as
the laughter of soldiers carousing in a tavern fell upon his ear, he
could have joined heartily in their merriment. But when the silent
desert lay around him, and the stars showed him that he would be much
too early at the appointed place, he brought the mule to a slower pace,
and the nearer he came to his destination the graver he grew, and the
stronger his heart beat. It must be something important and pressing
indeed that Klea desired to tell him in such a place and at such an
hour. Or was she like a thousand other women--was he now on the way to
a lover's meeting with her, who only a few days before had responded to
his glance and accepted his violets?

This thought flashed once through his mind with importunate
distinctness, but he dismissed it as absurd and unworthy of himself.
A king would be more likely to offer to share his throne with a beggar
than this girl would be to invite him to enjoy the sweet follies of
love-making with her in a secret spot.

Of course she wanted above all things to acquire some certainty as to
her sister's fate, perhaps too to speak to him of her parents; still,
she would hardly have made up her mind to invite him if she had not
learned to trust him, and this confidence filled him with pride, and at
the same time with an eager longing to see her, which seemed to storm
his heart with more violence with every minute that passed.

While the mule sought and found its way in the deep darkness with slow
and sure steps, he gazed up at the firmament, at the play of the clouds
which now covered the moon with their black masses, and now parted,
floating off in white sheeny billows while the silver crescent of the
moon showed between them like a swan against the dark mirror of a lake.

And all the time he thought incessantly of Klea--thinking in a dreamy
way that he saw her before him, but different and taller than before,
her form growing more and more before his eyes till at last it was so
tall that her head touched the sky, the clouds seemed to be her veil,
and the moon a brilliant diadem in her abundant dark hair. Powerfully
stirred by this vision he let the bridle fall on the mule's neck, and
spread open his arms to the beautiful phantom, but as he rode forwards
it ever retired, and when presently the west wind blew the sand in his
face, and he had to cover his eyes with his hand it vanished entirely,
and did not return before he found himself at the Apis-tombs.

He had hoped to find here a soldier or a watchman to whom he could
entrust the beast, but when the midnight chant of the priests of the
temple of Osiris-Apis had died away not a sound was to be heard far or
near; all that lay around him was as still and as motionless as though
all that had ever lived there were dead. Or had some demon robbed him
of his hearing? He could hear the rush of his own swift pulses in his
ears-not the faintest sound besides.

Such silence is there nowhere but in the city of the dead and at night,
nowhere but in the desert.

He tied the mule's bridle to a stela of granite covered with
inscriptions, and went forward to the appointed place. Midnight must be
past--that he saw by the position of the moon, and he was beginning to
ask himself whether he should remain standing where he was or go on to
meet the water-bearer when he heard first a light footstep, and then saw
a tall erect figure wrapped in a long mantle advancing straight towards
him along the avenue of sphinxes. Was it a man or a woman--was it she
whom he expected? and if it were she, was there ever a woman who had
come to meet a lover at an assignation with so measured, nay so solemn,
a step? Now he recognized her face--was it the pale moonlight that made
it look so bloodless and marble-white? There was something rigid in her
features, and yet they had never--not even when she blushingly accepted
his violets--looked to him so faultlessly beautiful, so regular and so
nobly cut, so dignified, nay impressive.

For fully a minute the two stood face to face, speechless and yet quite
near to each other. Then Publius broke the silence, uttering with the
warmest feeling and yet with anxiety in his deep, pure voice, only one
single word; and the word was her name "Klea."

The music of this single word stirred the girl's heart like a message
and blessing from heaven, like the sweetest harmony of the siren's song,
like the word of acquittal from a judge's lips when the verdict is life
or death, and her lips were already parted to say 'Publius' in a tone
no less deep and heartfelt-but, with all the force of her soul, she
restrained herself, and said softly and quickly:

"You are here at a late hour, and it is well that you have come."

"You sent for me," replied the Roman.

"It was another that did that, not I," replied Klea in a slow dull tone,
as if she were lifting a heavy weight, and could hardly draw her breath.
"Now--follow me, for this is not the place to explain everything in."

With these words Klea went towards the locked door of the Apis-tombs,
and tried, as she stood in front of it, to insert into the lock the
key that Krates had given her; but the lock was still so new, and her
fingers shook so much, that she could not immediately succeed. Publius
meanwhile was standing close by her side, and as he tried to help her
his fingers touched hers.

And when he--certainly not by mistake--laid his strong and yet trembling
hand on hers, she let it stay for a moment, for she felt as if a tide of
warm mist rose up in her bosom dimming her perceptions, and paralyzing
her will and blurring her sight.

"Klea," he repeated, and he tried to take her left hand in his own;
but she, like a person suddenly aroused to consciousness after a short
dream, immediately withdrew the hand on which his was resting, put the
key into the lock, opened the door, and exclaimed in a voice of almost
stern command, "Go in first."

Publius obeyed and entered the spacious antechamber of the venerable
cave, hewn out of the rock and now dimly lighted. A curved passage of
which he could not see the end lay before him, and on both sides, to
the right and left of him, opened out the chambers in which stood the
sarcophagi of the deceased sacred bulls. Over each of the enormous stone
coffins a lamp burnt day and night, and wherever a vault stood open
their glimmer fell across the deep gloom of the cave, throwing a bright
beam of light on the dusky path that led into the heart of the rock,
