came and yet another gave them the best she had to give; and I was none
the worse when she had my youngest sister at the breast, nor was she
when I was petted and kissed. And it must be just the same with you.
Thought I to myself: though she once loved another man, she may still
have a good share left for me!"

"Yes, indeed, Rustem!" she exclaimed, looking tearfully but gratefully
into his eyes. "All that is in me of love and tenderness is for you--for
you only."

At this he joyfully exclaimed:

"All, that is indeed good hearing! That will do for me; that is what I
call a good morning's work! I sat down under this tree a vagabond and
a wanderer, and I get up a future land-holder, with the sweetest little
wife in the world to keep house for me."

They sat a long time under the shady foliage; he craved no more than to
gaze at her and, when he put the old questions asked by all lovers, to
be answered with lips and eyes, or merely a speechless nod. Her hands no
longer plied the needle, and the pair would have smiled in pity on
any one who should have complained of the intolerable heat of this
scorching, parching forenoon. A pair of turtle doves over their heads
were less indifferent to the sun's rays than they, for the birds had
closed their eyes, and the head of the mother bird was resting languidly
against the dark collar round her mate's neck.




CHAPTER XIII.

The Vekeel, like the Persian lovers, did not allow the heat of the day
to interfere with his plans. He regarded the governor's house as
his own; all he found there aroused, not merely his avarice, but his
interest. His first object was to find some document which might justify
his proceedings against Orion and the sequestration of his estates, in
the eyes of the authorities at Medina.

Great schemes were brewing there; if the conspiracy against the Khaliff
Omar should succeed, he had little to fear; and the greater the sum he
could ere long forward to the new sovereign, the more surely he could
count on his patronage--a sum exceeding, if possible, the largest which
his predecessor had ever cast into the Khaliff's treasury.

He went from room to room with the curiosity and avidity of a child,
touching everything, testing the softness of the pillows, peeping into
scrolls which he did not understand, tossing them aside, smelling at the
perfumes in the dead woman's rooms, and the medicines she had used. He
showed his teeth with delight when he found in her trunks some costly
jewels and gold coins, stuck the finest of her diamond rings on his
finger, already covered with gems, and then eagerly searched every
corner of the rooms which Orion had occupied.

His interpreter, who could read Greek, had to translate every document
he found that did not contain verses. While he listened, he clawed and
strummed on the young man's lyre and poured out the scented oil which
Orion had been wont to use to smear it over his beard. In front of the
bright silver mirror he could not cease from making faces.

To his great disgust he could find nothing among the hundred objects
and trifles that lay about to justify suspicion, till, just as he was
leaving the room, he noticed in a basket near the writing-table some
discarded tablets. He at once pointed them out to the interpreter
and, though there was but little to read on the Diptychon,--[Double
writing-tablets, which folded together]--it seemed important to the
negro for it ran as follows:

"Orion, the son of George, to Paula the daughter of Thomas!

"You have heard already that it is now impossible for me to assist in
the rescue of the nuns. But do not misunderstand me. Your noble, and
only too well-founded desire to lend succor to your fellow-believers
would have sufficed..."

From this point the words written on the wax were carefully effaced, and
hardly a letter was decipherable; indeed, there were so few lines that
it seemed as though the letter had never been ended-which was the fact.

Though it gave the Vekeel no inculpating evidence against Orion it
pointed to his connection with the guilty parties: Paula, doubtless, had
been concerned in the scheme which had cost the lives of so many brave
Moslems. The negro had learnt, through the money-changer at Fostat,
that she was on terms of close intimacy with the Mukaukas' son and had
entrusted her property to his stewardship. They must both be accused as
accomplices in the deed, and the document proved Orion's knowledge of
it, at any rate.

Plotinus, the bishop, at whose instigation the fugitives had been
chased, could fill up what the damsel might choose to conceal.

He had started to follow the patriarch immediately after the pursuers
had set out, and had only returned from Upper Egypt early on the
previous day. On his arrival he had forwarded to the Vekeel two
indictments brought against Orion by the prelate: the first relating
to the evasion of the nuns; the other to the embezzlement of a costly
emerald; the rightful property of the church. These accusations were
what had encouraged the Negro to confiscate the young man's estate,
particularly as the bitter tone of the patriarch's document sufficiently
proved that in him he had found an ally.

Paula must next be placed in safe custody, and he had no doubt whatever
that her statement would incriminate Orion in some degree. He would
gladly have cross-examined her at once, but he had other matters in hand
to-day.

The longest part of his task was ransacking the treasurer's office;
Nilus himself had to conduct the search. Everything which he pointed out
as a legal document, title-deed, contract for purchase or sale, revenue
account or the like, was at once placed in oxcarts or on camels, with
the large sums of gold and silver coin, and carried across the river
under a strong escort. All the more antique deeds and the family
archives, the Vekeel left untouched. He was indeed an indefatigable
man, for although these details kept him busy the whole day, he allowed
himself no rest nor did he once ask for the refreshment of food or a
cooling draught. As the day went on he enquired again and again for the
bishop, with increasing impatience and irritation. It would have been
his part to wait on the patriarch, but who was Plotinus? Thin-skinned,
like all up-starts in authority, he took the bishop's delay as an act of
personal contumely. But the shepherd of the flock at Memphis was not a
haughty prelate, but a very humble and pious minister. His superior, the
patriarch, had entrusted him with an important mission to Amru or his
lieutenant, and yet he could let the Vekeel wait in vain, and not even
send him a message of explanation; in the afternoon, however, his old
housekeeper dispatched the acolyte who was attached to his person to
seek Philippus. Her master, a hale and vigorous man, had gone to bed
by broad day-light a few hours after his return home, and had not again
left it. He was hot and thirsty, and did not seem fully conscious of
where he was or of what was happening.

Plotinus had always maintained that prayer was the Christian's best
medicine; still, as his poor body had become alarmingly heated the old
woman ventured to send for the physician; but the messenger came back
saying that Philippus was absent on a journey. This was in fact the
case: He had quitted Memphis in obedience to a letter from Haschim. The
merchant's unfortunate son was not getting better. There seemed to be
an injury to some internal organ, which threatened his life. The anxious
father besought the leech, in whom he had the greatest confidence, to
hasten to Djidda, there to examine the sufferer and undertake the case.
At the same time he desired that Rustem should join him as soon as his
health would permit.

This letter--which ended with greetings to Paula, for whose father he
was making diligent search--agitated Philippus greatly. How could he
leave Memphis at a time of such famine and sickness?--And Dame Joanna
and her daughter!

On the other hand he was much drawn to get away on Paula's
account--away, far away; and then how gladly would he do his best
to save that fine old man's son. In spite of all this he would have
remained, but that his old friend, quite unexpectedly, took Haschim's
side of the question and implored him to make the journey. He would make
it his business and his pleasure to take charge of the women in Rufinus'
house; Philip's assistant could fill his place at the bedside of many
of the sick, and the rest could die without him. Had not he himself said
that there was no remedy for the disease? Again, Philip had said not
long since that there could be no peace for him within reach of Paula:
here was a favorable opportunity for escape without attracting remark,
and at the same time for doing a work of the truest charity.

So Philippus had yielded, and had started on his journey with very mixed
feelings.

Horapollo did not devote any particular attention to his personal
comfort; but in one respect he took especial care of himself. He had
great difficulty in walking and, as he loved to breathe the fresh air at
sundown, and sometimes to study the stars at a late hour, he kept an ass
of the best and finest breed. He did not hesitate to pay a high price
for such a beast if it really answered his requirements; that is to say
if it were strong, surefooted, gentle, and light-colored. His father and
grandfather, priests of Isis, had always ridden white asses, and so he
would do the same.

During the last few sultry weeks he had rarely gone out of doors, and
to-day he waited till the hour before sunset before starting to keep his
promise.

Robed in snowy-white linen, with new sandals on his feet, freshly
shaven, and protected from the sun's rays by a crisply curled, flowing
wig, after the manner of his fathers, as well as by an umbrella, he
mounted his beautiful white ass in the conviction that he had done
his best for his outer man, and set forth, followed by his black slave
trotting on foot.

It was not yet dark when he stopped at the house of Rufinus. His heart
had not beat so high for many a day.

"I feel as if I had come courting," said he, laughing at himself. "Well,
and I really am come to propose an alliance for the rest of my life!
Still, curiosity, one would think, might be shed with the hair and the
teeth!" However, it still clung to him, and he could not deny to himself
that he was very curious as to the person whom he hated, though he had
never seen her, simply because she was the daughter of a patrician and a
prefect, and had made his Philippus miserable. As he was dismounting,
a graceful young girl and an older woman, in very costly though simple
dresses, came through the garden. These must be the water-wagtail, and
Orion's Byzantine guest.--How annoying! So many women at once!

Their presence here could only embarrass and disturb him--a lonely
student unused to the society of women. However, there was no help for
it; and the new-comers were not so bad after all.

Katharina was a very attractive, pretty little mouse, and even without
her millions much too good for the libertine Orion. The matron, who had
a kind, pleasant face, was exactly what Philippus had described her. But
then--and this spoilt all--in their presence he must not allude to the
death of Rufinus, so that he could not mention his proposed arrangement.
He had swallowed all that dust, and borne that heat for nothing, and
to-morrow he must ignominiously go through it all again!

The first people he met were a handsome young couple: Rustem and
Mandane. There could be no doubt as to their identity; so he went up to
them and gave Rustem the merchant's message, offering in Philip's name
to advance the money for the journey. But the Masdakite patted his
sleeve, in which he carried a good round sum in gold pieces, and
exclaimed cheerily:

"It is all here, and enough for two travellers to the East.--My little
wife, by your leave; the time has come, little pigeon! Off we go,
homeward bound!"

The huge fellow shouted it out in his deep voice with such effervescent
contentment, and the pretty girl, as she looked up at him, was so glad,
so much in love, and so grateful, that it quite cheered the old man; and
he, who read an omen in every incident, accepted this meeting as of
good augury at his first entering the house which was probably to be his
home.

His visit went on as well as it had begun, for he was welcomed very
warmly both by the widow and daughter of Rufinus. Pulcheria at once
pushed forward her father's arm-chair and placed a pillow behind his
back, and she did it so quietly, so simply, and so amiably that it
warmed his old heart, and he said to himself that it would be almost
too much of a good thing to have such care given him every day and every
hour.

He could not forbear from a kindly jest with the young girl over her
attentions, and Martina at once entered into the joke. She had seen
him coming on his fine ass; she praised the steed, and then refused to
believe that the rider was past eighty. His news of Philip's departure
was regretted by all, and he was delighted to perceive that Pulcheria
seemed startled and presently shrank into the background. What a sweet,
pure, kind face the child had--and pretty withal; she must and should be
his little daughter; and all the while he was talking, or listening to
Katharina's small jokes and a friendly catechism from Martina and Dame
Joanna, in his mind's eye he saw Philippus and that dear little creature
as man and wife, surrounded by pretty children playing all about him.

He had come to comfort and to condole, and lo! he was having as pleasant
an hour as he had known in a long time.

He and the other visitors had been received in the vindarium, which was
now brightly lighted up, and now and then he glanced at the doors which
opened on this, the centre of the house, trying to imagine what the
different rooms should by-and-bye be used for.

But he heard a light step behind him; Martina rose, the water-wagtail
hurried to meet the new-comer, and there appeared on the scene the tall
figure of a girl dressed in mourning-robes. She greeted the matron with
distinguished dignity, cast a cordial glance of sympathetic intelligence
to Joanna and Pulcheria, and when the mistress of the house told her
who the old man was, she went up to him and held out her hand--a cool,
slender hand, as white as marble; the true patrician hand.

Yes, she was beautiful, wonderfully beautiful! He could hardly remember
ever to have seen her equal. A spotless masterpiece of the Creator's
hand, made like some unapproachable goddess, to command the worship of
subject adorers; however, she must renounce all hope of his, for those
marble features, all the whiter by contrast with her black dress, had no
attraction for him. No warming glow shone in those proud eyes; and under
that lordly bosom beat no loving or lovable heart; he shivered at the
touch of her fingers, and her presence, he thought, had a chilling and
paralyzing influence on all the party.

This was, in fact, the case.

Paula had been sent for to see the senator's wife and Katharina.
Martina, thought she, had come out of mere curiosity, and she had a
preconceived dislike to any one connected with Heliodora. She had lost
her confidence in the water-wagtail, for only two days ago the acolyte
in personal attendance on the bishop--and whose child Rufinus had cured
of a lame foot--had been to the house to warn Joanna against the girl.
Katharina, he told her, had a short while since betrayed to Plotinus
some important secret relating to her husband, and the bishop had
immediately gone over to Fostat. It was hard to believe such a thing
of any friend, still, the girl who, by her own confession, had been so
ready to play the part of spy in the neighboring garden, was the only
person who would have told the prelate what plan was in hand for the
rescue of the sisters. The acolyte's positive statement, indeed, left no
room for doubt.

It was not in Paula's nature to think ill of others; but in this case
her candid spirit, incapable of falsehood, would not suffer her to be
anything but cool to the child; the more effusively Katharina clung to
her, the more icily Paula repelled her.

The old man saw this, and he concluded that this mien and demeanor
were natural to Paula at all times patrician haughtiness, cold-hearted
selfishness, the insolent and boundless pride of the race he
loathed--noble by birth alone--stood before him incarnate. He hated the
whole class, and he hated this specimen of the class; and his aversion
increased tenfold as he remembered what woe this cold siren had wrought
for the son of his affections and might bring on him if she should
thwart his favorite project. Sooner would he end his days in loneliness,
parted even from Philippus, than share his home, his table, and his
daily life with this woman, who could repel the sincerely-meant caresses
of that pretty, childlike, simple little Katharina with such frigid and
supercilious haughtiness. The mere sight of her at meals would embitter
every mouthful; only to hear her domineering tones in the next room
would spoil his pleasure in working; the touch of her cold hand as she
bid him good-night would destroy his night's rest!

Here and now her presence was more than he could bear. It was an offense
to him, a challenge; and if ever he had wished to clear her out of his
path and the physician's--by force, if need should be--the idea wholly
possessed him now.

Irritated and provoked, he took leave of all the others, carefully
avoiding a glance even at Paula, though, after he rose, she went up to
him on purpose to say a few pleasant words, and to assure him how highly
she esteemed his adopted son.

Pulcheria escorted him through the garden and he promised her to return
on the morrow, or the day after, and then she must take care that he
found her and her mother alone, for he had no fancy to allow Paula to
thrust her pride and airs under his nose a second time.

He angrily rejected Pulcheria's attempts to take her friend's part, and
he trotted home again, mumbling curses between his old lips.

Martina, meanwhile, had made friends with Paula in her genial, frank
way. She had met her parents in time past in Constantinople and spoke of
them with heart-felt warmth. This broke the ice between them, and
when Martina spoke of Orion--her 'great Sesostris'--of the regard
and popularity he had enjoyed in Constantinople, and then, with due
recognition and sympathy, of his misfortune, Paula felt drawn towards
her indeed. Her reserve vanished entirely, and the conversation
between the new acquaintances became more and more eager, intimate, and
delightful.

When they parted both felt that they could only gain by further
intercourse. Paula was called away at the very moment of leave-taking,
and left the room with warm expressions intended only for the matron:
"Not good-bye--we must meet again. But of course it is my part, as
the younger, to go to you!" And she was no sooner gone than Martina
exclaimed:

"What a lovely creature! The worthy daughter of a noble father! And her
mother! O dame Joanna! A sweeter being has rarely graced this miserable
world; she was born to die young, she was only made to bloom and fade!"
Then, turning to Katharina, she went on: with kindly reproof. "Evil
tongues gave me a very false idea of this girl. 'A silver kernel in
a golden shell,' says the proverb, but in this case both alike are of
gold.--Between you two--good God!--But I know what has blinded your
clear eyes, poor little kitten. After all, we all see things as we
wish to see them. I would lay a wager, dame Joanna, that you are of my
opinion in thinking the fair Paula a perfectly noble creature. Aye, a
noble creature; it is an expressive word and God knows! How seldom is
it a true one? It is one I am little apt to use, but I know no other for
such as she is, and on her it is not ill-bestowed."

"Indeed it is not!" answered Joanna with warm assent; but Martina
sighed, for she was thinking to herself! "Poor Heliodora! I cannot but
confess that Paula is the only match for my 'great Sesostris.' But what
in Heaven's name will become of that poor, unfortunate, love-sick little
woman?"

All this flashed through her quick brain while Katharina was trying to
justify herself, and asserting that she fully recognised Paula's great
qualities, but that she was proud, fearfully proud--she had given
Martina herself some evidence of that.

At this Pulcheria interposed in zealous defense of her friend. She,
however, had hardly begun to speak when she, too, was interrupted,
for men's voices were heard in loud discussion in the vestibule, and
Perpetua suddenly rushed in with a terrified face, exclaiming, heedless
of the strangers: "Oh Dame Joanna! Here is another, dreadful misfortune!
Those Arab devils have come again, with an interpreter and a writer.
And they have been sent--Merciful Saviour, is it possible?--they have
brought a warrant to take away my poor dear child, to take her to
prison--to drag her all through the city on foot and throw her into
prison."

The faithful soul sobbed aloud and covered her face with her hands.
Terror fell upon them all; Joanna left the viridarium in speechless
dismay, and Martina exclaimed:

"What a horrible, vile country! Good God, they are even falling on us
women. Children, children--give me a seat, I feel quite ill.--In prison!
that beautiful, matchless creature dragged through the streets to
prison. If the warrant is all right she must go--she must! Not an angel
from heaven could save her. But that she should be marched through
the town, that noble and splendid creature, as if she were a common
thief--it is not to be borne. So much as one woman can do for another
at any rate shall be done, so long as I am here to stand on two
feet!--Katharina, child, do not you understand? Why do you stand gaping
at me as if I were a feathered ape? What do your fat horses eat oats
for? What, you do not understand me yet? Be off at once, this minute,
and have the horses put in the large closed chariot in which I came
here, and bring it to the door.--Ah! At last you see daylight; now, take
to your heels and fly!"

And she clapped her hands as if she were driving hens off a garden-bed;
Katharina had no alternative but to obey.

Martina then felt for her purse, and when she had found it she added
confidently:

"Thank God! I can talk to these villains! This is a language," and
she clinked the gold pieces, intelligible to all. "Come, where are the
rascals?"

The universal tongue had the desired effect. The chief of the guard
allowed it to persuade him to convey Paula to prison in the chariot,
and to promise that she should find decent accommodation there, while he
also granted old Betta the leave she insisted on with floods of tears,
to share the girl's captivity.

Paula maintained her dignity and composure under this unexpected shock.
Only when it came to taking leave of Pulcheria and Mary, who clung to
her in frantic grief and begged to go with her and Betta to prison, she
could not restrain her tears.

The scribe had informed her that she was charged dy Bishop Plotinus with
having plotted the escape and flight of the nuns, and Joanna's knees
trembled under her when Paula whispered in her ear:

"Beware of Katharina! No one else could have betrayed us; if she
has also revealed what Rufinus did for the sisters we must deny it,
positively and unflinchingly. Fear nothing: they will get not a word
out of me." Then she added aloud: "I need not beg you to remember me
lovingly; thanks to you both--the warmest, deepest thanks for all....
You, Pul...." And she clasped the mother and daughter to her bosom,
while Mary, clinging to her, hid her little face in her skirts, weeping
bitterly.... "You, Dame Joanna, took me in, a forlorn creature, and made
me happy till Fate fell on us all--you know, ah! you know too well.--The
kindness you have shown to me show now to my little Mary. And there
is one thing more--here comes the interpreter again!--A moment yet, I
beg!--If the messenger should return and bring news of my father or, my
God! my God!--my father himself, let me know, or bring him to me!--Or,
if I am dead by the time he comes, tell him that to find him, to see him
once more, was my heart's dearest wish. And beg my father," she breathed
the words into Joanna's ear, "to love Orion as a son. And tell them both
that I loved them to the last, deeply, perfectly, beyond words!" Then
she added aloud as: she kissed each on her eyes and lips: "I love you
and shall always love you--you, Joanna, and you, my Pulcheria, and you,
Mary, my sweet, precious darling."

At this the water-wagtail humed forward with outstretched arms, but Dame
Joanna put out a significantly warning hand; and they who were one in
heart clasped each other in a last embrace as though they were indeed
but one and no stranger could have any part in it.

Once more Katharina tried to approach Paula; but Martina, whose eyes
filled with tears as she looked on the parting, held her back by the
shoulder and whispered:

"Do not disturb them, child. Such hearts spontaneously attract those for
whom they yearn. I, old as I am, would gladly be worthy to be called."

The interpreter now sternly insisted on starting. The three women
parted; but still the little girl held tightly to Paula, even when she
went up to the matron and kissed her with a natural impulse. Martina
took her head between her hands, kissed her fondly, and said in a voice
she could scarcely control: "God protect and keep you, child! I thank
Him for having brought us together. A soul so pure and clear as yours is
not to be found in the capital, but we still know how to be friends to
our friends--at any rate I and my husband do--and if Heaven but grants
me the opportunity you shall prove it. You never need feel alone in the
world; never, so long as Justinus and his wife are still in it. Remember
that, child; I mean it in solemn earnest."

With this, she again embraced Paula, who as she went out to enter the
chariot also bestowed a farewell kiss on Eudoxia and Mandane, for they,
too, stood modestly weeping in the background; then she gave her hand to
the hump-backed gardener, and to the Masdakite, down whose cheeks tears
were rolling. At this moment Katharina stood in her path, seized her arm
in mortified excitement, and said insistently:

"And have you not a word for me?"

Paula freed herself from her clutch and said in a low voice: "I thank
you for lending me the chariot. As you know, it is taking me to prison,
and I fear it is your perfidy that has brought me to this. If I am
wrong, forgive me--if I am right, your punishment will hardly be lighter
than my fate. You are still young, Katharina; try to grow better."

And with this she stepped into the chariot with old Betta, and the last
she saw was little Mary who threw herself sobbing into Joanna's arms.




CHAPTER XIV.

Susannah had never particularly cared for Paula, but her fate shocked
her and moved her to pity. She must at once enquire whether it was not
possible to send her some better food than the ordinary prison-fare.
That was but Christian charity, and her daughter seemed to take her
friend's misfortune much to heart. When she and Martina returned home
she looked so cast down and distracted that no stranger now would ever
have dreamed of comparing her with a brisk little bird.

Once more a poisoned arrow had struck her. Till now she had been wicked
only in her own eyes; now she was wicked in the eyes of another. Paula
knew it was she who had betrayed her. The traitoress had been met by
treachery. The woman she hated had a right to regard her as spiteful and
malignant, and for this she hated her more than ever.

Till now she had nowhere failed to find an affectionate greeting and
welcome; and to-day how coldly she had been repulsed--and not by Paula
alone, but also by Martina, who no doubt had noticed something, and
whose dry reserve had been quite intolerable to the girl.

It was all the old bishop's fault; he had not kept his promise that her
tale-bearing should remain as secret as a confession. Indeed, he must
have deliberately revealed it, for no one but herself knew of the facts.
Perhaps he had even mentioned her name to the Arabs; in that case she
would have to bear witness before the judges, and then in what light
would she appear to Orion, to her mother, to Joanna and Martina?

She had not failed to understand that old Rufinus must have perished
in the expedition, and she was truly grieved. His wife and daughter
had always been kind neighbors to her; and she would not have willingly
brought sorrow on them. If she were called up to give evidence it might
go hard with them, and she wished no harm to any one but those who had
cheated her out of Orion's love. This idea of standing before a court of
justice was the worst of all; this must be warded off at any cost.

Where could Bishop Plotinus be? He had returned to Memphis the day
before, and yet he had not been to see her mother, to whom he usually
paid a daily visit. This absence seemed to her ominous. Everything
depended on her reminding the old man of his promise as soon as
possible; for if at the trial next morning--which of course, he
must attend--he should happen to mention her name, the guards, the
interpreter, and the scribe would invade her home too and then-horror!
She had given evidence once already, and could never again go through
all that had ensued.

But how was she to get at the bishop in the course of the night or early
to-morrow at latest?

The chariot had not yet returned, and if--it still wanted two hours of
midnight; yes--it must be done.

She began talking to her mother of the prelate's absence; Susannah, too,
was uneasy about it, particularly since she had heard that the old man
had come home ill and that his servant had been out and about in search
of a physician. Katharina promptly proposed to go and see him: the
horses were still in harness, her nurse could accompany her. She really
must go and learn how her venerable friend was going on.

Susannah thought this very sweet; still, she said it was very late for
such a visit; however, her spoilt child had said that she "must" and the
answer was a foregone conclusion. Dame Susannah gave way; the nurse was
sent for, and as soon as the chariot came round Katharina flung her arms
round her mother's neck, promising her not to stay long, and in a few
minutes the chariot stopped at the door of the bishop's palace. She bid
the nurse wait for her and went alone into the vast, rambling house.

The spacious hall, lighted feebly by a single lamp, was silent and
deserted, even the door-keeper had left his post; however, she was
familiar with every step and turning, and went on through the impluvium
into the library where, at this hour, the bishop was wont to be found.
But it was dark, and her gentle call met with no reply. In the next
room, to which she timidly felt her way, a slave lay snoring; beside
him were a wine jar and a hand-lamp. The sight somewhat reassured her.
Beyond was the bishop's bedroom, which she had never been into. A dim
light gleamed through the open door and she heard a low moaning and
gasping. She called the house-keeper by name once, twice; no answer. The
sleeping slave did not stir; but a familiar voice addressed her from the
bedroom, groaning rather than saying:

"Who is there? Is he come? Have you found him at last?"

The whole household had fled in fear of the pestilence; even the
acolyte, who had indeed a wife and children. The housekeeper had been
forced to leave the master to seek the physician, who had already been
there once, and the last remaining slave, a faithful, goodhearted,
heedless sot, had been left in charge; but he had brought a jar of wine
up from the unguarded cellar, had soon emptied it, and then, overcome by
drink and the heat of the night, he had fallen asleep.

Katharina at once spoke her name and the old man answered her, saying
kindly, but with difficulty: "Ah, it is you, you, my child!"

She took up the lamp and went close to the sick man. He put out his lean
arm to welcome her; but, as her approach brought the light near to him
he covered his eyes, crying out distressfully: "No, no; that hurts. Take
away the lamp."

Katharina set it down on a low chest behind the head of the bed; then
she went up to the sufferer, gave him her mother's message, and asked
him how he was and why he was left alone. He could only give incoherent
answers which he gasped out with great difficulty, bidding her go close
to him for he could not hear her distinctly. He was very ill, he told
her--dying. It was good of her to have come for she had always been his
pet, his dear, good little girl.

"And it was a happy impulse that brought you," he added, "to receive an
old man's blessing. I give it you with my whole heart."

As he spoke he put forth his hand and she, following an instinctive
prompting, fell on her knees by the side of the couch.

He laid his burning right hand on her head and murmured some words of
blessing; she, however, scarcely heeded them, for his hand felt like
lead and its heat oppressed and distressed her dreadfully. It was
a sincere grief to her to see this true old friend of her childhood
suffering thus--perhaps indeed dying; at the same time she did not
forget what had brought her here--still, she dared not disturb him
in this act of love. He gave her his blessing--that was kind; but his
mutterings did not come to an end, the weight of the hot hand on her
head grew heavier and heavier, and at last became intolerable. She
felt quite dazed, but with an effort she collected her senses and then
perceived that the old man had wandered off from the usual formulas of
blessing and was murmuring disconnected and inarticulate words.

At this she raised the terrible, fevered hand, laid it on the bed, and
was about to ask him whether he had betrayed her to Benjamin, and if he
had mentioned her name, when--Merciful God! there on his cheeks were the
same livid spots that she had noticed on those of the plague stricken
man in Medea's house. With a cry of horror she sprang up, snatched at
the lamp, held it over the sufferer, heedless of his cries of anguish,
looked into his face, and pulled away the weary hands with which he
tried to screen his eyes from the light. Then, having convinced herself
that she was not mistaken, she fled from room to room out into the hall.

Here she was met by the housekeeper, who took the lamp out of her hand
and was about to question her; but Katharina only screamed:

"The plague is in the house! Lock the doors!" and then rushed away, past
the leech who was coming in. With one bound she was in the chariot, and
as the horses started she wailed out to the nurse:

"The plague--they have the plague. Plotinus has taken the plague!"

The terrified woman tried to soothe her, assuring her that she must be
mistaken for such hellish fiends did not dare come near so holy a man.
But the girl vouchsafed no reply, merely desiring her to have a bath
made ready for her as soon as they should reach home.

She felt utterly shattered; on the spot where the old man's
plague-stricken hand had rested she was conscious of a heavy, hateful
pressure, and when the chariot at length drove into their own garden
something warm and heavy-something she could not shake off, still seemed
to weigh on her brain.

The windows were all dark excepting one on the ground-floor, where a
light was still visible in the room inhabited by Heliodora. A diabolical
thought flashed through her over-excited and restless mind; without
looking to the right hand or the left she obeyed the impulse and went
forward, just as she was, into her friend's sitting-room and then,
lifting a curtain, on into the bedroom. Heliodora was lying on her
couch, still suffering from a headache which had prevented her going to
visit their neighbors; at first she did not notice the late visitor who
stood by her side and bid her good evening.

A single lamp shed a dim light in the spacious room, and the young girl
had never thought their guest so lovely as she looked in that twilight.
A night wrapper of the thinnest material only half hid her beautiful
limbs. Round her flowing, fair hair, floated the subtle, hardly
perceptible perfume which always pervaded this favorite of fortune. Two
heavy plaits lay like sheeny snakes over her bosom and the white sheet.
Her face was turned upwards and was exquisitely calm and sweet; and as
she lay motionless and smiled up at Katharina, she looked like an angel
wearied in well-doing.

No man could resist the charms of this woman, and Orion had succumbed.
By her side was a lute, from which she brought the softest and most
soothing tones, and thus added to the witchery of her appearance.

Katharina's whole being was in wild revolt; she did not know how she
was able to return Heliodora's greeting, and to ask her how she could
possibly play the lute with a headache.

"Just gliding my fingers over the strings calms and refreshes my blood,"
she replied pleasantly. "But you, child, look as if you were suffering
far worse than I.--Did you come home in the chariot that drove up just
now?"

"Yes," replied Katharina. "I have been to see our dear old bishop. He is
very ill, dying; he will soon be taken from us. Oh, what a fearful
day! First Orion's mother, then Paula, and now this to crown all! Oh,
Heliodora, Heliodora!"

She fell on her knees by the bed and pressed her face against her
pitying friend's bosom. Heliodora saw the tears which had risen with
unaffected feeling to the girl's eyes; her tender soul was full of
sympathy with the sorrow of such a gladsome young creature, who had
already had so much to suffer, and she leaned over the child, kissing
her affectionately on the brow, and murmuring words of consolation.
Katharina clung to her closely, and pointing to the top of her head
where that burning hand had pressed it, she said: "There, kiss there:
there is where the pain is worst!--Ah, that is nice, that does me good."

And, as the tender-hearted Heliodora's fresh lips rested on the
plague-tainted hair, Katharina closed her eyes and felt as a gladiator
might who hitherto has only tried his weapons on the practising
ground, and now for the first time uses them in the arena to pierce his
opponent's heart. She had a vision of herself as some one else,
taller and stronger than she was; aye, as Death itself, the destroyer,
breathing herself into her victim's breast.

These feelings entirely possessed her as she knelt on the soft carpet,
and she did not notice that another woman was crossing it noiselessly
to her comforter's bed-side, with a glance of intelligence at Heliodora.
Just as she exclaimed: "Another kiss there-it burns so dreadfully,"
she felt two hands on her temples and two lips, not Heliodora's, were
pressed on her head.

She looked up in astonishment and saw the smiling face of her mother,
who had come after her to ask how the bishop was, and who wished to take
her share in soothing the pain of her darling.

How well her little surprise had succeeded!

But what came over the child? She started to her feet as if lightning
had struck her, as if an asp had stung her, looked horror-stricken into
her mother's eyes, and then, as Susannah was on the point of clasping
the little head to her bosom once more to kiss the aching, the
cursed spot, Katharina pushed her away, flew, distracted, through the
sitting-room into the vestibule, and down the narrow steps leading to
the bathroom.

Her mother looked after her, shaking her head in bewilderment. Then
she turned to Heliodora with a shrug, and said, as the tears filled her
eyes:

"Poor, poor little thing! Too many troubles have come upon her at once.
Her life till lately was like a long, sunny day, and now the hail is
pelting her from all sides at once. She has bad news of the bishop, I
fear."

"He is dying, she said," replied the young widow with feeling.

"Our best and truest friend," sobbed Susannah. "It is, it really is too
much. I often think that I must myself succumb, and as for her--hardly
more than a child!--And with what resignation she bears the heaviest
sorrows!--You, Heliodora, are far from knowing what she has gone
through; but you have no doubt seen how her only thought is to seem
bright, so as to cheer my heart. Not a sigh, not a complaint has passed
her lips. She submits like a saint to everything, without a murmur. But,
now that her clear old friend is stricken, she has lost her self-control
for the first time. She knows all that Plotinus has been to me." And
she broke down into fresh sobbing. When she was a little calmer, she
apologised for her weakness and bid her fair guest good night.

Katharina, meanwhile, was taking a bath.

A bathroom was an indispensable adjunct to every wealthy Graeco-Egyptian
house, and her father had taken particular pains with its construction.
It consisted of two chambers, one for men and one for women; both fitted
with equal splendor.

White marble, yellow alabaster, purple porphyry on all sides; while the
pavement was of fine Byzantine mosaic on a gold ground. There were no
