And oh for that beauty! I felt as though I were trying to guard a
treasure for him as I used every means I had heard of to save it from
disfigurement, not permitting one ray of daylight to penetrate into the
room, and attempting whatever could prevent the marks from remaining.
And here Millicent's habits of patience and self-command came to her
aid, and Dr. Dirkius said he had never had a better or a gentler sick
person to deal with.

Alas! it was all in vain. Millicent's beauty had been of that delicate
fragile description to which smallpox is the most fatal enemy, with its
tendency not only to thicken the complexion, but to destroy the refined
form of the features. We were prepared for the dreadful redness
at first, and when Millicent first beheld herself in the glass she
contrived to laugh, while she wondered what her little Emilia would
say to her changed appearance, and also adding that she wondered how it
fared with her step-mother, a more important question, she tried to say,
than for herself, for the young lady was betrothed to a rich merchant's
son, and would be married as soon as the days of mourning were over.
However, as Veronica had never been reckoned a beauty, and les beaux
yeux de sa cassette had been avowedly the attraction, we hoped that
however it might be, there would not be much difference in her lot.

We were to joint her at Hunkerslust to rid ourselves of infection, while
the house was purified from it. Before we went, Annora daily brought
little Emilia before the window that her mother might see the little
creature, who looked so grown and so full of health as to rejoice our
hearts. My brother and sister seemed to have made the little maid much
more animated than suited a Dutch child, for she skipped, frolicked, and
held up her wooden baby, making joyous gestures in a way that astonished
the solemn streets of Graavehage, as the inhabitants call it. She was to
come to us at Hunkerslust so soon as the purification was complete;
and then I was to go back to my brother and sister, for as the spring
advanced it was needful that we should return to France, to our mother
and my son.

It was April by the time Madame van Hunker was fit to move, and the
great coach came to the door to carry us out the three or four miles
into the country. I shall never forget the charm of leaving the
pest-house I had inhabited so long, and driving through the avenues,
all budding with fresh young foliage, and past gardens glowing with the
gayest of flowers, the canals making shining mirrors for tree, windmill,
bridge, and house, the broad smooth roads, and Milicent, holding one of
my hands, lay back on the cushions, deeply shrouded in her widow's veil,
unwilling to speak, but glad of the delight I could not help feeling.

We arrived at the house, and entered between the row of limes clipped in
arches. Never did I behold such a coup d'oeil as the garden presented,
with its paved and tiled paths between little beds of the most gorgeous
hyacinths and tulips, their colours assorted to perfection, and all in
full bloom. I could not restrain a childish cry of wonder and absolute
joy at the first glance; it was such a surprise, and yet I recollected
the next moment that there was something very sad in the display, for
it was in going to superintend this very garden that poor Mymheer van
Hunker had caught his death, and here were these his flowers blooming
away gaily in the sun unseen by him who had cared for them so much.

Veronica had come to meet us, and she and her step-mother wept in each
other's arms at the sight and the remembrances it excited; but their
grief was calm, and it appeared that Veronica had had a visit from her
betrothed and his mother, and had no reason to be dissatisfied with
their demeanour. Indeed, the young lady's portion must be so much
augmented by her sister's death that it was like to compensate for the
seams in her cheeks.

No matter of business had yet come before the widow, but it was
intimated to her that the notary, Magister Wyk, would do himself the
honour of coming to her at Hunkerslust so soon as she felt herself
strong enough to receive him, and to hear the provisions of the will.

Accordingly he came, the whole man impregnated with pungent perfumes
and with a pouncet-box in his hand, so that it almost made one sneeze to
approach him. He was by no means solicitous of any near neighbourhood to
either of the ladies, but was evidently glad to keep the whole length
of the hall-table between them and himself, at least so I heard, for of
course I did not thrust myself into the matter, but I learned afterwards
that Mynheer van Hunker had left a very large amount of money and lands,
which were divided between his daughters, subject to a very handsome
jointure to his wife, who was to possess both the houses at the Hague
and at Hunkerslust for her life, but would forfeit both these and her
income should she marry any one save a native of the States of Holland.
Her jewels, however, were her own, and the portion she had received from
her father, Sir James Wardour.

As she said to me afterwards, her husband hated all foreigners, and she
held him as having behaved with great kindness and liberality to her;
but, she added with a smile, as she turned bravely towards a mirror
behind her, he need not have laid her under the restriction, for such
things were all over for her. And happily he had not forbidden her to do
as she pleased with her wealth.

That very evening she began to arrange for packets of dollars from
unknown hands to find themselves in the lodgings of the poorest
cavaliers; and for weekly payments to be made at the ordinaries that
they might give their English frequenters substantial meals at a nominal
cost. She became quite merry over her little plots; but there was a
weight as of lead on my heart when I thought of my brother, and that her
freedom had only begun on such terms. Nay, I knew not for what to hope
or wish!

Permission had been given for Emilia to return to her mother, and as
Veronica had some purchases to make in the city, she undertook to drive
in in the coach, and bring out her little sister. I should have availed
myself of the opportunity of going back with her but that Millicent
would have had to spend the day alone, and I could see that, though her
mother's heart hungered for the little one, yet she dreaded the child's
seeing her altered face. She said she hoped Veronica might not return
till twilight or dusk, so that Emilia might recognize her by her voice
and her kisses before seeing her face.

She had been bidden to be out in the air, and she and I had walked down
the avenue in search of some cukoo-flowers and king-cups that grew by
the canal below. She loved them, she said, because they grew at home
by the banks of the Thames, and she was going to dress some beaupots to
make her chamber gay for Emilia. The gardens might be her own, but
she stood in too much awe of the gardener to touch a tulip or a
flower-de-luce, scarce even a lily of the valley; but when I taxed
her with it, she smiled and said she should ever love the English
wild-flowers best.

So we were walking back under the shade of the budding lime-tress when a
coach came rolling behind us. The horses were not the fat dappled grays
of the establishment, but brown ones, and Millicent, apprehending a
visit from some of her late husband's kindred, and unwilling to be seen
before they reached the house, drew behind a tree, hoping to be out of
sight.

She had, however, been descried. The carriage stopped. There was a
joyful cry in good English of 'Mother! mother! mother!' and the little
maiden flew headlong into her arms, while at the same moment my dear
brother, looking indeed thin, but most noble, most handsome, embraced
me. He explained in a few words that Mademoiselle van Hunker was dining
with her future mother-in-law, and that she had permitted him to have
the honour of giving up his charge to Madame.

Millicent looked up at him with the eyes that could not but be sweet,
and began to utter her thanks, while he smiled and said that the
pleasure to him and Annora had been so great that the obligation was
theirs.

The little girl, now holding her hand, was peering up curiously under
her hood, and broke upon their stiffness and formality by a sudden
outcry:

'No! no! mother is not ugly like Vronikje. She shall not be ugly. She is
Emilia's own dear pretty mother, and nobody shall say no.'

No doubt the little one felt the inward attraction of child to mother,
that something which so infinitely surpasses mere complexion, and as she
had been warned of the change, and had seen it in her sister, she was
really agreeable surprised, and above all felt that she had her mother
again.

Millicent clasped her to her bosom in a transport of joy, while Eustace
exclaimed:

'The little maid is right; most deeply right. That which truly matters
can never be taken away.'

Then Millicent raised her eyes to him and said, with quivering lip: 'I
had so greatly dreaded this moment. I owe it to you, my lord, that she
has come to me thus.'

Before he could answer Emilia had seen the golden flowers in her
mother's hand, and with a childish shriek of ecstasy had claimed them,
while Millicent said:

'I had culled them for thee, sweetheart.'

'I'll give some to my lord!' cried the child. 'My lord loves king-cups.'

'Yes,' said Eustace, taking the flowers and kissing the child, but with
his eyes on her mother's all the time; 'I have loved king-cups
ever since on May day when there was a boat going down the river to
Richmond.'

Her eyes fell, and that strange trembling came round her mouth. For, as
I learned afterwards from my sister, it was then that they had danced
in Richmond Park, and he had made a crown of king-cups and set it on her
flaxen hair, and then and there it was that love had first begun between
those two, whom ten years had so strangely changed. But Eustace said no
more, except to tell me that he had come to ask if I could be ready to
return to Paris the second day ensuing, as Sir Edward Hyde was going,
and had a pass by which we could all together go through the Spanish
Netherlands without taking ship. If Madame van Hunker could spare me on
such sudden notice he would like to take me back with him at once.

There was no reason for delay. Millicent had her child, and was really
quite will again; and I had very little preparation to make, having
with me as little clothing as possible. She took Eustace to the tiled
fireplace in the parlour, and served him with manchet-cake and wine,
but prayed him to pardon her absence while she went to aid me. I think
neither wished for a tete-a-tete. They had understood one another over
the king-cups, and it was no time to go farther. I need not tell of
the embraces and tears between us in my chamber. They were but
natural, after the time we had spent together, but at the end Millicent
whispered:

'You will tell him all, Margaret! He is too noble, but his generous soul
must feel no bondage towards one who has nothing--not even a face or a
purse for him.'

'Only a heart,' I said. But she shook her head in reproof, and I felt
that I had done wrong to speak on the matter.

After a brief time we took leave with full and stately formality. I
think both she and I were on our guard against giving way before my
brother, who had that grave self-restrained countenance which only
Englishmen seem able to maintain. He was thin, and there was a certain
transparency of skin about his cheeks and hands; but to my mind he
looked better than when he left us at Paris, and I could not but trust
that the hope which had returned to him would be an absolute cure for
all his ill-health. I saw it in his eyes.

We seated ourselves in the carriage, and I dreaded to break the silence
at first, but we had not long turned into the high road from the avenue
when hoofs came behind us, and a servant from Hunkerslust rode up to the
window, handing in a packet which he said had been left behind.

I sat for a few minutes without opening it, and deemed it was my Book of
Hours, for it was wrapped in a kerchief of my own; but when I unfolded
that, behold I saw a small sandal-wood casket, and turning the key, I
beheld these few words--'Praying my Lord Walwyn to permit restitution to
be made.--M. van H.' And beneath lay the pearls of Ribaumont.

'No! no! no, I cannot!' cried my brother, rising to lean from the window
and beckon back the messenger; but I pulled him by the skirts, telling
him it was too late, and whatever he might think fit to do, he must not
wound the lady's feelings by casting them back upon her in this sudden
manner, almost as if he were flinging them at her head. He sat down
again, but reiterated that he could not accept them.

I told him that her jewels were wholly her own, subject to no
restrition, but this only made him ask me with some displeasure whether
I had been privy to this matter; the which I could wholly deny, since
not a word had passed between us, save on the schemes for sending aid to
the distressed families.

'I thought not,' he returned; and then he began to show me, what needed
little proof, how absolutely inexpedient it was for his honour or for
hers, that he should accept anything from her, and how much more fitting
it was that they should be absolutely out of reach of all intercourse
with one another during her year of mourning, or until he could fitly
address her.

'No,' he said; 'the pearls must remain hers unless she can come
with them; or if not, as is most like, we shall be the last of the
Ribaumonts--and she may do as she will with them.'

'You have no doubts, Eustace?' I cried. 'You care not for her wealth,
and as to her face, a year will make it as fair and sweet as ever.'

'As sweet in my eyes, assuredly!' he said. But he went on to say that
her very haste in this matter was a token that she meant to have no more
to do with him, and that no one could wish her to give up her wealth
and prosperity to accept a poor broken cavalier, health and wealth alike
gone.

I would have argued cheeringly, but he made me understand that his own
Dorset estates, which Harry Merrycourt had redeemed for him before, had
been absolutely forfeited by his share in Montrose's expedition. The
Commonwealth had in a manner condoned what had been done in the service
of King Charles, but it regarded as treason the espousing the cause
of his son; and it was possible that the charge on the Wardour estates
might be refused to Millicent should she unite herself with one who was
esteemed a rebel.

My mother's jointure had been charged on the Ribaumont estate, and if
Eustace failed to gain the suit which had been lingering on so long,
there would hardly be enough rents to pay this to her, leaving almost
nothing for him. Nor, indeed, was it in my power to do much for their
assistance, since my situation was not what it would have been if my
dear husband had lived to become Marquis de Nidemerle. And we were
neither of us young enough to think that even the most constant love
could make it fit to drag Millicent into beggary. Yet still I could see
that Eustace did not give up hope. The more I began to despond, the more
cheerful he became. Was not the King in Scotland, and when he entered
England as he would certainly do next summer, would not all good
Cavaliers--yes, and all the Parliament men who had had enough of the
domineering of General Cromwell--rise on his behalf? My brother was
holding himself in readiness to obey the first summons to his standard,
and when he was restored, all would be easy, and he could offer himself
to Millicent worthily.

Moreover, my mother had written something about a way that had opened
for accommodating the suit respecting the property in Picardy, and
Eustace trusted the report all the more because our brother Solivet had
also written to urge his recall, in order to confer with his antagonist,
the Comte de Poligny, respecting it. So that, as the dear brother
impressed on me, he had every reason for hoping that in a very different
guise; and his hopes raised mine, so that I let them peep through the
letter with which I returned the jewels to Millicent.




CHAPTER XXVII. -- THE EXPEDIENT

(Annora's Narrative)



And what was this expedient of their? Now, Madame Meg, I forewarn you
that what I write here will be a horror and bad example to all your
well-brought-up French grandchildren, demoiselles bien elevees, so that
I advise you to re-write it in your own fashion, and show me up as a
shocking, willful, headstrong, bad daughter, deserving of the worst fate
of the bad princesses in Madame d'Aulnoy's fairly tales. Nay, I am
not sure that Mademoiselle de Nidemerle might not think I had actually
incurred a piteous lot. But chacun a son gout.

Well, this same expedient was this. M. de Poligny, who claimed the best
half of the Picardy estates in right of a grant from Henry III. when in
the power of the League, had made acquaintance with our half-brother,
Solivet, who had presented him to our mother, and he had offered, with
the greatest generosity possible--said my mother--to waive his claims
and put a stop to the suit (he knew it could not hold for a moment),
provided she would give her fair daughter to his son, the Chevalier de
Poligny, with the reversion of the Ribaumont property, after my brother,
on whom, vulture that he was, he had fixed his eyes, as a man in failing
health. My mother and her eldest son were absolutely enraptured, and
they expected Eustace to be equally delighted with this escape from
all difficulties. They were closeted with him for two hours the morning
after our return, while Meg was left to enjoy herself with her son, and
to converse with M. d'Aubepine. That poor little thing's Elysium had
come to an end as soon as the Princes were released from prison. No
sooner did her husband find that his idol, the Prince on Conde, showed
neither gratitude nor moderate civility to the faithful wife who had
fought so hard for him, than his ape must needs follow in his track and
cast off Cecile--though, of course, she still held that his duty kept
him in attendance on the Prince, and that he would return to her.

I do not know whether they were afraid of me, for not a word did any of
them say of the results of their conferences, only I was informed that
we were to have a reception in the evening, and a new white taffeta
dress, with all my mother's best jewels, was put out for me, and my
mother herself came to preside at my toilette and arrange my curls. I
did not suspect mischief even then, for I thought it was all in honour
of Solivet's poor little Petronille, whom he had succeeded in marrying
to a fat of Duke. What a transformation it was from the meek little
silent persionnaire without a word to say for herself, into a gay
butterfly, with a lovelock on her shoulder, a coquettish twist of her
neck, and all the language of the fan, as well as of tongue, ready
learned! I do not think her father was quite happy about her manners,
but then it served him right, and he had got a dukedom for his
grandchildren by shutting up his other poor daughter in a convent.

By and by I saw my brother bowing with extra politeness, and then
Solivet found me out, and did himself the honour to present to me
Monsieur le Comte de Poligny, who, in his turn, presented M. le
Chevalier. The Count was a rather good-looking Frenchman, with the
air of having seen the world; the Chevalier was a slight little
whipper-snapper of a lad in the uniform of the dragoons, and looking
more as if he were fastened to his sword and spurs than they to him.
I think the father was rather embarrassed not to find me a little prim
demoiselle, but a woman capable of talking about politics like other
people; and while I rejoiced that the Cardinal had been put to flight by
the Prince, I told them that no good would come of it, unless some one
would pluck up a spirit and care more for his fellow-creatures than for
his own intrigues.

Solivet looked comically dismayed to hear such independent sentiments
coming out of my mouth; I know now that he was extremely afraid that M.
de Poligny would be terrified out of is bargain. If I had only guessed
at his purpose, and that such an effect might be produced, I would
almost have gone the length of praising Mr. Hampden and Sir Thomas
Fairfax to complete the work; instead of which I stupidly bethought me
of Eustace's warning not to do anything that might damage Margaret and
her son, and I restrained myself.

The matter was only deferred till the next morning, when I was
summoned to my mother's chamber, where she sat up in bed, with her best
Flanders-lace nightcap and ruffles on, her coral rosary blessed by the
Pope, her snuff-box with the Queen's portrait, and her big fan that had
belonged to Queen Marie de Medicis, so that I knew something serious was
in hand; and, besides, my brothers Solivet and Walwyn sat on chairs by
the head of her bed. Margaret was not there.

'My daughter,' said my mother, when I had saluted her, and she had
signed to me to be seated, 'M. le Comte de Poligny has done you the
honour to demand your hand for his son, the Chevalier; and I have
accepted his proposals, since by this means the proces will be
terminated respecting the estates in Picardy, and he will come to
a favourable accommodation with your brother, very important in the
present circumstances.'

I suppose she and Solivet expected me to submit myself to my fate like
a good little French girl. What I did was to turn round and exclaim:
'Eustace, you have not sold me for this?'

He held out his hand, and said: 'No, sister. I have told my mother and
brother that my consent depends solely on you.'

Then I felt safe, even when Solivet said:

'Nor does any well-brought-up daughter speak of her wishes when her
parents have decided for her.'

'You are not my parent, sir,' I cried; 'you have no authority over me!
Nor am I what you call a well-brought-up girl--that is, a poor creature
without a will!'

'It is as I always said,' exclaimed my mother. 'She will be a scandal.'

But I need not describe the whole conversation, even if I could remember
more than the opening. I believe I behaved very ill, and was in danger
of injuring my own cause by my violence; my mother cried, and said I
should be a disgrace to the family, and Solivet looked fierce, handled
the hilt of his sword, and observed that he should know how to prevent
that; and then Eustace took my hands, and said he would speak with me
alone, and my mother declared that he would encourage me in my folly and
undutifulness; while Solivet added: 'Remember we are in earnest. This is
no child's play!'

A horrible dread had come over me that Eustace was in league with them;
for he always imperatively cut me short if I dared to say I was already
promised. I would hardly speak to him when at last he brought me to
his own rooms and shut the door; and when he called me his poor Nan, I
pushed him away, and said I wanted none of his pity, I could not have
thought it of him.

'You do not think it now,' he said; and as I looked up into his clear
eyes I was ashamed of myself, and could only murmur, what could I think
when I saw him sitting there aiding in their cruel manoeuvres,--all for
your own sake, too?

'I only sat there because I hoped to help you,' he said; and then he
bade me remember that they had disclosed nothing of these intentions of
theirs in the letters which spoke of an accommodation. If they had done
so, he might have left me in Holland with some of the English ladies so
as to be out of reach; but the scheme had only been propounded to him on
the previous morning. I asked why he had not refused it at once, and he
pointed out that it was not for him to disclose my secret attachment,
even had it been expedient so to do. All that he had been able to do
was to declare that the whole must depend on my free consent. 'And,' he
said, with a smile, 'methought thereby I had done enough for our Nan,
who has no weak will unless by violence she over-strain it.'

I felt rebuked as well as reassured and strengthened, and he again
assured me that I was safe so long as he lived from being pressed into
