
"Only that I can read your dream without the assistance of a Chaldean
interpreter, and my exposition is--that my fair companion does not wear
the dress of her sex."

"And if I do not, my lord," said his companion, hastily starting up, and
folding her cloak tight around her, "my dress, such as it is, covers one
who will not disgrace it."

"Many would call that speech a fair challenge," said Lord Glenvarloch,
looking on her fixedly; "women do not masquerade in men's clothes, to
make use of men's weapons."

"I have no such purpose," said the seeming boy; "I have other means
of protection, and powerful--but I would first know what is _your_
purpose."

"An honourable and a most respectful one," said Lord Glenvarloch;
"whatever you are--whatever motive may have brought you into this
ambiguous situation, I am sensible--every look, word, and action of
yours, makes me sensible, that you are no proper subject of importunity,
far less of ill usage. What circumstances can have forced you into so
doubtful a situation, I know not; but I feel assured there is, and can
be, nothing in them of premeditated wrong, which should expose you to
cold-blooded insult. From me you have nothing to dread."

"I expected nothing less from your nobleness, my lord," answered the
female; "my adventure, though I feel it was both desperate and foolish,
is not so very foolish, nor my safety here so utterly unprotected, as
at first sight--and in this strange dress, it may appear to be. I have
suffered enough, and more than enough, by the degradation of having been
seen in this unfeminine attire, and the comments you must necessarily
have made on my conduct--but I thank God that I am so far protected,
that I could not have been subjected to insult unavenged." When this
extraordinary explanation had proceeded thus far, the warder appeared,
to place before Lord Glenvarloch a meal, which, for his present
situation, might be called comfortable, and which, if not equal to
the cookery of the celebrated Chevalier Beaujeu, was much superior in
neatness and cleanliness to that of Alsatia. A warder attended to do the
honours of the table, and made a sign to the disguised female to rise
and assist him in his functions. But Nigel, declaring that he knew the
youth's parents, interfered, and caused his companion to eat along with
him. She consented with a sort of embarrassment, which rendered her
pretty features yet more interesting. Yet she maintained with a natural
grace that sort of good-breeding which belongs to the table; and
it seemed to Nigel, whether already prejudiced in her favour by the
extraordinary circumstances of their meeting, or whether really judging
from what was actually the fact, that he had seldom seen a young person
comport herself with more decorous propriety, mixed with ingenuous
simplicity; while the consciousness of the peculiarity of her situation
threw a singular colouring over her whole demeanour, which could be
neither said to be formal, nor easy, nor embarrassed, but was compounded
of, and shaded with, an interchange of all these three characteristics.
Wine was placed on the table, of which she could not be prevailed on
to taste a glass. Their conversation was, of course, limited by the
presence of the warder to the business of the table: but Nigel had, long
ere the cloth was removed, formed the resolution, if possible, of making
himself master of this young person's history, the more especially as he
now began to think that the tones of her voice and her features were not
so strange to him as he had originally supposed. This, however, was a
conviction which he adopted slowly, and only as it dawned upon him from
particular circumstances during the course of the repast.

At length the prison-meal was finished, and Lord Glenvarloch began to
think how he might most easily enter upon the topic he meditated, when
the warder announced a visitor.

"Soh!" said Nigel, something displeased, "I find even a prison does not
save one from importunate visitations."

He prepared to receive his guest, however, while his alarmed companion
flew to the large cradle-shaped chair, which had first served her as a
place of refuge, drew her cloak around her, and disposed herself as much
as she could to avoid observation. She had scarce made her arrangements
for that purpose when the door opened, and the worthy citizen, George
Heriot, entered the prison-chamber.

He cast around the apartment his usual sharp, quick glance of
observation, and, advancing to Nigel, said--"My lord, I wish I could say
I was happy to see you."

"The sight of those who are unhappy themselves, Master Heriot, seldom
produces happiness to their friends--I, however, am glad to see you."

He extended his hand, but Heriot bowed with much formal complaisance,
instead of accepting the courtesy, which in those times, when the
distinction of ranks was much guarded by etiquette and ceremony, was
considered as a distinguished favour.

"You are displeased with me, Master Heriot," said Lord Glenvarloch,
reddening, for he was not deceived by the worthy citizen's affectation
of extreme reverence and respect.

"By no means, my lord," replied Heriot; "but I have been in France, and
have thought it is well to import, along with other more substantial
articles, a small sample of that good-breeding which the French are so
renowned for."

"It is not kind of you," said Nigel, "to bestow the first use of it on
an old and obliged friend."

Heriot only answered to this observation with a short dry cough, and
then proceeded.

"Hem! hem! I say, ahem! My lord, as my French politeness may not carry
me far, I would willingly know whether I am to speak as a friend, since
your lordship is pleased to term me such; or whether I am, as befits
my condition, to confine myself to the needful business which must be
treated of between us."

"Speak as a friend by all means, Master Heriot," said Nigel; "I perceive
you have adopted some of the numerous prejudices against me, if not
all of them. Speak out, and frankly--what I cannot deny I will at least
confess."

"And I trust, my lord, redress," said Heriot.

"So far as in my power, certainly," answered Nigel.

"Ah I my lord," continued Heriot, "that is a melancholy though a
necessary restriction; for how lightly may any one do an hundred times
more than the degree of evil which it may be within his power to repair
to the sufferers and to society! But we are not alone here," he said,
stopping, and darting his shrewd eye towards the muffled figure of the
disguised maiden, whose utmost efforts had not enabled her so to adjust
her position as altogether to escape observation. More anxious to
prevent her being discovered than to keep his own affairs private, Nigel
hastily answered--"'Tis a page of mine; you may speak freely before him.
He is of France, and knows no English."

"I am then to speak freely," said Heriot, after a second glance at the
chair; "perhaps my words may be more free than welcome."

"Go on, sir," said Nigel, "I have told you I can bear reproof."

"In one word, then, my lord--why do I find you in this place, and
whelmed with charges which must blacken a name rendered famous by ages
of virtue?"

"Simply, then, you find me here," said Nigel, "because, to begin from my
original error, I would be wiser than my father."

"It was a difficult task, my lord," replied Heriot; "your father was
voiced generally as the wisest and one of the bravest men of Scotland."

"He commanded me," continued Nigel, "to avoid all gambling; and I took
upon me to modify this injunction into regulating my play according to
my skill, means, and the course of my luck."

"Ay, self opinion, acting on a desire of acquisition, my lord--you hoped
to touch pitch and not to be defiled," answered Heriot. "Well, my
lord, you need not say, for I have heard with much regret, how far
this conduct diminished your reputation. Your next error I may without
scruple remind you of--My lord, my lord, in whatever degree Lord
Dalgarno may have failed towards you, the son of his father should have
been sacred from your violence."

"You speak in cold blood, Master Heriot, and I was smarting under a
thousand wrongs inflicted on me under the mask of friendship."

"That is, he gave your lordship bad advice, and you," said Heriot--

"Was fool enough to follow his counsel," answered Nigel--"But we will
pass this, Master Heriot, if you please. Old men and young men, men of
the sword and men of peaceful occupation, always have thought, always
will think, differently on such subjects."

"I grant," answered Heriot, "the distinction between the old goldsmith
and the young nobleman--still you should have had patience for Lord
Huntinglen's sake, and prudence for your own. Supposing your quarrel
just--"

"I pray you to pass on to some other charge," said Lord Glenvarloch.

"I am not your accuser, my lord; but I trust in heaven, that your own
heart has already accused you bitterly on the inhospitable wrong which
your late landlord has sustained at your hand."

"Had I been guilty of what you allude to," said Lord Glenvarloch,--"had
a moment of temptation hurried me away, I had long ere now most bitterly
repented it. But whoever may have wronged the unhappy woman, it was not
I--I never heard of her folly until within this hour."

"Come, my lord," said Heriot, with some severity, "this sounds too much
like affectation. I know there is among our modern youth a new creed
respecting adultery as well as homicide--I would rather hear you speak
of a revision of the Decalogue, with mitigated penalties in favour of
the privileged orders--I would rather hear you do this than deny a fact
in which you have been known to glory."

"Glory!--I never did, never would have taken honour to myself from
such a cause," said Lord Glenvarloch. "I could not prevent other idle
tongues, and idle brains, from making false inferences."

"You would have known well enough how to stop their mouths, my lord,"
replied Heriot, "had they spoke of you what was unpleasing to your
ears, and what the truth did not warrant.--Come, my lord, remember your
promise to confess; and, indeed, to confess is, in this case, in
some slight sort to redress. I will grant you are young--the woman
handsome--and, as I myself have observed, light-headed enough. Let me
know where she is. Her foolish husband has still some compassion for
her--will save her from infamy--perhaps, in time, receive her back; for
we are a good-natured generation we traders. Do not, my lord, emulate
those who work mischief merely for the pleasure of doing so--it is the
very devil's worst quality."

"Your grave remonstrances will drive me mad," said Nigel. "There is
a show of sense and reason in what you say; and yet, it is positively
insisting on my telling the retreat of a fugitive of whom I know nothing
earthly."

"It is well, my lord," answered Heriot, coldly. "You have a right, such
as it is, to keep your own secrets; but, since my discourse on these
points seems so totally unavailing, we had better proceed to business.
Yet your father's image rises before me, and seems to plead that I
should go on."

"Be it as you will, sir," said Glenvarloch; "he who doubts my word shall
have no additional security for it."

"Well, my lord.--In the Sanctuary at Whitefriars--a place of refuge so
unsuitable to a young man of quality and character--I am told a murder
was committed."

"And you believe that I did the deed, I suppose?"

"God forbid, my lord!" said Heriot. "The coroner's inquest hath sat,
and it appeared that your lordship, under your assumed name of Grahame,
behaved with the utmost bravery."

"No compliment, I pray you," said Nigel; "I am only too happy to find,
that I did not murder, or am not believed to have murdered, the old
man."

"True, my lord," said Heriot; "but even in this affair there lacks
explanation. Your lordship embarked this morning in a wherry with a
female, and, it is said, an immense sum of money, in specie and other
valuables--but the woman has not since been heard of."

"I parted with her at Paul's Wharf," said Nigel, "where she went ashore
with her charge. I gave her a letter to that very man, John Christie."

"Ay, that is the waterman's story; but John Christie denies that he
remembers anything of the matter."

"I am sorry to hear this," said the young nobleman; "I hope in Heaven
she has not been trepanned, for the treasure she had with her."

"I hope not, my lord," replied Heriot; "but men's minds are much
disturbed about it. Our national character suffers on all hands. Men
remember the fatal case of Lord Sanquhar, hanged for the murder of a
fencing-master; and exclaim, they will not have their wives whored, and
their property stolen, by the nobility of Scotland."

"And all this is laid to my door!" said Nigel; "my exculpation is easy."

"I trust so, my lord," said Heriot;--"nay, in this particular, I do not
doubt it.--But why did you leave Whitefriars under such circumstances?"

"Master Reginald Lowestoffe sent a boat for me, with intimation to
provide for my safety."

"I am sorry to say," replied Heriot, "that he denies all knowledge of
your lordship's motions, after having dispatched a messenger to you with
some baggage."

"The watermen told me they were employed by him."

"Watermen!" said Heriot; "one of these proves to be an idle apprentice,
an old acquaintance of mine--the other has escaped; but the fellow who
is in custody persists in saying he was employed by your lordship, and
you only."

"He lies!" said Lord Glenvarloch, hastily;--"He told me Master
Lowestoffe had sent him.--I hope that kind-hearted gentleman is at
liberty?"

"He is," answered Heriot; "and has escaped with a rebuke from the
benchers, for interfering in such a matter as your lordship's. The Court
desire to keep well with the young Templars in these times of commotion,
or he had not come off so well."

"That is the only word of comfort I have heard from you," replied Nigel.
"But this poor woman,--she and her trunk were committed to the charge of
two porters."

"So said the pretended waterman; but none of the fellows who ply at the
wharf will acknowledge the employment.--I see the idea makes you uneasy,
my lord; but every effort is made to discover the poor woman's place
of retreat--if, indeed, she yet lives.--And now, my lord, my errand is
spoken, so far as it relates exclusively to your lordship; what remains,
is matter of business of a more formal kind."

"Let us proceed to it without delay," said Lord Glenvarloch. "I would
hear of the affairs of any one rather than of my own."

"You cannot have forgotten, my lord," said Heriot, "the transaction
which took place some weeks since at Lord Huntinglen's--by which a large
sum of money was advanced for the redemption of your lordship's estate?"

"I remember it perfectly," said Nigel; "and your present austerity
cannot make me forget your kindness on the occasion."

Heriot bowed gravely, and went on.--"That money was advanced under the
expectation and hope that it might be replaced by the contents of a
grant to your lordship, under the royal sign-manual, in payment of
certain monies due by the crown to your father.--I trust your lordship
understood the transaction at the time--I trust you now understand my
resumption of its import, and hold it to be correct?"

"Undeniably correct," answered Lord Glenvarloch. "If the sums contained
in the warrant cannot be recovered, my lands become the property of
those who paid off the original holders of the mortgage, and now stand
in their right."

"Even so, my lord," said Heriot. "And your lordship's unhappy
circumstances having, it would seem, alarmed these creditors, they
are now, I am sorry to say, pressing for one or other of these
alternatives--possession of the land, or payment of their debt."

"They have a right to one or other," answered Lord Glenvarloch; "and as
I cannot do the last in my present condition, I suppose they must enter
on possession."

"Stay, my lord," replied Heriot; "if you have ceased to call me a friend
to your person, at least you shall see I am willing to be such to your
father's house, were it but for the sake of your father's memory. If
you will trust me with the warrant under the sign-manual, I believe
circumstances do now so stand at Court, that I may be able to recover
the money for you."

"I would do so gladly," said Lord Glenvarloch, "but the casket which
contains it is not in my possession. It was seized when I was arrested
at Greenwich."

"It will be no longer withheld from you," said Heriot; "for, I
understand, my Master's natural good sense, and some information which
he has procured, I know not how, has induced him to contradict the whole
charge of the attempt on his person. It is entirely hushed up; and
you will only be proceeded against for your violence on Lord Dalgarno,
committed within the verge of the Palace--and that you will find heavy
enough to answer."

"I will not shrink under the weight," said Lord Glenvarloch. "But that
is not the present point.--If I had that casket--"

"Your baggage stood in the little ante-room, as I passed," said the
citizen; "the casket caught my eye. I think you had it of me. It was my
old friend Sir Faithful Frugal's. Ay; he, too, had a son--"

Here he stopped short.

"A son who, like Lord Glenvarloch's, did no credit to his father.--Was
it not so you would have ended the sentence, Master Heriot?" asked the
young nobleman.

"My lord, it was a word spoken rashly," answered Heriot. "God may
mend all in his own good time. This, however, I will say, that I have
sometimes envied my friends their fair and flourishing families; and yet
have I seen such changes when death has removed the head, so many rich
men's sons penniless, the heirs of so many knights and nobles acreless,
that I think mine own estate and memory, as I shall order it, has a fair
chance of outliving those of greater men, though God has given me no
heir of my name. But this is from the purpose.--Ho! warder, bring in
Lord Glenvarloch's baggage." The officer obeyed. Seals had been placed
upon the trunk and casket, but were now removed, the warder said, in
consequence of the subsequent orders from Court, and the whole was
placed at the prisoner's free disposal.

Desirous to bring this painful visit to a conclusion, Lord Glenvarloch
opened the casket, and looked through the papers which it contained,
first hastily, and then more slowly and accurately; but it was all in
vain. The Sovereign's signed warrant had disappeared.

"I thought and expected nothing better," said George Heriot, bitterly.
"The beginning of evil is the letting out of water. Here is a fair
heritage lost, I dare say, on a foul cast at dice, or a conjuring trick
at cards!--My lord, your surprise is well played. I give you full joy
of your accomplishments. I have seen many as young brawlers and
spendthrifts, but never as young and accomplished a dissembler.--Nay,
man, never bend your angry brows on me. I speak in bitterness of heart,
from what I remember of your worthy father; and if his son hears of his
degeneracy from no one else, he shall hear it from the old goldsmith."

This new suspicion drove Nigel to the very extremity of his patience;
yet the motives and zeal of the good old man, as well as the
circumstances of suspicion which created his displeasure, were so
excellent an excuse for it, that they formed an absolute curb on the
resentment of Lord Glenvarloch, and constrained him, after two or three
hasty exclamations, to observe a proud and sullen silence. At length,
Master Heriot resumed his lecture.

"Hark you, my lord," he said, "it is scarce possible that this most
important paper can be absolutely assigned away. Let me know in what
obscure corner, and for what petty sum, it lies pledged--something may
yet be done."

"Your efforts in my favour are the more generous," said Lord
Glenvarloch, "as you offer them to one whom you believe you have cause
to think hardly of--but they are altogether unavailing. Fortune has
taken the field against me at every point. Even let her win the battle."

"Zouns!" exclaimed Heriot, impatiently,--"you would make a saint swear!
Why, I tell you, if this paper, the loss of which seems to sit so
light on you, be not found, farewell to the fair lordship of
Glenvarloch--firth and forest--lea and furrow--lake and stream--all that
has been in the house of Olifaunt since the days of William the Lion!"

"Farewell to them, then," said Nigel,--"and that moan is soon made."

"'Sdeath! my lord, you will make more moan for it ere you die," said
Heriot, in the same tone of angry impatience.

"Not I, my old friend," said Nigel. "If I mourn, Master Heriot, it will
be for having lost the good opinion of a worthy man, and lost it, as I
must say, most undeservedly."

"Ay, ay, young man," said Heriot, shaking his head, "make me believe
that if you can.--To sum the matter up," he said, rising from his seat,
and walking towards that occupied by the disguised female, "for our
matters are now drawn into small compass, you shall as soon make me
believe that this masquerading mummer, on whom I now lay the hand of
paternal authority, is a French page, who understands no English."

So saying, he took hold of the supposed page's cloak, and, not without
some gentle degree of violence, led into the middle of the apartment the
disguised fair one, who in vain attempted to cover her face, first with
her mantle, and afterwards with her hands; both which impediments Master
Heriot removed something unceremoniously, and gave to view the detected
daughter of the old chronologist, his own fair god-daughter, Margaret
Ramsay.

"Here is goodly gear!" he said; and, as he spoke, he could not prevent
himself from giving her a slight shake, for we have elsewhere noticed
that he was a severe disciplinarian.--"How comes it, minion, that I
find you in so shameless a dress, and so unworthy a situation? Nay, your
modesty is now mistimed--it should have come sooner. Speak, or I will--"

"Master Heriot," said Lord Glenvarloch, "whatever right you may have
over this maiden elsewhere, while in my apartment she is under my
protection."

"Your protection, my lord!--a proper protector!--and how long, mistress,
have you been under my lord's protection? Speak out forsooth!"

"For the matter of two hours, godfather," answered the maiden, with a
countenance bent to the ground, and covered with blushes, "but it was
against my will."

"Two hours!" repeated Heriot,--"space enough for mischief.--My lord,
this is, I suppose, another victim offered to your character of
gallantry--another adventure to be boasted of at Beaujeu's ordinary?
Methinks the roof under which you first met this silly maiden should
have secured _her_, at least, from such a fate."

"On my honour, Master Heriot," said Lord Glenvarloch, "you remind me
now, for the first time, that I saw this young lady in your family.
Her features are not easily forgotten, and yet I was trying in vain to
recollect where I had last looked on them. For your suspicions, they are
as false as they are injurious both to her and me. I had but discovered
her disguise as you entered. I am satisfied, from her whole behaviour,
that her presence here in this dress was involuntary; and God forbid
that I have been capable of taking advantage of it to her prejudice."

"It is well mouthed, my lord," said Master Heriot; "but a cunning clerk
can read the Apocrypha as loud as the Scripture. Frankly, my lord, you
are come to that pass, where your words will not be received without a
warrant."

"I should not speak, perhaps," said Margaret, the natural vivacity of
whose temper could never be long suppressed by any situation, however
disadvantageous, "but I cannot be silent. Godfather, you do me
wrong--and no less wrong to this young nobleman. You say his words want
a warrant. I know where to find a warrant for some of them, and the rest
I deeply and devoutly believe without one."

"And I thank you, maiden," replied Nigel, "for the good opinion you have
expressed. I am at that point, it seems, though how I have been driven
to it I know not, where every fair construction of my actions and
motives is refused me. I am the more obliged to her who grants me that
right which the world denies me. For you, lady, were I at liberty, I
have a sword and arm should know how to guard your reputation."

"Upon my word, a perfect Amadis and Oriana!" said George Heriot. "I
should soon get my throat cut betwixt the knight and the princess, I
suppose, but that the beef-eaters are happily within halloo.--Come,
come, Lady Light-o'-Love--if you mean to make your way with me, it must
be by plain facts, not by speeches from romaunts and play-books. How, in
Heaven's name, came you here?"

"Sir," answered Margaret, "since I must speak, I went to Greenwich this
morning with Monna Paula, to present a petition to the king on the part
of the Lady Hermione."

"Mercy-a-gad!" exclaimed Heriot, "is she in the dance, too? Could she
not have waited my return to stir in her affairs? But I suppose the
intelligence I sent her had rendered her restless. Ah! woman, woman--he
that goes partner with you, had need of a double share of patience, for
you will bring none into the common stock.--Well, but what on earth had
this embassy of Monna Paula's to do with your absurd disguise? Speak
out."

"Monna Paula was frightened," answered Margaret, "and did not know
how to set about the errand, for you know she scarce ever goes out of
doors--and so--and so--I agreed to go with her to give her courage; and,
for the dress, I am sure you remember I wore it at a Christmas mumming,
and you thought it not unbeseeming."

"Yes, for a Christmas parlour," said Heriot, "but not to go a-masking
through the country in. I do remember it, minion, and I knew it even
now; that and your little shoe there, linked with a hint I had in the
morning from a friend, or one who called himself such, led to your
detection."--Here Lord Glenvarloch could not help giving a glance at the
pretty foot, which even the staid citizen thought worth recollection--it
was but a glance, for he saw how much the least degree of observation
added to Margaret's distress and confusion. "And tell me, maiden,"
continued Master Heriot, for what we have observed was by-play,--"did
the Lady Hermione know of this fair work?"

"I dared not have told her for the world," said Margaret--"she thought
one of our apprentices went with Monna Paula."

It may be here noticed, that the words, "our apprentices," seemed to
have in them something of a charm to break the fascination with which
Lord Glenvarloch had hitherto listened to the broken, yet interesting
details of Margaret's history.

"And wherefore went he not?--he had been a fitter companion for Monna
Paula than you, I wot," said the citizen.

"He was otherwise employed," said Margaret, in a voice scarce audible.

Master George darted a hasty glance at Nigel, and when he saw his
features betoken no consciousness, he muttered to himself,--"It must be
better than I feared.--And so this cursed Spaniard, with her head full,
as they all have, of disguises, trap-doors, rope-ladders, and masks,
was jade and fool enough to take you with her on this wild goose
errand?--And how sped you, I pray?"

"Just as we reached the gate of the Park," replied Margaret, "the cry
of treason was raised. I know not what became of Monna, but I ran till I
fell into the arms of a very decent serving-man, called Linklater; and I
was fain to tell him I was your god-daughter, and so he kept the rest of
them from me, and got me to speech of his Majesty, as I entreated him to
do."

"It is the only sign you showed in the whole matter that common sense
had not utterly deserted your little skull," said Heriot.

"His Majesty," continued the damsel, "was so gracious as to receive me
alone, though the courtiers cried out against the danger to his person,
and would have searched me for arms, God help me, but the king forbade
it. I fancy he had a hint from Linklater how the truth stood with me."

"Well, maiden, I ask not what passed," said Heriot; "it becomes not
me to pry into my Master's secrets. Had you been closeted with his
grandfather the Red Tod of Saint Andrews, as Davie Lindsay used to call
him, by my faith, I should have had my own thoughts of the matter; but
our Master, God bless him, is douce and temperate, and Solomon in every
thing, save in the chapter of wives and concubines."

"I know not what you mean, sir," answered Margaret. "His Majesty was
most kind and compassionate, but said I must be sent hither, and that
the Lieutenant's lady, the Lady Mansel, would have a charge of me, and
see that I sustained no wrong; and the king promised to send me in a
tilted barge, and under conduct of a person well known to you; and thus
I come to be in the Tower."

"But how, or why, in this apartment, nymph?" said George
Heriot--"Expound that to me, for I think the riddle needs reading."

"I cannot explain it, sir, further, than that the Lady Mansel sent me
here, in spite of my earnest prayers, tears, and entreaties. I was not
afraid of any thing, for I knew I should be protected. But I could have
died then--could die now--for very shame and confusion!"

"Well, well, if your tears are genuine," said Heriot, "they may the
sooner wash out the memory of your fault--Knows your father aught of
this escape of yours?"

"I would not for the world he did," replied she; "he believes me with
the Lady Hermione."

"Ay, honest Davy can regulate his horologes better than his
family.--Come, damsel, now I will escort you back to the Lady Mansel,
and pray her, of her kindness, that when she is again trusted with a
goose, she will not give it to the fox to keep.--The warders will let us
pass to my lady's lodgings, I trust."

"Stay but one moment," said Lord Glenvarloch. "Whatever hard opinion you
may have formed of me, I forgive you, for time will show that you do
me wrong; and you yourself, I think, will be the first to regret the
injustice you have done me. But involve not in your suspicions this
young person, for whose purity of thought angels themselves should be
vouchers. I have marked every look, every gesture; and whilst I can draw
breath, I shall ever think of her with--"

"Think not at all of her, my lord," answered George Heriot, interrupting
him; "it is, I have a notion, the best favour you can do her;--or think
of her as the daughter of Davy Ramsay, the clockmaker, no proper
subject for fine speeches, romantic adventures, or high-flown Arcadian
compliments. I give you god-den, my lord. I think not altogether so
harshly as my speech may have spoken. If I can help--that is, if I saw
my way clearly through this labyrinth--but it avails not talking now. I
give your lordship god-den.--Here, warder! Permit us to pass to the
Lady Hansel's apartment." The warder said he must have orders from the
Lieutenant; and as he retired to procure them, the parties remained
standing near each other, but without speaking, and scarce looking at
each other save by stealth, a situation which, in two of the party at
least, was sufficiently embarrassing. The difference of rank, though in
that age a consideration so serious, could not prevent Lord Glenvarloch
from seeing that Margaret Ramsay was one of the prettiest young women
he had ever beheld--from suspecting, he could scarce tell why, that he
himself was not indifferent to her--from feeling assured that he had
been the cause of much of her present distress--admiration, self-love,
and generosity, acting in favour of the same object; and when the yeoman
returned with permission to his guests to withdraw, Nigel's obeisance
to the beautiful daughter of the mechanic was marked with an expression,
which called up in her cheeks as much colour as any incident of the
eventful day had hitherto excited. She returned the courtesy timidly
and irresolutely--clung to her godfather's arm, and left the apartment,
which, dark as it was, had never yet appeared so obscure to Nigel, as
when the door closed behind her.




CHAPTER XXX


  Yet though thou shouldst be dragg'd in scorn
  To yonder ignominious tree,
  Thou shall not want one faithful friend
  To share the cruel fates' decree.
                   _Ballad of Jemmy Dawson._

Master George Heriot and his ward, as she might justly be termed, for
his affection to Margaret imposed on him all the cares of a guardian,
were ushered by the yeoman of the guard to the lodging of the
Lieutenant, where they found him seated with his lady. They were
received by both with that decorous civility which Master Heriot's
character and supposed influence demanded, even at the hand of a
punctilious old soldier and courtier like Sir Edward Mansel. Lady Mansel
received Margaret with like courtesy, and informed Master George that
she was now only her guest, and no longer her prisoner.

"She is at liberty," she said, "to return to her friends under your
charge--such is his Majesty's pleasure."

"I am glad of it, madam," answered Heriot, "but only I could have wished
her freedom had taken place before her foolish interview with that
singular young man; and I marvel your ladyship permitted it."

"My good Master Heriot," said Sir Edward, "we act according to the
commands of one better and wiser than ourselves--our orders from his
Majesty must be strictly and literally obeyed; and I need not say that
the wisdom of his Majesty doth more than ensure--"

"I know his Majesty's wisdom well," said Heriot; "yet there is an old
proverb about fire and flax--well, let it pass."

"I see Sir Mungo Malagrowther stalking towards the door of the lodging,"
said the Lady Mansel, "with the gait of a lame crane--it is his second
visit this morning."

"He brought the warrant for discharging Lord Glenvarloch of the charge
of treason," said Sir Edward.

"And from him," said Heriot, "I heard much of what had befallen; for I
came from France only late last evening, and somewhat unexpectedly."

As they spoke, Sir Mungo entered the apartment--saluted the Lieutenant
of the Tower and his lady with ceremonious civility--honoured George
Heriot with a patronising nod of acknowledgment, and accosted Margaret
with--"Hey! my young charge, you have not doffed your masculine attire
yet?"

"She does not mean to lay it aside, Sir Mungo," said Heriot, speaking
loud, "until she has had satisfaction from you, for betraying her
disguise to me, like a false knight--and in very deed, Sir Mungo, I
think when you told me she was rambling about in so strange a dress, you
might have said also that she was under Lady Mansel's protection."

"That was the king's secret, Master Heriot," said Sir Mungo, throwing
himself into a chair with an air of atrabilarious importance; "the other
was a well-meaning hint to yourself, as the girl's friend."

"Yes," replied Heriot, "it was done like yourself--enough told to make
me unhappy about her--not a word which could relieve my uneasiness."

"Sir Mungo will not hear that remark," said the lady; "we must change
the subject.--Is there any news from Court, Sir Mungo? you have been to
Greenwich?"

"You might as well ask me, madam," answered the Knight, "whether there
is any news from hell."

"How, Sir Mungo, how!" said Sir Edward, "measure your words something
better--You speak of the Court of King James."

"Sir Edward, if I spoke of the court of the twelve Kaisers, I would say
it is as confused for the present as the infernal regions. Courtiers of
forty years' standing, and such I may write myself, are as far to seek
in the matter as a minnow in the Maelstrom. Some folk say the king has
frowned on the Prince--some that the Prince has looked grave on the
duke--some that Lord Glenvarloch will be hanged for high treason--and
some that there is matter against Lord Dalgarno that may cost him as
much as his head's worth."

"And what do you, that are a courtier of forty years' standing, think of
it all?" said Sir Edward Mansel.

"Nay, nay, do not ask him, Sir Edward," said the lady, with an
expressive look to her husband.

