gave him a tremendous box on the ear, and told him to go to the devil.  He
went home instead, and did not reappear at Court for half a year or so,
when he and the Queen were reconciled, though never (as some suppose)
thoroughly.

From this time the fate of the Earl of Essex and that of the Queen seemed
to be blended together.  The Irish were still perpetually quarrelling and
fighting among themselves, and he went over to Ireland as Lord
Lieutenant, to the great joy of his enemies (Sir Walter Raleigh among the
rest), who were glad to have so dangerous a rival far off.  Not being by
any means successful there, and knowing that his enemies would take
advantage of that circumstance to injure him with the Queen, he came home
again, though against her orders.  The Queen being taken by surprise when
he appeared before her, gave him her hand to kiss, and he was
overjoyed--though it was not a very lovely hand by this time--but in the
course of the same day she ordered him to confine himself to his room,
and two or three days afterwards had him taken into custody.  With the
same sort of caprice--and as capricious an old woman she now was, as ever
wore a crown or a head either--she sent him broth from her own table on
his falling ill from anxiety, and cried about him.

He was a man who could find comfort and occupation in his books, and he
did so for a time; not the least happy time, I dare say, of his life.  But
it happened unfortunately for him, that he held a monopoly in sweet
wines: which means that nobody could sell them without purchasing his
permission.  This right, which was only for a term, expiring, he applied
to have it renewed.  The Queen refused, with the rather strong
observation--but she _did_ make strong observations--that an unruly beast
must be stinted in his food.  Upon this, the angry Earl, who had been
already deprived of many offices, thought himself in danger of complete
ruin, and turned against the Queen, whom he called a vain old woman who
had grown as crooked in her mind as she had in her figure.  These
uncomplimentary expressions the ladies of the Court immediately snapped
up and carried to the Queen, whom they did not put in a better tempter,
you may believe.  The same Court ladies, when they had beautiful dark
hair of their own, used to wear false red hair, to be like the Queen.  So
they were not very high-spirited ladies, however high in rank.

The worst object of the Earl of Essex, and some friends of his who used
to meet at LORD SOUTHAMPTON'S house, was to obtain possession of the
Queen, and oblige her by force to dismiss her ministers and change her
favourites.  On Saturday the seventh of February, one thousand six
hundred and one, the council suspecting this, summoned the Earl to come
before them.  He, pretending to be ill, declined; it was then settled
among his friends, that as the next day would be Sunday, when many of the
citizens usually assembled at the Cross by St. Paul's Cathedral, he
should make one bold effort to induce them to rise and follow him to the
Palace.

So, on the Sunday morning, he and a small body of adherents started out
of his house--Essex House by the Strand, with steps to the river--having
first shut up in it, as prisoners, some members of the council who came
to examine him--and hurried into the City with the Earl at their head
crying out 'For the Queen!  For the Queen!  A plot is laid for my life!'
No one heeded them, however, and when they came to St. Paul's there were
no citizens there.  In the meantime the prisoners at Essex House had been
released by one of the Earl's own friends; he had been promptly
proclaimed a traitor in the City itself; and the streets were barricaded
with carts and guarded by soldiers.  The Earl got back to his house by
water, with difficulty, and after an attempt to defend his house against
the troops and cannon by which it was soon surrounded, gave himself up
that night.  He was brought to trial on the nineteenth, and found guilty;
on the twenty-fifth, he was executed on Tower Hill, where he died, at
thirty-four years old, both courageously and penitently.  His step-father
suffered with him.  His enemy, Sir Walter Raleigh, stood near the
scaffold all the time--but not so near it as we shall see him stand,
before we finish his history.

In this case, as in the cases of the Duke of Norfolk and Mary Queen of
Scots, the Queen had commanded, and countermanded, and again commanded,
the execution.  It is probable that the death of her young and gallant
favourite in the prime of his good qualities, was never off her mind
afterwards, but she held out, the same vain, obstinate and capricious
woman, for another year.  Then she danced before her Court on a state
occasion--and cut, I should think, a mighty ridiculous figure, doing so
in an immense ruff, stomacher and wig, at seventy years old.  For another
year still, she held out, but, without any more dancing, and as a moody,
sorrowful, broken creature.  At last, on the tenth of March, one thousand
six hundred and three, having been ill of a very bad cold, and made worse
by the death of the Countess of Nottingham who was her intimate friend,
she fell into a stupor and was supposed to be dead.  She recovered her
consciousness, however, and then nothing would induce her to go to bed;
for she said that she knew that if she did, she should never get up
again.  There she lay for ten days, on cushions on the floor, without any
food, until the Lord Admiral got her into bed at last, partly by
persuasions and partly by main force.  When they asked her who should
succeed her, she replied that her seat had been the seat of Kings, and
that she would have for her successor, 'No rascal's son, but a King's.'
Upon this, the lords present stared at one another, and took the liberty
of asking whom she meant; to which she replied, 'Whom should I mean, but
our cousin of Scotland!'  This was on the twenty-third of March.  They
asked her once again that day, after she was speechless, whether she was
still in the same mind?  She struggled up in bed, and joined her hands
over her head in the form of a crown, as the only reply she could make.
At three o'clock next morning, she very quietly died, in the forty-fifth
year of her reign.

That reign had been a glorious one, and is made for ever memorable by the
distinguished men who flourished in it.  Apart from the great voyagers,
statesmen, and scholars, whom it produced, the names of BACON, SPENSER,
and SHAKESPEARE, will always be remembered with pride and veneration by
the civilised world, and will always impart (though with no great reason,
perhaps) some portion of their lustre to the name of Elizabeth herself.
It was a great reign for discovery, for commerce, and for English
enterprise and spirit in general.  It was a great reign for the
Protestant religion and for the Reformation which made England free.  The
Queen was very popular, and in her progresses, or journeys about her
dominions, was everywhere received with the liveliest joy.  I think the
truth is, that she was not half so good as she has been made out, and not
half so bad as she has been made out.  She had her fine qualities, but
she was coarse, capricious, and treacherous, and had all the faults of an
excessively vain young woman long after she was an old one.  On the
whole, she had a great deal too much of her father in her, to please me.

Many improvements and luxuries were introduced in the course of these
five-and-forty years in the general manner of living; but cock-fighting,
bull-baiting, and bear-baiting, were still the national amusements; and a
coach was so rarely seen, and was such an ugly and cumbersome affair when
it was seen, that even the Queen herself, on many high occasions, rode on
horseback on a pillion behind the Lord Chancellor.




CHAPTER XXXII--ENGLAND UNDER JAMES THE FIRST


'Our cousin of Scotland' was ugly, awkward, and shuffling both in mind
and person.  His tongue was much too large for his mouth, his legs were
much too weak for his body, and his dull goggle-eyes stared and rolled
like an idiot's.  He was cunning, covetous, wasteful, idle, drunken,
greedy, dirty, cowardly, a great swearer, and the most conceited man on
earth.  His figure--what is commonly called rickety from his
birth--presented a most ridiculous appearance, dressed in thick padded
clothes, as a safeguard against being stabbed (of which he lived in
continual fear), of a grass-green colour from head to foot, with a
hunting-horn dangling at his side instead of a sword, and his hat and
feather sticking over one eye, or hanging on the back of his head, as he
happened to toss it on.  He used to loll on the necks of his favourite
courtiers, and slobber their faces, and kiss and pinch their cheeks; and
the greatest favourite he ever had, used to sign himself in his letters
to his royal master, His Majesty's 'dog and slave,' and used to address
his majesty as 'his Sowship.'  His majesty was the worst rider ever seen,
and thought himself the best.  He was one of the most impertinent talkers
(in the broadest Scotch) ever heard, and boasted of being unanswerable in
all manner of argument.  He wrote some of the most wearisome treatises
ever read--among others, a book upon witchcraft, in which he was a devout
believer--and thought himself a prodigy of authorship.  He thought, and
wrote, and said, that a king had a right to make and unmake what laws he
pleased, and ought to be accountable to nobody on earth.  This is the
plain, true character of the personage whom the greatest men about the
court praised and flattered to that degree, that I doubt if there be
anything much more shameful in the annals of human nature.

He came to the English throne with great ease.  The miseries of a
disputed succession had been felt so long, and so dreadfully, that he was
proclaimed within a few hours of Elizabeth's death, and was accepted by
the nation, even without being asked to give any pledge that he would
govern well, or that he would redress crying grievances.  He took a month
to come from Edinburgh to London; and, by way of exercising his new
power, hanged a pickpocket on the journey without any trial, and knighted
everybody he could lay hold of.  He made two hundred knights before he
got to his palace in London, and seven hundred before he had been in it
three months.  He also shovelled sixty-two new peers into the House of
Lords--and there was a pretty large sprinkling of Scotchmen among them,
you may believe.

His Sowship's prime Minister, CECIL (for I cannot do better than call his
majesty what his favourite called him), was the enemy of Sir Walter
Raleigh, and also of Sir Walter's political friend, LORD COBHAM; and his
Sowship's first trouble was a plot originated by these two, and entered
into by some others, with the old object of seizing the King and keeping
him in imprisonment until he should change his ministers.  There were
Catholic priests in the plot, and there were Puritan noblemen too; for,
although the Catholics and Puritans were strongly opposed to each other,
they united at this time against his Sowship, because they knew that he
had a design against both, after pretending to be friendly to each; this
design being to have only one high and convenient form of the Protestant
religion, which everybody should be bound to belong to, whether they
liked it or not.  This plot was mixed up with another, which may or may
not have had some reference to placing on the throne, at some time, the
LADY ARABELLA STUART; whose misfortune it was, to be the daughter of the
younger brother of his Sowship's father, but who was quite innocent of
any part in the scheme.  Sir Walter Raleigh was accused on the confession
of Lord Cobham--a miserable creature, who said one thing at one time, and
another thing at another time, and could be relied upon in nothing.  The
trial of Sir Walter Raleigh lasted from eight in the morning until nearly
midnight; he defended himself with such eloquence, genius, and spirit
against all accusations, and against the insults of COKE, the Attorney-
General--who, according to the custom of the time, foully abused him--that
those who went there detesting the prisoner, came away admiring him, and
declaring that anything so wonderful and so captivating was never heard.
He was found guilty, nevertheless, and sentenced to death.  Execution was
deferred, and he was taken to the Tower.  The two Catholic priests, less
fortunate, were executed with the usual atrocity; and Lord Cobham and two
others were pardoned on the scaffold.  His Sowship thought it wonderfully
knowing in him to surprise the people by pardoning these three at the
very block; but, blundering, and bungling, as usual, he had very nearly
overreached himself.  For, the messenger on horseback who brought the
pardon, came so late, that he was pushed to the outside of the crowd, and
was obliged to shout and roar out what he came for.  The miserable Cobham
did not gain much by being spared that day.  He lived, both as a prisoner
and a beggar, utterly despised, and miserably poor, for thirteen years,
and then died in an old outhouse belonging to one of his former servants.

This plot got rid of, and Sir Walter Raleigh safely shut up in the Tower,
his Sowship held a great dispute with the Puritans on their presenting a
petition to him, and had it all his own way--not so very wonderful, as he
would talk continually, and would not hear anybody else--and filled the
Bishops with admiration.  It was comfortably settled that there was to be
only one form of religion, and that all men were to think exactly alike.
But, although this was arranged two centuries and a half ago, and
although the arrangement was supported by much fining and imprisonment, I
do not find that it is quite successful, even yet.

His Sowship, having that uncommonly high opinion of himself as a king,
had a very low opinion of Parliament as a power that audaciously wanted
to control him.  When he called his first Parliament after he had been
king a year, he accordingly thought he would take pretty high ground with
them, and told them that he commanded them 'as an absolute king.'  The
Parliament thought those strong words, and saw the necessity of upholding
their authority.  His Sowship had three children: Prince Henry, Prince
Charles, and the Princess Elizabeth.  It would have been well for one of
these, and we shall too soon see which, if he had learnt a little wisdom
concerning Parliaments from his father's obstinacy.

Now, the people still labouring under their old dread of the Catholic
religion, this Parliament revived and strengthened the severe laws
against it.  And this so angered ROBERT CATESBY, a restless Catholic
gentleman of an old family, that he formed one of the most desperate and
terrible designs ever conceived in the mind of man; no less a scheme than
the Gunpowder Plot.

His object was, when the King, lords, and commons, should be assembled at
the next opening of Parliament, to blow them up, one and all, with a
great mine of gunpowder.  The first person to whom he confided this
horrible idea was THOMAS WINTER, a Worcestershire gentleman who had
served in the army abroad, and had been secretly employed in Catholic
projects.  While Winter was yet undecided, and when he had gone over to
the Netherlands, to learn from the Spanish Ambassador there whether there
was any hope of Catholics being relieved through the intercession of the
King of Spain with his Sowship, he found at Ostend a tall, dark, daring
man, whom he had known when they were both soldiers abroad, and whose
name was GUIDO--or GUY--FAWKES.  Resolved to join the plot, he proposed
it to this man, knowing him to be the man for any desperate deed, and
they two came back to England together.  Here, they admitted two other
conspirators; THOMAS PERCY, related to the Earl of Northumberland, and
JOHN WRIGHT, his brother-in-law.  All these met together in a solitary
house in the open fields which were then near Clement's Inn, now a
closely blocked-up part of London; and when they had all taken a great
oath of secrecy, Catesby told the rest what his plan was.  They then went
up-stairs into a garret, and received the Sacrament from FATHER GERARD, a
Jesuit, who is said not to have known actually of the Gunpowder Plot, but
who, I think, must have had his suspicions that there was something
desperate afoot.

Percy was a Gentleman Pensioner, and as he had occasional duties to
perform about the Court, then kept at Whitehall, there would be nothing
suspicious in his living at Westminster.  So, having looked well about
him, and having found a house to let, the back of which joined the
Parliament House, he hired it of a person named FERRIS, for the purpose
of undermining the wall.  Having got possession of this house, the
conspirators hired another on the Lambeth side of the Thames, which they
used as a storehouse for wood, gunpowder, and other combustible matters.
These were to be removed at night (and afterwards were removed), bit by
bit, to the house at Westminster; and, that there might be some trusty
person to keep watch over the Lambeth stores, they admitted another
conspirator, by name ROBERT KAY, a very poor Catholic gentleman.

All these arrangements had been made some months, and it was a dark,
wintry, December night, when the conspirators, who had been in the
meantime dispersed to avoid observation, met in the house at Westminster,
and began to dig.  They had laid in a good stock of eatables, to avoid
going in and out, and they dug and dug with great ardour.  But, the wall
being tremendously thick, and the work very severe, they took into their
plot CHRISTOPHER WRIGHT, a younger brother of John Wright, that they
might have a new pair of hands to help.  And Christopher Wright fell to
like a fresh man, and they dug and dug by night and by day, and Fawkes
stood sentinel all the time.  And if any man's heart seemed to fail him
at all, Fawkes said, 'Gentlemen, we have abundance of powder and shot
here, and there is no fear of our being taken alive, even if discovered.'
The same Fawkes, who, in the capacity of sentinel, was always prowling
about, soon picked up the intelligence that the King had prorogued the
Parliament again, from the seventh of February, the day first fixed upon,
until the third of October.  When the conspirators knew this, they agreed
to separate until after the Christmas holidays, and to take no notice of
each other in the meanwhile, and never to write letters to one another on
any account.  So, the house in Westminster was shut up again, and I
suppose the neighbours thought that those strange-looking men who lived
there so gloomily, and went out so seldom, were gone away to have a merry
Christmas somewhere.

It was the beginning of February, sixteen hundred and five, when Catesby
met his fellow-conspirators again at this Westminster house.  He had now
admitted three more; JOHN GRANT, a Warwickshire gentleman of a melancholy
temper, who lived in a doleful house near Stratford-upon-Avon, with a
frowning wall all round it, and a deep moat; ROBERT WINTER, eldest
brother of Thomas; and Catesby's own servant, THOMAS BATES, who, Catesby
thought, had had some suspicion of what his master was about.  These
three had all suffered more or less for their religion in Elizabeth's
time.  And now, they all began to dig again, and they dug and dug by
night and by day.

They found it dismal work alone there, underground, with such a fearful
secret on their minds, and so many murders before them.  They were filled
with wild fancies.  Sometimes, they thought they heard a great bell
tolling, deep down in the earth under the Parliament House; sometimes,
they thought they heard low voices muttering about the Gunpowder Plot;
once in the morning, they really did hear a great rumbling noise over
their heads, as they dug and sweated in their mine.  Every man stopped
and looked aghast at his neighbour, wondering what had happened, when
that bold prowler, Fawkes, who had been out to look, came in and told
them that it was only a dealer in coals who had occupied a cellar under
the Parliament House, removing his stock in trade to some other place.
Upon this, the conspirators, who with all their digging and digging had
not yet dug through the tremendously thick wall, changed their plan;
hired that cellar, which was directly under the House of Lords; put six-
and-thirty barrels of gunpowder in it, and covered them over with fagots
and coals.  Then they all dispersed again till September, when the
following new conspirators were admitted; SIR EDWARD BAYNHAM, of
Gloucestershire; SIR EVERARD DIGBY, of Rutlandshire; AMBROSE ROOKWOOD, of
Suffolk; FRANCIS TRESHAM, of Northamptonshire.  Most of these were rich,
and were to assist the plot, some with money and some with horses on
which the conspirators were to ride through the country and rouse the
Catholics after the Parliament should be blown into air.

Parliament being again prorogued from the third of October to the fifth
of November, and the conspirators being uneasy lest their design should
have been found out, Thomas Winter said he would go up into the House of
Lords on the day of the prorogation, and see how matters looked.  Nothing
could be better.  The unconscious Commissioners were walking about and
talking to one another, just over the six-and-thirty barrels of
gunpowder.  He came back and told the rest so, and they went on with
their preparations.  They hired a ship, and kept it ready in the Thames,
in which Fawkes was to sail for Flanders after firing with a slow match
the train that was to explode the powder.  A number of Catholic gentlemen
not in the secret, were invited, on pretence of a hunting party, to meet
Sir Everard Digby at Dunchurch on the fatal day, that they might be ready
to act together.  And now all was ready.

But, now, the great wickedness and danger which had been all along at the
bottom of this wicked plot, began to show itself.  As the fifth of
November drew near, most of the conspirators, remembering that they had
friends and relations who would be in the House of Lords that day, felt
some natural relenting, and a wish to warn them to keep away.  They were
not much comforted by Catesby's declaring that in such a cause he would
blow up his own son.  LORD MOUNTEAGLE, Tresham's brother-in-law, was
certain to be in the house; and when Tresham found that he could not
prevail upon the rest to devise any means of sparing their friends, he
wrote a mysterious letter to this lord and left it at his lodging in the
dusk, urging him to keep away from the opening of Parliament, 'since God
and man had concurred to punish the wickedness of the times.'  It
contained the words 'that the Parliament should receive a terrible blow,
and yet should not see who hurt them.'  And it added, 'the danger is
past, as soon as you have burnt the letter.'

The ministers and courtiers made out that his Sowship, by a direct
miracle from Heaven, found out what this letter meant.  The truth is,
that they were not long (as few men would be) in finding out for
themselves; and it was decided to let the conspirators alone, until the
very day before the opening of Parliament.  That the conspirators had
their fears, is certain; for, Tresham himself said before them all, that
they were every one dead men; and, although even he did not take flight,
there is reason to suppose that he had warned other persons besides Lord
Mounteagle.  However, they were all firm; and Fawkes, who was a man of
iron, went down every day and night to keep watch in the cellar as usual.
He was there about two in the afternoon of the fourth, when the Lord
Chamberlain and Lord Mounteagle threw open the door and looked in.  'Who
are you, friend?' said they.  'Why,' said Fawkes, 'I am Mr. Percy's
servant, and am looking after his store of fuel here.'  'Your master has
laid in a pretty good store,' they returned, and shut the door, and went
away.  Fawkes, upon this, posted off to the other conspirators to tell
them all was quiet, and went back and shut himself up in the dark, black
cellar again, where he heard the bell go twelve o'clock and usher in the
fifth of November.  About two hours afterwards, he slowly opened the
door, and came out to look about him, in his old prowling way.  He was
instantly seized and bound, by a party of soldiers under SIR THOMAS
KNEVETT.  He had a watch upon him, some touchwood, some tinder, some slow
matches; and there was a dark lantern with a candle in it, lighted,
behind the door.  He had his boots and spurs on--to ride to the ship, I
suppose--and it was well for the soldiers that they took him so suddenly.
If they had left him but a moment's time to light a match, he certainly
would have tossed it in among the powder, and blown up himself and them.

They took him to the King's bed-chamber first of all, and there the King
(causing him to be held very tight, and keeping a good way off), asked
him how he could have the heart to intend to destroy so many innocent
people?  'Because,' said Guy Fawkes, 'desperate diseases need desperate
remedies.'  To a little Scotch favourite, with a face like a terrier, who
asked him (with no particular wisdom) why he had collected so much
gunpowder, he replied, because he had meant to blow Scotchmen back to
Scotland, and it would take a deal of powder to do that.  Next day he was
carried to the Tower, but would make no confession.  Even after being
horribly tortured, he confessed nothing that the Government did not
already know; though he must have been in a fearful state--as his
signature, still preserved, in contrast with his natural hand-writing
before he was put upon the dreadful rack, most frightfully shows.  Bates,
a very different man, soon said the Jesuits had had to do with the plot,
and probably, under the torture, would as readily have said anything.
Tresham, taken and put in the Tower too, made confessions and unmade
them, and died of an illness that was heavy upon him.  Rookwood, who had
stationed relays of his own horses all the way to Dunchurch, did not
mount to escape until the middle of the day, when the news of the plot
was all over London.  On the road, he came up with the two Wrights,
Catesby, and Percy; and they all galloped together into Northamptonshire.
Thence to Dunchurch, where they found the proposed party assembled.
Finding, however, that there had been a plot, and that it had been
discovered, the party disappeared in the course of the night, and left
them alone with Sir Everard Digby.  Away they all rode again, through
Warwickshire and Worcestershire, to a house called Holbeach, on the
borders of Staffordshire.  They tried to raise the Catholics on their
way, but were indignantly driven off by them.  All this time they were
hotly pursued by the sheriff of Worcester, and a fast increasing
concourse of riders.  At last, resolving to defend themselves at
Holbeach, they shut themselves up in the house, and put some wet powder
before the fire to dry.  But it blew up, and Catesby was singed and
blackened, and almost killed, and some of the others were sadly hurt.
Still, knowing that they must die, they resolved to die there, and with
only their swords in their hands appeared at the windows to be shot at by
the sheriff and his assistants.  Catesby said to Thomas Winter, after
Thomas had been hit in the right arm which dropped powerless by his side,
'Stand by me, Tom, and we will die together!'--which they did, being shot
through the body by two bullets from one gun.  John Wright, and
Christopher Wright, and Percy, were also shot.  Rookwood and Digby were
taken: the former with a broken arm and a wound in his body too.

It was the fifteenth of January, before the trial of Guy Fawkes, and such
of the other conspirators as were left alive, came on.  They were all
found guilty, all hanged, drawn, and quartered: some, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, on the top of Ludgate-hill; some, before the Parliament
House.  A Jesuit priest, named HENRY GARNET, to whom the dreadful design
was said to have been communicated, was taken and tried; and two of his
servants, as well as a poor priest who was taken with him, were tortured
without mercy.  He himself was not tortured, but was surrounded in the
Tower by tamperers and traitors, and so was made unfairly to convict
himself out of his own mouth.  He said, upon his trial, that he had done
all he could to prevent the deed, and that he could not make public what
had been told him in confession--though I am afraid he knew of the plot
in other ways.  He was found guilty and executed, after a manful defence,
and the Catholic Church made a saint of him; some rich and powerful
persons, who had had nothing to do with the project, were fined and
imprisoned for it by the Star Chamber; the Catholics, in general, who had
recoiled with horror from the idea of the infernal contrivance, were
unjustly put under more severe laws than before; and this was the end of
the Gunpowder Plot.



SECOND PART


His Sowship would pretty willingly, I think, have blown the House of
Commons into the air himself; for, his dread and jealousy of it knew no
bounds all through his reign.  When he was hard pressed for money he was
obliged to order it to meet, as he could get no money without it; and
when it asked him first to abolish some of the monopolies in necessaries
of life which were a great grievance to the people, and to redress other
public wrongs, he flew into a rage and got rid of it again.  At one time
he wanted it to consent to the Union of England with Scotland, and
quarrelled about that.  At another time it wanted him to put down a most
infamous Church abuse, called the High Commission Court, and he
quarrelled with it about that.  At another time it entreated him not to
be quite so fond of his archbishops and bishops who made speeches in his
praise too awful to be related, but to have some little consideration for
the poor Puritan clergy who were persecuted for preaching in their own
way, and not according to the archbishops and bishops; and they
quarrelled about that.  In short, what with hating the House of Commons,
and pretending not to hate it; and what with now sending some of its
members who opposed him, to Newgate or to the Tower, and now telling the
rest that they must not presume to make speeches about the public affairs
which could not possibly concern them; and what with cajoling, and
bullying, and fighting, and being frightened; the House of Commons was
the plague of his Sowship's existence.  It was pretty firm, however, in
maintaining its rights, and insisting that the Parliament should make the
laws, and not the King by his own single proclamations (which he tried
hard to do); and his Sowship was so often distressed for money, in
consequence, that he sold every sort of title and public office as if
they were merchandise, and even invented a new dignity called a
Baronetcy, which anybody could buy for a thousand pounds.

These disputes with his Parliaments, and his hunting, and his drinking,
and his lying in bed--for he was a great sluggard--occupied his Sowship
pretty well.  The rest of his time he chiefly passed in hugging and
slobbering his favourites.  The first of these was SIR PHILIP HERBERT,
who had no knowledge whatever, except of dogs, and horses, and hunting,
but whom he soon made EARL OF MONTGOMERY.  The next, and a much more
famous one, was ROBERT CARR, or KER (for it is not certain which was his
right name), who came from the Border country, and whom he soon made
VISCOUNT ROCHESTER, and afterwards, EARL OF SOMERSET.  The way in which
his Sowship doted on this handsome young man, is even more odious to
think of, than the way in which the really great men of England
condescended to bow down before him.  The favourite's great friend was a
certain SIR THOMAS OVERBURY, who wrote his love-letters for him, and
assisted him in the duties of his many high places, which his own
ignorance prevented him from discharging.  But this same Sir Thomas
having just manhood enough to dissuade the favourite from a wicked
marriage with the beautiful Countess of Essex, who was to get a divorce
