had been taken prisoner, and twice his ransom had been wrung by dint
of blows and tortures out of the starving peasants and ruined farmers.
Wolves or watch-dogs, it was hard to say from which the sheep had most
to fear.

The Castle of Villefranche was harsh and stern as its master. A broad
moat, a high outer wall turreted at the corners, with a great black keep
towering above all--so it lay before them in the moonlight. By the light
of two flambeaux, protruded through the narrow slit-shaped openings at
either side of the ponderous gate, they caught a glimpse of the glitter
of fierce eyes and of the gleam of the weapons of the guard. The sight
of the two-headed eagle of Du Guesclin, however, was a passport into
any fortalice in France, and ere they had passed the gate the old border
knight came running forwards with hands out-thrown to greet his famous
countryman. Nor was he less glad to see Sir Nigel, when the Englishman's
errand was explained to him, for these archers had been a sore thorn in
his side and had routed two expeditions which he had sent against them.
A happy day it would be for the Seneschal of Auvergne when they should
learn that the last yew bow was over the marches.

The material for a feast was ever at hand in days when, if there was
grim want in the cottage, there was at least rude plenty in the castle.
Within an hour the guests were seated around a board which creaked under
the great pasties and joints of meat, varied by those more dainty
dishes in which the French excelled, the spiced ortolan and the truffled
beccaficoes. The Lady Rochefort, a bright and laughter-loving dame, sat
upon the left of her warlike spouse, with Lady Tiphaine upon the right.
Beneath sat Du Guesclin and Sir Nigel, with Sir Amory Monticourt, of the
order of the Hospitallers, and Sir Otto Harnit, a wandering knight
from the kingdom of Bohemia. These with Alleyne and Ford, four French
squires, and the castle chaplain, made the company who sat together that
night and made good cheer in the Castle of Villefranche. The great fire
crackled in the grate, the hooded hawks slept upon their perches, the
rough deer-hounds with expectant eyes crouched upon the tiled floor;
close at the elbows of the guests stood the dapper little lilac-coated
pages; the laugh and jest circled round and all was harmony and comfort.
Little they recked of the brushwood men who crouched in their rags along
the fringe of the forest and looked with wild and haggard eyes at the
rich, warm glow which shot a golden bar of light from the high arched
windows of the castle.

Supper over, the tables dormant were cleared away as by magic and
trestles and bancals arranged around the blazing fire, for there was a
bitter nip in the air. The Lady Tiphaine had sunk back in her cushioned
chair, and her long dark lashes drooped low over her sparkling eyes.
Alleyne, glancing at her, noted that her breath came quick and short,
and that her cheeks had blanched to a lily white. Du Guesclin eyed her
keenly from time to time, and passed his broad brown fingers through his
crisp, curly black hair with the air of a man who is perplexed in his
mind.

"These folk here," said the knight of Bohemia, "they do not seem too
well fed."

"Ah, canaille!" cried the Lord of Villefranche. "You would scarce credit
it, and yet it is sooth that when I was taken at Poictiers it was all
that my wife and foster-brother could do to raise the money from them
for my ransom. The sulky dogs would rather have three twists of a rack,
or the thumbikins for an hour, than pay out a denier for their own
feudal father and liege lord. Yet there is not one of them but hath an
old stocking full of gold pieces hid away in a snug corner."

"Why do they not buy food then?" asked Sir Nigel. "By St. Paul! it
seemed to me their bones were breaking through their skin."

"It is their grutching and grumbling which makes them thin. We have a
saying here, Sir Nigel, that if you pummel Jacques Bonhomme he will pat
you, but if you pat him he will pummel you. Doubtless you find it so in
England."

"Ma foi, no!" said Sir Nigel. "I have two Englishmen of this class in
my train, who are at this instant, I make little doubt, as full of your
wine as any cask in your cellar. He who pummelled them might come by
such a pat as he would be likely to remember."

"I cannot understand it," quoth the seneschal, "for the English knights
and nobles whom I have met were not men to brook the insolence of the
base born."

"Perchance, my fair lord, the poor folk are sweeter and of a better
countenance in England," laughed the Lady Rochefort. "Mon Dieu! you
cannot conceive to yourself how ugly they are! Without hair, without
teeth, all twisted and bent; for me, I cannot think how the good God
ever came to make such people. I cannot bear it, I, and so my trusty
Raoul goes ever before me with a cudgel to drive them from my path."

"Yet they have souls, fair lady, they have souls!" murmured the
chaplain, a white-haired man with a weary, patient face.

"So I have heard you tell them," said the lord of the castle; "and for
myself, father, though I am a true son of holy Church, yet I think
that you were better employed in saying your mass and in teaching the
children of my men-at-arms, than in going over the country-side to put
ideas in these folks' heads which would never have been there but for
you. I have heard that you have said to them that their souls are as
good as ours, and that it is likely that in another life they may stand
as high as the oldest blood of Auvergne. For my part, I believe that
there are so many worthy knights and gallant gentlemen in heaven who
know how such things should be arranged, that there is little fear that
we shall find ourselves mixed up with base roturiers and swine-herds.
Tell your beads, father, and con your psalter, but do not come between
me and those whom the king has given to me!"

"God help them!" cried the old priest. "A higher King than yours has
given them to me, and I tell you here in your own castle hall, Sir
Tristram de Rochefort, that you have sinned deeply in your dealings with
these poor folk, and that the hour will come, and may even now be at
hand, when God's hand will be heavy upon you for what you have done." He
rose as he spoke, and walked slowly from the room.

"Pest take him!" cried the French knight. "Now, what is a man to do with
a priest, Sir Bertrand?--for one can neither fight him like a man nor
coax him like a woman."

"Ah, Sir Bertrand knows, the naughty one!" cried the Lady Rochefort.
"Have we not all heard how he went to Avignon and squeezed fifty
thousand crowns out of the Pope."

"Ma foi!" said Sir Nigel, looking with a mixture of horror and
admiration at Du Guesclin. "Did not your heart sink within you? Were you
not smitten with fears? Have you not felt a curse hang over you?"

"I have not observed it," said the Frenchman carelessly. "But by Saint
Ives! Tristram, this chaplain of yours seems to me to be a worthy man,
and you should give heed to his words, for though I care nothing for
the curse of a bad pope, it would be a grief to me to have aught but a
blessing from a good priest."

"Hark to that, my fair lord," cried the Lady Rochefort. "Take heed, I
pray thee, for I do not wish to have a blight cast over me, nor a palsy
of the limbs. I remember that once before you angered Father Stephen,
and my tire-woman said that I lost more hair in seven days than ever
before in a month."

"If that be sign of sin, then, by Saint Paul! I have much upon my soul,"
said Sir Nigel, amid a general laugh. "But in very truth, Sir Tristram,
if I may venture a word of counsel, I should advise that you make your
peace with this good man."

"He shall have four silver candlesticks," said the seneschal moodily.
"And yet I would that he would leave the folk alone. You cannot conceive
in your mind how stubborn and brainless they are. Mules and pigs are
full of reason beside them. God He knows that I have had great patience
with them. It was but last week that, having to raise some money,
I called up to the castle Jean Goubert, who, as all men know, has a
casketful of gold pieces hidden away in some hollow tree. I give you my
word that I did not so much as lay a stripe upon his fool's back, but
after speaking with him, and telling him how needful the money was to
me, I left him for the night to think over the matter in my dungeon.
What think you that the dog did? Why, in the morning we found that he
had made a rope from strips of his leathern jerkin, and had hung himself
to the bar of the window."

"For me, I cannot conceive such wickedness!" cried the lady.

"And there was Gertrude Le Boeuf, as fair a maiden as eye could see, but
as bad and bitter as the rest of them. When young Amory de Valance was
here last Lammastide he looked kindly upon the girl, and even spoke of
taking her into his service. What does she do, with her dog of a father?
Why, they tie themselves together and leap into the Linden Pool, where
the water is five spears'-lengths deep. I give you my word that it was
a great grief to young Amory, and it was days ere he could cast it
from his mind. But how can one serve people who are so foolish and so
ungrateful?"

Whilst the Seneschal of Villefranche had been detailing the evil doings
of his tenants, Alleyne had been unable to take his eyes from the face
of Lady Tiphaine. She had lain back in her chair, with drooping eyelids
and bloodless face, so that he had feared at first her journey had
weighed heavily upon her, and that the strength was ebbing out of her.
Of a sudden, however, there came a change, for a dash of bright color
flickered up on to either cheek, and her lids were slowly raised again
upon eyes which sparkled with such lustre as Alleyne had never seen
in human eyes before, while their gaze was fixed intently, not on the
company, but on the dark tapestry which draped the wall. So transformed
and so ethereal was her expression, that Alleyne, in his loftiest dream
of archangel or of seraph, had never pictured so sweet, so womanly, and
yet so wise a face. Glancing at Du Guesclin, Alleyne saw that he also
was watching his wife closely, and from the twitching of his features,
and the beads upon his brick-colored brow, it was easy to see that he
was deeply agitated by the change which he marked in her.

"How is it with you, lady?" he asked at last, in a tremulous voice.

Her eyes remained fixed intently upon the wall, and there was a long
pause ere she answered him. Her voice, too, which had been so clear
and ringing, was now low and muffled as that of one who speaks from a
distance.

"All is very well with me, Bertrand," said she. "The blessed hour of
sight has come round to me again."

"I could see it come! I could see it come!" he exclaimed, passing his
fingers through his hair with the same perplexed expression as before.

"This is untoward, Sir Tristram," he said at last. "And I scarce know
in what words to make it clear to you, and to your fair wife, and to Sir
Nigel Loring, and to these other stranger knights. My tongue is a blunt
one, and fitter to shout word of command than to clear up such a matter
as this, of which I can myself understand little. This, however, I know,
that my wife is come of a very sainted race, whom God hath in His
wisdom endowed with wondrous powers, so that Tiphaine Raquenel was known
throughout Brittany ere ever I first saw her at Dinan. Yet these powers
are ever used for good, and they are the gift of God and not of the
devil, which is the difference betwixt white magic and black."

"Perchance it would be as well that we should send for Father Stephen,"
said Sir Tristram.

"It would be best that he should come," cried the Hospitaller.

"And bring with him a flask of holy water," added the knight of Bohemia.

"Not so, gentlemen," answered Sir Bertrand. "It is not needful that this
priest should be called, and it is in my mind that in asking for this ye
cast some slight shadow or slur upon the good name of my wife, as though
it were still doubtful whether her power came to her from above or
below. If ye have indeed such a doubt I pray that you will say so, that
we may discuss the matter in a fitting way."

"For myself," said Sir Nigel, "I have heard such words fall from the
lips of this lady that I am of the opinion that there is no woman,
save only one, who can be in any way compared to her in beauty and in
goodness. Should any gentleman think otherwise, I should deem it great
honor to run a small course with him, or debate the matter in whatever
way might be most pleasing to him."

"Nay, it would ill become me to cast a slur upon a lady who is both
my guest and the wife of my comrade-in-arms," said the Seneschal of
Villefranche. "I have perceived also that on her mantle there is marked
a silver cross, which is surely sign enough that there is nought of evil
in these strange powers which you say that she possesses."

This argument of the seneschal's appealed so powerfully to the Bohemian
and to the Hospitaller that they at once intimated that their objections
had been entirely overcome, while even the Lady Rochefort, who had sat
shivering and crossing herself, ceased to cast glances at the door, and
allowed her fears to turn to curiosity.

"Among the gifts which have been vouchsafed to my wife," said Du
Guesclin, "there is the wondrous one of seeing into the future; but it
comes very seldom upon her, and goes as quickly, for none can command
it. The blessed hour of sight, as she hath named it, has come but twice
since I have known her, and I can vouch for it that all that she hath
told me was true, for on the evening of the Battle of Auray she said
that the morrow would be an ill day for me and for Charles of Blois.
Ere the sun had sunk again he was dead, and I the prisoner of Sir John
Chandos. Yet it is not every question that she can answer, but only
those----"

"Bertrand, Bertrand!" cried the lady in the same muttering far-away
voice, "the blessed hour passes. Use it, Bertrand, while you may."

"I will, my sweet. Tell me, then, what fortune comes upon me?"

"Danger, Bertrand--deadly, pressing danger--which creeps upon you and
you know it not."

The French soldier burst into a thunderous laugh, and his green eyes
twinkled with amusement. "At what time during these twenty years would
not that have been a true word?" he cried. "Danger is in the air that I
breathe. But is this so very close, Tiphaine?"

"Here--now--close upon you!" The words came out in broken, strenuous
speech, while the lady's fair face was writhed and drawn like that of
one who looks upon a horror which strikes the words from her lips. Du
Guesclin gazed round the tapestried room, at the screens, the tables,
the abace, the credence, the buffet with its silver salver, and the
half-circle of friendly, wondering faces. There was an utter stillness,
save for the sharp breathing of the Lady Tiphaine and for the gentle
soughing of the wind outside, which wafted to their ears the distant
call upon a swine-herd's horn.

"The danger may bide," said he, shrugging his broad shoulders. "And now,
Tiphaine, tell us what will come of this war in Spain."

"I can see little," she answered, straining her eyes and puckering her
brow, as one who would fain clear her sight. "There are mountains, and
dry plains, and flash of arms and shouting of battle-cries. Yet it is
whispered to me that by failure you will succeed."

"Ha! Sir Nigel, how like you that?" quoth Bertrand, shaking his head.
"It is like mead and vinegar, half sweet, half sour. And is there no
question which you would ask my lady?"

"Certes there is. I would fain know, fair lady, how all things are at
Twynham Castle, and above all how my sweet lady employs herself."

"To answer this I would fain lay hand upon one whose thoughts turn
strongly to this castle which you have named. Nay, my Lord Loring, it is
whispered to me that there is another here who hath thought more deeply
of it than you."

"Thought more of mine own home?" cried Sir Nigel. "Lady, I fear that in
this matter at least you are mistaken."

"Not so, Sir Nigel. Come hither, young man, young English squire with
the gray eyes! Now give me your hand, and place it here across my brow,
that I may see that which you have seen. What is this that rises before
me? Mist, mist, rolling mist with a square black tower above it. See it
shreds out, it thins, it rises, and there lies a castle in green plain,
with the sea beneath it, and a great church within a bow-shot. There are
two rivers which run through the meadows, and between them lie the tents
of the besiegers."

"The besiegers!" cried Alleyne, Ford, and Sir Nigel, all three in a
breath.

"Yes, truly, and they press hard upon the castle, for they are an
exceeding multitude and full of courage. See how they storm and rage
against the gate, while some rear ladders, and others, line after line,
sweep the walls with their arrows. There are many leaders who shout and
beckon, and one, a tall man with a golden beard, who stands before the
gate stamping his foot and hallooing them on, as a pricker doth the
hounds. But those in the castle fight bravely. There is a woman, two
women, who stand upon the walls, and give heart to the men-at-arms. They
shower down arrows, darts and great stones. Ah! they have struck down
the tall leader, and the others give back. The mist thickens and I can
see no more."

"By Saint Paul!" said Sir Nigel, "I do not think that there can be any
such doings at Christchurch, and I am very easy of the fortalice so long
as my sweet wife hangs the key of the outer bailey at the head of her
bed. Yet I will not deny that you have pictured the castle as well as I
could have done myself, and I am full of wonderment at all that I have
heard and seen."

"I would, Lady Tiphaine," cried the Lady Rochefort, "that you would use
your power to tell me what hath befallen my golden bracelet which I wore
when hawking upon the second Sunday of Advent, and have never set eyes
upon since."

"Nay, lady," said du Guesclin, "it does not befit so great and wondrous
a power to pry and search and play the varlet even to the beautiful
chatelaine of Villefranche. Ask a worthy question, and, with the
blessing of God, you shall have a worthy answer."

"Then I would fain ask," cried one of the French squires, "as to which
may hope to conquer in these wars betwixt the English and ourselves."

"Both will conquer and each will hold its own," answered the Lady
Tiphaine.

"Then we shall still hold Gascony and Guienne?" cried Sir Nigel.

The lady shook her head. "French land, French blood, French speech," she
answered. "They are French, and France shall have them."

"But not Bordeaux?" cried Sir Nigel excitedly.

"Bordeaux also is for France."

"But Calais?"

"Calais too."

"Woe worth me then, and ill hail to these evil words! If Bordeaux and
Calais be gone, then what is left for England?"

"It seems indeed that there are evil times coming upon your country,"
said Du Guesclin. "In our fondest hopes we never thought to hold
Bordeaux. By Saint Ives! this news hath warmed the heart within me. Our
dear country will then be very great in the future, Tiphaine?"

"Great, and rich, and beautiful," she cried. "Far down the course of
time I can see her still leading the nations, a wayward queen among the
peoples, great in war, but greater in peace, quick in thought, deft in
action, with her people's will for her sole monarch, from the sands of
Calais to the blue seas of the south."

"Ha!" cried Du Guesclin, with his eyes flashing in triumph, "you hear
her, Sir Nigel?--and she never yet said word which was not sooth."

The English knight shook his head moodily. "What of my own poor
country?" said he. "I fear, lady, that what you have said bodes but
small good for her."

The lady sat with parted lips, and her breath came quick and fast. "My
God!" she cried, "what is this that is shown me? Whence come they, these
peoples, these lordly nations, these mighty countries which rise up
before me? I look beyond, and others rise, and yet others, far and
farther to the shores of the uttermost waters. They crowd! They swarm!
The world is given to them, and it resounds with the clang of their
hammers and the ringing of their church bells. They call them many
names, and they rule them this way or that but they are all English,
for I can hear the voices of the people. On I go, and onwards over seas
where man hath never yet sailed, and I see a great land under new
stars and a stranger sky, and still the land is England. Where have her
children not gone? What have they not done? Her banner is planted on
ice. Her banner is scorched in the sun. She lies athwart the lands, and
her shadow is over the seas. Bertrand, Bertrand! we are undone for the
buds of her bud are even as our choicest flower!" Her voice rose into
a wild cry, and throwing up her arms she sank back white and nerveless
into the deep oaken chair.

"It is over," said Du Guesclin moodily, as he raised her drooping head
with his strong brown hand. "Wine for the lady, squire! The blessed hour
of sight hath passed."



CHAPTER XXX. HOW THE BRUSHWOOD MEN CAME TO THE CHATEAU OF VILLEFRANCHE.


It was late ere Alleyne Edricson, having carried Sir Nigel the goblet
of spiced wine which it was his custom to drink after the curling of his
hair, was able at last to seek his chamber. It was a stone-flagged room
upon the second floor, with a bed in a recess for him, and two smaller
pallets on the other side, on which Aylward and Hordle John were already
snoring. Alleyne had knelt down to his evening orisons, when there came
a tap at his door, and Ford entered with a small lamp in his hand. His
face was deadly pale, and his hand shook until the shadows flickered up
and down the wall.

"What is it, Ford?" cried Alleyne, springing to his feet.

"I can scarce tell you," said he, sitting down on the side of the couch,
and resting his chin upon his hand. "I know not what to say or what to
think."

"Has aught befallen you, then?"

"Yes, or I have been slave to my own fancy. I tell you, lad, that I am
all undone, like a fretted bow-string. Hark hither, Alleyne! it
cannot be that you have forgotten little Tita, the daughter of the old
glass-stainer at Bordeaux?"

"I remember her well."

"She and I, Alleyne, broke the lucky groat together ere we parted, and
she wears my ring upon her finger. 'Caro mio,' quoth she when last we
parted, 'I shall be near thee in the wars, and thy danger will be my
danger.' Alleyne, as God is my help, as I came up the stairs this night
I saw her stand before me, her face in tears, her hands out as though in
warning--I saw it, Alleyne, even as I see those two archers upon their
couches. Our very finger-tips seemed to meet, ere she thinned away like
a mist in the sunshine."

"I would not give overmuch thought to it," answered Alleyne. "Our minds
will play us strange pranks, and bethink you that these words of the
Lady Tiphaine Du Guesclin have wrought upon us and shaken us."

Ford shook his head. "I saw little Tita as clearly as though I were back
at the Rue des Apotres at Bordeaux," said he. "But the hour is late, and
I must go."

"Where do you sleep, then?"

"In the chamber above you. May the saints be with us all!" He rose
from the couch and left the chamber, while Alleyne could hear his feet
sounding upon the winding stair. The young squire walked across to the
window and gazed out at the moonlit landscape, his mind absorbed by
the thought of the Lady Tiphaine, and of the strange words that she
had spoken as to what was going forward at Castle Twynham. Leaning his
elbows upon the stonework, he was deeply plunged in reverie, when in a
moment his thoughts were brought back to Villefranche and to the scene
before him.

The window at which he stood was in the second floor of that portion of
the castle which was nearest to the keep. In front lay the broad moat,
with the moon lying upon its surface, now clear and round, now drawn
lengthwise as the breeze stirred the waters. Beyond, the plain sloped
down to a thick wood, while further to the left a second wood shut
out the view. Between the two an open glade stretched, silvered in the
moonshine, with the river curving across the lower end of it.

As he gazed, he saw of a sudden a man steal forth from the wood into the
open clearing. He walked with his head sunk, his shoulders curved, and
his knees bent, as one who strives hard to remain unseen. Ten paces from
the fringe of trees he glanced around, and waving his hand he crouched
down, and was lost to sight among a belt of furze-bushes. After him
there came a second man, and after him a third, a fourth, and a fifth
stealing across the narrow open space and darting into the shelter of
the brushwood. Nine-and-seventy Alleyne counted of these dark figures
flitting across the line of the moonlight. Many bore huge burdens upon
their backs, though what it was that they carried he could not tell at
the distance. Out of the one wood and into the other they passed, all
with the same crouching, furtive gait, until the black bristle of trees
had swallowed up the last of them.

For a moment Alleyne stood in the window, still staring down at the
silent forest, uncertain as to what he should think of these midnight
walkers. Then he bethought him that there was one beside him who was
fitter to judge on such a matter. His fingers had scarce rested upon
Aylward's shoulder ere the bowman was on his feet, with his hand
outstretched to his sword.

"Qui va?" he cried. "Hola! mon petit. By my hilt! I thought there had
been a camisade. What then, mon gar.?"

"Come hither by the window, Aylward," said Alleyne. "I have seen
four-score men pass from yonder shaw across the glade, and nigh every
man of them had a great burden on his back. What think you of it?"

"I think nothing of it, mon camarade! There are as many masterless folk
in this country as there are rabbits on Cowdray Down, and there are many
who show their faces by night but would dance in a hempen collar if
they stirred forth in the day. On all the French marches are droves
of outcasts, reivers, spoilers, and draw-latches, of whom I judge that
these are some, though I marvel that they should dare to come so nigh
to the castle of the seneschal. All seems very quiet now," he added,
peering out of the window.

"They are in the further wood," said Alleyne.

"And there they may bide. Back to rest, mon petit; for, by my hilt! each
day now will bring its own work. Yet it would be well to shoot the bolt
in yonder door when one is in strange quarters. So!" He threw himself
down upon his pallet and in an instant was fast asleep.

It might have been about three o'clock in the morning when Alleyne was
aroused from a troubled sleep by a low cry or exclamation. He listened,
but, as he heard no more, he set it down as the challenge of the guard
upon the walls, and dropped off to sleep once more. A few minutes later
he was disturbed by a gentle creaking of his own door, as though some
one were pushing cautiously against it, and immediately afterwards he
heard the soft thud of cautious footsteps upon the stair which led
to the room above, followed by a confused noise and a muffled groan.
Alleyne sat up on his couch with all his nerves in a tingle, uncertain
whether these sounds might come from a simple cause--some sick archer
and visiting leech perhaps--or whether they might have a more sinister
meaning. But what danger could threaten them here in this strong castle,
under the care of famous warriors, with high walls and a broad moat
around them? Who was there that could injure them? He had well-nigh
