
This report was written on large-sized paper, in the finest handwriting
of the President.

Rosa was announced simply as Rosa Gryphus; but as her name, well as it
might sound, was unknown to the President, she was refused admittance.

Rosa, however, was by no means abashed, having vowed in her heart,
in pursuing her cause, not to allow herself to be put down either by
refusal, or abuse, or even brutality.

"Announce to the President," she said to the servant, "that I want to
speak to him about the black tulip."

These words seemed to be an "Open Sesame," for she soon found herself
in the office of the President, Van Systens, who gallantly rose from his
chair to meet her.

He was a spare little man, resembling the stem of a flower, his head
forming its chalice, and his two limp arms representing the double leaf
of the tulip; the resemblance was rendered complete by his waddling gait
which made him even more like that flower when it bends under a breeze.

"Well, miss," he said, "you are coming, I am told, about the affair of
the black tulip."

To the President of the Horticultural Society the Tulipa nigra was a
first-rate power, which, in its character as queen of the tulips, might
send ambassadors.

"Yes, sir," answered Rosa; "I come at least to speak of it."

"Is it doing well, then?" asked Van Systens, with a smile of tender
veneration.

"Alas! sir, I don't know," said Rosa.

"How is that? could any misfortune have happened to it?"

"A very great one, sir; yet not to it, but to me."

"What?"

"It has been stolen from me."

"Stolen! the black tulip?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you know the thief?"

"I have my suspicions, but I must not yet accuse any one."

"But the matter may very easily be ascertained."

"How is that?"

"As it has been stolen from you, the thief cannot be far off."

"Why not?"

"Because I have seen the black tulip only two hours ago."

"You have seen the black tulip!" cried Rosa, rushing up to Mynheer van
Systens.

"As I see you, miss."

"But where?"

"Well, with your master, of course."

"With my master?"

"Yes, are you not in the service of Master Isaac Boxtel?"

"I?"

"Yes, you."

"But for whom do you take me, sir?"

"And for whom do you take me?"

"I hope, sir, I take you for what you are,--that is to say, for the
honorable Mynheer van Systens, Burgomaster of Haarlem, and President of
the Horticultural Society."

"And what is it you told me just now?"

"I told you, sir, that my tulip has been stolen."

"Then your tulip is that of Mynheer Boxtel. Well, my child, you express
yourself very badly. The tulip has been stolen, not from you, but from
Mynheer Boxtel."

"I repeat to you, sir, that I do not know who this Mynheer Boxtel is,
and that I have now heard his name pronounced for the first time."

"You do not know who Mynheer Boxtel is, and you also had a black tulip?"

"But is there any other besides mine?" asked Rosa, trembling.

"Yes,--that of Mynheer Boxtel."

"How is it?"

"Black, of course."

"Without speck?"

"Without a single speck, or even point."

"And you have this tulip,--you have it deposited here?"

"No, but it will be, as it has to be exhibited before the committee
previous to the prize being awarded."

"Oh, sir!" cried Rosa, "this Boxtel--this Isaac Boxtel--who calls
himself the owner of the black tulip----"

"And who is its owner?"

"Is he not a very thin man?"

"Bald?"

"Yes."

"With sunken eyes?"

"I think he has."

"Restless, stooping, and bowlegged?"

"In truth, you draw Master Boxtel's portrait feature by feature."

"And the tulip, sir? Is it not in a pot of white and blue earthenware,
with yellowish flowers in a basket on three sides?"

"Oh, as to that I am not quite sure; I looked more at the flower than at
the pot."

"Oh, sir! that's my tulip, which has been stolen from me. I came here to
reclaim it before you and from you."

"Oh! oh!" said Van Systens, looking at Rosa. "What! you are here
to claim the tulip of Master Boxtel? Well, I must say, you are cool
enough."

"Honoured sir," a little put out by this apostrophe, "I do not say that
I am coming to claim the tulip of Master Boxtel, but to reclaim my own."

"Yours?"

"Yes, the one which I have myself planted and nursed."

"Well, then, go and find out Master Boxtel, at the White Swan Inn, and
you can then settle matters with him; as for me, considering that the
cause seems to me as difficult to judge as that which was brought before
King Solomon, and that I do not pretend to be as wise as he was, I shall
content myself with making my report, establishing the existence of the
black tulip, and ordering the hundred thousand guilders to be paid to
its grower. Good-bye, my child."

"Oh, sir, sir!" said Rosa, imploringly.

"Only, my child," continued Van Systens, "as you are young and pretty,
and as there may be still some good in you, I'll give you some good
advice. Be prudent in this matter, for we have a court of justice and
a prison here at Haarlem, and, moreover, we are exceedingly ticklish
as far as the honour of our tulips is concerned. Go, my child, go,
remember, Master Isaac Boxtel at the White Swan Inn."

And Mynheer van Systens, taking up his fine pen, resumed his report,
which had been interrupted by Rosa's visit.




Chapter 26. A Member of the Horticultural Society


Rosa, beyond herself and nearly mad with joy and fear at the idea of the
black tulip being found again, started for the White Swan, followed by
the boatman, a stout lad from Frisia, who was strong enough to knock
down a dozen Boxtels single-handed.

He had been made acquainted in the course of the journey with the state
of affairs, and was not afraid of any encounter; only he had orders, in
such a case, to spare the tulip.

But on arriving in the great market-place Rosa at once stopped, a sudden
thought had struck her, just as Homer's Minerva seizes Achilles by the
hair at the moment when he is about to be carried away by his anger.

"Good Heaven!" she muttered to herself, "I have made a grievous blunder;
it may be I have ruined Cornelius, the tulip, and myself. I have given
the alarm, and perhaps awakened suspicion. I am but a woman; these men
may league themselves against me, and then I shall be lost. If I am lost
that matters nothing,--but Cornelius and the tulip!"

She reflected for a moment.

"If I go to that Boxtel, and do not know him; if that Boxtel is not my
Jacob, but another fancier, who has also discovered the black tulip; or
if my tulip has been stolen by some one else, or has already passed into
the hands of a third person;--if I do not recognize the man, only the
tulip, how shall I prove that it belongs to me? On the other hand, if
I recognise this Boxtel as Jacob, who knows what will come out of it?
whilst we are contesting with each other, the tulip will die."

In the meanwhile, a great noise was heard, like the distant roar of the
sea, at the other extremity of the market-place. People were running
about, doors opening and shutting, Rosa alone was unconscious of all
this hubbub among the multitude.

"We must return to the President," she muttered.

"Well, then, let us return," said the boatman.

They took a small street, which led them straight to the mansion of
Mynheer van Systens, who with his best pen in his finest hand continued
to draw up his report.

Everywhere on her way Rosa heard people speaking only of the black
tulip, and the prize of a hundred thousand guilders. The news had spread
like wildfire through the town.

Rosa had not a little difficulty is penetrating a second time into the
office of Mynheer van Systens, who, however, was again moved by the
magic name of the black tulip.

But when he recognised Rosa, whom in his own mind he had set down as
mad, or even worse, he grew angry, and wanted to send her away.

Rosa, however, clasped her hands, and said with that tone of honest
truth which generally finds its way to the hearts of men,--

"For Heaven's sake, sir, do not turn me away; listen to what I have to
tell you, and if it be not possible for you to do me justice, at least
you will not one day have to reproach yourself before God for having
made yourself the accomplice of a bad action."

Van Systens stamped his foot with impatience; it was the second time
that Rosa interrupted him in the midst of a composition which stimulated
his vanity, both as a burgomaster and as President of the Horticultural
Society.

"But my report!" he cried,--"my report on the black tulip!"

"Mynheer van Systens," Rosa continued, with the firmness of innocence
and truth, "your report on the black tulip will, if you don't hear me,
be based on crime or on falsehood. I implore you, sir, let this Master
Boxtel, whom I assert to be Master Jacob, be brought here before you and
me, and I swear that I will leave him in undisturbed possession of the
tulip if I do not recognise the flower and its holder."

"Well, I declare, here is a proposal," said Van Systens.

"What do you mean?"

"I ask you what can be proved by your recognising them?"

"After all," said Rosa, in her despair, "you are an honest man, sir; how
would you feel if one day you found out that you had given the prize to
a man for something which he not only had not produced, but which he had
even stolen?"

Rosa's speech seemed to have brought a certain conviction into the heart
of Van Systens, and he was going to answer her in a gentler tone, when
at once a great noise was heard in the street, and loud cheers shook the
house.

"What is this?" cried the burgomaster; "what is this? Is it possible?
have I heard aright?"

And he rushed towards his anteroom, without any longer heeding Rosa,
whom he left in his cabinet.

Scarcely had he reached his anteroom when he cried out aloud on seeing
his staircase invaded, up to the very landing-place, by the multitude,
which was accompanying, or rather following, a young man, simply clad in
a violet-coloured velvet, embroidered with silver; who, with a certain
aristocratic slowness, ascended the white stone steps of the house.

In his wake followed two officers, one of the navy, and the other of the
cavalry.

Van Systens, having found his way through the frightened domestics,
began to bow, almost to prostrate himself before his visitor, who had
been the cause of all this stir.

"Monseigneur," he called out, "Monseigneur! What distinguished honour is
your Highness bestowing for ever on my humble house by your visit?"

"Dear Mynheer van Systens," said William of Orange, with a serenity
which, with him, took the place of a smile, "I am a true Hollander, I
am fond of the water, of beer, and of flowers, sometimes even of that
cheese the flavour of which seems so grateful to the French; the flower
which I prefer to all others is, of course, the tulip. I heard at Leyden
that the city of Haarlem at last possessed the black tulip; and, after
having satisfied myself of the truth of news which seemed so incredible,
I have come to know all about it from the President of the Horticultural
Society."

"Oh, Monseigneur, Monseigneur!" said Van Systens, "what glory to the
society if its endeavours are pleasing to your Highness!"

"Have you got the flower here?" said the Prince, who, very likely,
already regretted having made such a long speech.

"I am sorry to say we have not."

"And where is it?"

"With its owner."

"Who is he?"

"An honest tulip-grower of Dort."

"His name?"

"Boxtel."

"His quarters?"

"At the White Swan; I shall send for him, and if in the meanwhile your
Highness will do me the honour of stepping into my drawing-room, he will
be sure--knowing that your Highness is here--to lose no time in bringing
his tulip."

"Very well, send for him."

"Yes, your Highness, but----"

"What is it?"

"Oh, nothing of any consequence, Monseigneur."

"Everything is of consequence, Mynheer van Systens."

"Well, then, Monseigneur, if it must be said, a little difficulty has
presented itself."

"What difficulty?"

"This tulip has already been claimed by usurpers. It's true that it is
