great want, and which throws a man wrong on every point where veneration
is required. Secondly, he was without the organ of comparison--a
deficiency which strips a man of sympathy; and thirdly, he had too
little of the organs of benevolence and ideality, which took the glory
and softness from his nature, and for him diminished those divine
qualities throughout the universe.

The want of veneration made him intolerant to those above him--kings and
nobles and priests, dynasties and parliaments and establishments, with
all their doings, most of their enactments, their forms, their rights,
their claims, were to him an abomination, all rubbish; he found no use
or pleasure in them, and believed it would be clear gain, and no damage
to the world, if its high places were razed, and their occupants crushed
in the fall. The want of veneration, too, made him dead at heart to the
electric delight of admiring what is admirable; it dried up a thousand
pure sources of enjoyment; it withered a thousand vivid pleasures. He
was not irreligious, though a member of no sect; but his religion could
not be that of one who knows how to venerate. He believed in God and
heaven; but his God and heaven were those of a man in whom awe,
imagination, and tenderness lack.

The weakness of his powers of comparison made him inconsistent; while he
professed some excellent general doctrines of mutual toleration and
forbearance, he cherished towards certain classes a bigoted antipathy.
He spoke of "parsons" and all who belonged to parsons, of "lords" and
the appendages of lords, with a harshness, sometimes an insolence, as
unjust as it was insufferable. He could not place himself in the
position of those he vituperated; he could not compare their errors with
their temptations, their defects with their disadvantages; he could not
realize the effect of such and such circumstances on himself similarly
situated, and he would often express the most ferocious and tyrannical
wishes regarding those who had acted, as he thought, ferociously and
tyrannically. To judge by his threats, he would have employed arbitrary,
even cruel, means to advance the cause of freedom and equality.
Equality! yes, Mr. Yorke talked about equality, but at heart he was a
proud man--very friendly to his workpeople, very good to all who were
beneath him, and submitted quietly to be beneath him, but haughty as
Beelzebub to whomsoever the world deemed (for he deemed no man) his
superior. Revolt was in his blood: he could not bear control; his
father, his grandfather before him, could not bear it, and his children
after him never could.

The want of general benevolence made him very impatient of imbecility,
and of all faults which grated on his strong, shrewd nature; it left no
check to his cutting sarcasm. As he was not merciful, he would sometimes
wound and wound again, without noticing how much he hurt, or caring how
deep he thrust.

As to the paucity of ideality in his mind, that can scarcely be called a
fault: a fine ear for music, a correct eye for colour and form, left him
the quality of taste; and who cares for imagination? Who does not think
it a rather dangerous, senseless attribute, akin to weakness, perhaps
partaking of frenzy--a disease rather than a gift of the mind?

Probably all think it so but those who possess, or fancy they possess,
it. To hear them speak, you would believe that their hearts would be
cold if that elixir did not flow about them, that their eyes would be
dim if that flame did not refine their vision, that they would be lonely
if this strange companion abandoned them. You would suppose that it
imparted some glad hope to spring, some fine charm to summer, some
tranquil joy to autumn, some consolation to winter, which you do not
feel. An illusion, of course; but the fanatics cling to their dream, and
would not give it for gold.

As Mr. Yorke did not possess poetic imagination himself, he considered
it a most superfluous quality in others. Painters and musicians he could
tolerate, and even encourage, because he could relish the results of
their art; he could see the charm of a fine picture, and feel the
pleasure of good music; but a quiet poet--whatever force struggled,
whatever fire glowed, in his breast--if he could not have played the man
in the counting-house, of the tradesman in the Piece Hall, might have
lived despised, and died scorned, under the eyes of Hiram Yorke.

And as there are many Hiram Yorkes in the world, it is well that the
true poet, quiet externally though he may be, has often a truculent
spirit under his placidity, and is full of shrewdness in his meekness,
and can measure the whole stature of those who look down on him, and
correctly ascertain the weight and value of the pursuits they disdain
him for not having followed. It is happy that he can have his own bliss,
his own society with his great friend and goddess Nature, quite
independent of those who find little pleasure in him, and in whom he
finds no pleasure at all. It is just that while the world and
circumstances often turn a dark, cold side to him--and properly, too,
because he first turns a dark, cold, careless side to them--he should be
able to maintain a festal brightness and cherishing glow in his bosom,
which makes all bright and genial for him; while strangers, perhaps,
deem his existence a Polar winter never gladdened by a sun. The true
poet is not one whit to be pitied, and he is apt to laugh in his sleeve
when any misguided sympathizer whines over his wrongs. Even when
utilitarians sit in judgment on him, and pronounce him and his art
useless, he hears the sentence with such a hard derision, such a broad,
deep, comprehensive, and merciless contempt of the unhappy Pharisees who
pronounce it, that he is rather to be chidden than condoled with. These,
however, are not Mr. Yorke's reflections, and it is with Mr. Yorke we
have at present to do.

I have told you some of his faults, reader: as to his good points, he
was one of the most honourable and capable men in Yorkshire; even those
who disliked him were forced to respect him. He was much beloved by the
poor, because he was thoroughly kind and very fatherly to them. To his
workmen he was considerate and cordial. When he dismissed them from an
occupation, he would try to set them on to something else, or, if that
was impossible, help them to remove with their families to a district
where work might possibly be had. It must also be remarked that if, as
sometimes chanced, any individual amongst his "hands" showed signs of
insubordination, Yorke--who, like many who abhor being controlled, knew
how to control with vigour--had the secret of crushing rebellion in the
germ, of eradicating it like a bad weed, so that it never spread or
developed within the sphere of his authority. Such being the happy state
of his own affairs, he felt himself at liberty to speak with the utmost
severity of those who were differently situated, to ascribe whatever was
unpleasant in their position entirely to their own fault, to sever
himself from the masters, and advocate freely the cause of the
operatives.

Mr. Yorke's family was the first and oldest in the district; and he,
though not the wealthiest, was one of the most influential men. His
education had been good. In his youth, before the French Revolution, he
had travelled on the Continent. He was an adept in the French and
Italian languages. During a two years' sojourn in Italy he had collected
many good paintings and tasteful rarities, with which his residence was
now adorned. His manners, when he liked, were those of a finished
gentleman of the old school; his conversation, when he was disposed to
please, was singularly interesting and original; and if he usually
expressed himself in the Yorkshire dialect, it was because he chose to
do so, preferring his native Doric to a more refined vocabulary, "A
Yorkshire burr," he affirmed, "was as much better than a cockney's lisp
as a bull's bellow than a raton's squeak."

Mr. Yorke knew every one, and was known by every one, for miles round;
yet his intimate acquaintances were very few. Himself thoroughly
original, he had no taste for what was ordinary: a racy, rough
character, high or low, ever found acceptance with him; a refined,
insipid personage, however exalted in station, was his aversion. He
would spend an hour any time in talking freely with a shrewd workman of
his own, or with some queer, sagacious old woman amongst his cottagers,
when he would have grudged a moment to a commonplace fine gentleman or
to the most fashionable and elegant, if frivolous, lady. His preferences
on these points he carried to an extreme, forgetting that there may be
amiable and even admirable characters amongst those who cannot be
original. Yet he made exceptions to his own rule. There was a certain
order of mind, plain, ingenuous, neglecting refinement, almost devoid of
intellectuality, and quite incapable of appreciating what was
intellectual in him, but which, at the same time, never felt disgust at
his rudeness, was not easily wounded by his sarcasm, did not closely
analyze his sayings, doings, or opinions, with which he was peculiarly
at ease, and, consequently, which he peculiarly preferred. He was lord
amongst such characters. They, while submitting implicitly to his
influence, never acknowledged, because they never reflected on, his
superiority; they were quite tractable, therefore, without running the
smallest danger of being servile; and their unthinking, easy, artless
insensibility was as acceptable, because as convenient, to Mr. Yorke as
that of the chair he sat on, or of the floor he trod.

It will have been observed that he was not quite uncordial with Mr.
Moore. He had two or three reasons for entertaining a faint partiality
to that gentleman. It may sound odd, but the first of these was that
Moore spoke English with a foreign, and French with a perfectly pure,
accent; and that his dark, thin face, with its fine though rather wasted
lines, had a most anti-British and anti-Yorkshire look. These points
seem frivolous, unlikely to influence a character like Yorke's; but the
fact is they recalled old, perhaps pleasurable, associations--they
brought back his travelling, his youthful days. He had seen, amidst
Italian cities and scenes, faces like Moore's; he had heard, in Parisian
cafes and theatres, voices like his. He was young then, and when he
looked at and listened to the alien, he seemed young again.

Secondly, he had known Moore's father, and had had dealings with him.
That was a more substantial, though by no means a more agreeable tie;
for as his firm had been connected with Moore's in business, it had
also, in some measure, been implicated in its losses.

Thirdly, he had found Robert himself a sharp man of business. He saw
reason to anticipate that he would, in the end, by one means or another,
make money; and he respected both his resolution and acuteness--perhaps,
also, his hardness. A fourth circumstance which drew them together was
that of Mr. Yorke being one of the guardians of the minor on whose
estate Hollow's Mill was situated; consequently Moore, in the course of
his alterations and improvements, had frequent occasion to consult him.

As to the other guest now present in Mr. Yorke's parlour, Mr. Helstone,
between him and his host there existed a double antipathy--the antipathy
of nature and that of circumstances. The free-thinker hated the
formalist; the lover of liberty detested the disciplinarian. Besides, it
was said that in former years they had been rival suitors of the same
lady.

Mr. Yorke, as a general rule, was, when young, noted for his preference
of sprightly and dashing women: a showy shape and air, a lively wit, a
ready tongue, chiefly seemed to attract him. He never, however, proposed
to any of these brilliant belles whose society he sought; and all at
once he seriously fell in love with and eagerly wooed a girl who
presented a complete contrast to those he had hitherto noticed--a girl
with the face of a Madonna; a girl of living marble--stillness
personified. No matter that, when he spoke to her, she only answered him
in monosyllables; no matter that his sighs seemed unheard, that his
glances were unreturned, that she never responded to his opinions,
rarely smiled at his jests, paid him no respect and no attention; no
matter that she seemed the opposite of everything feminine he had ever
in his whole life been known to admire. For him Mary Cave was perfect,
because somehow, for some reason--no doubt he had a reason--he loved
her.

Mr. Helstone, at that time curate of Briarfield, loved Mary too--or, at
any rate, he fancied her. Several others admired her, for she was
beautiful as a monumental angel; but the clergyman was preferred for his
office's sake--that office probably investing him with some of the
illusion necessary to allure to the commission of matrimony, and which
Miss Cave did not find in any of the young wool-staplers, her other
adorers. Mr. Helstone neither had, nor professed to have, Mr. Yorke's
absorbing passion for her. He had none of the humble reverence which
seemed to subdue most of her suitors; he saw her more as she really was
than the rest did. He was, consequently, more master of her and himself.
She accepted him at the first offer, and they were married.

Nature never intended Mr. Helstone to make a very good husband,
especially to a quiet wife. He thought so long as a woman was silent
nothing ailed her, and she wanted nothing. If she did not complain of
solitude, solitude, however continued, could not be irksome to her. If
she did not talk and put herself forward, express a partiality for this,
an aversion to that, she had no partialities or aversions, and it was
useless to consult her tastes. He made no pretence of comprehending
women, or comparing them with men. They were a different, probably a
very inferior, order of existence. A wife could not be her husband's
companion, much less his confidante, much less his stay. _His_ wife,
after a year or two, was of no great importance to him in any shape; and
when she one day, as he thought, suddenly--for he had scarcely noticed
her decline--but, as others thought, gradually, took her leave of him
and of life, and there was only a still, beautiful-featured mould of
clay left, cold and white, in the conjugal couch, he felt his
bereavement--who shall say how little? Yet, perhaps, more than he seemed
to feel it; for he was not a man from whom grief easily wrung tears.

His dry-eyed and sober mourning scandalized an old housekeeper, and
likewise a female attendant, who had waited upon Mrs. Helstone in her
sickness, and who, perhaps, had had opportunities of learning more of
the deceased lady's nature, of her capacity for feeling and loving, than
her husband knew. They gossiped together over the corpse, related
anecdotes, with embellishments of her lingering decline, and its real or
supposed cause. In short, they worked each other up to some indignation
against the austere little man, who sat examining papers in an adjoining
room, unconscious of what opprobrium he was the object.

Mrs. Helstone was hardly under the sod when rumours began to be rife in
the neighbourhood that she had died of a broken heart. These magnified
quickly into reports of hard usage, and, finally, details of harsh
treatment on the part of her husband--reports grossly untrue, but not
the less eagerly received on that account. Mr. Yorke heard them, partly
believed them. Already, of course, he had no friendly feeling to his
successful rival. Though himself a married man now, and united to a
woman who seemed a complete contrast to Mary Cave in all respects, he
could not forget the great disappointment of his life; and when he heard
that what would have been so precious to him had been neglected, perhaps
abused, by another, he conceived for that other a rooted and bitter
animosity.

Of the nature and strength of this animosity Mr. Helstone was but half
aware. He neither knew how much Yorke had loved Mary Cave, what he had
felt on losing her, nor was he conscious of the calumnies concerning his
treatment of her, familiar to every ear in the neighbourhood but his
own. He believed political and religious differences alone separated him
and Mr. Yorke. Had he known how the case really stood, he would hardly
have been induced by any persuasion to cross his former rival's
threshold.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Yorke did not resume his lecture of Robert Moore. The conversation
ere long recommenced in a more general form, though still in a somewhat
disputative tone. The unquiet state of the country, the various
depredations lately committed on mill-property in the district, supplied
abundant matter for disagreement, especially as each of the three
gentlemen present differed more or less in his views on these subjects.
Mr. Helstone thought the masters aggrieved, the workpeople unreasonable;
he condemned sweepingly the widespread spirit of disaffection against
constituted authorities, the growing indisposition to bear with patience
evils he regarded as inevitable. The cures he prescribed were vigorous
government interference, strict magisterial vigilance; when necessary,
prompt military coercion.

Mr. Yorke wished to know whether this interference, vigilance, and
coercion would feed those who were hungry, give work to those who wanted
work, and whom no man would hire. He scouted the idea of inevitable
evils. He said public patience was a camel, on whose back the last atom
that could be borne had already been laid, and that resistance was now a
duty; the widespread spirit of disaffection against constituted
authorities he regarded as the most promising sign of the times; the
masters, he allowed, were truly aggrieved, but their main grievances had
been heaped on them by a "corrupt, base, and bloody" government (these
were Mr. Yorke's epithets). Madmen like Pitt, demons like Castlereagh,
mischievous idiots like Perceval, were the tyrants, the curses of the
country, the destroyers of her trade. It was their infatuated
perseverance in an unjustifiable, a hopeless, a ruinous war, which had
brought the nation to its present pass. It was their monstrously
oppressive taxation, it was the infamous "Orders in Council"--the
originators of which deserved impeachment and the scaffold, if ever
public men did--that hung a millstone about England's neck.

"But where was the use of talking?" he demanded. "What chance was there
of reason being heard in a land that was king-ridden, priest-ridden,
peer-ridden; where a lunatic was the nominal monarch, an unprincipled
debauchee the real ruler; where such an insult to common sense as
hereditary legislators was tolerated; where such a humbug as a bench of
bishops, such an arrogant abuse as a pampered, persecuting established
church was endured and venerated; where a standing army was maintained,
and a host of lazy parsons and their pauper families were kept on the
fat of the land?"

Mr. Helstone, rising up and putting on his shovel-hat, observed in
reply, "that in the course of his life he had met with two or three
instances where sentiments of this sort had been very bravely maintained
so long as health, strength, and worldly prosperity had been the allies
of him who professed them; but there came a time," he said, "to all men,
'when the keepers of the house should tremble; when they should be
afraid of that which is high, and fear should be in the way;' and that
time was the test of the advocate of anarchy and rebellion, the enemy of
religion and order. Ere now," he affirmed, "he had been called upon to
read those prayers our church has provided for the sick by the miserable
dying-bed of one of her most rancorous foes; he had seen such a one
stricken with remorse, solicitous to discover a place for repentance,
and unable to find any, though he sought it carefully with tears. He
must forewarn Mr. Yorke that blasphemy against God and the king was a
deadly sin, and that there was such a thing as 'judgment to come.'"

Mr. Yorke "believed fully that there was such a thing as judgment to
come. If it were otherwise, it would be difficult to imagine how all the
scoundrels who seemed triumphant in this world, who broke innocent
hearts with impunity, abused unmerited privileges, were a scandal to
honourable callings, took the bread out of the mouths of the poor,
browbeat the humble, and truckled meanly to the rich and proud, were to
be properly paid off in such coin as they had earned. But," he added,
"whenever he got low-spirited about such-like goings-on, and their
seeming success in this mucky lump of a planet, he just reached down t'
owd book" (pointing to a great Bible in the bookcase), "opened it like
at a chance, and he was sure to light of a verse blazing wi' a blue
brimstone low that set all straight. He knew," he said, "where some folk
war bound for, just as weel as if an angel wi' great white wings had
come in ower t' door-stone and told him."

"Sir," said Mr. Helstone, collecting all his dignity--"sir, the great
knowledge of man is to know himself, and the bourne whither his own
steps tend."

"Ay, ay. You'll recollect, Mr. Helstone, that Ignorance was carried away
from the very gates of heaven, borne through the air, and thrust in at a
door in the side of the hill which led down to hell."

"Nor have I forgotten, Mr. Yorke, that Vain-Confidence, not seeing the
way before him, fell into a deep pit, which was on purpose there made by
the prince of the grounds, to catch vainglorious fools withal, and was
dashed to pieces with his fall."

"Now," interposed Mr. Moore, who had hitherto sat a silent but amused
spectator of this worldly combat, and whose indifference to the party
politics of the day, as well as to the gossip of the neighbourhood, made
him an impartial, if apathetic, judge of the merits of such an
encounter, "you have both sufficiently blackballed each other, and
proved how cordially you detest each other, and how wicked you think
each other. For my part, my hate is still running in such a strong
current against the fellows who have broken my frames that I have none
to spare for my private acquaintance, and still less for such a vague
thing as a sect or a government. But really, gentlemen, you both seem
very bad by your own showing--worse than ever I suspected you to be.--I
dare not stay all night with a rebel and blasphemer like you, Yorke; and
I hardly dare ride home with a cruel and tyrannical ecclesiastic like
Mr. Helstone."

"I am going, however, Mr. Moore," said the rector sternly. "Come with me
or not, as you please."

"Nay, he shall not have the choice; he _shall_ go with you," responded
Yorke. "It's midnight, and past; and I'll have nob'dy staying up i' my
house any longer. Ye mun all go."

He rang the bell.

"Deb," said he to the servant who answered it, "clear them folk out o'
t' kitchen, and lock t' doors, and be off to bed.--Here is your way,
gentlemen," he continued to his guests; and, lighting them through the
passage, he fairly put them out at his front door.

They met their party hurrying out pell-mell by the back way. Their
horses stood at the gate; they mounted, and rode off, Moore laughing at
their abrupt dismissal, Helstone deeply indignant thereat.




CHAPTER V.

HOLLOW'S COTTAGE.


Moore's good spirits were still with him when he rose next morning. He
and Joe Scott had both spent the night in the mill, availing themselves
of certain sleeping accommodations producible from recesses in the front
and back counting-houses. The master, always an early riser, was up
somewhat sooner even than usual. He awoke his man by singing a French
song as he made his toilet.

"Ye're not custen dahn, then, maister?" cried Joe.

"Not a stiver, mon garcon--which means, my lad. Get up, and we'll take a
turn through the mill before the hands come in, and I'll explain my
future plans. We'll have the machinery yet, Joseph. You never heard of
Bruce, perhaps?"

"And th' arrand (spider)? Yes, but I hev. I've read th' history o'
Scotland, and happen knaw as mich on't as ye; and I understand ye to
mean to say ye'll persevere."

"I do."

"Is there mony o' your mak' i' your country?" inquired Joe, as he folded
up his temporary bed, and put it away.

"In my country! Which is my country?"

"Why, France--isn't it?"

"Not it, indeed! The circumstance of the French having seized Antwerp,
where I was born, does not make me a Frenchman."

"Holland, then?"

"I am not a Dutchman. Now you are confounding Antwerp with Amsterdam."

"Flanders?"

"I scorn the insinuation, Joe! I a Flamand! Have I a Flemish face--the
clumsy nose standing out, the mean forehead falling back, the pale blue
eyes 'a fleur de tete'? Am I all body and no legs, like a Flamand? But
you don't know what they are like, those Netherlanders. Joe, I'm an
Anversois. My mother was an Anversoise, though she came of French
lineage, which is the reason I speak French."

"But your father war Yorkshire, which maks ye a bit Yorkshire too; and
onybody may see ye're akin to us, ye're so keen o' making brass, and
getting forrards."

"Joe, you're an impudent dog; but I've always been accustomed to a
boorish sort of insolence from my youth up. The 'classe ouvriere'--that
is, the working people in Belgium--bear themselves brutally towards
their employers; and by _brutally_, Joe, I mean _brutalement_--which,
perhaps, when properly translated, should be _roughly_."

"We allus speak our minds i' this country; and them young parsons and
grand folk fro' London is shocked at wer 'incivility;' and we like weel
enough to gi'e 'em summat to be shocked at, 'cause it's sport to us to
watch 'em turn up the whites o' their een, and spreed out their bits o'
hands, like as they're flayed wi' bogards, and then to hear 'em say,
nipping off their words short like, 'Dear! dear! Whet seveges! How very
corse!'"

"You _are_ savages, Joe. You don't suppose you're civilized, do you?"

"Middling, middling, maister. I reckon 'at us manufacturing lads i' th'
north is a deal more intelligent, and knaws a deal more nor th' farming
folk i' th' south. Trade sharpens wer wits; and them that's mechanics
like me is forced to think. Ye know, what wi' looking after machinery
and sich like, I've getten into that way that when I see an effect, I
look straight out for a cause, and I oft lig hold on't to purpose; and
then I like reading, and I'm curious to knaw what them that reckons to
govern us aims to do for us and wi' us. And there's many 'cuter nor me;
there's many a one amang them greasy chaps 'at smells o' oil, and amang
them dyers wi' blue and black skins, that has a long head, and that can
tell what a fooil of a law is, as well as ye or old Yorke, and a deal
better nor soft uns like Christopher Sykes o' Whinbury, and greet
hectoring nowts like yond' Irish Peter, Helstone's curate."

"You think yourself a clever fellow, I know, Scott."

"Ay! I'm fairish. I can tell cheese fro' chalk, and I'm varry weel aware
that I've improved sich opportunities as I have had, a deal better nor
some 'at reckons to be aboon me; but there's thousands i' Yorkshire
that's as good as me, and a two-three that's better."

"You're a great man--you're a sublime fellow; but you're a prig, a
conceited noodle with it all, Joe! You need not to think that because
you've picked up a little knowledge of practical mathematics, and
because you have found some scantling of the elements of chemistry at
the bottom of a dyeing vat, that therefore you're a neglected man of
science; and you need not to suppose that because the course of trade
does not always run smooth, and you, and such as you, are sometimes
short of work and of bread, that therefore your class are martyrs, and
that the whole form of government under which you live is wrong. And,
moreover, you need not for a moment to insinuate that the virtues have
taken refuge in cottages and wholly abandoned slated houses. Let me tell
you, I particularly abominate that sort of trash, because I know so well
that human nature is human nature everywhere, whether under tile or
thatch, and that in every specimen of human nature that breathes, vice
and virtue are ever found blended, in smaller or greater proportions,
and that the proportion is not determined by station. I have seen
villains who were rich, and I have seen villains who were poor, and I
have seen villains who were neither rich nor poor, but who had realized
Agar's wish, and lived in fair and modest competency. The clock is going
to strike six. Away with you, Joe, and ring the mill bell."

It was now the middle of the month of February; by six o'clock therefore
dawn was just beginning to steal on night, to penetrate with a pale ray
its brown obscurity, and give a demi-translucence to its opaque shadows.
Pale enough that ray was on this particular morning: no colour tinged
the east, no flush warmed it. To see what a heavy lid day slowly lifted,
what a wan glance she flung along the hills, you would have thought the
sun's fire quenched in last night's floods. The breath of this morning
was chill as its aspect; a raw wind stirred the mass of night-cloud, and
showed, as it slowly rose, leaving a colourless, silver-gleaming ring
all round the horizon, not blue sky, but a stratum of paler vapour
beyond. It had ceased to rain, but the earth was sodden, and the pools
and rivulets were full.

The mill-windows were alight, the bell still rung loud, and now the
little children came running in, in too great a hurry, let us hope, to
feel very much nipped by the inclement air; and indeed, by contrast,
perhaps the morning appeared rather favourable to them than otherwise,
for they had often come to their work that winter through snow-storms,
through heavy rain, through hard frost.

Mr. Moore stood at the entrance to watch them pass. He counted them as
they went by. To those who came rather late he said a word of reprimand,
which was a little more sharply repeated by Joe Scott when the lingerers
reached the work-rooms. Neither master nor overlooker spoke savagely.
They were not savage men either of them, though it appeared both were
rigid, for they fined a delinquent who came considerably too late. Mr.
Moore made him pay his penny down ere he entered, and informed him that
the next repetition of the fault would cost him twopence.

Rules, no doubt, are necessary in such cases, and coarse and cruel
masters will make coarse and cruel rules, which, at the time we treat of
at least, they used sometimes to enforce tyrannically; but though I
describe imperfect characters (every character in this book will be
found to be more or less imperfect, my pen refusing to draw anything in
the model line), I have not undertaken to handle degraded or utterly
infamous ones. Child-torturers, slave masters and drivers, I consign to
the hands of jailers. The novelist may be excused from sullying his page
with the record of their deeds.

Instead, then, of harrowing up my reader's soul and delighting his organ
of wonder with effective descriptions of stripes and scourgings, I am
happy to be able to inform him that neither Mr. Moore nor his overlooker
ever struck a child in their mill. Joe had, indeed, once very severely
flogged a son of his own for telling a lie and persisting in it; but,
like his employer, he was too phlegmatic, too calm, as well as too
reasonable a man, to make corporal chastisement other than the exception
to his treatment of the young.

Mr. Moore haunted his mill, his mill-yard, his dye-house, and his
warehouse till the sickly dawn strengthened into day. The sun even
rose--at least a white disc, clear, tintless, and almost chill-looking
as ice, peeped over the dark crest of a hill, changed to silver the
livid edge of the cloud above it, and looked solemnly down the whole
length of the den, or narrow dale, to whose strait bounds we are at
present limited. It was eight o'clock; the mill lights were all
extinguished; the signal was given for breakfast; the children, released
for half an hour from toil, betook themselves to the little tin cans
which held their coffee, and to the small baskets which contained their
allowance of bread. Let us hope they have enough to eat; it would be a
pity were it otherwise.

And now at last Mr. Moore quitted the mill-yard, and bent his steps to
his dwelling-house. It was only a short distance from the factory, but
the hedge and high bank on each side of the lane which conducted to it
seemed to give it something of the appearance and feeling of seclusion.
It was a small, whitewashed place, with a green porch over the door;
scanty brown stalks showed in the garden soil near this porch, and
likewise beneath the windows--stalks budless and flowerless now, but
giving dim prediction of trained and blooming creepers for summer days.
A grass plat and borders fronted the cottage. The borders presented only
black mould yet, except where, in sheltered nooks, the first shoots of
snowdrop or crocus peeped, green as emerald, from the earth. The spring
was late; it had been a severe and prolonged winter; the last deep snow
had but just disappeared before yesterday's rains; on the hills, indeed,
white remnants of it yet gleamed, flecking the hollows and crowning the
peaks; the lawn was not verdant, but bleached, as was the grass on the
bank, and under the hedge in the lane. Three trees, gracefully grouped,
rose beside the cottage. They were not lofty, but having no rivals near,
they looked well and imposing where they grew. Such was Mr. Moore's
home--a snug nest for content and contemplation, but one within which
the wings of action and ambition could not long lie folded.

Its air of modest comfort seemed to possess no particular attraction for
its owner. Instead of entering the house at once he fetched a spade from
a little shed and began to work in the garden. For about a quarter of an
hour he dug on uninterrupted. At length, however, a window opened, and a
female voice called to him,--

"Eh, bien! Tu ne dejeunes pas ce matin?"

The answer, and the rest of the conversation, was in French; but as this
is an English book, I shall translate it into English.

"Is breakfast ready, Hortense?"

"Certainly; it has been ready half an hour."

"Then I am ready too. I have a canine hunger."

He threw down his spade, and entered the house. The narrow passage
conducted him to a small parlour, where a breakfast of coffee and bread
and butter, with the somewhat un-English accompaniment of stewed pears,
was spread on the table. Over these viands presided the lady who had
spoken from the window. I must describe her before I go any farther.

She seemed a little older than Mr. Moore--perhaps she was thirty-five,
tall, and proportionately stout; she had very black hair, for the
present twisted up in curl-papers, a high colour in her cheeks, a small
nose, a pair of little black eyes. The lower part of her face was large
in proportion to the upper; her forehead was small and rather
corrugated; she had a fretful though not an ill-natured expression of
countenance; there was something in her whole appearance one felt
inclined to be half provoked with and half amused at. The strangest
point was her dress--a stuff petticoat and a striped cotton camisole.
The petticoat was short, displaying well a pair of feet and ankles which
left much to be desired in the article of symmetry.

You will think I have depicted a remarkable slattern, reader. Not at
all. Hortense Moore (she was Mr. Moore's sister) was a very orderly,
economical person. The petticoat, camisole, and curl-papers were her
morning costume, in which, of forenoons, she had always been accustomed
to "go her household ways" in her own country. She did not choose to
adopt English fashions because she was obliged to live in England; she
adhered to her old Belgian modes, quite satisfied that there was a merit
in so doing.

Mademoiselle had an excellent opinion of herself--an opinion not wholly
undeserved, for she possessed some good and sterling qualities; but she
rather over-estimated the kind and degree of these qualities, and quite
left out of the account sundry little defects which accompanied them.
You could never have persuaded her that she was a prejudiced and
narrow-minded person, that she was too susceptible on the subject of her
own dignity and importance, and too apt to take offence about trifles;
yet all this was true. However, where her claims to distinction were not
opposed, and where her prejudices were not offended, she could be kind
and friendly enough. To her two brothers (for there was another Gerard
Moore besides Robert) she was very much attached. As the sole remaining
representatives of their decayed family, the persons of both were almost
sacred in her eyes. Of Louis, however, she knew less than of Robert. He
had been sent to England when a mere boy, and had received his education
at an English school. His education not being such as to adapt him for
trade, perhaps, too, his natural bent not inclining him to mercantile
pursuits, he had, when the blight of hereditary prospects rendered it
necessary for him to push his own fortune, adopted the very arduous and
very modest career of a teacher. He had been usher in a school, and was
said now to be tutor in a private family. Hortense, when she mentioned
Louis, described him as having what she called "des moyens," but as
being too backward and quiet. Her praise of Robert was in a different
strain, less qualified: she was very proud of him; she regarded him as
the greatest man in Europe; all he said and did was remarkable in her
eyes, and she expected others to behold him from the same point of view;
nothing could be more irrational, monstrous, and infamous than
opposition from any quarter to Robert, unless it were opposition to
herself.

Accordingly, as soon as the said Robert was seated at the
breakfast-table, and she had helped him to a portion of stewed pears,
and cut him a good-sized Belgian tartine, she began to pour out a flood
of amazement and horror at the transaction of last night, the
destruction of the frames.

"Quelle idee! to destroy them. Quelle action honteuse! On voyait bien
que les ouvriers de ce pays etaient a la fois betes et mechants. C'etait
absolument comme les domestiques anglais, les servantes surtout: rien
d'insupportable comme cette Sara, par exemple!"

"She looks clean and industrious," Mr. Moore remarked.

"Looks! I don't know how she looks, and I do not say that she is
altogether dirty or idle, mais elle est d'une insolence! She disputed
with me a quarter of an hour yesterday about the cooking of the beef;
she said I boiled it to rags, that English people would never be able to
eat such a dish as our bouilli, that the bouillon was no better than
greasy warm water, and as to the choucroute, she affirms she cannot
touch it! That barrel we have in the cellar--delightfully prepared by my
own hands--she termed a tub of hog-wash, which means food for pigs. I am
harassed with the girl, and yet I cannot part with her lest I should get
a worse. You are in the same position with your workmen, pauvre cher
frere!"

"I am afraid you are not very happy in England, Hortense."

"It is my duty to be happy where you are, brother; but otherwise there
are certainly a thousand things which make me regret our native town.
All the world here appears to me ill-bred (mal-eleve). I find my habits
considered ridiculous. If a girl out of your mill chances to come into
the kitchen and find me in my jupon and camisole preparing dinner (for
you know I cannot trust Sarah to cook a single dish), she sneers. If I
accept an invitation out to tea, which I have done once or twice, I
perceive I am put quite into the background; I have not that attention
paid me which decidedly is my due. Of what an excellent family are the
Gerards, as we know, and the Moores also! They have a right to claim a
certain respect, and to feel wounded when it is withheld from them. In
Antwerp I was always treated with distinction; here, one would think
that when I open my lips in company I speak English with a ridiculous
accent, whereas I am quite assured that I pronounce it perfectly."

"Hortense, in Antwerp we were known rich; in England we were never known
but poor."

"Precisely, and thus mercenary are mankind. Again, dear brother, last
Sunday, if you recollect, was very wet; accordingly I went to church in
my neat black sabots, objects one would not indeed wear in a fashionable
city, but which in the country I have ever been accustomed to use for
walking in dirty roads. Believe me, as I paced up the aisle, composed
and tranquil, as I am always, four ladies, and as many gentlemen,
laughed and hid their faces behind their prayer-books."

"Well, well! don't put on the sabots again. I told you before I thought
they were not quite the thing for this country."

"But, brother, they are not common sabots, such as the peasantry wear. I
tell you, they are sabots noirs, tres propres, tres convenables. At Mons
and Leuze--cities not very far removed from the elegant capital of
Brussels--it is very seldom that the respectable people wear anything
else for walking in winter. Let any one try to wade the mud of the
Flemish chaussees in a pair of Paris brodequins, on m'en dirait des
nouvelles!"

"Never mind Mons and Leuze and the Flemish chaussees; do at Rome as the
Romans do. And as to the camisole and jupon, I am not quite sure about
them either. I never see an English lady dressed in such garments. Ask
Caroline Helstone."

"Caroline! _I_ ask Caroline? _I_ consult her about my dress? It is _she_
who on all points should consult _me_. She is a child."

"She is eighteen, or at least seventeen--old enough to know all about
gowns, petticoats, and chaussures."

"Do not spoil Caroline, I entreat you, brother. Do not make her of more
consequence than she ought to be. At present she is modest and
unassuming: let us keep her so."

"With all my heart. Is she coming this morning?"

"She will come at ten, as usual, to take her French lesson."

"You don't find that she sneers at you, do you?"

"She does not. She appreciates me better than any one else here; but
then she has more intimate opportunities of knowing me. She sees that I
have education, intelligence, manner, principles--all, in short, which
belongs to a person well born and well bred."

"Are you at all fond of her?"

"For _fond_ I cannot say. I am not one who is prone to take violent
fancies, and, consequently, my friendship is the more to be depended on.
I have a regard for her as my relative; her position also inspires
interest, and her conduct as my pupil has hitherto been such as rather
to enhance than diminish the attachment that springs from other causes."

"She behaves pretty well at lessons?"

"To _me_ she behaves very well; but you are conscious, brother, that I
have a manner calculated to repel over-familiarity, to win esteem, and
to command respect. Yet, possessed of penetration, I perceive clearly
that Caroline is not perfect, that there is much to be desired in her."

"Give me a last cup of coffee, and while I am drinking it amuse me with
an account of her faults."

"Dear brother, I am happy to see you eat your breakfast with relish,
after the fatiguing night you have passed. Caroline, then, is defective;
but with my forming hand and almost motherly care she may improve. There
is about her an occasional something--a reserve, I think--which I do not
quite like, because it is not sufficiently girlish and submissive; and
there are glimpses of an unsettled hurry in her nature, which put me
out. Yet she is usually most tranquil, too dejected and thoughtful
indeed sometimes. In time, I doubt not, I shall make her uniformly
sedate and decorous, without being unaccountably pensive. I ever
disapprove what is not intelligible."

"I don't understand your account in the least. What do you mean by
'unsettled hurries,' for instance?"

"An example will, perhaps, be the most satisfactory explanation. I
sometimes, you are aware, make her read French poetry by way of
practice in pronunciation. She has in the course of her lessons gone
through much of Corneille and Racine, in a very steady, sober spirit,
such as I approve. Occasionally she showed, indeed, a degree of languor
in the perusal of those esteemed authors, partaking rather of apathy
than sobriety; and apathy is what I cannot tolerate in those who have
the benefit of my instructions--besides, one should not be apathetic in
studying standard works. The other day I put into her hands a volume of
short fugitive pieces. I sent her to the window to learn one by heart,
and when I looked up I saw her turning the leaves over impatiently, and
curling her lip, absolutely with scorn, as she surveyed the little poems
cursorily. I chid her. 'Ma cousine,' said she, 'tout cela m'ennuie a la
mort.' I told her this was improper language. 'Dieu!' she exclaimed, 'il
n'y a donc pas deux lignes de poesie dans toute la litterature
francaise?' I inquired what she meant. She begged my pardon with proper
submission. Ere long she was still. I saw her smiling to herself over
the book. She began to learn assiduously. In half an hour she came and
stood before me, presented the volume, folded her hands, as I always
require her to do, and commenced the repetition of that short thing by
Chenier, 'La Jeune Captive.' If you had heard the manner in which she
went through this, and in which she uttered a few incoherent comments
when she had done, you would have known what I meant by the phrase
'unsettled hurry.' One would have thought Chenier was more moving than
all Racine and all Corneille. You, brother, who have so much sagacity,
will discern that this disproportionate preference argues an
ill-regulated mind; but she is fortunate in her preceptress. I will give
her a system, a method of thought, a set of opinions; I will give her
the perfect control and guidance of her feelings."

"Be sure you do, Hortense. Here she comes. That was her shadow passed
the window, I believe."

"Ah! truly. She is too early--half an hour before her time.--My child,
what brings you here before I have breakfasted?"

This question was addressed to an individual who now entered the room, a
young girl, wrapped in a winter mantle, the folds of which were gathered
with some grace round an apparently slender figure.

"I came in haste to see how you were, Hortense, and how Robert was too.
I was sure you would be both grieved by what happened last night. I did
not hear till this morning. My uncle told me at breakfast."

"Ah! it is unspeakable. You sympathize with us? Your uncle sympathizes
with us?"

"My uncle is very angry--but he was with Robert, I believe, was he
not?--Did he not go with you to Stilbro' Moor?"

"Yes, we set out in very martial style, Caroline; but the prisoners we
went to rescue met us half-way."

"Of course nobody was hurt?"

"Why, no; only Joe Scott's wrists were a little galled with being
pinioned too tightly behind his back."

"You were not there? You were not with the wagons when they were
attacked?"

"No. One seldom has the fortune to be present at occurrences at which
one would particularly wish to assist."

"Where are you going this morning? I saw Murgatroyd saddling your horse
in the yard."

"To Whinbury. It is market day."

"Mr. Yorke is going too. I met him in his gig. Come home with him."

"Why?"

"Two are better than one, and nobody dislikes Mr. Yorke--at least, poor
people do not dislike him."

"Therefore he would be a protection to me, who am hated?"

"Who are _misunderstood_. That, probably, is the word. Shall you be
late?--Will he be late, Cousin Hortense?"

"It is too probable. He has often much business to transact at Whinbury.
Have you brought your exercise-book, child?"

"Yes.--What time will you return, Robert?"

"I generally return at seven. Do you wish me to be at home earlier?"

"Try rather to be back by six. It is not absolutely dark at six now, but
