ships, and continue wroth with the Achaians, and refrain utterly from
battle: for Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos, unto the noble Ethiopians
for a feast, and all the gods followed with him; but on the twelfth day
will he return to Olympus, and then will I fare to Zeus' palace of the
bronze threshold, and will kneel to him and think to win him."

So saying she went her way and left him there, vexed in spirit for the
fair-girdled woman's sake, whom they had taken perforce despite his
will: and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse with the holy hecatomb. When
they were now entered within the deep haven, they furled their sails and
laid them in the black ship, and lowered the mast by the forestays and
brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with oars to the
anchorage. Then they cast out the mooring stones and made fast the
hawsers, and so themselves went forth on to the sea-beach, and forth
they brought the hecatomb for the Far-darter Apollo, and forth came
Chryseis withal from the seafaring ship. Then Odysseus of many counsels
brought her to the altar and gave her into her father's arms, and spake
unto him: "Chryses, Agamemnon king of men sent me hither to bring thee
thy daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the Danaans'
behalf, wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought sorrow
and lamentation on the Argives."

So saying he gave her to his arms, and he gladly took his dear child;
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
well-builded altar; next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal. Then Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them:
"Hearken to me, god of the silver bow that standest over Chryse and holy
Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might; even as erst thou heardest my
prayer, and didst me honour, and mightily afflictest the people of the
Achaians, even so now fulfil me this my desire: remove thou from the
Danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence."

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal, first they drew back the victims'
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them, and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid raw
collops thereon, and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine; and at his side the young men in
their hands held five-pronged forks. Now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals, then sliced they all the rest and pierced it
through with spits, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. So
when they had rest from the task and had made ready the banquet, they
feasted, nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when
they had put away from them the desire of meat and drink, the young men
crowned the bowls with wine, and gave each man his portion after the
drink-offering had been poured into the cups. So all day long worshipped
they the god with music, singing the beautiful paean, the sons of the
Achaians making music to the Far-darter [or, "the Averter" (of
pestilence)]; and his heart was glad to hear. And when the sun went down
and darkness came on them, they laid them to sleep beside the ship's
hawsers; and when rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, the child of morning,
then set they sail for the wide camp of the Achaians; and Apollo the
Far-darter sent them a favouring gale. They set up their mast and spread
the white sails forth, and the wind filled the sail's belly and the dark
wave sang loud about the stem as the ship made way, and she sped across
the wave, accomplishing her journey. So when they were now come to the
wide camp of the Achaians, they drew up their black ship to land high
upon the sands, and set in line the long props beneath her; and
themselves were scattered amid their huts and ships.

But he sat by his swift-faring ships, still wroth, even the heaven-sprung
son of Peleus, Achilles fleet of foot; he betook him neither to the
assembly that is the hero's glory, neither to war, but consumed his
heart in tarrying in his place, and yearned for the war-cry and for
battle.

Now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then the gods that are
for ever fared to Olympus all in company, led of Zeus. And Thetis forgat
not her son's charge, but rose up from the sea-wave, and at early morn
mounted up to great heaven and Olympus. There found she Kronos' son of
the far-sounding voice sitting apart from all on the topmost peak of
many-ridged Olympus. So she sat before his face and with her left hand
clasped his knees, and with her right touched him beneath his chin, and
spake in prayer to king Zeus son of Kronos: "Father Zeus, if ever I gave
thee aid amid the immortal gods, whether by word or deed, fulfil thou
this my desire: do honour to my son, that is doomed to earliest death of
all men: now hath Agamemnon king of men done him dishonour, for he hath
taken away his meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed.
But honour thou him, Zeus of Olympus, lord of counsel; grant thou
victory to the Trojans the while until the Achaians do my son honour and
exalt him with recompense."

So spake she; but Zeus the cloud-gatherer said no word to her, and sat
long time in silence. But even as Thetis had clasped his knees, so held
she by him clinging, and questioned him yet a second time: "Promise me
now this thing verily, and bow thy head thereto; or else deny me, seeing
there is naught for thee to fear; that I may know full well how I among
all gods am least in honour."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer, sore troubled, spake to her: "Verily it is
a sorry matter, if thou wilt set me at variance with Hera, whene'er she
provoketh me with taunting words. Even now she upbraideth me ever amid
the immortal gods, and saith that I aid the Trojans in battle. But do
thou now depart again, lest Hera mark aught; and I will take thought for
these things to fulfil them. Come now, I will bow my head to thee, that
thou mayest be of good courage; for that, of my part, is the surest
token amid the immortals; no word of mine is revocable nor false nor
unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it."

Kronion spake, and bowed his dark brow, and the ambrosial locks waved
from the king's immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.

Thus the twain took counsel and parted; she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering Olympus, and Zeus fared to his own palace. All
the gods in company arose from their seats before their father's face;
neither ventured any to await his coming, but stood up all before him.
So he sate him there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and was not ignorant
how that the daughter of the Ancient of the sea, Thetis the
silver-footed, had devised counsel with him. Anon with taunting words
spake she to Zeus the son of Kronos: "Now who among the gods, thou
crafty of mind, hath devised counsel with thee? It is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments, nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest."

Then the father of gods and men made answer her: "Hera, think not thou
to know all my sayings; hard they are for thee, even though thou art my
wife. But whichsoever it is seemly for thee to hear, none sooner than
thou shall know, be he god or man. Only when I will to take thought
aloof from the gods, then do not thou ask of every matter nor make
question."

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen made answer to him. "Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? Yea, surely of old I have
not asked thee nor made question, but in my heart sore afraid lest thou
have been won over by silver-footed Thetis, daughter of the Ancient of
the sea, for she at early morn sat by thee and clasped thy knees. To her
I deem thou gavest a sure pledge that thou wilt do honour to Achilles,
and lay many low beside the Achaians' ships."

To her made answer Zeus the cloud-gatherer: "Lady, Good lack! ever art
thou imagining, nor can I escape thee; yet shalt thou in no wise have
power to fulfil, but wilt be the further from my heart; that shall be
even the worse for thee. And if it be so, then such must my good
pleasure be. Abide thou in silence and hearken to my bidding, lest all
the gods that are in Olympus keep not off from thee my visitation, when
I put forth my hands unapproachable against thee."

He said, and Hera the ox-eyed queen was afraid, and sat in silence,
curbing her heart; but throughout Zeus' palace the gods of heaven were
troubled. Then Hephaistos the famed craftsman began to make harangue
among them, to do kindness to his mother, white-armed Hera: "Verily this
will be a sorry matter, neither any more endurable, if ye twain thus
fight for mortals' sakes, and bring wrangling among the gods; neither
will there any more be joy of the goodly feast, seeing that evil
triumpheth. So I give counsel to my mother, though herself is wise, to
do kindness to our dear father Zeus, that our father upbraid us not
again and cast the banquet in confusion. What if the Olympian, the lord
of the lightning, will to dash us from our seats! for he is strongest
far. Nay, approach thou him with gentle words, then will the Olympian
forthwith be gracious unto us."

So speaking he rose up and sat in his dear mother's hand the twy-handled
cup, and spake to her: "Be of good courage, mother mine, and endure,
though thou art vexed, lest I behold thee, thou art so dear, chastised
before mine eyes, and then shall I not be able for all my sorrow to save
thee; for the Olympian is a hard foe to face. Yea, once ere this, when I
was fain to save thee, he caught me by my foot and hurled me from the
heavenly threshold; all day I flew, and at the set of sun I fell in
Lemnos, and little life was in me. There did the Sintian folk forthwith
tend me for my fall."

He spake, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled, and smiling took the
cup at her son's hand. Then he poured wine to all the other gods from
right to left, ladling the sweet nectar from the bowl. And laughter
unquenchable arose amid the blessed gods to see Hephaistos bustling
through the palace.

So feasted they all day till the setting of the sun; nor was their soul
aught stinted of the fair banquet, nor of the beauteous lyre that Apollo
held, and the Muses singing alternately with sweet voice.

Now when the bright light of the sun was set, these went each to his own
house to sleep, where each one had his palace made with cunning device
by famed Hephaistos the lame god; and Zeus the Olympian, the lord of
lightning, departed to his couch where he was wont of old to take his
rest, whenever sweet sleep visited him. There went he up and slept, and
beside him was Hera of the golden throne.



BOOK II.

    How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly
    of the Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of
    the names and numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the
    Trojans.

Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his heart
how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians' ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit, to
send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: "Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians' fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang."

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians' fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

"Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee."

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his mind
things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to take
Priam's city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the plans that
Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and wailing on
Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn fights. Then
woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his ears. So he rose
up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and bright, and cast around
him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering feet he bound his fair
sandals, and over his shoulders cast his silver-studded sword, and
grasped his sires' sceptre, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his
way amid the mail-clad Achaians' ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds summon
to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those summon, and
these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship of
king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed his
cunning counsel: "Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to me in
my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly Nestor was
very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over my head and
charged me saying: 'Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses?
To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to
whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken
straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he
be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to
arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou
mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that
dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since
Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the
Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy
heart.' So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet sleep left me.
So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of the Achaians. But
first I will speak to make trial of them as is fitting, and bid them
flee with their benched ships; only do ye from this side and from that
speak to hold them back."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor, who
was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them and
said: "My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any other of
the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false thing, and
rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of all Achaians
avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms as we may the
sons of the Achaians."

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly clustering
among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some on that fly
thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach marched forth
their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly. And in their
midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them to go; and so
they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an uproar, and the
earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and there was turmoil.
Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if perchance they might
refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings, the fosterlings of
Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit, and keep them to
their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord Agamemnon bearing
his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously. Hephaistos gave it
to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to the messenger-god
the slayer of Argus [Or, possibly, "the swift-appearing"]; and king
Hermes gave it to Pelops the charioteer, and Pelops again gave it to
Atreus shepherd of the host. And Atreus dying left it to Thyestes rich
in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left it to Agamemnon to bear, that
over many islands and all Argos he should be lord. Thereon he leaned and
spake his saying to the Argives:

"My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares' company, Zeus Kronos' son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart is
he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not till I
had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that he
planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured, with
the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty Zeus,
who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay low; for
his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come after to
hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus vainly warred
a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end thereof is yet
seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and Trojans, to
swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the Trojans should
gather together all that have their dwellings in the city, and we
Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every company choose a
Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a cup-bearer: so
much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the Trojans that
dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even warriors that
wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me perforce, and for all
my will suffer me not to waste the populous citadel of Ilios. Already
have nine years of great Zeus passed away, and our ships' timbers have
rotted and the tackling is loosed; while there our wives and little
children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet is our task utterly
unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come, even as I bid let us
all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear native land; for now
shall we never take wide-wayed Troy."

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout the
multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly swayed
like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south wind
raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even as
when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent blast,
and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they with
shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their feet
rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to seize the
ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out the
launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: "Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed flee
homeward to their dear native land over the sea's broad back? But they
would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos,
for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away from his
dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the mail-clad
Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man, neither suffer
them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea."

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of
many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched ships to
flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to Priam and
the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake many an
Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land. But go
thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with gentle
words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their curved ships
down to the salt sea."

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybated of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went to
meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre of
his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: "Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus' son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them."

But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: "Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom the
son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the sceptre and
judgments, that he may rule among you"].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled speech, whose mind was
full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
"Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene'er we take a town.
Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of the
horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it is
not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles' mind, but he is slack; else
this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last."

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with hard
words rebuked him: "Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator though
thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against kings. For I
deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with the sons of
