"My mother will be very glad to welcome you, and to see to every want,"
said he quickly, as though he had read her thoughts.  "But you, sir, I
have surely seen you before."

"And I you," cried the guardsman.  "My name is Amory de Catinat, once of
the regiment of Picardy.  Surely you are Achille de la Noue de Sainte
Marie, whom I remember when you came with your father to the government
_levees_ at Quebec."

"Yes, it is I," the young man answered, holding out his hand and smiling
in a somewhat constrained fashion.  "I do not wonder that you should
hesitate, for when you saw me last I was in a very different dress to
this."

De Catinat did indeed remember him as one of the band of the young
_noblesse_ who used to come up to the capital once a year, where they
inquired about the latest modes, chatted over the year-old gossip of
Versailles, and for a few weeks at least lived a life which was in
keeping with the traditions of their order.  Very different was he now,
with scalp-lock and war-paint, under the shadow of the great oaks, his
musket in his hand and his tomahawk at his belt.

"We have one life for the forest and one for the cities," said he,
"though indeed my good father will not have it so, and carries
Versailles with him wherever he goes.  You know him of old, monsieur,
and I need not explain my words.  But it is time for our relief, and so
we may guide you home."

Two men in the rude dress of Canadian _censitaires_ or farmers, but
carrying their muskets in a fashion which told De Catinat's trained
senses that they were disciplined soldiers, had suddenly appeared upon
the scene.  Young De la Noue gave them a few curt injunctions, and then
accompanied the refugees along the path.

"You may not know my friend here," said he, pointing to the other
sentinel, "but I am quite sure that his name is not unfamiliar to you.
This is Greysolon du Lhut."

Both Amos and De Catinat looked with the deepest curiosity and interest
at the famous leader of _coureurs-de-bois_, a man whose whole life had
been spent in pushing westward, ever westward, saying little, writing
nothing, but always the first wherever there was danger to meet or
difficulty to overcome.  It was not religion and it was not hope of gain
which led him away into those western wildernesses, but pure love of
nature and of adventure, with so little ambition that he had never cared
to describe his own travels, and none knew where he had been or where he
had stopped.  For years he would vanish from the settlements away into
the vast plains of the Dacotah, or into the huge wilderness of the
north-west, and then at last some day would walk back into Sault La
Marie, or any other outpost of civilisation, a little leaner, a little
browner, and as taciturn as ever.  Indians from the furthest corners of
the continent knew him as they knew their own sachem.  He could raise
tribes and bring a thousand painted cannibals to the help of the French
who spoke a tongue which none knew, and came from the shores of rivers
which no one else had visited.  The most daring French explorers, when,
after a thousand dangers, they had reached some country which they
believed to be new, were as likely as not to find Du Lhut sitting by his
camp fire there, some new squaw by his side, and his pipe between his
teeth.  Or again, when in doubt and danger, with no friends within a
thousand miles, the traveller might suddenly meet this silent man, with
one or two tattered wanderers of his own kidney, who would help him from
his peril, and then vanish as unexpectedly as he came.  Such was the man
who now walked by their sides along the bank of the Richelieu, and both
Amos and De Catinat knew that his presence there had a sinister meaning,
and that the place which Greysolon du Lhut had chosen was the place
where the danger threatened.

"What do you think of those fires over yonder, Du Lhut?" asked young De
la Noue.

The adventurer was stuffing his pipe with rank Indian tobacco, which he
pared from a plug with a scalping knife.  He glanced over at the two
little plumes of smoke which stood straight up against the red evening
sky.

"I don't like them," said he.

"They are Iroquois then?"

"Yes."

"Well, at least it proves that they are on the other side of the river."

"It proves that they are on this side."

"What!"

Du Lhut lit his pipe from a tinder paper.  "The Iroquois are on this
side," said he.  "They crossed to the south of us."

"And you never told us.  How do you know that they crossed, and why
did you not tell us?"

"I did not know until I saw the fires over yonder."

"And how did they tell you?"

"Tut, an Indian papoose could have told," said Du Lhut impatiently.
"Iroquois on the trail do nothing without an object.  They have an
object then in showing that smoke.  If their war-parties were over
yonder there would be no object.  Therefore their braves must have
crossed the river.  And they could not get over to the north without
being seen from the fort.  They have got over on the south then."

Amos nodded with intense appreciation.  "That's it!" said he, "that's
Injun ways.  I'll lay that he is right."

"Then they may be in the woods round us.  We may be in danger," cried De
la Noue.

Du Lhut nodded and sucked at his pipe.

De Catinat cast a glance round him at the grand tree trunks, the fading
foliage, the smooth sward underneath with the long evening shadows
barred across it.  How difficult it was to realise that behind all this
beauty there lurked a danger so deadly and horrible that a man alone
might well shrink from it, far less one who had the woman whom he loved
walking within hand's touch of him.  It was with a long heart-felt sigh
of relief that he saw a wall of stockade in the midst of a large
clearing in front of him, with the stone manor house rising above it.
In a line from the stockade were a dozen cottages with cedar-shingled
roofs turned up in the Norman fashion, in which dwelt the habitants
under the protection of the seigneur's chateau--a strange little graft
of the feudal system in the heart of an American forest.  Above the main
gate as they approached was a huge shield of wood with a coat of arms
painted upon it, a silver ground with a chevron ermine between three
coronets gules.  At either corner a small brass cannon peeped through an
embrasure.  As they passed the gate the guard inside closed it and
placed the huge wooden bars into position.  A little crowd of men,
women, and children were gathered round the door of the chateau, and a
man appeared to be seated on a high-backed chair upon the threshold.

"You know my father," said the young man with a shrug of his shoulders.
"He will have it that he has never left his Norman castle, and that he
is still the Seigneur de la Noue, the greatest man within a day's ride
of Rouen, and of the richest blood of Normandy.  He is now taking his
dues and his yearly oaths from his tenants, and he would not think it
becoming, if the governor himself were to visit him, to pause in the
middle of so august a ceremony.  But if it would interest you, you may
step this way and wait until he has finished.  You, madame, I will take
at once to my mother, if you will be so kind as to follow me."

The sight was, to the Americans at least, a novel one.  A triple row of
men, women, and children were standing round in a semicircle, the men
rough and sunburned, the women homely and clean, with white caps upon
their heads, the children open-mouthed and round-eyed, awed into an
unusual quiet by the reverent bearing of their elders.  In the centre,
on his high-backed carved chair, there sat an elderly man very stiff and
erect, with an exceedingly solemn face.  He was a fine figure of a man,
tall and broad, with large strong features, clean-shaven and
deeply-lined, a huge beak of a nose, and strong shaggy eyebrows which
arched right up to the great wig, which he wore full and long as it had
been worn in France in his youth.  On his wig was placed a white hat
cocked jauntily at one side with a red feather streaming round it, and
he wore a coat of cinnamon-coloured cloth with silver at the neck and
pockets, which was still very handsome, though it bore signs of having
been frayed and mended more than once.  This, with black velvet
knee-breeches and high well-polished boots, made a costume such as De
Catinat had never before seen in the wilds of Canada.

As they watched, a rude husbandman walked forwards from the crowd, and
kneeling down upon a square of carpet placed his hands between those of
the seigneur.

"Monsieur de Sainte Marie, Monsieur de Sainte Marie, Monsieur de Sainte
Marie," said he three times, "I bring you the faith and homage which I
am bound to bring you on account of my fief Herbert, which I hold as a
man of faith of your seigneury."

"Be true, my son.  Be valiant and true!" said the old nobleman solemnly,
and then with a sudden change of tone: "What in the name of the devil
has your daughter got there?"

A girl had advanced from the crowd with a large strip of bark in front
of her on which was heaped a pile of dead fish.

"It is your eleventh fish which I am bound by my oath to render to you,"
said the _censitaire_.  "There are seventy-three in the heap, and I have
caught eight hundred in the month."

"_Peste!_" cried the nobleman.  "Do you think, Andre Dubois, that I will
disorder my health by eating three-and-seventy fish in this fashion?
Do you think that I and my body-servants and my personal retainers and
the other members of my household have nothing to do but to eat your
fish?  In future, you will pay your tribute not more than five at a
time.  Where is the major-domo?  Theuriet, remove the fish to our
central store-house, and be careful that the smell does not penetrate to
the blue tapestry chamber or to my lady's suite."

A man in very shabby black livery, all stained and faded, advanced with
a large tin platter and carried off the pile of white fish.  Then, as
each of the tenants stepped forward to pay their old-world homage, they
all left some share of their industry for their lord's maintenance.
With some it was a bundle of wheat, with some a barrel of potatoes,
while others had brought skins of deer or of beaver.  All these were
carried off by the major-domo, until each had paid his tribute, and the
singular ceremony was brought to a conclusion.  As the seigneur rose,
his son, who had returned, took De Catinat by the sleeve and led him
through the throng.

"Father," said he, "this is Monsieur de Catinat, whom you may remember
some years ago at Quebec."

The seigneur bowed with much condescension, and shook the guardsman by
the hand.

"You are extremely welcome to my estates, both you and your
body-servants--"

"They are my friends, monsieur.  This is Monsieur Amos Green and Captain
Ephraim Savage.  My wife is travelling with me, but your courteous son
has kindly taken her to your lady."

"I am honoured--honoured indeed!" cried the old man, with a bow and a
flourish.  "I remember you very well, sir, for it is not so common to
meet men of quality in this country.  I remember your father also, for
he served with me at Rocroy, though he was in the Foot, and I in the Red
Dragoons of Grissot.  Your arms are a martlet in fess upon a field
azure, and now that I think of it, the second daughter of your
great-grand-father married the son of one of the La Noues of Andelys,
which is one of our cadet branches.  Kinsman, you are welcome!"
He threw his arms suddenly round De Catinat and slapped him three times
on the back.

The young guardsman was only too delighted to find himself admitted to
such an intimacy.

"I will not intrude long upon your hospitality," said he.  "We are
journeying down to Lake Champlain, and we hope in a day or two to be
ready to go on."

"A suite of rooms shall be laid at your disposal as long as you do me
the honour to remain here.  _Peste!_ It is not every day that I can open
my gates to a man with good blood in his veins!  Ah, sir, that is what I
feel most in my exile, for who is there with whom I can talk as equal to
equal?  There is the governor, the intendant, perhaps, one or two
priests, three or four officers, but how many of the _noblesse_?
Scarcely one.  They buy their titles over here as they buy their pelts,
and it is better to have a canoe-load of beaver skins than a pedigree
from Roland.  But I forget my duties.  You are weary and hungry, you and
your friends.  Come up with me to the tapestried _salon_, and we shall
see if my stewards can find anything for your refreshment.  You play
piquet, if I remember right?  Ah, my skill is leaving me, and I should
be glad to try a hand with you."

The manor-house was high and strong, built of gray stone in a framework
of wood.  The large iron-clamped door through which they entered was
pierced for musketry fire, and led into a succession of cellars and
store-houses in which the beets, carrots, potatoes, cabbages, cured
meat, dried eels, and other winter supplies were placed.  A winding
stone staircase led them through a huge kitchen, flagged and lofty, from
which branched the rooms of the servants or retainers as the old
nobleman preferred to call them.  Above this again was the principal
suite, centering in the dining-hall with its huge fireplace and rude
home-made furniture.  Rich rugs formed of bear or deer-skin were
littered thickly over the brown-stained floor, and antlered heads
bristled out from among the rows of muskets which were arranged along
the wall.  A broad rough-hewn maple table ran down the centre of this
apartment, and on this there was soon set a venison pie, a side of
calvered salmon, and a huge cranberry tart, to which the hungry
travellers did full justice.  The seigneur explained that he had already
supped, but having allowed himself to be persuaded into joining them, he
ended by eating more than Ephraim Savage, drinking more than Du Lhut,
and finally by singing a very amorous little French _chanson_ with a
tra-le-ra chorus, the words of which, fortunately for the peace of the
company, were entirely unintelligible to the Bostonian.

"Madame is taking her refection in my lady's boudoir," he remarked, when
the dishes had been removed.  "You may bring up a bottle of Frontiniac
from bin thirteen, Theuriet.  Oh, you will see, gentlemen, that even in
the wilds we have a little, a very little, which is perhaps not
altogether bad.  And so you come from Versailles, De Catinat?  It was
built since my day, but how I remember the old life of the court at St.
Germain, before Louis turned serious!  Ah, what innocent happy days they
were when Madame de Nevailles had to bar the windows of the maids of
honour to keep out the king, and we all turned out eight deep on to the
grass plot for our morning duel!  By Saint Denis, I have not quite
forgotten the trick of the wrist yet, and, old as I am, I should be none
the worse for a little breather."  He strutted in his stately fashion
over to where a rapier and dagger hung upon the wall, and began to make
passes at the door, darting in and out, warding off imaginary blows with
his poniard, and stamping his feet with little cries of "Punto! reverso!
stoccata! dritta! mandritta!" and all the jargon of the fencing schools.
Finally he rejoined them, breathing heavily and with his wig awry.

"That was our old exercise," said he.  "Doubtless you young bloods have
improved upon it, and yet it was good enough for the Spaniards at Rocroy
and at one or two other places which I could mention.  But they still
see life at the court, I understand.  There are still love passages and
blood lettings.  How has Lauzun prospered in his wooing of Mademoiselle
de Montpensier?  Was it proved that Madame de Clermont had bought a
phial from Le Vie, the poison woman, two days before the soup disagreed
so violently with monsieur?  What did the Due de Biron do when his
nephew ran away with the duchess?  Is it true that he raised his
allowance to fifty thousand livres for having done it?"  Such were the
two-year-old questions which had not been answered yet upon the banks of
the Richelieu River.  Long into the hours of the night, when his
comrades were already snoring under their blankets, De Catinat, blinking
and yawning, was still engaged in trying to satisfy the curiosity of the
old courtier, and to bring him up to date in all the most minute gossip
of Versailles.



CHAPTER XXXIII.


THE SLAYING OF BROWN MOOSE.

Two days were spent by the travellers at the seigneury of Sainte Marie,
and they would very willingly have spent longer, for the quarters were
comfortable and the welcome warm, but already the reds of autumn were
turning to brown, and they knew how suddenly the ice and snow come in
those northern lands, and how impossible it would be to finish their
journey if winter were once fairly upon them.  The old nobleman had sent
his scouts by land and by water, but there were no signs of the Iroquois
upon the eastern banks, so that it was clear that De Lhut had been
mistaken.  Over on the other side, however, the high gray plumes of
smoke still streamed up above the trees as a sign that their enemies
were not very far off.  All day from the manor-house windows and from
the stockade they could see those danger signals which reminded them
that a horrible death lurked ever at their elbow.

The refugees were rested now and refreshed, and of one mind about
pushing on.

"If the snow comes, it will be a thousand times more dangerous," said
Amos, "for we shall leave a track then that a papoose could follow."

"And why should we fear?" urged old Ephraim.

"Truly this is a desert of salt, even though it lead to the vale of
Hinnom, but we shall be borne up against these sons of Jeroboam.
Steer a straight course, lad, and jam your helm, for the pilot will see
you safe."

"And I am not frightened, Amory, and I am quite rested now," said Adele.
"We shall be so much more happy when we are in the English Provinces,
for even now, how do we know that that dreadful monk may not come with
orders to drag us back to Quebec and Paris?"

It was indeed very possible that the vindictive Franciscan, when
satisfied that they had not ascended to Montreal, or remained at Three
Rivers, might seek them on the banks of the Richelieu.  When De Catinat
thought of how he passed them in his great canoe that morning, his eager
face protruded, and his dark body swinging in time to the paddles, he
felt that the danger which his wife suggested was not only possible but
imminent.  The seigneur was his friend, but the seigneur could not
disobey the governor's orders.  A great hand, stretching all the way
from Versailles, seemed to hang over them, even here in the heart of the
virgin forest, ready to snatch them up and carry them back into
degradation and misery.  Better all the perils of the woods than that!

But the seigneur and his son, who knew nothing of their pressing reasons
for haste, were strenuous in urging De Catinat the other way, and in
this they were supported by the silent Du Lhut, whose few muttered words
were always more weighty than the longest speech, for he never spoke
save about that of which he was a master.

"You have seen my little place," said the old nobleman, with a wave of
his beruffled ring-covered hand.  "It is not what I should wish it, but
such as it is, it is most heartily yours for the winter, if you and your
comrades would honour me by remaining.  As to madame, I doubt not that
my own dame and she will find plenty to amuse and occupy them, which
reminds me, De Catinat, that you have not yet been presented.  Theuriet,
go to your mistress and inform her that I request her to be so good as
to come to us in the hall of the dais."

De Catinat was too seasoned to be easily startled, but he was somewhat
taken aback when the lady, to whom the old nobleman always referred in
terms of exaggerated respect, proved to be as like a full-blooded Indian
squaw as the hall of the dais was to a French barn.  She was dressed, it
was true, in a bodice of scarlet taffeta with a black skirt,
silver-buckled shoes, and a scented pomander ball dangling by a silver
chain from her girdle, but her face was of the colour of the bark of the
Scotch fir, while her strong nose and harsh mouth, with the two plaits
of coarse black hair which dangled down her back, left no possible doubt
as to her origin.

"Allow me to present you, Monsieur de Catinat," said the Seigneur de
Sainte Marie solemnly, "to my wife, Onega de la Noue de Sainte Marie,
chatelaine by right of marriage to this seigneury, and also to the
Chateau d'Andelys in Normandy, and to the estate of Varennes in
Provence, while retaining in her own right the hereditary chieftainship
on the distaff side of the nation of the Onondagas.  My angel, I have
been endeavouring to persuade our friends to remain with us at Sainte
Marie instead of journeying on to Lake Champlain."

"At least leave your White Lily at Sainte Marie," said the dusky
princess, speaking in excellent French, and clasping with her ruddy
fingers the ivory hand of Adele.  "We will hold her safe for you until
the ice softens, and the leaves and the partridge berries come once
more.  I know my people, monsieur, and I tell you that the woods are
full of murder, and that it is not for nothing that the leaves are the
colour of blood, for death lurks behind every tree."

De Catinat was more moved by the impressive manner of his hostess than
by any of the other warnings which he had received.  Surely she, if
anyone, must be able to read the signs of the times.

"I know not what to do!" he cried in despair.  "I must go on, and yet
how can I expose her to these perils?  I would fain stay the winter, but
you must take my word for it, sir, that it is not possible."

"Du Lhut, you know how things should be ordered," said the seigneur.
"What should you advise my friend to do, since he is so set upon getting
to the English Provinces before the winter comes?"

The dark silent pioneer stroked his beard with his hand as he pondered
over the question.

"There is but one way," said he at last, "though even in it there is
danger.  The woods are safer than the river, for the reeds are full of
_cached_ canoes.  Five leagues from here is the blockhouse of Poitou,
and fifteen miles beyond, that of Auvergne.  We will go to-morrow to
Poitou through the woods and see if all be safe.  I will go with you,
and I give you my word that if the Iroquois are there, Greysolon du Lhut
will know it.  The lady we shall leave here, and if we find that all is
safe we shall come back for her.  Then in the same fashion we shall
advance to Auvergne, and there you must wait until you hear where their
war-parties are.  It is in my mind that it will not be very long before
we know."

"What! You would part us!" cried Adele aghast.

"It is best, my sister," said Onega, passing her arm caressingly round
her.  "You cannot know the danger, but we know it, and we will not let
our White Lily run into it.  You will stay here to gladden us, while the
great chief Du Lhut, and the French soldier, your husband, and the old
warrior who seems so wary, and the other chief with limbs like the wild
deer, go forward through the woods and see that all is well before you
venture."

And so it was at last agreed, and Adele, still protesting, was consigned
to the care of the lady of Sainte Marie, while De Catinat swore that
without a pause he would return from Poitou to fetch her.  The old
nobleman and his son would fain have joined them in their adventure, but
they had their own charge to watch and the lives of many in their
keeping, while a small party were safer in the woods than a larger one
would be.  The seigneur provided them with a letter for De Lannes, the
governor of the Poitou blockhouse, and so in the early dawn the four of
them crept like shadows from the stockade-gate, amid the muttered good
wishes of the guard within, and were lost in an instant in the blackness
of the vast forest.

From La Noue to Poitou was but twelve miles down the river, but by the
woodland route where creeks were to be crossed, reed-girt lakes to be
avoided, and paths to be picked among swamps where the wild rice grew
higher than their heads, and the alder bushes lay in dense clumps before
them, the distance was more than doubled.  They walked in single file,
Du Lhut leading, with the swift silent tread of some wild creature, his
body bent forward, his gun ready in the bend of his arm, and his keen
dark eyes shooting little glances to right and left, observing
everything from the tiniest mark upon the ground or tree trunk to the
motion of every beast and bird of the brushwood.  De Catinat walked
behind, then Ephraim Savage, and then Amos, all with their weapons ready
and with every sense upon the alert.  By midday they were more than
half-way, and halted in a thicket for a scanty meal of bread and cheese,
for De Lhut would not permit them to light a fire.

"They have not come as far as this," he whispered, "and yet I am sure
that they have crossed the river.  Ah, Governor de la Barre did not know
what he did when he stirred these men up, and this good dragoon whom the
king has sent us now knows even less."

"I have seen them in peace," remarked Amos.  "I have traded to Onondaga
and to the country of the Senecas.  I know them as fine hunters and
brave men."

"They are fine hunters, but the game that they hunt best are their
fellow-men.  I have myself led their scalping parties, and I have fought
against them, and I tell you that when a general comes out from France
who hardly knows enough to get the sun behind him in a fight, he will
find that there is little credit to be gained from them.  They talk of
burning their villages!  It would be as wise to kick over the wasps'
nest, and think that you have done with the wasps.  You are from New
England, monsieur?"

"My comrade is from New England; I am from New York."

"Ah, yes.  I could see from your step and your eye that the woods were
as a home to you.  The New England man goes on the waters and he slays
the cod with more pleasure than the caribou.  Perhaps that is why his
face is so sad.  I have been on the great water, and I remember that my
face was sad also.  There is little wind, and so I think that we may
light our pipes without danger.  With a good breeze I have known a
burning pipe fetch up a scalping party from two miles' distance, but the
