
"Saladin is noble," answered the Emir, "and will not spur a generous
horse to a leap which he cannot achieve. Come with me to my tent,"
he added, "and thou shalt be presently equipped with a disguise as
unsearchable as midnight, so thou mayest walk the camp of the Nazarenes
as if thou hadst on thy finger the signet of Giaougi." [Perhaps the same
with Gyges.]



CHAPTER XXIV

     A grain of dust
     Soiling our cup, will make our sense reject
     Fastidiously the draught which we did thirst for;
     A rusted nail, placed near the faithful compass,
     Will sway it from the truth, and wreck the argosy.
     Even this small cause of anger and disgust
     Will break the bonds of amity 'mongst princes,
     And wreck their noblest purposes.
                  THE CRUSADE.

The reader can now have little doubt who the Ethiopian slave really was,
with what purpose he had sought Richard's camp, and wherefore and
with what hope he now stood close to the person of that Monarch, as,
surrounded by his valiant peers of England and Normandy, Coeur de Lion
stood on the summit of Saint George's Mount, with the Banner of England
by his side, borne by the most goodly person in the army, being his own
natural brother, William with the Long Sword, Earl of Salisbury, the
offspring of Henry the Second's amour with the celebrated Rosamond of
Woodstock.

From several expressions in the King's conversation with Neville on the
preceding day, the Nubian was left in anxious doubt whether his disguise
had not been penetrated, especially as that the King seemed to be aware
in what manner the agency of the dog was expected to discover the thief
who stole the banner, although the circumstance of such an animal's
having been wounded on the occasion had been scarce mentioned in
Richard's presence. Nevertheless, as the King continued to treat him
in no other manner than his exterior required, the Nubian remained
uncertain whether he was or was not discovered, and determined not to
throw his disguise aside voluntarily.

Meanwhile, the powers of the various Crusading princes, arrayed under
their royal and princely leaders, swept in long order around the base
of the little mound; and as those of each different country passed by,
their commanders advanced a step or two up the hill, and made a signal
of courtesy to Richard and to the Standard of England, "in sign of
regard and amity," as the protocol of the ceremony heedfully expressed
it, "not of subjection or vassalage." The spiritual dignitaries, who in
those days veiled not their bonnets to created being, bestowed on the
King and his symbol of command their blessing instead of rendering
obeisance.

Thus the long files marched on, and, diminished as they were by so many
causes, appeared still an iron host, to whom the conquest of Palestine
might seem an easy task. The soldiers, inspired by the consciousness of
united strength, sat erect in their steel saddles; while it seemed that
the trumpets sounded more cheerfully shrill, and the steeds, refreshed
by rest and provender, chafed on the bit, and trod the ground more
proudly. On they passed, troop after troop, banners waving, spears
glancing, plumes dancing, in long perspective--a host composed of
different nations, complexions, languages, arms, and appearances, but
all fired, for the time, with the holy yet romantic purpose of rescuing
the distressed daughter of Zion from her thraldom, and redeeming the
sacred earth, which more than mortal had trodden, from the yoke of the
unbelieving pagan. And it must be owned that if, in other circumstances,
the species of courtesy rendered to the King of England by so many
warriors, from whom he claimed no natural allegiance, had in it
something that might have been thought humiliating, yet the nature and
cause of the war was so fitted to his pre-eminently chivalrous character
and renowned feats in arms, that claims which might elsewhere have been
urged were there forgotten, and the brave did willing homage to the
bravest, in an expedition where the most undaunted and energetic courage
was necessary to success.

The good King was seated on horseback about half way up the mount, a
morion on his head, surmounted by a crown, which left his manly features
exposed to public view, as, with cool and considerate eye, he perused
each rank as it passed him, and returned the salutation of the leaders.
His tunic was of sky-coloured velvet, covered with plates of silver, and
his hose of crimson silk, slashed with cloth of gold. By his side stood
the seeming Ethiopian slave, holding the noble dog in a leash, such as
was used in woodcraft. It was a circumstance which attracted no notice,
for many of the princes of the Crusade had introduced black slaves
into their household, in imitation of the barbarous splendour of the
Saracens. Over the King's head streamed the large folds of the banner,
and, as he looked to it from time to time, he seemed to regard a
ceremony, indifferent to himself personally, as important, when
considered as atoning an indignity offered to the kingdom which he
ruled. In the background, and on the very summit of the Mount, a wooden
turret, erected for the occasion, held the Queen Berengaria and the
principal ladies of the Court. To this the King looked from time to
time; and then ever and anon his eyes were turned on the Nubian and the
dog, but only when such leaders approached, as, from circumstances of
previous ill-will, he suspected of being accessory to the theft of the
standard, or whom he judged capable of a crime so mean.

Thus, he did not look in that direction when Philip Augustus of France
approached at the head of his splendid troops of Gallic chivalry---nay,
he anticipated the motions of the French King, by descending the Mount
as the latter came up the ascent, so that they met in the middle space,
and blended their greetings so gracefully that it appeared they met in
fraternal equality. The sight of the two greatest princes in Europe,
in rank at once and power, thus publicly avowing their concord, called
forth bursts of thundering acclaim from the Crusading host at many miles
distance, and made the roving Arab scouts of the desert alarm the camp
of Saladin with intelligence that the army of the Christians was in
motion. Yet who but the King of kings can read the hearts of monarchs?
Under this smooth show of courtesy, Richard nourished displeasure and
suspicion against Philip, and Philip meditated withdrawing himself and
his host from the army of the Cross, and leaving Richard to accomplish
or fail in the enterprise with his own unassisted forces.

Richard's demeanour was different when the dark-armed knights and
squires of the Temple chivalry approached--men with countenances bronzed
to Asiatic blackness by the suns of Palestine, and the admirable state
of whose horses and appointments far surpassed even that of the choicest
troops of France and England. The King cast a hasty glance aside; but
the Nubian stood quiet, and his trusty dog sat at his feet, watching,
with a sagacious yet pleased look, the ranks which now passed before
them. The King's look turned again on the chivalrous Templars, as the
Grand Master, availing himself of his mingled character, bestowed his
benediction on Richard as a priest, instead of doing him reverence as a
military leader.

"The misproud and amphibious caitiff puts the monk upon me," said
Richard to the Earl of Salisbury. "But, Longsword, we will let it pass.
A punctilio must not lose Christendom the services of these experienced
lances, because their victories have rendered them overweening. Lo you,
here comes our valiant adversary, the Duke of Austria. Mark his manner
and bearing, Longsword--and thou, Nubian, let the hound have full view
of him. By Heaven, he brings his buffoons along with him!"

In fact, whether from habit, or, which is more likely, to intimate
contempt of the ceremonial he was about to comply with, Leopold was
attended by his SPRUCH-SPRECHER and his jester; and as he advanced
towards Richard, he whistled in what he wished to be considered as an
indifferent manner, though his heavy features evinced the sullenness,
mixed with the fear, with which a truant schoolboy may be seen to
approach his master. As the reluctant dignitary made, with discomposed
and sulky look, the obeisance required, the SPRUCH-SPRECHER shook his
baton, and proclaimed, like a herald, that, in what he was now doing,
the Archduke of Austria was not to be held derogating from the rank and
privileges of a sovereign prince; to which the jester answered with a
sonorous AMEN, which provoked much laughter among the bystanders.

King Richard looked more than once at the Nubian and his dog; but
the former moved not, nor did the latter strain at the leash, so
that Richard said to the slave with some scorn, "Thy success in this
enterprise, my sable friend, even though thou hast brought thy hound's
sagacity to back thine own, will not, I fear, place thee high in the
rank of wizards, or much augment thy merits towards our person."

The Nubian answered, as usual, only by a lowly obeisance.

Meantime the troops of the Marquis of Montserrat next passed in order
before the King of England. That powerful and wily baron, to make the
greater display of his forces, had divided them into two bodies. At the
head of the first, consisting of his vassals and followers, and levied
from his Syrian possessions, came his brother Enguerrand; and he himself
followed, leading on a gallant band of twelve hundred Stradiots, a kind
of light cavalry raised by the Venetians in their Dalmatian possessions,
and of which they had entrusted the command to the Marquis, with whom
the republic had many bonds of connection. These Stradiots were clothed
in a fashion partly European, but partaking chiefly of the Eastern
fashion. They wore, indeed, short hauberks, but had over them
party-coloured tunics of rich stuffs, with large wide pantaloons and
half-boots. On their heads were straight upright caps, similar to those
of the Greeks; and they carried small round targets, bows and arrows,
scimitars, and poniards. They were mounted on horses carefully selected,
and well maintained at the expense of the State of Venice; their saddles
and appointments resembled those of the Turks, and they rode in the same
manner, with short stirrups and upon a high seat. These troops were
of great use in skirmishing with the Arabs, though unable to engage in
close combat, like the iron-sheathed men-at-arms of Western and Northern
Europe.

Before this goodly band came Conrade, in the same garb with the
Stradiots, but of such rich stuff that he seemed to blaze with gold
and silver, and the milk-white plume fastened in his cap by a clasp of
diamonds seemed tall enough to sweep the clouds. The noble steed which
he reined bounded and caracoled, and displayed his spirit and agility
in a manner which might have troubled a less admirable horseman than
the Marquis, who gracefully ruled him with the one hand, while the other
displayed the baton, whose predominancy over the ranks which he led
seemed equally absolute. Yet his authority over the Stradiots was more
in show than in substance; for there paced beside him, on an ambling
palfrey of soberest mood, a little old man, dressed entirely in black,
without beard or moustaches, and having an appearance altogether mean
and insignificant when compared with the blaze of splendour around
him. But this mean-looking old man was one of those deputies whom the
Venetian government sent into camps to overlook the conduct of the
generals to whom the leading was consigned, and to maintain that jealous
system of espial and control which had long distinguished the policy of
the republic.

Conrade, who, by cultivating Richard's humour, had attained a certain
degree of favour with him, no sooner was come within his ken than the
King of England descended a step or two to meet him, exclaiming, at the
same time, "Ha, Lord Marquis, thou at the head of the fleet Stradiots,
and thy black shadow attending thee as usual, whether the sun shines or
not! May not one ask thee whether the rule of the troops remains with
the shadow or the substance?"

Conrade was commencing his reply with a smile, when Roswal, the noble
hound, uttering a furious and savage yell, sprung forward. The Nubian,
at the same time, slipped the leash, and the hound, rushing on, leapt
upon Conrade's noble charger, and, seizing the Marquis by the throat,
pulled him down from the saddle. The plumed rider lay rolling on the
sand, and the frightened horse fled in wild career through the camp.

"Thy hound hath pulled down the right quarry, I warrant him," said
the King to the Nubian, "and I vow to Saint George he is a stag of ten
tynes! Pluck the dog off; lest he throttle him."

The Ethiopian, accordingly, though not without difficulty, disengaged
the dog from Conrade, and fastened him up, still highly excited, and
struggling in the leash. Meanwhile many crowded to the spot, especially
followers of Conrade and officers of the Stradiots, who, as they
saw their leader lie gazing wildly on the sky, raised him up amid a
tumultuary cry of "Cut the slave and his hound to pieces!"

But the voice of Richard, loud and sonorous, was heard clear above all
other exclamations. "He dies the death who injures the hound! He hath
but done his duty, after the sagacity with which God and nature have
endowed the brave animal.--Stand forward for a false traitor, thou
Conrade, Marquis of Montserrat! I impeach thee of treason."

Several of the Syrian leaders had now come up, and Conrade--vexation,
and shame, and confusion struggling with passion in his manner and
voice--exclaimed, "What means this? With what am I charged? Why this
base usage and these reproachful terms? Is this the league of concord
which England renewed but so lately?"

"Are the Princes of the Crusade turned hares or deers in the eyes of
King Richard that he should slip hounds on them?" said the sepulchral
voice of the Grand Master of the Templars.

"It must be some singular accident--some fatal mistake," said Philip of
France, who rode up at the same moment.

"Some deceit of the Enemy," said the Archbishop of Tyre.

"A stratagem of the Saracens," cried Henry of Champagne. "It were well
to hang up the dog, and put the slave to the torture."

"Let no man lay hand upon them," said Richard, "as he loves his own
life! Conrade, stand forth, if thou darest, and deny the accusation
which this mute animal hath in his noble instinct brought against thee,
of injury done to him, and foul scorn to England!"

"I never touched the banner," said Conrade hastily.

"Thy words betray thee, Conrade!" said Richard, "for how didst thou
know, save from conscious guilt, that the question is concerning the
banner?"

"Hast thou then not kept the camp in turmoil on that and no other
score?" answered Conrade; "and dost thou impute to a prince and an ally
a crime which, after all, was probably committed by some paltry
felon for the sake of the gold thread? Or wouldst thou now impeach a
confederate on the credit of a dog?"

By this time the alarm was becoming general, so that Philip of France
interposed.

"Princes and nobles," he said, "you speak in presence of those whose
swords will soon be at the throats of each other if they hear their
leaders at such terms together. In the name of Heaven, let us draw off
each his own troops into their separate quarters, and ourselves meet
an hour hence in the Pavilion of Council to take some order in this new
state of confusion."

"Content," said King Richard, "though I should have liked to have
interrogated that caitiff while his gay doublet was yet besmirched with
sand. But the pleasure of France shall be ours in this matter."

The leaders separated as was proposed, each prince placing himself at
the head of his own forces; and then was heard on all sides the crying
of war-cries and the sounding of gathering-notes upon bugles and
trumpets, by which the different stragglers were summoned to their
prince's banner, and the troops were shortly seen in motion, each taking
different routes through the camp to their own quarters. But although
any immediate act of violence was thus prevented, yet the accident which
had taken place dwelt on every mind; and those foreigners who had that
morning hailed Richard as the worthiest to lead their army, now resumed
their prejudices against his pride and intolerance, while the English,
conceiving the honour of their country connected with the quarrel, of
which various reports had gone about, considered the natives of other
countries jealous of the fame of England and her King, and disposed to
undermine it by the meanest arts of intrigue. Many and various were the
rumours spread upon the occasion, and there was one which averred that
the Queen and her ladies had been much alarmed by the tumult, and that
one of them had swooned.

The Council assembled at the appointed hour. Conrade had in the
meanwhile laid aside his dishonoured dress, and with it the shame and
confusion which, in spite of his talents and promptitude, had at first
overwhelmed him, owing to the strangeness of the accident and suddenness
of the accusation. He was now robed like a prince; and entered the
council-chamber attended by the Archduke of Austria, the Grand Masters
both of the Temple and of the Order of Saint John, and several other
potentates, who made a show of supporting him and defending his cause,
chiefly perhaps from political motives, or because they themselves
nourished a personal enmity against Richard.

This appearance of union in favour of Conrade was far from influencing
the King of England. He entered the Council with his usual indifference
of manner, and in the same dress in which he had just alighted from
horseback. He cast a careless and somewhat scornful glance on the
leaders, who had with studied affectation arranged themselves around
Conrade as if owning his cause, and in the most direct terms charged
Conrade of Montserrat with having stolen the Banner of England, and
wounded the faithful animal who stood in its defence.

Conrade arose boldly to answer, and in despite, as he expressed himself,
of man and brute, king or dog, avouched his innocence of the crime
charged.

"Brother of England," said Philip, who willingly assumed the character
of moderator of the assembly, "this is an unusual impeachment. We do
not hear you avouch your own knowledge of this matter, further than your
belief resting upon the demeanour of this hound towards the Marquis of
Montserrat. Surely the word of a knight and a prince should bear him out
against the barking of a cur?"

"Royal brother," returned Richard, "recollect that the Almighty, who
gave the dog to be companion of our pleasures and our toils, hath
invested him with a nature noble and incapable of deceit. He forgets
neither friend nor foe--remembers, and with accuracy, both benefit and
injury. He hath a share of man's intelligence, but no share of man's
falsehood. You may bribe a soldier to slay a man with his sword, or a
witness to take life by false accusation; but you cannot make a hound
tear his benefactor. He is the friend of man, save when man justly
incurs his enmity. Dress yonder marquis in what peacock-robes you will,
disguise his appearance, alter his complexion with drugs and washes,
hide him amidst a hundred men,--I will yet pawn my sceptre that the
hound detects him, and expresses his resentment, as you have this day
beheld. This is no new incident, although a strange one. Murderers
and robbers have been ere now convicted, and suffered death under such
evidence, and men have said that the finger of God was in it. In thine
own land, royal brother, and upon such an occasion, the matter was tried
by a solemn duel betwixt the man and the dog, as appellant and defendant
in a challenge of murder. The dog was victorious, the man was punished,
and the crime was confessed. Credit me, royal brother, that hidden
crimes have often been brought to light by the testimony even of
inanimate substances, not to mention animals far inferior in instinctive
sagacity to the dog, who is the friend and companion of our race."

"Such a duel there hath indeed been, royal brother," answered Philip,
"and that in the reign of one of our predecessors, to whom God be
gracious. But it was in the olden time, nor can we hold it a precedent
fitting for this occasion. The defendant in that case was a private
gentleman of small rank or respect; his offensive weapons were only a
club, his defensive a leathern jerkin. But we cannot degrade a prince
to the disgrace of using such rude arms, or to the ignominy of such a
combat."

"I never meant that you should," said King Richard; "it were foul play
to hazard the good hound's life against that of such a double-faced
traitor as this Conrade hath proved himself. But there lies our own
glove; we appeal him to the combat in respect of the evidence we
brought forth against him. A king, at least, is more than the mate of a
marquis."

Conrade made no hasty effort to seize on the pledge which Richard cast
into the middle of the assembly, and King Philip had time to reply ere
the marquis made a motion to lift the glove.

"A king," said he of France, "is as much more than a match for the
Marquis Conrade as a dog would be less. Royal Richard, this cannot be
permitted. You are the leader of our expedition--the sword and buckler
of Christendom."

"I protest against such a combat," said the Venetian proveditore, "until
the King of England shall have repaid the fifty thousand byzants which
he is indebted to the republic. It is enough to be threatened with loss
of our debt, should our debtor fall by the hands of the pagans, without
the additional risk of his being slain in brawls amongst Christians
concerning dogs and banners."

"And I," said William with the Long Sword, Earl of Salisbury, "protest
in my turn against my royal brother perilling his life, which is the
property of the people of England, in such a cause. Here, noble brother,
receive back your glove, and think only as if the wind had blown it from
your hand. Mine shall lie in its stead. A king's son, though with the
bar sinister on his shield, is at least a match for this marmoset of a
marquis."

"Princes and nobles," said Conrade, "I will not accept of King Richard's
defiance. He hath been chosen our leader against the Saracens, and if
his conscience can answer the accusation of provoking an ally to the
field on a quarrel so frivolous, mine, at least, cannot endure the
reproach of accepting it. But touching his bastard brother, William of
Woodstock, or against any other who shall adopt or shall dare to stand
godfather to this most false charge, I will defend my honour in the
lists, and prove whosoever impeaches it a false liar."

"The Marquis of Montserrat," said the Archbishop of Tyre, "hath spoken
like a wise and moderate gentleman; and methinks this controversy might,
without dishonour to any party, end at this point."

"Methinks it might so terminate," said the King of France, "provided
King Richard will recall his accusation as made upon over-slight
grounds."

"Philip of France," answered Coeur de Lion, "my words shall never do my
thoughts so much injury. I have charged yonder Conrade as a thief,
who, under cloud of night, stole from its place the emblem of England's
dignity. I still believe and charge him to be such; and when a day is
appointed for the combat, doubt not that, since Conrade declines to
meet us in person, I will find a champion to appear in support of my
challenge--for thou, William, must not thrust thy long sword into this
quarrel without our special license."

"Since my rank makes me arbiter in this most unhappy matter," said
Philip of France, "I appoint the fifth day from hence for the decision
thereof, by way of combat, according to knightly usage--Richard, King of
England, to appear by his champion as appellant, and Conrade, Marquis of
Montserrat, in his own person, as defendant. Yet I own I know not where
to find neutral ground where such a quarrel may be fought out; for it
must not be in the neighbourhood of this camp, where the soldiers would
make faction on the different sides."

"It were well," said Richard, "to apply to the generosity of the
royal Saladin, since, heathen as he is, I have never known knight more
fulfilled of nobleness, or to whose good faith we may so peremptorily
entrust ourselves. I speak thus for those who may be doubtful of mishap;
for myself, wherever I see my foe, I make that spot my battle-ground."

"Be it so," said Philip; "we will make this matter known to Saladin,
although it be showing to an enemy the unhappy spirit of discord
which we would willingly hide from even ourselves, were it possible.
Meanwhile, I dismiss this assembly, and charge you all, as Christian
men and noble knights, that ye let this unhappy feud breed no further
brawling in the camp, but regard it as a thing solemnly referred to the
judgment of God, to whom each of you should pray that He will dispose
of victory in the combat according to the truth of the quarrel; and
therewith may His will be done!"

"Amen, amen!" was answered on all sides; while the Templar whispered the
Marquis, "Conrade, wilt thou not add a petition to be delivered from the
power of the dog, as the Psalmist hath it?"

"Peace, thou--!" replied the Marquis; "there is a revealing demon abroad
which may report, amongst other tidings, how far thou dost carry the
motto of thy order--'FERIATUR LEO'."

"Thou wilt stand the brunt of challenge?" said the Templar.

"Doubt me not," said Conrade. "I would not, indeed, have willingly
met the iron arm of Richard himself, and I shame not to confess that
I rejoice to be free of his encounter; but, from his bastard brother
downward, the man breathes not in his ranks whom I fear to meet."

"It is well you are so confident," continued the Templar; "and, in that
case, the fangs of yonder hound have done more to dissolve this league
of princes than either thy devices or the dagger of the Charegite. Seest
thou how, under a brow studiously overclouded, Philip cannot conceal the
satisfaction which he feels at the prospect of release from the alliance
which sat so heavy on him? Mark how Henry of Champagne smiles to
