say my opponents, the Stoics and Antiocheans, we desire no better senses
than we have." Well you are like the mole, which does not yearn for the
light because it does not know what light is. Of course all the ancients
thought the mole blind. A glance will show the insipidity of the sense
given by Halm's reading. _Quererer cum deo_: would enter into an
altercation with the god. The phrase, like [Greek: loidoresthai tini] as
opposed to [Greek: loidorein tina] implies mutual recrimination, cf. _Pro
Deiotaro_ 9 _querellae cum Deiotaro_. The reading _tam quererer_ for the
_tamen quaereretur_ of the MSS. is due to Manut. _Navem_: Sextus often uses
the same illustration, as in _P.H._ I. 107, _A.M._ VII. 414. _Non tu verum
testem_, etc.: cf. 105. For the om. of _te_ before _habere_, which has
strangely troubled edd. and induced them to alter the text, see n. on I. 6.

Sec.82. _Quid ego_: Bait. has _sed quid_ after Ernesti. _Nave_: so the best
MSS., not _navi_, cf. Madv. _Gram._ 42. _Duodeviginti_: so in 128. Goer.
and Roeper qu. by Halm wished to read _duodetriginta_. The reff. of Goer.
at least do not prove his point that the ancients commonly estimated the
sun at 28 times the size of the earth. _Quasi pedalis_: cf. _D.F._ I. 20
_pedalis fortasse_. For _quasi_ = _circiter_ cf. note on 74. Madv. on
_D.F._ I. 20 quotes Diog. Laert. X. 91, who preserves the very words of
Epicurus, in which however no mention of a foot occurs, also Lucr. V. 590,
who copies Epicurus, and Seneca _Quaest. Nat._ I. 3, 10 (_solem sapientes
viri pedalem esse contenderunt_). Madv. points out from Plut. _De Plac.
Phil._ II. 21, p. 890 E, that Heraclitus asserted the sun to be a foot
wide, he does not however quote Stob. _Phys._ I. 24, 1 [Greek: helion
megethos echein euros podos anthropeiou], which is affirmed to be the
opinion of Heraclitus and Hecataeus. _Ne maiorem quidem_: so the MSS., but
Goer. and Orelli read _nec_ for _ne_, incurring the reprehension of Madv.
_D.F._ p. 814, ed 2. _Nihil aut non multum_: so in _D.F._ V. 59, the
correction of Orelli, therefore, _aut non multum mentiantur aut nihil_, is
rash. _Semel_: see 79. _Qui ne nunc quidem_: sc. _mentiri sensus putat_.
Halm prints _quin_, and is followed by Baiter, neither has observed that
_quin ne ... quidem_ is bad Latin (see _M.D.F._ V. 56). Nor can _quin ne_
go together even without _quidem_, cf. Krebs and Allgayer, _Antibarbarus_
ed. 4 on _quin_.

Sec.83. _In parvo lis sit_: Durand's em. for the _in parvulis sitis_ of the
MSS., which Goer. alone defends. _Quattuor capita_: these were given in 40
by Lucullus, cf. also 77. _Epicurus_: as above in 19, 79 etc.

Sec.84. _Geminum_: cf. 56. _Nota_: cf. 58 and the speech of Lucullus _passim_.
_Ne sit ... potest_: cf. 80 _quasi quaeratur quid sit, non quid videatur.
Si ipse erit_ for _ipse_ apparently = _is ipse_ cf. _M.D.F._ II. 93.

Sec.85. _Quod non est_: = _qu. n. e. id quod esse videtur_. _Sui generis_: cf.
50, 54, 56. _Nullum esse pilum_, etc.: a strong expression of this belief
is found in Seneca _Ep._. 113, 13, qu. R. and P. 380. Note the word
_Stoicum_; Lucullus is of course not Stoic, but Antiochean. _Nihil
interest_: the same opinion is expressed in 40, where see my note. _Visa
res_: Halm writes _res a re_, it is not necessary, however, either in Gk.
or Lat. to express _both_ of two related things when a word is inserted
like _differat_ here, which shows that they _are_ related. Cf. the elliptic
constructions in Gk. with [Greek: homoion, metaxy, mesos], and such words.
_Eodem caelo atque_: a difficult passage. MSS. have _aqua_, an error easy,
as Halm notes, to a scribe who understood _caelum_ to be the heaven, and
not [Greek: glypheion], a graving tool. Faber and other old edd. defend the
MSS. reading, adducing passages to show that sky and water were important
in the making of statues. For _aqua_ Orelli conj. _acu_ = _schraffirnadel_,
C.F. Hermann _caelatura_, which does not seem to be a Ciceronian word.
Halm's _aeque_ introduces a construction with _ceteris omnibus_ which is
not only not Ciceronian, but not Latin at all. I read _atque_, taking
_ceteris omnibus_ to be the abl. neut. "all the other implements." Formerly
I conj. _ascra_, or _atque in_, which last leading would make _omnibus_ =
_om. statuis_. _Alexandros_: Lysippus alone was privileged to make statues
of Alexander, as Apelles alone was allowed to paint the conqueror, cf. _Ad
Fam._ V. 12, 7.

Sec.86. _Anulo_: cf. 54. _Aliqui_: n. on 61. _Gallinarium_: cf. 57. _Adhibes
artem_: cf. 20 _adhibita arte_. _Pictor ... tibicen_: so in 20. _Simul
inflavit_: note _simul_ for _simul atque_, cf. _T.D._ IV. 12. _Nostri
quidem_: i.e. _Romani_. _Admodum_: i.e. _adm. pauci_ cf. _De Leg._ III. 32
_pauci enim atque admodum pauci_. _Praeclara_: evidently a fem. adj.
agreeing with _natura_. Dav. and Ern. made the adj. neuter, and
understanding _sunt_ interpreted "these arguments I am going to urge are
grand, viz. _quanto art_. etc."

Sec.87. _Scilicet_: Germ. "naturlich." _Fabricata sit_: cf. 30, 119, 121 and
N.D. I. 19. _Ne modo_: for _modo ne_, a noticeable use. _Physicis_:
probably neut. _Contra sensus_: he wrote both for and against [Greek:
synetheia]; cf. R. and P. 360 and 368. _Carneadem_: Plut. _Sto. Rep_. 1036
B relates that Carneades in reading the arguments of Chrysippus against the
senses, quoted the address of Andromache to Hector: [Greek: daimonie
phthisei se to son menos]. From Diog. IV. 62 we learn that he thus parodied
the line qu. in n. on 75, [Greek: ei me gar en Chrysippos ouk an en ego].

Sec.88. _Diligentissime_: in 48--53. _Dicebas_: in 52 _imbecillius
adsentiuntur_. _Siccorum_: cf. Cic. _Contra Rullum_ I. 1 _consilia
siccorum_. _Madere_ is common with the meaning "to be drunk," as in Plaut.
_Mostellaria_ I. 4, 6. _Non diceret_: Orelli was induced by Goer. to omit
the verb, with one MS., cf. 15 and I. 13. The omission of a verb in the
subjunctive is, Madv. says on _D.F._ I. 9, impossible; for other ellipses
of the verb see _M.D.F._ V. 63. _Alcmaeo autem_: i.e. Ennius' own Alcmaeon;
cf. 52. _Somnia reri_: the best MSS. have _somniare_. Goer. reads _somnia_,
supplying _non fuisse vera_. I have already remarked on his extraordinary
power of _supplying_. Halm conj. _somnia reprobare_, forgetting that the
verb _reprobare_ belongs to third century Latinity, also _sua visa putare_,
which Bait. adopts. Thinking this too large a departure from the MSS., I
read _reri_, which verb occurred in I. 26, 39. Possibly _putare_, a little
farther on, has got misplaced. _Non id agitur_: these difficulties supply
Sextus with one of his [Greek: tropoi], i.e. [Greek: ho peri tas
peristaseis]; cf. _P.H._ I. 100, also for the treatment of dreams, _ib._ I.
104. _Si modo_, etc.: "if only he dreamed it," i.e. "merely because he
dreamed it." _Aeque ac vigilanti_: = _aeque ac si vigilaret_. Dav. missing
the sense, and pointing out that _when awake_ Ennius did not assent to his
sensations at all, conj. _vigilantis_. Two participles used in very
different ways not unfrequently occur together, see Madv. _Em. Liv._ p.
442. _Ita credit_: MSS. have _illa_, which Dav. altered. Halm would prefer
_credidit_. _Itera dum_, etc.: from the _Iliona_ of Pacuvius; a favourite
quotation with Cic.; see _Ad Att._ XIV. 14, and _T.D._ II. 44.

Sec.89. _Quisquam_: for the use of this pronoun in interrogative sentences cf.
Virg. _Aen._ I. 48 with the FileOutputStreams of Wagner and Conington. _Tam
certa putat_: so Sextus _A.M._ VII. 61 points out that Protagoras must in
accordance with his doctrine [Greek: panton metron anthropos] hold that the
[Greek: memenos] is the [Greek: kriterion ton en maniai phainomenon].
_Video, video te_: evidently from a tragedy whose subject was [Greek: Aias
mainomenos], see Ribbeck _Trag. Lat. rel._ p. 205. Cic. in _De Or._ III.
162 thus continues the quotation, "_oculis postremum lumen radiatum rape_."
So in Soph. _Aiax_ 100 the hero, after killing, as he thinks, the Atridae,
keeps Odysseus alive awhile in order to torture him. _Hercules_: cf. Eur.
_Herc. Fur._ 921--1015. The mad visions of this hero, like those of
Orestes, are often referred to for a similar purpose by Sext., e.g. _A.M._
VII. 405 [Greek: ho goun Herakles maneis kai labon phantasian apo ton idion
paidon hos Eurystheos, ten akolouthon praxin tautei te phantasiai synepsen.
akolouthon de en to tous tou echthrou paidas anelein, hoper kai epoiesen.]
Cf. also _A.M._ VII. 249. _Moveretur_: imperf. for plup. as in 90. _Alcmaeo
tuus_: cf. 52. _Incitato furore_: Dav. reads _incitatus_. Halm qu. from
Wesenberg _Observ. Crit. ad Or. p. Sestio_ p. 51 this explanation, "_cum
furor eius initio remissior paulatim incitatior et vehementior factus
esset_," he also refers to Wopkens _Lect. Tull._ p. 55 ed. Hand. _Incedunt_
etc.: the MSS. have _incede_, which Lamb. corrected. The subject of the
verb is evidently _Furiae_. _Adsunt_: is only given once by MSS., while
Ribbeck repeats it thrice, on Halm's suggestion I have written it twice.
_Caerulea ... angui_: _anguis_ fem is not uncommon in the old poetry. MSS.
here have _igni_. _Crinitus_: [Greek: akersekomes], "never shorn," as
Milton translates it. _Luna innixus_: the separate mention in the next line
of _Diana_, usually identified with the moon, has led edd. to emend this
line. Some old edd. have _lunat_, while Lamb. reads _genu_ for _luna_, cf.
Ov. _Am._ I. 1, 25 (qu. by Goer.) _lunavitque genu sinuosum fortiter
arcum_. Wakefield on Lucr. III. 1013 puts a stop at _auratum_, and goes on
with _Luna innixans_. Taber strangely explains _luna_ as = _arcu ipso
lunato_, Dav. says we ought not to expect the passage to make sense, as it
is the utterance of a maniac. For my part, I do not see why the poet should
not regard _luna_ and _Diana_ as distinct.

Sec.90. _Illa falsa_: sc. _visa_, which governs the two genitives. Goer.
perversely insists on taking _somniantium recordatione ipsorum_ closely
together. _Non enim id quaeritur_: cf. 80 n. Sext. very often uses very
similar language, as in _P.H._ I. 22, qu. in n. on 40. _Tum cum
movebantur_: so Halm for MSS. _tum commovebantur_, the em. is supported by
88.

    Sec.Sec.91--98. Summary: Dialectic cannot lead to stable knowledge, its
    processes are not applicable to a large number of philosophical
    questions (91). You value the art, but remember that it gave rise to
    fallacies like the _sorites_, which you say is faulty (92). If it is
    so, refute it. The plan of Chrysippus to refrain from answering, will
    avail you nothing (93). If you refrain because you _cannot_ answer,
    your knowledge fails you, if you _can_ answer and yet refrain, you are
    unfair (94). The art you admire really undoes itself, as Penelope did
    her web, witness the _Mentiens_, (95). You assent to arguments which
    are identical in form with the _Mentiens_, and yet refuse to assent to
    it Why so? (96) You demand that these sophisms should be made
    exceptions to the rules of Dialectic. You must go to a tribune for that
    exception. I just remind you that Epicurus would not allow the very
    first postulate of your Dialectic (97). In my opinion, and I learned
    Dialectic from Antiochus, the _Mentiens_ and the arguments identical
    with it in form must stand or fall together (98).

Sec.91. _Inventam esse_: cf. 26, 27. _In geometriane_: with this inquiry into
the special function of Dialectic cf. the inquiry about Rhetoric in Plato
_Gorg._ 453 D, 454 C. _Sol quantus sit_: this of course is a problem for
[Greek: physike], not for [Greek: dialektike]. _Quod sit summum bonum_: not
[Greek: dialektike] but [Greek: ethike] must decide this. _Quae
coniunctio_: etc. so Sext. often opposes [Greek: symploke] or [Greek:
synemmenon] to [Greek: diezeugmenon], cf. esp _P.H._ II. 201, and Zeller
109 sq. with footnotes. An instance of a _coniunctio_ (hypothetical
judgment) is "_si lucet, lucet_" below, of a _disiunctio_ (disjunctive
judgment) "_aut vivet cras Hermarchus aut non vivet_". _Ambigue dictum_:
[Greek: amphibolon], on which see _P.H._ II. 256, Diog VII. 62. _Quid
sequatur_: [Greek: to akolouthon], cf. I. 19 n. _Quid repugnet_: cf. I. 19,
n. _De se ipsa_: the _ipsa_, according to Cic.'s usage, is nom. and not
abl. Petrus Valentia (p. 301, ed Orelli) justly remarks that an art is not
to be condemned as useless merely because it is unable to solve every
problem presented to it. He quotes Plato's remarks (in _Rep._ II.) that the
Expert is the man who knows exactly what his art can do and what it cannot.
Very similar arguments to this of Cic. occur in Sext., cf. esp. _P.H._ II.
175 and the words [Greek: eautou estai ekkalyptikon]. For the mode in which
Carneades dealt with Dialectic cf. Zeller 510, 511. The true ground of
attack is that Logic always _assumes_ the truth of phenomena, and cannot
_prove_ it. This was clearly seen by Aristotle alone of the ancients; see
Grote's essay on the Origin of Knowledge, now reprinted in Vol II. of his
_Aristotle_.

Sec.92. _Nata sit_: cf. 28, 59. _Loquendi_: the Stoic [Greek: logike], it must
be remembered, included [Greek: rhetorike]. _Concludendi_: [Greek: tou
symperainein] or [Greek: syllogizesthai]. _Locum_: [Greek: topon] in the
philosophical sense. _Vitiosum_: 49, n. _Num nostra culpa est_: cf. 32.
_Finium_: absolute limits; the fallacy of the _sorites_ and other such
sophisms lies entirely in the treatment of purely _relative_ terms as
though they were _absolute_. _Quatenus_: the same ellipse occurs in
_Orator_ 73. _In acervo tritici_: this is the false _sorites_, which may be
briefly described thus: A asks B whether one grain makes a heap, B answers
"No." A goes on asking whether two, three, four, etc. grains make a heap. B
cannot always reply "No." When he begins to answer "Yes," there will be a
difference of one grain between heap and no heap. One grain therefore
_does_ make a heap. The true _sorites_ or chain inference is still treated
in books on logic, cf. Thomson's _Laws of Thought_, pp 201--203, ed 8.
_Minutatim_: cf. Heindorf's note on [Greek: kata smikron] in _Sophistes_
217 D. _Interrogati_: cf. 104. In 94 we have _interroganti_, which some
edd. read here. _Dives pauper_, etc.: it will be easily seen that the
process of questioning above described can be applied to any relative term
such as these are. For the omission of any connecting particle between the
members of each pair, cf. 29, 125, _T.D._ I. 64, V. 73, 114, Zumpt _Gram._
782. _Quanto addito aut dempto_: after this there is a strange ellipse of
some such words as _id efficiatur, quod interrogatur_. [_Non_] _habemus_: I
bracket _non_ in deference to Halm, Madv. however (_Opusc._ I. 508) treats
it as a superabundance of negation arising from a sort of anacoluthon,
comparing _In Vatin._ 3, _Ad Fam._ XII. 24. The scribes insert and omit
negatives very recklessly, so that the point may remain doubtful.

Sec.93. _Frangite_: in later Gk. generally [Greek: apolyein]. _Erunt ...
cavetis_: this form of the conditional sentence is illustrated in Madv.
_D.F._ III. 70, _Em. Liv._ p. 422, _Gram._ 340, obs. 1. Goer. qu. Terence
_Heaut._ V. 1, 59 _quot incommoda tibi in hac re capies nisi caves_, cf.
also 127, 140 of this book. The present is of course required by the
instantaneous nature of the action. _Chrysippo_: he spent so much time in
trying to solve the sophism that it is called peculiarly his by Persius VI.
80. _inventus, Chrysippe, tui finitor acervi_. The titles of numerous
distinct works of his on the _Sorites_ and _Mentiens_ are given by Diog.
_Tria pauca sint_: cf. the instances in Sext. _A.M._ VII. 418 [Greek: ta
pentekonta oliga estin, ta myria oliga estin], also Diog. VII. 82 [Greek:
hesychazein] the advice is quoted in Sext. _P.H._ II. 253 ([Greek: dein
histasthai kai epechein]), _A.M._ VII. 416 ([Greek: ho sophos stesetai kai
hesychasei]). The same terms seem to have been used by the Cynics, see
Sext. _P.H._ II. 244, III. 66. _Stertas_: imitated by Aug. _Contra Ac._
III. 25 _ter terna novem esse ... vel genere humano stertente verum sit_,
also _ib._ III. 22. _Proficit_: Dav. _proficis_, but Madv. rightly
understands [Greek: to hesychazein] (_Em._ 184), cf. _N.D._ II. 58.
_Ultimum ... respondere_: "to put in as your answer" cf. the use of
_defendere_ with an accus. "to put in as a plea". Kayser suggests _paucorum
quid sit_.

Sec.94. _Ut agitator_: see the amusing letter to Atticus XIII. 21, in which
Cic. discusses different translations for the word [Greek: epechein], and
quotes a line of Lucilius _sustineat currum ut bonu' saepe agitator
equosque_, adding _semperque Carneades_ [Greek: probolen] _pugilis et
retentionem aurigae similem facit_ [Greek: epoche]. Aug. _Contra Ac._
trans. [Greek: epoche] by _refrenatio_ cf. also _Lael._ 63. _Superbus es_:
I have thus corrected the MSS. _responde superbe_; Halm writes _facis
superbe_, Orelli _superbis_, which verb is hardly found in prose. The
phrase _superbe resistere_ in Aug. _Contra Ac._ III. 14 may be a
reminiscence. _Illustribus_: Bait. with some probability adds _in_,
comparing _in decimo_ below, and 107, cf. however Munro on Lucr. I. 420.
_Irretiat_: parallel expressions occur in _T.D._ V. 76, _De Or._ I. 43, _De
Fato_ 7. _Facere non sinis_: Sext. _P.H._ II. 253 points the moral in the
same way. _Augentis nec minuentis_: so Halm for MSS. _augendi nec
minuendi_, which Bait. retains. I cannot believe the phrase _primum
augendi_ to be Latin.

Sec.95. _Tollit ... superiora_: cf. _Hortensius_ fragm. 19 (Orelli) _sed ad
extremum pollicetur prolaturum qui se ipse comest quod efficit
dialecticorum ratio_. _Vestra an nostra_: Bait. after Christ needlessly
writes _nostra an vestra_. [Greek: axioma]: "a judgment expressed in
language"; cf. Zeller 107, who gives the Stoic refinements on this subject.
_Effatum_: Halm gives the spelling _ecfatum_. It is probable that this
spelling was antique in Cic.'s time and only used in connection with
religious and legal formulae as in _De Div._ I. 81, _De Leg._ II. 20, see
Corss. _Ausspr._ I. 155 For the word cf. Sen. _Ep._ 117 _enuntiativum
quiddam de corpore quod alii effatum vocant, alii enuntiatum, alii
edictum_, in _T.D._ I. 14 _pronuntiatum_ is found, in _De Fato_ 26
_pronuntiatio_, in Gellius XVI. 8 (from Varro) _prologium_. _Aut verum esse
aut falsum_: the constant Stoic definition of [Greek: axioma], see Diog.
VII. 65 and other passages in Zeller 107. _Mentiris an verum dicis_: the
_an_ was added by Schutz on a comparison of Gellius XVIII. 10 _cum mentior
et mentiri me dico, mentior an verum dico?_ The sophism is given in a more
formally complete shape in _De Div._ II. 11 where the following words are
added, _dicis autem te mentiri verumque dicis, mentiris igitur_. The
fallacy is thus hit by Petrus Valentia (p. 301, ed Orelli), _quis unquam
dixit "ego mentior" quum hoc ipsum pronuntiatum falsum vellet declarare?_
_Inexplicabilia_: [Greek: apora] in the Greek writers. _Odiosius_: this
adj. has not the strong meaning of the Eng. "hateful," but simply means
"tiresome," "annoying." _Non comprehensa_: as in 99, the opposite of
_comprehendibilia_ III. 1, 41. The past partic. in Cic. often has the same
meaning as an adj. in _-bilis_. Faber points out that in the _Timaeus_ Cic.
translates [Greek: alytos] by _indissolutus_ and _indissolubilis_
indifferently. _Imperceptus_, which one would expect, is found in Ovid.

Sec.96. _Si dicis_: etc. the words in italics are needed, and were given by
Manut. with the exception of _nunc_ which was added by Dav. The idea of
Orelli, that Cic. clipped these trite sophisms as he does verses from the
comic writers is untenable. _In docendo_: _docere_ is not to _expound_ but
to _prove_, cf. n. on 121. _Primum ... modum_: the word _modus_ is
technical in this sense cf. _Top._ 57. The [Greek: protos logos
anapodeiktos] of the Stoic logic ran thus [Greek: ei hemera esti, phos
estin ... alla men hemera estin phos ara estin] (Sext. _P.H._ II. 157, and
other passages qu. Zeller 114). This bears a semblance of inference and is
not so utterly tautological as Cic.'s translation, which merges [Greek:
phos] and [Greek: hemera] into one word, or that of Zeller (114, note).
These arguments are called [Greek: monolemmatoi] (involving only one
premise) in Sext. _P.H._ I. 152, 159, II. 167. _Si dicis te mentiri_, etc.:
it is absurd to assume, as this sophism does, that when a man _truly_
states that he _has_ told a lie, he establishes against himself not merely
that he _has_ told a lie, but also that he _is_ telling a lie at the moment
when he makes the _true_ statement. The root of the sophism lies in the
confusion of past and present time in the one infinitive _mentiri_.
_Eiusdem generis_: the phrase _te mentiri_ had been substituted for _nunc
lucere_. _Chrysippea_: n. on 93. _Conclusioni_: on _facere_ with the dat.
see n. on 27. _Cederet_: some edd. _crederet_, but the word is a trans. of
Gk. [Greek: eikein]; n. on 66. _Conexi_: = [Greek: synemmenon], cf. Zeller
109. This was the proper term for the hypothetical judgment. _Superius_:
the [Greek: synemmenon] consists of two parts, the hypothetical part and
the affirmative--called in Greek [Greek: hegoumenon] and [Greek: legon]; if
one is admitted the other follows of course.

Sec.97. _Excipiantur_: the legal _formula_ of the Romans generally directed
the _iudex_ to condemn the defendant if certain facts were proved, unless
certain other facts were proved; the latter portion went by the name of
_exceptio_. See _Dict. Ant_. _Tribunum ... adeant_: a retort upon Lucullus;
cf. 13. The MSS. have _videant_ or _adeant_; Halm conj. _adhibeant_,
comparing 86 and _Pro Rabirio_ 20. _Contemnit_: the usual trans. "to
despise" for _contemnere_ is too strong; it means, like [Greek: oligorein],
merely to neglect or pass by. _Effabimur_; cf. _effatum_ above.
_Hermarchus_: not _Hermachus_, as most edd.; see _M.D.F._ II. 96.
_Diiunctum_: [Greek: diezeugmenon], for which see Zeller 112.
_Necessarium_: the reason why Epicurus refused to admit this is given in
_De Fato_ 21 _Epicurus veretur ne si hoc concesserit, concedendum sit fato
fieri quaecumque fiant_. The context of that passage should be carefully
read, along with _N.D._ I. 69, 70. Aug. _Contra Ac._ III. 29 lays great
stress on the necessary truth of disjunctive propositions. _Catus_: so
Lamb. for MSS. _cautus_. _Tardum_: _De Div._ II. 103 _Epicurum quem hebetem
et rudem dicere solent Stoici_; cf. also _ib._ II. 116, and the frequent
use of [Greek: bradys] in Sext., e.g. _A.M._ VII. 325. _Cum hoc igitur_:
the word _igitur_, as usual, picks up the broken thread of the sentence.
