
His blood curdled--his hair stood on end.  That awful solitude, what
mysterious and preternatural being could penetrate!  'Who's there?' he
cried, in new alarm; 'what spectre--what dread larva, calls upon the
lost Calenus?'

'Priest,' replied the Thessalian, 'unknown to Arbaces, I have been, by
the permission of the gods, a witness to his perfidy.  If I myself can
escape from these walls, I may save thee.  But let thy voice reach my
ear through this narrow passage, and answer what I ask.'

'Ah, blessed spirit,' said the priest, exultingly, and obeying the
suggestion of Nydia, 'save me, and I will sell the very cups on the
altar to pay thy kindness.'

'I want not thy gold--I want thy secret.  Did I hear aright? Canst thou
save the Athenian Glaucus from the charge against his life?'

'I can--I can!--therefore (may the Furies blast the foul Egyptian!) hath
Arbaces snared me thus, and left me to starve and rot!'

'They accuse the Athenian of murder: canst thou disprove the
accusation?'

'Only free me, and the proudest head of Pompeii is not more safe than
his. I saw the deed done--I saw Arbaces strike the blow; I can convict
the true murderer and acquit the innocent man.  But if I perish, he dies
also.  Dost thou interest thyself for him?  Oh, blessed stranger, in my
heart is the urn which condemns or frees him!'

'And thou wilt give full evidence of what thou knowest?'

'Will!--Oh! were hell at my feet--yes!  Revenge on the false
Egyptian!--revenge!--revenge! revenge!'

As through his ground teeth Calenus shrieked forth those last words,
Nydia felt that in his worst passions was her certainty of his justice
to the Athenian.  Her heart beat: was it to be her proud destiny to
preserve her idolized--her adored?  Enough,' said she, 'the powers that
conducted me hither will carry me through all.  Yes, I feel that I shall
deliver thee. Wait in patience and hope.'

'But be cautious, be prudent, sweet stranger.  Attempt not to appeal to
Arbaces--he is marble.  Seek the praetor--say what thou knowest--obtain
his writ of search; bring soldiers, and smiths of cunning--these locks
are wondrous strong!  Time flies--I may starve--starve! if you are not
quick! Go--go!  Yet stay--it is horrible to be alone!--the air is like a
charnel--and the scorpions--ha! and the pale larvae; oh! stay, stay!'

'Nay,' said Nydia, terrified by the terror of the priest, and anxious to
confer with herself--'nay, for thy sake, I must depart. Take hope for
thy companion--farewell!'

So saying, she glided away, and felt with extended arms along the
pillared space until she had gained the farther end of the hall and the
mouth of the passage that led to the upper air.  But there she paused;
she felt that it would be more safe to wait awhile, until the night was
so far blended with the morning that the whole house would be buried in
sleep, and so that she might quit it unobserved.  She, therefore, once
more laid herself down, and counted the weary moments.  In her sanguine
heart, joy was the predominant emotion.  Glaucus was in deadly
peril--but she should save him!



Chapter XV

ARBACES AND IONE.  NYDIA GAINS THE GARDEN.  WILL SHE ESCAPE AND SAVE THE
ATHENIAN?

WHEN Arbaces had warmed his veins by large draughts of that spiced and
perfumed wine so valued by the luxurious, he felt more than usually
elated and exultant of heart.  There is a pride in triumphant ingenuity,
not less felt, perhaps, though its object be guilty.  Our vain human
nature hugs itself in the consciousness of superior craft and
self-obtained success--afterwards comes the horrible reaction of
remorse.

But remorse was not a feeling which Arbaces was likely ever to
experience for the fate of the base Calenus.  He swept from his
remembrance the thought of the priest's agonies and lingering death: he
felt only that a great danger was passed, and a possible foe silenced;
all left to him now would be to account to the priesthood for the
disappearance of Calenus; and this he imagined it would not be difficult
to do.  Calenus had often been employed by him in various religious
missions to the neighboring cities.  On some such errand he could now
assert that he had been sent, with offerings to the shrines of Isis at
Herculaneum and Neapolis, placatory of the goddess for the recent murder
of her priest Apaecides.  When Calenus had expired, his body might be
thrown, previous to the Egyptian's departure from Pompeii, into the deep
stream of the Sarnus; and when discovered, suspicion would probably fall
upon the Nazarene atheists, as an act of revenge for the death of
Olinthus at the arena. After rapidly running over these plans for
screening himself, Arbaces dismissed at once from his mind all
recollection of the wretched priest; and, animated by the success which
had lately crowned all his schemes, he surrendered his thoughts to Ione.
The last time he had seen her, she had driven him from her presence by a
reproachful and bitter scorn, which his arrogant nature was unable to
endure.  He now felt emboldened once more to renew that interview; for
his passion for her was like similar feelings in other men--it made him
restless for her presence, even though in that presence he was
exasperated and humbled.  From delicacy to her grief he laid not aside
his dark and unfestive robes, but, renewing the perfumes on his raven
locks, and arranging his tunic in its most becoming folds, he sought the
chamber of the Neapolitan.  Accosting the slave in attendance without,
he inquired if Ione had yet retired to rest; and learning that she was
still up, and unusually quiet and composed, he ventured into her
presence.  He found his beautiful ward sitting before a small table, and
leaning her face upon both her hands in the attitude of thought.  Yet
the expression of the face itself possessed not its wonted bright and
Psyche-like expression of sweet intelligence; the lips were apart--the
eye vacant and unheeding--and the long dark hair, falling neglected and
disheveled upon her neck, gave by the contrast additional paleness to a
cheek which had already lost the roundness of its contour.

Arbaces gazed upon her a moment ere he advanced.  She, too, lifted up
her eyes; and when she saw who was the intruder, shut them with an
expression of pain, but did not stir.

'Ah!' said Arbaces in a low and earnest tone as he respectfully, nay,
humbly, advanced and seated himself at a little distance from the
table--'Ah! that my death could remove thy hatred, then would I gladly
die! Thou wrongest me, Ione; but I will bear the wrong without a murmur,
only let me see thee sometimes.  Chide, reproach, scorn me, if thou
wilt--I will teach myself to bear it.  And is not even thy bitterest
tone sweeter to me than the music of the most artful lute? In thy
silence the world seems to stand still--a stagnation curdles up the
veins of the earth--there is no earth, no life, without the light of thy
countenance and the melody of thy voice.'

'Give me back my brother and my betrothed,' said Ione, in a calm and
imploring tone, and a few large tears rolled unheeded down her cheeks.

'Would that I could restore the one and save the other!' returned
Arbaces, with apparent emotion.  'Yes; to make thee happy I would
renounce my ill-fated love, and gladly join thy hand to the Athenian's.
Perhaps he will yet come unscathed from his trial (Arbaces had prevented
her learning that the trial had already commenced); if so, thou art free
to judge or condemn him thyself.  And think not, O Ione, that I would
follow thee longer with a prayer of love.  I know it is in vain.  Suffer
me only to weep--to mourn with thee.  Forgive a violence deeply
repented, and that shall offend no more.  Let me be to thee only what I
once was--a friend, a father, a Protector.  Ah, Ione! spare me and
forgive.'

'I forgive thee.  Save but Glaucus, and I will renounce him.  O mighty
Arbaces! thou art powerful in evil or in good: save the Athenian, and
the poor Ione will never see him more.' As she spoke, she rose with weak
and trembling limbs, and falling at his feet, she clasped his knees:
'Oh! if thou really lovest me--if thou art human--remember my father's
ashes, remember my childhood, think of all the hours we passed happily
together, and save my Glaucus!'

Strange convulsions shook the frame of the Egyptian; his features worked
fearfully--he turned his face aside, and said, in a hollow voice, 'If I
could save him, even now, I would; but the Roman law is stern and sharp.
Yet if I could succeed--if I could rescue and set him free--wouldst thou
be mine--my bride?'

'Thine?' repeated Ione, rising: 'thine!--thy bride?  My brother's blood
is unavenged: who slew him?  O Nemesis, can I even sell, for the life of
Glaucus, thy solemn trust?  Arbaces--thine?  Never.'

'Ione, Ione!' cried Arbaces, passionately; 'why these mysterious
words?--why dost thou couple my name with the thought of thy brother's
death?'

'My dreams couple it--and dreams are from the gods.'

'Vain fantasies all!  Is it for a dream that thou wouldst wrong the
innocent, and hazard thy sole chance of saving thy lover's life?'

'Hear me!' said Ione, speaking firmly, and with a deliberate and solemn
voice: 'If Glaucus be saved by thee, I will never be borne to his home a
bride.  But I cannot master the horror of other rites: I cannot wed with
thee.  Interrupt me not; but mark me, Arbaces!--if Glaucus die, on that
same day I baffle thine arts, and leave to thy love only my dust!
Yes--thou mayst put the knife and the poison from my reach--thou mayst
imprison--thou mayst chain me, but the brave soul resolved to escape is
never without means.  These hands, naked and unarmed though they be,
shall tear away the bonds of life.  Fetter them, and these lips shall
firmly refuse the air. Thou art learned--thou hast read how women have
died rather than meet dishonour.  If Glaucus perish, I will not
unworthily linger behind him.  By all the gods of the heaven, and the
ocean, and the earth, I devote myself to death!  I have said!'

High, proud, dilating in her stature, like one inspired, the air and
voice of Ione struck an awe into the breast of her listener.

'Brave heart!' said he, after a short pause; 'thou art indeed worthy to
be mine.  Oh! that I should have dreamt of such a partner in my lofty
destinies, and never found it but in thee! Ione,' he continued rapidly,
'dost thou not see that we are born for each other? Canst thou not
recognize something kindred to thine own energy--thine own courage--in
this high and self-dependent soul?  We were formed to unite our
sympathies--formed to breathe a new spirit into this hackneyed and gross
world--formed for the mighty ends which my soul, sweeping down the gloom
of time, foresees with a prophet's vision.  With a resolution equal to
thine own, I defy thy threats of an inglorious suicide.  I hail thee as
my own!  Queen of climes undarkened by the eagle's wing, unravaged by
his beak, I bow before thee in homage and in awe--but I claim thee in
worship and in love! Together will we cross the ocean--together will we
found our realm; and far distant ages shall acknowledge the long race of
kings born from the marriage-bed of Arbaces and Ione!'

'Thou ravest!  These mystic declamations are suited rather to some
palsied crone selling charms in the market-place than to the wise
Arbaces.  Thou hast heard my resolution--it is fixed as the Fates
themselves.  Orcus has heard my vow, and it is written in the book of
the unforgetful Hades. Atone, then, O Arbaces!--atone the past: convert
hatred into regard--vengeance into gratitude; preserve one who shall
never be thy rival. These are acts suited to thy original nature, which
gives forth sparks of something high and noble.  They weigh in the
scales of the Kings of Death: they turn the balance on that day when the
disembodied soul stands shivering and dismayed between Tartarus and
Elysium; they gladden the heart in life, better and longer than the
reward of a momentary passion.  Oh, Arbaces! hear me, and be swayed!'

'Enough, Ione.  All that I can do for Glaucus shall be done; but blame
me not if I fail.  Inquire of my foes, even, if I have not sought, if I
do not seek, to turn aside the sentence from his head; and judge me
accordingly. Sleep then, Ione.  Night wanes; I leave thee to rest--and
mayst thou have kinder dreams of one who has no existence but in thine.'

Without waiting a reply, Arbaces hastily withdrew; afraid, perhaps, to
trust himself further to the passionate prayer of Ione, which racked him
with jealousy, even while it touched him to compassion.  But compassion
itself came too late.  Had Ione even pledged him her hand as his reward,
he could not now--his evidence given--the populace excited--have saved
the Athenian. Still made sanguine by his very energy of mind, he threw
himself on the chances of the future, and believed he should yet triumph
over the woman that had so entangled his passions.

As his attendants assisted to unrobe him for the night, the thought of
Nydia flashed across him.  He felt it was necessary that Ione should
never learn of her lover's frenzy, lest it might excuse his imputed
crime; and it was possible that her attendants might inform her that
Nydia was under his roof, and she might desire to see her.  As this idea
crossed him, he turned to one of his freedmen:

'Go, Callias,' said he, 'forthwith to Sosia, and tell him, that on no
pretence is he to suffer the blind slave Nydia out of her chamber.  But,
stay--first seek those in attendance upon my ward, and caution them not
to inform her that the blind girl is under my roof Go--quick!'

The freedman hastened to obey.  After having discharged his commission
with respect to Ione's attendants, he sought the worthy Sosia.  He found
him not in the little cell which was apportioned for his cubiculum; he
called his name aloud, and from Nydia's chamber, close at hand, he heard
the voice of Sosia reply:

'Oh, Callias, is it you that I hear?--the gods be praised!' Open the
door, I pray you!'

Callias withdrew the bolt, and the rueful face of Sosia hastily
protruded itself.

'What!--in the chamber with that young girl, Sosia! Proh pudor! Are
there not fruits ripe enough on the wall, but that thou must tamper with
such green...'

'Name not the little witch!' interrupted Sosia, impatiently; 'she will
be my ruin!' And he forthwith imparted to Callias the history of the Air
Demon, and the escape of the Thessalian.

'Hang thyself, then, unhappy Sosia!  I am just charged from Arbaces with
a message to thee; on no account art thou to suffer her, even for a
moment, from that chamber!'

'Me miserum!' exclaimed the slave.  'What can I do!--by this time she
may have visited half Pompeii.  But tomorrow I will undertake to catch
her in her old haunts.  Keep but my counsel, my dear Callias.'

'I will do all that friendship can, consistent with my own safety. But
are you sure she has left the house?--she may be hiding here yet.'

'How is that possible?  She could easily have gained the garden; and the
door, as I told thee, was open.'

'Nay, not so; for, at that very hour thou specifiest, Arbaces was in the
garden with the priest Calenus.  I went there in search of some herbs
for my master's bath to-morrow.  I saw the table set out; but the gate I
am sure was shut: depend upon it, that Calenus entered by the garden,
and naturally closed the door after him.'

'But it was not locked.'

'Yes; for I myself, angry at a negligence which might expose the bronzes
in the peristyle to the mercy of any robber, turned the key, took it
away, and--as I did not see the proper slave to whom to give it, or I
should have rated him finely--here it actually is, still in my girdle.'

'Oh, merciful Bacchus!  I did not pray to thee in vain, after all.  Let
us not lose a moment!  Let us to the garden instantly--she may yet be
there!'

The good-natured Callias consented to assist the slave; and after vainly
searching the chambers at hand, and the recesses of the peristyle, they
entered the garden.

It was about this time that Nydia had resolved to quit her hiding-place,
and venture forth on her way.  Lightly, tremulously holding her breath,
which ever and anon broke forth in quick convulsive gasps--now gliding
by the flower--wreathed columns that bordered the peristyle--now
darkening the still moonshine that fell over its tessellated centre--now
ascending the terrace of the garden--now gliding amidst the gloomy and
breathless trees, she gained the fatal door--to find it locked!  We have
all seen that expression of pain, of uncertainty, of fear, which a
sudden disappointment of touch, if I may use the expression, casts over
the face of the blind. But what words can paint the intolerable woe, the
sinking of the whole heart, which was now visible on the features of the
Thessalian? Again and again her small, quivering hands wandered to and
fro the inexorable door. Poor thing that thou wert! in vain had been all
thy noble courage, thy innocent craft, thy doublings to escape the hound
and huntsmen!  Within but a few yards from thee, laughing at thy
endeavors--thy despair--knowing thou wert now their own, and watching
with cruel patience their own moment to seize their prey--thou art saved
from seeing thy pursuers!

'Hush, Callias!--let her go on.  Let us see what she will do when she
has convinced herself that the door is honest.'

'Look! she raises her face to the heavens--she mutters--she sinks down
despondent!  No!  by Pollux, she has some new scheme!  She will not
resign herself!  By Jupiter, a tough spirit!  See, she springs up--she
retraces her steps--she thinks of some other chance!--I advise thee,
Sosia, to delay no longer: seize her ere she quit the garden--now!'

'Ah! runaway!  I have thee--eh?' said Sosia, seizing upon the unhappy
Nydia. As a hare's last human cry in the fangs of the dogs--as the sharp
voice of terror uttered by a sleep-walker suddenly awakened--broke the
shriek of the blind girl, when she felt the abrupt gripe of her gaoler.
It was a shriek of such utter agony, such entire despair, that it might
have rung hauntingly in your ears for ever.  She felt as if the last
plank of the sinking Glaucus were torn from his clasp!  It had been a
suspense of life and death; and death had now won the game.

'Gods! that cry will alarm the house!  Arbaces sleeps full lightly. Gag
her!' cried Callias.

'Ah! here is the very napkin with which the young witch conjured away my
reason!  Come, that's right; now thou art dumb as well as blind.'

And, catching the light weight in his arms, Sosia soon gained the house,
and reached the chamber from which Nydia had escaped. There, removing
the gag, he left her to a solitude so racked and terrible, that out of
Hades its anguish could scarcely be exceeded.



Chapter XVI

THE SORROW OF BOON COMPANIONS FOR OUR AFFLICTIONS.  THE DUNGEON AND ITS
VICTIMS.

IT was now late on the third and last day of the trial of Glaucus and
Olinthus.  A few hours after the court had broken up and judgment been
given, a small party of the fashionable youth at Pompeii were assembled
round the fastidious board of Lepidus.

'So Glaucus denies his crime to the last?' said Clodius.

'Yes; but the testimony of Arbaces was convincing; he saw the blow
given,' answered Lepidus.

'What could have been the cause?'

'Why, the priest was a gloomy and sullen fellow.  He probably rated
Glaucus soundly about his gay life and gaming habits, and ultimately
swore he would not consent to his marriage with Ione.  High words arose;
Glaucus seems to have been full of the passionate god, and struck in
sudden exasperation. The excitement of wine, the desperation of abrupt
remorse, brought on the delirium under which he suffered for some days;
and I can readily imagine, poor fellow! that, yet confused by that
delirium, he is even now unconscious of the crime he committed!  Such,
at least, is the shrewd conjecture of Arbaces, who seems to have been
most kind and forbearing in his testimony.'

'Yes; he has made himself generally popular by it.  But, in
consideration of these extenuating circumstances, the senate should have
relaxed the sentence.'

'And they would have done so, but for the people; but they were
outrageous. The priest had spared no pains to excite them; and they
imagined--the ferocious brutes!--because Glaucus was a rich man and a
gentleman, that he was likely to escape; and therefore they were
inveterate against him, and doubly resolved upon his sentence.  It
seems, by some accident or other, that he was never formally enrolled as
a Roman citizen; and thus the senate is deprived of the power to resist
the people, though, after all, there was but a majority of three against
him.  Ho! the Chian!'

'He looks sadly altered; but how composed and fearless!'

'Ay, we shall see if his firmness will last over to-morrow.' But what
merit in courage, when that atheistical hound, Olinthus, manifested the
same?'

'The blasphemer!  Yes,' said Lepidus, with pious wrath, 'no wonder that
one of the decurions was, but two days ago, struck dead by lightning in
a serene sky.' The gods feel vengeance against Pompeii while the vile
desecrator is alive within its walls.'

'Yet so lenient was the senate, that had he but expressed his penitence,
and scattered a few grains of incense on the altar of Cybele, he would
have been let off.  I doubt whether these Nazarenes, had they the state
religion, would be as tolerant to us, supposing we had kicked down the
image of their Deity, blasphemed their rites, and denied their faith.'

'They give Glaucus one chance, in consideration of the circumstances;
they allow him, against the lion, the use of the same stilus wherewith
he smote the priest.'

'Hast thou seen the lion? hast thou looked at his teeth and fangs, and
wilt thou call that a chance?  Why, sword and buckler would be mere reed
and papyrus against the rush of the mighty beast!  No, I think the true
mercy has been, not to leave him long in suspense; and it was therefore
fortunate for him that our benign laws are slow to pronounce, but swift
to execute; and that the games of the amphitheatre had been, by a sort
of providence, so long since fixed for to-morrow.  He who awaits death,
dies twice.'

'As for the Atheist, said Clodius, 'he is to cope the grim tiger
naked-handed.  Well, these combats are past betting on.  Who will take
the odds?' A peal of laughter announced the ridicule of the question.

'Poor Clodius!' said the host; I to lose a friend is something; but to
find no one to bet on the chance of his escape is a worse misfortune to
thee.'

'Why, it is provoking; it would have been some consolation to him and to
me to think he was useful to the last.'

'The people,' said the grave Pansa, 'are all delighted with the result.
They were so much afraid the sports at the amphitheatre would go off
without a criminal for the beasts; and now, to get two such criminals is
indeed a joy for the poor fellows!  They work hard; they ought to have
some amusement.'

'There speaks the popular Pansa, who never moves without a string of
clients as long as an Indian triumph.  He is always prating about the
people.  Gods! he will end by being a Gracchus!'

'Certainly I am no insolent patrician,' said Pansa, with a generous air.

'Well,' observed Lepidus, it would have been assuredly dangerous to have
been merciful at the eve of a beast-fight.  If ever I, though a Roman
bred and born, come to be tried, pray Jupiter there may be either no
beasts in the vivaria, or plenty of criminals in the gaol.'

'And pray,' said one of the party, 'what has become of the poor girl
whom Glaucus was to have married?  A widow without being a bride--that
is hard!'

'Oh,' returned Clodius, 'she is safe under the protection of her
guardian, Arbaces.  It was natural she should go to him when she had
lost both lover and brother.'

'By sweet Venus, Glaucus was fortunate among the women.  They say the
rich Julia was in love with him.'

'A mere fable, my friend,' said Clodius, coxcombically; 'I was with her
to-day.  If any feeling of the sort she ever conceived, I flatter myself
that I have consoled her.'

'Hush, gentlemen!' said Pansa; 'do you not know that Clodius is employed
at the house of Diomed in blowing hard at the torch?  It begins to burn,
and will soon shine bright on the shrine of Hymen.'

'Is it so?' said Lepidus.  'What! Clodius become a married man?--Fie!'

'Never fear,' answered Clodius; 'old Diomed is delighted at the notion
of marrying his daughter to a nobleman, and will come down largely with
the sesterces.  You will see that I shall not lock them up in the
atrium.  It will be a white day for his jolly friends, when Clodius
marries an heiress.'

'Say you so?' cried Lepidus; 'come, then, a full cup to the health of
the fair Julia!'

While such was the conversation--one not discordant to the tone of mind
common among the dissipated of that day, and which might perhaps, a
century ago, have found an echo in the looser circles of Paris--while
such, I say, was the conversation in the gaudy triclinium of Lepidus,
far different the scene which scowled before the young Athenian.

After his condemnation, Glaucus was admitted no more to the gentle
guardianship of Sallust, the only friend of his distress.  He was led
along the forum till the guards stopped at a small door by the side of
the temple of Jupiter.  You may see the place still.  The door opened in
the centre in a somewhat singular fashion, revolving round on its
hinges, as it were, like a modern turnstile, so as only to leave half
the threshold open at the same time.  Through this narrow aperture they
thrust the prisoner, placed before him a loaf and a pitcher of water,
and left him to darkness, and, as he thought, to solitude.  So sudden
had been that revolution of fortune which had prostrated him from the
palmy height of youthful pleasure and successful love to the lowest
abyss of ignominy, and the horror of a most bloody death, that he could
scarcely convince himself that he was not held in the meshes of some
fearful dream.  His elastic and glorious frame had triumphed over a
potion, the greater part of which he had fortunately not drained.  He
had recovered sense and consciousness, but still a dim and misty
depression clung to his nerves and darkened his mind.  His natural
courage, and the Greek nobility of pride, enabled him to vanquish all
unbecoming apprehension, and, in the judgment-court, to face his awful
lot with a steady mien and unquailing eye.  But the consciousness of
innocence scarcely sufficed to support him when the gaze of men no
longer excited his haughty valor, and he was left to loneliness and
silence.  He felt the damps of the dungeon sink chillingly into his
enfeebled frame.  He--the fastidious, the luxurious, the refined--he who
had hitherto braved no hardship and known no sorrow.  Beautiful bird
that he was! why had he left his far and sunny clime--the olive-groves
of his native hills--the music of immemorial streams?  Why had he
wantoned on his glittering plumage amidst these harsh and ungenial
strangers, dazzling the eyes with his gorgeous hues, charming the ear
with his blithesome song--thus suddenly to be arrested--caged in
darkness--a victim and a prey--his gay flights for ever over--his hymns
of gladness for ever stilled!  The poor Athenian! his very faults the
exuberance of a gentle and joyous nature, how little had his past career
fitted him for the trials he was destined to undergo!  The hoots of the
mob, amidst whose plaudits he had so often guided his graceful car and
bounding steeds, still rang gratingly in his ear.  The cold and stony
faces of former friends (the co-mates of merry revels) still rose before
his eye.  None now were by to soothe, to sustain, the admired, the
adulated stranger.  These walls opened but on the dread arena of a
violent and shameful death.  And Ione! of her, too, he had heard naught;
no encouraging word, no pitying message; she, too, had forsaken him; she
believed him guilty--and of what crime?--the murder of a brother!  He
ground his teeth--he groaned aloud--and ever and anon a sharp fear shot
across him.  In that fell and fierce delirium which had so unaccountably
seized his soul, which had so ravaged the disordered brain, might he
not, indeed, unknowing to himself, have committed the crime of which he
was accused?  Yet, as the thought flashed upon him, it was as suddenly
checked; for, amidst all the darkness of the past, he thought distinctly
to recall the dim grove of Cybele, the upward face of the pale dead, the
pause that he had made beside the corpse, and the sudden shock that
felled him to the earth.  He felt convinced of his innocence; and yet
who, to the latest time, long after his mangled remains were mingled
with the elements, would believe him guiltless, or uphold his fame?  As
he recalled his interview with Arbaces, and the causes of revenge which
had been excited in the heart of that dark and fearful man, he could not
but believe that he was the victim of some deep-laid and mysterious
snare--the clue and train of which he was lost in attempting to
discover: and Ione--Arbaces loved her--might his rival's success be
founded upon his ruin?  That thought cut him more deeply than all; and
his noble heart was more stung by jealousy than appalled by fear.  Again
he groaned aloud.

A voice from the recess of the darkness answered that burst of anguish.
'Who (it said) is my companion in this awful hour?  Athenian Glaucus, it
is thou?'

'So, indeed, they called me in mine hour of fortune: they may have other
names for me now.  And thy name, stranger?'

'Is Olinthus, thy co-mate in the prison as the trial.'

'What! he whom they call the Atheist?  Is it the injustice of men that
hath taught thee to deny the providence of the gods?'

'Alas!' answered Olinthus: 'thou, not I, art the true Atheist, for thou
deniest the sole true God--the Unknown One--to whom thy Athenian fathers
erected an altar.  It is in this hour that I know my God.  He is with me
in the dungeon; His smile penetrates the darkness; on the eve of death
my heart whispers immortality, and earth recedes from me but to bring
the weary soul nearer unto heaven.'

'Tell me,' said Glaucus, abruptly, 'did I not hear thy name coupled with
that of Apaecides in my trial?  Dost thou believe me guilty?'

'God alone reads the heart! but my suspicion rested not upon thee.'

'On whom then?'

'Thy accuser, Arbaces.'

'Ha! thou cheerest me: and wherefore?'

'Because I know the man's evil breast, and he had cause to fear him who
is now dead.'

With that, Olinthus proceeded to inform Glaucus of those details which
the reader already knows, the conversion of Apaecides, the plan they had
proposed for the detection of the impostures of the Egyptian upon the
youthful weakness of the proselyte.  'Therefore,' concluded Olinthus,
