of April, set sail from Brest, intending to make a complete circuit of
the British Isles. Entering the Irish Sea, he spread terror along its
shores, where his coming was like a bolt from the blue, engaged and
captured the British ship-of-war Drake, took a number of prizes, and
sailed into Brest again after an absence of twenty-eight days.

It has been the fashion in some quarters to call Jones a pirate, but it
is difficult to see any argument for such a characterization of him. He
sailed under the flag of the United States, held a commission from the
United States, and attacked an enemy with whom the United States was at
war. There is no hint of piracy about that; but Jones came to be a sort
of bogeyman to the coast towns of the British Isles, who never knew when
to expect an attack from him, and no name was too hard for their
frightened inhabitants to apply to him.

But it was some time before Jones was able to strike another blow. He
realized that he must have a more effective squadron for his second
cruise, and more than a year was spent in getting it together. Finally,
on August 14, 1779, he got to sea again with a squadron of four
vessels--not a very effective one, but the best that could be had. The
flagship was an unwieldy old Indiaman which Jones had named the Bon
Homme Richard, in honor of his good friend, Benjamin Franklin, whose
Poor Richard was almost as famous in France as in America. The other
three ships were commanded by Frenchmen, and all the crews were of the
most motley description. On September 23, the squadron sighted a great
fleet of English merchantmen, under convoy of the Serapis, a powerful
frigate mounting forty-four guns, and the Countess of Scarborough,
mounting twenty-eight. Jones signalled his squadron to give chase and
himself closed with the Serapis.

Captain Pearson, of the Serapis, was very willing for the contest, since
his ship was greatly superior to Jones's old boat in fighting
qualities; but Jones succeeded in depriving the Serapis of some of this
advantage by running his vessel into her and lashing fast. So close did
they lie that their yardarms interlocked, and their rigging was soon so
fouled that Jones could not have got away, even had he wished to do so.
For three hours the ships lay there, side by side, pouring broadsides
into each other; their decks were soon covered with dead and wounded;
two of the Richard's guns burst and her main battery was silenced, but
Jones kept fighting on, for a time with so few guns that the captain of
the Serapis thought he had surrendered.

"Have you struck?" he shouted, through his trumpet.

"No," Jones shouted back, "I have not yet begun to fight!"

The Serapis was on fire and the Richard was sinking, but at this
juncture, one of the men of the Richard crept out along a yardarm, and
dropped a hand grenade down a hatchway of the Serapis. It wrought
fearful havoc, and Pearson struck his flag.

It was time, for the Richard was on fire in two places, all her
main-deck guns were dismounted, and she was sinking fast. She was kept
afloat with great difficulty until morning, giving Jones time to place
his wounded on the Serapis, and to save such of her fittings as could be
removed. The Pallas, another of Jones's ships, had captured the
Scarborough, and with these prizes, Jones put back to France. He was
welcomed with great enthusiasm there, received the thanks of the
Congress, and was designated to command the ship-of-the-line then
building. But he fought no more battles under the Stars and Stripes.
After a brief service with Russia, he returned to Paris, broken in
health, and died there in 1792. His body was only recently brought to
this country and interred with national honors at Annapolis.

We have said that there was only one other naval commander of the
Revolution whose name shines with any lustre to-day--Nicholas Biddle.
His career was a brief and brilliant one. Born in Philadelphia, he had
gone to sea at the age of thirteen, was cast away on a desert island,
was rescued, and enlisted in the English navy, but returned to America
as soon as revolution threatened. He was given command of a little brig
called the Andrea Doria, took a number of prizes, and made so good a
record that in 1776 he was appointed to command the new frigate,
Randolph. Using Charleston, South Carolina, as his base, he captured
four prizes within a few days, but on his second cruise, fell in with a
British sixty-four, the Yarmouth. After a sharp action of twenty
minutes, fire got into the magazine of the Randolph, in some way, and
she blew up, only four of her crew of 310 escaping. The blow was a heavy
one to the American navy, for Biddle was its best commander, next to
Jones, and the Randolph was its best ship. Luckily the French alliance
placed the French fleet at the disposal of the colonies--or Cornwallis
would never have been captured at Yorktown.

It is one of our polite fictions that the United States has always been
victorious in war; but, as a matter of fact, we were not victorious in
the second war with England, and, when the treaty of peace came to be
signed, abandoned practically all the contentions which war had been
declared to maintain. On land, the war was, for the most part, a series
of costly blunders, beginning with the surrender of Detroit, and closing
with the sack of Washington, and had England had her hands free of
Napoleon, the result for us might have been very serious. The only
considerable and decisive victory won by American arms was that of
Andrew Jackson at New Orleans--a battle fought after the treaty of peace
had been signed.

But on the ocean there was a different story--a series of brilliant
victories which, while they did not seriously cripple the great English
navy, caused Canning to declare in Parliament that "the sacred spell of
the invincibility of the British navy is broken." The heaviest blow was
struck to British commerce, no less than sixteen hundred English
merchantmen falling victims to privateers and ships-of-war.

The group of men who commanded the American vessels was a most
remarkable one, and their fighting qualities were worthy in every way of
John Paul Jones. First blood was drawn by David Porter, illustrious
scion of a family which gave five generations to brilliant service in
the navy. On August 13, 1812, Porter, with the Essex, engaged in a
sharp battle with the British ship Alert, which, after an action of
eight minutes, surrendered in a sinking condition. He had seen hard
service before that, had been twice impressed by British vessels and
twice escaped, had fought French and pirates, and spent some time in a
prison in Tripoli.

After his capture of the Alert, he went on a cruise in the Pacific,
destroying the English whale fisheries there, capturing booty valued at
two and a half million dollars, and taking four hundred prisoners. So
great was the damage he inflicted, that a British squadron was fitted
out and sent to the Pacific to capture him, found him in a partially
disabled condition in the harbor of Valparaiso, and, disregarding the
neutrality of the port, sailed in and attacked him. The engagement
lasted two hours and a half, the Essex finally surrendering when reduced
to a helpless wreck. On the Essex at the time was a midshipman aged
twelve years, who got his first taste of fighting there, and whose name
was destined to become, after that of Paul Jones, the most famous in
American naval history--David Glasgow Farragut.

Less than a week after Porter's victory over the Alert, another and much
more important one was won by Captain Isaac Hull in the frigate
Constitution--"Old Ironsides"--the most famous ship-of-war the navy has
ever possessed. Isaac Hull was a nephew of General William Hull, who, on
August 16, 1812, surrendered Detroit and his entire army to the British
without striking a blow. Three days later, Isaac Hull, having sailed
from Boston without orders, in his anxiety to meet the enemy and for
fear the command of the Constitution would be given to some one else--a
breach of discipline for which he would probably have been
court-martialled and shot, had the cruise ended disastrously--fell in
with the powerful British frigate Guerriere. Inscribed across the
Guerriere's mainsail in huge red letters were the words:

    All who meet me have a care,
    I am England's Guerriere.

She was a powerful vessel, but neither the vessel nor the menace
frightened Hull, and he sailed straight for her, holding his fire until
he was within fifty yards, when he let fly a broadside and then another,
which sent two of her masts by the board, and the third soon followed,
leaving her unmanageable. Within a very few minutes, under Hull's raking
fire, she was reduced to a "perfect wreck"--so perfect, in fact, that
she had to be blown up and sunk, as there was no chance of getting her
back to port. The Constitution was practically uninjured, and Hull
sailed back to Boston, with his ship crowded with British prisoners. He
was welcomed with the wildest enthusiasm, banquets were given in his
honor, swords voted him by state legislatures, New York ordered a
portrait painted of him, and Congress gave him a gold medal. The War
Department discreetly permitted his disobedience of orders to drop out
of sight.

Hull's victory was not the result of accident, but of long and careful
training. He had begun his sea career in the merchant service at the age
of fourteen, was a captain at the age of twenty, and entered the navy in
1798. He soon gained a high reputation for seamanship, and his genius
for handling a ship under all conditions was one of the most important
factors in his success. He saved his ship on one occasion, when she was
becalmed and practically surrounded by a powerful British fleet, by
"kedging"--in other words, sending a row-boat out with an anchor, which
was dropped as far ahead as the boat could take it, and the ship pulled
up to it by means of the windlass. As soon as the British saw him doing
this, they tried it too, but Hull managed to get away from them by
almost superhuman exertions. He served in the navy for many years after
his memorable victory over the Guerriere, but never achieved another so
notable.

The second capture of a British frigate in the war of 1812 was made by
Stephen Decatur, who had distinguished himself years before by an
exploit which Lord Nelson called "the most daring act of the age."
Decatur, who possessed in unusual degree the dash and brilliance so
valuable in a naval commander, came naturally by his love of the sea,
for his grandfather had been an officer in the French navy, and his
father was a captain in the navy of the United States.

Entering the service at the age of eighteen, his first cruise was in the
frigate, United States, which he was afterwards to command. He rose
steadily in the service and got his first command six years later, being
given the sixteen-gun brig Argus, and sent with Commodore Preble to
assist in subduing the Barbary corsairs.

It is difficult to-day to realize that there was a time when the United
States paid tribute to anybody, more especially to a power so
insignificant as the Barbary States. Yet such was the fact. Lying along
the north coast of Africa were the half-civilized states of Morocco,
Tunis, Tripoli, and Algiers, and most of their income was from piracy.
All merchantmen were their prey; they divided the loot and sold the
crews into slavery. Many nations, to secure immunity from these
outrages, paid a stated sum yearly to these powers, and the United
States was one of them.

Why the nations did not join together and wipe the pirates out of
existence is difficult to understand, but so it was. On one occasion,
Congress actually revoked an order for some new ships for the navy, and
used the appropriation to buy off the Barbary powers. The fund was known
as the "Mediterranean Fund," and was intrusted to the secretary of state
to expend as might be necessary. But after a while, the Barbary powers
became so outrageous in their demands, that it occurred to the State
Department that there might be another way of dealing with them, and a
squadron under Commodore Preble was sent to the Mediterranean for the
purpose.

Shortly before he reached there, the U.S. frigate Philadelphia,
commanded by Captain Bainbridge, had gone upon a reef just outside the
harbor of Tripoli and had been surrounded and captured, with all her
crew, by the Tripolitan gunboats. The Tripolitans got her off the rocks,
towed her into the harbor, and anchored her close under the guns of
their forts. They also strengthened her batteries, and prepared her for
a cruise, which could not but have been disastrous to our shipping. It
was evident that she must be destroyed before she got out of the harbor,
and Stephen Decatur volunteered to lead a party into the harbor on this
desperate mission. Commodore Preble hesitated to accept Decatur's offer,
for he knew how greatly against success the odds were, but finally, in
January, 1804, he told him to go ahead.

A small vessel known as a ketch had recently been captured from the
Tripolitans, and Decatur selected this in which to make the venture. He
took seventy men from his own vessel, and, on the night of February 15,
sailed boldly into the harbor of Tripoli. Let us pause for a minute to
consider the odds against him. First there was the Philadelphia with her
forty guns double-shotted and ready to fire; half a gunshot away was the
Bashaw's castle, the mole and crown batteries, while within range were
ten other batteries, mounting, all told, a hundred and fifteen guns.
Between the Philadelphia and the shore lay a number of Tripolitan
cruisers, galleys and gunboats. Into this hornet's nest, Decatur steered
his little vessel of sixty tons, carrying four small guns, and having a
crew of only seventy men.

The Tripolitans saw the vessel entering the harbor, but supposed it to
be one of their own until it was alongside the Philadelphia. Then there
was a cry of "Americanos!" and a rush to quarters, but it was too late,
for Decatur and his men swarmed up the side and over the rail of the
Philadelphia, and charged the dismayed and panic-stricken Tripolitans.
There was a short and desperate struggle, and five minutes later, the
ship was cleared of the enemy.

It was manifestly impossible to get the Philadelphia out of the harbor,
so Decatur gave the order to burn her. Combustibles had been prepared in
advance, and in a moment, flames began to break out in all parts of the
ship. Then the order was given to return to the ketch, the cable was
cut, the sweeps got out, and the ketch drew rapidly away from the
burning vessel. The sounds of the melee had awakened the troops on
shore, and, as the harbor was lighted by the flames from the
Philadelphia, the shore batteries opened upon the little vessel, but
without doing her any serious damage, and Decatur got safely out of the
harbor and back to the fleet without losing a man.

Shortly afterwards his life was saved by one of those acts of heroism
which stir the blood. In a general attack upon the Tripolitan gunboats,
Decatur laid his ship alongside one of the enemy, grappled with her and
boarded. Decatur was the first over the side and a desperate
hand-to-hand combat followed. The pirate captain, a gigantic fellow,
soon met Decatur face to face, and stood on tiptoe to deal him a
tremendous blow with his scimitar. Decatur rushed in under the swinging
sword, grappled with him, and they fell to the deck together, when
another Tripolitan raised his scimitar to deal the American a fatal
blow. A young sailor named Reuben James, himself with both arms disabled
from sword cuts, seeing his beloved captain's peril, interposed his own
head beneath the descending sword and received a wound which marked him
for life. An instant later, Decatur's crew rallied to him, killed the
pirate captain and drove the remainder of his crew over the side into
the sea.

At the outbreak of the war of 1812, Decatur was given command of the
United States, and on the morning of October 25, overhauled the British
frigate Macedonian near the Canary Islands. Seventeen minutes later, the
Macedonian, with a third of her crew dead, hauled down her colors.
Decatur had lost only twelve men killed and wounded, and placing a crew
aboard his prize, got her safely to New York. This victory was soon
followed by disaster, for, securing command of the President, a frigate
mounting forty-four guns, he attempted to get past the British blockade
of New York harbor, but ran into a squadron of the enemy, and, after a
running fight lasting thirty hours, was overhauled by a superior force
and compelled to surrender. Decatur was taken captive to Bermuda, but
was soon parolled, and, after commanding a squadron in the
Mediterranean, built himself a house at Washington, expecting to spend
the remainder of his days there in honorable retirement.

But it was not to be. In 1816, Decatur, while a member of the board of
navy commissioners, had occasion to censure Commodore James Barron.
Barron considered himself insulted, and a long correspondence followed,
which finally resulted in Barron challenging Decatur to fight a duel.
Under the code of honor then in vogue, Decatur could do nothing but
accept, and the meeting took place at Bladensburg, Maryland, March 22,
1820. At the word "fire," Barron fell wounded in the hip, where Decatur
had said he would shoot him, while Decatur himself received a wound in
the abdomen from which he died that night. He was, all in all, one of
the most brilliant and efficient men the navy ever boasted; and he will
be remembered, too, for his immortal toast: "My country: may she be
always right; but, right or wrong, my country!"

Closely associated with Decatur in some of his exploits was William
Bainbridge, as handsome, impetuous and daring a sailor as ever trod a
deck. Bainbridge, who was five years younger than Decatur, began his
seafaring career at the age of sixteen, and three years later was in
command of a merchantman. He entered the navy at its reorganization in
1798, and two years later was appointed to command the George
Washington, a ship of twenty-eight guns.

Bainbridge's first duty was to carry a tribute of half a million
dollars to the Dey of Algiers, according to the arrangement made by the
Secretary of State which we have already mentioned. The errand was a
hateful one to Bainbridge, as it would have been to any American
sailorman; but he was in the navy to obey orders, and in September,
1800, he reached Algiers and anchored in the harbor and delivered the
tribute. But when he had done this, the Dey sent word that he had a
cargo of slaves and wild beasts for the Sultan of Turkey at
Constantinople, and that Bainbridge must take them, or his ship would be
taken from him and he and his crew sold into slavery.

There was nothing to do but consent, since the ship was wholly in the
Dey's power, so to Constantinople Bainbridge sailed her. When a boat was
sent ashore there to announce her arrival, the Turks were greatly
astonished, for they had never heard of a nation called the United
States, and did not know that there was a great continent on the other
side of the world. It makes us feel less self-important, sometimes, when
we stop to consider that about one half the human race, even at the
present day, have no idea of our existence.

Well, Bainbridge delivered his cargo, and then sailed back to Algiers
with orders from the Sultan to the Dey. He delivered these to the Dey,
and in accordance with them, the Dey immediately declared war on France,
and notified all the French in Algiers that if they had not left his
dominions within forty-eight hours, they would be sold into slavery.
There was no French ship in the harbor, and it looked, for a time, as
though, the French would not be able to get away, but as soon as he
learned of their predicament, Bainbridge gathered them together and took
them over to Spain--an act for which he received the personal thanks of
Napoleon Bonaparte.

Bainbridge was, of course, glad to get away from Algiers, but he had by
no means seen the last of the Barbary pirates. Returning to the United
States, he was given command of the Philadelphia, and sent back to the
Mediterranean with Commodore Preble's squadron to give the pirates a
lesson. The Philadelphia went on ahead to Tripoli and began a vigorous
blockade of that port, but, in chasing a Tripolitan vessel which was
trying to enter the harbor, ran hard and fast on an uncharted reef, and
keeled over so far that her guns were useless. The Tripolitans were not
long in discovering her predicament, swarmed out of the harbor in their
gunboats, and soon had the American vessel at their mercy.

With what bitterness of spirit Bainbridge hauled down his flag may be
imagined. He and his men were taken ashore and imprisoned and their
vessel was got off the reef and towed into the harbor. From the window
of their prison, the Americans could see her riding at anchor, flying
the flag of Tripoli, and the sight did not render their imprisonment
more pleasant. But one night, they heard shots in the harbor, and,
