one enemy the more."

"One enemy the more!"

"Yes; favorites are but little beloved at the court of France."

"Oh! while she has her lover to protect her, is not that enough? She has
chosen him of such a quality that her enemies cannot prevail against
her." But, stopping all at once, "And then she has you for a friend,
mademoiselle," added he, with a shade of irony which did not glide off
the cuirass.

"Who! I?--Oh, no! I am no longer one of those whom Mademoiselle de la
Valliere deigns to look upon; but--"

This _but_, so big with menaces and storm; this _but_, which made the
heart of Raoul beat, such griefs did it presage for her whom lately he
loved so dearly; this terrible _but_, so significant in a woman like
Montalais, was interrupted by a moderately loud noise heard by the
speakers, proceeding from the alcove behind the wainscoting. Montalais
turned to listen, and Raoul was already rising, when a lady entered the
room quietly by the secret door, which she closed after her.

"Madame!" exclaimed Raoul, on recognizing the sister-in-law of the king.

"Stupid wretch!" murmured Montalais, throwing herself, but too late,
before the princess, "I have been mistaken in an hour!" She had,
however, time to warn the princess, who was walking toward Raoul.

"M. de Bragelonne, madame." And at these words the princess drew back,
uttering a cry in her turn.

"Your royal highness," said Montalais, with volubility, "is kind enough
to think of this lottery, and--"

The princess began to lose countenance. Raoul hastened his departure
without yet divining all; but he felt that he was in the way. Madame was
preparing a word of transition to recover herself, when a closet opened
in front of the alcove, and M. de Guiche issued, all radiant, also from
that closet. The most pale of the four, we must admit, was still Raoul.
The princess, however, was near fainting, and was obliged to lean upon
the foot of the bed for support. No one ventured to support her. This
scene occupied several minutes of terrible silence. But Raoul broke it.
He went up to the comte, whose inexpressible emotion made his knees
tremble, and taking his hand, "Dear comte," said he, "tell Madame I am
too unhappy not to merit my pardon; tell her also that I have loved in
the course of my life, and that the horror of the treachery that has
been practiced on me renders me inexorable for all other treachery that
may be committed around me. This is why, mademoiselle," said he,
smiling, to Montalais, "I never would divulge the secret of the visits
of my friend to your apartment. Obtain from Madame--from Madame, who is
so clement and so generous--obtain her pardon for you whom she has just
surprised also. You are both free, love each other, be happy!"

The princess felt for a moment the despair which cannot be described; it
was repugnant to her, notwithstanding the exquisite delicacy which Raoul
had exhibited, to feel herself at the mercy of an indiscretion. It was
equally repugnant to her to accept the evasion offered by this delicate
deception. Agitated, nervous, she struggled against the double stings of
the two troubles. Raoul comprehended her position, and came once more to
her aid. Bending his knee before her, "Madame!" said he, in a low voice,
"in two days I shall be far from Paris; in a fortnight I shall be far
from France, where I shall never be seen again."

"Are you going away, then?" said she, with great delight.

"With M. de Beaufort."

"Into Africa!" cried Guiche, in his turn. "You, Raoul--oh! my
friend--into Africa, where everybody dies!"

And forgetting everything, forgetting that that forgetfulness itself
compromised the princess more eloquently than his presence, "Ingrate!"
said he, "and you have not even consulted me!" And he embraced him;
during which time Montalais had led away Madame, and disappeared
herself.

Raoul passed his hand over his brow, and said with a smile, "I have been
dreaming!" Then warmly to Guiche, who, by degrees, absorbed him, "My
friend," said he, "I conceal nothing from you, who are the elected of my
heart. I am going to seek death in yonder country; your secret will not
remain in my breast more than a year."

"Oh, Raoul! a man!"

"Do you know what is my thought, Guiche? This is it--'I shall live more,
being buried beneath the earth, than I have lived for this month past.'
We are Christians, my friend, and if such suffering were to continue, I
would not be answerable for the safety of my soul."

Guiche was anxious to raise objections.

"Not one word more on my account," said Raoul; "but advice to you, dear
friend; what I am going to say to you is of much greater importance."

"What is that?"

"Without doubt, you risk much more than I do, because you love."

"Oh!"

"It is a joy so sweet to me to be able to speak to you thus! Well, then,
Guiche, beware of Montalais."

"What! of that kind friend?"

"She was the friend of--her you know of. She ruined her by pride."

"You are mistaken."

"And now, when she has ruined her, she would ravish from her the only
thing that renders that woman excusable in my eyes."

"What is that?"

"Her love."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean that there is a plot formed against her who is the mistress of
the king--a plot formed in the very house of Madame."

"Can you think so?"

"I am certain of it."

"By Montalais?"

"Take her as the least dangerous of the enemies I dread for--the other."

"Explain yourself clearly, my friend; and, if I can understand you--"

"In two words. Madame has been jealous of the king."

"I know she has--"

"Oh! fear nothing--you are beloved--you are beloved, Guiche; do you feel
the value of these three words? They signify that you can raise your
head, that you can sleep tranquilly, that you can thank God every minute
of your life. You are beloved; that signifies that you may hear
everything, even the counsel of a friend who wishes to preserve your
happiness. You are beloved, Guiche--you are beloved! You do not endure
those atrocious nights, those nights without end, which, with arid eye
and devoured heart, others pass through who are destined to die. You
will live long, if you act like the miser who, bit by bit, crumb by
crumb, collects and heaps up diamonds and gold. You are beloved!--allow
me to tell you what you must do that you may be beloved forever."

Guiche contemplated for sometime this unfortunate young man, half mad
with despair, till there passed through his heart something like remorse
at his own happiness. Raoul suppressed his feverish excitement, to
assume the voice and countenance of an impassible man. "They will make
her, whose name I should wish still to be able to pronounce--they will
make her suffer. Swear to me that you will not second them in
anything--but that you will defend her, when possible, as I would have
done myself."

"I swear I will," replied Guiche.

"And," continued Raoul, "some day when you shall have rendered her a
great service--some day when she shall thank you, promise me to say
these words to her--'I have done you this kindness, madame, by the warm
desire of M. de Bragelonne, whom you so deeply injured.'"

"I swear I will," murmured Guiche.

"That is all. Adieu! I set out to-morrow, or the day after, for Toulon.
If you have a few hours to spare, give them to me."

"All! all!" cried the young man.

"Thank you!"

"And what are you going to do now?"

"I am going to meet M. le Comte at the house of Planchet, where we hope
to find M. d'Artagnan."

"M. d'Artagnan?"

"Yes, I wish to embrace him before my departure. He is a brave man, who
loves me dearly. Farewell, my friend: you are expected, no doubt; you
will find me, when you wish, at the lodgings of the comte. Farewell!"

The two young men embraced. They who might have seen them both thus,
would not have hesitated to say, pointing to Raoul: "That is the happy
man!"




CHAPTER CIII.

PLANCHET'S INVENTORY.


Athos, during the visit made to the Luxembourg by Raoul, had gone to
Planchet's residence to inquire after D'Artagnan. The gentleman, on
arriving at the Rue des Lombards, found the shop of the grocer in great
confusion; but it was not the encumberment of a lucky sale, or that of
an arrival of goods. Planchet was not throned, as usual, upon sacks and
barrels. No. A young man with a pen behind his ear, and another with an
account book in his hand, were setting down a number of figures, while a
third counted and weighed. An inventory was being taken. Athos, who had
no knowledge of commercial matters, felt himself a little embarrassed by
the material obstacles and the majesty of those who were thus employed.
He saw several customers sent away, and asked himself whether he, who
came to buy nothing, would not be more properly deemed importunate. He
therefore asked very politely if he could see M. Planchet. The reply,
pretty carelessly given, was that M. Planchet was packing his trunks.
These words surprised Athos. "How! his trunks!" said he, "is M. Planchet
going away?"

"Yes, monsieur, directly."

"Then, if you please, inform him that M. le Comte de la Fere desires to
speak to him for a moment."

At the mention of the comte's name, one of the young men, no doubt
accustomed to hear it pronounced with respect, immediately went to
inform Planchet. It was at this moment that Raoul, after his painful
scene with Montalais and Guiche, arrived at the grocer's house. Planchet
left his job directly he received the comte's message.

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte!" exclaimed he, "how glad I am to see you! What
good star brings you here?"

"My dear Planchet," said Athos, pressing the hand of his son, whose sad
look he silently observed--"we are come to learn of you--But in what
confusion do I find you! You are as white as a miller; where have you
been rummaging?"

"Ah, diable! take care, monsieur: don't come near me till I have well
shaken myself."

"What for? Flour or dust only whitens."

"No, no; what you see on my arms is arsenic."

"Arsenic?"

"Yes; I am making my provision for the rats."

"Aye, I suppose in an establishment like this the rats play a
conspicuous part."

"It is not with this establishment I concern myself, M. le Comte. The
rats have robbed me of more here than they will ever rob me of again."

"What do you mean?"

"Why, you may have observed, monsieur, my inventory is being taken."

"Are you leaving trade, then?"

"Eh! mon Dieu! yes. I have disposed of my business to one of my young
men."

"Bah! you are rich, then. I suppose."

"Monsieur, I have taken a dislike to the city; I don't know whether it
is because I am growing old, and, as M. d'Artagnan one day said, when we
grow old we more often think of the things of our youth; but for some
time past I have felt myself attracted toward the country and gardening;
I was a countryman formerly." And Planchet marked this confession with a
little rather pretentious laugh for a man making profession of humility.

Athos made a gesture of approval, and then added: "You are going to buy
an estate then?"

"I have bought one, monsieur."

"Ah! that is still better."

"A little house at Fontainebleau, with something like twenty acres of
land round it."

"Very well, Planchet! Accept my compliments on your acquisition."

"But, monsieur, we are not comfortable here; the cursed dust makes you
cough. Corbleu! I should not wish to poison the most worthy gentleman in
the kingdom."

Athos did not smile at this little pleasantry which Planchet had aimed
at him, in order to try his strength in mundane facetiousness.

"Yes," said he, "let us have a little talk by ourselves--in your own
room, for example. You have a room, have you not?"

"Certainly, Monsieur le Comte."

"Upstairs, perhaps?" And Athos, seeing Planchet a little embarrassed,
wished to relieve him by going first.

"It is--but--" said Planchet, hesitating.

Athos was mistaken in the cause of this hesitation, and, attributing it
to a fear the grocer might have of offering humble hospitality--"Never
mind, never mind," said he, still going up, "the dwelling of a tradesman
in this quarter is not expected to be a palace. Come on!"

Raoul nimbly preceded him, and entered first. Two cries were heard
simultaneously--we may say three. One of these cries dominated over the
others; it was uttered by a woman. The other proceeded from the mouth of
Raoul; it was an exclamation of surprise. He had no sooner made it than
he shut the door sharply. The third was from fright; Planchet had
proffered it.

"I ask your pardon!" added he, "Madame is dressing."

Raoul had, no doubt, seen that what Planchet said was true, for he
turned round to go downstairs again.

"Madame--" said Athos; "Oh! pardon me, Planchet, I did not know that you
had upstairs--"

"It is Truechen," added Planchet, blushing a little.

"It is whom you please, my good Planchet; but pardon my rudeness."

"No, no; go up now, gentlemen."

"We will do no such thing," said Athos.

"Oh! madame having notice, has had time--"

"No, Planchet; farewell!"

"Eh, gentlemen! you would not disoblige me; thus standing on the
staircase, or by going away without having sat down."

"If we had known you had a lady upstairs," replied Athos, with his
customary coolness, "we would have asked permission to pay our respects
to her."

Planchet was so disconcerted by this little extravagance, that he forced
the passage, and himself opened the door to admit the comte and his son.
Truechen was quite dressed: costume of the shopkeeper's wife, rich and
coquettish; German eyes attacking French eyes. She ceded the apartment
after two curtseys, and went down into the shop--but not without having
listened at the door, to know what Planchet's gentlemen visitors would
say of her. Athos suspected that, and therefore turned the conversation
accordingly. Planchet, on his part, was burning to give explanations,
which Athos avoided. But, as certain tenacities are stronger than all
others, Athos was forced to hear Planchet recite his idols of felicity,
translated into a language more chaste than that of Longus. So Planchet
related how Truechen had charmed his ripe age, and brought good luck to
his business, as Ruth did to Boaz.

"You want nothing now, then, but heirs to your property."

"If I had one, he would have three hundred thousand livres," said
Planchet.

"Humph! you must have one then," said Athos, phlegmatically; "if only to
prevent your little fortune being lost."

This word _little fortune_ placed Planchet in his rank, like the voice
of the sergeant when Planchet was but a _piqueur_ in the regiment of
Piedmont, in which Rochefort had placed him. Athos perceived that the
grocer would marry Truechen, and, in spite of fate, establish a family.
This appeared the more evident to him when he learned that the young man
to whom Planchet was selling his business was her cousin. Having heard
all that was necessary of the happy prospects of the retiring grocer,
"What is M. d'Artagnan about," said he, "he is not at the Louvre?"

"Ah! Monsieur le Comte, Monsieur d'Artagnan has disappeared."

"Disappeared!" said Athos, with surprise.

"Oh! monsieur, we know what that means."

"But I do not know."

"Whenever M. d'Artagnan disappears it is always for some mission or some
great affair."

"Has he said anything to you about it?"

"Never."

"You were acquainted with his departure for England formerly, were you
not?"

"On account of the speculation," said Planchet, heedlessly.

"The speculation!"

"I mean--" interrupted Planchet, quite confused.

"Well, well; neither your affairs nor those of your master are in
question: the interest we take in him alone has induced me to apply to
you. Since the captain of the musketeers is not here, and as we cannot
learn from you where we are likely to find M. d'Artagnan, we will take
our leave of you. Au revoir, Planchet, au revoir. Let us begone, Raoul."

"Monsieur le Comte, I wish I were able to tell you--"

"Oh, not at all; I am not the man to reproach a servant with
discretion."

This word "servant" struck rudely on the ears of the demi-millionaire,
Planchet, but natural respect and bonhomie prevailed over pride. "There
is nothing indiscreet in telling you. Monsieur le Comte, M. d'Artagnan
came here the other day--"

"Ah, ah!"

"And remained several hours consulting a geographical chart."

"You are right, then, my friend; say no more about it."

"And the chart is there as a proof," added Planchet, who went to fetch
from the neighboring wall, where it was suspended by a twist, forming a
triangle with the bar of the window to which it was fastened--the plan
consulted by the captain on his last visit to Planchet. This plan, which
he brought to the comte, was a map of France, upon which the practiced
eye of that gentleman discovered an itinerary, marked out with small
pins; where-ever a pin was missing, a hole denoted its having been
there. Athos, by following with his eye the pins and holes, saw that
D'Artagnan had taken the direction of the south, and gone as far as the
Mediterranean, toward Toulon. It was near Cannes that the marks and the
punctured places ceased. The Comte de la Fere puzzled his brains for
some time, to divine what the musketeer could be going to do at Cannes,
and what motive could have led him to examine the banks of the Var. The
reflections of Athos suggested nothing. His accustomed perspicacity was
at fault. Raoul's researches were not more successful than his father's.

"Never mind," said the young man to the comte, who silently, and with
his finger, had made him understand the route of D'Artagnan; "we must
confess that there is a Providence always occupied in connecting our
destiny with that of D'Artagnan. There he is on the coast of Cannes, and
you, monsieur, will, at least, conduct me as far as Toulon. Be assured
that we shall meet with him more easily upon our route than upon this
map."

Then, taking leave of Planchet, who was scolding his shopmen, even the
cousin of Truechen, his successor, the gentlemen set out to pay a visit
to M. de Beaufort. On leaving the grocer's shop, they saw a coach, the
future depositary of the charms of Mademoiselle Truechen and the bags of
crowns of Planchet.

"Every one journeys toward happiness by the route he chooses," said
Raoul, in a melancholy tone.

"Road to Fontainebleau!" cried Planchet to his coachman.




CHAPTER CIV.

THE INVENTORY OF M. DE BEAUFORT.


To have talked of D'Artagnan with Planchet, to have seen Planchet quit
Paris to bury himself in his county retreat, had been for Athos and his
son like a last farewell to the noise of the capital--to their life of
former days. What, in fact, did these men leave behind them--one of whom
had exhausted the past age in glory, and the other the present age in
misfortune? Evidently, neither of them had anything to ask of his
contemporaries. They had only to pay a visit to M. de Beaufort, and
arrange with him the particulars of the departure. The duc was lodged
magnificently in Paris. He had one of those superb establishments
pertaining to great fortunes, which certain old men remembered to have
seen flourish in the times of wasteful liberality in Henry III.'s reign.
Then, really, several great nobles were richer than the king. They knew
it, used it, and never deprived themselves of the pleasure of
humiliating his royal majesty when they had an opportunity. It was this
egotistical aristocracy which Richelieu had constrained to contribute,
with its blood, its purse, and its duties, to what was from his time
styled the king's service. From Louis XI.--that terrible mower down of
the great--to Richelieu, how many families had raised their heads! How
many from Richelieu to Louis XIV. had bowed their heads never to raise
them again. But M. de Beaufort was born a prince, and of a blood which
is not shed upon scaffolds, unless by the decree of peoples. This prince
had kept up a grand style of living. How did he maintain his horses, his
people, and his table? Nobody knew; himself less than others. Only there
were then privileges for the sons of kings, to whom nobody refused to
become a creditor, whether from respect, devotedness, or a persuasion
that they would some day be paid.

Athos and Raoul found the mansion of the duc in as much confusion as
that of Planchet. The duc, likewise, was making his inventory; that is
to say, he was distributing to his friends everything of value he had in
his house. Owing nearly two millions--an enormous amount in those
days--M. de Beaufort had calculated that he could not set out for Africa
without a good round sum; and, in order to find that sum, he was
distributing to his old creditors plate, arms, jewels and furniture,
which was more magnificent than selling it, and brought him back double.
In fact, how could a man to whom ten thousand livres were owing, refuse
to carry away a present of six thousand, enhanced in merit from having
belonged to a descendant of Henry IV.? And how, after having carried
away that present, could he refuse ten thousand livres more to this
generous noble? This, then, was what had happened. The duc had no longer
a dwelling-house--that had become useless to an admiral, whose place of
residence is his ship; he had no longer need of superfluous arms, when
he was placed amid his cannons; no more jewels, which the sea might rob
him of; but he had three or four hundred thousand crowns fresh in his
coffers. And throughout the house there was a joyous movement of people
who believed they were plundering monseigneur. The prince had, in a
supreme degree, the art of making happy the creditors the most to be
pitied. Every distressed man, every empty purse, found with him patience
and intelligence of his position. To some he said, "I wish I had what
you have, I would give it you." And to others, "I have but this silver
ewer, it is worth at least five hundred livres--take it."

The effect of which was--so truly is courtesy a current payment--that
the prince constantly found means to renew his creditors. This time he
used no ceremony; it might be called a general pillage. He gave up
everything. The oriental fable of the poor Arab, who carried away from
the pillage of a palace a kettle at the bottom of which was concealed a
bag of gold, and whom everybody allowed to pass without jealousy--this
fable had become a truth in the prince's mansion. Many contractors paid
themselves upon the offices of the duc. Thus, the provision department,
who plundered the clothes-presses and the harness-rooms, attached very
little value to things which tailors and saddlers set great store by.
Anxious to carry home to their wives preserves given them by
monseigneur, many were seen bounding joyously along, under the weight of
earthen jars and bottles, gloriously stamped with the arms of the
prince. M. de Beaufort finished by giving away his horses and the hay
from his lofts. He made more than thirty happy with kitchen utensils;
and thirty more, with the contents of his cellar. Still further; all
these people went away with the conviction that M. de Beaufort only
acted in this manner to prepare for a new fortune concealed beneath the
Arab tents. They repeated to each other, while devastating his hotel,
that he was sent to Gigelli by the king, to reconstruct his lost
fortunes; that the treasures of Africa would be equally divided between
the admiral and the king of France; that these treasures consisted in
mines of diamonds, or other fabulous stones; the gold and silver mines
of Mount Atlas did not even obtain the honor of being named. In addition
to the mines to be worked--which could not be begun till after the
campaign--there would be the booty made by the army. M. de Beaufort
would lay his hands upon all the riches pirates had robbed Christendom
of since the battle of Lepanto. The number of millions from these
sources defied calculation. Why, then, should he who was going in quest
of such treasures set any store by the poor utensils of his past life?
And, reciprocally, why should they spare the property of him who spared
it so little himself?

Such was the position of affairs. Athos, with his investigating glance,
saw what was going on at once. He found the admiral of France a little
exalted, for he was rising from a table of fifty covers, at which the
guests had drunk long and deeply to the prosperity of the expedition; at
which, with the dessert, the remains of the meal had been given to the
servants, and the empty dishes and plates to the curious. The prince was
intoxicated with his ruin and his popularity at the same time. He had
drunk his old wine to the health of his future wine. When he saw Athos
and Raoul--

"There is my aid-de-camp being brought to me!" he cried. "Come hither,
comte; come hither, vicomte." Athos tried to find a passage through the
heaps of linen and plate.

"Ah! step over, step over!" said the duc, offering a full glass to
Athos. The latter took it; Raoul scarcely moistened his lips.

"Here is your commission," said the prince to Raoul. "I had prepared it,
reckoning upon you. You will go on before me as far as Antibes."

"Yes, monseigneur."

"Here is the order." And De Beaufort gave Raoul the order. "Do you know
anything of the sea?"

"Yes, monseigneur; I have traveled with M. le Prince."

"That is well. All these barges and lighters must be in attendance to
form an escort, and carry my provisions. The army must be prepared to
embark in a fortnight at the latest."

"That shall be done, monseigneur."

"The present order gives you the right to visit and search all the isles
along the coast; you will there make the enrollments and levies you may
want for me."

"Yes, Monsieur le Duc."

"And as you are an active man, and will work freely, you will spend much
money."

"I hope not, monseigneur."

"But I reckon you will. My intendant has prepared orders of a thousand
livres, drawn upon the cities of the south; he will give you a hundred
of them. Now, dear vicomte, begone."

Athos interrupted the prince. "Keep your money, monseigneur; war is to
be made among the Arabs with gold as well as lead."

"I wish to try the contrary," replied the duc; "and then, you are
acquainted with my ideas upon the expedition--plenty of noise, plenty of
fire, and, if so it must be, I shall disappear in the smoke." Having
spoken thus, M. de Beaufort began to laugh; but his mirth was not
reciprocated by Athos and Raoul. He perceived this at once. "Ah," said
he, with the courteous egotism of his rank and his age, "you are such
people as a man should not see after dinner; you are cold, stiff, and
dry, when I am all fire, all suppleness, and all wine. No, devil take
me! I should always see you fasting, vicomte, and you, comte, if you
wear such a face as that, you will see me no more."

He said this, pressing the hand of Athos, who replied with a
smile--"Monseigneur, do not talk so grandly because you happen to have
plenty of money. I predict that within a month you will be dry, stiff,
and cold, in presence of your strong box, and that then, having Raoul at
your elbow, quite fasting, you will be surprised to see him gay,
animated, and generous, because he will have some new crowns to offer
you."

"God grant it may be so!" cried the delighted duc. "Comte, stay with
me."

"No, I shall go with Raoul; the mission with which you charge him is a
troublesome and a difficult one. Alone, it would be too much for him to
execute. You do not observe, monseigneur, you have given him a command
of the first order."

"Bah!"

"And in the marine."

"That may be true. But when people resemble him, do they not do all that
is required of them?"

"Monseigneur, I believe you will find nowhere so much zeal and
intelligence, so much real bravery, as in Raoul; but if he failed in
your embarkation, you would only meet with what you deserve."

"Humph! you are scolding me, then."

"Monseigneur, to provision a fleet, to assemble a flotilla, to enroll
your maritime force, would take an admiral a year. Raoul is a cavalry
officer, and you allow him a fortnight!"

"I tell you he will get through."

"He may; but I will help him."

"To be sure you will; I reckoned upon you, and still further believe
that when we are once at Toulon you will not let him depart alone."

"Oh!" said Athos, shaking his head.

"Patience! patience!"

"Monseigneur, permit us to take our leave."

"Begone, then, and my good fortune attend you."

"Adieu! monseigneur; and may your good fortune attend you likewise."

"Here is an expedition admirably commenced!" said Athos to his son. "No
provisions--no store flotilla! What can be done, thus?"

"Humph!" murmured Raoul; "if all are going to do as I am, provisions
will not be wanted."

"Monsieur," replied Athos, sternly, "do not be unjust and senseless in
your egotism, or your grief, whichever you please to call it. If you set
out for this war solely with the intention of getting killed in it, you
stand in need of nobody, and it was scarcely worth while to recommend
you to M. de Beaufort. But when you have been introduced to the prince
commandant--when you have accepted the responsibility of a post in his
army, the question is no longer about you, but about all those poor
soldiers, who, as well as you, have hearts and bodies, who will weep for
their country and endure all the necessities of their human condition.
Remember, Raoul, that an officer is a minister as useful as a priest and
that he ought to have more charity than a priest."

"Monsieur, I know it, and have practiced it; I would have continued to
do so still, but--"

"You forget also that you are of a country which is proud of its
military glory; go and die if you like, but do not die without honor and
without advantage to France. Cheer up, Raoul! do not let my words grieve
you; I love you, and wish to see you perfect."

"I love your reproaches, monsieur," said the young man, mildly; "they
alone may cure me, because they prove to me that some one loves me
still."

"And now, Raoul, let us be off; the weather is so fine, the heavens are
so pure, those heavens which we shall always find above our heads, which
you will see more pure still at Gigelli, and which will speak to you of
me there, as they speak to me here of God."

The two gentlemen, after having agreed on this point, talked over the
wild freaks of the duke, convinced that France would be served in a very
incomplete manner, as regarded both spirit and practice, in the ensuing
expedition; and having summed up his policy under the word vanity, they
set forward, in obedience to their will rather than to their destiny.
The sacrifice was accomplished.




CHAPTER CV.

THE SILVER DISH.


The journey passed off pretty well. Athos and his son traversed France
at the rate of fifteen leagues per day; sometimes more, sometimes less,
according to the intensity of Raoul's grief. It took them a fortnight to
reach Toulon, and they lost all traces of D'Artagnan at Antibes. They
were forced to believe that the captain of the musketeers was desirous
of preserving an incognito on his route, for Athos derived from his
inquiries an assurance that such a cavalier as he described had
exchanged his horse for a well-closed carriage on quitting Avignon.
Raoul was much affected at not meeting with D'Artagnan. His affectionate
heart longed to take a farewell and receive consolation from that heart
of steel. Athos knew from experience that D'Artagnan became impenetrable
when engaged in any serious affair, whether on his own account or in the
service of the king. He even feared to offend his friend, or thwart him
by too pressing inquiries. And yet when Raoul commenced his labor of
classing the flotilla, and got together the chalands and lighters to
send them to Toulon, one of the fishermen told the comte that his boat
had been laid up to refit since a trip he had made on account of a
gentleman who was in great haste to embark. Athos, believing that this
man was telling a falsehood in order to be left at liberty to fish, and
so gain more money when all his companions were gone, insisted upon
having the details. The fisherman informed him that six days previously,
a man had come in the night to hire his boat, for the purpose of
visiting the island of St. Honorat. The price was agreed upon, but the
gentleman had arrived with an immense carriage case, which he insisted
upon embarking, in spite of all the difficulties which opposed
themselves to that operation. The fisherman had wished to retract. He
had even threatened, but his threats had procured him nothing but a
shower of blows from the gentleman's cane, which fell upon his shoulders
sharp and long. Swearing and grumbling, he had recourse to the syndic of
his brotherhood at Antibes, who administer justice among themselves and
protect each other; but the gentleman had exhibited a certain paper, at
the sight of which the syndic, bowing to the very ground, had enjoined
obedience from the fisherman, and abused him for having been refractory.
They then departed with the freight.

"But all this does not tell us," said Athos, "how you have injured your
boat."

"This is the way. I was steering toward St. Honorat as the gentleman had
desired me; but he changed his mind, and pretended that I could not pass
to the south of the abbey."

"And why not?"

"Because, monsieur, there is in front of the square tower of the
Benedictines, toward the southern point, the bank of the Moines."

"A rock?" asked Athos.

"Level with the water, and below the water; a dangerous passage, but one
I have cleared a thousand times; the gentleman required me to land him
at St. Marguerite's."

"Well?"

"Well, monsieur!" cried the fisherman, with his Provencal accent, "a man
is a sailor, or he is not; he knows his course, or he is nothing but a
fresh-water lubber. I was obstinate, and wished to try the channel. The
gentleman took me by the collar, and told me quietly he would strangle
me. My mate armed himself with a hatchet, and so did I. We had the
affront of the night before to pay him out for. But the gentleman drew
his sword, and used it in such an astonishingly rapid manner, that we
neither of us could get near him. I was about to hurl my hatchet at his
head, and I had a right to do so, hadn't I, monsieur? for a sailor
aboard is master, as a citizen is in his chamber; I then, in
self-defense, to cut the gentleman in two, when all at once--believe me
or not, monsieur--the great carriage case opened of itself, I don't know
how, and there came out of it a sort of a phantom, his head covered with
a black helmet and a black mask, something terrible to look upon, which
came toward me threatening with its fist."

"And that was--?" said Athos.

"That was the devil, monsieur; for the gentleman, with great glee, cried
out on seeing him: 'Ah! thank you, monseigneur!'"

"A strange story!" murmured the comte, looking at Raoul.

"And what did you do?" asked the latter of the fisherman.

"You must know, monsieur, that two poor men, such as we are, could be no
match for two gentlemen; but when one of them is the devil we had no
chance! My companion and I did not stop to consult one another; we made
but one jump into the sea, for we were within seven or eight hundred
feet of the shore."

"Well, and then?"

"Why, and then, monseigneur, as there was a little wind from the
southwest, the boat drifted into the sands of Sainte-Marguerite's."

"Oh!--but the two travelers?"

"Bah! you need not be uneasy about them! It was pretty plain that one
was the devil, and protected the other; for when we recovered the boat,
after she got afloat again, instead of finding these two creatures
injured by the shock, we found nothing, not even the carriage or the
case."

"Very strange! very strange!" repeated the comte. "But since that, what
have you done, my friend?"

"I made my complaint to the governor of Sainte-Marguerite's, who brought
my finger under my nose by telling me if I plagued him with such silly
stories he would have me flogged."

"What! did the governor say so?"

"Yes, monsieur; and yet my boat was injured, seriously injured, for the
prow is left upon the point of Sainte-Marguerite's, and the carpenter
asks a hundred and twenty livres to repair it."

"Very well," replied Raoul; "you will be exempted from the service. Go."

"We will go to Sainte-Marguerite's, shall we?" said the comte to
Bragelonne, as the man walked away.

"Yes, monsieur, for there is something to be cleared up; that man does
not seem to me to have told the truth."

"Nor to me neither, Raoul. The story of the masked man and the carriage
having disappeared, may be told to conceal some violence these fellows
have committed upon their passenger in the open sea, to punish him for
his persistence in embarking."

"I formed the same suspicion; the carriage was more likely to contain
property than a man."

"We shall see to that, Raoul. This gentleman very much resembles
D'Artagnan; I recognize his mode of proceeding. Alas! we are no longer
the young invincibles of former days. Who knows whether the hatchet or
the iron bar of this miserable coaster has not succeeded in doing that
which the best blades of Europe, balls, and bullets, have not been able
to do in forty years?"

That same day they set out for Sainte-Marguerite's, on board a
chasse-maree come from Toulon under orders. The impression they felt on
landing was a singularly pleasing one. The isle was full of flowers and
fruits. In its cultivated part it served as a garden for the governor.
Orange, pomegranate, and fig trees bent beneath the weight of their
golden or purple fruits. All around this garden, in the uncultivated
parts, the red partridges ran about in coveys among the brambles and
tufts of junipers, and at every step of the comte and Raoul a terrified
rabbit quitted his thyme and heath to scuttle away to his burrow. In
fact, this fortunate isle was uninhabited. Flat, offering nothing but a
tiny bay for the convenience of embarkation, and under the protection of
the governor, who went shares with them, smugglers made use of it as a
provisional entrepot, at the expense of not killing the game or
devastating the garden. With this compromise, the governor was in a
situation to be satisfied with a garrison of eight men to guard his
fortress, in which twelve cannons accumulated their coats of mouldy
green. The governor was a sort of happy farmer, harvesting wines, figs,
oil, and oranges, preserving his citrons and cedrats in the sun of his
casemates. The fortress, encircled by a deep ditch, its only guardian,
arose like three heads upon turrets connected with each other by
terraces covered with moss.

Athos and Raoul wandered for some time round the fences of the garden
without finding any one to introduce them to the governor. They ended by
making their own way into the garden. It was at the hottest time of the
day. Everything sought shelter beneath grass or stone. The heavens
spread their fiery veils as if to stifle all noises, to envelop all
existences; the rabbit under the broom, the fly under the leaf, slept as
the wave did beneath the heavens. Athos saw nothing living but a
soldier, upon the terrace beneath the second and third court, who was
carrying a basket of provisions on his head. This man returned almost
immediately without his basket, and disappeared in the shade of his
sentry-box. Athos supposed this man must have been carrying dinner to
some one, and, after having done so, returned to dine himself. All at
once, they heard some one call out, and raising their heads, perceived
in the frame of the bars of the window something of a white color, like
a hand that was waved backward and forward--something shining, like a
polished weapon struck by the rays of the sun. And before they were able
to ascertain what it was they saw, a luminous train, accompanied by a
hissing sound in the air, called their attention from the donjon to the
ground. A second dull noise was heard from the ditch, and Raoul ran to
pick up a silver plate which was rolling along the dry sand. The hand
which had thrown this plate made a sign to the two gentlemen and then
disappeared. Athos and Raoul, approaching each other, commenced an
attentive examination of the dusty plate, and they discovered, in
characters traced upon the bottom of it with the point of a knife, this
inscription:

"_I am the brother of the king of France--a prisoner to-day--a madman
to-morrow. French gentlemen and Christians, pray to God for the soul and
the reason of the son of your masters._"

The plate fell from the hands of Athos while Raoul was endeavoring to
make out the meaning of these dismal words. At the same instant they
heard a cry from the top of the donjon. As quick as lightning Raoul bent
down his head, and forced down that of his father likewise. A musket
barrel glittered from the crest of the wall. A white smoke floated like
a plume from the mouth of the musket, and a ball was flattened against a
stone within six inches of the two gentlemen.

"Cordieu!" cried Athos. "What, are people assassinated here? Come down,
cowards as you are!"

"Yes, come down!" cried Raoul, furiously shaking his fist at the castle.

One of the assailants--he who was about to fire--replied to these cries
by an exclamation of surprise; and, as his companion, who wished to
continue the attack, had re-seized his loaded musket, he who had cried
out threw up the weapon, and the ball flew into the air. Athos and
Raoul, seeing them disappear from the platform, expected they would come
to them, and waited with a firm demeanor. Five minutes had not elapsed,
when a stroke upon a drum called the eight soldiers of the garrison to
arms, and they showed themselves on the other side of the ditch with
their muskets in hand. At the head of these men was an officer, whom
Athos and Raoul recognized as the one who had fired the first musket.
The man ordered the soldiers to "make ready."

"We are going to be shot!" cried Raoul; "but, sword-in-hand, at least
let us leap the ditch! We shall kill at least two of these scoundrels,
when their muskets are empty." And, suiting the action to the word,
Raoul was springing forward, followed by Athos, when a well-known voice
resounded behind them--"Athos! Raoul!"

"D'Artagnan!" replied the two gentlemen.

"Recover arms! Mordioux!" cried the captain to the soldiers. "I was sure
I could not be mistaken!"

"What is the meaning of this?" asked Athos. "What! were we to be shot
without warning?"

"It was I who was going to shoot you, and if the governor missed you, I
should not have missed you, my dear friends. How fortunate it is that I
am accustomed to take a long aim, instead of firing at the instant I
raise my weapon! I thought I recognized you. Ah! my dear friends, how
fortunate!" And D'Artagnan wiped his brow, for he had run fast, and
emotion with him was not feigned.

"How!" said Athos. "And is the gentleman who fired at us the governor of
the fortress?"

"In person."

"And why did he fire at us? What have we done to him?"

"Pardieu! You received what the prisoner threw to you?"

"That is true."

"That plate--the prisoner has written something on the bottom of it, has
he not?"

"Yes."

"Good heavens! I was afraid he had."

And D'Artagnan, with all the marks of mortal disquietude, seized the
plate, to read the inscription. When he had read it, a fearful pallor
spread over his countenance. "Oh! Good heavens!" repeated he.
"Silence!--Here is the governor."

"And what will he do to us? Is it our fault?"

"It is true, then?" said Athos, in a subdued voice. "Is it true?"

"Silence! I tell you!--silence! If he only believes you can read; if he
only suspects you have understood; I love you, my dear friends, I will
be killed for you. But--"

"But--" said Athos and Raoul.

"But, I could not save you from perpetual imprisonment, if I saved you
from death. Silence, then! Silence again!"

The governor came up, having crossed the ditch upon a plank bridge.

"Well!" said he to D'Artagnan, "what stops us?"

"You are Spaniards--you do not understand a word of French," said the
captain, eagerly, to his friends in a low voice.

"Well!" replied he, addressing the governor, "I was right; these
gentlemen are two Spanish captains with whom I was acquainted at Ypres,
last year; they don't know a word of French."

"Ah!" said the governor, sharply. "And yet they were trying to read the
inscription on the plate."

D'Artagnan took it out of his hands, effacing the characters with the
point of his sword.

"How!" cried the governor--"what are you doing? I cannot read them now!"

"It is a state secret," replied D'Artagnan, bluntly: "and as you know
that, according to the king's orders, it is under the penalty of death
any one should penetrate it, I will, if you like, allow you to read it
and have you shot immediately afterward."

During this apostrophe--half serious, half ironical--Athos and Raoul
preserved the coolest, most unconcerned silence.

"But, is it possible," said the governor, "that these gentlemen do not
comprehend at least some words?"

"Suppose they do! If they do understand a few spoken words it does not
follow that they should understand what is written. They cannot even
read Spanish. A noble Spaniard, remember, ought never to know how to
read."

The governor was obliged to be satisfied with these explanations, but he
was still tenacious. "Invite these gentlemen to come to the fortress,"
said he.

"That I will willingly do. I was about to propose it to you." The fact
is, the captain had quite another idea, and would have wished his
friends a hundred leagues off. But he was obliged to make the best of
it. He addressed the two gentlemen in Spanish, giving them a polite
invitation, which they accepted. They all turned toward the entrance of
the fort, and the incident being exhausted, the eight soldiers returned
to their delightful leisure, for a moment disturbed by this unexpected
adventure.




CHAPTER CVI.

CAPTIVE AND JAILERS.


When they had entered the fort, and while the governor was making some
preparations for the reception of his guests--"Come," said Athos, "let
us have a word of explanation while we are alone.

"It is simply this," replied the musketeer. "I have conducted hither a
prisoner, who the king commands shall not be seen. You came here, he has
thrown something to you through the lattice of the window; I was at
dinner with the governor, I saw the object thrown, and I saw Raoul pick
it up. It does not take long to understand this. I understood it; and I
thought you in intelligence with my prisoner. And then--"

"And then--you commanded us to be shot."

"Ma foi! I admit it; but if I was the first to seize a musket,
fortunately I was the last to take aim at you."

"If you had killed me, D'Artagnan, I should have had the good fortune to
die for the royal house of France, and it would be an honor to die by
your hand--you, its noblest and most loyal defender."

"What the devil, Athos, do you mean by the royal house?" stammered
D'Artagnan. "You don't mean that you, a well-informed and sensible man,
can place any faith in the nonsense written by an idiot?"

"I do believe in it."

"With so much the more reason, my dear chevalier, from your having
orders to kill all those who do believe in it," said Raoul.

"That is because," replied the captain of the musketeers--"because every
calumny, however absurd it may be, has the almost certain chance of
becoming popular."

"No, D'Artagnan," replied Athos, promptly; "but because the king is not
willing that the secret of his family should transpire among the people,
and cover with shame the executioners of the son of Louis XIII."

"Do not talk in such a childish manner, Athos, or I shall begin to think
you have lost your senses. Besides, explain to me how it is possible
Louis XIII. should have a son in the Isle of Sainte-Marguerite?"

"A son whom you have brought hither masked, in a fishing boat," said
Athos. "Why not?"

D'Artagnan was brought to a pause.

"Ah! ah!" said he: "whence do you know that a fishing boat--"

"Brought you to Sainte-Marguerite's with the carriage containing the
prisoner--with a prisoner whom you styled monseigneur. Oh! I am
acquainted with all that," resumed the comte. D'Artagnan bit his
mustache.

"If it were true," said he, "that I had brought hither in a boat and
with a carriage a masked prisoner, nothing proves that this prisoner
must be a prince--a prince of the house of France?"

"Oh! ask that of Aramis," replied Athos coolly.

"Of Aramis!" cried the musketeer, quite at a stand. "Have you seen
Aramis?"

"After his discomfiture at Vaux, yes; I have seen Aramis, a fugitive,
pursued, ruined; and Aramis has told me enough to make me believe in the
complaints that this unfortunate young man cut upon the bottom of the
plate."

D'Artagnan's head sunk upon his breast with confusion. "This is the
way," said he, "in which God turns to nothing that which men call their
wisdom? A fine secret must that be of which twelve or fifteen persons
hold the tattered fragments! Athos, cursed be the chance which has
brought you face to face with me in this affair: for now--"

"Well," said Athos, with his customary mild severity, "is your secret
lost because I know it? Consult your memory, my friend. Have I not
borne secrets as heavy as this?"

"You have never borne one so dangerous," replied D'Artagnan, in a tone
of sadness. "I have something like a sinister idea that all who are
concerned with this secret will die, and die unfortunately."

"The will of God be done!" said Athos, "but here is your governor."

D'Artagnan and his friends immediately resumed their parts. The
governor, suspicious and hard, behaved toward D'Artagnan with a
politeness almost amounting to obsequiousness. With respect to the
travelers, he contented himself with offering them good cheer, and never
taking his eye from them. Athos and Raoul observed that he often tried
to embarrass them by sudden attacks, or to catch them off their guard;
but neither the one nor the other gave him the least advantage. What
D'Artagnan had said was probable, if the governor did not believe it to
be quite true. They rose from the table to impose awhile.

"What is this man's name? I don't like the looks of him," said Athos to
D'Artagnan in Spanish.

"De Saint-Mars," replied the captain.

"He is then, I suppose, the prince's jailer?"

"Eh! how can I tell? I may be kept at Sainte-Marguerite forever."

"Oh! no, not you!"

"My friend, I am in the situation of a man who finds a treasure in the
midst of a desert. He would like to carry it away, but he cannot; he
would like to leave it, but he dares not. The king will not dare to
recall me, for fear no one else should serve him as faithfully as I
should; he regrets not having me near him, from being aware that no one
will be of so much service near his person as myself. But it will happen
as it may please God."

"But," observed Raoul, "your not being certain proves that your
situation here is provisional, and you will return to Paris?"

"Ask these gentlemen," interrupted the governor, "what was their purpose
in coming to Sainte-Marguerite?"

"They came from learning there was a convent of Benedictines at
Sainte-Honorat which is considered curious; and from being told there
was excellent shooting in the island."

"That is quite at their service, as well as yours," replied Saint-Mars.

D'Artagnan politely thanked him.

"When will they depart?" added the governor.

"To-morrow," replied D'Artagnan.

M. de Saint-Mars went to make his rounds, and left D'Artagnan alone with
the pretended Spaniards.

"Oh!" exclaimed the musketeer, "here is a life with a society that suits
me but little. I command this man, and he bores me, mordioux! Come, let
us have a shot or two at the rabbits: the walk will be beautiful, and
not fatiguing. The isle is but a league and a half in length, upon a
breadth of a league; a real park. Let us try to amuse ourselves."

"As you please, D'Artagnan; not for the sake of amusing ourselves, but
to gain an opportunity for talking freely."

D'Artagnan made a sign to a soldier, who brought the gentlemen some
guns, and then returned to the fort.

"And now," said the musketeer, "answer me the question put to you by
that black-looking Saint-Mars. What did you come to do at the Lerin
Isles?"

"To bid you farewell."

"Bid me farewell! What do you mean by that? Is Raoul going anywhere?"

"Yes."

"Then I will lay a wager it is with M. de Beaufort."

"With M. de Beaufort it is, my dear friend; you always guess rightly."

"From habit."

While the two friends were commencing their conversation, Raoul, with
his head hanging down and his heart oppressed, seated himself on a mossy
rock, his gun across his knees, looking at the sea--looking at the
heavens, and listening to the voice of his soul--he allowed the
sportsmen to attain a considerable distance from him. D'Artagnan
remarked his absence.

"He has not recovered the blow," said he to Athos.

"He is struck to death."

"Oh! your fears exaggerate, I hope. Raoul is of a fine nature. Around
all hearts so noble as his there is a second envelope which forms a
cuirass. The first bleeds, the second resists."

"No," replied Athos. "Raoul will die of it."

"Mordioux!" said D'Artagnan, in a melancholy tone. And he did not add a
word to this exclamation. Then, a minute after. "Why do you let him go?"

"Because he insists upon going."

"And why do you not go with him?"

"Because I could not bear to see him die."

D'Artagnan looked his friend earnestly in the face. "You know one
thing," continued the comte, leaning upon the arm of the captain; "you
know that in the course of my life I have been afraid of but few things.
Well! I have an incessant, gnawing, insurmountable fear that a day will
arrive in which I shall hold the dead body of that boy in my arms."

"Oh!" murmured D'Artagnan; "oh!"

"He will die, I know. I have a perfect conviction of that; but I would
not see him die."

"How is this, Athos? you come and place yourself in the presence of the
bravest man you say you have ever seen, of your own D'Artagnan, of that
man without an equal, as you formerly called him, and you come and tell
him with your arms folded that you are afraid of witnessing the death of
your son, you who have seen all that can be seen in this world! Why have
you this fear, Athos? Man upon this earth must expect everything and
ought to face everything."

"Listen to me, my friend. After having worn myself out upon this earth
of which you speak, I have preserved but two religions: that of life, my
friendships, my duty as a father--that of eternity, love and respect for
God. Now, I have within me the revelation that if God should decree that
my friend or my son should render up his last sigh in my presence--oh,
no, I cannot even tell you, D'Artagnan!"

"Speak, speak, tell me!"

"I am strong against everything, except against the death of those I
love. For that only there is no remedy. He who dies, gains; he who sees
others die, loses. No; this it is--to know that I should no more meet
upon earth him whom I now behold with joy; to know that there would
nowhere be a D'Artagnan any more, nowhere again be a Raoul, oh! I am
old, see you, I have no longer courage; I pray God to spare me in my
weakness; but if He struck me so plainly and in that fashion, I should
curse Him. A Christian gentleman ought not to curse his God, D'Artagnan;
it is quite enough to have cursed a king."

"Humph!" said D'Artagnan, a little confused by this violent tempest of
grief. "Let me speak to him, Athos. Who knows?"

"Try, if you please, but I am convinced you will not succeed."

"I will not attempt to console him, I will serve him."

"You will?"

"Doubtless, I will. Do you think this would be the first time a woman
had repented of an infidelity? I will go to him, I tell you."

Athos shook his head, and continued his walk alone. D'Artagnan, cutting
across the brambles, rejoined Raoul, and held out his hand to him.
"Well, Raoul! you have something to say to me?"

"I have a kindness to ask of you," replied Bragelonne.

"Ask it, then."

"You will some day return to France?"

"I hope so."

"Ought I to write to Mademoiselle de la Valliere?"

"No; you must not."

"But I have so many things to say to her."

"Come and say them to her, then."

"Never!"

"Pray, what virtue do you attribute to a letter which your speech might
not possess?"

"Perhaps you are right."

"She loves the king," said D'Artagnan, bluntly; "and she is an honest
girl."

Raoul started. "And you, you! whom she abandons, she, perhaps, loves
better than she does the king, but after another fashion."

"D'Artagnan, do you believe she loves the king?"

"To idolatry. Her heart is inaccessible to any other feeling. You might
continue to live near her, and would be her best friend."

"Ah!" exclaimed Raoul, with a passionate burst of repugnance for such a
painful hope.

"Will you do so?"

"It would be base."

"That is a very absurd word, which would lead me to think slightly of
your understanding. Please to understand, Raoul, that it is never base
to do that which is imposed by a superior force. If your heart says to
you, 'Go there, or die,' why, go there, Raoul. Was she base or brave,
she whom you loved, in preferring the king to you, the king whom her
heart commanded her imperiously to prefer to you? No, she was the
bravest of women. Do, then, as she has done. Obey yourself. Do you know
one thing of which I am sure, Raoul?"

"What is that?"

"Why, that by seeing her closely with the eyes of a jealous man--"

"Well?"

"Well! You would cease to love her."

"Then I am decided, my dear D'Artagnan."

"To set off to see her again?"

"No; to set off that I may never see her again. I wish to love her
forever."

"Humph! I must confess," replied the musketeer, "that is a conclusion
which I was far from expecting."

"This is what I wish, my friend. You will see her again, and you will
give her a letter which, if you think proper, will explain to her as to
yourself, what is passing in my heart. Read it; I prepared it last
night. Something told me I should see you to-day." He held the letter
out, and D'Artagnan read it:

     "MADEMOISELLE--You are not wrong in my eyes in not loving
     me. You have only been guilty of one fault toward me, that of
     having left me to believe you loved me. This error will cost me my
     life. I pardon you, but I cannot pardon myself. It is said that
     happy lovers are deaf to the complaints of rejected lovers. It will
     not be so with you who did not love me, except with anxiety. I am
     sure that if I had persisted in endeavoring to change that
     friendship into love, you would have yielded out of a fear of
     bringing about my death, or of lessening the esteem I had for you.
     It is much more delightful to me to die, knowing you are free and
     satisfied. How much, then, will you love me, when you will no
     longer fear either my presence or my reproaches! You will love me,
     because, however charming a new love may appear to you, God has not
     made me in anything inferior to him you have chosen, and because my
     devotedness, my sacrifice, and my painful end will assure me, in
     your eyes, a certain superiority over him. I have allowed to
     escape, in the candid credulity of my heart, the treasure I
     possessed. Many people tell me that you loved me enough to lead me
     to hope you would have loved me much. That idea takes from my mind
     all bitterness, and leads me only to blame myself. You will accept
     this last farewell, and you will bless me for having taken refuge
     in the inviolable asylum where all hatred is extinguished, and
     where all love endures forever. Adieu, mademoiselle. If your
     happiness could be purchased by the last drop of my blood, I would
     shed that drop. I willingly make the sacrifice of it to my misery!

                                      "RAOUL, VICOMTE DE BRAGELONNE."

"The letter is very well," said the captain. "I have only one fault to
find with it."

"Tell me what that is?" said Raoul.

"Why, it is, that it tells everything, except the thing which exhales,
like a mortal poison, from your eyes and from your heart; except the
senseless love which still consumes you." Raoul grew paler, but remained
silent.

"Why did you not write simply these words:

"'Mademoiselle--Instead of cursing you, I love you and I die.'"

"That is true," exclaimed Raoul, with a sinister kind of joy.

And tearing the letter he had just taken back, he wrote the following
words upon a leaf of his tablets:

"To procure the happiness of once more telling you I love you, I commit
the baseness of writing to you; and to punish myself for that baseness,
I die." And he signed it.

"You will give her these tablets, captain, will you not?"

"When?" asked the latter.

"On the day," said Bragelonne, pointing to the last sentence, "on the
day when you can place a date under these words." And he sprang away
quickly to join Athos, who was returning with slow steps.

As they re-entered the fort, the sea rose with that rapid, gusty
vehemence which characterizes the Mediterranean; the ill humor of the
element became a tempest. Something shapeless, and tossed about
violently by the waves, appeared just off the coast.

"What is that?" said Athos--"a wrecked boat?"

"No, it is not a boat," said D'Artagnan.

"Pardon me," said Raoul, "there is a bark gaining the port rapidly."

"Yes, there is a bark in the creek, which is prudently seeking shelter
here; but that which Athos points to in the sand is not a boat at
all--it has run aground."

"Yes, yes, I see it."

"It is the carriage which I threw into the sea, after landing the
prisoner."

"Well!" said Athos, "if you will take my advice, D'Artagnan, you will
burn that carriage, in order that no vestige of it may remain, without
which the fishermen of Antibes, who have believed they had to do with
the devil, will endeavor to prove that your prisoner was but a man."

"Your advice is good, Athos, and I will this night have it carried out,
or rather, I will carry it out myself; but let us go in, for the rain
falls heavily, and the lightning is terrific."

As they were passing over the ramparts to a gallery of which D'Artagnan
had the key, they saw M. de Saint-Mars directing his steps toward the
chamber inhabited by the prisoner. Upon a sign from D'Artagnan, they
concealed themselves in an angle of the staircase.

"What is it?" said Athos.

"You will see. Look. The prisoner is returning from chapel."

And they saw, by the red flashes of the lightning against the violet fog
which the wind stamped upon the bankward sky, they saw pass gravely, at
six paces behind the governor, a man clothed in black and masked by a
vizor of polished steel, soldered to a helmet of the same nature, which
altogether enveloped the whole of his head. The fire of the heavens cast
red reflections upon the polished surface, and these reflections, flying
off capriciously, seemed to be angry looks launched by this unfortunate,
instead of imprecations. In the middle of the gallery, the prisoner
stopped for a moment, to contemplate the infinite horizon, to respire
the sulphurous perfumes of the tempest, to drink in thirstily the hot
rain, and to breathe a sigh resembling a smothered roar.

"Come on, monsieur," said Saint-Mars, sharply to the prisoner, for he
already became uneasy at seeing him look so long beyond the walls.
"Monsieur, come on!"

"Say monseigneur!" cried Athos, from his corner, with a voice so solemn
and terrible, that the governor trembled from head to foot. Athos
insisted upon respect being paid to fallen majesty. The prisoner turned
round.

"Who spoke?" asked Saint-Mars.

"It was I," replied D'Artagnan, showing himself promptly. "You know that
is the order."

"Call me neither Monsieur nor Monseigneur," said the prisoner in his
turn, in a voice that penetrated to the very soul of Raoul; "call me
ACCURSED!" He passed on, and the iron door creaked after him.

"That is truly an unfortunate man!" murmured the musketeer in a hollow
whisper, pointing-out to Raoul the chamber inhabited by the prince.




CHAPTER CVII.

PROMISES.


Scarcely had D'Artagnan re-entered his apartment with his two friends,
than one of the soldiers of the fort came to inform him that the
governor was seeking for him. The bark which Raoul had perceived at sea,
and which appeared so eager to gain the port, came to Sainte-Marguerite
with an important dispatch for the captain of the musketeers. On opening
it, D'Artagnan recognized the writing of the king: "I should think,"
said Louis XIV., "you will have completed the execution of my orders,
Monsieur d'Artagnan; return then immediately to Paris, and join me at
the Louvre."

"There is the end of my exile!" cried the musketeer with joy; "God be
praised, I am no longer a jailer!" And he showed the letter to Athos.

"So then you must leave us?" replied the latter, in a melancholy tone.

"Yes; but to meet again, dear friend, seeing that Raoul is old enough
now to go alone with M. de Beaufort, and who will prefer his father
going back in company with M. d'Artagnan, to forcing him to travel two
hundred leagues solitarily to reach home at La Fere; would you not,
Raoul?"

"Certainly," stammered the latter, with an expression of tender regret.

"No, no, my friend," interrupted Athos, "I will never quit Raoul till
the day his vessel shall have disappeared on the horizon. As long as he
remains in France, he shall not be separated from me."

"As you please, dear friend; but we will, at least, leave
Sainte-Marguerite together; take advantage of the bark which will convey
me back to Antibes."

"With all my heart; we cannot too soon be at a distance from this fort,
and from the spectacle which saddened us so just now."

The three friends quitted the little isle, after paying their respects
to the governor, and by the last flashes of the departing tempest they
took their farewell of the white walls of the fort. D'Artagnan parted
from his friends that same night, after having seen fire set to the
carriage upon the shore by the orders of Saint-Mars, according to the
advice the captain had given him. Before getting on horseback, and after
leaving the arms of Athos: "My friends," said he, "you bear too much
resemblance to two soldiers who are abandoning their post. Something
warns me that Raoul will require being supported by you in his rank.
Will you allow me to ask permission to go over into Africa with a
hundred good muskets? The king will not refuse me, and I will take you
with me."

"Monsieur d'Artagnan," replied Raoul, pressing his hand with emotion,
"thanks for that offer, which would give us more than we wish, either
Monsieur le Comte or I. I, who am young, stand in need of labor of mind
and fatigue of body; Monsieur le Comte wants the profoundest repose. You
are his best friend. I recommend him to your care. In watching over him,
you will hold both our souls in your hands."

"I must go; my horse is all in a fret," said D'Artagnan, with whom the
most manifest sign of a lively emotion was the change of ideas in a
conversation. "Come, comte, how many days longer has Raoul to stay
here?"

"Three days at most."

"And how long will it take you to reach home?"

"Oh! a considerable time," replied Athos. "I shall not like the idea of
being separated too quickly from Raoul. Time will travel too fast of
itself to require me to aid it by distance. I shall only make
half-stages."

"And why so, my friend? Nothing is more dull than traveling slowly; and
hostelry life does not become a man like you."

"My friend, I came hither on post-horses; but I wish to purchase two
animals of a superior kind. Now, to take them home fresh, it would not
be prudent to make them travel more than seven or eight leagues a day."

"Where is Grimaud?"

"He arrived yesterday morning, with Raoul's appointments; and I have
left him to sleep."

"That is, never to come back again," D'Artagnan suffered to escape him.
"Till we meet again, then, dear Athos--and if you are diligent, well, I
shall embrace you the sooner." So saying, he put his foot in the
stirrup, which Raoul held.

"Farewell!" said the young man, embracing him.

"Farewell!" said D'Artagnan, as he got into his saddle.

His horse made a movement which divided the cavalier from his friends.
This scene had taken place in front of the house chosen by Athos, near
the gates of Antibes, whither D'Artagnan, after his supper, had ordered
his horses to be brought. The road began to extend there, white and
undulating in the vapors of the night. The horse eagerly respired the
salt, sharp perfume of the marshes. D'Artagnan put him into a trot; and
Athos and Raoul sadly turned toward the house. All at once they heard
the rapid approach of a horse's steps, and at first believed it to be
one of those singular repercussions which deceive the ear at every turn
in a road. But it was really the return of the horseman. They uttered a
cry of joyous surprise; and the captain, springing to the ground like a
young man, seized within his arms the two beloved heads of Athos and
Raoul. He held them long embraced thus, without speaking a word, or
suffering the sigh which was bursting his breast to escape him. Then, as
rapidly as he had come back, he set off again, with a sharp application
of his spurs to the sides of his fiery horse.

"Alas!" said the comte, in a low voice, "alas! alas!"

"Evil presage!" on his side said D'Artagnan to himself, making up for
lost time. "I could not smile upon them. An evil presage!"

The next day Grimaud was on foot again. The service commanded by M. de
Beaufort was happily accomplished. The flotilla, sent to Toulon by the
exertions of Raoul, had set out, dragging after it in little nutshells,
almost invisible, the wives and friends of the fishermen and smugglers
put in requisition for the service of the fleet. The time, so short,
which remained for the father and the son to live together, appeared to
have doubled in rapidity, as the swiftness of everything increases which
inclines toward mixing with the gulf of eternity.

Athos and Raoul returned to Toulon, which began to be filled with the
noise of carriages, with the noise of arms, with the noise of neighing
horses. The trumpeters sounded their spirited marches; the drummers
signalized their strength; the streets were overflowing with soldiers,
servants, and tradespeople. The Duc de Beaufort was everywhere,
superintending the embarkation with the zeal and interest of a good
captain. He encouraged even the most humble of his companions; he
scolded his lieutenants, even those of the highest rank. Artillery,
provisions, baggage, he insisted upon seeing all himself. He examined
the equipment of every soldier; he assured himself of the health and
soundness of every horse. It was plain that, light, boastful, and
egotistical, in his hotel, the gentleman became the soldier again--the
high noble, a captain--in face of the responsibility he had accepted.
And yet, it must be admitted that, whatever was the care with which he
presided over the preparations for departure, it was easy to perceive
careless precipitation, and the absence of all the precaution which make
