overlook these and, as they came up, beams of wood and huge stones
were cast down upon them; striking with such force that it soon
became evident, to those within them, that the towers would not
hold together.

They were dragged on, however, until a canal crossed the road. The
bridge had been removed, and both the cavalry and the towers were
brought to a standstill. The latter were abandoned, and Cortez
ordered his troops to make a road forward, by filling up the canal
with stones and wood from the houses near.

While engaged in this operation, they were exposed to an incessant
fire from every point of advantage in the neighborhood, and from
the opposite bank of the canal. The work was, however, completed;
and the cavalry, crossing, drove the Mexicans headlong down the
great street; until they came to another canal, where the same work
had again to be performed. No less than seven canals crossed the
street, and it took two days of constant fighting before the last
of these was crossed, and the whole street in their hands.

Just as the last canal had been captured, Cortez, who was ever at
the head of his men, received news that the Mexicans desired to
open a parley with him, and that some of their nobles had arrived
at the palace for that purpose. Delighted at the news, he rode back
with his officers. The Mexicans requested that the two priests who
had been captured in the great temple should be released, and
should be the bearers of his terms, and discuss the negotiations.

Cortez at once consented, and the priests left with the envoys;
with instructions that, if the Mexicans would lay down their arms,
the past should be forgiven. The mission was, however, a mere
trick. The Mexicans were most anxious to rescue the priests, one of
whom was the high priest, and therefore most sacred in their eyes.
Cortez had scarcely sat down to a meal, which he sorely needed
after his fatigues, when the news was brought that the Mexicans had
again attacked, with greater fury than ever; and, at three points,
had driven off the detachments placed to guard the newly-made
causeways across the canal.

Cortez and his companions leaped on their horses and, riding down
the great street, again cleared it. But no sooner had he reached
the other end than the Mexicans, gathering in the lanes and side
streets, poured in again, and overpowered the guard at one of the
principal canals.

Swarms of warriors poured in on all sides, and a storm of arrows
and other missiles was poured down upon Cortez and his cavaliers.
The confusion at the broken bridge was tremendous. The cavalry and
infantry struggled fiercely with the crowds of foes, while others
strove again to repair the bridge which the Mexicans had again torn
down.

Cortez himself performed prodigies of valor in covering the retreat
of his men, dashing alone into the midst of the ranks of the enemy,
shouting his battle cry, and dealing death with every blow of his
sword. So far did he penetrate among his foes, that reports spread
that he was killed; and when at last he fought his way back, and
leaped his horse over a chasm still remaining in the bridge, his
escape was regarded by his troops as absolutely miraculous; and it
was said that he had been saved by the national Apostle, Saint
James, and the Virgin Mary, who had fought by his side. At night
the Mexicans, as usual, drew off; and the Spaniards, dispirited and
exhausted, fell back to their citadel.

That evening Montezuma died. He had refused all nourishment, as
well as medicine, from the time he had been wounded. Father Olmedo
did his best to persuade him to embrace the Christian faith, but
Montezuma stoutly refused. Just before he died he sent for Cortez,
and recommended his three daughters by his principal wife to his
charge; begging him to interest his master, the emperor, on their
behalf, and to see that they had some portion of their rightful
inheritance.

"Your lord will do this," he said, "if only for the friendly
offices I have rendered the Spaniards; and for the love that I have
shown them, though it has brought me to this condition; but for
this I bear them no ill will."

This Cortez promised and, after the conquest, took the three ladies
into his own family. They were instructed in the doctrines of
Christianity, and were married to Spanish nobles, and handsome
dowries assigned to them.

The news of Montezuma's death was received with real grief by the
Spaniards, to whom his generosity, and constant kindness, and
gentleness of manner had endeared him. There can be but little
doubt that, in spite of the accusations against him of meditating
treachery, Montezuma was, from the time they entered the capital,
sincere in his goodwill towards the Spaniards. He was devoted to
his own gods, and believed implicitly in the prophecy that
Quetzalcoatl, or his descendants, would return to rule Mexico.
Their superior science and attainments confirmed him in his belief
that the Spaniards fulfilled the prophecy, and he was willing to
resign alike his power, his possessions, and himself to their
hands. In his early days he had shown great personal bravery; and
the cowardice he displayed, throughout the whole of his dealing
with the Spaniards, was the result of superstition, and not that of
personal fear.

Cortez paid all respect to the remains of his late unhappy captive.
The body was arrayed in royal robes, and laid on a bier; and was
carried, by the nobles who had remained faithful to him during his
imprisonment, into the city. It is uncertain where Montezuma was
finally buried.

With the death of the emperor, the last hope of the Spaniards of
making terms with their assailants vanished. There was nothing,
now, but retreat. After some debate, it was settled that this
should take place at night, when they would find the Mexicans
unprepared. The difficulties of passage would be greater; but these
would, it was thought, be counterbalanced by the advantage of being
able to make at least a portion of their retreat unobserved.

It was determined that no time should be lost. The Mexicans would
doubtless be mourning over the body of Montezuma, and would be
unprepared for such prompt action on the part of the Spaniards.

The first question was the disposal of the treasure. The soldiers
had, for the most part, converted their share of the gold into
chains; which they wore round their necks. But there was a vast
amount in bars and ornaments, constituting the one-fifth which had
been set aside for the crown, the one-fifth for Cortez himself, and
the shares of his principal officers.

One of the strongest horses was laden with the richest portion of
the crown treasure, but all the rest was abandoned. The gold lay in
great heaps.

"Take what you like of it!" Cortez said to his men, "but be careful
not to overload yourselves. 'He travels safest, in the dark, who
travels lightest.'"

His own veterans took his advice, and contented themselves with
picking out a few of the most valuable ornaments; but the soldiers
of Narvaez could not bring themselves to leave such treasures
behind them, and loaded themselves up with as much gold as they
could carry.

Cortez now arranged the order of march. The van was composed of two
hundred Spanish foot, and twenty horsemen, under the orders of
Gonzalo de Sandoval. The rearguard, with the main body of the
infantry and the greater portion of the guns, was commanded by
Alvarado and Velasquez de Leon. Cortez himself led the center,
which was in charge of the baggage, some of the heavy guns, and the
prisoners; among whom were a son and two daughters of Montezuma,
Cacama, and the other nobles who had been in prison with him. The
Tlascalans were divided among the three corps.

A portable bridge had been prepared for crossing the canals which
intersected the causeway; the intention being that it should be
laid across a canal, that the army should pass over it, and that it
should then be carried forward to the next gap in the causeway.
This was a most faulty arrangement, necessitating frequent and long
delays, and entailing almost certain disaster. Had three such
portable bridges been constructed, the column could have crossed
the causeway with comparatively little risk; and there was no
reason why these bridges should not have been constructed, as they
could have been carried, without difficulty, by the Tlascalans.

At midnight the troops were in readiness for the march. Mass was
performed by Father Olmedo; and at one o'clock on July 1st, 1520,
the Spaniards sallied out from the fortress that they had so
stoutly defended.

Silence reigned in the city. As noiselessly as possible, the troops
made their way down the broad street, expecting every moment to be
attacked; but even the tramping of the horses, and the rumbling of
the baggage wagons and artillery did not awake the sleeping
Mexicans, and the head of the column arrived at the head of the
causeway before they were discovered. Then, as the advanced guard
were preparing to lay the portable bridge across the first opening,
some Aztec sentinels gave the alarm.

The priests on the summits of the temples heard their cries, and at
once sounded their horns and the huge war drum. Instantly the city
awoke, and the silence was succeeded by a roar of sound. The
vanguard had scarcely got upon the causeway when canoes shot out
upon the lake, and soon a storm of stones and arrows burst upon the
column. More and more terrible did it become, as fresh canoes,
crowded with the warriors, came up. Many of these pushed up to the
causeway itself; and the natives, landing, fell upon the Spaniards
with fury.

The latter made no stay. Fighting their way through their foes they
pressed on until they reached the next opening in the causeway, and
there waited for the bridge to come up. But a column many thousands
strong, with baggage and artillery, takes a long time to cross a
bridge; and the advanced guard had reached the opening long before
the rear had passed the bridge, and there stood helpless, exposed
to the terrible storm of missiles, until at last the column were
all across the bridge.

Then forty picked men, who had been specially told off for the
task, tried to raise it so that it might be carried to the front;
but the weight of the baggage wagons and artillery had so wedged it
into the earth, that they were unable to move it. They persevered
in their efforts until most of them had fallen. The rest bore the
terrible news to the army that the bridge was immovable.

A terrible cry of despair arose, as the news spread. All hope
seemed lost and, regardless of order or discipline, all pressed
forward to endeavor, in some way or other, to cross the obstacle
that barred their way.

Pressed on by those behind them, Sandoval and his cavaliers dashed
into the water. The distance was short, but the horses were weak
from hunger, and burdened by their own heavy armor and that of
their riders. Some succeeded in swimming across. Others sank; while
some reached the opposite side, only to fall back again, as they
tried to climb the steep bank.

The infantry followed them, throwing away their armor to enable
them to swim. Some succeeded, others were pressed down by their
comrades. Many were killed by the war clubs or spears of the
Mexicans in their canoes. Others again, half stunned by the clubs,
were dragged into the canoes and carried off to the city to be
sacrificed.

All along the causeway the fight raged unceasingly; the Aztecs in
the boats alongside leaping ashore, and grappling with their foes,
and rolling with them down the causeway into the water; while those
in the distance kept up their rain of missiles. The opening in the
causeway was at last filled--choked up with ammunition wagons and
guns, bales of rich goods, chests of gold, and the bodies of men
and horses--and over these the Spaniards made their way.

Cortez had swum or waded across on his horse, and he rode on until
he joined Sandoval and the remains of the advanced guard, who were
checked at the third and last opening. The cavaliers set the
example to their followers by plunging into the water. The rest
followed as best they could. Many were drowned by the weight of the
gold they carried. Others got across by clinging to the tails and
manes of the horses.

Cortez, with Sandoval and other cavaliers, led the retreat until
they reached the end of the causeway. The din of battle was now far
behind, but those who came up brought the news that the rear guard
were so sorely pressed, that they would be destroyed unless aid
reached them.

Cortez and his companions did not hesitate. They dashed along the
causeway, again swam the canal, and made their way through the
crowd until they reached the rear guard. Morning was breaking now,
and it showed the lake covered with canoes filled with warriors.
Along the whole length of the causeway a desperate fight was
raging.

Cortez found Alvarado on foot, his horse had been killed under him.
With a handful of followers, he was still desperately defending the
rear against the Mexicans, who had poured out from the city in
pursuit. The artillery had at first done good service, sweeping the
causeway and mowing down hundreds of their assailants; but the
Aztecs were careless of life, and rushed on so furiously that they
swept over the guns, killing those who served them, and fell upon
the infantry.

The charge of Cortez and his companions for a moment bore back the
foe; but, pressed by those behind, they swept aside resistance, and
bore back the Spaniards to the edge of the canal. Cortez and his
companions plunged in and swam across. Alvarado stood on the brink,
hesitating. Unhorsed and defenseless, he could not make his way
across the gap, which was now crowded with the canoes of the enemy.
He set his strong lance on the bottom of the canal and, using it as
a leaping pole, sprang across. The feat was an extraordinary one,
for although the width is not given, it was declared, by those who
witnessed it, to be impossible for any mortal. It filled friends
and foes alike with astonishment; and the spot is, to this day,
known by the Mexicans as "Alvarado's Leap."

The Aztecs followed no farther. They were occupied, now, in
securing the enormous wealth the Spaniards had left behind them;
and the remnants of the army marched along the causeway unmolested,
and took possession of the village at its end.

Cortez, iron hearted as he was, sat down and burst into tears as he
viewed the broken remnant of his army. He was consoled, however, by
finding that many of his most trusted companions had escaped.
Sandoval, Alvarado, Olid, Ordaz and Avila were safe; and so, to his
great joy, was Marina. She had, with a daughter of a Tlascalan
chief, been placed under the escort of a party of Tlascalan
warriors, in the van of the column, and had passed unharmed through
the dangers of the night.

The loss of the Spaniards in their retreat is variously estimated;
but the balance of authority, among contemporary writers, places it
at four hundred and fifty Spaniards, and four thousand Tlascalans.
This, with the loss sustained in the previous conflicts, reduced
the Spaniards to about a third, and the Tlascalans to a fifth of
the force which had entered the capital. The greater part of the
soldiers of Narvaez had been killed. They had formed the rear
guard, and had not only borne the brunt of the battle, but had
suffered from the effect of their cupidity. Of the cavalry but
twenty-three remained mounted, all the artillery had been lost, and
every musket thrown away in the flight.

Velasquez de Leon had fallen in the early part of the retreat,
bravely defending the rear; and several others among the leaders
had also fallen, together with all the prisoners whom they had
brought out from the capital.

The remains of the army straggled on into the town of Tlacopan, but
Cortez would allow of no halt there. At any moment the exultant
Aztecs from the capital might arrive and, in a battle in the
streets, the Spaniards would stand no chance, whatever, with their
foes. He therefore hurried the soldiers through and, when outside,
endeavored to form them into some sort of order.

It was necessary to give them a few hours of repose, and he led
them towards an eminence, crowned by a temple, which commanded the
plain. It was held by a party of natives; and the troops,
dispirited and exhausted, refused at first to advance against them;
but the influence of Cortez, backed by the example of his officers,
had its usual effect. The column moved forward against the temple,
and the natives, after a few discharges of missiles, abandoned the
place.

It was a large building, affording ample shelter for the Spaniards
and their allies. Provisions were found there, and a large supply
of fuel intended for the service of the temple. Here, lighting
great fires, they dried their clothing, bound up their wounds and,
after partaking of food, threw themselves down to sleep.

Fortunate it was for the Spaniards that the Mexicans, contented
with the slaughter they had inflicted, the plunder they had
captured, and most of all with the prisoners whom they had carried
off to be sacrificed on their altars, retired to the capital, and
allowed the invaders twenty-four hours' breathing time. Had they
pressed them hotly and relentlessly, from the moment when they
emerged from the causeway, they would have annihilated them; for at
that time the Spaniards were too worn out, and dispirited, to be
capable of any effectual resistance. Food and rest, however, did
wonders for them. They were hardy veterans, and with Cortez and the
leaders they most trusted with them, they soon came to look at
matters in a more cheerful light.

They were still stronger than they were when they first marched
upon Mexico. Why, then, should they despair of making their way
back to Tlascala, where they would have rest and friends? They knew
there was a long and painful march before them, and probably
desperate battles to fight; but in a fair field, they felt
themselves a match for any number of the enemy; and when, late in
the evening, their officers bade them form up and prepare for a
night's march, they fell in steadily and willingly; and Cortez felt
that they could again be relied upon, under every emergency.



Chapter 19: The Passage Of The Causeway.


On marching out from the city, Roger and his two comrades formed
part of a picked band, to whom was entrusted the charge of the
prisoners. Roger had been specially selected, as he could translate
to them any order given by the officer of the party; and he was
ordered to march next to them.

He had once or twice in the past few days been enabled, by the
intervention of Marina, to visit the prisoners. Cacama's spirit was
in no way shaken by captivity.

"Your general has made a fatal mistake," he said, "in sending
Cuitlahua out to pacify the populace. He is of very different stuff
from Montezuma, who has become a woman in the hands of the Spanish.
You will see that he will never return, but will lead the people on
to the attack.

"It matters little to us. I know that we shall never escape. The
Spaniards will slay us all, rather than that we should rejoin our
people. But for that I care not. One would rather die in battle
than be slain as a captive; but in either case we shall be dying
for our country, and what can we wish for more? It is the duty of
all to risk their lives, whenever they be needed for their country.
Some here have fought in fifty battles for Mexico. I am younger,
but not too young to have shared in many a battle. I fear death in
no way, my friend, and should welcome it, as a change from
captivity.

"I am well content, now. I should have grieved to have died,
believing that the Mexicans had lost all their ancient spirit and
courage, and were content to be slaves beneath the yoke of a
handful of strangers; but now I see that they were asleep, and not
dead; and that these boasting strangers will find that the despised
Mexican is a match for them; I shall die happy."

The news of the wounding of Montezuma, and the desperate fighting
in the streets and round the palace, excited the prisoners to the
utmost. In their place of confinement they heard the thunder of the
guns, the perpetual rattle of the musketry, and the shouts and
yells of the combatants; but it was only when Roger visited them
that they obtained any details as to the combat that was going on.
They were filled with enthusiasm, as they heard how desperately
their countrymen were fighting; and their only regret was that they
could not join in the struggle, and die leading the assault against
the Spaniards.

Roger did not see them, upon the last day, until he took his place
by their side, when the column formed up in the courtyard.

"I am to keep near you, Cacama," he said, "in order to translate
anything the officer may have to say to you."

"We are going to leave the city?" Cacama asked, eagerly.

"Yes, we are going to cross the causeway."

The officer in charge here came up, and gave an order which Roger
interpreted:

"He asks whether you will all give a pledge to remain silent, as we
march out. If you will do so, he will accept your promise; but if
not, he will be forced to gag you, as the safety of the army
depends upon our getting beyond the streets, before our march is
discovered."

"I wonder that they are ready to take our promise," Cacama said
disdainfully, "after their own treachery. However, an Aztec noble
is not like a Spaniard. Our faith may be depended upon. We will
give our word to be silent."

The other prisoners also promised, and were allowed to take their
places in the column, ungagged.

The alarm was given long before the rear of the column had got out
from the street. Cacama gave an exclamation of joy, when he heard
the silence broken by loud cries at the end of the street; and
immediately afterwards by the shouts of the priests on the lofty
temples, by the blowing of horns, and the beating of the great war
drum.

"The game has begun," he said. "We shall see how many Spaniards
remain alive, when the sun rises. Long before they can get across
the causeway, our people will be upon them. We shall not see the
triumph, for without defensive armor we shall fall, in the
darkness, beneath the missiles of our own people. That matters not.
Better to die at the hands of a Mexican, struggling to be free,
than at those of these treacherous invaders."

The missiles showered down thickly upon the column, from the
houses, till they emerged from the street and made their way out on
to the causeway. Then they became exposed to the storm of arrows,
darts, and stones from the canoes on the lake. By their officer's
orders, the soldiers immediately in charge of the prisoners drew
their swords and formed a circle round them; with orders to fall
upon and kill them, at once, did they make the slightest movement
to escape. Roger translated to the captives the officer's assurance
that, although he was most anxious for their safety, he had no
resource but to order the soldiers to slay them, at once, if they
made any movement to escape.

"We shall not try to escape," Cacama said. "How can we do so, with
our hands bound?"

During the long pause that ensued, before the rear of the column
passed over the bridge on to the causeway, the impatience among the
soldiers was great. Many had already fallen beneath the missiles of
the enemy. Scarce one but had received wounds, more or less severe.
Several of the prisoners, too, had fallen.

"What is it?" Cacama asked, as the cry of despair went up; when it
became known that the bridge was immovable, and that there were no
means of crossing the breaks in the causeway, ahead.

He muttered an exclamation of triumph, when Roger repeated to him
the news he had just learned.

"That settles it," he said. "Their fate is now sealed. The gods are
at last fighting again for Mexico.

"Roger, I am sorry for you, I am sorry for my wife, and for
Amenche; but I rejoice for my country. If you should escape this
night, Roger--and you have more chance than most, since you speak
our language--do all you can for them."

"You may be sure that I shall do that, Cacama; but the chance of
any escaping seems, to me, a small one. Still, it may be that some
will get over alive. The Spaniards have their faults, Cacama, but
they are grand soldiers; and at any rate, now that they see they
must win their way or perish, they will perform wonders."

"Ah!" the exclamation was caused by an arrow striking the young
prince in the chest.

At this time a terrible fight was raging all around them. The
natives had gained a footing on the causeway, and the Spaniards
were fighting hand to hand with them.

"I am mortally wounded, Roger," Cacama said. "Most of the others
have already fallen. It is better so. I have lived long enough to
see vengeance taken on our oppressors.

"Roger, there is one chance for you. Wrap round you one of our
mantles. In the darkness, none will see that you are not a Mexican,
and they will not shoot at you.

"Listen, there is Cuitcatl's war cry. I know his voice; and
doubtless they have discerned our white dresses, in the darkness,
and he is trying to rescue us."

The crowd, pressing along the causeway, had swept the guards away
from the prisoners--indeed, there were now scarcely any prisoners
left to guard. Unprotected by any defensive armor, most of them had
fallen very early in the conflict. Roger was supporting Cacama, and
another prisoner lay dead at their feet.

Roger stooped and snatched off his mantle; then, lifting Cacama in
his arms, forced his way through the press to the edge of the
causeway, just as a canoe ran up alongside, and a number of Aztecs
sprang ashore.

"Cuitcatl!" Roger shouted, at the top of his voice.

"Here," the young noble exclaimed, as he sprang forward.

"Here is Cacama," Roger cried.

At the same moment, he received a stunning blow on the back of his
helmet from one of the Spaniards, who took him for a Mexican; and
fell down the side of the causeway, into the water, with his burden
in his arms.

When Roger recovered his senses, he was lying in a canoe, which was
being paddled rapidly. He had been insensible but a few minutes,
for the cries of the combatants still sounded close at hand.
Cuitcatl was bending over him.

"How is Cacama?" he asked, as soon as he could speak.

"Alas! He is dead," Cuitcatl replied. "You did your best to save
him, Roger.

"He spoke but once, after we had got him into the canoe. He said
'Protect my wife, Cuitcatl; and save our friend.'"

