refreshment; but he, moaning, refused:

"I entreat [you], if any of my beloved companions would be obedient to
me, bid me not satiate my heart with food or drink, since heavy grief
hath invaded me; but I will wait entirely till the setting sun, and will
endure."

So saying, he dismissed the other kings: but two sons of Atreus
remained; and noble Ulysses, Nestor, Idomeneus, and the aged knight
Phoenix, constantly endeavouring to delight him sorrowing; nor was he at
all delighted, before he should enter the mouth[638] of bloody war. But
remembering [Patroclus], he frequently heaved [a sigh], and said:

   [Footnote 638: So Ennius, p. 128. Hessel.: "Belli ferratos
   posteis portasque refregit." Virg. AEn. i. 298: "Claudentur belli
   portae." Stat. Theb. v. 136: "Movet ostia belli."]

"Surely once, thou too, O unhappy one! dearest of my companions, wouldst
thyself have set before me a plentiful feast, within my tent, speedily
and diligently, when the Greeks hastened to make tearful war upon the
horse-breaking Trojans. But now thou liest mangled; but my heart is
without drink and food, though they are within, from regret for thee;
for I could not suffer anything worse, not even if I were to hear of my
father being dead, who now perhaps sheds the tender tear in Phthia from
the want of such a son; while I, in a foreign people, wage war against
the Trojans, for the sake of detested Helen: or him, my beloved son, who
is nurtured for me at Scyros, if indeed he still lives, godlike
Neoptolemus. For formerly the mind within my bosom hoped that I alone
should perish here in Troy, far from steed-nourishing Argos, and that
thou shouldst return to Phthia, that thou mightst lead back my son in
thy black ship from Scyros, and mightst show him everything, my
property, my servants, and my great, lofty-domed abode. For now I
suppose that Peleus is either totally deceased, or that he, barely
alive, suffers pain from hateful old age, and that he is continually
expecting bad news respecting me, when he shall hear of my being dead."

Thus he spoke, weeping; and the elders also groaned, remembering, each
of them, the things which they had left in their dwellings. But the son
of Saturn felt compassion, seeing them weeping, and immediately to
Minerva addressed winged words:

"O daughter mine, thou entirely now desertest thy valiant hero. Is
Achilles then no longer at all a care to thee in thy mind? He himself is
sitting before his lofty-beaked ships, bewailing his dear companion;
while the others have gone to a banquet; but he is unrefreshed and
unfed. Go, therefore, instil into his breast nectar and delightful
ambrosia, that hunger may come not upon him."

So saying, he urged on Minerva, who was before eager. But she, like unto
a broad-winged, shrill-voiced harpy, leaped down from the heavens
through the air. The Greeks, however, were then arming themselves
throughout the camp, when she instilled into the bosom of Achilles
nectar and delightful ambrosia, that unpleasant hunger might not come
upon his limbs. Then she went to the solid mansion of her powerful sire,
and they, apart, poured forth from the swift ships.

And as when thick snow-flakes fly down from Jove, beneath the force of
the cold, air-clearing Boreas; so from the ships were borne out crowded
helmets, shining brightly, and bossed shields, strong-cavitied corslets,
and ashen spears. But the sheen reached to heaven, and all the earth
around smiled beneath the splendour of the brass; and a trampling of the
feet of men arose beneath. In the midst noble Achilles was armed, and
there was a gnashing of his teeth, and his eyes shone like a blaze of
fire; but intolerable grief entered his heart within him, and, enraged
against the Trojans, he put on the gifts of the god, which Vulcan,
toiling, had fabricated for him. First around his legs he placed the
beautiful greaves, joined with silver clasps, next he put on the corslet
round his breast, and suspended from his shoulders the brazen,
silver-studded sword; then he seized the shield, large and solid, the
sheen of which went to a great distance, as of the moon.[639] And as
when from the sea the blaze of a burning fire shines to mariners, which
is lit aloft amongst the mountains in a solitary place; but the storm
bears them against their inclination away from their friends over the
fishy deep; so from the shield of Achilles, beautiful and skilfully
made, the brightness reached the sky. But raising it, he placed the
strong helmet upon his head; and the helmet, crested with horse-hair,
shone like a star; and the golden tufts which Vulcan had diffused thick
around the cone were shaken. Then noble Achilles tried himself in his
arms if they would fit him, and if his fair limbs would move freely in
them; but they were like wings to him, and lifted up the shepherd of the
people. And from its sheath he drew forth his paternal spear, heavy,
great, and stout, which no other of the Greeks was able to brandish, but
Achilles alone knew how to hurl it--a Pelian ash, which Chiron had cut
for his father from the top of Pelion, to be a destruction to heroes.
But Automedon and Alcimus, harnessing the steeds, yoked them; and
beautiful collars were upon them. They put the bridles into their jaws,
and drew back the reins towards the well-glued car, when Automedon,
seizing the shining lash, fitted to his hand, leaped into the car;
Achilles, armed for battle, mounted behind him, glittering in his armour
like the shining sun; and terribly he gave command to the horses of his
sire:

   [Footnote 639: Milton, P. L. i. 284:

                 "........ his pond'rous shield
         Ethereal temper, massy, large, and round,
         Behind him cast; the broad circumference
         Hung on his shoulders like the moon."]

"Xanthus, and Balius, illustrious offspring of Podarges, resolve now in
a different manner to bring back your charioteer in safety to the body
of the Greeks, after we are satiated with battle, nor leave him there
dead, like Patroclus."

But from beneath the yoke, Xanthus, his swift-footed steed, addressed
him, and immediately hung down his head, and his whole mane, drooping
from the ring which was near the yoke, reached the ground. But the
white-armed goddess Juno gave him the power of speech:

"Now, at least, we will bear thee safe, O impetuous Achilles: but the
fatal day draws nigh to thee; nor are we to blame, but a mighty deity
and violent destiny. For not by our laziness, or sloth, have the Trojans
stripped the armour from the shoulders of Patroclus; but the bravest of
the gods, whom fair-haired Latona brought forth, slew him among the
front ranks, and gave glory to Hector. And [though] we can run even with
the blast of Zephyrus, which they say is the most fleet, yet to thyself
it is fated that thou shouldst be violently subdued by a god and a man."

Of him, having thus spoken, the Furies restrained the voice: but him
swift-footed Achilles, greatly indignant, addressed:

"O Xanthus, why dost thou predict my death to me? For it is not at all
necessary for thee. Well do I myself know that it is my fate to perish
here, far away from my dear father and mother. Nevertheless I will not
cease before the Trojans are abundantly satiated with war."

He spoke, and shouting amongst the front ranks, directed on his
solid-hoofed steeds.




                          BOOK THE TWENTIETH


                               ARGUMENT.

Jove permits the gods to join in the battle, and they take their
respective places on either side. AEneas engages Achilles, but is rescued
by Neptune. Hector, in revenge for the death of his brother Polydorus,
also attacks Achilles, and is only saved from death by the intervention
of Apollo. Achilles then slays many Trojans.


Thus around thee, O son of Peleus, were the Achaeans armed, insatiable in
fight, beside their crooked ships; and the Trojans, on the other side,
on the acclivity[640] of the plain. But Jove ordered Themis to summon
the gods to an assembly, from the top of many-valleyed Olympus, and she,
going round, ordered them to proceed to the palace of Jove. Nor was any
one of the rivers absent, save Oceanus, nor of the nymphs who inhabit
the pleasant groves and springs of rivers, and the grassy meads. Then,
coming to the habitation of cloud-compelling Jove, they sat down upon
shining polished benches, which Vulcan with cunning skill had made for
father Jove. Thus were they assembled within the palace of Jove: nor did
Neptune disobey the goddess, but he came to them from the sea. Then he
sat in the midst, and inquired the design of Jove:

   [Footnote 640: See x. 160; xi. 56.]

"Why again, O hurler of the glowing lightning, hast thou summoned the
gods to an assembly? Dost thou deliberate anything respecting the
Trojans and Greeks? For now their combat and the battle are on the point
of being kindled."

But him cloud-compelling Jove answering, addressed:

"Thou knowest, O earth-shaker, my design within my breast, [and] for
whose sake I have assembled you; for though about to perish, they are a
care to me. I will, however, remain sitting on the top of Olympus,
whence looking, I shall delight my soul; but depart the rest of you,
that ye may go to the Trojans and Greeks. Give aid to both, according as
is the inclination of each. For if Achilles alone shall fight against
the Trojans, they will not even for a little sustain the swift-footed
son of Peleus. Formerly even beholding him, they fled terrified; but now
when he is grievously enraged in his mind on account of his companion, I
fear lest he overthrow the wall, even contrary to fate."

Thus spoke Saturnian Jove, and he stirred up the unyielding[641]
contest; and the gods hastened to proceed to the battle, having
discordant minds. Juno, indeed, and Pallas Minerva [went] to the
assemblage of the ships, as well as earth-shaking Neptune, and useful
Mercury, who excelled in a prudent mind, with whom went Vulcan, looking
savage in his might, limping, and under him his weak limbs moved with
all their force. But to the Trojans [went] crest-tossing Mars, and with
him unshorn Phoebus,[642] and Diana, delighting in archery, Latona,
Xanthus, and laughter-loving Venus. As long as the gods were apart from
mortal men, so long the Greeks were greatly elated, because Achilles
appeared, for he had long abstained from the dire battle; and a violent
tremor came upon the Trojans, upon each of them as to their limbs,
fearing because they beheld the swift-footed son of Peleus glittering in
arms, equal to man-slaughtering Mars. But after the Olympians had come
to the crowd of men, then arose fierce Contention, the exciter of the
people, and Minerva shouted, sometimes standing beside the trench,
outside the wall, at other times she loudly shouted along the echoing
shores. But Mars yelled aloud on the other side, like unto a dark
whirlwind, keenly animating the Trojans from the lofty city, at other
times running along the Simois over Callicolone.[643]

Thus the blessed gods, inciting both sides, engaged, and among them made
severe contention to break out. But dreadfully from above thundered the
father of gods and men; whilst beneath Neptune shook the boundless earth
and the lofty summits of the mountains. The roots and all the summits of
many-rilled Ida were shaken, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships
of the Greeks. Pluto himself, king of the nether world, trembled
beneath, and leaped up from his throne, terrified, and shouted aloud,
lest earth-shaking Neptune should rend asunder the earth over him, and
disclose to mortals and immortals his mansions, terrible, squalid, which
even the gods loathe. So great a tumult arose from the gods engaging in
combat. Against king Neptune, indeed, stood Phoebus Apollo, having his
winged shafts, and against Mars the azure-eyed goddess Minerva. Opposed
to Juno stood the goddess of the golden bow, huntress Diana, rejoicing
in archery, the sister of Apollo; and opposite Latona, the
preserver,[644] useful Mercury. Against Vulcan also was the great
deep-eddying river, which the gods call Xanthus, and men the Scamander.

   [Footnote 641: Buttm. Lexil. p. 406, 3: "The adjective [Greek:
   aliastos], literally _unbending, unyielding, not to be turned_,
   became the epithet of a violent, uncontrollable, incessant
   tumult, battle, lamentation, &c, as at Il. M. 471; B. 797; O.
   760; and as an adverb at O. 549."]

   [Footnote 642: Hor. Od. i. xxii. 2: "Intonsum, pueri, dicite
   Cynthium." Tibull. i. 4, 37: "Solis aeterna est Phoebo, Bacchoque
   juventa: hanc decet intonsus crinis utrumque Deum." Various
   reasons are assigned for this; such as, "quia occidendo et
   renascendo semper est juvenior," Fulgent. Myth. i. 17; or, "quod
   ipse sit sol, et sol ignis est, qui nunquam senescit," Lutat. on
   Stat. Theb. i. 694. The inhabitants of Hieropolis, however,
   worshipped a bearded Apollo.--Macr. Sat. i. 17.]

   [Footnote 643: A rising ground which lay on the road from Troy
   towards the sea-coast, on the other side of the Simois,
   commanding the entire plain. Hence it is the rendezvous of the
   gods who favoured the Trojans.]

   [Footnote 644: We find a collateral verb [Greek:
   sokeiin]=_valere_, in AEsch. Eum. 36. Apollon. Lex. p. 762;
   Hesych. t. ii. p. 1334, derive [Greek: sokos] from [Greek:
   sosioikos], the former connecting it with [Greek: eriounios, o
   megalos oniskon, tout' esti ophelon].]

Thus indeed gods went against gods; but Achilles chiefly longed to
penetrate through the crowd against Hector, the son of Priam; for with
his blood his mind particularly ordered him to satiate Mars, the
invincible warrior. But Apollo, exciter of troops, immediately aroused
AEneas against the son of Peleus, and infused into him strong courage.
And he likened himself in voice to Lycaon, the son of Priam, and having
likened himself to him, Apollo, the son of Jove, said:

"O AEneas, counsellor of the Trojans, where are thy threats which, whilst
carousing, thou didst promise to the leaders of the Trojans, that thou
wouldst fight against Achilles, the son of Peleus?"

But him AEneas, answering, addressed in turn:

"Son of Priam, why dost thou order me, not wishing it, these things, to
fight against magnanimous Pelides? For shall I not now for the first
time stand against swift-footed Achilles, but already, on another
occasion, he chased me with his spear from Ida, when he attacked our
cattle, and laid waste Lyrnessus and Pedasus: but Jove preserved me, who
excited my strength and nimble limbs. Certainly I should have been
subdued beneath the hands of Achilles, and Minerva, who, preceding, gave
him victory, and encouraged him to slay the Lelegans and Trojans with
his brazen spear. Wherefore it is not possible that a man should fight
against Achilles, because one of the gods is ever beside him, who averts
destruction. Besides, also, his weapon flies direct, nor stops before it
has pierced through human flesh; though if the deity would extend an
equal scale of victory, not very easily would he conquer me, although he
boasts himself to be all brazen."

But him again king Apollo, the son of Jove, addressed:

"But do thou also pray, O hero, to the immortal gods, for they say that
thou too art sprung from Venus, the daughter of Jove, but he from an
inferior goddess; for the one is from Jove, and the other from the aged
sea-god. But direct thy invincible brass right against him, nor let him
at all avert thee by haughty words and threats."

Thus saying, he breathed great courage into the shepherd of the people;
and he advanced through the front ranks, accoutred in shining brass. Nor
did the son of Anchises escape the notice of white-armed Juno, going
against the son of Peleus through the ranks of men; but, calling the
gods together, she addressed them:

"Consider now, both Neptune and Minerva, in your minds, how these things
shall be. This AEneas, accoutred in shining brass, has advanced against
the son of Peleus; and Phoebus Apollo has urged him on. But come, let us,
however, turn him back again; or let some one of us stand by Achilles,
and give him great strength, nor let him at all be wanting in courage;
that he may know that the mightiest of the immortals love him; and that
those, on the contrary, are vain, who hitherto avert war and slaughter
from the Trojans. But we have all come down from Olympus, about to
participate in this battle, lest he should suffer anything among the
Trojans to-day; but hereafter he shall suffer those things, as
many as Fate at his birth wove in his thread [of destiny],[645] to him,
what time his mother brought him forth. But if Achilles shall not learn
these things from the voice of a god, he will afterwards be afraid when
any god comes against him in battle; for the gods, when made manifest,
are terrible to be seen manifestly." [646]

But her then earth-shaking Neptune answered:

"Juno, be not beyond reason enraged; nor is it at all necessary. I,
indeed, would not desire that we should engage the other gods in a
battle, since we are much more powerful.[647] Rather let us, going out
of the way, sit down upon a place of observation,[648] but the war shall
be a care to mortals. But if Mars shall begin the combat, or Apollo, or
shall restrain Achilles, and not suffer him to fight, then immediately
shall the strife of contention there arise to us; and I think that they,
having very speedily decided it, will return to Olympus, and mix with
the assembly of other gods, violently subdued by necessity under our
hands."

Thus then having spoken, the azure-haired [god] led the way to the lofty
mound-raised wall of divine Hercules, which the Trojans and Pallas
Minerva had made, that, flying, he might escape from the sea-monster,
when pursued from the shore to the plain. There then Neptune sat down,
and the other gods, and drew an indissoluble cloud around their
shoulders; whilst on the other side they sat upon the tops of
Callicolone, around thee, O archer Apollo, and Mars, the sacker of
cities. Thus they sat on both sides, planning designs, yet both were
unwilling to commence grievous war; but Jove, sitting aloft, cheered
them on. All the plain, however, was filled with them, and glittered
with the brass of men and horses, and the earth echoed under the feet of
them rushing together. But two heroes, by far the most valiant, advanced
towards [each other] into the midst of both armies, eager to
fight,--AEneas, the son of Anchises, and noble Achilles. And first AEneas,
threatening, advanced, nodding with his strong casque; and before his
breast he held his impetuous shield, and shook his brazen spear. But on
the other side Pelides rushed against him like a destructive lion, which
men assembled together, a whole village, are anxious to kill. He,
however, at first despising them, proceeds; but when some one of
vigorous youths has wounded him with a dart, yawning, he collects
himself [for a spring],[649] and the foam arises round his teeth, and
his valiant soul groans within his breast, and he lashes his sides and
thighs on both sides with his tail, and rouses himself to battle; then,
grimly glaring, he is borne straight on by his strength, if he can kill
some of the men, or is himself destroyed in the first crowd. Thus did
his might and noble soul urge Achilles to go against magnanimous AEneas.
But when now, advancing, they approached each other, swift-footed, noble
Achilles first addressed the other:

   [Footnote 645: See Duport, p. 114. On the web woven by the Fates
   for man's life, see Virg. Ecl. iv. 46; Catullus, lxiv. 328. But
   this passage of Homer seems to imply the ancient notion, that the
   Fates might be delayed, but never set aside. Cf. Nemes. de Nat.
   Horn. i. 36; Censorin. de die Nat. xiv.; Serv. on AEn. vii. 398.]

   [Footnote 646: "Deos _manifesto_ in lumine vidi."--Virg. AEn. iv.
   358. On the belief that the sight of a god was attended with
   danger, cf. Liv. i. xvi. where Proculus beseeches the apparition
   of Romulus "ut contra intueri fas esset." See intpp. on Exod.
   xxxiii. 20; Judges xiii. 22.]

   [Footnote 647: I am half inclined to condemn this verse as
   spurious, with Ernesti. It is wanting in MS. Lips, and ed. Rom.,
   and does not appear to have been read by Eustathius.]

   [Footnote 648: Compare the "Contemplantes" of Lucan, sub init.,
   where the gods seek a similar place of observation.]

   [Footnote 649: So [Greek: aleis] in xv. 403. "It is also used in
   the same way of a warrior, who, whilst he is preparing to rush on
   his enemy, or expecting his attack, draws himself up together,
   or, as we say, puts himself in an attitude of attack or
   defence."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 258.]

"Why, O AEneas, coming through so great a length of crowd, dost thou
stand against me? Does then thy soul urge thee to fight with me, hoping
that thou wilt govern the horse-breaking Trojans in the place[650] of
Priam? Yet even if thou shalt slay me, not thus will Priam place this
reward in thy hand: for he has sons; and he is himself steady, nor
inconstant. Or, if thou slayest me, have the Trojans cut off for thee an
enclosure[651] of soil surpassing others, suited to vines and the
plough, that thou mayest cultivate it? Still I hope thou wilt effect it
with difficulty. For I think I have at some other time put thee to
flight with my spear. Dost thou not remember when I impetuously drove
thee, when alone, from the oxen, with rapid feet, down the Idaean
mountains? Then indeed thou didst never turn round while flying, but
didst escape thence into Lyrnessus; but I wasted it, having attacked it
with the aid of Minerva and father Jove. The women also I led away
captives, having taken away their day of freedom; but Jove and the other
gods preserved thee. However, I do not think they will protect thee now,
as thou castest in thy mind; but I exhort thee, retiring, to go into the
crowd, nor stand against me, before thou suffer some evil; but [it is] a
fool [who] knows a thing [only] when it is done."

   [Footnote 650: [Greek: agti..... basileias] is Gaza's correct
   paraphrase.]

   [Footnote 651: Cf 194.]

But him AEneas answered in turn, and said:

"Do not think, O son of Peleus, to affright me, like an infant boy, with
words; since I also well know how to utter both threats and reproaches.
But we know each other's race, and we know our parents, hearing the
words of mortal men long since uttered; although by sight, indeed,
neither dost thou know mine, nor I thine. They say, indeed, that thou
art the offspring of renowned Peleus, and of thy mother Thetis, the
fair-haired sea-nymph; whereas I boast myself to be sprung from
magnanimous Anchises, and Venus is my mother. Of these the one or the
other shall this day lament their beloved son; for I think we shall not
return from the battle thus separated by childish words. But if thou
desirest to be taught these matters, that thou mayest well know our race
(for many men know it), cloud-compelling Jove indeed first begat
Dardanus.[652] And he built Dardania, for sacred Ilium, the city of
articulate-speaking men, was not as yet built in the plain, and they
still dwelt at the foot of many-rilled Ida. Dardanus again begat a son,
king Erichthonius, who was then the richest of mortal men; whose three
thousand mares pastured through the marsh, rejoicing in their tender
foals. Boreas, however, was enamoured of some of these when pasturing,
and having likened himself to an azure-maned steed, covered them; and
they, becoming pregnant, brought forth twelve female foals; which when
they bounded upon the fruitful earth, ran over the highest fruit of the
stalks of corn, nor did they break them:[653] but when they sported over
the broad back of the ocean, they ran along the surface of the ridge of
the hoary sea. But Erichthonius begat Tros, king of the Trojans. From
Tros again were descended three illustrious sons, Ilus, Assaracus, and
godlike Ganymede, who indeed was the handsomest of mortal men; and whom
the gods caught up into heaven, to pour out wine for Jove,[654] that, on
account of his beauty, he might be with the immortals. Ilus again begat
his renowned son Laomedon; but Laomedon begat Tithonus and Priam,
Lampus, Clytius, and Hicetaon, a branch of Mars; and Assaracus Capys,
who also begat his son Anchises. But Anchises begat me, and Priam noble
Hector. Of this race and blood do I boast myself to be. But Jove
increases and diminishes valour to men, as he pleases; for he is the
most powerful of all. But come, let us no longer talk of these things,
like little boys, standing in the middle combat of the strife. For it is
possible for both to utter very many reproaches, so that a hundred-oared
galley[655] would not contain the burthen; for the language of mortals
is voluble,[656] and the discourses in it numerous and varied: and vast
is the distribution[657] of words here and there. Whatsoever word thou
mayest speak, such also wilt thou hear. But what need is there to us of
disputes and railing, that we should quarrel with each other like women,
who, being angry with a soul-destroying strife, proceeding into the
middle of the way, chide each other with many things true and not true:
for rage also suggests those things?[658] With words, however, thou
shalt not turn me, courageous, from my valour, before thou lightest
against me with thy brass; but come, quickly let us make trial of each
other with brazen spears."

   [Footnote 652: On Dardanus, the eponymus of Dardania, see Grote,
   vol. i. p. 387, where the whole legend of Troy is admirably
   discussed. Cf. Virg. AEn. i. 292; iii. 167, where the Roman poet
   has made use of Homer in tracing the pedigree of AEneas to Jove.]

   [Footnote 653: This hyperbole has been emulated by numberless
   poets. Cf. Oppian, Cyn. i. 231; Apollon. Rh. i. 183; Quintus
   Calab. viii. 156; Virg. AEn. vii. 808; Claudian in 3rd Cons. Hon.
   i. 97.]

   [Footnote 654: Cf. Pindar, Ol. i. 69, and Serv. on AEn. i. 32.]

   [Footnote 655: Compare the Latin phrase, "plaustra convitiorum,"
   and Duport, p. 116.]

   [Footnote 656: [Greek: Strepte--ygra kai eylygistos].--Eustath.]

   [Footnote 657: [Greek: Nomos, epinemesis eph' ekateoa].--Eustath.
   See Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 658: "_I.e._ prompts to utter all sorts of things, true
   and false."--Oxf. Tr.]

He spoke, and hurled his brazen spear against the dreadful shield,
terrible [to be seen], and the huge buckler resounded with the stroke of
the javelin. But the son of Peleus, alarmed, held the shield from him
with his strong hand, for he supposed that the long spear of
great-hearted AEneas would easily penetrate; foolish! nor did he reflect
in his mind and soul, that the glorious gifts of the gods are not easy
to be subdued by mortal men, nor to yield. Nor then did the heavy spear
of warlike AEneas penetrate the shield; but the gold stopped it, the gift
of the god. It penetrated, however, through two folds, but there were
still three; since Vulcan had drawn five folds over it, two brazen, two
inside of tin, and one golden; in which the brazen spear was stopped.
But Achilles next sent forth his long-shadowed spear, and struck against
the shield of AEneas, equal on all sides, at the outside edge, where the
thinnest brass ran round it, and the ox-hide was thinnest upon it; but
the Pelian ash broke through, and the shield was crushed by it. But
AEneas crouched,[659] and being terrified, held the shield from him;
whilst the spear [passing] over his back, stuck in the earth eager [to
go on], for it had burst through both orbs of the mighty[660] shield.
But he, having escaped the long spear, stood still, but immoderate
sadness was poured over his eyes, terrified, because the weapon had
stuck so near him. But Achilles eagerly sprang upon him, drawing his
sharp sword, and shouting dreadfully. Then AEneas seized in his hand a
stone, a great weight, which not two men could bear, such as men now
are; but he, though alone, easily wielded it. Then indeed had AEneas
smitten him, rushing on, with the stone, either upon the helmet or the
shield, which kept off grievous destruction from him; and Pelides, in
close fight, had taken away his life with the sword, had not
earth-shaking Neptune quickly perceived it, and immediately addressed
this speech to the immortal gods:

   [Footnote 659: See on ver. 168.]

   [Footnote 660: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 83. The Schol. and Hesych.
   t. i. p. 296, interpret it "man-encircling."]

"Ye gods! certainly there now is grief to me, on account of magnanimous
AEneas,[661] who will quickly descend to Hades, subdued by the son of
Peleus, foolish, being persuaded by the words of far-darting Apollo; nor
can he by any means avert[662] sad destruction from him. But why now
should this guiltless[663] man suffer evils gratuitously, on account of
sorrows due to others, for he always presents gifts agreeable to the
gods who inhabit the wide heaven? But come, let us withdraw him from
death, lest even the son of Saturn be angry, if indeed Achilles slay
this man: moreover, it is fated that he should escape, that the race of
Dardanus, whom Jove loved above all the children that were descended
from him and mortal women, may not perish without offspring, and become
extinct. For already hath the son of Saturn hated the race of Priam, and
the might of AEneas shall now rule over the Trojans, and the sons of his
sons, who may be born in after-times."

   [Footnote 661: The remarks of Grote, vol. i. p. 428, sqq. on the
   character and position of AEneas throughout the Iliad, deserve
   much attention.]

   [Footnote 662: "The examples of [Greek: chraismein] are frequent
   enough in Homer to enable us safely to assert, from a comparison
   of them, that it never has (at least in his writings) the more
   general meaning of _to be useful, to help_, but, without an
   exception, the more definite sense of _to ward off_..... by
   examining passages we find, that even where no accusative is
   expressed, the evil to be warded off may always be inferred from
   the context."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 542.]

   [Footnote 663: He had wished to restore Helen. See Liv. i. 1.]

But him large-eyed venerable Juno then answered:

"O earth-shaker! do thou thyself reflect within thy mind, with respect
to AEneas, whether thou wilt withdraw him, or suffer him, being brave, to
be subdued by Achilles, the son of Peleus. For already we two, I and
Pallas Minerva, have sworn many oaths amongst all the immortals, that we
will never help to avert the evil day from the Trojans, not even when
all Troy, fired, shall burn with consuming flame, and the warlike sons
of the Greeks fire it."

But when earth-shaking Neptune heard this, he hastened to go through the
battle and the clash of spears; and came where were AEneas and renowned
Achilles. And immediately he shed a darkness upon the eyes of Achilles,
son of Peleus, and he drew out the ashen spear, well guarded with brass,
from the shield of magnanimous AEneas; and laid it before the feet of
Achilles, and pushed on AEneas, lifting him high up from the ground. But
AEneas leaped over many ranks of men and many of horses, impelled by the
hand of the god, and came to the rear of the troubled fight, where the
Caucones were arrayed for war. But very near him came earth-shaking
Neptune, and addressing him, spoke winged words:

"O AEneas, which of the gods commanded thee, thus mad, to combat against
Achilles, who is at once more valiant than thou, and more dear to the
immortals? But retire whenever thou shalt be opposed to him, lest, even
contrary to fate, thou arrive at the habitation of Pluto. But when
Achilles shall have attained his death and destiny, then again, being
confident, fight among the front ranks, because no other of the Greeks
shall slay thee."

So saying, he left him there, when he had told him all, and immediately
afterwards dissipated the thick darkness from the eyes of Achilles, and
he then saw very clearly with his eyes; whereupon groaning, he addressed
his magnanimous soul:

"Ye gods! certainly I behold this, a great marvel with mine eyes. The
spear indeed lies upon the ground, nor do I at all perceive the man at
whom I hurled it, desiring to kill him. Undoubtedly AEneas, too, was dear
to the immortal gods, although I supposed that he boasted thus idly. Let
him go; there will be no spirit in him hereafter to make trial of me,
who even now rejoicing, has escaped from death. But come, having
encouraged the warlike Greeks, I will make trial of the other Trojans,
going against them."

He spoke, and sprang into the ranks, and cheered on every man:

"No longer now stand off from the Trojans, O noble Greeks, but on! let
man advance against man, and let him be eager to engage. Difficult is it
for me, although being valiant, to attack so many warriors, and to fight
with them all. Not even Mars, who is an immortal god, nor yet Minerva,
could charge and toil against the force of such a conflict. Yet whatever
I can do with hands, with feet, and with strength, I declare that I will
no longer be remiss, not ever so little; but I will go right through
their line, nor do I think that any Trojan will rejoice, whoever may
come near my javelin."

Thus he spoke, encouraging them; but illustrious Hector, upbraiding,
animated the Trojans, and said that he would go against Achilles:

"Ye magnanimous Trojans, fear not the son of Peleus. I, too, could fight
with words even with the immortals, but with the spear it is difficult,
for they are far more powerful. Nor shall Achilles give effect to all
his words; but one part he shall fulfil, and the other leave half
imperfect. Against him will I go, even though he were like to fire as to
his hands; and to shining iron, as to his might."

Thus he spoke, inciting them; but the Trojans opposite quickly raised
their spears; their strength was mingled together, and a shout arose.
Then also Phoebus Apollo, standing near, addressed Hector:

"Hector, do not at all fight in the van with Achilles, but receive him
in the crowd, and from the tumult, lest by any chance he hit thee, or
strike thee with the sword in close combat."

Thus he spoke, and Hector sunk back again into the thick body of men,
dismayed when he heard the voice of the god speaking. But Achilles
leaped among the Trojans, clad with courage as to his soul, shouting
dreadfully; and first slew gallant Iphition, son of Otrynteus, the
leader of many people, whom the nymph Nais bore to Otrynteus, the sacker
of cities, under snowy Tmolus, in the rich district of Hyda.[664] Him,
eagerly rushing straight forward, noble Achilles struck with his
javelin in the middle of the head; and it was entirely split in two. He
gave a crash as he fell, and noble Achilles boasted over him:

   [Footnote 664: A town of Maeonia in Lydia. See Steph. Byz. s. v.]

"O son of Otrynteus, most terrible of all men, thou liest; death is here
upon thee. Thy birth, however, is at the Gygaean lake, where is thy
paternal land, beside fishy Hyllus, and eddying Hermus."

Thus he spoke, boasting; but darkness covered his (Iphition's) eyes, but
the horses of the Greeks tore him with the tires of the wheels in the
front ranks. After him Achilles smote Demoleon, son of Antenor, a brave
repeller of the fight, in the temples, through his brazen-cheeked
helmet. Nor indeed did the brazen casque resist it, but through it the
eager javelin broke the bone, and the whole brain within was defiled;
and he subdued him, ardent. Next he wounded with his spear in the back,
Hippodamas, as he was leaping down from his chariot, while flying before
him. But he breathed out his soul, and groaned, like as when a bull,
dragged round the Heliconian king,[665] bellows, as the youths drag him;
and the earth-shaker is delighted with them: so, as he moaned, his
fierce soul left his bones. But he went with his spear against godlike
Polydorus,[666] the son of Priam; but him his father did not permit to
fight, because he was the youngest among all, and dearest to him, and
surpassed all in speed. Then, indeed, through youthful folly, exhibiting
the excellence of his speed, he ran among the front ranks till he lost
his life. Him noble swift-footed Achilles smote rushing by, in the
middle of the back, where the golden rings of his belt clasped together,
and the doubled corslet met. Right through at the navel pierced the
point of the spear, and uttering a groan, he fell upon his knees; a
black cloud enveloped him, and stooping down, he gathered his intestines
