suspect, acquainted you with our meeting, was no other than Herne the
Hunter," replied Surrey.

"You amaze me!" exclaimed the duke; "it was indeed a tall dark man,
muffled in a cloak, who informed me that you were to meet at midnight in
King James's bower in the moat, and I therefore came to surprise you."

"Your informant was Herne," replied Surrey.

"Right!" exclaimed the demon, stepping from behind a tree, where he
had hitherto remained concealed; "it was I--I, Herne the Hunter. And
I contrived the meeting in anticipation of a far different result from
that which has ensued. But I now tell you, my lord of Surrey, that it
is idle to indulge a passion for the Fair Geraldine. You will never wed
her."

"False fiend, thou liest!" cried Surrey.

"Time will show," replied Herne. "I repeat, you will wed another--and
more, I tell you, you are blinder than Richmond has shown himself--for
the most illustrious damsel in the kingdom has regarded you with eyes of
affection, and yet you have not perceived it."

"The Princess Mary?" demanded Richmond.

"Ay, the Princess Mary," repeated Herne. "How say you now, my
lord?--will you let ambition usurp the place of love?"

"No," replied Surrey. "But I will hold no further converse with thee.
Thou wouldst tempt to perdition. Hence, fiend!"

"Unless you trust yourself to my guidance, you will never reach your
chamber," rejoined Herne, with a mocking laugh. "The iron door in
the mound cannot be opened on this side, and you well know what the
consequence of a discovery will be. Come, or I leave you to your fate."
And he moved down the path on the right.

"Go with him, Surrey," cried Richmond.

Pressing the Fair Geraldine to his breast, the Earl committed her to the
charge of his friend, and tearing himself away, followed the steps of
the demon. He had not proceeded far when he heard his name pronounced by
a voice issuing from the tree above him. Looking up, he saw Herne in one
of the topmost branches, and at a sign, instantly climbed up to him. The
thick foliage screened them from observation, and Surrey concluded his
guide was awaiting the disappearance of the sentinel, who was at that
moment approaching the tree. But such apparently was not the other's
intentions; for the man had scarcely passed than Herne sprang upon the
ramparts, and the poor fellow turning at the sound, was almost scared
out of his senses at the sight of the dreaded fiend. Dropping his
halbert, he fell upon his face with a stifled cry Herne then motioned
Surrey to descend, and they marched together quickly to a low door
opening into the keep. Passing through it, and ascending a flight
of steps, they stood upon the landing at the top of the staircase
communicating with the Norman Tower, and adjoining the entrance to
Surrey's chamber.

Apparently familiar with the spot, Herne took down a large key from a
nail in the wall, against which it hung, and unlocked the door.

"Enter," he said to Surrey, "and do not forget the debt you owe to Herne
the Hunter."

And as the earl stepped into the chamber, the door was locked behind
him.




II.

     How Sir Thomas Wyat found Mabel in the Sandstone Cave, and
     what happened to him there


A week after the foregoing occurrence, the Earl of Surrey was set free.
But his joy at regaining his liberty was damped by learning that the
Fair Geraldine had departed for Ireland. She had left the tenderest
messages for him with his sister, the Lady Mary Howard, accompanied with
assurances of unalterable attachment.

But other changes had taken place, which were calculated to afford him
some consolation. Ever since the night on which he had been told the
Lady Mary was not indifferent to him, Richmond had devoted himself
entirely to her; and matters had already proceeded so far, that he had
asked her in marriage of the Duke of Norfolk, who, after ascertaining
the king's pleasure on the subject, had gladly given his consent, and
the youthful pair were affianced to each other. Surrey and Richmond now
became closer friends than ever; and if, amid the thousand distractions
of Henry's gay and festive court, the young earl did not forget the
Fair Geraldine, he did not, at least, find the time hang heavily on his
hands.

About a week after Wolsey's dismissal, while the court was still
sojourning at Windsor, Surrey proposed to Richmond to ride one morning
with him in the great park. The Duke willingly assented, and mounting
their steeds, they galloped towards Snow Hill, wholly unattended. While
mounting this charming ascent at a more leisurely pace, the earl said
to his companion, "I will now tell you why I proposed this ride to you,
Richmond. I have long determined to follow up the adventure of Herne the
Hunter, and I wish to confer with you about it, and ascertain whether
you are disposed to join me."

"I know not what to say, Surrey," replied the duke gravely, and speaking
in a low tone. "The king, my father, failed in his endeavours to expel
the demon, who still lords it in the forest."

"The greater glory to us if we succeed," said Surrey.

"I will take counsel with Lady Mary on the subject before I give an
answer," rejoined Richmond.

"Then there is little doubt what your grace's decision will be," laughed
Surrey. "To speak truth, it was the fear of your consulting her that
made me bring you here. What say you to a ride in the forest to-morrow
night?"

"I have little fancy for it," replied Richmond; "and if you will be
ruled by me, you will not attempt the enterprise yourself."

"My resolution is taken," said the earl; "but now, since we have reached
the brow of the hill, let us push forward to the lake."

A rapid ride of some twenty minutes brought them to the edge of
the lake, and they proceeded along the verdant path leading to the
forester's hut. On arriving at the dwelling, it appeared wholly
deserted, but they nevertheless dismounted, and tying their horses
to the trees at the back of the cottage, entered it. While they were
examining the lower room, the plash of oars reached their ears, and
rushing to the window, they descried the skiff rapidly approaching the
shore. A man was seated within it, whose attire, though sombre, seemed
to proclaim him of some rank, but as his back was towards them, they
could not discern his features. In another instant the skiff touched the
strand, and the rower leaping ashore, proved to be Sir Thomas Wyat.
On making this discovery they both ran out to him, and the warmest
greetings passed between them. When these were over, Surrey expressed
his surprise to Wyat at seeing him there, declaring he was wholly
unaware of his return from the court of France.

"I came back about a month ago," said Wyat. "His majesty supposes me at
Allington; nor shall I return to court without a summons."

"I am not sorry to hear it," said Surrey; "but what are you doing here?"

"My errand is a strange and adventurous one," replied Wyat. "You may
have heard that before I departed for France I passed some days in the
forest in company with Herne the Hunter. What then happened to me I may
not disclose; but I vowed never to rest till I have freed this forest
from the weird being who troubles it."

"Say you so?" cried Surrey; "then you are most fortunately encountered,
Sir Thomas, for I myself, as Richmond will tell you, am equally bent
upon the fiend's expulsion. We will be companions in the adventure."

"We will speak of that anon," replied Wyat. "I was sorry to find this
cottage uninhabited, and the fair damsel who dwelt within it, when I
beheld it last, gone. What has become of her?

"It is a strange story," said Richmond. And he proceeded to relate all
that was known to have befallen Mabel.

Wyat listened with profound attention to the recital, and at its close,
said, "I think I can find a clue to this mystery, but to obtain it I
must go alone. Meet me here at midnight to-morrow, and I doubt not we
shall be able to accomplish our design."

"May I not ask for some explanation of your scheme?" said Surrey.

"Not yet," rejoined Wyat. "But I will freely confess to you that there
is much danger in the enterprise--danger that I would not willingly any
one should share with me, especially you, Surrey, to whom I owe so much.
If you do not find me here, therefore, to-morrow night, conclude that I
have perished, or am captive."

"Well, be it as you will, Wyat," said Surrey; "but I would gladly
accompany you, and share your danger."

"I know it, and I thank you," returned Wyat, warmly grasping the other's
hand; "but much--nay, all--may remain to be done to-morrow night. You
had better bring some force with you, for we may need it."

"I will bring half a dozen stout archers," replied Surrey--"and if you
come not, depend upon it, I will either release you or avenge you."

"I did not intend to prosecute this adventure further," said Richmond;
"but since you are both resolved to embark in it, I will not desert
you."

Soon after this, the friends separated,--Surrey and Richmond taking
horse and returning to the castle, discoursing on the unlooked--for
meeting with Wyat, while the latter again entered the skiff, and rowed
down the lake. As soon as the hut was clear, two persons descended the
steps of a ladder leading to a sort of loft in the roof, and sprang upon
the floor of the hut.

"Ho! ho! Ho!" laughed the foremost, whose antlered helm and wild garb
proclaimed him to be Herne; "they little dreamed who were the hearers of
their conference. So they think to take me, Fenwolf--ha!"

"They know not whom they have to deal with," rejoined the latter.

"They should do so by this time," said Herne; "but I will tell thee why
Sir Thomas Wyat has undertaken this enterprise. It is not to capture me,
though that may be one object that moves him. But he wishes to see
Mabel Lyndwood. The momentary glimpse he caught of her bright eyes was
sufficient to inflame him."

"Ah!" exclaimed Fenwolf, "think you so?"

"I am assured of it," replied Herne. "He knows the secret of the cave,
and will find her there."

"But he will never return to tell what he has seen," said Fenwolf
moodily.

"I know not that," replied Herne. "I have my own views respecting him. I
want to renew my band."

"He will never join you," rejoined Fenwolf.

"What if I offer him Mabel as a bait?" said Herne.

"You will not do so, dread master?" rejoined Fenwolf, trembling and
turning pale. "She belongs to me."

"To thee, fool!" cried Herne, with a derisive laugh. "Thinkest thou I
would resign such a treasure to thee? No, no. But rest easy, I will not
give her to Wyat."

"You mean her for yourself, then?" said Fenwolf.

"Darest thou to question me?" cried Herne, striking him with the hand
armed with the iron gyves. "This to teach thee respect."

And this to prove whether thou art mortal or rejoined Fenwolf, plucking
his hunting-knife from his belt, and striking it with all his force
against the other's breast. But though surely and forcibly dealt, the
blow glanced off as if the demon were cased in steel, and the intended
assassin fell back in amazement, while an unearthly laugh rang in his
ears. Never had Fenwolf seen Herne wear so formidable a look as he at
that moment assumed. His giant frame dilated, his eyes flashed fire, and
the expression of his countenance was so fearful that Fenwolf shielded
his eyes with his hands.

"Ah, miserable dog!" thundered Herne; "dost thou think I am to be hurt
by mortal hands, or mortal weapons? Thy former experience should have
taught thee differently. But since thou hast provoked it, take thy
fate!"

Uttering these words, he seized Fenwolf by the throat, clutching him
with a terrific gripe, and in a few seconds the miserable wretch would
have paid the penalty of his rashness, if a person had not at the moment
appeared at the doorway. Flinging his prey hastily backwards, Herne
turned at the interruption, and perceived old Tristram Lyndwood, who
looked appalled at what he beheld.

"Ah, it is thou, Tristram?" cried Herne; "thou art just in time to
witness the punishment of this rebellious hound."

"Spare him, dread master! oh, spare him!" cried Tristram imploringly.

"Well," said Herne, gazing at the half-strangled caitiff, "he may
live. He will not offend again. But why hast thou ventured from thy
hiding-place, Tristram?"

"I came to inform you that I have just observed a person row across the
lake in the skiff," replied the old man. "He appears to be taking the
direction of the secret entrance to the cave."

"It is Sir Thomas Wyat," replied Herne, "I am aware of his proceedings.
Stay with Fenwolf till he is able to move, and then proceed with him to
the cave. But mark me, no violence must be done to Wyat if you find
him there. Any neglect of my orders in this respect will be followed by
severe punishment. I shall be at the cave ere long; but, meanwhile, I
have other business to transact."

And quitting the hut, he plunged into the wood.

Meanwhile, Sir Thomas Wyat, having crossed the lake, landed, and
fastened the skiff to a tree, struck into the wood, and presently
reached the open space in which lay the secret entrance to the cave. He
was not long in finding the stone, though it was so artfully concealed
by the brushwood that it would have escaped any uninstructed eye, and
removing it, the narrow entrance to the cave was revealed.

Committing himself to the protection of Heaven, Wyat entered, and having
taken the precaution of drawing the stone after him, which was easily
accomplished by a handle fixed to the inner side of it, he commenced the
descent. At first, he had to creep along, but the passage gradually got
higher, until at length, on reaching the level ground, he was able to
stand upright. There was no light to guide him, but by feeling against
the sides of the passage, he found that he was in the long gallery he
had formerly threaded. Uncertain which way to turn, he determined to
trust to chance for taking the right direction, and drawing his sword,
proceeded slowly to the right.

For some time he encountered no obstacle, neither could he detect the
slightest sound, but he perceived that the atmosphere grew damp, and
that the sides of the passage were covered with moisture. Thus warned,
he proceeded with great caution, and presently found, after emerging
into a more open space, and striking off on the left, that he had
arrived at the edge of the pool of water which he knew lay at the end of
the large cavern.

While considering how he should next proceed, a faint gleam of light
became visible at the upper end of the vault. Changing his position,
for the pillars prevented him from seeing the source of the glimmer, he
discovered that it issued from a lamp borne by a female hand, who he had
no doubt was Mabel. On making this discovery, he sprang forwards, and
called to her, but instantly repented his rashness, for as he uttered
the cry the light was extinguished.

Wyat was now completely at a loss how to proceed. He was satisfied that
Mabel was in the vault; but in what way to guide himself to her retreat
he could not tell, and it was evident she herself would not assist him.
Persuaded, however, if he could but make himself known, he should no
longer be shunned, he entered one of the lateral passages, and ever and
anon, as he proceeded, repeated Mabel's name in a low, soft tone.
The stratagem was successful. Presently he heard a light footstep
approaching him, and a gentle voice inquired--"Who calls me?"

"A friend," replied Wyat.

"Your name?" she demanded.

"You will not know me if I declare myself, Mabel," he replied, "but I am
called Sir Thomas Wyat."

"The name is well known to me," she replied, in trembling tones; "and I
have seen you once--at my grandfather's cottage. But why have you come
here? Do you know where you are?

"I know that I am in the cave of Herne the Hunter," replied Wyat; "and
one of my motives for seeking it was to set you free. But there is
nothing to prevent your flight now."

"Alas! there is," she replied. "I am chained here by bonds I cannot
break. Herne has declared that any attempt at escape on my part shall be
followed by the death of my grandsire. And he does not threaten idly, as
no doubt you know. Besides, the most terrible vengeance would fall on my
own head. No,--I cannot--dare not fly. But let us not talk in the dark.
Come with me to procure a light. Give me your hand, and I will lead you
to my cell."

Taking the small, trembling hand offered him, Wyat followed his
conductress down the passage. A few steps brought them to a door, which
she pushed aside, and disclosed a small chamber, hewn out of the rock,
in a recess of which a lamp was burning. Lighting the lamp which she had
recently extinguished, she placed it on a rude table.

"Have you been long a prisoner here?" asked Wyat, fixing his regards
upon her countenance, which, though it had lost somewhat of its bloom,
had gained much in interest and beauty.

"For three months, I suppose," she replied; "but I am not able to
calculate the lapse of time. It has seemed very--very long. Oh that I
could behold the sun again, and breathe the fresh, pure air!

"Come with me, and you shall do so," rejoined Wyat.

"I have told you I cannot fly," she answered. "I cannot sacrifice my
grandsire."

"But if he is leagued with this demon he deserves the worst fate that
can befall him," said Wyat. "You should think only of your own safety.
What can be the motive of your detention?"

"I tremble to think of it," she replied; "but I fear that Herne has
conceived a passion for me."

"Then indeed you must fly," cried Wyat; "such unhallowed love will tend
to perdition of soul and body."

"Oh that there was any hope for me!" she ejaculated.

"There is hope," replied Wyat. "I will protect you--will care for
you--will love you."

"Love me!" exclaimed Mabel, a deep blush overspreading her pale
features. "You love another."

"Absence has enabled me to overcome the vehemence of my passion,"
replied Wyat, "and I feel that my heart is susceptible of new emotions.
But you, maiden," he added coldly, "you are captivated by the admiration
of the king."

"My love, like yours, is past," she answered, with a faint smile; "but
if I were out of Herne's power I feel that I could love again, and
far more deeply than I loved before--for that, in fact, was rather the
result of vanity than of real regard."

"Mabel," said Wyat, taking her hand, and gazing into her eyes, "if I set
you free, will you love me?"

"I love you already," she replied; "but if that could be, my whole life
should be devoted to you. Ha!" she exclaimed with a sudden change of
tone, "footsteps are approaching; it is Fenwolf. Hide yourself within
that recess."

Though doubting the prudence of the course, Wyat yielded to her
terrified and imploring looks, and concealed himself in the manner she
had indicated. He was scarcely ensconed in the recess, when the door
opened, and Morgan Fenwolf stepped in, followed by her grandfather.
Fenwolf gazed suspiciously round the little chamber, and then glanced
significantly at old Tristram, but he made no remark.

"What brings you here?" demanded Mabel tremblingly.

"You are wanted in the cave," said Fenwolf.

"I will follow you anon," she replied.

"You must come at once," rejoined Fenwolf authoritatively. "Herne will
become impatient."

Upon this Mabel rose, and, without daring to cast a look towards the
spot where Wyat was concealed, quitted the cell with them. No sooner
were they all out, than Fenwolf, hastily shutting the door, turned the
key in the lock, and taking it out, exclaimed, "So we have secured you,
Sir Thomas Wyat. No fear of your revealing the secret of the cave now,
or flying with Mabel--ha! ha!" to here.




III.

     In what manner Herne declared his Passion for Mabel.


Utterly disregarding her cries and entreaties, Fenwolf dragged Mabel
into the great cavern, and forced her to take a seat on a bench near the
spot where a heap of ashes showed that the fire was ordinarily lighted.
All this while, her grandfather had averted his face from her, as if
fearing to meet her regards, and he now busied himself in striking a
light and setting fire to a pile of fagots and small logs of wood.

"I thought you told me Herne was here," said Mabel in a tone of bitter
reproach, to Fenwolf, who seated himself beside her on the bench.

"He will be here ere long," he replied sullenly.

"Oh, do not detain Sir Thomas Wyat!" cried Mabel piteously; "do not
deliver him to your dread master! Do what you will with me--but let him
go."

"I will tell you what I will do," replied Fenwolf, in a low tone;
"I will set Sir Thomas at liberty, and run all risks of Herne's
displeasure, if you will promise to be mine."

Mabel replied by a look of unutterable disgust.

"Then he will await Herne's coming where he is," rejoined Fenwolf.

Saying which he arose, and, pushing a table near the bench, took the
remains of a huge venison pasty and a loaf from a hutch standing on one
side of the cavern.

By this time Old Tristram, having succeeded in lighting the fire, placed
himself at the farther end of the table, and fell to work upon the
viands with Fenwolf. Mabel was pressed to partake of the repast, but she
declined the offer. A large stone bottle was next produced and emptied
of its contents by the pair, who seemed well contented with their
regale.

Meanwhile Mabel was revolving the possibility of flight, and had more
than once determined to make an attempt, but fear restrained her. Her
grandsire, as has been stated, sedulously avoided her gaze, and turned a
