"But because I am a Queen and a Catholic there is no justice for me,"
said Mary.  "Well, what is the defence you would have me confine myself
to, my sole privy counsellors?"

Here Cis, to show she was awake, pressed her mother's hand and looked
up in her face, but Mary, though returning the glance and the pressure,
did not send her away, while Melville recommended strongly that the
Queen should continue to insist on the imperfection of the evidence
adduced against her, which he said might so touch some of the lawyers,
or the nobles, that Burghley and Walsingham might be afraid to proceed.
If this failed her, she must allow her knowledge of the plot for her
own escape and the Spanish invasion, but strenuously deny the part
which concerned Elizabeth's life.

"That it is which they above all desire to fix on me," said the Queen.

Cicely's brain was in confusion.  Surely she had heard those letters
read in the hall.  Were they false or genuine?  The Queen had utterly
denied them there.  Now she seemed to think the only point was to prove
that these were not the originals.  Dr. Bourgoin seemed to feel the
same difficulty.

"Madame will pardon me," he said; "I have not been of her secret
councils, but can she not, if rightly dealt with, prove those two
letters that were read to have been forged by her enemies?"

"What I could do is this, my good Bourgoin," said Mary; "were I only
confronted with Nau and Curll, I could prove that the letter I received
from Babington bore nothing about the destroying the usurping
competitor.  The poor faithful lad was a fool, but not so great a fool
as to tell me such things.  And, on the other hand, hath either of you,
my friends, ever seen in me such symptoms of midsummer madness as that
I should be asking the names of the six who were to do the deed?  What
cared I for their names?  I--who only wished to know as little of the
matter as possible!"

"Can your Majesty prove that you knew nothing?" asked Melville.

Mary paused.  "They cannot prove by fair means that I knew anything,"
said she, "for I did not.  Of course I was aware that Elizabeth must be
taken out of the way, or the heretics would be rallying round her; but
there is no lack of folk who delight in work of that sort, and why
should I meddle with the knowledge?  With the Prince of Parma in
London, she, if she hath the high courage she boasteth of, would soon
cause the Spanish pikes to use small ceremony with her!  Why should I
concern myself about poor Antony and his five gentlemen?  But it is the
same as it was twenty years ago.  What I know will have to be, and yet
choose not to hear of, is made the head and front of mine offending,
that the real actors may go free!  And because I have writ naught that
they can bring against me, they take my letters and add to and garble
them, till none knows where to have them.  Would that we were in
France!  There it was a good sword-cut or pistol-shot at once, and one
took one's chance of a return, without all this hypocrisy of law and
justice to weary one out and make men double traitors."

"Methought Walsingham winced when your Majesty went to the point with
him," said Bourgoin.

"And you put up with his explanation?" said Melville.

"Truly I longed to demand of what practices Mr. Secretary in his
office,--not as a private person--would be ashamed; but it seemed to me
that they might call it womanish spite, and to that the Queen of Scots
will never descend!"

"Pity but that we had Babington's letter!  Then might we put him to
confusion by proving the additions," said Melville.

"It is not possible, my good friend.  The letter is at the bottom of
the Castle well; is it not, mignonne?  Mourn for it not, Andrew.  It
would have been of little avail, and it carried with it stuff that Mr.
Secretary would give almost his precious place to possess, and that
might be fatal to more of us.  I hoped that there might have been
safety for poor Babington in the destruction of that packet, never
guessing at the villainy of yon Burton brewer, nor of those who set him
on.  Come, it serves not to fret ourselves any more.  I must answer as
occasion serves me; speaking not so much to Elizabeth's Commission, who
have foredoomed me, as to all Christendom, and to the Scots and English
of all ages, who will be my judges."

Her judges?  Ay! but how?  With the same enthusiastic pity and
indignation, mixed with the same misgiving as her own daughter felt.
Not wholly innocent, not wholly guilty, yet far less guilty than those
who had laid their own crimes on her in Scotland, or who plotted to
involve her in meshes partly woven by herself in England. The evil done
to her was frightful, but it would have been powerless had she been
wholly blameless.  Alas! is it not so with all of us?

The second day's trial came on.  Mary Seaton was so overpowered with
the strain she had gone through that the Queen would not take her into
the hall, but let Cicely sit at her feet instead.  On this day none of
the Crown lawyers took part in the proceedings; for, as Cavendish
whispered to Humfrey, there had been high words between them and my
Lord Treasurer and Mr. Secretary; and they had declared themselves
incapable of conducting a prosecution so inconsistent with the forms of
law to which they were accustomed.  The pedantic fellows wanted more
direct evidence, he said, and Humfrey honoured them.

Lord Burghley then conducted the proceedings, and they had thus a more
personal character.  The Queen, however, acted on Melville's advice,
and no longer denied all knowledge of the conspiracy, but insisted that
she was ignorant of the proposed murder of Elizabeth, and argued most
pertinently that a copy of a deciphered cipher, without the original,
was no proof at all, desiring further that Nau and Curll should be
examined in her presence.  She reminded the Commissioners how their
Queen herself had been called in question for Wyatt's rebellion, in
spite of her innocence.  "Heaven is my witness," she added, "that much
as I desire the safety and glory of the Catholic religion, I would not
purchase it at the price of blood. I would rather play Esther than
Judith."

Her defence was completed by her taking off the ring which Elizabeth
had sent to her at Lochleven.  "This," she said, holding it up, "your
Queen sent to me in token of amity and protection.  You best know how
that pledge has been redeemed."  Therewith she claimed another day's
hearing, with an advocate granted to her, or else that, being a
Princess, she might be believed on the word of a Princess.

This completed her defence, except so far that when Burghley responded
in a speech of great length, she interrupted, and battled point by
point, always keeping in view the strong point of the insufficient
evidence and her own deprivation of the chances of confuting what was
adduced against her.

It was late in the afternoon when he concluded.  There was a pause, as
though for a verdict by the Commissioners.  Instead of this, Mary rose
and repeated her appeal to be tried before the Parliament of England at
Westminster.  No reply was made, and the Court broke up.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

A VENTURE.


"Mother, dear mother, do but listen to me."

"I must listen, child, when thou callest me so from your heart; but it
is of no use, my poor little one.  They have referred the matter to the
Star Chamber, that they may settle it there with closed doors and no
forms of law.  Thou couldst do nothing!  And could I trust thee to go
wandering to London, like a maiden in a ballad, all alone?"

"Nay, madam, I should not go alone.  My father, I mean Mr. Talbot,
would take me."

"Come, bairnie, that is presuming overmuch on the good man's kindness."

"I do not speak without warrant, madam.  I told him what I longed to
do, and he said it might be my duty, and if it were so, he would not
gainsay me; but that he could not let me go alone, and would go with
me.  And he can get access for me to the Queen.  He has seen her
himself, and so has Humfrey; and Diccon is a gentleman pensioner."

"There have been ventures enough for me already," said Mary.  "I will
bring no more faithful heads into peril."

"Then will you not consent, mother?  He will quit the castle to-morrow,
and I am to see him in the morning and give him an answer. If you would
let me go, he would crave license to take me home, saying that I look
paler than my wont."

"And so thou dost, child.  If I could be sure of ever seeing thee
again, I should have proposed thy going home to good Mistress Susan's
tendance for a little space.  But it is not to be thought of.  I could
not risk thee, or any honest loving heart, on so desperate a stake as
mine!  I love thee, mine ain, true, leal lassie, all the more, and I
honour him; but it may not be!  Ask me no more."

Mary was here interrupted by a request from Sir Christopher Hatton for
one of the many harassing interviews that beset her during the days
following the trial, when judgment was withheld, according to the
express command of the vacillating Elizabeth, and the case remitted to
the Star Chamber.  Lord Burghley considered this hesitation to be the
effect of judicial blindness--so utterly had hatred and fear of the
future shut his eyes to all sense of justice and fair play.

Cicely felt all youth's disappointment in the rejection of its grand
schemes.  But to her surprise at night Mary addressed her again, "My
daughter, did that true-hearted foster-father of thine speak in sooth?"

"He never doth otherwise," returned Cicely.

"For," said her mother, "I have thought of a way of gaining thee access
to the Queen, far less perilous to him, and less likely to fail.  I
will give thee letters to M. De Chateauneuf, the French Ambassador,
whom I have known in old times, with full credentials. It might be well
to have with thee those that I left with Mistress Talbot.  Then he will
gain thee admittance, and work for thee as one sent from France, and
protected by the rights of the Embassy.  Thus, Master Richard need
never appear in the matter at all, and at any rate thou wouldst be
secure.  Chateauneuf would find means of sending thee abroad if
needful."

"Oh! I would return to you, madam my mother, or wait for you in London."

"That must be as the wills above decree," said Mary sadly.  "It is
folly in me, but I cannot help grasping at the one hope held out to me.
There is that within me that will hope and strive to the end, though I
am using my one precious jewel to weight the line I am casting across
the gulf.  At least they cannot do thee great harm, my good child."

The Queen sat up half the night writing letters, one to Elizabeth, one
to Chateauneuf, and another to the Duchess of Lorraine, which Cis was
to deliver in case of her being sent over to the Continent.  But the
Queen committed the conduct of the whole affair to M. De Chateauneuf,
since she could completely trust his discretion and regard for her;
and, moreover, it was possible that the face of affairs might undergo
some great alteration before Cicely could reach London.  Mr. Talbot
must necessarily go home first, being bound to do so by his commission
to the Earl.  "And, hark thee," said the Queen, "what becomes of the
young gallant?"

"I have not heard, madam," said Cicely, not liking the tone.

"If my desires still have any effect," said Mary, "he will stay here. I
will not have my damosel errant squired by a youth under
five-and-twenty."

"I promised you, madam, and he wots it," said Cicely, with spirit.

"He wots it, doth he?" said the Queen, in rather a provoking voice.
"No, no, mignonne; with all respect to their honour and discretion, we
do not put flint and steel together, when we do not wish to kindle a
fire.  Nay, little one, I meant not to vex thee, when thou art doing
one of the noblest deeds daughter ever did for mother, and for a mother
who sent thee away from her, and whom thou hast scarce known for more
than two years!"

Cicely was sure to see her foster-father after morning prayers on the
way from the chapel across the inner court.  Here she was able to tell
him of the Queen's consent, over which he looked grave, having secretly
persuaded himself that Mary would think the venture too great, and not
hopeful enough to be made.  He could not, however, wonder that the
unfortunate lady should catch at the least hope of preserving her life;
and she had dragged too many down in the whirlpool to leave room for
wonder that she should consent to peril her own daughter therein.
Moreover, he would have the present pleasure of taking her home with
him to his Susan, and who could say what would happen in the meantime?

"Thou hast counted the cost?" he said.

"Yea, sir," Cis answered, as the young always do; adding, "the Queen
saith that if we commit all to the French Ambassador, M. De
Chateauneuf, who is her very good friend, he will save you from any
peril."

"Hm!  I had rather be beholden to no Frenchman," muttered Richard, "but
we will see, we will see.  I must now to Paulett to obtain consent to
take thee with me.  Thou art pale and changed enough indeed to need a
blast of Hallamshire air, my poor maid."

So Master Richard betook him to the knight, a man of many charges, and
made known that finding his daughter somewhat puling and sickly, he
wished having, as she told him, the consent of the Queen of Scots, to
take her home with him for a time.

"You do well, Mr. Talbot," said Sir Amias.  "In sooth, I have only
marvelled that a pious and godly man like you should have consented to
let her abide so long, at her tender age, among these papistical,
idolatrous, and bloodthirsty women."

"I think not that she hath taken harm," said Richard.

"I have done my poor best; I have removed the priest of Baal," said the
knight; "I have caused godly ministers constantly to preach sound
doctrine in the ears of all who would hearken; and I have uplifted my
testimony whensoever it was possible.  But it is not well to expose the
young to touching the accursed thing, and this lady hath shown herself
greatly affected to your daughter, so that she might easily be seduced
from the truth.  Yet, sir, bethink you is it well to remove the maiden
from witnessing that which will be a warning for ever of the judgment
that falleth on conspiracy and idolatry?"

"You deem the matter so certain?" said Richard.

"Beyond a doubt, sir.  This lady will never leave these walls alive.
There can be no peace for England nor safety for our blessed and
gracious Queen while she lives.  Her guilt is certain; and as Mr.
Secretary said to me last night, he and the Lord Treasurer are
determined that for no legal quibbles, nor scruples of mercy from our
ever-pitiful Queen, shall she now escape.  Her Majesty, however her
womanish heart may doubt now, will rejoice when the deed is done.
Methinks I showed you the letter she did me the honour to write,
thanking me for the part I took in conveying the lady suddenly to
Tixall."

Richard had already read that letter three times, so he avowed his
knowledge of it.

"You will not remove your son likewise?" added Sir Amias.  "He hath an
acquaintance with this lady's people, which is useful in one so
thoroughly to be trusted; and moreover, he will not be tampered with.
For, sir, I am never without dread of some attempt being made to deal
with this lady privily, in which case I should be the one to bear all
the blame.  Wherefore I have made request to have another honourable
gentleman joined with me in this painful wardship."

Richard had no desire to remove his son.  He shared Queen Mary's
feelings on the inexpediency of Humfrey forming part of the escort of
the young lady, and thought it was better for both to see as little of
one another as possible.

Sir Amias accordingly, on his morning visit of inspection, intimated to
the Queen that Mr. Talbot wished his daughter to return home with him
for the recovery of her health.  He spoke as if the whole suite were at
his own disposal, and Mary resented it in her dignified manner.

"The young lady hath already requested license from us," she said, "and
we have granted it.  She will return when her health is fully restored."

Sir Amias had forbearance enough not to hint that unless the return
were speedy, she would scarcely find the Queen there, and the matter
was settled.  Master Richard would not depart until after dinner, when
other gentlemen were going, and this would enable Cicely to make up her
mails, and there would still be time to ride a stage before dark.  Her
own horse was in the stables, and her goods would be bestowed in cloak
bags on the saddles of the grooms who had accompanied Mr. Talbot; for,
small as was the estate of Bridgefield, for safety's sake he could not
have gone on so long an expedition without a sufficient guard.

The intervening time was spent by the Queen in instructing her daughter
how to act in various contingencies.  If it were possible to the French
Ambassador to present her as freshly come from the Soissons convent,
where she was to have been reared, it would save Mr. Talbot from all
risk; but the Queen doubted whether she could support the character, so
English was her air, though there were Scottish and English nuns at
Soissons, and still more at Louvaine and Douay, who _might_ have
brought her up.

"I cannot feign, madam," said Cicely, alarmed.  "Oh, I hope I need only
speak truth!" and her tone sounded much more like a confession of
incapacity than a moral objection, and so it was received: "Poor child,
I know thou canst not act a part, and thy return to the honest mastiffs
will not further thee in it; but I have bidden Chateauneuf to do what
he can for thee--and after all the eyes will not be very critical."

If there still was time, Cicely was to endeavour first of all to obtain
of Elizabeth that Mary might be brought to London to see her, and be
judged before Parliament with full means of defence.  If this were no
longer possible, Cicely might attempt to expose Walsingham's
contrivance; but this would probably be too dangerous.  Chateauneuf
must judge.  Or, as another alternative, Queen Mary gave Cicely the
ring already shown at the trial, and with that as her pledge, a solemn
offer was to be made on her behalf to retire into a convent in Austria,
or in one of the Roman Catholic cantons of Switzerland, out of the
reach of Spain and France, and there take the veil, resigning all her
rights to her son.  All her money had been taken away, but she told
Cicely she had given orders to Chateauneuf to supply from her French
dowry all that might be needed for the expenses that must be incurred.

Now that the matter was becoming so real, Cicely's heart quailed a
little.  Castles in the air that look heroic at the first glance would
not so remain did not they show themselves terrible at a nearer
approach, and the maiden wondered, whether Queen Elizabeth would be
much more formidable than my Lady Countess in a rage!

And what would become of herself?  Would she be detained in the bondage
in which the poor sisters of the Grey blood had been kept? Or would her
mother carry her off to these strange lands?....  It was all strange,
and the very boldness of her offer, since it had been thus accepted,
made her feel helpless and passive in the grasp of the powers that her
simple wish had set moving.

The letters were sewn up in the most ingenious manner in her dress by
Mary Seaton, in case any search should be made; but the only woman Sir
Amias would be able to employ in such a matter was purblind and
helpless, and they trusted much to his implicit faith in the Talbots.

There was only just time to complete her preparations before she was
summoned; and with an almost convulsive embrace from her mother, and
whispered benedictions from Jean Kennedy, she left the dreary walls of
Fotheringhay.

Humfrey rode with them through the Chase.  Both he and Cicely were very
silent.  When the time came for parting, Cicely said, as she laid her
hand in his, "Dear brother, for my sake do all thou canst for her with
honour."

"That will I," said Humfrey.  "Would that I were going with thee,
Cicely!"

"So would not I," she returned; "for then there would be one true heart
the less to watch over her."

"Come, daughter!" said Richard, who had engaged one of the gentlemen in
conversation so as to leave them to themselves.  "We must be jogging.
Fare thee well, my son, till such time as thy duties permit thee to
follow us."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

MY LADY'S REMORSE.


"And have you brought her back again!  O my lass! my lass!" cried
Mistress Susan, surprised and delighted out of her usual staid
composure, as, going out to greet her husband, an unexpected figure was
seen by his side, and Cicely sprang into her arms as if they were truly
a haven of rest.

Susan looked over her head, even in the midst of the embrace, with the
eyes of one hungering for her first-born son, but her husband shook his
head.  "No, mother, we have not brought thee the boy.  Thou must
content thyself with her thou hast here for a little space."

"I hope it bodes not ill," said Susan.

"It bodes," said Richard, "that I have brought thee back a good
daughter with a pair of pale cheeks, which must be speedily coloured
anew in our northern breezes."

"Ah, how sweet to be here at home," cried Cicely, turning round in
rapturous greeting to all the serving men and women, and all the dogs.
"We want only the boys!  Where is Ned?"

Their arrival having been unannounced, Ned was with Master Sniggius,
whose foremost scholar he now was, and who kept him much later than the
other lads to prepare him for Cambridge; but it was the return to this
tender foster-mother that seemed such extreme bliss to Cicely. All was
most unlike her reluctant return two years previously, when nothing but
her inbred courtesy and natural sweetness of disposition had prevented
her from being contemptuous of the country home.  Now every stone,
every leaf, seemed precious to her, and she showed herself, even as she
ascended the steps to the hall, determined not to be the guest but the
daughter.  There was a little movement on the parents' part, as if they
bore in mind that she came as a princess; but she flew to draw up
Master Richard's chair, and put his wife's beside it, nor would she
sit, till they had prayed her to do so; and it was all done with such a
graceful bearing, the noble carriage of her head had become so much
more remarkable, and a sweet readiness and responsiveness of manner had
so grown upon her, that Susan looked at her in wondering admiration, as
something more her own and yet less her own than ever, tracing in her
for the first time some of the charms of the Queen of Scots.

All the household hovered about in delight, and confidences could not
be exchanged just then: the travellers had to eat and drink, and they
were only just beginning to do so when Ned came home.  He was of
slighter make than his brothers, and had a more scholarly aspect: but
his voice made itself heard before him.  "Is it true?  Is it true that
my father is come?  And our Cis too?  Ha!" and he rushed in, hardly
giving himself time for the respectful greeting to his father, before
he fell upon Cis with undoubting brotherly delight.

"Is Humfrey come?" he asked as soon as he could take breath.  "No?  I
thought 'twas too good to be all true."

"How did you hear?"

"Hob the hunter brought up word that the Queen's head was off. What?"
as Cicely gave a start and little scream.  "Is it not so?"

"No, indeed, boy," said his father.  "What put that folly into his
head?"

"Because he saw, or thought he saw, Humfrey and Cis riding home with
you, sir, and so thought all was over with the Queen of Scots.  My
Lady, they say, had one of her shrieking fits, and my Lord sent down to
ask whether I knew aught; and when he found that I did not, would have
me go home at once to bid you come up immediately to the Manor; and
before I had gotten out Dapple, there comes another message to say
that, in as brief space as it will take to saddle them, there will be
beasts here to bring up you and my mother and Cis, to tell my Lady
Countess all that has befallen."

Cis's countenance so changed that kind Susan said, "I will make thine
excuses to my Lady.  Thou art weary and ill at ease, and I cannot have
thee set forth at once again."

"The Queen would never have sent such sudden and hasty orders," said
Cicely.  "Mother, can you not stay with me?--I have so much to say to
you, and my time is short."

The Talbots were, however, too much accustomed to obedience to the
peremptory commands of their feudal chiefs to venture on such
disobedience.  Susan's proposal had been a great piece of audacity, on
which she would hardly have ventured but for her consciousness that the
maiden was no Talbot at all.

Yet to Cis the dear company of her mother Susan, even in the Countess's
society, seemed too precious to be resigned, and she had likewise been
told that Lady Shrewsbury's mind had greatly changed towards Mary, and
that since the irritation of the captive's presence had been removed,
she remembered only the happier and kindlier portion of their past
intercourse.  There had been plenty of quarrels with her husband, but
none so desperate as before, and at this present time the Earl and
Countess were united against the surviving sons, who, with Gilbert at
their head, were making large demands on them.  Cicely felt grateful to
the Earl for his absence from Fotheringhay, and, though disappointed of
her peaceful home evening, declared she would come up to the Lodge
rather than lose sight of "mother."  The stable people, more
considerate than their Lord and Lady, proved to have sent a horse
litter for the conveyance of the ladies called out on the wet dark
October evening, and here it was that Cis could enjoy her first
precious moment of privacy with one for whom she had so long yearned.
Susan rejoiced in the heavy lumbering conveyance as a luxury, sparing
the maiden's fatigue, and she was commencing some inquiries into the
indisposition which had procured this holiday, when Cicely broke in, "O
mother, nothing aileth me.  It is not for that cause--but oh! mother, I
am to go to see Queen Elizabeth, and strive with her for her--for my
mother's life and freedom."

"Thou! poor little maid.  Doth thy father--what am I saying?  Doth my
husband know?"

"Oh yes.  He will take me.  He saith it is my duty."

"Then it must be well," said Susan in an altered voice on hearing this.
"From whom came the proposal?"

"I made it," said Cicely in a low, feeble voice on the verge of tears.
"Oh, dear mother, thou wilt not tell any one how faint of heart I am?
I did mean it in sooth, but I never guessed how dreadful it would grow
now I am pledged to it."

"Thou art pledged, then, and canst not falter?"

"Never," said Cicely; "I would not that any should know it, not even my
father; but mother, mother, I could not help telling you.  You will let
no one guess?  I know it is unworthy, but--"

"Not unworthy to fear, my poor child, so long as thou dost not waver."

"It is, it is unworthy of my lineage.  My mother queen would say so,"
cried Cis, drawing herself up.

"Giving way would be unworthy," said Susan, "but turn thou to thy God,
my child, and He will give thee strength to carry through whatever is
the duty of a faithful daughter towards this poor lady; and my husband,
thou sayest, holds that so it is?"

"Yea, madam; he craved license to take me home, since I have truly
often been ailing since those dreadful days at Tixall, and he hath
promised to go to London with me."

"And is this to be done in thine own true name?" asked Susan, trembling
somewhat at the risk to her husband, as well as to the maiden.

"I trow that it is," said Cis, "but the matter is to be put into the
hands of M. de Chateauneuf, the French Ambassador.  I have a letter
here," laying her hand on her bosom, "which, the Queen declares, will
thoroughly prove to him who I am, and if I go as under his protection,
none can do my father any harm."

Susan hoped so, but she trusted to understand all better from her
husband, though her heart failed her as much as, or even perhaps more
than, did that of poor little Cis.  Master Richard had sped on before
their tardy conveyance, and had had time to give the heads of his
intelligence before they reached the Manor house, and when they were
conducted to my Lady's chamber, they saw him, by the light of a large
fire, standing before the Earl and Countess, cap in hand, much as a
groom or gamekeeper would now stand before his master and mistress.

The Earl, however, rose to receive the ladies; but the Countess, no
great observer of ceremony towards other people, whatever she might
exact from them towards herself, cried out, "Come hither, come hither,
Cicely Talbot, and tell me how it fares with the poor lady," and as the
maiden came forward in the dim light-- "Ha!  What!  Is't she?" she
cried, with a sudden start.  "On my faith, what has she done to thee?
Thou art as like her as the foal to the mare."

This exclamation disconcerted the visitors, but luckily for them the
Earl laughed and declared that he could see no resemblance in Mistress
Cicely's dark brows to the arched ones of the Queen of Scots, to which
his wife replied testily, "Who said there was?  The maid need not be
uplifted, for there's nothing alike between them, only she hath caught
the trick of her bearing so as to startle me in the dark, my head
running on the poor lady.  I could have sworn 'twas she coming in, as
she was when she first came to our care fifteen years agone.  Pray
Heaven she may not haunt the place!  How fareth she in health, wench?"

"Well, madam, save when the rheumatic pains take her," said Cicely.

"And still of good courage?"

"That, madam, nothing can daunt."

Seats, though only joint stools, were given to the ladies, but Susan
found herself no longer trembling at the effects of the Countess's
insolence upon Cicely, who seemed to accept it all as a matter of
course, and almost of indifference, though replying readily and with a
gentle grace, most unlike her childish petulance.

Many close inquiries from the Earl and Countess were answered by
Richard and the young lady, until they had a tolerably clear idea of
the situation.  The Countess wept bitterly, and to Cicely's great
amazement began bemoaning herself that she was not still the poor
lady's keeper.  It was a shame to put her where there were no women to
feel for her.  Lady Shrewsbury had apparently forgotten that no one had
been so virulent against the Queen as herself.

And when it was impossible to deny that things looked extremely ill,
and that Burghley and Walsingham seemed resolved not to let slip this
opportunity of ridding themselves of the prisoner, my Lady burst out
with, "Ah! there it is!  She will die, and my promise is broken, and
she will haunt me to my dying day, all along of that venomous toad and
spiteful viper, Mary Talbot."

A passionate fit of weeping succeeded, mingled with vituperations of
her daughter Mary, far more than of herself, and amid it all, during
Susan's endeavours at soothing, Cicely gathered that the cause of the
Countess's despair was that in the time of her friendship and amity,
she had uttered an assurance that the Queen need not fear death, as she
would contrive means of safety.  And on her own ground, in her own
Castle or Lodge, there could be little doubt that she would have been
able to have done so.  The Earl, indeed, shook his head, but repented,
for she laughed at him half angrily, half hysterically, for thinking he
could have prevented anything that she was set upon.

And now she said and fully believed that the misunderstanding which had
resulted in the removal of the prisoner had been entirely due to the
slanders and deceits of her own daughter Mary, and her husband Gilbert,
