chance, or, in part at least, to his own unreflecting conduct, Mr.
Morton availed himself of Major Melville's permission to pay him
an early visit.

Waverley's first impulse was to intimate a desire that he might
not be disturbed with questions or conversation; but he suppressed
it upon observing the benevolent and reverend appearance of the
clergyman who had rescued him from the immediate violence of the
villagers.

'I believe, sir,' said the unfortunate young man,'that in any
other circumstances I should have had as much gratitude to express
to you as the safety of my life may be worth; but such is the
present tumult of my mind, and such is my anticipation of what I
am yet likely to endure, that I can hardly offer you thanks for
your interposition.'

Mr. Morton replied, that, far from making any claim upon his good
opinion, his only wish and the sole purpose of his visit was to
find out the means of deserving it. 'My excellent friend, Major
Melville,' he continued, 'has feelings and duties as a soldier and
public functionary by which I am not fettered; nor can I always
coincide in opinions which he forms, perhaps with too little
allowance for the imperfections of human nature.' He paused and
then proceeded: 'I do not intrude myself on your confidence, Mr.
Waverley, for the purpose of learning any circumstances the
knowledge of which can be prejudicial either to yourself or to
others; but I own my earnest wish is that you would intrust me
with any particulars which could lead to your exculpation. I can
solemnly assure you they will be deposited with a faithful and, to
the extent of his limited powers, a zealous agent.'

'You are, sir, I presume, a Presbyterian clergyman?' Mr. Morton
bowed. 'Were I to be guided by the prepossessions of education, I
might distrust your friendly professions in my case; but I have
observed that similar prejudices are nourished in this country
against your professional brethren of the Episcopal persuasion,
and I am willing to believe them equally unfounded in both cases.'

'Evil to him that thinks otherwise,' said Mr. Morton; 'or who
holds church government and ceremonies as the exclusive gage of
Christian faith or moral virtue.'

'But,' continued Waverley, 'I cannot perceive why I should trouble
you with a detail of particulars, out of which, after revolving
them as carefully as possible in my recollection, I find myself
unable to explain much of what is charged against me. I know,
indeed, that I am innocent, but I hardly see how I can hope to
prove myself so.'

'It is for that very reason, Mr. Waverley,' said the clergyman,
'that I venture to solicit your confidence. My knowledge of
individuals in this country is pretty general, and can upon
occasion be extended. Your situation will, I fear, preclude your
taking those active steps for recovering intelligence or tracing
imposture which I would willingly undertake in your behalf; and if
you are not benefited by my exertions, at least they cannot be
prejudicial to you.'

Waverley, after a few minutes' reflection, was convinced that his
reposing confidence in Mr. Morton, so far as he himself was
concerned, could hurt neither Mr. Bradwardine nor Fergus Mac-Ivor,
both of whom had openly assumed arms against the government, and
that it might possibly, if the professions of his new friend
corresponded in sincerity with the earnestness of his expression,
be of some service to himself. He therefore ran briefly over most
of the events with which the reader is already acquainted,
suppressing his attachment to Flora, and indeed neither mentioning
her nor Rose Bradwardine in the course of his narrative.

Mr. Morton seemed particularly struck with the account of
Waverley's visit to Donald Bean Lean. 'I am glad,' he said, 'you
did not mention this circumstance to the Major. It is capable of
great misconstruction on the part of those who do not consider the
power of curiosity and the influence of romance as motives of
youthful conduct. When I was a young man like you, Mr. Waverley,
any such hair-brained expedition (I beg your pardon for the
expression) would have had inexpressible charms for me. But there
are men in the world who will not believe that danger and fatigue
are often incurred without any very adequate cause, and therefore
who are sometimes led to assign motives of action entirely foreign
to the truth. This man Bean Lean is renowned through the country
as a sort of Robin Hood, and the stories which are told of his
address and enterprise are the common tales of the winter
fireside. He certainly possesses talents beyond the rude sphere in
which he moves; and, being neither destitute of ambition nor
encumbered with scruples, he will probably attempt, by every
means, to distinguish himself during the period of these unhappy
commotions.' Mr. Morton then made a careful memorandum of the
various particulars of Waverley's interview with Donald Bean Lean
and the other circumstances which he had communicated.

The interest which this good man seemed to take in his
misfortunes, above all, the full confidence he appeared to repose
in his innocence, had the natural effect of softening Edward's
heart, whom the coldness of Major Melville had taught to believe
that the world was leagued to oppress him. He shook Mr. Morton
warmly by the hand, and, assuring him that his kindness and
sympathy had relieved his mind of a heavy load, told him that,
whatever might be his own fate, he belonged to a family who had
both gratitude and the power of displaying it. The earnestness of
his thanks called drops to the eyes of the worthy clergyman, who
was doubly interested in the cause for which he had volunteered
his services, by observing the genuine and undissembled feelings
of his young friend.

Edward now inquired if Mr. Morton knew what was likely to be his
destination.

'Stirling Castle,' replied his friend; 'and so far I am well
pleased for your sake, for the governor is a man of honour and
humanity. But I am more doubtful of your treatment upon the road;
Major Melville is involuntarily obliged to intrust the custody of
your person to another.'

'I am glad of it,' answered Waverley. 'I detest that cold-blooded
calculating Scotch magistrate. I hope he and I shall never meet
more. He had neither sympathy with my innocence nor with my
wretchedness; and the petrifying accuracy with which he attended
to every form of civility, while he tortured me by his questions,
his suspicions, and his inferences, was as tormenting as the racks
of the Inquisition. Do not vindicate him, my dear sir, for that I
cannot bear with patience; tell me rather who is to have the
charge of so important a state prisoner as I am.'

'I believe a person called Gilfillan, one of the sect who are
termed Cameronians.'

'I never heard of them before.'

'They claim,' said the clergyman, 'to represent the more strict
and severe Presbyterians, who, in Charles Second's and James
Second's days, refused to profit by the Toleration, or Indulgence,
as it was called, which was extended to others of that religion.
They held conventicles in the open fields, and, being treated with
great violence and cruelty by the Scottish government, more than
once took arms during those reigns. They take their name from
their leader, Richard Cameron.'

'I recollect,' said Waverley; 'but did not the triumph of
Presbytery at the Revolution extinguish that sect?'

'By no means,' replied Morton; 'that great event fell yet far
short of what they proposed, which was nothing less than the
complete establishment of the Presbyterian Church upon the grounds
of the old Solemn League and Covenant. Indeed, I believe they
scarce knew what they wanted; but being a numerous body of men,
and not unacquainted with the use of arms, they kept themselves
together as a separate party in the state, and at the time of the
Union had nearly formed a most unnatural league with their old
enemies the Jacobites to oppose that important national measure.
Since that time their numbers have gradually diminished; but a
good many are still to be found in the western counties, and
several, with a better temper than in 1707, have now taken arms
for government. This person, whom they call Gifted Gilfillan, has
been long a leader among them, and now heads a small party, which
will pass here to-day or to-morrow on their march towards
Stirling, under whose escort Major Melville proposes you shall
travel. I would willingly speak to Gilfillan in your behalf; but,
having deeply imbibed all the prejudices of his sect, and being of
the same fierce disposition, he would pay little regard to the
remonstrances of an Erastian divine, as he would politely term me.
And now, farewell, my young friend; for the present I must not
weary out the Major's indulgence, that I may obtain his permission
to visit you again in the course of the day.'





CHAPTER XXXIV

THINGS MEND A LITTLE


About noon Mr. Morton returned and brought an invitation from
Major Melville that Mr. Waverley would honour him with his company
to dinner, notwithstanding the unpleasant affair which detained
him at Cairnvreckan, from which he should heartily rejoice to see
Mr. Waverley completely extricated. The truth was that Mr.
Morton's favourable report and opinion had somewhat staggered the
preconceptions of the old soldier concerning Edward's supposed
accession to the mutiny in the regiment; and in the unfortunate
state of the country the mere suspicion of disaffection or an
inclination to join the insurgent Jacobites might infer
criminality indeed, but certainly not dishonour. Besides, a person
whom the Major trusted had reported to him (though, as it proved,
inaccurately) a contradiction of the agitating news of the
preceding evening. According to this second edition of the
intelligence, the Highlanders had withdrawn from the Lowland
frontier with the purpose of following the army in their march to
Inverness. The Major was at a loss, indeed, to reconcile his
information with the well-known abilities of some of the gentlemen
in the Highland army, yet it was the course which was likely to be
most agreeable to others. He remembered the same policy had
detained them in the north in the year 1715, and he anticipated a
similar termination to the insurrection as upon that occasion.

This news put him in such good-humour that he readily acquiesced
in Mr. Morton's proposal to pay some hospitable attention to his
unfortunate guest, and voluntarily added, he hoped the whole
affair would prove a youthful escapade, which might be easily
atoned by a short confinement. The kind mediator had some trouble
to prevail on his young friend to accept the invitation. He dared
not urge to him the real motive, which was a good-natured wish to
secure a favourable report of Waverley's case from Major Melville
to Governor Blakeney. He remarked, from the flashes of our hero's
spirit, that touching upon this topic would be sure to defeat his
purpose. He therefore pleaded that the invitation argued the
Major's disbelief of any part of the accusation which was
inconsistent with Waverley's conduct as a soldier and a man of
honour, and that to decline his courtesy might be interpreted into
a consciousness that it was unmerited. In short, he so far
satisfied Edward that the manly and proper course was to meet the
Major on easy terms that, suppressing his strong dislike again to
encounter his cold and punctilious civility, Waverley agreed to be
guided by his new friend.

The meeting at first was stiff and formal enough. But Edward,
having accepted the invitation, and his mind being really soothed
and relieved by the kindness of Morton, held himself bound to
behave with ease, though he could not affect cordiality. The Major
was somewhat of a bon vivant, and his wine was excellent. He told
his old campaign stories, and displayed much knowledge of men and
manners. Mr. Morton had an internal fund of placid and quiet
gaiety, which seldom failed to enliven any small party in which he
found himself pleasantly seated. Waverley, whose life was a dream,
gave ready way to the predominating impulse and became the most
lively of the party. He had at all times remarkable natural powers
of conversation, though easily silenced by discouragement. On the
present occasion he piqued himself upon leaving on the minds of
his companions a favourable impression of one who, under such
disastrous circumstances, could sustain his misfortunes with ease
and gaiety. His spirits, though not unyielding, were abundantly
elastic, and soon seconded his efforts. The trio were engaged in
very lively discourse, apparently delighted with each other, and
the kind host was pressing a third bottle of Burgundy, when the
sound of a drum was heard at some distance. The Major, who, in the
glee of an old soldier, had forgot the duties of a magistrate,
cursed, with a muttered military oath, the circumstances which
recalled him to his official functions. He rose and went towards
the window, which commanded a very near view of the highroad, and
he was followed by his guests.

The drum advanced, beating no measured martial tune, but a kind of
rub-a-dub-dub, like that with which the fire-drum startles the
slumbering artizans of a Scotch burgh. It is the object of this
history to do justice to all men; I must therefore record, in
justice to the drummer, that he protested he could beat any known
march or point of war known in the British army, and had
accordingly commenced with 'Dumbarton's Drums,' when he was
silenced by Gifted Gilfillan, the commander of the party, who
refused to permit his followers to move to this profane, and even,
as he said, persecutive tune, and commanded the drummer to beat
the 119th Psalm. As this was beyond the capacity of the drubber of
sheepskin, he was fain to have recourse to the inoffensive row-de-
dow as a harmless substitute for the sacred music which his
instrument or skill were unable to achieve. This may be held a
trifling anecdote, but the drummer in question was no less than
town-drummer of Anderton. I remember his successor in office, a
member of that enlightened body, the British Convention. Be his
memory, therefore, treated with due respect.





CHAPTER XXXV

A VOLUNTEER SIXTY YEARS SINCE


On hearing the unwelcome sound of the drum, Major Melville hastily
opened a sashed door and stepped out upon a sort of terrace which
divided his house from the highroad from which the martial music
proceeded. Waverley and his new friend followed him, though
probably he would have dispensed with their attendance. They soon
recognised in solemn march, first, the performer upon the drum;
secondly, a large flag of four compartments, on which were
inscribed the words, COVENANT, KIRK, KING, KINGDOMS. The person
who was honoured with this charge was followed by the commander of
the party, a thin, dark, rigid-looking man, about sixty years old.
The spiritual pride, which in mine host of the Candlestick mantled
in a sort of supercilious hypocrisy, was in this man's face
elevated and yet darkened by genuine and undoubting fanaticism. It
was impossible to behold him without imagination placing him in
some strange crisis, where religious zeal was the ruling
principle. A martyr at the stake, a soldier in the field, a lonely
and banished wanderer consoled by the intensity and supposed
purity of his faith under every earthly privation, perhaps a
persecuting inquisitor, as terrific in power as unyielding in
adversity; any of these seemed congenial characters to this
personage. With these high traits of energy, there was something
in the affected precision and solemnity of his deportment and
discourse that bordered upon the ludicrous; so that, according to
the mood of the spectator's mind and the light under which Mr.
Gilfillan presented himself, one might have feared, admired, or
laughed at him. His dress was that of a West-Country peasant, of
better materials indeed than that of the lower rank, but in no
respect affecting either the mode of the age or of the Scottish
gentry at any period. His arms were a broadsword and pistols,
which, from the antiquity of their appearance, might have seen the
rout of Pentland or Bothwell Brigg.

As he came up a few steps to meet Major Melville, and touched
solemnly, but slightly, his huge and over-brimmed blue bonnet, in
answer to the Major, who had courteously raised a small triangular
gold-laced hat, Waverley was irresistibly impressed with the idea
that he beheld a leader of the Roundheads of yore in conference
with one of Marlborough's captains.

The group of about thirty armed men who followed this gifted
commander was of a motley description. They were in ordinary
Lowland dresses, of different colours, which, contrasted with the
arms they bore, gave them an irregular and mobbish appearance; so
much is the eye accustomed to connect uniformity of dress with the
military character. In front were a few who apparently partook of
their leader's enthusiasm, men obviously to be feared in a combat,
where their natural courage was exalted by religious zeal. Others
puffed and strutted, filled with the importance of carrying arms
and all the novelty of their situation, while the rest, apparently
fatigued with their march, dragged their limbs listlessly along,
or straggled from their companions to procure such refreshments as
the neighbouring cottages and alehouses afforded. Six grenadiers
of Ligonier's, thought the Major to himself, as his mind reverted
to his own military experience, would have sent all these fellows
to the right about.

Greeting, however, Mr. Gilfillan civilly, he requested to know if
he had received the letter he had sent to him upon his march, and
could undertake the charge of the state prisoner whom he there
mentioned as far as Stirling Castle. 'Yea,' was the concise reply
of the Cameronian leader, in a voice which seemed to issue from
the very penetralia of his person.

'But your escort, Mr. Gilfillan, is not so strong as I expected,'
said Major Melville.

'Some of the people,' replied Gilfillan, 'hungered and were
athirst by the way, and tarried until their poor souls were
refreshed with the word.'

'I am sorry, sir,' replied the Major, 'you did not trust to your
refreshing your men at Cairnvreckan; whatever my house contains is
at the command of persons employed in the service.'

'It was not of creature-comforts I spake,' answered the
Covenanter, regarding Major Melville with something like a smile
of contempt; 'howbeit, I thank you; but the people remained
waiting upon the precious Mr. Jabesh Rentowel for the out-pouring
of the afternoon exhortation.'

'And have you, sir,' said the Major, 'when the rebels are about to
spread themselves through this country, actually left a great part
of your command at a fieldpreaching?'

Gilfillan again smiled scornfully as he made this indirect answer
--'Even thus are the children of this world wiser in their
generation than the children of light!'

'However, sir,' said the Major, 'as you are to take charge of this
gentleman to Stirling, and deliver him, with these papers, into
the hands of Governor Blakeney, I beseech you to observe some
rules of military discipline upon your march. For example, I would
advise you to keep your men more closely together, and that each
in his march should cover his file-leader, instead of straggling
like geese upon a common; and, for fear of surprise, I further
recommend to you to form a small advance-party of your best men,
with a single vidette in front of the whole march, so that when
you approach a village or a wood'--(here the Major interrupted
himself)--'But as I don't observe you listen to me, Mr.
Gilfillan, I suppose I need not give myself the trouble to say
more upon the subject. You are a better judge, unquestionably,
than I am of the measures to be pursued; but one thing I would
have you well aware of, that you are to treat this gentleman, your
prisoner, with no rigour nor incivility, and are to subject him to
no other restraint than is necessary for his security.'

'I have looked into my commission,' said Mr. Gilfillan,'
subscribed by a worthy and professing nobleman, William, Earl of
Glencairn; nor do I find it therein set down that I am to receive
any charges or commands anent my doings from Major William
Melville of Cairnvreckan.'

Major Melville reddened even to the well-powdered ears which
appeared beneath his neat military sidecurls, the more so as he
observed Mr. Morton smile at the same moment. 'Mr. Gilfillan,' he
answered, with some asperity, 'I beg ten thousand pardons for
interfering with a person of your importance. I thought, however,
that as you have been bred a grazier, if I mistake not, there
might be occasion to remind you of the difference between
Highlanders and Highland cattle; and if you should happen to meet
with any gentleman who has seen service, and is disposed to speak
upon the subject, I should still imagine that listening to him
would do you no sort of harm. But I have done, and have only once
more to recommend this gentleman to your civility as well as to
your custody. Mr. Waverley, I am truly sorry we should part in
this way; but I trust, when you are again in this country, I may
have an opportunity to render Cairnvreckan more agreeable than
circumstances have permitted on this occasion.'

So saying, he shook our hero by the hand. Morton also took an
affectionate farewell, and Waverley, having mounted his horse,
with a musketeer leading it by the bridle and a file upon each
side to prevent his escape, set forward upon the march with
Gilfillan and his party. Through the little village they were
accompanied with the shouts of the children, who cried out, 'Eh!
see to the Southland gentleman that's gaun to be hanged for
shooting lang John Mucklewrath, the smith!





APPENDICES TO THE GENERAL PREFACE


NO. I

FRAGMENT [Footnote: It is not to be supposed that these fragments
are given in possessing any intrinsic value of themselves; but
there may be some curiosity attached to them, as to the first
etchings of a plate, which are accounted interesting by those who
have, in any degree, been interested in the more finished works of
the artist.] OF A ROMANCE WHICH WAS TO HAVE BEEN ENTITLED

THOMAS THE RHYMER

CHAPTER I

THE sun was nearly set behind the distant mountains of Liddesdale,
when a few of the scattered and terrified inhabitants of the
village of Hersildoune, which had four days before been burned by
a predatory band of English Borderers, were now busied in
repairing their ruined dwellings. One high tower in the centre of
the village alone exhibited no appearance of devastation. It was
surrounded with court walls, and the outer gate was barred and
bolted. The bushes and brambles which grew around, and had even
insinuated their branches beneath the gate, plainly showed that it
must have been many years since it had been opened. While the
cottages around lay in smoking ruins, this pile, deserted and
desolate as it seemed to be, had suffered nothing from the
violence of the invaders; and the wretched beings who were
endeavouring to repair their miserable huts against nightfall
seemed to neglect the preferable shelter which it might have
