like a carpet woven of rays of light.

What place was this that Klea had chosen to speak with him in.

But though her voice sounded firm, she herself was not cool and
insensible as Orcus--which this place, which was filled with the fumes
of incense and weighed upon his senses, much resembled--for he had felt
her fingers tremble under his, and when he went up to her, to help her,
her heart beat no less violently and rapidly than his own. Ah! the man
who should succeed in touching that heart of hard, but pure and precious
crystal would indeed enjoy a glorious draught of the most perfect bliss.

"This is our destination," said Klea; and then she went on in short
broken sentences. "Remain where you are. Leave me this place near the
door. Now, answer me first one question. My sister Irene has vanished
from the temple. Did you cause her to be carried off?"

"I did," replied Publius eagerly. "She desired me to greet you from her,
and to tell you how much she likes her new friends. When I shall have
told you--"

"Not now," interrupted Klea excitedly. "Turn round--there where you see
the lamp-light." Publius did as he was desired, and a slight shudder
shook even his bold heart, for the girl's sayings and doings seemed
to him not solemn merely, but mysterious like those of a prophetess.
A violent crash sounded through the silent and sacred place, and loud
echoes were tossed from side to side, ringing ominously throughout the
grotto. Publius turned anxiously round, and his eye, seeking Klea, found
her no more; then, hurrying to the door of the cave, he heard her lock
it on the outside.

The water-bearer had escaped him, had flung the heavy door to, and
imprisoned him; and this idea was to the Roman so degrading and
unendurable that, lost to every feeling but rage, wounded pride, and
the wild desire to be free, he kicked the door with all his might, and
called out angrily to Klea:

"Open this door--I command you. Let me free this moment or, by all the
gods--"

He did not finish his threat, for in the middle of the right-hand panel
of the door a small wicket was opened through which the priests were
wont to puff incense into the tomb of the sacred bulls--and twice,
thrice, finally, when he still would not be pacified, a fourth time,
Klea called out to him:

"Listen to me--listen to me, Publius." Publius ceased storming, and she
went on:

"Do not threaten me, for you will certainly repent it when you have
heard what I have to tell you. Do not interrupt me; I may tell you at
once this door is opened every day before sunrise, so your imprisonment
will not last long; and you must submit to it, for I shut you in to save
your life--yes, your life which was in danger. Do you think my anxiety
was folly? No, Publius, it is only too well founded, and if you, as a
man, are strong and bold, so am I as a woman. I never was afraid of an
imaginary nothing. Judge yourself whether I was not right to be afraid
for you.

"King Euergetes and Eulaeus have bribed two hideous monsters to murder
you. When I went to seek out Irene I overheard all, and I have seen with
my own eyes the two horrible wolves who are lurking to fall upon you,
and heard with these ears their scheme for doing it. I never wrote the
note on the tile which was signed with my name; Eulaeus did it, and you
took his bait and came out into the desert by night. In a few minutes
the ruffians will have stolen up to this place to seek their victim, but
they will not find you, Publius, for I have saved you--I, Klea, whom you
first met with smiles--whose sister you have stolen away--the same Klea
that you a minute since were ready to threaten. Now, at once, I am going
into the desert, dressed like a traveller in a coat and hat, so that in
the doubtful light of the moon I may easily be taken for you--going to
give my weary heart as a prey to the assassins' knife."

"You are mad!" cried Publius, and he flung himself with his whole weight
on the door, and kicked it with all his strength. "What you purpose is
pure madness open the door, I command you! However strong the villains
may be that Euergetes has bribed, I am man enough to defend myself."

"You are unarmed, Publius, and they have cords and daggers."

"Then open the door, and stay here with me till day dawns. It is not
noble, it is wicked to cast away your life. Open the door at once, I
entreat you, I command you!"

At any other time the words would not have failed of their effect on
Klea's reasonable nature, but the fearful storm of feeling which had
broken over her during the last few hours had borne away in its whirl
all her composure and self-command. The one idea, the one resolution,
the one desire, which wholly possessed her was to close the life
that had been so full of self-sacrifice by the greatest sacrifice
of all--that of life itself, and not only in order to secure Irene's
happiness and to save the Roman, but because it pleased her--her
father's daughter--to make a noble end; because she, the maiden, would
fain show Publius what a woman might be capable of who loved him above
all others; because, at this moment, death did not seem a misfortune;
and her mind, overwrought by hours of terrific tension, could not free
itself from the fixed idea that she would and must sacrifice herself.

She no longer thought these things--she was possessed by them; they had
the mastery, and as a madman feels forced to repeat the same words again
and again to himself, so no prayer, no argument at this moment would
have prevailed to divert her from her purpose of giving up her young
life for Publius and Irene. She contemplated this resolve with affection
and pride as justifying her in looking up to herself as to some nobler
creature. She turned a deaf ear to the Roman's entreaty, and said in a
tone of which the softness surprised him:

"Be silent Publius, and hear me further. You too are noble, and
certainly you owe me some gratitude for having saved your life."

"I owe you much, and I will pay it," cried Publius, "as long as there is
breath in this body--but open the door, I beseech you, I implore you--"

"Hear me to the end, time presses; hear me out, Publius. My sister Irene
went away with you. I need say nothing about her beauty, but how bright,
how sweet her nature is you do not know, you cannot know, but you will
find out. She, you must be told, is as poor as I am, but the child of
freeborn and noble parents. Now swear to me, swear--no, do not interrupt
me--swear by the head of your father that you will never, abandon her,
that you will never behave to her otherwise than as if she were the
daughter of your dearest friend or of your own brother."

"I swear it and I will keep my oath--by the life of the man whose head
is more sacred to me than the names of all the gods. But now I beseech
you, I command you open this door, Klea--that I may not lose you--that I
may tell you that my whole heart is yours, and yours alone--that I love
you, love you unboundedly."

"I have your oath," cried the girl in great excitement, for she could
now see a shadow moving backwards and forwards at some distance in the
desert. "You have sworn by the head of your father. Never let Irene
repent having gone with you, and love her always as you fancy now, in
this moment, that you love me, your preserver. Remember both of you the
hapless Klea who would gladly have lived for you, but who now gladly
dies for you. Do not forget me, Publius, for I have never but this once
opened my heart to love, but I have loved you Publius, with pain and
torment, and with sweet delight--as no other woman ever yet revelled in
the ecstasy of love or was consumed in its torments." She almost shouted
the last words at the Roman as if she were chanting a hymn of triumph,
beside herself, forgetting everything and as if intoxicated.

Why was he now silent, why had he nothing to answer, since she had
confessed to him the deepest secret of her breast, and allowed him to
look into the inmost sanctuary of her heart? A rush of burning words
from his lips would have driven her off at once to the desert and to
death; his silence held her back--it puzzled her and dropped like cool
rain on the soaring flames of her pride, fell on the raging turmoil of
her soul like oil on troubled water. She could not part from him thus,
and her lips parted to call him once more by his name.

While she had been making confession of her love to the Roman as if
it were her last will and testament, Publius felt like a man dying
of thirst, who has been led to a flowing well only to be forbidden
to moisten his lips with the limpid fluid. His soul was filled with
passionate rage approaching to despair, and as with rolling eyes he
glanced round his prison an iron crow-bar leaning against the wall met
his gaze; it had been used by the workmen to lift the sarcophagus of the
last deceased Apis into its right place. He seized upon this tool, as a
drowning man flings himself on a floating plank: still he heard Klea's
last words, and did not lose one of them, though the sweat poured from
his brow as he inserted the metal lever like a wedge between the two
halves of the door, just above the threshold.

All was now silent outside; perhaps the distracted girl was already
hurrying towards the assassins--and the door was fearfully heavy and
would not open nor yield. But he must force it--he flung himself on the
earth and thrust his shoulder under the lever, pushing his whole
body against the iron bar, so that it seemed to him that every joint
threatened to give way and every sinew to crack; the door rose--once
more he put forth the whole strength of his manly vigor, and now the
seam in the wood cracked, the door flew open, and Klea, seized with
terror, flew off and away--into the desert--straight towards the
murderers.

Publius leaped to his feet and flung himself out of his prison; as he
saw Klea escape he flew after her with, hasty leaps, and caught her in
a few steps, for her mantle hindered her in running, and when she would
not obey his desire that she should stand still he stood in front of her
and said, not tenderly but sternly and decidedly:

"You do not go a step farther, I forbid it."

"I am going where I must go," cried the girl in great agitation. "Let me
go, at once!"

"You will stay here--here with me," snarled Publius, and taking both
her hands by the wrists he clasped them with his iron fingers as with
handcuffs. "I am the man and you are the woman, and I will teach you who
is to give orders here and who is to obey."

Anger and rage prompted these quite unpremeditated words, and as
Klea--while he spoke them with quivering lips--had attempted with the
exertion of all her strength, which was by no means contemptible, to
wrench her hands from his grasp, he forced her--angry as he still was,
but nevertheless with due regard for her womanliness--forced her by a
gentle and yet irresistible pressure on her arms to bend before him, and
compelled her slowly to sink down on both knees.

As soon as she was in this position, Publius let her free; she covered
her eyes with her aching hands and sobbed aloud, partly from anger, and
because she felt herself bitterly humiliated.

"Now, stand up," said Publius in an altered tone as he heard her
weeping. "Is it then such a hard matter to submit to the will of a man
who will not and cannot let you go, and whom you love, besides?" How
gentle and kind the words sounded! Klea, when she heard them, raised her
eyes to Publius, and as she saw him looking down on her as a supplicant
her anger melted and turned to grateful emotion--she went closer to him
on her knees, laid her head against him and said:

"I have always been obliged to rely upon myself, and to guide another
person with loving counsel, but it must be sweeter far to be led by
affection and I will always, always obey you."

"I will thank you with heart and soul henceforth from this hour!" cried
Publius, lifting her up. "You were ready to sacrifice your life for
me, and now mine belongs to you. I am yours and you are mine--I your
husband, you my wife till our life's end!"

He laid his hands on her shoulders, and turned her face round to his;
she resisted no longer, for it was sweet to her to yield her will to
that of this strong man. And how happy was she, who from her childhood
had taken it upon herself to be always strong, and self-reliant, to feel
herself the weaker, and to be permitted to trust in a stronger arm than
her own. Somewhat thus a young rose-tree might feel, which for the first
time receives the support of the prop to which it is tied by the careful
gardener.

Her eyes rested blissfully and yet anxiously on his, and his lips had
just touched hers in a first kiss when they started apart in terror, for
Klea's name was clearly shouted through the still night-air, and in the
next instant a loud scream rang out close to them followed by dull cries
of pain.

"The murderers!" shrieked Klea, and trembling for herself and for
him she clung closely to her lover's breast. In one brief moment the
self-reliant heroine--proud in her death-defying valor--had become a
weak, submissive, dependent woman.




CHAPTER XXII.

On the roof of the tower of the pylon by the gate of the Serapeum stood
an astrologer who had mounted to this, the highest part of the temple,
to observe the stars; but it seemed that he was not destined on this
occasion to fulfil his task, for swiftly driving black clouds swept
again and again across that portion of the heavens to which his
observations were principally directed. At last he impatiently laid
aside his instruments, his waxed tablet and style, and desired the
gate-keeper--the father of poor little Philo--whose duty it was to
attend at night on the astrologers on the tower, to carry down all his
paraphernalia, as the heavens were not this evening favorable to his
labors.

"Favorable!" exclaimed the gate-keeper, catching up the astrologer's
words, and shrugging his shoulders so high that his head disappeared
between them.

"It is a night of horror, and some great disaster threatens us for
certain. Fifteen years have I been in my place, and I never saw such a
night but once before, and the very next day the soldiers of Antiochus,
the Syrian king, came and plundered our treasury. Aye--and to-night is
worse even than that was; when the dog-star first rose a horrible shape
with a lion's mane flew across the desert, but it was not till midnight
that the fearful uproar began, and even you shuddered when it broke out
in the Apis-cave. Frightful things must be coming on us when the sacred
bulls rise from the dead and butt and storm at the door with their
horns to break it open. Many a time have I seen the souls of the dead
fluttering and wheeling and screaming above the old mausoleums, and
rock-tombs of ancient times. Sometimes they would soar up in the air in
the form of hawks with men's heads, or like ibises with a slow lagging
flight, and sometimes sweep over the desert like gray shapeless shadows,
or glide across the sand like snakes; or they would creep out of the
tombs, howling like hungry dogs. I have often heard them barking like
jackals or laughing like hyenas when they scent carrion, but to-night
is the first time I ever heard them shrieking like furious men, and then
groaning and wailing as if they were plunged in the lake of fire and
suffering horrible torments.

"Look there--out there--something is moving again! Oh! holy father,
exorcise them with some mighty bann. Do you not see how they are growing
larger? They are twice the size of ordinary mortals." The astronomer
took an amulet in his hand, muttered a few sentences to himself,
seeking at the same time to discover the figures which had so scared the
gate-keeper.

"They are indeed tall," he said when he perceived them. "And now they
are melting into one, and growing smaller and smaller--however,
perhaps they are only men come to rob the tombs, and who happen to be
particularly tall, for these figures are not of supernatural height."

"They are twice as tall as you, and you are not short," cried the
gate-keeper, pressing his lips devoutly to the amulet the astrologer
held in his hand, "and if they are robbers why has no watchman called
out to stop them? How is it their screams and groans have not waked the
sentinels that are posted there every night? There--that was another
fearful cry! Did you ever hear such tones from any human breast? Great
Serapis, I shall die of fright! Come down with me, holy father, that I
may look after my little sick boy, for those who have seen such sights
do not escape unstricken."

The peaceful silence of the Necropolis had indeed been disturbed, but
the spirits of the departed had no share in the horrors which had been
transacted this night in the desert, among the monuments and rocktombs.
They were living men that had disturbed the calm of the sacred place,
that had conspired with darkness in cold-blooded cruelty, greater than
that of evil spirits, to achieve the destruction of a fellow-man; but
they were living men too who, in the midst of the horrors of a most
fearful night, had experienced the blossoming in their own souls of the
divinest germ which heaven implants in the bosom of its mortal children.
Thus in a day of battle amid blood and slaughter may a child be born
that shall grow up blessed and blessing, the comfort and joy of his
family.

The lion-maned monster whose appearance and rapid disappearance in
the desert had first alarmed the gate-keeper, had been met by several
travellers on its way to Memphis, and each and all, horrified by its
uncanny aspect, had taken to flight or tried to hide themselves--and
yet it was no more than a man with warm pulses, an honest purpose, and
a true and loving heart. But those who met him could not see into his
soul, and his external aspect certainly bore little resemblance to that
of other men.

His feet, unused to walking, moved but clumsily, and had a heavy body
to carry, and his enormous beard and the mass of gray hair on his
head--which he turned now this way and now that--gave him an aspect that
might well scare even a bold man who should meet him unexpectedly. Two
stall-keepers who, by day, were accustomed to offer their wares for sale
near the Serapeum to the pilgrims, met him close to the city.

"Did you see that panting object?" said one to the other as they looked
after him. "If he were not shut up fast in his cell I could declare it
was Serapion, the recluse."

"Nonsense," replied the other. "He is tied faster by his oath than by
chains and fetters. It must be one of the Syrian beggars that besiege
the temple of Astarte."

"Perhaps," answered his companion with indifference. "Let us get on now,
my wife has a roast goose for supper this evening."

Serapion, it is true, was fast tied to his cell, and yet the pedler
had judged rightly, for he it was who hurried along the high-road
frightening all he met. After his long captivity walking was very
painful to him; besides, he was barefoot, and every stone in the
path hurt the soles of his feet which had grown soft; nevertheless he
contrived to make a by no means contemptible pace when in the distance
he caught sight of a woman's figure which he could fancy to be Klea.
Many a man, who in his own particular sphere of life can cut a very
respectable figure, becomes a laughing-stock for children when he is
taken out of his own narrow circle, and thrown into the turmoil of
the world with all his peculiarities clinging to him. So it was with
Serapion; in the suburbs the street-boys ran after him mocking at him,
but it was not till three smart hussys, who were resting from their
dance in front of a tavern, laughed loudly as they caught sight of him,
and an insolent soldier drove the point of his lance through his flowing
mane, as if by accident, that he became fully conscious of his wild
