changes the water level swift as thought, and the same law is certain
in all human relations. Madame was not quite the same; something had
been taken away; the level of their friendship was changed; and when
Doctor Moran could not but perceive this fact, he said--

"Go less frequently to madame's, Cornelia. You do not enjoy your
visits; dissolve a friendship that begins to be incomplete. It is the
best plan."




CHAPTER XII

A HEART THAT WAITS


Late summer on the Norfolk Broads! And where on earth can the lover of
boats find a more charming resort? How alluring are the mysterious
entrances to these Broads! where a boat seems to make an insane dive
into a hopeless cul de sac of a ditch, and then suddenly emerges on a
wide expanse of water, teeming with pike and bream and eels; and
fringed with a border of plashy ground, full of reeds and willows and
flowering flags; and alive with water fowl.

Now close to the Manor of Hyde, the country home of Earl Hyde in
Norfolk, there was one of these delightful Broads--flat as a billiard
table, and hidden by the tall reeds which bordered it. But Annie Hyde
lying at the open window of her room in the Manor House could see its
silvery waters, and the black-sailed wherry floating on them, and the
young man sitting at the prow fishing, and idling, among the lilies and
languors of these hot summer days. Her hands were folded, her lips
moved, she was asking of some intelligence among the angels, grace and
favour for one who was dearer to her than her own life or happiness.

An aged man sat silently by her, a man of noble beauty, whose soul was
in every part of his body, expressive and impressive--a fiery particle
not always at its window, but when there, infecting and going through
observers, whether they would or not. He was dressed altogether in
black, and had fine small hands, a thin austere face and clean
sensitive lips which seemed to say, "He hath made us kings and
priests"--a man of celestial race, valuing things at their eternal, not
at their temporal worth.

There had been silence for some time between them, and he did not
appear disposed to break it; but Annie longed for him to do so, because
she had a mystical appetite for sacred things, and was never so happy
and so much at rest as when he was talking to her of them. For she
loved God, and had been led to the love of God by a kind of thirst for
God.

"Dear father," she said finally, "I have been thinking of the past
years, in which you have taught me so much."

"It is better to look forward, Annie," he answered. "The traveller to
Eternity must not continually turn back to count his steps; for if God
be leading him, no matter how dangerous or lonely the road, 'He will
pluck thy feet out of the net.'"

"Even in the valley of death?"

"'BE NOT AFRAID! NOTHING OF THEE WILL DIE!' Take these sweet
compassionate words of Jesus, as He wept by the dying bed of Joseph,
His father, into thy heart. Blessed are the homesick, Annie! for they
shall get home."

"All my life I have loved God, and His love has been over me."

"Date not God's love from thy nativity; look far, far back of it--to
the everlasting love."

"After death, I SHALL KNOW."

"Death!" he repeated, "Death that deceitful word. What is it? A dream,
that wakes us at the end of the night. This is the great saying that
men forget--Death is Life!"

"Yet life ceases."

"It does not, Annie. Death, is like the setting of the sun. The sun
never sets; life never ceases. Certain phenomena occur which deceive
us, because human vision is so feeble--we think the sun sets, and it
never ceases shining; we think our friends die, and they never cease
living."

As he spoke these words Mary Damer entered, and she laid her hand on
his shoulder and said, "My dear Doctor Roslyn, after death what then?
we are not all good--what then?"

He looked at her wistfully and answered, "I will give you one thought,
Mary, to ponder--the blessedness of heaven, is it not an eternity older
than the misery of hell? Let your soul fearlessly follow where this
fact leads it; for there is no limit to God's mercy. Do you think it is
His way to worry a wandering sheep eternally? Jesus Christ thought
better of His father. He told us that the Great Shepherd of souls
followed such sheep into the wilderness, and brought them home in His
arms, or on His shoulder, and then called on the angels of heaven to
rejoice because they were found. Find out what that parable means,
Mary. He whose name is 'Love' can teach you."

Then he rose and went away, and Mary sat down in his place, and Annie
gradually came back to the material plane of everyday life and duty.
Indeed Mary brought this element in a very decided form with her; for
she had a letter in her hand from an old lover, and she was much
excited by its advent, and eager to discuss the particulars with Annie.

"It is from Captain Seabright, who is now in Pondicherry," she
explained. "He loves me, Annie. He loved me long ago, and went to India
to make money; now he says he has enough and to spare; and he asks me
if I have forgotten."

"There is Mr. Van Ariens to consider. You have promised to marry him,
Mary. It is not hard to find the right way on this road, I think."

"Of course. I would scorn to do a dishonourable or unhandsome thing.
But is it not very strange Willie Seabright should write to me at this
time? How contradictory life is! I had also a letter from Mr. Van
Ariens by the same mail, and I shall answer them both this evening."
Then she laughed a little, and added, "I must take care and not make
the mistake an American girl made, under much the same circumstances."

"What was it?" inquired Annie languidly.

"She misdirected her letters and thus sent 'No' to the man whom of all
others, she wished to marry."

As Mary spoke a soft brightness seemed to pervade Annie's brain cells,
and she could hardly restrain the exclamation of sudden enlightenment
that rose to her lips. She raised herself slightly, and in so doing,
her eyes fell upon the tall figure of Hyde standing clearly out in the
intense, white sunshine of the Broads; and perhaps her soul may have
whispered to his soul, for he turned his face to the house, and lifted
the little red fishing cap from his head. The action stimulated to the
utmost Annie's intuitive powers.

"Mary," she said, "what a strange incident! Did you know the girl?"

"I saw her once in Philadelphia. Mr. Van Ariens told me about her. She
is the friend of his sister the Marquise de Tounnerre."

"How did Mr. Van Ariens know of such an event?"

"I suppose the Marquise told him of it."

"I am interested. Is she pretty? Who, and what is her father? Did she
lose her lover through the mistake?"

"You are more interested in this American girl, than in me. I think you
might ask a little concerning my love affair with Captain Seabright."

"I always ask you about Mr. Van Ariens. A girl cannot have two lovers,"

"But if one is gone away?"

"Then he has gone away; and that is the end of him. He must not trouble
the one who has come to stay, eh, Mary?"

"You are right, Annie. But one's first lover has always a charm above
reason; and Willie Seabright was once very dear to me."

"I am sorry for that unfortunate American girl."

"So am I. She is a great beauty. Her name is Cornelia Moran; and her
father is a famous physician in New York."

"And this beauty had two lovers?"

"Yes; an Englishman of noble birth; and an American. They both loved
her, and she loved the Englishman. They must have both asked her hand
on the same day, and she must have answered both letters in the same
hour; and the letter she intended for the man she loved, went to the
man she did not love. Presumably, the man she loved got the refusal she
intended for the other, for he never sought her society again; and Mr.
Van Ariens told me she nearly died in consequence. I know not as to
this part of the story; when I saw her in Philadelphia, she had no more
of fragility than gave delicacy to all her charms."

"And what became of the two lovers, Mary?"

"The Englishman went back to England; and the American found another
girl more kind to him."

"I wonder what made Mr. Van Ariens tell you this story?"

"He talked much of his sister, and this young lady was her chief friend
and confidante."

"When did it happen?"

"A few days after his sister's marriage."

"Then the Marquise could not know of it; and so she could not have told
her brother. However in the world could he have found out the mistake?
Do you think the girl herself found it out?"

"That is inconceivable," answered Mary. "She would have written to her
lover and explained the affair."

"Certainly. It is a very singular incident. I want to think it
over--how--did--Mr. Van Ariens--find--it--out, I wonder!"

"Perhaps the rejected lover confided in him."

"But why did not the rejected lover send the letter he received--and
which he must have known he had no right to retain--to Miss Moran, or
to the Englishman for whom it was intended? A man who could keep a
letter like that, must have some envious sneaking devil in his body. A
bad man, Mary, a bad man--the air must be unclean in any room he comes
into."

"Why Annie! How angry you are. Let us drop the subject. I really do
want to tell you something about Willie Seabright."

"What did Mr. Van Ariens say about the matter? What did he think? Why
did he tell you?"

"We were talking of the Marquise. The story came up quite naturally. I
think Mr. Van Ariens felt very sorry for Miss Moran. Of course he did.
Will you listen to Captain Seabright's letter? I had no idea it could
affect me so much."

"But you loved him once?"

"Very dearly."

"Well then, Mary, I think no one has a double in love or friendship. If
the loved one dies, or goes away, his place remains empty forever. We
have lost feelings that he, and he only, could call up."

At this point in the conversation Hyde entered, brown and wind-blown,
the scent of the sedgy water and the flowery woods about him.

"Your servant, ladies," he said gayly, "I have bream enough for a dozen
families, Mary; and I have sent a string to the rectory."

"Poor little fish!" answered Annie. "They could not cry out, or plead
with you, or beg for their lives, and because they were dumb and opened
not their mouths, they were wounded and strangled to death."

"Don't say such things, Annie. How can I enjoy my sport if you do?"

"I don't think you ought to enjoy sport which is murder. You have your
wherry to sail, is not that sport enough? I have heard you say nothing
that floats on fresh water, can beat a Norfolk wherry."

"I vow it is the truth. With her fine lines and strong sails she can
lie closer to the wind than any other craft. She is safe, and fast, and
handy to manage. Three feet of water will do her, though she be sixty
tons burden; and I will sail her where nothing but a row boat can
follow me."

"Is not that sport enough?"

"I must have something to get. I would have brought you armfuls of
flowers, but you do not like me to cut them."

"I like my flowers alive, George. You must be dull indeed if you make
no difference between the scent of growing flowers, and cut ones.
Tomorrow Mary is going to Ranforth, you must go with her, and you may
bring me some peaches from the Hall, if you please to do so."

Then Hyde and Mary had a game of battledore, and she watched them
tossing the gayly painted corks, until amid their light laughter and
merry talk she fell asleep. And when she awakened it was sunset, and
there was no one in her room but her maid. She had slept long, but in
spite of its refreshment, she had a sense of something uneasy. Then she
recalled the story Mary Damer had told her, and because she
comprehended the truth, she was instantly at rest. The whole secret was
clear as daylight to her. She knew now every turn of an event so full
of sorrow. She was positive Rem Van Ariens was himself the thief of her
cousin's love and happiness, and the bringer of grief--almost of
death--to Cornelia. All the facts she did not have, but facts are
little; intuition is everything. She said to herself, "I shall not be
long here, and before I go away, I must put right love's wrong."

She considered then what she ought to do, and gradually the plan that
pleased her best, grew distinctly just, and even-handed in her mind.
She would write to Cornelia. Her word would be indisputable. Then she
would dismiss the subject from her conversations with Mary, until
Cornelia's answer arrived; nor until that time would she say a word of
her suspicions to Hyde. In pursuance of these resolutions the following
letter to Cornelia left Hyde Manor for New York the next mail:

To Miss CORNELIA MORAN:

Because you are very dear to one of my dear kindred, and because I feel
that you are worthy of his great love, I also love you. Will you trust
me now? There has been a sad mistake. I believe I can put it right. You
must recollect the day on which George Hyde wrote asking you to fix an
hour when he could call on Doctor Moran about your marriage. Did any
other lover ask you on that day to marry him? Was that other lover Mr.
Van Ariens? Did you write to both about the same time? If so, you
misdirected your letters; and the one intended for Lord Hyde went to
Mr. Van Ariens; and the one intended for Mr. Van Ariens, went to Lord
Hyde. Now you will understand many things. I found out this mistake
through the young lady Mr. Van Ariens is intending to marry. Can you
send to me, for Lord Hyde, a copy of the letter you intended for him.
When I receive it, you may content your heart. I may never see you
again, but I would like you to remember me by this act of loving
kindness; and I wish you all the joy in your love, that I could wish
myself. The shadows will soon flee away, and when your wedding bells
ring, I shall know; and rejoice with you, and with my dear cousin.
Delay not to answer this, why should you delay your happiness? I send
you as love gifts my thoughts, desires, prayers, all that is best in
me, al! that I give to one high in my esteem, and whom I wish to place
high in my affection, This to your hand and heart, with all sincerity,
 ANNIE HYDE.

