from her husband for the purpose, the said Countess, in her rage, got Sir
Thomas put into the Tower, and there poisoned him.  Then the favourite
and this bad woman were publicly married by the King's pet bishop, with
as much to-do and rejoicing, as if he had been the best man, and she the
best woman, upon the face of the earth.

But, after a longer sunshine than might have been expected--of seven
years or so, that is to say--another handsome young man started up and
eclipsed the EARL OF SOMERSET.  This was GEORGE VILLIERS, the youngest
son of a Leicestershire gentleman: who came to Court with all the Paris
fashions on him, and could dance as well as the best mountebank that ever
was seen.  He soon danced himself into the good graces of his Sowship,
and danced the other favourite out of favour.  Then, it was all at once
discovered that the Earl and Countess of Somerset had not deserved all
those great promotions and mighty rejoicings, and they were separately
tried for the murder of Sir Thomas Overbury, and for other crimes.  But,
the King was so afraid of his late favourite's publicly telling some
disgraceful things he knew of him--which he darkly threatened to do--that
he was even examined with two men standing, one on either side of him,
each with a cloak in his hand, ready to throw it over his head and stop
his mouth if he should break out with what he had it in his power to
tell.  So, a very lame affair was purposely made of the trial, and his
punishment was an allowance of four thousand pounds a year in retirement,
while the Countess was pardoned, and allowed to pass into retirement too.
They hated one another by this time, and lived to revile and torment each
other some years.

While these events were in progress, and while his Sowship was making
such an exhibition of himself, from day to day and from year to year, as
is not often seen in any sty, three remarkable deaths took place in
England.  The first was that of the Minister, Robert Cecil, Earl of
Salisbury, who was past sixty, and had never been strong, being deformed
from his birth.  He said at last that he had no wish to live; and no
Minister need have had, with his experience of the meanness and
wickedness of those disgraceful times.  The second was that of the Lady
Arabella Stuart, who alarmed his Sowship mightily, by privately marrying
WILLIAM SEYMOUR, son of LORD BEAUCHAMP, who was a descendant of King
Henry the Seventh, and who, his Sowship thought, might consequently
increase and strengthen any claim she might one day set up to the throne.
She was separated from her husband (who was put in the Tower) and thrust
into a boat to be confined at Durham.  She escaped in a man's dress to
get away in a French ship from Gravesend to France, but unhappily missed
her husband, who had escaped too, and was soon taken.  She went raving
mad in the miserable Tower, and died there after four years.  The last,
and the most important of these three deaths, was that of Prince Henry,
the heir to the throne, in the nineteenth year of his age.  He was a
promising young prince, and greatly liked; a quiet, well-conducted youth,
of whom two very good things are known: first, that his father was
jealous of him; secondly, that he was the friend of Sir Walter Raleigh,
languishing through all those years in the Tower, and often said that no
man but his father would keep such a bird in such a cage.  On the
occasion of the preparations for the marriage of his sister the Princess
Elizabeth with a foreign prince (and an unhappy marriage it turned out),
he came from Richmond, where he had been very ill, to greet his new
brother-in-law, at the palace at Whitehall.  There he played a great game
at tennis, in his shirt, though it was very cold weather, and was seized
with an alarming illness, and died within a fortnight of a putrid fever.
For this young prince Sir Walter Raleigh wrote, in his prison in the
Tower, the beginning of a History of the World: a wonderful instance how
little his Sowship could do to confine a great man's mind, however long
he might imprison his body.

And this mention of Sir Walter Raleigh, who had many faults, but who
never showed so many merits as in trouble and adversity, may bring me at
once to the end of his sad story.  After an imprisonment in the Tower of
twelve long years, he proposed to resume those old sea voyages of his,
and to go to South America in search of gold.  His Sowship, divided
between his wish to be on good terms with the Spaniards through whose
territory Sir Walter must pass (he had long had an idea of marrying
Prince Henry to a Spanish Princess), and his avaricious eagerness to get
hold of the gold, did not know what to do.  But, in the end, he set Sir
Walter free, taking securities for his return; and Sir Walter fitted out
an expedition at his own coast and, on the twenty-eighth of March, one
thousand six hundred and seventeen, sailed away in command of one of its
ships, which he ominously called the Destiny.  The expedition failed; the
common men, not finding the gold they had expected, mutinied; a quarrel
broke out between Sir Walter and the Spaniards, who hated him for old
successes of his against them; and he took and burnt a little town called
SAINT THOMAS.  For this he was denounced to his Sowship by the Spanish
Ambassador as a pirate; and returning almost broken-hearted, with his
hopes and fortunes shattered, his company of friends dispersed, and his
brave son (who had been one of them) killed, he was taken--through the
treachery of SIR LEWIS STUKELY, his near relation, a scoundrel and a Vice-
Admiral--and was once again immured in his prison-home of so many years.

His Sowship being mightily disappointed in not getting any gold, Sir
Walter Raleigh was tried as unfairly, and with as many lies and evasions
as the judges and law officers and every other authority in Church and
State habitually practised under such a King.  After a great deal of
prevarication on all parts but his own, it was declared that he must die
under his former sentence, now fifteen years old.  So, on the
twenty-eighth of October, one thousand six hundred and eighteen, he was
shut up in the Gate House at Westminster to pass his late night on earth,
and there he took leave of his good and faithful lady who was worthy to
have lived in better days.  At eight o'clock next morning, after a
cheerful breakfast, and a pipe, and a cup of good wine, he was taken to
Old Palace Yard in Westminster, where the scaffold was set up, and where
so many people of high degree were assembled to see him die, that it was
a matter of some difficulty to get him through the crowd.  He behaved
most nobly, but if anything lay heavy on his mind, it was that Earl of
Essex, whose head he had seen roll off; and he solemnly said that he had
had no hand in bringing him to the block, and that he had shed tears for
him when he died.  As the morning was very cold, the Sheriff said, would
he come down to a fire for a little space, and warm himself?  But Sir
Walter thanked him, and said no, he would rather it were done at once,
for he was ill of fever and ague, and in another quarter of an hour his
shaking fit would come upon him if he were still alive, and his enemies
might then suppose that he trembled for fear.  With that, he kneeled and
made a very beautiful and Christian prayer.  Before he laid his head upon
the block he felt the edge of the axe, and said, with a smile upon his
face, that it was a sharp medicine, but would cure the worst disease.
When he was bent down ready for death, he said to the executioner,
finding that he hesitated, 'What dost thou fear?  Strike, man!'  So, the
axe came down and struck his head off, in the sixty-sixth year of his
age.

The new favourite got on fast.  He was made a viscount, he was made Duke
of Buckingham, he was made a marquis, he was made Master of the Horse, he
was made Lord High Admiral--and the Chief Commander of the gallant
English forces that had dispersed the Spanish Armada, was displaced to
make room for him.  He had the whole kingdom at his disposal, and his
mother sold all the profits and honours of the State, as if she had kept
a shop.  He blazed all over with diamonds and other precious stones, from
his hatband and his earrings to his shoes.  Yet he was an ignorant
presumptuous, swaggering compound of knave and fool, with nothing but his
beauty and his dancing to recommend him.  This is the gentleman who
called himself his Majesty's dog and slave, and called his Majesty Your
Sowship.  His Sowship called him STEENIE; it is supposed, because that
was a nickname for Stephen, and because St. Stephen was generally
represented in pictures as a handsome saint.

His Sowship was driven sometimes to his wits'-end by his trimming between
the general dislike of the Catholic religion at home, and his desire to
wheedle and flatter it abroad, as his only means of getting a rich
princess for his son's wife: a part of whose fortune he might cram into
his greasy pockets.  Prince Charles--or as his Sowship called him, Baby
Charles--being now PRINCE OF WALES, the old project of a marriage with
the Spanish King's daughter had been revived for him; and as she could
not marry a Protestant without leave from the Pope, his Sowship himself
secretly and meanly wrote to his Infallibility, asking for it.  The
negotiation for this Spanish marriage takes up a larger space in great
books, than you can imagine, but the upshot of it all is, that when it
had been held off by the Spanish Court for a long time, Baby Charles and
Steenie set off in disguise as Mr. Thomas Smith and Mr. John Smith, to
see the Spanish Princess; that Baby Charles pretended to be desperately
in love with her, and jumped off walls to look at her, and made a
considerable fool of himself in a good many ways; that she was called
Princess of Wales and that the whole Spanish Court believed Baby Charles
to be all but dying for her sake, as he expressly told them he was; that
Baby Charles and Steenie came back to England, and were received with as
much rapture as if they had been a blessing to it; that Baby Charles had
actually fallen in love with HENRIETTA MARIA, the French King's sister,
whom he had seen in Paris; that he thought it a wonderfully fine and
princely thing to have deceived the Spaniards, all through; and that he
openly said, with a chuckle, as soon as he was safe and sound at home
again, that the Spaniards were great fools to have believed him.

Like most dishonest men, the Prince and the favourite complained that the
people whom they had deluded were dishonest.  They made such
misrepresentations of the treachery of the Spaniards in this business of
the Spanish match, that the English nation became eager for a war with
them.  Although the gravest Spaniards laughed at the idea of his Sowship
in a warlike attitude, the Parliament granted money for the beginning of
hostilities, and the treaties with Spain were publicly declared to be at
an end.  The Spanish ambassador in London--probably with the help of the
fallen favourite, the Earl of Somerset--being unable to obtain speech
with his Sowship, slipped a paper into his hand, declaring that he was a
prisoner in his own house, and was entirely governed by Buckingham and
his creatures.  The first effect of this letter was that his Sowship
began to cry and whine, and took Baby Charles away from Steenie, and went
down to Windsor, gabbling all sorts of nonsense.  The end of it was that
his Sowship hugged his dog and slave, and said he was quite satisfied.

He had given the Prince and the favourite almost unlimited power to
settle anything with the Pope as to the Spanish marriage; and he now,
with a view to the French one, signed a treaty that all Roman Catholics
in England should exercise their religion freely, and should never be
required to take any oath contrary thereto.  In return for this, and for
other concessions much less to be defended, Henrietta Maria was to become
the Prince's wife, and was to bring him a fortune of eight hundred
thousand crowns.

His Sowship's eyes were getting red with eagerly looking for the money,
when the end of a gluttonous life came upon him; and, after a fortnight's
illness, on Sunday the twenty-seventh of March, one thousand six hundred
and twenty-five, he died.  He had reigned twenty-two years, and was fifty-
nine years old.  I know of nothing more abominable in history than the
adulation that was lavished on this King, and the vice and corruption
that such a barefaced habit of lying produced in his court.  It is much
to be doubted whether one man of honour, and not utterly self-disgraced,
kept his place near James the First.  Lord Bacon, that able and wise
philosopher, as the First Judge in the Kingdom in this reign, became a
public spectacle of dishonesty and corruption; and in his base flattery
of his Sowship, and in his crawling servility to his dog and slave,
disgraced himself even more.  But, a creature like his Sowship set upon a
throne is like the Plague, and everybody receives infection from him.




CHAPTER XXXIII--ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE FIRST


Baby Charles became KING CHARLES THE FIRST, in the twenty-fifth year of
his age.  Unlike his father, he was usually amiable in his private
character, and grave and dignified in his bearing; but, like his father,
he had monstrously exaggerated notions of the rights of a king, and was
evasive, and not to be trusted.  If his word could have been relied upon,
his history might have had a different end.

His first care was to send over that insolent upstart, Buckingham, to
bring Henrietta Maria from Paris to be his Queen; upon which occasion
Buckingham--with his usual audacity--made love to the young Queen of
Austria, and was very indignant indeed with CARDINAL RICHELIEU, the
French Minister, for thwarting his intentions.  The English people were
very well disposed to like their new Queen, and to receive her with great
favour when she came among them as a stranger.  But, she held the
Protestant religion in great dislike, and brought over a crowd of
unpleasant priests, who made her do some very ridiculous things, and
forced themselves upon the public notice in many disagreeable ways.
Hence, the people soon came to dislike her, and she soon came to dislike
them; and she did so much all through this reign in setting the King (who
was dotingly fond of her) against his subjects, that it would have been
better for him if she had never been born.

Now, you are to understand that King Charles the First--of his own
determination to be a high and mighty King not to be called to account by
anybody, and urged on by his Queen besides--deliberately set himself to
put his Parliament down and to put himself up. You are also to
understand, that even in pursuit of this wrong idea (enough in itself to
have ruined any king) he never took a straight course, but always took a
crooked one.

He was bent upon war with Spain, though neither the House of Commons nor
the people were quite clear as to the justice of that war, now that they
began to think a little more about the story of the Spanish match.  But
the King rushed into it hotly, raised money by illegal means to meet its
expenses, and encountered a miserable failure at Cadiz, in the very first
year of his reign.  An expedition to Cadiz had been made in the hope of
plunder, but as it was not successful, it was necessary to get a grant of
money from the Parliament; and when they met, in no very complying
humour, the King told them, 'to make haste to let him have it, or it
would be the worse for themselves.'  Not put in a more complying humour
by this, they impeached the King's favourite, the Duke of Buckingham, as
the cause (which he undoubtedly was) of many great public grievances and
wrongs.  The King, to save him, dissolved the Parliament without getting
the money he wanted; and when the Lords implored him to consider and
grant a little delay, he replied, 'No, not one minute.'  He then began to
raise money for himself by the following means among others.

He levied certain duties called tonnage and poundage which had not been
granted by the Parliament, and could lawfully be levied by no other
power; he called upon the seaport towns to furnish, and to pay all the
cost for three months of, a fleet of armed ships; and he required the
people to unite in lending him large sums of money, the repayment of
which was very doubtful.  If the poor people refused, they were pressed
as soldiers or sailors; if the gentry refused, they were sent to prison.
Five gentlemen, named SIR THOMAS DARNEL, JOHN CORBET, WALTER EARL, JOHN
HEVENINGHAM, and EVERARD HAMPDEN, for refusing were taken up by a warrant
of the King's privy council, and were sent to prison without any cause
but the King's pleasure being stated for their imprisonment.  Then the
question came to be solemnly tried, whether this was not a violation of
Magna Charta, and an encroachment by the King on the highest rights of
the English people.  His lawyers contended No, because to encroach upon
the rights of the English people would be to do wrong, and the King could
do no wrong.  The accommodating judges decided in favour of this wicked
nonsense; and here was a fatal division between the King and the people.

For all this, it became necessary to call another Parliament.  The
people, sensible of the danger in which their liberties were, chose for
it those who were best known for their determined opposition to the King;
but still the King, quite blinded by his determination to carry
everything before him, addressed them when they met, in a contemptuous
manner, and just told them in so many words that he had only called them
together because he wanted money.  The Parliament, strong enough and
resolute enough to know that they would lower his tone, cared little for
what he said, and laid before him one of the great documents of history,
which is called the PETITION OF RIGHT, requiring that the free men of
England should no longer be called upon to lend the King money, and
should no longer be pressed or imprisoned for refusing to do so; further,
that the free men of England should no longer be seized by the King's
special mandate or warrant, it being contrary to their rights and
liberties and the laws of their country.  At first the King returned an
answer to this petition, in which he tried to shirk it altogether; but,
the House of Commons then showing their determination to go on with the
impeachment of Buckingham, the King in alarm returned an answer, giving
his consent to all that was required of him.  He not only afterwards
departed from his word and honour on these points, over and over again,
but, at this very time, he did the mean and dissembling act of publishing
his first answer and not his second--merely that the people might suppose
that the Parliament had not got the better of him.

That pestilent Buckingham, to gratify his own wounded vanity, had by this
time involved the country in war with France, as well as with Spain.  For
such miserable causes and such miserable creatures are wars sometimes
made!  But he was destined to do little more mischief in this world.  One
morning, as he was going out of his house to his carriage, he turned to
speak to a certain Colonel FRYER who was with him; and he was violently
stabbed with a knife, which the murderer left sticking in his heart.  This
happened in his hall.  He had had angry words up-stairs, just before,
with some French gentlemen, who were immediately suspected by his
servants, and had a close escape from being set upon and killed.  In the
midst of the noise, the real murderer, who had gone to the kitchen and
might easily have got away, drew his sword and cried out, 'I am the man!'
His name was JOHN FELTON, a Protestant and a retired officer in the army.
He said he had had no personal ill-will to the Duke, but had killed him
as a curse to the country.  He had aimed his blow well, for Buckingham
had only had time to cry out, 'Villain!' and then he drew out the knife,
fell against a table, and died.

The council made a mighty business of examining John Felton about this
murder, though it was a plain case enough, one would think.  He had come
seventy miles to do it, he told them, and he did it for the reason he had
declared; if they put him upon the rack, as that noble MARQUIS OF DORSET
whom he saw before him, had the goodness to threaten, he gave that
marquis warning, that he would accuse _him_ as his accomplice!  The King
was unpleasantly anxious to have him racked, nevertheless; but as the
judges now found out that torture was contrary to the law of England--it
is a pity they did not make the discovery a little sooner--John Felton
was simply executed for the murder he had done.  A murder it undoubtedly
was, and not in the least to be defended: though he had freed England
from one of the most profligate, contemptible, and base court favourites
to whom it has ever yielded.

A very different man now arose.  This was SIR THOMAS WENTWORTH, a
Yorkshire gentleman, who had sat in Parliament for a long time, and who
had favoured arbitrary and haughty principles, but who had gone over to
the people's side on receiving offence from Buckingham.  The King, much
wanting such a man--for, besides being naturally favourable to the King's
cause, he had great abilities--made him first a Baron, and then a
Viscount, and gave him high employment, and won him most completely.

A Parliament, however, was still in existence, and was _not_ to be won.
On the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and twenty-nine,
SIR JOHN ELIOT, a great man who had been active in the Petition of Right,
brought forward other strong resolutions against the King's chief
instruments, and called upon the Speaker to put them to the vote.  To
this the Speaker answered, 'he was commanded otherwise by the King,' and
got up to leave the chair--which, according to the rules of the House of
Commons would have obliged it to adjourn without doing anything more--when
two members, named Mr. HOLLIS and Mr. VALENTINE, held him down.  A scene
of great confusion arose among the members; and while many swords were
drawn and flashing about, the King, who was kept informed of all that was
going on, told the captain of his guard to go down to the House and force
the doors.  The resolutions were by that time, however, voted, and the
House adjourned.  Sir John Eliot and those two members who had held the
Speaker down, were quickly summoned before the council.  As they claimed
it to be their privilege not to answer out of Parliament for anything
they had said in it, they were committed to the Tower.  The King then
went down and dissolved the Parliament, in a speech wherein he made
mention of these gentlemen as 'Vipers'--which did not do him much good
that ever I have heard of.

As they refused to gain their liberty by saying they were sorry for what
they had done, the King, always remarkably unforgiving, never overlooked
their offence.  When they demanded to be brought up before the court of
King's Bench, he even resorted to the meanness of having them moved about
from prison to prison, so that the writs issued for that purpose should
not legally find them.  At last they came before the court and were
sentenced to heavy fines, and to be imprisoned during the King's
pleasure.  When Sir John Eliot's health had quite given way, and he so
longed for change of air and scene as to petition for his release, the
King sent back the answer (worthy of his Sowship himself) that the
petition was not humble enough.  When he sent another petition by his
young son, in which he pathetically offered to go back to prison when his
health was restored, if he might be released for its recovery, the King
still disregarded it.  When he died in the Tower, and his children
petitioned to be allowed to take his body down to Cornwall, there to lay
it among the ashes of his forefathers, the King returned for answer, 'Let
Sir John Eliot's body be buried in the church of that parish where he
died.'  All this was like a very little King indeed, I think.

And now, for twelve long years, steadily pursuing his design of setting
himself up and putting the people down, the King called no Parliament;
but ruled without one.  If twelve thousand volumes were written in his
praise (as a good many have been) it would still remain a fact,
impossible to be denied, that for twelve years King Charles the First
reigned in England unlawfully and despotically, seized upon his subjects'
goods and money at his pleasure, and punished according to his unbridled
will all who ventured to oppose him.  It is a fashion with some people to
think that this King's career was cut short; but I must say myself that I
think he ran a pretty long one.

WILLIAM LAUD, Archbishop of Canterbury, was the King's right-hand man in
the religious part of the putting down of the people's liberties.  Laud,
who was a sincere man, of large learning but small sense--for the two
things sometimes go together in very different quantities--though a
Protestant, held opinions so near those of the Catholics, that the Pope
wanted to make a Cardinal of him, if he would have accepted that favour.
He looked upon vows, robes, lighted candles, images, and so forth, as
amazingly important in religious ceremonies; and he brought in an
immensity of bowing and candle-snuffing.  He also regarded archbishops
and bishops as a sort of miraculous persons, and was inveterate in the
last degree against any who thought otherwise.  Accordingly, he offered
up thanks to Heaven, and was in a state of much pious pleasure, when a
Scotch clergyman, named LEIGHTON, was pilloried, whipped, branded in the
cheek, and had one of his ears cut off and one of his nostrils slit, for
calling bishops trumpery and the inventions of men.  He originated on a
Sunday morning the prosecution of WILLIAM PRYNNE, a barrister who was of
similar opinions, and who was fined a thousand pounds; who was pilloried;
who had his ears cut off on two occasions--one ear at a time--and who was
imprisoned for life.  He highly approved of the punishment of DOCTOR
BASTWICK, a physician; who was also fined a thousand pounds; and who
afterwards had _his_ ears cut off, and was imprisoned for life.  These
were gentle methods of persuasion, some will tell you: I think, they were
rather calculated to be alarming to the people.

In the money part of the putting down of the people's liberties, the King
was equally gentle, as some will tell you: as I think, equally alarming.
He levied those duties of tonnage and poundage, and increased them as he
thought fit.  He granted monopolies to companies of merchants on their
paying him for them, notwithstanding the great complaints that had, for
years and years, been made on the subject of monopolies.  He fined the
people for disobeying proclamations issued by his Sowship in direct
violation of law.  He revived the detested Forest laws, and took private
property to himself as his forest right.  Above all, he determined to
have what was called Ship Money; that is to say, money for the support of
the fleet--not only from the seaports, but from all the counties of
England: having found out that, in some ancient time or other, all the
counties paid it.  The grievance of this ship money being somewhat too
strong, JOHN CHAMBERS, a citizen of London, refused to pay his part of
it.  For this the Lord Mayor ordered John Chambers to prison, and for
that John Chambers brought a suit against the Lord Mayor.  LORD SAY,
also, behaved like a real nobleman, and declared he would not pay.  But,
the sturdiest and best opponent of the ship money was JOHN HAMPDEN, a
gentleman of Buckinghamshire, who had sat among the 'vipers' in the House
of Commons when there was such a thing, and who had been the bosom friend
of Sir John Eliot.  This case was tried before the twelve judges in the
Court of Exchequer, and again the King's lawyers said it was impossible
that ship money could be wrong, because the King could do no wrong,
however hard he tried--and he really did try very hard during these
twelve years.  Seven of the judges said that was quite true, and Mr.
Hampden was bound to pay: five of the judges said that was quite false,
and Mr. Hampden was not bound to pay.  So, the King triumphed (as he
thought), by making Hampden the most popular man in England; where
matters were getting to that height now, that many honest Englishmen
could not endure their country, and sailed away across the seas to found
a colony in Massachusetts Bay in America.  It is said that Hampden
himself and his relation OLIVER CROMWELL were going with a company of
such voyagers, and were actually on board ship, when they were stopped by
a proclamation, prohibiting sea captains to carry out such passengers
without the royal license.  But O! it would have been well for the King
if he had let them go!  This was the state of England.  If Laud had been
a madman just broke loose, he could not have done more mischief than he
did in Scotland.  In his endeavours (in which he was seconded by the
King, then in person in that part of his dominions) to force his own
ideas of bishops, and his own religious forms and ceremonies upon the
Scotch, he roused that nation to a perfect frenzy.  They formed a solemn
league, which they called The Covenant, for the preservation of their own
religious forms; they rose in arms throughout the whole country; they
summoned all their men to prayers and sermons twice a day by beat of
drum; they sang psalms, in which they compared their enemies to all the
evil spirits that ever were heard of; and they solemnly vowed to smite
them with the sword.  At first the King tried force, then treaty, then a
Scottish Parliament which did not answer at all.  Then he tried the EARL
OF STRAFFORD, formerly Sir Thomas Wentworth; who, as LORD WENTWORTH, had
been governing Ireland.  He, too, had carried it with a very high hand
there, though to the benefit and prosperity of that country.

Strafford and Laud were for conquering the Scottish people by force of
arms.  Other lords who were taken into council, recommended that a
Parliament should at last be called; to which the King unwillingly
consented.  So, on the thirteenth of April, one thousand six hundred and
forty, that then strange sight, a Parliament, was seen at Westminster.  It
is called the Short Parliament, for it lasted a very little while.  While
the members were all looking at one another, doubtful who would dare to
speak, MR. PYM arose and set forth all that the King had done unlawfully
during the past twelve years, and what was the position to which England
was reduced.  This great example set, other members took courage and
spoke the truth freely, though with great patience and moderation.  The
King, a little frightened, sent to say that if they would grant him a
certain sum on certain terms, no more ship money should be raised.  They
debated the matter for two days; and then, as they would not give him all
he asked without promise or inquiry, he dissolved them.

But they knew very well that he must have a Parliament now; and he began
to make that discovery too, though rather late in the day.  Wherefore, on
the twenty-fourth of September, being then at York with an army collected
against the Scottish people, but his own men sullen and discontented like
the rest of the nation, the King told the great council of the Lords,
whom he had called to meet him there, that he would summon another
Parliament to assemble on the third of November.  The soldiers of the
Covenant had now forced their way into England and had taken possession
of the northern counties, where the coals are got.  As it would never do
to be without coals, and as the King's troops could make no head against
the Covenanters so full of gloomy zeal, a truce was made, and a treaty
with Scotland was taken into consideration.  Meanwhile the northern
counties paid the Covenanters to leave the coals alone, and keep quiet.

We have now disposed of the Short Parliament.  We have next to see what
memorable things were done by the Long one.



SECOND PART


