
And with that philanthropic advice, the postilion took his leave, and
went down the stairway singing a postilion's song in a vinous voice.

Montbar followed the song conscientiously through two verses, then, as
the voice died away in the distance, he was obliged to forego the rest
of the song, however interesting he may have found it.




CHAPTER XLII. THE CHAMBERY MAIL-COACH

The next day, at five in the afternoon, Antoine, anxious, no doubt, not
to be late, was in the courtyard of the Hotel de la Poste, harnessing
the three horses which were to relay the mail-coach.

Shortly after, the coach rumbled into the courtyard at a gallop, and was
pulled up under the windows of a room close to the servants' stairway,
which had seemed greatly to occupy Antoine's attention. If any one had
paid attention to so slight a detail it might have been observed that
the window-curtain was somewhat imprudently drawn aside to permit the
occupant of the room to see the persons who got out of the coach. There
were three men, who, with the haste of famished travellers, made their
way toward the brilliantly lighted windows of the common room.

They had scarcely entered, when a smart postilion came down the kitchen
staircase, shod simply with thin pumps over which he intended to pull
his heavy riding-boots, These he received from Antoine, slipping five
louis into his hand at the same time, and turned for the man to throw
his riding cape over his shoulders, a protection rendered necessary by
the severity of the weather.

This completed, Antoine returned hastily to the stables and hid in the
darkest corner. As for the man who had taken his place, reassured no
doubt by the high collar of the cape that concealed half of his face,
he went straight to the horses which stood ready harnessed, slipped his
pistols into the holsters, and, profitting by the moment when the other
horses were being led into the stable by their postilion, he took a
gimlet, which might in case of need serve as a dagger, from his pocket,
and screwed the four rings into the woodwork of the coach, one into each
door, and the other two into the body of the coach. After which he
put the horses to with a rapidity and skill which bespoke in him a
man familiar from childhood with all the details of an art pushed to
extremes in our day by that honorable class of society which we call
"gentlemen riders."

That done, he waited, quieting his restless horses by voice and whip,
judiciously combined, or used in turn.

Everyone knows the rapidity with which the meals of the unhappy beings
condemned to travel by mail are hurried through. The half-hour was not
up, when the voice of the conductor was heard, calling:

"Come, citizen travellers, take your places."

Montbar placed himself close to the carriage door and recognized Roland
and the colonel of the 7th Chasseurs, perfectly, in spite of their
disguise, as they jumped into the coach, paying no attention whatever to
the postilion.

The latter closed the door upon them, slipped the padlock through
the two rings and turned the key. Then, walking around the coach, he
pretended to drop his whip before the other door, and, in stooping for
it, slipped the second padlock through the rings, deftly turned the key
as he straightened up, and, assured that the two officers were securely
locked in, he sprang upon his horse, grumbling at the conductor who had
left him to do his work. In fact the conductor was still squabbling with
the landlord over his bill when the third traveller got into his place
in the coupe.

"Are you coming this evening, to-night, or to-morrow morning, Pere
Francois?" cried the pretended postilion, imitating Antoine as best he
could.

"All right, all right, I'm coming," answered the conductor; then,
looking around him: "Why, where are the travellers?" he asked.

"Here," replied the two officers from the interior and the agent from
the coupe.

"Is the door properly closed?" persisted Pere Francois.

"I'll answer for that," said Montbar.

"Then off you go, baggage!" cried the conductor, as he climbed into the
coupe and closed the door behind him.

The postilion did not wait to be told twice; he started his horses,
digging his spurs into the belly of the one he rode and lashing the
others vigorously. The mail-coach dashed forward at a gallop.

Montbar drove as if he had never done anything else in his life; as he
crossed the town the windows rattled and the houses shook; never did
real postilion crack his whip with greater science.

As he left Macon he saw a little troop of horse; they were the twelve
chasseurs told off to follow the coach without seeming to escort it.
The colonel passed his head through the window and made a sign to the
sergeant who commanded them.

Montbar did not seem to notice anything; but after going some four or
five hundred yards, he turned his head, while executing a symphony with
his whip, and saw that the escort had started.

"Wait, my babes!" said Montbar, "I'll make you see the country." And he
dug in his spurs and brought down his whip. The horses seemed to have
wings, and the coach flew over the cobblestones like the chariot of
thunder rumbling past. The conductor became alarmed.

"Hey, Master Antoine," cried he, "are you drunk?"

"Drunk? fine drinking!" replied Montbar; "I dined on a beetroot salad."

"Damn him! If he goes like that," cried Roland, thrusting his head
through the window, "the escort can't keep up."

"You hear what he says!" shrieked the conductor.

"No," replied Montbar, "I don't."

"Well, he says that if you keep this up the escort can't follow."

"Is there an escort?" asked Montbar.

"Of course; we're carrying government money."

"That's different; you ought to have said so at first."

But instead of slacking his pace the coach was whirled along as before;
if there was any change, it was for greater velocity than before.

"Antoine, if there's an accident, I'll shoot you through the head,"
shouted the conductor.

"Run along!" exclaimed Montbar; "everybody knows those pistols haven't
any balls in them."

"Possibly not; but mine have!" cried the police agent.

"That remains to be seen," replied Montbar, keeping on his way at the
same pace without heed to these remonstrances.

On they went with the speed of lightning through the village of
Varennes, then through that of La Creche and the little town of
Chapelle-de-Guinchay; only half a mile further and they would reach the
Maison-Blanche. The horses were dripping, and tossed the foam from their
mouths as they neighed with excitement.

Montbar glanced behind him; more than a mile back the sparks were flying
from the escort's horses. Before him was the mountainous declivity. Down
it he dashed, gathering the reins to master his horses when the time
came.

The conductor had ceased expostulating, for he saw that the hand which
guided the horses was firm and capable. But from time to time the
colonel thrust his head through the window to look for his men.

Half-way down the slope Montbar had his horses under control, without,
however, seeming to check their course. Then he began to sing, at the
top of his voice, the "Reveil du Peuple," the song of the royalists,
just as the "Marseillaise" was the song of the Jacobins.

"What's that rogue about?" cried Roland, putting his head through the
window. "Tell him to hold his tongue, conductor, or I'll put a ball
through his loins."

Perhaps the conductor might have repeated Roland's threat to Montbar,
but he suddenly saw a black line blocking the road. "Halt, conductor!"
thundered a voice the next moment.

"Postilion, drive over the bellies of those bandits!" shouted the police
agent.

"Drive on yourself!" said Montbar. "Do you suppose I'm going over the
stomachs of friends? Who-o-ah!"

The mail coach stopped as if by magic.

"Go on! go on!" cried Roland and the colonel, aware that the escort was
too far behind to help them.

"Ha! You villain of a postilion," cried the police agent, springing out
of the coupe, and pointing his pistol at Montbar, "you shall pay for
this."

The words were scarcely uttered when Montbar, forestalling him, fired,
and the agent rolled, mortally wounded, under the wheels of the coach.
His fingers, convulsed by death, touched the trigger and the pistol went
off, but the ball touched no one.

"Conductor," shouted the two officers, "by all the powers of heaven,
open, open, open quickly!"

"Gentlemen," said Morgan, advancing, "we are not attacking your persons,
we merely want the government money. Conductor! that fifty thousand
francs, and quickly too!"

Two shots from the interior made answer for the officers, who, after
vainly shaking the doors, were still more fruitlessly attempting to
force themselves through the windows. No doubt one of their shots took
effect, for a cry of rage was heard and a flash illuminated the road.
The colonel gave a sigh, and fell back against Roland. He was killed
outright.

Roland fired again, but no one replied to him. His pistols were both
discharged; locked in as he was he could not use his sabre, and he
howled with rage.

Meantime the conductor was forced, with a pistol at his throat, to
give up the money. Two men took the bags containing the fifty thousand
francs, and fastened them on Montbar's horse, which his groom had
brought ready saddled and bridled, as if to a meet. Montbar kicked off
his heavy boots and sprang into the saddle.

"My compliments to the First Consul, Monsieur de Montrevel!" cried
Morgan. Then, turning to his companions, he cried: "Scatter which way
you will, you know the rendezvous for to-morrow night."

"Yes, yes," replied ten or a dozen voices.

And the band dispersed like a flock of birds, disappearing down the
valley into the shadow of the trees that lined the banks of the little
river and surrounded the Maison-Blanche.

At that moment the gallop of horses was heard, and the escort, alarmed
by the pistol shots, appeared on the crest of the hill and came down
the slope like an avalanche. But it came too late; it found only the
conductor sitting dazed by the roadside, the bodies of the colonel and
of Fouche's agent, and Roland a prisoner, roaring like a lion gnawing at
the bars of its cage.




CHAPTER XLIII. LORD GRENVILLE'S REPLY

While the events we have just recorded were transpiring, and occupying
the minds and newspapers of the provinces, other events, of very
different import, were maturing in Paris, which were destined to occupy
the minds and newspapers of the whole world.

Lord Tanlay had returned, bringing the reply of his uncle, Lord
Grenville. This reply consisted of a letter addressed to M. de
Talleyrand, inclosing a memorandum for the First Consul. The letter was
couched in the following terms:

  DOWNING STREET, February 14, 1800

  Sir--I have received and placed before the King the letter
  which you transmitted to me through my nephew, Lord Tanlay.
  His Majesty, seeing no reason to depart from the
  long-established customs of Europe in treating with foreign
  states, directs me to forward you in his name the official
  reply which is herewith inclosed.

  I have the honor to be, with the highest esteem, your very
  humble and obedient servant,  GRENVILLE.

The letter was dry; the memorandum curt. Moreover, the First Consul's
letter to King George was autographic, and King George, not "departing
from the long-established customs of Europe in treating with foreign
States," replied by a simple memorandum written by a secretary.

True, the memorandum was signed "Grenville." It was a long recrimination
against France; against the spirit of disorder, which disturbed the
nation; against the fears which that spirit of disorder inspired in all
Europe; and on the necessity imposed on the sovereigns of Europe, for
the sake of their own safety, to repress it. In short, the memorandum
was virtually a continuation of the war.

The reading of such a dictum made Bonaparte's eyes flash with the flame
which, in him, preceded his great decisions, as lightning precedes
thunder.

"So, sir," said he, turning to Lord Tanlay, "this is all you have
obtained?"

"Yes, citizen First Consul."

"Then you did not repeat verbally to your uncle all that I charged you
to say to him?"

"I did not omit a syllable."

"Did you tell him that you had lived in France three years, that you had
seen her, had studied her; that she was strong, powerful, prosperous and
desirous of peace while prepared for war?"

"I told him all that."

"Did you add that the war which England is making against France is
a senseless war; that the spirit of disorder of which they speak, and
which, at the worst, is only the effervescence of freedom too long
restrained, which it were wiser to confine to France by means of a
general peace; that that peace is the sole _cordon sanitaire_ which can
prevent it from crossing our frontiers; and that if the volcano of war
is lighted in France, France will spread like lava over foreign lands.
Italy is delivered, says the King of England; but from whom? From her
liberators. Italy is delivered, but why? Because I conquered Egypt from
the Delta to the third Cataract; Italy is delivered because I was no
longer in Italy. But--I am here: in a month I can be in Italy. What do I
need to win her back from the Alps to the Adriatic? A single battle. Do
you know what Massena is doing in defending Genoa? Waiting for me. Ha!
the sovereigns of Europe need war to protect their crowns? Well, my
lord, I tell you that I will shake Europe until their crowns tremble on
their heads. Want war, do they? Just wait--Bourrienne! Bourrienne!"

The door between the First Consul's study and the secretary's office
opened precipitately, and Bourrienne rushed in, his face terrified, as
though he thought Bonaparte were calling for help. But when he saw him
highly excited, crumpling the diplomatic memorandum in one hand and
striking with the other on his desk, while Lord Tanlay was standing
calm, erect and silent near him, he understood immediately that
England's answer had irritated the First Consul.

"Did you call me, general?" he asked.

"Yes," said the First Consul, "sit down there and write."

Then in a harsh, jerky voice, without seeking his words, which, on the
contrary, seemed to crowd through the portal of his brain, he dictated
the following proclamation:

  SOLDIERS!--In promising peace to the French people, I was your
  mouthpiece; I know your power.

  You are the same men who conquered the Rhine, Holland and Italy,
  and granted peace beneath the walls of astounded Vienna.

  Soldiers, it is no longer our own frontiers that you have to
  defend; it is the enemy's country you must now invade.

  Soldiers, when the time comes, I shall be among you, and
  astounded Europe shall remember that you belong to the race
  of heroes!

Bourrienne raised his head, expectant, after writing the last words.

"Well, that's all," said Bonaparte.

"Shall I add the sacramental words: 'Vive la Republique!'?"

"Why do you ask that?"

"Because we have issued no proclamation during the last four months, and
something may be changed in the ordinary formulas."

"The proclamation will do as it is," said Bonaparte, "add nothing to
it."

Taking a pen, he dashed rather than wrote his signature at the bottom of
the paper, then handing it to Bourrienne, he said: "See that it appears
in the 'Moniteur' to-morrow."

Bourrienne left the room, carrying the proclamation with him.

Bonaparte, left alone with Lord Tanlay, walked up and down the room for
a moment, as though he had forgotten the Englishman's presence; then he
stopped suddenly before him.

"My lord," he asked, "do you think you obtained from your uncle all that
another man might have obtained in your place?"

"More, citizen First Consul."

"More! more! Pray, what have you obtained?"

"I think that the citizen First Consul did not read the royal memorandum
with all the attention it deserves."

"Heavens!" exclaimed Bonaparte, "I know it by heart."

"Then the citizen First Consul cannot have weighed the meaning and the
wording of a certain paragraph."

"You think so?"

"I am sure of it; and if the citizen First Consul will permit me to read
him the paragraph to which I allude--"

Bonaparte relaxed his hold upon the crumpled note, and handed it to Lord
Tanlay, saying: "Read it."

Sir John cast his eyes over the document, with which he seemed to be
familiar, paused at the tenth paragraph, and read:

  The best and surest means for peace and security, and for their
  continuance, would be the restoration of that line of princes who
  for so many centuries have preserved to the French nation its
  internal prosperity and the respect and consideration of foreign
  countries. Such an event would have removed, and at any time will
  remove, the obstacles which are now in the way of negotiations
  and peace; it would guarantee to France the tranquil possession
  of her former territory, and procure for all the other nations of
  Europe, through a like tranquillity and peace, that security which
  they are now obliged to seek by other means.

"Well," said Bonaparte, impatiently, "I have read all that, and
perfectly understood it. Be Monk, labor for another man, and your
victories, your renown, your genius will be forgiven you; humble
yourself, and you shall be allowed to remain great!"

"Citizen First Consul," said Lord Tanlay, "no one knows better than
I the difference between you and Monk, and how far you surpass him in
genius and renown."

"Then why do you read me that?"

"I only read that paragraph," replied Sir John, "to lead you to give to
the one following its due significance."

"Let's hear it," said Bonaparte, with repressed impatience.

Sir John continued:

  But, however desirable such an event may be for France and for
  the world, it is not to this means alone that his Majesty
  restricts the possibility of a safe and sure pacification.

Sir John emphasized the last words.

"Ah! ah!" exclaimed Bonaparte, stepping hastily to Sir John's side.

The Englishman continued:

  His Majesty does not presume to prescribe to France her form
  of government, nor the hands into which she may place the
  necessary authority to conduct the affairs of a great and
  powerful nation.

"Read that again, sir," said Bonaparte, eagerly.

"Read it yourself," replied Sir John.

He handed him the note, and Bonaparte re-read it.

"Was it you, sir," he asked, "who added that paragraph?"

"I certainly insisted on it."

Bonaparte reflected.

"You are right," he said; "a great step has been taken; the return of
the Bourbons is no longer a condition _sine qua non_. I am accepted, not
only as a military, but also as a political power." Then, holding out
his hand to Sir John, he added: "Have you anything to ask of me, sir?"

"The only thing I seek has been asked of you by my friend Roland."

"And I answered, sir, that I shall be pleased to see you the husband of
his sister. If I were richer, or if you were less so, I would offer to
dower her"--Sir John made a motion--"but as I know your fortune will
suffice for two," added Bonaparte, smiling, "or even more, I leave you
the joy of giving not only happiness, but also wealth to the woman you
love. Bourrienne!" he called.

Bourrienne appeared.

"I have sent it, general," he said.

"Very good," replied the First Consul; "but that is not what I called
you for."

"I await your orders."

"At whatever hour of the day or night Lord Tanlay presents himself,
I shall be happy to receive him without delay; you hear me, my dear
Bourrienne? You hear me, my lord?"

Lord Tanlay bowed his thanks.

"And now," said Bonaparte, "I presume you are in a hurry to be off to
the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines. I won't detain you, but there is one
condition I impose."

"And that is, general?"

"If I need you for another mission--"

"That is not a condition, citizen First Consul; it is a favor."

Lord Tanlay bowed and withdrew.

Bourrienne prepared to follow him, but Bonaparte called him back. "Is
there a carriage below?" he asked.

Bourrienne looked into the courtyard. "Yes, general."

"Then get ready and come with me."

"I am ready, general; I have only my hat and overcoat to get, and they
are in the office."

"Then let us go," said Bonaparte.

He took up his hat and coat, went down the private staircase, and signed
to the carriage to come up. Notwithstanding Bourrienne's haste, he got
down after him. A footman opened the door; Bonaparte sprang in.

"Where are we going, general?" asked Bourrienne.

"To the Tuileries," replied Bonaparte.

Bourrienne, amazed, repeated the order, and looked at the First Consul
as if to seek an explanation; but the latter was plunged in thought, and
the secretary, who at this time was still the friend, thought it best
not to disturb him.

The horses started at gallop--Bonaparte's usual mode of progression--and
took the way to the Tuileries.

The Tuileries, inhabited by Louis XVI. after the days of the 5th and 6th
of October, and occupied successively by the Convention and the Council
of Five Hundred, had remained empty and devastated since the 18th
Brumaire. Since that day Bonaparte had more than once cast his eyes
on that ancient palace of royalty; but he knew the importance of not
arousing any suspicion that a future king might dwell in the palace of
the abolished monarchy.

Bonaparte had brought back from Italy a magnificent bust of Junius
Brutus; there was no suitable place for it at the Luxembourg, and toward
the end of November, Bonaparte had sent for the Republican, David, and
ordered him to place the bust in the gallery of the Tuileries. Who could
suppose that David, the friend of Marat, was preparing the dwelling of a
future emperor by placing the bust of Caesar's murderer in the gallery of
the Tuileries? No one did suppose, nor even suspect it.

When Bonaparte went to see if the bust were properly placed, he noticed
the havoc committed in the palace of Catherine of Medicis. The Tuileries
were no longer the abode of kings, it is true, but they were a national
palace, and the nation could not allow one of its palaces to become
dilapidated. Bonaparte sent for citizen Lecomte, the architect, and
ordered him to _clean_ the Tuileries. The word might be taken in both
senses--moral and physical.

The architect was requested to send in an estimate of the cost of the
cleaning. It amounted to five hundred thousand francs. Bonaparte asked
if for that sum, the Tuileries could be converted into a suitable
"palace for the government." The architect replied that the sum
named would suffice not only to restore the Tuileries to their former
condition, but to make them habitable.

A habitable palace, that was all Bonaparte wanted. How should he, a
Republican, need regal luxury? The "palace of the government" ought to
be severely plain, decorated with marbles and statues only. But what
ought those statues to be? It was the First Consul's duty to select
them.

Accordingly, Bonaparte chose them from the three great ages and the
three great nations: from the Greeks, from the Romans, from France and
her rivals. From the Greeks he chose Alexander and Demosthenes; the
genius of conquest and the genius of eloquence. From the Romans he chose
Scipio, Cicero, Cato, Brutus and Caesar, placing the great victim side
by side with the murderer, as great almost as himself. From the
modern world he chose Gustavus Adolphus, Turenne, the great Conde,
Duguay-Trouin, Marlborough, Prince Eugene, and the Marechal de
Saxe; and, finally, the great Frederick and George Washington--false
philosophy upon a throne, and true wisdom founding a free state.

To these he added warlike heroes--Dampierre, Dugommier, Joubert--to
prove that, while he did not fear the memory of a Bourbon in the great
Conde, neither was he jealous of his brothers-in-arms, the victims of a
cause already no longer his.

Matters were in this state at the period of which we are now speaking;
that is, the last of February, 1800. The Tuileries had been cleaned,
the busts were in their niches, the statues were on their pedestals; and
only a favorable occasion was wanting.

That occasion came when the news of Washington's death was received. The
founder of the liberty of the United States had ceased to breathe on the
14th of December, 1799.

It was that event of which Bonaparte was thinking, when Bourrienne
saw by the expression of his face that he must be left entirely to the
reflections which absorbed him.

The carriage stopped before the Tuileries. Bonaparte sprang out with the
same haste with which he had entered it; went rapidly up the stairs, and
through the apartments, examining more particularly those which had been
inhabited by Louis XVI. and Marie-Antoinette. In the private study of
Louis XVI. he stopped short.

"Here's where we will live, Bourrienne," he said, suddenly, as if
the latter had followed him through the mental labyrinth in which he
wandered, following the thread of Ariadne which we call thought. "Yes,
we will lodge here; the Third Consul can have the Pavilion of Flora, and
Cambaceres will remain at the Chancellerie."

"In that way," said Bourrienne, "when the time comes, you will have only
one to turn out."

"Come, come," said Bonaparte, catching Bourrienne by the ear, "that's
not bad."

"When shall we move in, general?" asked Bourrienne.

"Oh, not to-morrow; it will take at least a week to prepare the
Parisians to see me leave the Luxembourg for the Tuileries."

"Eight days," exclaimed Bourrienne; "that will do."

"Especially if we begin at once. Come, Bourrienne, to the Luxembourg."

With the rapidity that characterized all his movements when serious
matters were in question, he passed through the suites of apartments he
had already visited, ran down the stairs, and sprang into the carriage,
calling out: "To the Luxembourg!"

"Wait, wait," cried Bourrienne, still in the vestibule; "general, won't
you wait for me?"

"Laggard!" exclaimed Bonaparte. And the carriage started, as it had
come, at a gallop.

When Bonaparte re-entered his study he found the minister of police
awaiting him.

"Well, what now, citizen Fouche? You look upset. Have I, perchance, been
assassinated?"

"Citizen First Consul," said the minister, "you seemed to attach the
utmost importance to the destruction of those bands who call themselves
the Companions of Jehu."

"Evidently, since I sent Roland himself to pursue them. Have you any
news of them?"

"We have."

"From whom?"

"Their leader himself."

"Their leader?"

"He has had the audacity to send me a report of their last exploit."

"Against whom?"

"The fifty thousand francs you sent to the Saint-Bernard fathers."

"What became of them?"

"The fifty thousand francs?"

"Yes."

"They are in the possession of those brigands, and their leader informs
me he will transfer them shortly to Cadoudal."

"Then Roland is killed?"

"No."

"How do you mean, no?"

"My agent is killed; Colonel Maurice is killed; but your aide-de-camp is
safe and sound."

"Then he will hang himself," said Bonaparte.

"What good would that do? The rope would break; you know his luck."

"Or his misfortune, yes--Where is the report?"

"You mean the letter?"

"Letter, report, thing--whatever it was that told you this news."

The minister handed the First Consul a paper inclosed in a perfumed
envelope.

"What's this?"

"The thing you asked for."

Bonaparte read the address: "To the citizen Fouche, minister of police.
Paris." Then he opened the letter, which contained the following.

  CITIZEN MINISTER--I have the honor to inform you that the fifty
  thousand francs intended for the monks of Saint-Bernard came
  into our hands on the night of February 25, 1800 (old style),
  and that they will reach those of citizen Cadoudal within the
  week.

  The affair was well-managed, save for the deaths of your agent
  and Colonel Saint-Maurice. As for M. Roland de Montrevel, I have
  the satisfaction of informing you that nothing distressing has
  befallen him. I did not forget that he was good enough to receive
  me at the Luxembourg.

  I write you, citizen minister, because I presume that M. Roland
  de Montrevel is just now too much occupied in pursuing us to
  write you himself. But I am sure that at his first leisure moment
  you will receive from him a report containing all the details
  into which I cannot enter for lack of time and facilities for
  writing.

  In exchange for the service I render you, citizen minister, I
  will ask you to do one for me; namely, inform Madame de Montrevel,
  without delay, that her son is in safety.  MORGAN.

  Maison-Blanche, on the road from Macon to Lyons, Saturday, 9 P.M.

"Ha, the devil!" said Bonaparte; "a bold scamp!" Then he added, with a
sigh: "What colonels and captains those men would make me!"

"What are your orders, citizen First Consul?" asked the minister of
police.

"None; that concerns Roland. His honor is at stake; and, as he is not
killed, he will take his revenge."

"Then the First Consul will take no further notice of the affair?"

"Not for the present, at any rate." Then, turning to his secretary, he
added, "We have other fish to fry, haven't we, Bourrienne?"

Bourrienne nodded affirmatively.

"When does the First Consul wish to see me again?" asked the minister.

"To-night, at ten o'clock. We move out in eight days."

"Where are you going?"

"To the Tuileries."

Fouche gave a start of amazement.

"Against your opinion, I know," said the First Consul; "but I'll take
the whole business on myself; you have only to obey."

Fouche bowed, and prepared to leave the room.

"By the way!" exclaimed Bonaparte.

Fouche turned round.

"Don't forget to notify Madame de Montrevel that her son is safe and
sound; that's the least you can do for citizen Morgan after the service
he has rendered you."

And he turned his back on the minister of police, who retired, biting
his lips till the blood came.




CHAPTER XLIV. CHANGE OF RESIDENCE

That same day, the First Consul, left alone with Bourrienne, dictated
the following order, addressed to the Consulate guard and to the army at
large:

  Washington is dead! That great man fought against tyranny. He
  consolidated the liberty of America. His memory will ever be dear
  to the French people, to all free men in both hemispheres, but
  especially to the French soldiers, who, like Washington and his
  soldiers, have fought for Liberty and Equality. Consequently, the
  First Consul orders that the flags and banners of the Republic
  shall be hung with crape for ten days.

But the First Consul did not intend to confine himself to this order of
the day.

Among the means he took to facilitate his removal from the Luxembourg to
the Tuileries was one of those fetes by which he knew, none better, how
to amuse the eyes and also direct the minds of the spectator. This fete
was to take place at the Invalides, or, as they said in those days, the
Temple of Mars. A bust of Washington was to be crowned, and the flags of
Aboukir were to be received from the hands of General Lannes.

It was one of those combinations which Bonaparte thoroughly
understood--a flash of lightning drawn from the contact of contrasting
facts. He presented the great man of the New World, and a great victory
of the old; young America coupled with the palms of Thebes and Memphis.

On the day fixed for the ceremony, six thousand cavalry were in line
from the Luxembourg to the Invalides. At eight o'clock, Bonaparte
mounted his horse in the main courtyard of the Consular palace; issuing
by the Rue de Tournon he took the line of the quays, accompanied by a
staff of generals, none of whom were over thirty-five years of age.

Lannes headed the procession; behind him were sixty Guides bearing the
sixty captured flags; then came Bonaparte about two horse's-lengths
ahead of his staff.

The minister of war, Berthier, awaited the procession under the dome
of the temple. He leaned against a statue of Mars at rest, and the
ministers and councillors of state were grouped around him. The flags
of Denain and Fontenoy, and those of the first campaign in Italy,
were already suspended from the columns which supported the roof.
Two centenarian "Invalids" who had fought beside Marechal Saxe were
standing, one to the right and one to the left of Berthier, like
caryatides of an ancient world, gazing across the centuries. To the
right, on a raised platform, was the bust of Washington, which was now
to be draped with the flags of Aboukir. On another platform, opposite to
the former, stood Bonaparte's armchair.

On each side of the temple were tiers of seats in which was gathered all
the elegant society of Paris, or rather that portion of it which gave
its adhesion to the order of ideas then to be celebrated.

When the flags appeared, the trumpets blared, their metallic sounds
echoing through the arches of the temple,

Lannes entered first. At a sign from him, the Guides mounted two by
two the steps of the platform and placed the staffs of the flags in the
holders prepared for them. During this time Bonaparte took his place in
the chair,

Then Lannes advanced to the minister of war, and, in that voice that
rang out so clearly on the battlefield, crying "Forward!" he said:

"Citizen minister, these are the flags of the Ottoman army, destroyed
before your eyes at Aboukir. The army of Egypt, after crossing burning
deserts, surviving thirst and hunger, found itself before an enemy proud
of his numbers and his victories, and believing that he saw an easy prey
in our troops, exhausted by their march and incessant combats. He had
yet to learn that the French soldier is greater because he knows how to
suffer than because he knows how to vanquish, and that his courage rises
and augments in danger. Three thousand Frenchmen, as you know, fell
upon eighteen thousand barbarians, broke their ranks, forced them
back, pressed them between our lines and the sea; and the terror of our
bayonets is such that the Mussulmans, driven to choose a death, rushed
into the depths of the Mediterranean.

"On that memorable day hung the destinies of Egypt, France and Europe,
and they were saved by your courage,

"Allied Powers! if you dare to violate French territory, and if the
general who was given back to us by the victory of Aboukir makes an
appeal to the nation--Allied Powers! I say to you, that your successes
would be more fatal to you than disasters! What Frenchman is there who
would not march to victory again under the banners of the First Consul,
or serve his apprenticeship to fame with him?"

Then, addressing the "Invalids," for whom the whole lower gallery had
been reserved, he continued in a still more powerful voice:

"And you, brave veterans, honorable victims of the fate of battles, you
will not be the last to flock under the orders of him who knows your
misfortunes and your glory, and who now delivers to your keeping these
trophies won by your valor. Ah, I know you, veterans, you burn to
sacrifice the half of your remaining lives to your country and its
freedom!"
