had died. In coming back a number of the Berkshire men had been arrested
and maltreated in Northampton. Formidable military preparations were
being made by the government, and parties of Boston cavalry were
scouring the eastern counties and had taken several insurgent leaders
prisoners, who would probably be hung. The men had been demoralized
by the spread of a well substantiated report that Shays had offered to
desert to the other side if he could be assured of pardon. In the lower
counties indeed all the talk was of pardon and terms of submission. The
white paper cockade which had been adopted in contradistinction to the
hemlock as the badge of the government party, predominated in many of
the towns through which Abner's party had passed.

"That air proclamashin 's kinder skeert em more'n did us Berkshire
folks." Abner explained to a crowd at the tavern. "They all wanter be
on the hangman's side wen it comes tew the hangin. They hain't got the
pluck of a weasel, them fellers daown east hain't. This ere war'll hev
tew be fit aout in this ere caounty, I guess, ef wuss comes to wuss."

"They've got a slew o' men daown Bosting way," said a farmer. "I callate
we couldn' hole aout agin' em long ef it come tew fightin, an they
should reely tackle us."

"I dunno baout that nuther," declared Abner with a cornerwise nod of the
head. "Thar be plenty o' pesky places long the road wen it gits up intew
the mountings an is narrer and windin like. I wouldn' ass fer more'n
a kumpny tew stop a regiment in them places. I wuz talkin tew the Duke
baout that tidday. He says the hull caounty's a reglar fort, an ef the
folks 'll hang tewgether it can't be tuk by the hull res' o' the state.
We kin hole aout jist like the Green Mounting boys did agin the Yorkers
an licked em tew, and got shet of em an be indypendent tidday, by gol,
same ez Berkshire orter be."

"Trew's Gospel Abner," averred Israel Goodrich, "thar ain't no use o'
the two eends o' the state tryin tew git on tewgether. They hain't never
made aout tew gree, an I guess they never would nuther ef they tried it
a hundred year more. Darn it, the folks is differn folks daown east o'
Worcester. River folks is more like us but git daown east o' Worcester,
an I hain't no opinyun on em."

"Yer right thar Isr'el," said Abner with heartiness, "I can't bear
Bosting fellers no more'n I kin a skunk, and I kin tell em baout ez fer
orf. I dunno wat tiz baout em, but I can't git up no more feller feelin
fer em nor I kin fer Britishers. Seems though they wern't ezzackly
human, though I s'pose they be, but darn em anyhaow."

"I callate thar's suthin in the mountain air changes men," said Peleg,
"fer it's sartain we be more like the Green Mounting boys in aour
noshins an ways an we be like the Bosting chaps."

"I'd be in favor o' jinin onter Vairmount, an mebbe that'll be the
upshot on't all," observed Ezra Phelps. "Ye see Vairmount hain't a
belongin tew the cussed Continental federashin, an it hain't got none o'
them big debts ez is hangin round the necks o' the thirteen states,
and so we sh'd git rid o' the biggis part o' our taxes all kerslap.
Vairmount is an indypendent kentry, an I callate we'd better jine. Ef
they'd a made aout with that air noshin folks hed a spell ago, baout
raisin up a new state, made aout o' Hampshire caounty an a track o' land
tew the northard,'twould a been jess the sorter thing fer us Berkshire
fellers to a hitched on tew."

"I never hearn nothin baout that idea" said Peleg.

"I s'pose ye hain't," replied Ezra. "I wuz livin in Hampshire them
times, an so I wuz right in the way o' the talk. They wuz gonter call
the state New Connecticut. But the idee never come ter nothin. The war
come on an folks hed other fish ter fry."

But Israel declared that he was not in favor of joining on to anything.
Berkshire was big enough state for him, and he did not want to see any
better times than along from '74 to '80, when Berkshire would take no
orders from Boston.




CHAPTER TWENTY-THIRD

SNOW-BOUND


All through the first half of December one heavy snow storm had followed
another. The roads about Stockbridge were often blocked for days
together. In the village the work of digging paths along the sidewalks,
between the widely-parted houses, was quite too great to be so much as
thought of, and the only way of getting about was in sleighs, or wading
mid-leg deep. Of course, for the women, this meant virtual imprisonment
to the house, save on the occasion of the Sunday drive to meeting. In
these days, even the disciplinary tedium of a convict's imprisonment is
relieved by supplies of reading matter gathered by benevolent societies.
But for the imprisoned women of whom I write there was not even this
recreation. Printing had, indeed, been invented some hundreds of years,
but it can scarcely be said that books had been as yet, and especially
the kinds of books that ladies care to read. A bible, concordance, and
perhaps a commentary, with maybe three or four other grave volumes,
formed the limit of the average library in wealthy Berkshire families of
that day.

It is needless to say then, that Desire's time hung very heavy on her
hands, despite the utmost alleviations which embroidery, piano-playing,
and cakemaking could afford. For her, isolated by social superiority,
and just now, more than ever, separated from intercourse with the lower
classes by reason of the present political animosities, there was
no participation in the sports which made the season lively for the
farmers' daughters. The moonlight sledding and skating expeditions, the
promiscuously packed and uproarious sleighing-parties, the candy-pulls
and "bees" of one sort and another, and all the other robust and not
over-decorous social recreations in which the rural youth and maidens of
that day delighted, were not for the storekeeper's fastidious daughter.
The gentlemen's families in town did, indeed, afford a more refined
and correspondingly duller social circle, but naturally enough in the
present state of politics, there was very little thought of jollity in
that quarter.

And so, as I said, it was very dull for Desire, in fact terribly dull.
The only outside distraction all through the livelong day was the
occasional passage of a team in the road, and her mother, too, usually
occupied the chair at the only window commanding the road. And when the
aching dullness of the day was over, and the candles were lit for the
evening, and the little ones had been sent to bed, there was nothing for
her but to sit in the chimney corner, and look at the blazing logs and
brood and brood, till, at bedtime her father and Jonathan came in from
the store. Then her mother woke up, and there was a little talk, but
after that yawned the long dead night--sleep, sleep, nothing but sleep
for a heart and brain that cried out for occupation.

Up to the time when the sudden coming of the winter put an abrupt end
to her meeting with Perez, she was merely playing, or in more modern
parlance, "flirting" with him, as a princess might flirt with a
servitor. She had merely allowed his devotion to amuse her idleness. But
now, thanks to the tedium which made any mental distraction welcome, the
complexion of her thoughts concerning the young man suffered a gradual
change. Having no other resource, she gave her fancy _carte blanche_
to amuse her, and what materials could fancy find so effective as the
exciting experiences of the last Autumn? Sitting before the great open
fireplace in the evenings, while her mother dozed in the chimney corner,
and the silence was only broken by the purring of the cat, the crackling
of the fire, the ticking of the clock, and the low noise heard through
the partition, of men talking over their cups with her father in the
back room of the store, she fell into reveries from which she would be
roused by the thick, hot beating of her heart, or wake with cheeks
dyed in blushes at the voice of her mother. And then the long, dreamful
nights. Almost two-thirds of each twenty-four hours in this dark season
belonged to the domain of dreams. What wonder that discretion should
find itself all unable to hold its own against fancy in such a world of
shadows. What wonder that when, after meeting on Sundays she met Perez
as she was stepping into her father's sleigh at the meeting-house door,
she should feel too confused fairly to look him in the face, much as she
had thought all through the week before of that opportunity of meeting
him.

One day it chanced that Mrs. Edwards who was sitting by the window, said
abruptly:

"Here comes that Hamlin fellow."

Desire sprang up with such an appearance of agitation that her mother
added:

"Don't be scared, child. He won't come in here. It's only into the store
he's coming."

She naturally presumed that it was terror which occasioned her
daughter's perturbation. What would have been her astonishment if she
could have followed the girl as she presently went up to her room, and
seen her cowering there by the window in the cold for a full half-hour,
so that she might through a rent in the curtain have a glimpse of Perez
as he left the store! I am not sure that I even do right in telling the
reader of this. Indeed her own pride did so revolt against her weakness
that she tingled scarcely less with shame than with cold as she knelt
there. Once or twice she did actually rise up and leave the window, and
start to go downstairs, saying that she was glad she had not seen him
yet, for she could still draw back with some self-respect. But even as
she was thus in the act of retiring, some noise of boots in the store
below suggesting that now he might be going out, brought her hurriedly
back to the window. And when at last he did go, in her eagerness to see
him, she forgot all about her scruples. Her heart sprang into her throat
as she caught sight of him. She could have cried at a fleck in the
miserable glass which spoiled her view. Then when he turned and looked
up, a wave of color rushed all over her face, and she jumped back in
such fear at the thought he might see her, although she was well hidden,
that he had passed out of sight ere she dared look out again. But that
upward glance and the eager look in his eyes consoled her for the loss.
Had he not looked up, she would no doubt have yielded to a revulsion of
self-contempt for her weakness, which would have been a damper on her
growing infatuation. But that glance had made her foolishly, glowingly
elated, and disposed to make light of the reproaches of her pride.

"I suppose you were waiting for that Hamlin fellow to go away, before
coming down," said her mother as Desire re-entered the living-room. The
girl started and averted her face with a guilty terror, saying faintly,
"What?" How did her mother know? Her fears were relieved, though not her
embarrassment, as her mother added:

"You needn't have been so much frightened, although I really can't blame
you for it, after all you've been through at his hands. Still he would
scarcely dare, with all his impudence, to try to force a way in here.
You would have been quite safe, had you staid downstairs."

The good lady could not understand why, in spite of this reassurance,
Desire should thereafter persist, as she did, in retiring to her own
room whenever Hamlin came into the store. As the better informed reader
will infer from this fact the girl's infatuation was on the increase.
She had become quite shameless and hardened about using her point of
espionage to see, without being seen, the lover who so occupied her
thoughts. The only events of the slow, dull days for her were now his
visits to the store. She no longer started back when, in going, his
eager glance rose to her window, but panting, yet secure behind her
covert, looked into his eyes and scanned his expression. Sometimes a
quick rush of tears would rob her of her vision as she read in the sad
hunger of those eyes how he longed for a glimpse of her face. But for
very shame's sake she would have pulled the curtains up. It was so
unfair of her, she thought self-reproachfully, to sate her own eyes
while cheating his. She knew well enough that all which brought him to
the store so often was the hope of seeing and speaking with her. And
finally, about the middle of January, she made a desperate resolution
that he should. For several days she managed to occupy her mother's
usual seat by the window commanding the approach to the store, and
finally was rewarded by seeing Hamlin go in. She said nothing at first,
but soon remarked carelessly:

"I wonder if father hasn't got some other dimity in the store."

"Perhaps. I think not, though," replied Mrs. Edwards. Desire leaned back
in her chair, stifled a yawn and presently said:

"I believe I'll just run in and ask him before I get any further
on this." She rose up leisurely, stole a glance at the mirror in
passing--how pale she was--opened the connecting door and went into the
store.

She saw Perez, out of the corner of her eye, the instant she opened the
door. But not taking any notice of him, in fact holding her head very
stiffly, and walking unusually fast, she went across to her father
and asked him about the dimity. Receiving his reply she turned, still
without looking at Perez, and began mechanically to go back. So nervous
and cowardly had she been made by the excessive preoccupation of her
mind with him, that she actually had not the self-possession to carry
out her boldly begun project of speaking to him, now that he was so
near. It seemed as if she were actually afraid of looking at him. But
when he said in a rather hurt tone, "Good afternoon, Miss Edwards," she
stopped, and turned abruptly toward him and without speaking held out
her hand. He had not ventured to offer his, but he now took hers. Her
face was red enough now, and what he saw in her eyes made him forget
everything else. They stood for several seconds in this intensely
awkward way, speechless, for she had not even answered his greeting.
Squire Edwards, in the act of putting back the roll of dimity on the
shelf, was staring over his shoulder at them, astounded. She knew her
father was looking at them, but she did not care. She felt at that
moment that she did not care who looked on or what happened.

"How cold the weather is!" she said, dreamily.

"Yes, very," replied Perez.

"I hope it will be warmer, soon, don't you?" she murmered.

Then she seemed to come to herself, slowly withdrew her hand from his,
and walked slowly into the living-room and shut the door, and went
upstairs to her chamber. As soon as Hamlin had gone Edwards came in and
spoke with some indignation of his presumption.

"If he had not let go her hand, I should have taken him by the shoulder
in another second," he said angrily.

"Whatever made her shake hands with him?" demanded Mrs. Edwards.

"I suppose she thought she had to, or he would be murdering us all. The
girl acted very properly, and would not have noticed him if he had not
stopped her. But by the Providence of God matters now wear a better
look. This fellow is no longer to be greatly feared. The rebels lose
ground daily in town as well as in the county and state, and this Hamlin
is losing control even over his own sort. If he does not leave the
village he will be arrested soon. There is no need that we should humble
ourselves before him any longer."

All of which was quite true. For while we have been following the dreams
of a fancy-fevered girl, secluded in her snow-bound home among the hills
of Berkshire, the scenes have shifted swiftly in the great drama of the
rebellion, and a total change has come over the condition and prospects
of the revolt. The policy of conciliation pursued by the state
government had borne its fruit, better and more speedy fruit than any
other policy could have borne. Any other would have plunged the state
into bloody war and been of doubtful final issue. The credit for its
adoption is due primarily to the popular form of the government which
made it impossible for the authorities to act save in accordance with
popular sentiment. There was no force save the militia, and for their
use the approval of the two houses of the Legislature was needful. The
conservative and aristocratic Senate might alone have favored a
harsh course, but it could do nothing without the House, which fully
sympathized with the people. The result was a compromise by which the
Legislature at its extra session, ending the middle of November,
passed laws giving the people the most of what they demanded, and then
threatened them with the heavy arm of the law if they did not thereafter
conduct themselves peaceably.

To alleviate the distress from the lack of circulating medium, the
payment of back taxes in certain specified articles other than money
was authorized, and real and personal estate at appraised value was made
legal tender in actions for debt and in satisfaction for executions.
An act was also passed and others were promised reducing the justly
complained of costs of legal processes, and the fee tables of attorneys,
sheriffs, clerks of courts and justices, for, according to the system
then in vogue, most classes of judges were paid by fees from litigating
parties instead of by salary. The complaint against the appropriation
of so large a part of the income from the import and excise taxes to the
payment of interest on the state debt was met by the appropriation
of one-third of those taxes to government expenses. To be sure the
Legislature had refused to provide for the emission of any more paper
money, and this, in the opinion of many, was unpardonable but it had
shown a disposition to make up in some degree for this failure
by passing a law to establish a mint in Boston. These concessions
practically cut the ground out from under the rebellion, and the
practical minded people of the state, reckoning up what they had gained,
wisely concluded that it would not be worth while to go to blows for the
residue, especially as there was every reason to think the Legislature
at the next sitting would complete the work of reform it had so well
begun. A convention of the Hampshire County people at Hadley, on the
second of January, gave formal expression to these views in a resolution
advising all persons to lay aside arms and trust to peaceable petition
for the redress of such grievances as still remained.

Indeed, even if the mass of the people had been less satisfied than
they had reason to be with the Legislature's action, they had had
quite enough of anarchy. The original stopping of the courts and jail
deliveries, had been with their entire approval. But, as might be
expected, the mobs which had done the business had been chiefly
recruited from the idle and shiftless. Each village had furnished its
contingent of tavern loafers, neerdowells, and returned soldiers with
a distaste for industry. These fellows were all prompt to feel their
importance and responsibility as champions of the people, and to a large
extent had taken the domestic police as well as military affairs into
their own hands. Of course it was not long before these self-elected
dictators, began to indulge themselves in unwarrantable liberties with
persons and property, while the vicious and criminal classes generally,
taking advantage of the suspension of law, zealously made their hay
while the sun shone. In fact, whatever course the government had taken,
this state of things had grown so unbearable in many places that an
insurrection within the insurrection, a revolt of the people against the
rebels, must presently have taken place. But as may readily be supposed
these rebel bands, both privates and officers, were by no means in
favor of laying down their arms and thereby relapsing from their present
position of importance and authority to their former state of social
trash, despised by the solid citizens whom now they lorded it over.
Peace, and the social insignificance it involved had no charms for them.
Property for the most part they had none to lose. Largely veterans
of the Revolution, for eight years more used to camp than house, the
vagabond military state was congenial to them and its license sufficient
reward. The course of the Shays' rebellion will not be readily
comprehensible to any who leave out of sight this great multitude of
returned soldiers with which the state was at the time filled, men
generally destitute, unemployed and averse to labor, but inured to war,
eager for its excitements, and moreover feeling themselves aggrieved by
a neglectful and thankless country. And so though the mass of the
people by the early part of winter had grown to be indifferent to
the rebellion, if not actually in sympathy with the government, the
insurgent soldiery still held together wonderfully and in a manner
that would be impossible to understand without taking into account the
peculiar material that composed it. Not a man of the lot took advantage
of the governor's proclamation offering pardon, and instead of being
intimidated by the crushing military force sent against them in January,
the rebel army at the Battle of Springfield the last day of that month
was the largest body of insurgents that had been assembled at any time.

The causes described which had been at work in the lower counties, to
weaken popular sympathy with the insurgents, had simultaneously operated
in Berkshire. The report brought back from Worcester by Abner's men,
with the subsequent action of the Hadley convention in advising the
laying aside of arms, had strengthened the hands of the conservatives
in Stockbridge. The gentlemen of the village who had been so quiet since
Perez' relentless suppression of the Woodbridge rising in September,
found their voices again, and cautiously at first, but more boldly as
they saw the favorable change of popular feeling, began to talk and
reason with their fellow-citizens. If the insurrection had had no other
effect, it had at least taught these somewhat haughty aristocrats the
necessity of a conciliatory tone with the lower classes. The return
home of Theodore Sedgwick in the latter part of December, gave a marked
impulse to the government party, of whom he was at once recognized as
the leader. He had the iron hand of Woodbridge, with a velvet glove of
suavity, which the other lacked. To command seemed natural to him, but
he could persuade with as much dignity as he could command, a gift at
