persuaded himself that his fears were a foolish fancy, when his eyes
fell upon that which sent the blood cold to his heart and left him
gasping, with hands clutching at the counterpane.

Right in front of him was the broad window of the chamber, with the moon
shining brightly through it. For an instant something had obscured the
light, and now a head was bobbing up and down outside, the face looking
in at him, and swinging slowly from one side of the window to the other.
Even in that dim light there could be no mistaking those features.
Drawn, distorted and blood-stained, they were still those of the young
fellow-squire who had sat so recently upon his own couch. With a cry of
horror Alleyne sprang from his bed and rushed to the casement, while the
two archers, aroused by the sound, seized their weapons and stared about
them in bewilderment. One glance was enough to show Edricson that his
fears were but too true. Foully murdered, with a score of wounds upon
him and a rope round his neck, his poor friend had been cast from
the upper window and swung slowly in the night wind, his body rasping
against the wall and his disfigured face upon a level with the casement.

"My God!" cried Alleyne, shaking in every limb. "What has come upon us?
What devil's deed is this?"

"Here is flint and steel," said John stolidly. "The lamp, Aylward! This
moonshine softens a man's heart. Now we may use the eyes which God hath
given us."

"By my hilt!" cried Aylward, as the yellow flame flickered up, "it is
indeed young master Ford, and I think that this seneschal is a black
villain, who dare not face us in the day but would murther us in our
sleep. By the twang of string! if I do not soak a goose's feather with
his heart's blood, it will be no fault of Samkin Aylward of the White
Company."

"But, Aylward, think of the men whom I saw yesternight," said Alleyne.
"It may not be the seneschal. It may be that others have come into the
castle. I must to Sir Nigel ere it be too late. Let me go, Aylward, for
my place is by his side."

"One moment, mon gar. Put that steel head-piece on the end of my
yew-stave. So! I will put it first through the door; for it is ill to
come out when you can neither see nor guard yourself. Now, camarades,
out swords and stand ready! Hola, by my hilt! it is time that we were
stirring!"

As he spoke, a sudden shouting broke forth in the castle, with the
scream of a woman and the rush of many feet. Then came the sharp clink
of clashing steel, and a roar like that of an angry lion--"Notre Dame Du
Guesclin! St. Ives! St. Ives!" The bow-man pulled back the bolt of the
door, and thrust out the headpiece at the end of the bow. A clash, the
clatter of the steel-cap upon the ground, and, ere the man who struck
could heave up for another blow, the archer had passed his sword through
his body. "On, camarades, on!" he cried; and, breaking fiercely past two
men who threw themselves in his way, he sped down the broad corridor in
the direction of the shouting.

A sharp turning, and then a second one, brought them to the head of a
short stair, from which they looked straight down upon the scene of the
uproar. A square oak-floored hall lay beneath them, from which opened
the doors of the principal guest-chambers. This hall was as light as
day, for torches burned in numerous sconces upon the walls, throwing
strange shadows from the tusked or antlered heads which ornamented them.
At the very foot of the stair, close to the open door of their chamber,
lay the seneschal and his wife: she with her head shorn from her
shoulders, he thrust through with a sharpened stake, which still
protruded from either side of his body. Three servants of the castle lay
dead beside them, all torn and draggled, as though a pack of wolves had
been upon them. In front of the central guest-chamber stood Du Guesclin
and Sir Nigel, half-clad and unarmored, with the mad joy of battle
gleaming in their eyes. Their heads were thrown back, their lips
compressed, their blood-stained swords poised over their right
shoulders, and their left feet thrown out. Three dead men lay huddled
together in front of them: while a fourth, with the blood squirting
from a severed vessel, lay back with updrawn knees, breathing in
wheezy gasps. Further back--all panting together, like the wind in a
tree--there stood a group of fierce, wild creatures, bare-armed and
bare-legged, gaunt, unshaven, with deep-set murderous eyes and wild
beast faces. With their flashing teeth, their bristling hair, their mad
leapings and screamings, they seemed to Alleyne more like fiends from
the pit than men of flesh and blood. Even as he looked, they broke
into a hoarse yell and dashed once more upon the two knights, hurling
themselves madly upon their sword-points; clutching, scrambling, biting,
tearing, careless of wounds if they could but drag the two soldiers to
earth. Sir Nigel was thrown down by the sheer weight of them, and Sir
Bertrand with his thunderous war-cry was swinging round his heavy sword
to clear a space for him to rise, when the whistle of two long English
arrows, and the rush of the squire and the two English archers down the
stairs, turned the tide of the combat. The assailants gave back, the
knights rushed forward, and in a very few moments the hall was cleared,
and Hordle John had hurled the last of the wild men down the steep steps
which led from the end of it.

"Do not follow them," cried Du Guesclin. "We are lost if we scatter. For
myself I care not a denier, though it is a poor thing to meet one's end
at the hands of such scum; but I have my dear lady here, who must by no
means be risked. We have breathing-space now, and I would ask you, Sir
Nigel, what it is that you would counsel?"

"By St. Paul!" answered Sir Nigel, "I can by no means understand what
hath befallen us, save that I have been woken up by your battle-cry,
and, rushing forth, found myself in the midst of this small bickering.
Harrow and alas for the lady and the seneschal! What dogs are they who
have done this bloody deed?"

"They are the Jacks, the men of the brushwood. They have the castle,
though I know not how it hath come to pass. Look from this window into
the bailey."

"By heaven!" cried Sir Nigel, "it is as bright as day with the torches.
The gates stand open, and there are three thousand of them within the
walls. See how they rush and scream and wave! What is it that they
thrust out through the postern door? My God! it is a man-at-arms, and
they pluck him limb from limb like hounds on a wolf. Now another, and
yet another. They hold the whole castle, for I see their faces at the
windows. See, there are some with great bundles on their backs."

"It is dried wood from the forest. They pile them against the walls and
set them in a blaze. Who is this who tries to check them? By St. Ives!
it is the good priest who spake for them in the hall. He kneels, he
prays, he implores! What! villains, would ye raise hands against those
who have befriended you? Ah, the butcher has struck him! He is down!
They stamp him under their feet! They tear off his gown and wave it in
the air! See now, how the flames lick up the walls! Are there none left
to rally round us? With a hundred men we might hold our own."

"Oh, for my Company!" cried Sir Nigel. "But where is Ford, Alleyne?"

"He is foully murdered, my fair lord."

"The saints receive him! May he rest in peace! But here come some at
last who may give us counsel, for amid these passages it is ill to stir
without a guide."

As he spoke, a French squire and the Bohemian knight came rushing down
the steps, the latter bleeding from a slash across his forehead.

"All is lost!" he cried. "The castle is taken and on fire, the seneschal
is slain, and there is nought left for us."

"On the contrary," quoth Sir Nigel, "there is much left to us, for there
is a very honorable contention before us, and a fair lady for whom to
give our lives. There are many ways in which a man might die, but none
better than this."

"You can tell us, Godfrey," said Du Guesclin to the French squire: "how
came these men into the castle, and what succors can we count upon? By
St. Ives! if we come not quickly to some counsel we shall be burned like
young rooks in a nest."

The squire, a dark, slender stripling, spoke firmly and quickly, as one
who was trained to swift action. "There is a passage under the earth
into the castle," said he, "and through it some of the Jacks made their
way, casting open the gates for the others. They have had help from
within the walls, and the men-at-arms were heavy with wine: they must
have been slain in their beds, for these devils crept from room to room
with soft step and ready knife. Sir Amory the Hospitaller was struck
down with an axe as he rushed before us from his sleeping-chamber. Save
only ourselves, I do not think that there are any left alive."

"What, then, would you counsel?"

"That we make for the keep. It is unused, save in time of war, and the
key hangs from my poor lord and master's belt."

"There are two keys there."

"It is the larger. Once there, we might hold the narrow stair; and at
least, as the walls are of a greater thickness, it would be longer ere
they could burn them. Could we but carry the lady across the bailey, all
might be well with us."

"Nay; the lady hath seen something of the work of war," said Tiphaine
coming forth, as white, as grave, and as unmoved as ever. "I would not
be a hamper to you, my dear spouse and gallant friend. Rest assured of
this, that if all else fail I have always a safeguard here"--drawing a
small silver-hilted poniard from her bosom--"which sets me beyond the
fear of these vile and blood-stained wretches."

"Tiphaine," cried Du Guesclin, "I have always loved you; and now, by Our
Lady of Rennes! I love you more than ever. Did I not know that your hand
will be as ready as your words I would myself turn my last blow upon
you, ere you should fall into their hands. Lead on, Godfrey! A new
golden pyx will shine in the minster of Dinan if we come safely through
with it."

The attention of the insurgents had been drawn away from murder to
plunder, and all over the castle might be heard their cries and whoops
of delight as they dragged forth the rich tapestries, the silver
flagons, and the carved furniture. Down in the courtyard half-clad
wretches, their bare limbs all mottled with blood-stains, strutted
about with plumed helmets upon their heads, or with the Lady Rochefort's
silken gowns girt round their loins and trailing on the ground behind
them. Casks of choice wine had been rolled out from the cellars, and
starving peasants squatted, goblet in hand, draining off vintages which
De Rochefort had set aside for noble and royal guests. Others, with
slabs of bacon and joints of dried meat upon the ends of their pikes,
held them up to the blaze or tore at them ravenously with their teeth.
Yet all order had not been lost amongst them, for some hundreds of the
better armed stood together in a silent group, leaning upon their rude
weapons and looking up at the fire, which had spread so rapidly as to
involve one whole side of the castle. Already Alleyne could hear the
crackling and roaring of the flames, while the air was heavy with heat
and full of the pungent whiff of burning wood.



CHAPTER XXXI. HOW FIVE MEN HELD THE KEEP OF VILLEFRANCHE


Under the guidance of the French squire the party passed down two narrow
corridors. The first was empty, but at the head of the second stood a
peasant sentry, who started off at the sight of them, yelling loudly to
his comrades. "Stop him, or we are undone!" cried Du Guesclin, and had
started to run, when Aylward's great war-bow twanged like a harp-string,
and the man fell forward upon his face, with twitching limbs and
clutching fingers. Within five paces of where he lay a narrow and
little-used door led out into the bailey. From beyond it came such a
Babel of hooting and screaming, horrible oaths and yet more horrible
laughter, that the stoutest heart might have shrunk from casting down
the frail barrier which faced them.

"Make straight for the keep!" said Du Guesclin, in a sharp, stern
whisper. "The two archers in front, the lady in the centre, a squire
on either side, while we three knights shall bide behind and beat back
those who press upon us. So! Now open the door, and God have us in his
holy keeping!"

For a few moments it seemed that their object would be attained without
danger, so swift and so silent had been their movements. They were
half-way across the bailey ere the frantic, howling peasants made a
movement to stop them. The few who threw themselves in their way were
overpowered or brushed aside, while the pursuers were beaten back by the
ready weapons of the three cavaliers. Unscathed they fought their way to
the door of the keep, and faced round upon the swarming mob, while the
squire thrust the great key into the lock.

"My God!" he cried, "it is the wrong key."

"The wrong key!"

"Dolt, fool that I am! This is the key of the castle gate; the other
opens the keep. I must back for it!" He turned, with some wild intention
of retracing his steps, but at the instant a great jagged rock, hurled
by a brawny peasant, struck him full upon the ear, and he dropped
senseless to the ground.

"This is key enough for me!" quoth Hordle John, picking up the huge
stone, and hurling it against the door with all the strength of his
enormous body. The lock shivered, the wood smashed, the stone flew into
five pieces, but the iron clamps still held the door in its position.
Bending down, he thrust his great fingers under it, and with a heave
raised the whole mass of wood and iron from its hinges. For a moment it
tottered and swayed, and then, falling outward, buried him in its ruin,
while his comrades rushed into the dark archway which led to safety.

"Up the steps, Tiphaine!" cried Du Guesclin. "Now round, friends, and
beat them back!" The mob of peasants had surged in upon their heels, but
the two trustiest blades in Europe gleamed upon that narrow stair, and
four of their number dropped upon the threshold. The others gave back,
and gathered in a half circle round the open door, gnashing their teeth
and shaking their clenched hands at the defenders. The body of the
French squire had been dragged out by them and hacked to pieces. Three
or four others had pulled John from under the door, when he suddenly
bounded to his feet, and clutching one in either hand dashed them
together with such force that they fell senseless across each other upon
the ground. With a kick and a blow he freed himself from two others
who clung to him, and in a moment he was within the portal with his
comrades.

Yet their position was a desperate one. The peasants from far and near
had been assembled for this deed of vengeance, and not less than six
thousand were within or around the walls of the Chateau of Villefranche.
Ill armed and half starved, they were still desperate men, to whom
danger had lost all fears: for what was death that they should shun
it to cling to such a life as theirs? The castle was theirs, and the
roaring flames were spurting through the windows and flickering high
above the turrets on two sides of the quadrangle. From either side they
were sweeping down from room to room and from bastion to bastion in the
direction of the keep. Faced by an army, and girt in by fire, were six
men and one woman; but some of them were men so trained to danger and
so wise in war that even now the combat was less unequal than it seemed.
Courage and resource were penned in by desperation and numbers, while
the great yellow sheets of flame threw their lurid glare over the scene
of death.

"There is but space for two upon a step to give free play to our
sword-arms," said Du Guesclin. "Do you stand with me, Nigel, upon the
lowest. France and England will fight together this night. Sir Otto, I
pray you to stand behind us with this young squire. The archers may go
higher yet and shoot over our heads. I would that we had our harness,
Nigel."

"Often have I heard my dear Sir John Chandos say that a knight should
never, even when a guest, be parted from it. Yet it will be more honor
to us if we come well out of it. We have a vantage, since we see them
against the light and they can scarce see us. It seems to me that they
muster for an onslaught."

"If we can but keep them in play," said the Bohemian, "it is likely
that these flames may bring us succor if there be any true men in the
country."

"Bethink you, my fair lord," said Alleyne to Sir Nigel, "that we have
never injured these men, nor have we cause of quarrel against them.
Would it not be well, if but for the lady's sake, to speak them fair and
see if we may not come to honorable terms with them?"

"Not so, by St. Paul!" cried Sir Nigel. "It does not accord with mine
honor, nor shall it ever be said that I, a knight of England, was ready
to hold parley with men who have slain a fair lady and a holy priest."

"As well hold parley with a pack of ravening wolves," said the French
captain. "Ha! Notre Dame Du Guesclin! Saint Ives! Saint Ives!"

As he thundered forth his war-cry, the Jacks who had been gathering
before the black arch of the gateway rushed in madly in a desperate
effort to carry the staircase. Their leaders were a small man, dark in
the face, with his beard done up in two plaits, and another larger man,
very bowed in the shoulders, with a huge club studded with sharp nails
in his hand. The first had not taken three steps ere an arrow from
Aylward's bow struck him full in the chest, and he fell coughing and
spluttering across the threshold. The other rushed onwards, and breaking
between Du Guesclin and Sir Nigel he dashed out the brains of the
Bohemian with a single blow of his clumsy weapon. With three swords
through him he still struggled on, and had almost won his way through
them ere he fell dead upon the stair. Close at his heels came a hundred
furious peasants, who flung themselves again and again against the five
swords which confronted them. It was cut and parry and stab as quick as
eye could see or hand act. The door was piled with bodies, and the stone
floor was slippery with blood. The deep shout of Du Guesclin, the hard,
hissing breath of the pressing multitude, the clatter of steel, the
thud of falling bodies, and the screams of the stricken, made up such
a medley as came often in after years to break upon Alleyne's sleep.
Slowly and sullenly at last the throng drew off, with many a fierce
backward glance, while eleven of their number lay huddled in front of
the stair which they had failed to win.

"The dogs have had enough," said Du Guesclin.

"By Saint Paul! there appear to be some very worthy and valiant persons
among them," observed Sir Nigel. "They are men from whom, had they been
of better birth, much honor and advancement might be gained. Even as it
is, it is a great pleasure to have seen them. But what is this that they
are bringing forward?"

"It is as I feared," growled Du Guesclin. "They will burn us out, since
they cannot win their way past us. Shoot straight and hard, archers;
for, by St. Ives! our good swords are of little use to us."

As he spoke, a dozen men rushed forward, each screening himself behind a
huge fardel of brushwood. Hurling their burdens in one vast heap within
the portal, they threw burning torches upon the top of it. The wood
had been soaked in oil, for in an instant it was ablaze, and a long,
hissing, yellow flame licked over the heads of the defenders, and drove
them further up to the first floor of the keep. They had scarce reached
it, however, ere they found that the wooden joists and planks of the
flooring were already on fire. Dry and worm-eaten, a spark upon them
became a smoulder, and a smoulder a blaze. A choking smoke filled the
air, and the five could scarce grope their way to the staircase which
led up to the very summit of the square tower.

Strange was the scene which met their eyes from this eminence. Beneath
them on every side stretched the long sweep of peaceful country,
rolling plain, and tangled wood, all softened and mellowed in the silver
moonshine. No light, nor movement, nor any sign of human aid could be
seen, but far away the hoarse clangor of a heavy bell rose and fell upon
the wintry air. Beneath and around them blazed the huge fire, roaring
and crackling on every side of the bailey, and even as they looked the
two corner turrets fell in with a deafening crash, and the whole castle
was but a shapeless mass, spouting flames and smoke from every window
and embrasure. The great black tower upon which they stood rose like a
last island of refuge amid this sea of fire but the ominous crackling
and roaring below showed that it would not be long ere it was engulfed
also in the common ruin. At their very feet was the square courtyard,
crowded with the howling and dancing peasants, their fierce faces
upturned, their clenched hands waving, all drunk with bloodshed and with
vengeance. A yell of execration and a scream of hideous laughter burst
from the vast throng, as they saw the faces of the last survivors of
their enemies peering down at them from the height of the keep. They
still piled the brushwood round the base of the tower, and gambolled
hand in hand around the blaze, screaming out the doggerel lines which
had long been the watchword of the Jacquerie:

        Cessez, cessez, gens d'armes et pietons,
        De piller et manger le bonhomme
        Qui de longtemps Jacques Bonhomme
          Se nomme.

Their thin, shrill voices rose high above the roar of the flames and the
crash of the masonry, like the yelping of a pack of wolves who see their
quarry before them and know that they have well-nigh run him down.

"By my hilt!" said Aylward to John, "it is in my mind that we shall not
see Spain this journey. It is a great joy to me that I have placed
my feather-bed and other things of price with that worthy woman at
Lyndhurst, who will now have the use of them. I have thirteen arrows
yet, and if one of them fly unfleshed, then, by the twang of string! I
shall deserve my doom. First at him who flaunts with my lady's silken
frock. Clap in the clout, by God! though a hand's-breadth lower than
I had meant. Now for the rogue with the head upon his pike. Ha! to
the inch, John. When my eye is true, I am better at rovers than at
long-butts or hoyles. A good shoot for you also, John! The villain hath
fallen forward into the fire. But I pray you, John, to loose gently, and
not to pluck with the drawing-hand, for it is a trick that hath marred
many a fine bowman."

Whilst the two archers were keeping up a brisk fire upon the mob beneath
them, Du Guesclin and his lady were consulting with Sir Nigel upon their
desperate situation.

"'Tis a strange end for one who has seen so many stricken fields," said
the French chieftain. "For me one death is as another, but it is the
thought of my sweet lady which goes to my heart."

"Nay, Bertrand, I fear it as little as you," said she. "Had I my dearest
wish, it would be that we should go together."

"Well answered, fair lady!" cried Sir Nigel. "And very sure I am that my
own sweet wife would have said the same. If the end be now come, I have
had great good fortune in having lived in times when so much glory was
to be won, and in knowing so many valiant gentlemen and knights. But why
do you pluck my sleeve, Alleyne?"

"If it please you, my fair lord, there are in this corner two great
tubes of iron, with many heavy balls, which may perchance be those
bombards and shot of which I have heard."

"By Saint Ives! it is true," cried Sir Bertrand, striding across to
the recess where the ungainly, funnel-shaped, thick-ribbed engines were
standing. "Bombards they are, and of good size. We may shoot down upon
them."

"Shoot with them, quotha?" cried Aylward in high disdain, for pressing
danger is the great leveller of classes. "How is a man to take aim with
these fool's toys, and how can he hope to do scath with them?"

"I will show you," answered Sir Nigel; "for here is the great box of
powder, and if you will raise it for me, John, I will show you how it
may be used. Come hither, where the folk are thickest round the fire.
Now, Aylward, crane thy neck and see what would have been deemed an old
wife's tale when we first turned our faces to the wars. Throw back the
lid, John, and drop the box into the fire!"

A deafening roar, a fluff of bluish light, and the great square tower
rocked and trembled from its very foundations, swaying this way and that
like a reed in the wind. Amazed and dizzy, the defenders, clutching at
the cracking parapets for support, saw great stones, burning beams of
wood, and mangled bodies hurtling past them through the air. When they
staggered to their feet once more, the whole keep had settled down upon
one side, so that they could scarce keep their footing upon the sloping
platform. Gazing over the edge, they looked down upon the horrible
destruction which had been caused by the explosion. For forty yards
round the portal the ground was black with writhing, screaming figures,
who struggled up and hurled themselves down again, tossing this way
and that, sightless, scorched, with fire bursting from their tattered
clothing. Beyond this circle of death their comrades, bewildered and
amazed, cowered away from this black tower and from these invincible
men, who were most to be dreaded when hope was furthest from their
hearts.

"A sally, Du Guesclin, a sally!" cried Sir Nigel. "By Saint Paul! they
are in two minds, and a bold rush may turn them." He drew his sword as
he spoke and darted down the winding stairs, closely followed by his
four comrades. Ere he was at the first floor, however, he threw up his
arms and stopped. "Mon Dieu!" he said, "we are lost men!"

"What then?" cried those behind him.

"The wall hath fallen in, the stair is blocked, and the fire still rages
below. By Saint Paul! friends, we have fought a very honorable fight,
and may say in all humbleness that we have done our devoir, but I think
that we may now go back to the Lady Tiphaine and say our orisons, for we
have played our parts in this world, and it is time that we made ready
for another."

The narrow pass was blocked by huge stones littered in wild confusion
over each other, with the blue choking smoke reeking up through the
crevices. The explosion had blown in the wall and cut off the only path
by which they could descend. Pent in, a hundred feet from earth, with
a furnace raging under them and a ravening multitude all round who
thirsted for their blood, it seemed indeed as though no men had ever
come through such peril with their lives. Slowly they made their way
back to the summit, but as they came out upon it the Lady Tiphaine
darted forward and caught her husband by the wrist.

"Bertrand," said she, "hush and listen! I have heard the voices of men
all singing together in a strange tongue."

Breathless they stood and silent, but no sound came up to them, save the
roar of the flames and the clamor of their enemies.

"It cannot be, lady," said Du Guesclin. "This night hath over wrought
you, and your senses play you false. What men are there in this country
who would sing in a strange tongue?"

"Hola!" yelled Aylward, leaping suddenly into the air with waving hands
and joyous face. "I thought I heard it ere we went down, and now I hear
it again. We are saved, comrades! By these ten finger-bones, we are
saved! It is the marching song of the White Company. Hush!"

With upraised forefinger and slanting head, he stood listening. Suddenly
there came swelling up a deep-voiced, rollicking chorus from somewhere
out of the darkness. Never did choice or dainty ditty of Provence or
Languedoc sound more sweetly in the ears than did the rough-tongued
Saxon to the six who strained their ears from the blazing keep:

        We'll drink all together
        To the gray goose feather
          And the land where the gray goose flew.

"Ha, by my hilt!" shouted Aylward, "it is the dear old bow song of the
Company. Here come two hundred as tight lads as ever twirled a shaft
over their thumbnails. Hark to the dogs, how lustily they sing!"

Nearer and clearer, swelling up out of the night, came the gay marching
lilt:

        What of the bow?
           The bow was made in England.
        Of true wood, of yew wood,
           The wood of English bows;
        For men who are free
        Love the old yew-tree
           And the land where the yew tree grows.

