evil intentions of these cruel men? It is true that the Governor has
shown himself your friend--I should rather say, my friend--by giving me
this secret information; but he would not openly espouse your cause, or
resist the will of the Assembly. Why, then, should you spurn from you
the means of safety that have been so mercifully afforded, and tempt
Providence to leave you to your fate'?

'Edith,' he replied--and the bright flush faded from his cheek, and the
fire in his eye died away, and he sank again upon his couch--'Edith,
you have subdued my spirit; or perhaps,' he added, smiling up in her
face, 'weakness has subdued it. I feel that I have no strength to
accomplish what I desire, and to show my persecutors that liberty of
thought and feeling is my birthright, and that I will never relinquish
the privilege. I must, therefore, submit to the will of One who is
wiser and mightier than I am; and believe me, my Edith,' he continued--
as he saw the tears falling from her gentle eyes--'believe me, I do to
with perfect contentment now. The passion--the sinful passion--that
stirred me so mightily just now, is gone; and I feel the goodness of my
God in holding me back from the rash act I contemplated, and from
rushing upon dangers that I might indeed defy, but could not hope to
conquer. I will be calm, my love; and you shall devise some means for
my escape. I feel assured that still more violent measures will be
adopted by the Assembly to get me into their power; and now that I can
quietly reflect on the consequences of such an event, I am aware that
they would, probably, be our violent and indefinite separation. I could
not bear that, Edith; though I believe that I could bear much to
vindicate my honor.'

How changed was Roger's countenance now! All passion--all excitement--
was gone; and the natural sweetness of his disposition, and tenderness
of his heart, resumed their interrupted influence over his whole manner
and expression. Edith thought she had never either admired or loved him
so much as at this moment, when he had conquered his impetuous
feelings, and yielded his fiery impulse to show a bold resentment of
injury, to her influence and persuasions.

'Heaven bless you, my own Roger!' she exclaimed, 'and reward your
better resolution, by granting us many future years of united
happiness. But now we must think of the present, and provide for its
emergencies. I see clearly that there is now no safety for you in
Salem, and that a speedy flight can alone ensure your liberty. You have
made a great sacrifice for my sake; and I will also make one for yours.
I will not even ask to fly with you, for I could only be an encumbrance
to you at this inclement season of the year, and my presence here may
be of use to you. My heart rebels while I say it, Roger; but you must
go alone, and use every exertion to reach Plymouth as speedily as
possible. When you are safe beneath my father's roof, then will be time
enough to think of me. I feel no doubt that Governor Bradford will
afford you every assistance in his power; and, probably, will again
allow the vessel that brought us here in brighter days, to convey me
once more to you and to happiness.'

Edith had tried to speak with steadiness and composure; and, so far,
she had succeeded tolerably well. But when she realized to herself the
time that must elapse before she could rejoin her husband, and all the
dangers and privations that might await him in the interval, her
calmness quite gave way, and she burst into tears of uncontrollable
agony.

Roger strove to cheer her, and to point to the happy future that he
trusted was in store for them--if not on earth, yet assuredly in a
better world, where faithful hearts will never know the misery of
parting. But it was not until he had knelt with her in prayer, and had
humbly asked to meet the coming trial, and to be sanctified by it, that
her tears ceased to flow, and a smile of hope and resignation illumined
her interesting countenance.

'I must act now, Roger,' she said, in a cheerful voice, as she rose
from her knees. 'Our time is short; and I must make such arrangements
for your comfort during your journey as are in my power. All other
things that are needful to you I will endeavor to send by sea to
Plymouth; or, if no opportunity occurs during the winter, you must have
patience until I can convey them myself.'

Her voice again trembled; and unbidden tears again rose to her eyes.
But she sought relief in occupation; and on the day after the morrow,
when Roger was to commence his toilsome journey at break of day, his
knapsack was ready, and stored with everything that would be most
requisite to his comfort.

The moment of parting came; but we will not describe it. It was borne
by Edith as a devoted Christian wife can bear anything that is
necessary for the safety and welfare of her husband. But when he was
gone, and her swimming eyes could no longer see his beloved form, or
catch his last signal of farewell, the whole desolation of her own
position burst upon her: and Edith was, for a time, bowed down with
grief. She felt herself alone in the world, and she shrank from seeking
comfort or sympathy from any human being who was then near her. But
friends whom she could not then expect to see were near, and the
wounded heart found a balm and a consolation beyond its hopes.

The very evening after Roger's departure, Edith's spirit was cheered by
the arrival of Elliot and his wife at her now dreary home. O, how she
welcomed them! and how deeply they sympathized in her distress and
anxiety! They had heard of the last summons that had been sent from the
General Assembly; and had hastened to Salem, in spite of the severity
of the weather to offer any assistance or counsel that might be needed
by either Roger or Edith. They rejoiced, with much thankfulness, when
they heard of his having escaped the cruel vengeance of his
adversaries; but their minds were filled with fear and anxiety, when
they reflected on the many perils that he might encounter on his long
journey, and the sufferings from cold, and hunger, and fatigue, that he
must endure in his present debilitated state of health. They did not,
however, add to Edith's anxiety by telling of their own, but exerted
themselves to cheer and rouse her, and lead her to place a perfect
trust in the over-ruling care of Him, without whose permission not even
a sparrow can fall to the ground.

The wisdom of the plan that Edith had persuaded her husband to adopt
was soon but too apparent; for, in a few days, a pinnace arrived at
Salem, bringing an officer and attendants, who were commissioned by the
General Assembly to seize on the offending pastor, and convey him on
board a vessel that was lying at Nantasket, ready for sea. But this
cruel and arbitrary intention was happily frustrated. The officer came
to the dwelling of Williams, and had the mortification of finding that
he had been gone three days; nor could all his threats or persuasions
obtain from any of the inmates the least information concerning his
flight. He also sought out, and strictly interrogated, several of the
inhabitants of Salem, who were known to be the partisans of this
persecuted friend of liberty. But, although they were well acquainted
with his sudden departure and his destination, and some of the younger
men were even preparing to follow him, not one of them betrayed their
respected leader.

The officer therefore returned to Boston, to report the ill-success of
his errand, which excited much wrath and vexation in the members of the
Assembly, but afforded secret satisfaction to the amiable Governor
Winthrop, who had unwillingly submitted to the decision of a large
majority of the government, and who had kindly exerted himself to
rescue from a cruel and unjust fate the man whose only fault consisted
in a determination to think for himself.

Meanwhile, the fugitive was pursuing his slow and difficult way through
the woods and wilds to the south of Salem. But whither should he direct
his steps? Every road out of the district must lead him through the
territory of his foes and persecutors; and he dared not show in any of
the hamlets or villages, where his person and reputation were well
known, lest he should be seized and given up to the magistrates of
Boston.  He, therefore, traveled chiefly by night, guided by the moon
and stars, and lay concealed in some damp covert, or rocky ravine,
during the day. The small stock of provisions that Edith had placed in
his knapsack was soon expended, and for some days he subsisted on the
nuts and berries that still remained on the trees.

At length he felt himself safe from immediate pursuit, and changed his
course suddenly to the east.  He emerged from the shelter of the woods,
and, hurrying across the open plain that skirted the bay, he found
himself at the spot which he desired to reach. This was a little cove
on the shore, surrounded on the land side by rocks, and only capable of
receiving a small boat into its tranquil harbor. As Roger approached
the water's edge, and stepped round the last point of rock that
concealed the inlet, he made a signal, which, to his great joy, was
instantly replied to from within. Day was just dawning over the far
horizon, and a dim twilight shone on the smooth and boundless ocean
that spread to the east. A few light strokes of an oar fell on Roger's
ear, and then he saw the white spray, and the dark form of a boat
emerging from the gloomy cavern that was formed by the overhanging
rocks. In a moment his hand was grasped in that of a friend, and all
his sense of loneliness vanished away.

Seaton entreated him to lose no time in entering the boat, and leaving
the inhospitable shores of Massachusetts; and Williams gladly obeyed
him. The little shallop, which his friends at Salem had secretly
purchased, and sent by one of the most devoted of their number to meet
him at the appointed place, was well supplied with provisions and warm
clothing, which proved a most seasonable relief to Roger; but the most
acceptable part of its contents was a letter from Edith, informing him
of the welcome arrival of their friends, the Elliots, at Salem, and of
the futile efforts of the men of Boston to make him a prisoner. Edith
wrote more cheerfully than she felt; and she spoke of the happy time
when they would be reunited, and of her hopes that it was not far
distant, assuring him that she was willing--and trusted, ere long, to
be able--to follow him to any spot where he might fix his home.

This letter, and the refreshment with which Seaton furnished him,
raised his drooping and exhausted spirits; and, at his friend's
request, he wrapped himself in the large boat-cloak that his provident
wife had sent for him and lay down to enjoy the first calm and
undisturbed repose that had been permitted to him since he left his
beloved home.

Silently and rapidly the little boat glided over the calm surface of
the bay; and, ere long, it was opposite to the harbor of Boston, and
might be espied by some of the vessels lying there, Roger still slept
the deep sleep of exhaustion and security; but Seaton now required his
aid, and reluctantly aroused him to take a second oar, and speed the
shallop past the region of danger. Roger sprang to his feet, and seized
the oar, and the boat darted forward from the impulse of his now fresh
and powerful arm. It passed near several boats belonging to the
Bostoners; but the fugitive drew his large Spanish hat over his brows,
and hid his well-known form and dress beneath the folds of the ample
cloak, and thus escaped detection or observation.

It was his intention to row down the bay as far as New Plymouth, where
he designed to visit Edith's parents and apprise them of all that had
befallen him; and also endeavor to prevail on Bradford to send a
vessel, as soon as the inclemency of the weather had subsided, to bring
his wife to her paternal home. He then proposed to go on with Seaton,
and any of the Plymouthers who would accompany him, and seek a
settlement further to the south, in some part of Narragansett Bay. But
this scheme was not permitted to be carried out.

Towards evening, a fresh breeze sprang up from the east; and before
sun-set it blew so violently, that Roger and his companion had the
greatest difficulty in keeping their little vessel out at sea, and
preventing its being dashed on the coral reefs that girt that 'stern
and rock-bound coast.' Manfully they wrought at the oars; but their
strength was almost exhausted, and no creek or inlet offered them a
secure refuge.  Still they persevered--for it was a struggle for life!
The least remission of their toil would have placed them at the mercy
of the wind, and they must have been driven violently against the
sunken rocks.

At length, when the light of day was failing them, and they began to
give themselves up as lost, the keen eye of Roger espied an opening
through the foam-covered reef; and though it was narrow, and evidently
dangerous, he and Seaton resolved to make a desperate effort to pass
through it, and gain the smooth still waters that they knew must lie
between the rock and the shore.

They breathed a fervent and heart-felt prayer for help from above, and
then commenced the fearful contest. The moment they turned the prow of
their shallop towards the shore, the light and buoyant little vessel
darted forward, impelled by both wind and tide, and mounted like a
seabird on the rolling waves. The dashing spray fell ever it, almost
blinding its crew, and the helm no longer had power to divert its
headlong course.

'Now may He who rules the storm have pity on my Edith!' exclaimed
Roger, as he saw the fail extent of their peril, and not a fear for
himself crossed his steadfast soul. 'May the Lord of the winds and the
waves be our guide and protector, or the next minute will be our last!'

He clasped his hands in prayer, and raised his kindling eye to the
frowning heavens above him. But his eye of faith could look through
those dark clouds, and see a Father's hand of love and mercy governing
and controlling the elements: and his spirit was at peace.

'Now God be praised!' cried Seaton, as he drew a long shivering breath;
and snatching up both the oars, projected them on each side of the boat
to protect it from the rocks that bounded the narrow channel. 'We have
entered the passage; and, with Heaven's help, we shall yet be saved.'

They had, indeed, dashed straight into the opening that divided the
reef, and through which the waves were rushing at a terrific rate; and
their only apparent chance of safety lay in the possibility of guiding
the little bark through the channel, without its being impelled against
the rugged sides. Williams caught one of the oars from his friend, and
both directed their whole strength to this object. There was a brief
interval of breathless suspense; and then the boat struck on a hidden
coral rock. It was but for a moment--another swelling wave lifted it
again, and rolled forward, bearing the little vessel on its summit into
the smooth water that lay, like a narrow lake, between the dangerous
reef and the flat sandy shore.

But the peril was not yet over. The blow-on the rock, though momentary,
had been so violent as to spring a leak in the bottom of the boat; and
through this the water gushed up with fearful rapidity, threatening to
sink it before the shore could be reached. Again the oars were pulled
with the strength of desperation; and again the danger was averted. But
Roger Williams and his friend found themselves on a desert and
uninhabited coast, with a useless vessel, and no means of proceeding to
Plymouth.

Still their lives had been providentially preserved, and they were
deeply grateful to the Divine power which had been exerted for their
rescue. And faith and courage, and bodily strength were their portion
likewise: and they did not despair. They slept long and soundly; and
the following morning, having ascertained that the boat was too
seriously injured to be repaired by any means at their command, they
resolved on abandoning it, and recommenced their journey on foot.

The extreme difficulty of reaching Plymouth by land, and the wide
circuit from the course that he wished ultimately to pursue that must
be traveled in order to reach the settlement of the Pilgrim Fathers,
caused Williams to relinquish that part of his plan, and decide on
striking at once into the forest, and pursuing a south-westerly course
until he should arrive at Narragansett Bay. This would lead him through
the trackless woods, and the dreary wilds, inhabited only by the
barbarous and untutored red men. But from them he hoped to meet with
that hospitality and succor which was denied him by his fellow-
countrymen and fellow-Christians.



CHAPTER XXI.

'...Alas! to see the strength that clings
Round woman in such hours!...A mournful sight,
Though lovely! an o'erflowing of the springs,
The full springs of affection, deep and bright!
And she, because her life is ever twined
With other lives, and by no stormy wind
May thence be shaken; and because the light
Of tenderness is round her, and her eye
Doth weep such passionate tears--therefore,
She thus endures.'    HEMANS.

Without any guide, Roger and his faithful friend Seaton wandered
through the wilderness. They took from the stranded boat as much of
food and other useful articles as they could carry; but the provision
did not last long, and before they reached any Indian encampment they
were seduced to extreme want and suffering. Their clothes were drenched
by the frequent heavy rain, which so completely saturated the ground
and the dead branches that lay strewed upon it, as often to preclude
all possibility of lighting a fire. Their nights were passed on the
damp ground, or beneath any sheltering rock that they could find and
once a hollow tree afforded them a refuge from the storm that raged
around them, when no other was at hand.

At length, after fourteen weeks of trial and hardship, they reached the
village of Packanokick, where dwelt Masasoyt, the aged Sagamore of the
Wampanoges. During the time that Williams had resided at Plymouth, he
had learnt the language of the natives; and on some of his visits to
the village of Mooanam, he had become acquainted with his father,
Masasoyt, the chief Sachem of the divided tribe. The regard and respect
with which his eloquence and his attractive manners had inspired the
younger Chieftain were fully shared by the Sagamore; and both prince
and people learnt to love and reverence the man who honored their
rights, respected their prejudices, and prayed to his God for their
welfare.

His appearance in the village of Masasoyt was hailed with joy, and
regarded as a privilege by all the inhabitants. The Sachem received
both him and is way-worn companion with kindness and hospitality, and
gave them a chamber in his own lodge; which, if not remarkable either
for cleanliness or comfort, yet seemed a luxurious abode to men who had
passed so many days and nights in the unsheltered depths of the forest.

On the following morning, when food and rest had somewhat restored the
exhausted strength of the travelers, Masasoyt invited Williams to a
private conference, in which he informed him that a serious quarrel had
again arisen between his tribe and that of Cundineus, the Chief of the
Narragansetts; and he entreated him to use all his powerful influence
with the latter to heal the present dissension, and prevent the dispute
from ending in open hostilities. Williams undertook this negotiation
with much satisfaction; for peace-making was not only in accordance
with his feelings, and with the duty of his profession, but he also
desired to secure the favor and protection of the Narragansett Chief,
on the borders of whose dominions he designed to fix his future home.
He, therefore, made no delay in setting out, with a few Indian
attendants, on the proposed expedition and in a few days, returned to
Packanokick with the welcome intelligence that the wrath of Cundincus
was appeased, and that he had listened favorably to the explanation of
his rival Chieftain.

The old Narragansett Chief also was so captivated by the English
stranger, and so won by his peculiar eloquence, that we are told that
'the barbarous heart of the old prince loved him like a son to his
latest breath'; and his nephew and co-ruler, the young Miantonomo, also
regarded him as a friend, and placed in him a perfect confidence.

'Let no one,' thankfully exclaimed Williams in his diary, 'mistrust
Providence--these ravens fed me in the wilderness!'

But inactive repose was neither the wish nor the lot of Roger Williams;
and he earnestly desired to reach the spot where he proposed to found
his new settlement, and prepare a home for his beloved Edith; and from
whence, also, he hoped to be able to send a letter to Salem or to
Plymouth, which might allay the anxious fears that he well knew she had
so long been enduring. Since he had received the letter that Seaton
brought him from his high-minded wife, he had not had any opportunity
of conveying to her the intelligence of his own safety; or of hearing
from her whether her strength and spirits were supported under the
protracted trial of absence and anxiety. He knew, also, that ere this
time he had reason to believe himself a father; and his heart yearned
to be assured of the welfare of his wife and child, and to see them
safely lodged beneath the shelter of his own roof.  It was a source of
extreme consolation to him, under all his feelings of anxiety, to
believe that his Edith had been cheered and supported by the presence
of Dame Elliot and her excellent husband, who, he felt assured, would
not leave her until she could be removed either to Plymouth or to her
husband's new abode: and to their kind care, and the protection of his
heavenly Father, he was contented to leave her, while he used every
effort to procure for her a safe and happy home, in which he could
hope, ere long, to welcome her.

He, therefore, lost no time in concluding a bargain with Masasoyt for a
piece of land in the district called Seacomb[*], not far from the east
arm of Narragansett Bay; and thither he proceeded with Seaton, and
commenced building and planting. From this place, he found means to
convey intelligence, both to Salem and Plymouth, of the safe
termination of his perilous journey, and his intention to fix his
settlement on the piece of ground that he had purchased. His messengers
returned, after a considerable interval, and brought him a letter from
his now joyful wife, which gladdened his heart with the welcome news of
her health and safety; and that also of his little daughter Edith. This
name, she told him, had been given to the infant in accordance with
what she knew to be his wish; and his friend John Elliot--who, with his
wife, had resided chiefly at Salem since his departure--had  performed
the rite of baptism. She further informed him that Governor Bradford,
on hearing of her lonely position, had kindly promised to send a vessel
for her; and, as the severity of winter had already partially subsided,
she was in daily expectation of the arrival of the pinnace, which would
carry her back to the happy home of her youth; and then she hoped the
time would not be long until she could rejoin her husband, and once
more be at peace.

[Footnote: Now Reheboth]

This letter called forth the lively joy and gratitude of Roger, and
animated him to fresh zeal and activity in all his proceedings at
Seacomb.  He was also encouraged greatly by the arrival, at the same
