vinous babbling of a garrulous fool.

"Three days!" he said, and took out his snuff-box and tapped it,
laughing jeeringly. And this strange thing my Lady Betty marked, that
his white hand shook a little as if from hidden excitement. "Three
days!" he mocked.

"No man of fashion now," said Lord Charles, and tapped his snuff-box
also, "is drunk for more than two."

But Sir Christopher felt he was gaining a victory before her ladyship's
very eyes, which always so mocked and teased him for his clumsiness in
any encounter of words, wherefore he pressed his point gleefully.

"Three days!" cries he. "'Twas nearer four."

Sir John turned on him, laughing still, seeming in very truth as if the
thing amused him.

"When, when?" he said. "Never, I swear!" and held a pinch of snuff in
his fingers daintily, his eyes gleaming blue as sapphires through the
new light in them.

"Swear away!" cried Sir Christopher; "thou wast too drunk to remember.
'Twas the night thou hidst the package in the wall."

Then he burst forth again in laughter, for Sir John had so started that
he forgot his pinch of snuff and scattered it.

"Canst see 'tis no slander, my lady," he cried, pointing at Sir John,
who stood like a man who wakes from long sleep and is bewildered by the
thoughts which rush through his brain. "I laughed till I was like to
crack my sides." Then to Sir John, "Thou hadst but just left Clo
Wildairs and I rode with thee to Essex. Lord, how I laughed to watch
thee groping to find a place safe enough to put it in. 'I'm drunk,'
says thou, 'and I would have it safe till I am sober. 'Twill be safe
here,' and stuffed it in the broken plaster 'neath the window-sill. And
safe it was, for I'll warrant thou hast not thought of it since, and
safe thou'lt find it at the Cow at Wickben still."

Sir John struck one closed hand sudden on the palm of the other.

"It comes back to thee," cried Sir Christopher, with a grimace aside at
his audience.

"Ay, it comes back," answers Sir John; "it comes back." And he broke
forth into a short, excited laugh, there being in its sound a note of
triumph almost hysteric; and hearing this they stared, for why in such
case he should be triumphant, Heaven knew.

"'Twas a love-token!" said Lady Betty, simpering, for of a sudden he
had become another man--no longer black-visaged, but gallant, and
smiling with his old charming, impudent, irresistible air. He bent and
took her hand and kissed her finger-tips with this same old enchanting
insolence.

"Had your ladyship given it to me," he said, "I had not hid it in a
wall, but in my heart." And with a soft glance and a smiling bow he
left their circle and sauntered towards the ball-room.


"'Twas the last time I spoke with him," said my Lady Betty, when he was
talked of later. "I wonder if 'twas in his head when he kissed my
hand--if indeed 'twas a matter he himself planned or had aught to do
with. Faith! though he was a villain he had a killing air when he
chose."

When her ladyship had played off all her airs and graces upon her
servitors she led them again to the ball-room that she might vary her
triumphs and fascinations. A minuet was being played, and my Lady
Dunstanwolde was among the dancers, moving stately and slow in her
white and silver, while the crowd looked on, telling each other of the
preparations being made for her marriage, and that my lord Duke of
Osmonde was said to worship her, and could scarce live through the
hours he was held from her in France.

Among the watchers, and listening to the group as he watched, stood Sir
John Oxon. He stood with a graceful air and watched her steadily, and
there was a gleam of pleasure in his glance.

"He has followed and gazed at her so for the last half-hour," said
Mistress Lovely. "Were I the Duke of Osmonde I would command him to
choose some other lady to dog with his eyes. Now the minuet is ending I
would wager he will follow her to her seat and hang about her."

And this indeed he did when the music ceased, but 'twas done with a
more easy, confident air than had been observed in him for some time
past. He did not merely loiter in her vicinity, but when the circle
thinned about her he made his way through it and calmly joined her.

"Does he pay her compliments?" said Lord Charles, who looked on at a
distance. "Faith, if he does, she does not greatly condescend to him. I
should be frozen by a beauty who, while I strove to melt her, did not
deign to turn her eyes. Ah, she has turned them now. What has he said?
It must have been fire and flame to move her. What's this--what's
this?"

He started forward, as all the company did--for her ladyship of
Dunstanwolde had risen to her full height with a strange movement and,
standing a moment swaying, had fallen at Sir John Oxon's feet, white in
a death-like swoon.




_CHAPTER XXVIII_

_Sir John Rides out of Town_


Tom Tantillion had not appeared at the ball, having otherwise
entertained himself for the evening, but at an hour when most
festivities were at an end and people were returning from them, rolling
through the streets in their coaches, the young man was sitting at a
corner table in Cribb's Coffee-House surrounded by glasses and jolly
companions and clouds of tobacco-smoke.

One of these companions had been to the ball and left it early, and had
fallen to talking of great personages he had seen there, and describing
the beauties who had shone the brightest, among them speaking of my
Lady Dunstanwolde and the swoon which had so amazed those who had seen
it.

"I was within ten feet of her," says he, "and watching her as a man
always does when he is near enough. Jack Oxon stood behind her, and was
speaking low over her shoulder, but she seeming to take little note of
him and looking straight before her. And of a sudden she stands
upright, her black eyes wide open as if some sound had startled her,
and the next minute falls like a woman dropping dead, and lies among
her white and silver like one carven out of stone. One who knows her
well--old Sir Chris Crowell--says she hath never fallen in a swoon
before since she was born. Gad! 'twas a strange sight--'twas so
sudden." He had just finished speaking, and was filling his glass
again, when a man strode into the room in such haste that all turned to
glance at him.

He was in riding-dress, and was flushed and excited, and smiling as if
to himself.

"Drawer!" he called, "bring me coffee and brandy, and, damme! be in
haste."

Young Tantillion nudged his nearest companion with his elbow.

"Jack Oxon," he said. "Where rides the fellow at this time of night?"

"Eh, Jack!" he said, aloud, "art on a journey already, after shining at
the Court ball?"

Sir John started, and seeing who spoke, answered with an ugly laugh.

"Ay," said he, "I ride to the country in hot haste. I go to Wickben in
Essex, to bring back a thing I once left there."

"'Twas a queer place to leave valuables," said Tom--"a village of
tumble-down thatched cottages. Was't a love-token or a purse of gold?"

Sir John gave his knee a sudden joyous slap, and laughed aloud.

"'Twas a little thing," he replied, "but 'twill bring back fortune--if
I find it--and help me to pay back old scores, which is a thing I like
better." And his grin was so ugly that Tom and his companions glanced
aside at each other, believing that he was full of liquor already, and
ready to pick a quarrel if they continued their talk. This they were
not particularly inclined to, however, and began a game of cards,
leaving him to himself to finish his drink. This he did, quickly
tossing down both brandy and coffee the instant they were brought to
him, and then striding swaggering from the room and mounting his horse,
which waited in the street, and riding clattering off over the stones
at a fierce pace.

"Does he ride for a wager?" said Will Lovell, dealing the cards.

"He rides for some ill purpose, I swear," said Tom Tantillion. "Jack
Oxon never went in haste towards an honest deed; but to play some
devil's trick 'tis but nature to him to go full speed."

But what he rode for they never heard, neither they nor anyone else who
told the story, though 'twas sure that if he went to Wickben he came
back to town for a few hours at least, for there were those who saw him
the next day, but only one there was who spoke with him, and that one
my Lady Dunstanwolde herself.

Her ladyship rode out in the morning hoping, 'twas said, that the
fresh air and exercise would restore her strength and spirits. She rode
without attendant, and towards the country, and in the high road Sir
John Oxon joined her.

"I did not know he had been out of town," she said, when the mystery
was discussed. "He did not say so. He returned to Dunstanwolde House
with me, and we had talk together. He had scarce left me when I
remembered that I had forgot to say a thing to him I had wished to say.
So I sent Jenfry forth quickly to call him back. He had scarce had time
to turn the street's corner, but Jenfry returned, saying he was not
within sight."

"Whereupon you sent a note to his lodgings, was't not so?" asked Sir
Christopher.

"Yes," answered her ladyship, "but he had not returned there."

"Nor ever did," said Sir Christopher, whenever the mystery was referred
to afterwards; "nor ever did, and where he went to from that hour only
the devil knows, for no man or woman that one has heard of has ever
clapt eyes on him since."

This was, indeed, the mysterious truth. After he entered the Panelled
Parlour at Dunstanwolde House it seemed that none had seen him, for the
fact was that by a strange chance even the lacquey who should have been
at his place in the entrance hall had allowed himself to be ensnared
from his duty by a pretty serving-wench, and had left his post for a
few minutes to make love to her in the servants' hall, during which
time 'twas plain Sir John must have left the house, opening the
entrance-door for himself unattended.

"Lord," said the lacquey in secret to his mates, "my gizzard was in my
throat when her ladyship began to question me. 'Did you see the gentle,
man depart, Martin?' says she. ''Twas you who attended him to the door,
of a surety.' 'Yes, your ladyship,' stammers I. ''Twas I--and I marked
he seemed in haste.' 'Did you not observe him as he walked away?' says
my lady. 'Did you not see which way he went?' 'To the left he turned,
my lady,' says I, cold sweat breaking out on me, for had I faltered in
an answer she would have known I was lying and guessed I had broke her
orders by leaving my place by the door--and Lord have mercy on a man
when she finds he has tricked her. There is a flash in her eye like
lightning, and woe betide him it falls on. But truth was that from the
moment the door of the Panelled Parlour closed behind him the
gentleman's days were ended, for all I saw of him, for I saw him no
more."

And there was none who saw him, for from that time he disappeared from
his lodgings, from the town, from England, from the surface of the
earth, as far as any ever heard or discovered, none knowing where he
went, or how, or wherefore.

Had he been a man of greater worth or importance, or one who had made
friends, his so disappearing would have aroused a curiosity and
excitement not easily allayed; but a vicious wastrel who has lost hold
even on his whilom companions in evil-doing, and has no friends more
faithful, is like, indeed, on dropping out of the world's sight, to
drop easily and lightly from its mind, his loss being a nine days'
wonder and nothing more.

So it was with this one, who had had his day of being the fashion and
had broken many a fine lady's brittle heart, and, living to be no
longer the mode, had seen the fragile trifles cemented together again,
to be almost as good as new. When he was gone he was forgot quickly
and, indeed, but talked about because her ladyship of Dunstanwolde had
last beheld him, and on the afternoon had been entertaining company in
the Panelled Parlour when the lacquey had brought back the undelivered
note with which Jenfry had waited three hours at the lost man's
lodgings in the hope that he would return to them, which he did no
more.

"'Tis a good riddance to all, my lady, wheresoever he be gone," said
Sir Christopher, sitting nursing his stout knee in the blue parlour a
week later (for her ladyship had had a sudden fancy to have the
panelled room made wholly new and decorated before the return of his
Grace from France). "Tis a good riddance to all."

Then he fell to telling stories of the man, of the creditors he had
left in the lurch, having swindled them of their very hearts' blood,
and that every day there was heard of some poor tradesman he had
ruined, till 'twas a shame to hear it told; and there were worse
things--worse things yet!

"By the Lord!" he said, "the ruin one man's life can bring about, the
heartbreak, and the shame! 'Tis enough to make even a sinner as old as
I, repent, to come upon them face to face. Eh, my lady?" looking at her
suddenly, "thou must get back the roses thou hast lost these three days
nursing Mistress Anne, or his Grace will be at odds with us every one."

For Mistress Anne had been ailing, and her sister being anxious and
watching over her had lost some of her glorious bloom, which was indeed
a new thing to see. At this moment the roses had dropped from her
cheeks and she smiled strangely.

"They will return," she said, "when his Grace does."

She asked questions of the stories Sir Christopher had told and showed
anxiousness concerning the poor people who had been so hardly treated.

"I have often thought," she said, "that so rich a woman as I should set
herself some task of good deeds to do. 'Twould be a good work to take
in hand the undoing of the wrongs a man who is lost has left behind
him. Why should not I, Clo Wildairs, take in hand the undoing of this
man's?" And she rose up suddenly and stood before him, straight and
tall, the colour coming out on her cheeks as if life flooded back
there.

"Thou!" he cried, gazing at her in loving wonder. "Why shouldst _thou_,
Clo?" None among them had ever understood her and her moods, and he
surely did not understand this one--for it seemed as if a fire leaped
up within her, and she spoke almost wildly.

"Because I would atone for all my past," she said, "and cleanse myself
with unceasing mercies, and what I cannot undo, do penance for--that I
may be worthy--worthy."

She broke off and drew her hand across her eyes, and ended with a
strange little sound, half laugh.

"Perhaps all men and women have been evil," she said, "and some
are--some seem fated! And when my lord Duke comes back, I shall be
happy--happy--in spite of all; and I scarce dare to think my joy may
not be taken from me. Is joy _always_ torn away after it has been
given to a human thing--given for just so long, as will make loss,
madness?"

"Eh, my lady!" he said, blundering, "thou art fearful, just as another
woman might be. 'Tis not like Clo Wildairs. Such thoughts will not make
thee a happy woman."

She ended with a laugh stranger than her first one, and her great black
eyes were fixed on him as he had remembered seeing her fix them when
she was a child and full of some wild fancy or weird sadness.

"'Tis not Clo Wildairs who thinks them," says she; "'tis another woman.
'Twas Clo who knew John Oxon who is gone--and was as big a sinner as
he, though she did harm to none but herself. And 'tis for those
two--for both--I would have mercy. But I am a strong thing, and was
born so, and my happiness will not die, despite--despite whatsoever
comes. And I _am_ happy, and know I shall be more; and 'tis for that I
am afraid--afraid."

"Good Lord!" cried Sir Chris, swallowing a lump which rose, he knew not
why, in his throat. "What a strange creature thou art!"


His Grace's couriers went back and forth to France, and upon his
estates the people prepared their rejoicings for the marriage-day, and
never had Camylott been so heavenly fair as on the day when the bells
rang out once more, and the villagers stood along the roadside and at
their cottage doors, courtesying and throwing up hats and calling down
God's blessings on the new-wed pair, as the coach passed by, and his
Grace, holding his lady's hand, showed her to his people, seeming to
give her and her loveliness to them as they bowed and smiled
together--she almost with joyful tears in her sweet eyes.

In her room near the nurseries, at the window which looked out among
the ivy, Nurse Halsell sat, watching the equipage as it made its way up
the long avenue, and might be seen now and then between the trees, and
her old hands trembled in her lap, for very joy. And before the day was
done his Grace, knocking on the door gently, brought his Duchess to
her.

"And 'twas you," said her Grace, standing close by her chair, and
holding the old hand between her own two, which were so white and
velvet warm, "and 'twas you who held him in your arms when he was but a
little new-born thing, and often sang him to sleep, and were so loved
by him. And he played here--" and she looked about the apartment with a
tremulous smile.

"Yes," said his Grace, with a low laugh of joyful love, "and now I
bring you to her, and 'tis my marriage-day."

Nurse Halsell gazed up at the eyes which glowed above her.

"'Tis what his Grace hath waited long for," she said, "and he would
have died an unwedded man had he not reached it at last. 'Tis sure what
God ordained." And for a minute she looked straight and steady into the
Duchess's face. "A man must come to his own," she said, and bent and
kissed the fair hand with passionate love, but her Grace lifted the old
face with her palm, and stooped and kissed it fondly--gratefully.

Then the Duke took his wife to the Long Gallery and they stood there,
he holding her close against his side, while the golden sun went down.

"Here I stood and heard that you were born," he said, and kissed her
red, tender mouth. "Here I stood in agony and fought my battle with my
soul the first sad day you came to Camylott." And he kissed her slow
and tenderly again, in memory of the grief of that past time. "And here
I stand and feel your dear heart beat against my side, and look into
your eyes--and look into your eyes--and they are the eyes of her who is
mine own--and Death himself cannot take her from me."




_CHAPTER XXIX_
