Senlac were coming true--his shadow was over our king, for ill in
all things.

The battle was going against Cnut--once Eadmund himself had cut his
way through the press of Danes before their king, and had almost
come to hand strokes with him, but had been borne back. And then
Streone's eyes lit on one Osmer, a warrior of the Danish host,
standing near him, and he saw that he was like our king. Therefore
he slew him, and set his head on a spear, and rode forward to where
the English line pressed most hardly on the Danish ranks. There he
raised the head aloft, shouting in his great voice:

"Fly, English, fly! Eadmund is dead. Know his head!"

Then for a moment panic seized our folk, and they held their hands,
and in that pause Ulf the jarl charged among them, and the line was
broken and flight began.

But Eadmund unhelmed when he heard the cry that he was slain, and
rode through the ranks, and our men knew him, and cheered, and fell
on the Danes afresh, and the broken line closed up, and they fought
till night fell, and in the night the Danes drew off. And in the
night by twos and threes, and then in companies, Eadmund's levies
melted away from him, for his men were worn out and sick of
slaughter, and knew not enough to bid them stay to follow their
foes and turn retreat into rout, and doubt into victory. The Danes
were going, they saw and heard; what need to stay longer?

So it came to pass that nothing was wrought by that awful fighting,
and both sides claimed victory, for our men deemed that they had
won, and the Danes claimed it because they were not followed, and
because Ulf the jarl had cut through our line.

It was through this last that I lost Godwine as a companion. For
Ulf lost himself in the forest that was in the rear of our forces,
because he followed the flying too far, and the dusk of the evening
was close at hand. He thought that the victory was surely won, for
it had ever been that the first sign of flight was followed by rout
of our men. At least the Danes learnt this at Sherston, that
Eadmund could hold his own against them.

So Ulf the jarl wandered all night in the wood, and came out of it
on the hillside where Godwine was speaking to one of his father's
shepherds. And Godwine brought him, unknowing who he was, back to
Berkeley.

Then maybe came into Wulfnoth's mind that rede of the witch of
Senlac, that bade Godwine mind his sheep, and so find his place, or
else this was part of the plan which had brought him into Wessex.
For he asked Ulf to take Godwine to Cnut, and find him a place in
his court, and the jarl did so. It was not until Godwine came to
the ships that he knew who it was that he had guided, and they won
him over, and he stayed.

Nor did I know. I spoke with Ulf, asking him of the battle, and of
Egil, and the like, for he was the earl's guest. And I thought
nothing of Godwine's guidance of a Dane to the ships, for the earl
was no foe of Cnut. But when I rose in the morning after Ulf had
come, and found that he and Godwine had gone in the night, and was
told by Wulfnoth who the warrior was, and what he had asked for his
son, I was very angry, though I knew that the earl had little cause
to love the house of Ethelred.

But the earl said, very quietly:

"There are two kings in England, and no king of England. Choice is
free to me, and I choose that king who will honour my son, and who
has done me no wrong. Were you to go to Cnut I would hold you
blameworthy, seeing how things have been between you and Eadmund.
Godwine goes to Cnut even as he flies to his ships. No man may say
that he did but join him when he was victor."

Now, it was not Wulfnoth's way to give reasons thus for aught that
he did, and I was surprised that he would do so to me. But I could
look at things in his way if I put my own love for Eadmund aside,
and I said:

"I may not blame you, lord earl, maybe; but it is hard for me to
see my friend take what I think the wrong side."

"Think no ill of him. It is my doing," Wulfnoth said. "All his life
has Godwine been bidden to hate the house of Ethelred of Wessex.
Now before long this warfare must end. And if your king has the
victory I pray you speak for Godwine if need is. And if Cnut is
victor you will need Godwine, maybe, to speak for you. Let this
matter bide there between us. I would now that I had not let him
go, for I am lonely."

Then I knew why the fierce old earl unbent to speak thus to me, and
I spoke only of honour to be gained in the service of so great a
king as Cnut.

Thereafter the time went very heavily for me. The great Danish
fleet left the Severn on the day when Godwine would have come to
them, and then Eadmund must gather another levy, and prepare for
some fresh landing. And before that was done I was free again, and
I could join him with a light heart. The earl gave me a good horse
when I rode away, and parted with me very kindly for Godwine's
sake, he said, and his own liking for me also.

"I shall look for you at Pevensea yet. Come to me when things go
ill with you, and you shall be welcome."

I knew not if ever I should see Sussex again. But of this I was
sure now, that if fortune went with me presently, I would surely
seek Ailwin and tell him that I must be free, and so would seek
Uldra, and ask her to share what I might have to give her, if a
home should be mine again. I had thought much of this brave, quiet
maiden while I was chafing at doing nought in Wulfnoth's farmstead,
though I would not have stayed at Penhurst.

Now came a time when the victory was ours, and it seemed that at
last the strong hand had come. For men would follow Eadmund, and he
had the power of making them fight as he would. Yet there was
nothing that would keep our levies together. Had they done so we
had surely conquered, but it was ever the same. They fought and
dispersed, and all the work and loss was for nought. I think it
would have been the same with the Danish host had they been in
their own country; but here they must needs hold together, and Cnut
and his jarls wielded that mighty force as a man wields his sword.
Eadmund smote as a man who fells his enemy with a staff that breaks
in the smiting, so that he must needs seek another while his fallen
foe rises again, sword in hand.

But our men were called from home and fireside to fight, and when
they won and their own fields and houses were safe, they thought
they had done all, and went home again, at ease, and maybe boasting
overmuch.

We marched on London and relieved the city, driving the Danes in
flight to their ships. And Eadmund slept that night among a great
host; and in the morning the Wessex men were going home, and only
his own housecarles and the men who followed him from ruined Mercia
and East Anglia and Kent would bide around him. London could take
care of herself now. But Eadmund strove to gather them for one more
blow, and we had a great fight at Brentford, for the Danes had gone
up river, and we won. Yet the Danes turned on us when the ships
were reached, and we lost many men in the river, for they scattered
in their eagerness to plunder the ships that they thought were
already won, and so, without order or leaders, were driven to their
death in the swift water.

Then Wessex disbanded, and all the work of gathering our forces
must be done over again; and at once the Danes closed in round
London when Eadmund had gone back to Salisbury.

Surely it would have broken the heart of any man but Eadmund the
Ironside that thus it must be, but he would say:

"England is waking; we shall win yet."

Then Cnut recalled the ships and host from London, and they raised
the siege, and went into the Orwell, and once again began to march
across the heart of our land.

This fourth levy that Eadmund the king had made was the best that
he had had. And word must have come thereof to the Danes, for they
went back to their fleet; and so waited for a little while,
thinking doubtless that this levy would melt away in idleness as
ever. For they came back into the Medway with the booty they had,
and there we fell on them and drove them headlong to their ships,
and I surely thought that we had done with Cnut for good and all.

Then fell the shadow of ill on us. Edric Streone and his men met us
at Aylesford, and he came in to the king and made most humble
submission to him.

And that was what Olaf had told Eadmund would happen when once
again he had the victory. Therefore when I saw the earl come into
the camp to speak with Eadmund I said:

"Mind you what Olaf said. How that you should hang Streone."

"Aye, I mind it. But the man is deserted by his new friends. They
have gone."

Almost had Eadmund quarrelled with Olaf on that saying.

"Put him in ward, my king, at least," I urged, and Ulfkytel, who
had come with us from London, prayed him also to do so.

But Eadmund's fate was on him, and he received his foster father
kindly, and forgave him, and thought that all would be well.

Now with Ulfkytel came my Colchester men, or rather the thirty who
were left, And those two brothers, Thrand and Guthorm, who had
ridden to Stamford with me were there also. These two came to me
that evening when I was alone, and said that they had a plan they
would carry out if I gave the word. And it was nothing more or less
than that they would fall on Edric Streone and slay him when and
where they met him.

I would that they had not asked me, but had wrought the deed on
their own account. But I said that I could not have this done, for
it was too much after Streone's own manner of settling things. I
could not think of letting my men lie in wait for any foe of mine,
however good cause I had for hating him. And I did hate Streone
with a hate that I am not ashamed of, not for my own sake, but
because he was a traitor to both king and country. There were
Englishmen who fought for Cnut thinking that thus they wrought best
for England and her peace--as Wulfnoth chose for Godwine--and I had
no hatred for them. They were honest if they were wrong; but they
were no traitors. But Edric Streone was as Judas to me.

So Thrand and Guthorm grumbled, and forbore, though they would have
spent their own lives willingly in this way had I lifted a finger.
It was, however, in revenge for the Stamford business that they
would slay the earl, and that was only my quarrel, nothing higher.
Nevertheless I owed them thanks for their love thus shown to me,
and so I told them. Little had I done to deserve it; but who shall
know what wins the love of rough souls like these?

Strange news came with Streone, though I had heard rumours thereof
before, as I have said. It was true that Cnut was to wed Emma the
queen; and they had, as it seemed, already been betrothed, at the
advice of the three great jarls. Now she and the athelings her sons
were back in Normandy, and one might see what the reason of this
policy was, Not only was Duke Richard kept quiet, but also Cnut was
stepfather to Eadward Atheling and his brothers. That meant that if
Cnut won, they must needs suffer him to take the crown unopposed.
And more than this, if Cnut must leave England alone presently,
when Eadmund died he would claim the throne at once, either for
himself or for one of these athelings as his under-king. For no man
ever thought twice of Eadmund's brother Edwy, who was weak bodily,
nor of his half brother, the other Edwy, whom we called "king of
the churls," by reason of the low birth of his mother, for no
thanes would follow him had he had the gift of leading.

Cnut's fleet went from the Medway northward, and it was in the
thoughts of all men that the end had come, and that he sought his
own land at last. And that seemed the more certain to most because
Streone had submitted, as if he knew that he had no further hope of
honour from the Danish king. Presently, however, it was plain that
his coming over was but part of the deepest plot that he had yet
made.

Suddenly, even as our levies dispersed in spite of all the king's
entreaties, came the news that the Danish fleet had turned and was
in the Crouch river in Essex, whence already the host had begun
their march inland across Mercia in the old way. And so for the
fifth time Eadmund strove to gather all England to him, and his
summons was well obeyed. The thanes and their men gathered in
haste, savage with hope deferred, and Cnut shrank back again to
Ashingdon on the Crouch, and there built himself an earthwork on
the south side of the river, while his ships lay on the further
shore at Burnham, and in the anchorage, and along the mud below the
earthworks, seeming countless. And there he waited for us, and
there we knew that he meant to end the warfare in one great fight
for mastery, with his ships behind him that he might go if he were
at last obliged.

And there, too, though we knew it not, he waited for Streone to
give England into his hands.

We were close on him when his main force fell back upon his
earthworks, where they stand on the little hill above the river
banks that men will call "Cnut's dune" {13} henceforward, in
memory of what he won there. And Ulfkytel and I and the few East
Anglians that we had were with the advance guard, and drove in the
pickets that were between us and the hill. And then we knew that
Cnut meant to stand and fight in the open, and we were glad, for
out of his intrenchments poured his men, and we sent horsemen back
to Eadmund to hurry on the main body of our forces.

They were a mile or two behind us, and we waited impatiently,
watching the Danish host as it neared us, forming into the terrible
half circle as it came. And I remember all of that waiting, for the
day began with such hope, and ended so fearfully for us.

One could not have had a better day on which to fight, for there
was neither sun to dazzle, nor rain to beat in the faces of men who
needed eyes to guard their lives. But it was a gray day with a
pleasant wind that blew in from the sea, and the light was
wonderfully clear and shadowless as before rain, so that one could
see all things over-plainly, as it were. The rounded top of
Ashingdon hill seemed to tower higher than its wont, and close at
hand, beyond the swampy meadows to our left, and I wondered that
Cnut had not chosen that for his camping ground, though maybe it
would have been less well placed for reaching the ships, owing to
some shoaling of water that did not suit them. The tide was nearly
high now, and all the wide stretch of the Crouch river was alive
with the ships that brought over men from the Burnham shore, and
one could see the very wake and the ripple at the bows as they
came.

And when one looked at the Danes, the chiefs who ordered the host
were plain to be seen, and the gay colours of banners and cloaks
and shields were wonderful in the brightness, though at first we
were nearly half a mile from them as we waited. I thought that we
were about equal to them in numbers, and I knew that did we but
fight as at Sherston the day would surely be ours. For when a force
that is hard pressed knows that safety is close behind them there
is an ever-present reason for giving way.

"We can drive this host to the ships, lord earl," I said to
Ulfkytel.

"Aye, surely," he answered. "They know that the ships wait for
them, and so will give back."

Now came Eadmund, and behind him our men marched steadily, and at
his side was Edric Streone. He looked at the Danes, and his face
was bright and confident.

"How shall we fight, lord earl?" he said to Ulfkytel.

"Redwald and I have spoken thereof," the earl answered. "And it
seems to us that Olaf's viking plan is best. Let us fight in a
wedge, and drive the point through that circle and break it in
twain. We of East Anglia will willingly make the point, as we are
on our own ground."

"It is a good plan, but I have not tried it," said Eadmund; and
then Streone spoke.

"The old Saxon line is surely good enough," he said. "What need to
take up with outland plans?"

"It will be good enough if our men fight as at Sherston," Eadmund
answered.

And all the thanes who were gathering round him cried out that they
would surely not fail him, and one could not but listen to the
voice of all the noblest in England who were gathered there, for
Eadmund had all his best with him. It was indeed a levy of all
England.

So we were to fight in line, as Eadmund had given us our places on
the day before, when we neared the battlefield. He himself was in
the centre with his Wessex men, and Edric Streone and his Mercians
were with him. There were some of us who had cried out at that, but
the earl had said proudly that he would make amends for former ill,
and the council had listened to and believed his words.

Ulfkytel was on the left, and there our line was flanked by the
marshes that lie between the long slope where we were to fight and
Ashingdon hill. At least he would have no horsemen upon him from
the side, and that flank was safe from turning. The right wing was
given to the Lindsey men under their own ealdorman, and with them
were the men of the Five Boroughs {14}.

So our line was drawn up, and Eadmund rode out before them and they
cheered, and then he unhelmed, and Bishop Ednoth of Dorchester,
clad in his robes over chain mail, and with a heavy mace at his
saddle bow, rode up beside him, and a monk who was with him brought
forward and raised aloft a golden cross, and at that sign the host
knelt, and the bishop shrived them and blessed them before the
fight, and the sound of the "Amen" they spoke was like a thunder
roll from end to end of the line. And it reached the ears of the
Danes who waited for us, and they broke out into their war
song--the Heysaa--and thereat our men sprang up and shouted thrice,
and then the sullen silence of the Saxon kin settled down on them,
for we are not wont to speak much when work is meant.

Silently we crossed the heath between us and the yelling Danes, and
I rode beside Eadmund in my old place, and my heart was light, and
sword Foe's Bane rattled in the scabbard as if longing to be let
loose. And all the while I kept my eyes on Streone, who was riding
among his Mercians twenty yards away to our right, and presently
behind him I saw Thrand and Guthorm.

I thought that was ill for Streone, but I could not help it now--we
were but a hundred yards from the foe. The first arrow flight
crossed as I saw them, and then Eadmund cried:

"Forward--remember Sherston!"

At that word the front ranks sprang like wolves to meet one
another--and then came the shock of the meeting lines and the howl
and cheer of Dane and Englishman--and under the arrow storm the
spear and axe and sword were at work.

I kept my shield up and covering Eadmund's right side, and watched.
The time for us to take our part had not come yet. And Eadmund
looked on his foes to see what chance might be for a charge that
would break them when arms grew weary.

Many were the brave deeds that I saw done in that little time, as
the first lines fought man to man. And presently I knew that over
against us was Cnut the king, for I saw one who was little more
than a boy, whose helm bore a golden crown. There were several
chiefs round him also, and one was Ulf. But I saw not Godwine, for
he would not fight on that day against his own kin.

There, too, was another chief--he was Eirik the jarl, though I knew
it not then; and he looked ever to our right, as if waiting for
somewhat. And when I saw that I looked also, but there was nought
