There lie the bones and remains of near two thousand bodies, carried by
the dead carts to their grave in that one year.

Fourth, Besides this, there was a piece of ground in Moorfields, by the
going into the street which is now called Old Bethlem, which was
enlarged much, though not wholly taken in, on the same occasion.

N.B. The author of this journal lies buried in that very ground, being
at his own desire, his sister having been buried there a few years
before.

Fifth, Stepney Parish, extending itself from the east part of London to
the north, even to the very edge of Shoreditch churchyard, had a piece
of ground taken in to bury their dead, close to the said churchyard; and
which, for that very reason, was left open, and is since, I suppose,
taken into the same churchyard. And they had also two other burying
places in Spittlefields,--one where since a chapel or tabernacle has
been built for ease to this great parish, and another in Petticoat Lane.

There were no less than five other grounds made use of for the parish of
Stepney at that time; one where now stands the parish church of St.
Paul, Shadwell, and the other where now stands the parish church of St.
John, at Wapping, both which had not the names of parishes at that time,
but were belonging to Stepney Parish.

I could name many more; but these coming within my particular knowledge,
the circumstance, I thought, made it of use to record them. From the
whole, it may be observed that they were obliged in this time of
distress to take in new burying grounds in most of the outparishes for
laying the prodigious numbers of people which died in so short a space
of time; but why care was not taken to keep those places separate from
ordinary uses, that so the bodies might rest undisturbed, that I cannot
answer for, and must confess I think it was wrong. Who were to blame, I
know not.

I should have mentioned that the Quakers[324] had at that time also a
burying ground set apart to their use, and which they still make use of;
and they had also a particular dead cart to fetch their dead from their
houses. And the famous Solomon Eagle, who, as I mentioned before,[325]
had predicted the plague as a judgment, and run naked through the
streets, telling the people that it was come upon them to punish them
for their sins, had his own wife died[326] the very next day of the
plague, and was carried, one of the first, in the Quakers' dead cart to
their new burying ground.

I might have thronged this account with many more remarkable things
which occurred in the time of the infection, and particularly what
passed between the lord mayor and the court, which was then at Oxford,
and what directions were from time to time received from the government
for their conduct on this critical occasion; but really the court
concerned themselves so little, and that little they did was of so small
import, that I do not see it of much moment to mention any part of it
here, except that of appointing a monthly fast in the city, and the
sending the royal charity to the relief of the poor, both which I have
mentioned before.

Great was the reproach thrown upon those physicians who left their
patients during the sickness; and, now they came to town again, nobody
cared to employ them. They were called deserters, and frequently bills
were set up on their doors, and written, "Here is a doctor to be let!"
So that several of those physicians were fain for a while to sit still
and look about them, or at least remove their dwellings and set up in
new places and among new acquaintance. The like was the case with the
clergy, whom the people were indeed very abusive to, writing verses and
scandalous reflections upon them; setting upon the church door, "Here is
a pulpit to be let," or sometimes "to be sold," which was worse.

It was not the least of our misfortunes, that with our infection, when
it ceased, there did not cease the spirit of strife and contention,
slander and reproach, which was really the great troubler of the
nation's peace before. It was said to be the remains of the old
animosities which had so lately involved us all in blood and
disorder;[327] but as the late act of indemnity[328] had lain asleep the
quarrel itself, so the government had recommended family and personal
peace, upon all occasions, to the whole nation.

But it[329] could not be obtained; and particularly after the ceasing
of the plague in London, when any one had seen the condition which the
people had been in, and how they caressed one another at that time,
promised to have more charity for the future, and to raise no more
reproaches,--I say, any one that had seen them then would have thought
they would have come together with another spirit at last. But, I say,
it could not be obtained. The quarrel remained, the Church[330] and the
Presbyterians were incompatible. As soon as the plague was removed, the
dissenting ousted ministers who had supplied the pulpits which were
deserted by the incumbents, retired. They[331] could expect no other but
that they[332] should immediately fall upon them[331] and harass them
with their penal laws; accept their[331] preaching while they[332] were
sick, and persecute them[331] as soon as they[332] were recovered again.
This even we that were of the Church thought was hard, and could by no
means approve of it.

But it was the government, and we could say nothing to hinder it. We
could only say it was not our doing, and we could not answer for it.

On the other hand, the dissenters reproaching those ministers of the
Church with going away, and deserting their charge, abandoning the
people in their danger, and when they had most need of comfort, and the
like,--this we could by no means approve; for all men have not the same
faith and the same courage, and the Scripture commands us to judge the
most favorably, and according to charity.

A plague is a formidable enemy, and is armed with terrors that every man
is not sufficiently fortified to resist, or prepared to stand the shock
against.[333] It is very certain that a great many of the clergy who
were in circumstances to do it withdrew, and fled for the safety of
their lives; but it is true, also, that a great many of them staid, and
many of them fell in the calamity, and in the discharge of their duty.

It is true, some of the dissenting turned-out ministers staid, and
their courage is to be commended and highly valued; but these were not
abundance. It cannot be said that they all staid, and that none retired
into the country, any more than it can be said of the Church clergy that
they all went away. Neither did all those that went away go without
substituting curates[334] and others in their places, to do the offices
needful, and to visit the sick as far as it was practicable. So that,
upon the whole, an allowance of charity might have been made on both
sides, and we should have considered that such a time as this of 1665 is
not to be paralleled in history, and that it is not the stoutest courage
that will always support men in such cases. I had not said this, but had
rather chosen[335] to record the courage and religious zeal of those of
both sides who did hazard themselves for the service of the poor people
in their distress, without remembering that any failed in their duty on
either side; but the want of temper among us has made the contrary to
this necessary: some that staid, not only boasting too much of
themselves, but reviling those that fled, branding them with cowardice,
deserting their flocks, and acting the part of the hireling, and the
like. I recommend it to the charity of all good people to look back and
reflect duly upon the terrors of the time; and whoever does so will see
that it is not an ordinary strength that could support it. It was not
like appearing in the head of an army, or charging a body of horse in
the field; but it was charging death itself on his pale horse.[336] To
stay was indeed to die; and it could be esteemed nothing less,
especially as things appeared at the latter end of August and the
beginning of September, and as there was reason to expect them at that
time; for no man expected, and I dare say believed, that the distemper
would take so sudden a turn as it did, and fall immediately two
thousand in a week, when there was such a prodigious number of people
sick at that time as it was known there was; and then it was that many
shifted[337] away that had staid most of the time before.

Besides, if God gave strength to some more than to others, was it to
boast of their ability to abide the stroke, and upbraid those that had
not the same gift and support, or ought they not rather to have been
humble and thankful if they were rendered more useful than their
brethren?

I think it ought to be recorded to the honor of such men, as well clergy
as physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, magistrates, and officers of
every kind, as also all useful people, who ventured their lives in
discharge of their duty, as most certainly all such as staid did to the
last degree; and several of these kinds did not only venture, but lost
their lives on that sad occasion.

I was once making a list of all such (I mean of all those professions
and employments who thus died, as I call it, in the way of their duty),
but it was impossible for a private man to come at a certainty in the
particulars. I only remember that there died sixteen clergymen, two
aldermen, five physicians, thirteen surgeons, within the city and
liberties, before the beginning of September. But this being, as I said
before, the crisis and extremity of the infection, it can be no complete
list. As to inferior people, I think there died six and forty constables
and headboroughs[338] in the two parishes of Stepney and Whitechapel;
but I could not carry my list on, for when the violent rage of the
distemper, in September, came upon us, it drove us out of all measure.
Men did then no more die by tale[339] and by number: they might put out
a weekly bill, and call them seven or eight thousand, or what they
pleased. It is certain they died by heaps, and were buried by heaps;
that is to say, without account. And if I might believe some people who
were more abroad and more conversant with those things than I (though I
was public enough for one that had no more business to do than I
had),--I say, if we may believe them, there was not many less buried
those first three weeks in September than twenty thousand per week.
However the others aver the truth of it, yet I rather choose to keep to
the public account. Seven or eight thousand per week is enough to make
good all that I have said of the terror of those times; and it is much
to the satisfaction of me that write, as well as those that read, to be
able to say that everything is set down with moderation, and rather
within compass than beyond it.

Upon all these accounts, I say, I could wish, when we were recovered,
our conduct had been more distinguished for charity and kindness, in
remembrance of the past calamity, and not so much in valuing ourselves
upon our boldness in staying; as if all men were cowards that fly from
the hand of God, or that those who stay do not sometimes owe their
courage to their ignorance, and despising the hand of their Maker, which
is a criminal kind of desperation, and not a true courage.

I cannot but leave it upon record, that the civil officers, such as
constables, headboroughs, lord mayor's and sheriff's men, also parish
officers, whose business it was to take charge of the poor, did their
duties, in general, with as much courage as any, and perhaps with more;
because their work was attended with more hazards, and lay more among
the poor, who were more subject to be infected, and in the most pitiful
plight when they were taken with the infection. But then it must be
added, too, that a great number of them died; indeed, it was scarcely
possible it should be otherwise.

I have not said one word here about the physic or preparations that were
ordinarily made use of on this terrible occasion (I mean we that
frequently went abroad up and down the streets, as I did). Much of this
was talked of in the books and bills of our quack doctors, of whom I
have said enough already. It may, however, be added, that the College of
Physicians were daily publishing several preparations, which they had
considered of in the process of their practice; and which, being to be
had in print, I avoid repeating them for that reason.

One thing I could not help observing,--what befell one of the quacks,
who published that he had a most excellent preservative against the
plague, which whoever kept about them should never be infected, or
liable to infection. This man, who, we may reasonably suppose, did not
go abroad without some of this excellent preservative in his pocket, yet
was taken by the distemper, and carried off in two or three days.

I am not of the number of the physic haters or physic despisers (on the
contrary, I have often mentioned the regard I had to the dictates of my
particular friend Dr. Heath); but yet I must acknowledge I made use of
little or nothing, except, as I have observed, to keep a preparation of
strong scent, to have ready in case I met with anything of offensive
smells, or went too near any burying place or dead body.

Neither did I do, what I know some did, keep the spirits high and hot
with cordials and wine, and such things, and which, as I observed, one
learned physician used himself so much to, as that he could not leave
them off when the infection was quite gone, and so became a sot for all
his life after.

I remember my friend the doctor used to say that there was a certain set
of drugs and preparations which were all certainly good and useful in
the case of an infection, out of which or with which physicians might
make an infinite variety of medicines, as the ringers of bells make
several hundred different rounds of music by the changing and order of
sound but in six bells; and that all these preparations shall[340] be
really very good. "Therefore," said he, "I do not wonder that so vast a
throng of medicines is offered in the present calamity, and almost every
physician prescribes or prepares a different thing, as his judgment or
experience guides him; but," says my friend, "let all the prescriptions
of all the physicians in London be examined, and it will be found that
they are all compounded of the same things, with such variations only as
the particular fancy of the doctor leads him to; so that," says he,
"every man, judging a little of his own constitution and manner of his
living, and circumstances of his being infected, may direct his own
medicines out of the ordinary drugs and preparations. Only that," says
he, "some recommend one thing as most sovereign, and some another.
Some," says he, "think that Pill. Ruff., which is called itself the
antipestilential pill, is the best preparation that can be made; others
think that Venice treacle[341] is sufficient of itself to resist the
contagion; and I," says he, "think as both these think, viz., that the
first is good to take beforehand to prevent it, and the last, if
touched, to expel it." According to this opinion, I several times took
Venice treacle, and a sound sweat upon it, and thought myself as well
fortified against the infection as any one could be fortified by the
power of physic.

As for quackery and mountebank, of which the town was so full, I
listened to none of them, and observed often since, with some wonder,
that for two years after the plague I scarcely ever heard one of them
about the town. Some fancied they were all swept away in the infection
to a man, and were for calling it a particular mark of God's vengeance
upon them for leading the poor people into the pit of destruction merely
for the lucre of a little money they got by them; but I cannot go that
length, neither. That abundance of them died is certain (many of them
came within the reach of my own knowledge); but that all of them were
swept off, I much question. I believe, rather, they fled into the
country, and tried their practices upon the people there, who were in
apprehension of the infection before it came among them.

This, however, is certain, not a man of them appeared for a great while
in or about London. There were indeed several doctors who published
bills recommending their several physical preparations for cleansing the
body, as they call it, after the plague, and needful, as they said, for
such people to take who had been visited and had been cured; whereas, I
must own, I believe that it was the opinion of the most eminent
physicians of that time, that the plague was itself a sufficient purge,
and that those who escaped the infection needed no physic to cleanse
their bodies of any other things (the running sores, the tumors, etc.,
which were broken and kept open by the direction of the physicians,
having sufficiently cleansed them); and that all other distempers, and
causes of distempers, were effectually carried off that way. And as the
physicians gave this as their opinion wherever they came, the quacks got
little business.

There were indeed several little hurries which happened after the
decrease of the plague, and which, whether they were contrived to fright
and disorder the people, as some imagined, I cannot say; but sometimes
we were told the plague would return by such a time; and the famous
Solomon Eagle, the naked Quaker I have mentioned, prophesied evil
tidings every day, and several others, telling us that London had not
been sufficiently scourged, and the sorer and severer strokes were yet
behind. Had they stopped there, or had they descended to particulars,
and told us that the city should be the next year destroyed by fire,
then, indeed, when we had seen it come to pass, we should not have been
to blame to have paid more than common respect to their prophetic
spirits (at least, we should have wondered at them, and have been more
serious in our inquiries after the meaning of it, and whence they had
the foreknowledge); but as they generally told us of a relapse into the
plague, we have had no concern since that about them. Yet by those
frequent clamors we were all kept with some kind of apprehensions
constantly upon us; and if any died suddenly, or if the spotted fevers
at any time increased, we were presently alarmed; much more if the
number of the plague increased, for to the end of the year there were
always between two and three hundred[342] of the plague. On any of these
occasions, I say, we were alarmed anew.

Those who remember the city of London before the fire must remember that
there was then no such place as that we now call Newgate Market; but in
the middle of the street, which is now called Blow Bladder Street, and
which had its name from the butchers, who used to kill and dress their
sheep there (and who, it seems, had a custom to blow up their meat with
pipes, to make it look thicker and fatter than it was, and were punished
there for it by the lord mayor),--I say, from the end of the street
towards Newgate there stood two long rows of shambles for the
selling[343] meat.

It was in those shambles that two persons falling down dead as they were
buying meat, gave rise to a rumor that the meat was all infected; which
though it might affright the people, and spoiled the market for two or
three days, yet it appeared plainly afterwards that there was nothing of
truth in the suggestion: but nobody can account for the possession of
fear when it takes hold of the mind. However, it pleased God, by the
continuing of the winter weather, so to restore the health of the city,
that by February following we reckoned the distemper quite ceased, and
then we were not easily frighted again.

There was still a question among the learned, and[344] at first
perplexed the people a little; and that was, in what manner to purge the
