with a hostile squadron, in passing between the islands and the
mainland.

"I should like to have seen the face of the commander of the Genoese
squadron this morning," Matteo said, "when he discovered that four of
his vessels were missing. He can hardly have supposed that they were
lost, for although the wind was strong, it blew nearly dead aft, and
there was nothing of a gale to endanger well-handled ships. I almost
wonder that he did not send back the two fully manned galleys he had
with him, to search for us."

"Perhaps he did," Francis said; "but he would have been a hundred miles
further north by daybreak, and it would have taken him a couple of days
to get back to where we were lying."

No hostile sail was seen during the voyage back to Venice. Francis
remained in command of the little squadron, for the captains, and many
of the superior officers, had been transferred to the galley of the
officer in command of the squadron, and Francis happened to be the only
second officer on board any of the four ships.

Great care was observed when they approached Venice, as, for aught they
knew, Doria's squadron might be blockading the port. The Genoese fleet,
however, was still cruising on the coast of Dalmatia, capturing port
after port of the Venetian possessions there.

The four vessels passed through the channel of the Lido with their
colours flying. When first observed from the watchtower of Venice, they
were supposed to form part of the squadron of Zeno, but as soon as they
cast anchor, and the news spread that they were four of Pisani's
galleys, which had been recaptured from the Genoese, the delight of the
population was immense.

The ships were speedily surrounded by a fleet of boats, containing
relatives and friends of those taken prisoners at the battle of Polo,
and the decks were crowded with persons inquiring after their friends,
or embracing with delight those whom they had, an hour before, believed
to be either dead or immured in the dungeons of Genoa.

One of the first to appear was Polani, who had early received the news
by a swift boat from one of his ships in the port, that the Pluto was
one of the vessels entering the harbour.

"What miracle is this, Francis?" he asked, as he warmly embraced his
young friend.

"Not a miracle at all, Messer Polani. The Genoese fancied that a guard
of fifty men was amply sufficient to keep a hundred and fifty Venetians
captives, and we taught them their mistake."

"It wasn't we," Matteo put in, as he shook hands with his kinsman. "We
had no more idea of escaping than we had of flying. The whole thing was
entirely the work of Francisco here."

"I might have been sure the Genoese would not keep you long,
Francisco," Polani said; "and the girls and I might have spared
ourselves the pain of fretting for you. But how did it all come about?"

"If you will take me to the Piazza in your gondola, I will tell you all
about on the way," Francis replied. "For, absurd as it seems, I am the
senior officer of the squadron, and must, I suppose, report to the
council what has happened."

"Take me, too, kinsman," Matteo said. "I know Francisco so well that I
am quite sure that, of himself, he will never tell the facts of this
affair, and will simply say that we broke out, avoiding all mention of
his share in it, and how it was that under his orders we recaptured the
other ships."

"I think that a very good plan, Matteo; so do you come with us, and you
shall tell me all about it, instead of my hearing it from Francis, and
I will take care the council know the truth of the matter."

"The admiral got safely back, I hope?" Francis asked. "We saw that his
galley, with five others, broke through the Genoese fleet and got
safely away, but of course, we knew not whether the brave admiral was
himself hurt."

"He arrived here safely," Polani replied; "but knowing the Venetians as
you do, you will be scarcely surprised to hear that he has been
sentenced to six months' imprisonment, for losing the battle."

"But that is shameful," Francis exclaimed indignantly. "I heard from
our captain, who was present at the council, that Pisani was opposed to
fighting, and that he was only overruled by the proveditors. It is
shameful. I will go on shore and make my report, and then I will come
back to you, for I swear that not another blow will I strike on behalf
of the republic, as long as Pisani is in prison."

"It is a bad business, my lad," Polani said; "but you know that Pisani,
popular as he is with the people, has few friends among the nobles.
They are jealous of his fame and popularity, and, to say the truth, he
has often irritated them, by his bluntness and his disregard for their
opinion and rank. Consequently, they seized upon his defeat as an
occasion for accusing him, and it was even a question in the council of
taking his life, and he may be considered fortunate in getting off with
the sentence of six months' imprisonment.

"I do not think he will have to remain very long in confinement. We may
expect the Genoese fleet here in a few days, for the Paduan army is
already moving, as we heard last night. No doubt it is going to
cooperate with the fleet. Once the danger presses, the populace will
demand Pisani's release. There have already been demonstrations, and
shouts of 'Viva Pisani!' have been raised in the Piazza.

"At any rate, Francis, let me advise you, most strongly, not to suffer
any expression of your feelings concerning him to escape you before the
council. I need scarcely say it would do no good to the admiral, and
would set the whole of his enemies against you. It is no affair of
yours, if the governors of Venice behave ungratefully to one who
deserves well at their hands, and you have made more than enough
enemies by mingling in my affairs, without drawing upon yourself more
foes, by your championship of Pisani."

"I will, of course, follow your counsel," Francis said; "but I will
certainly serve the state no more, until Pisani is freed."

Several of the councillors were already assembled, on hearing the
strange news that four of the ships, which had been captured by the
Genoese, had entered port. Francis, on announcing his errand, was at
once shown in to them. Polani accompanied him, explaining his presence
to the council by saying:

"I have ventured, signors, to accompany my young friend here, in order
that I may give you a much further detail of the affair in which he has
been engaged, than you are likely to hear from his own lips. I have
just come on shore from his ship, the Pluto, and have heard the story
from my kinsman, Matteo Giustiniani."

"We have surely seen this young gentleman before, Messer Polani," one
of the council said.

"You have, signor," Polani replied. "You may remember that he greatly
distinguished himself at the fight of Antium, was sent home by the
admiral with his despatches, and had the honour of receiving, from you,
the thanks of the republic and the gift of citizenship."

"I remember now," the councillor said; and a murmur of assent from the
others showed that they also recalled the circumstance. "Is he again
the bearer of despatches, from the officer in command of the little
squadron which, as it seems, has just, by some miracle, entered the
port? And how is it that the officer did not present himself in person
before us?"

"The officer has presented himself," Polani said. "Messer Hammond is in
command of the four ships which have just arrived. Not only is he in
command by virtue of senior rank, but it is to him that their recapture
from the Genoese is entirely due."

There was a murmur of incredulity from the circle of councillors, but
Polani went on quietly.

"It may seem well nigh impossible to you, signors, but what I say is
strictly true. If Messer Hammond will first relate to you the broad
facts of the recapture of the ships, I will furnish you with such
details as he may omit."

Francis then briefly related the events which had led to the capture of
the four galleys. He explained that by the death of the captain he, as
second officer, succeeded to the command of the Pluto, and that
afterwards being captured by the Genoese, Signor Parucchi, the sole
other surviving officer, and ten gentlemen belonging to noble families
and serving as volunteers on board the Pluto, were confined in one hold
of that ship on her voyage as a prize to Genoa, the crew being shut up
in the other; that by working at night they had effected a junction
with the crew, and choosing a stormy night, when any noise that might
be made would not be heard on board the ship, they made their way up to
the deck above, through a hole they had cut in the planks, and
overpowered the Genoese almost without resistance; that they had then,
in the darkness, ran alongside another of the ships and captured her
with equal ease; and Parucchi, with a portion of the crew of the Pluto,
and the Venetian prisoners on board that ship, had retaken a third;
while the Pluto had captured a fourth.

"It may seem to you, signors," Francis concluded, "that we might, in
the same way, have recaptured the rest of our ships, and it was a
bitter disappointment to me that we failed to do so; but the storm was
so high, and the sea so rough, that it was only with the greatest
danger and difficulty that ships could lie alongside each other. The
bulwarks of all four vessels were greatly damaged, and the Pluto lost
her foremast while alongside the last ship we captured, and as the
storm was increasing, rather than abating, we were, to our great
chagrin, obliged to let the rest escape, since in striving for more we
might have lost, not only our lives, but the vessels we had taken."

"This is indeed a most notable achievement, Messer Hammond, and the
restoration of four ships and their crews, at the present moment, is of
great importance to the republic, threatened as she is with invasion by
land and sea.

"Now, Messer Polani, if you will give us the full details of which you
spoke, we shall be glad."

Polani then related to the council the full story of the means by which
the crew of the Pluto had gained their liberty, showing how the
recapture was entirely due to the initiative of Francis, and to the
ingenuity with which he overcame all difficulties. He ended by saying:

"My kinsman, Matteo, said that should you doubt whether this account is
not tinged by his friendship and partiality for Messer Hammond, Signor
Parucchi, and all the gentlemen who were confined with them in the
hold, can substantiate the account that he has given. He said that
Parucchi's evidence would be all the more valuable, since he and the
other officers were in the first place much prejudiced against Messer
Hammond, deeming it an indignity that one so young, and a foreigner by
birth, should be appointed to the command over the heads of others,
Venetian born, of good family, and his seniors in age. The
circumstances which I have related to you have, however, completely
altered his opinion, and he is as enthusiastic, with respect to Messer
Hammond's conduct, as are my kinsman and all on board the ship."

"I remember now," one of the council said, "that we had a letter from
the admiral in the spring, and that, when describing how terribly the
crews had been diminished and weakened by the severity of the winter,
he said that the sole exception was the Pluto, whose crew was kept up
to their full strength, and in excellent health, owing entirely to the
care and attention that Messer Hammond, the officer second in command,
had bestowed upon them."

"Thanks, Messer Polani," the president of the council said, "for the
light you have thrown on this matter.

"Messer Hammond, it is difficult to overestimate the services that you
have rendered to the state. We shall, at an early day, decide in what
manner most fitly to reward them, and in the meantime you will remain
in command of the squadron you have brought in."

Francis returned thanks for the promise of the president, but expressed
his desire to resign the command of the squadron at once.

"I am in business," he said, "with Messer Polani, and although, for a
short time, I abandoned commerce in order to sail under Admiral Pisani,
I now, from various reasons, desire, as soon as my successor is
appointed, to return to my work with Signor Polani.

"I desire to recommend warmly to your excellencies Signor Parucchi, who
is, except myself, the sole remaining officer of the Pluto. He seconded
me most admirably in our enterprise, and himself commanded at the
recapture of one of the ships. The gentlemen volunteers also worked
with the greatest energy and spirit. Matteo Giustiniani has been acting
as third officer, and to him also the thanks of the republic are due."

On leaving the ship, Messer Polani had despatched a boat, to carry to
his house the news that Francis had returned; and when they came back
from the palace they found Giulia anxiously expecting them, and a few
minutes later Matteo arrived with his brother Rufino, and Maria. The
latter was far more effusive in her greeting of Francis than Giulia had
been.

"Matteo has been telling us all about it, Francis, and that he, and
everyone else, owed their escape from the dungeons of Genoa entirely to
your cleverness."

"Not so much to his cleverness, Maria," Matteo corrected, "although he
is wonderful in inventing things, but to his energy, determination, and
steadfastness. There was not one of us but regarded a visit to the
dungeons of Genoa as a foregone conclusion, and when Francis spoke of
our recapturing the Pluto, as if it were the easiest and most natural
thing in the world, it was as much as we could do not to laugh in his
face. However, he set about it as quietly and calmly as if he were
carrying on the regular work of a ship. We gradually caught some of his
spirit, and when we began to see that there was a method in his
madness, did our best to carry out his orders."

"It is wonderful," Maria said; "and do you know, Francisco, that when
we first knew you, after you had rescued us from the attack on the
canal, I absolutely thought that, though you were brave and
straightforward and honourable, yet that by the side of our own people
of your age, you were rather stupid, and ever since then I have been
learning how mistaken I was."

Francis laughed.

"I think your estimate of me was correct enough," he said. "You see
people are often stupid one way, and sharp another. Matteo will tell
you I was far behind most of those in the seminary in learning lessons,
and certainly when it came to talking, and bandying jokes, I had no
chance at all. I suppose that every lady I have ever spoken to, when I
have been with you at entertainments, has thought me exceptionally
stupid; and I am sure I am, in most things, only I suppose I have got a
fair share of common sense, and a habit of thinking for myself. There
was no cleverness at all in anything that Matteo is telling you of.

"It was just the same here as it was when I was in that cell near
Tunis. I wanted to get out. I supposed there must be some way out, if I
could but discover it, and so I sat down to think how it was to be
done; and of course, after trying in my mind every possible scheme, I
hit upon the right one. There certainly was nothing clever in that."

"But I have heard nothing about it yet," Giulia said; "and everyone
else seems to know how it was done."

"Matteo, do you tell Giulia," Maria ordered. "I have lots of questions
to ask Francis."

"By the way, Francis," Messer Polani said, "you will be glad to hear
that I have succeeded in getting home your man Giuseppi. He returned
two days ago, and I have no doubt is somewhere below waiting to see
you."

"I will go and see him at once," Francis said, hurrying away. "I am
indeed glad to know that you have rescued him."

Maria laughed, as the door closed behind Francis.

"There, Rufino," she said, turning to him, "you pretend sometimes to be
jealous of Francisco Hammond; and there, you see, just when I have said
I have lots of questions to ask him, and five minutes after my arrival
here to greet him, he races away without a word, directly he hears that
his man Giuseppi has returned."

"And he is quite right, Maria," Matteo said indignantly. "Giuseppi
would give his life for Francisco, and the two have been together every
day for the last six or seven years. I don't doubt the faithful fellow
is crying with joy now. Francisco is quite right, not to keep him
waiting for a minute."

"Perhaps I cried for joy, too, Master Matteo," Maria said.

"I believe I did see tears in your eyes, Maria; but I put them down to
my own account. You would naturally be delighted to know that your
brother-in-law was safe and sound, to say nothing of the fact that the
family would be spared the expense of sending a thousand ducats or so
to ransom him."

"A thousand ducats, Matteo! A thousand soldi would more nearly
represent your value, if the Genoese did but know it. But why don't you
tell Giulia your adventures, as I ordered you?"

"Because Giulia would very much rather hear them from Francisco's lips,
and I have no doubt he will be equally glad to tell her himself, though
certainly he is a bad hand at recounting his own doings. However, he
shall have the pleasure of telling her of it, and I can fill up the
details for her, afterwards."

Two days later, a decree was published by the council stating that, in
consideration of the very great service rendered to the state by
Francisco Hammond, a citizen of Venice, in recapturing four galleys
from the Genoese, the council decreed the settlement upon him, for
life, of a pension of three hundred ducats a year.

"You will not want it, Francisco," Messer Polani said, as he brought in
the news, "for I intend, at the end of these troubles, to take you as a
partner in my business. I told your father that I should do so; and you
have not only proved yourself earnest in business, quick at learning,
and full of resources, but you have vastly added to the debt of
gratitude which first caused me to make the proposition, by again
saving my daughters from falling into the hands of their enemy. I told
your father that I should regard you in the light of a son, and I do so
regard you, and as a son of whom I have every reason to be proud.

"I need no thanks, my lad. I am still, and shall always remain, your
debtor. You have very much more than fulfilled my expectations, and I
shall be glad to place some of the burden of my business upon your
shoulders.

"There is another matter, which I have long had in my mind, but of
which I will not speak just at present.

"Thus, then, the three hundred ducats, which you will receive each year
from the state, may not be needed by you. Still, you are to be
congratulated upon the grant, because being the recipient of a pension,
for distinguished services, will add to your weight and influence in
the city. And so long as you do not need it--and no man can say what
may occur, in the course of years, to hinder the trade of Venice--you
can bestow the sum annually upon the poor of the city, and thus
increase your popularity."

"I shall be happy to do that, signor," Francis said, "although it seems
to me that popularity is of little value in Venice. It has not saved
the man whom, a short time since, the people hailed as their father,
from unmerited disgrace and imprisonment."

"It has not, Francisco, but it has saved his life. You may take my word
for it, that the proposal, absolutely made in the council, for the
execution of Pisani, would have been voted had it not been for fear of
the people; and it may be that you will yet see, that the voice of the
people will bring Pisani from his prison, long before the expiration of
his term of imprisonment. Popularity is not to be despised, for it is a
great power. That power may be abused, as when one, having gained the
ear of the people, leads them astray for his own base ends, and uses
the popularity he has gained to attack, and hurl from power, men less
eloquent and less gifted in the arts of cajoling the people, but more
worthy than himself. But, used rightly, the power of swaying and
influencing the people is a great one, and especially valuable in a
city like Venice, where private enmities and private feuds are carried
to so great an extent. Already your name is in every mouth. Your rescue
of Pisani, when sorely beset by the enemy, has been the theme of talk
in every house; and this feat, which retrieves, to some extent, the
misfortune of Pola, will make your name a household word in Venice."

Immediately after the battle of Pola, the Venetians had entered into
negotiations with Hungary, to endeavour to detach that power from the
league against them. But the demands of King Louis were too extravagant
to be accepted. He demanded the cession of Trieste, the recognition of
the suzerainty of his crown on the part of the present doge, and all
his successors, an annual tribute of one hundred thousand ducats, and
half a million of ready money. This demand was so excessive that, even
in their distress, the Venetians refused to accept it, and hastened on
their preparations for a struggle for life or death.

Fortunately, the Genoese continued for three months, after their
success at Pola, to capture the outlying possessions of Venice, instead
of striking at the capital. Towards the end of July, seventeen Genoese
vessels appeared off Pelestrina, burned a merchant ship lying there,
and spent the day in reconnoitring positions, and in taking soundings
of the shallows and canals off Brondolo. They then sailed away for
Dalmatia. In less than a week six galleys again hove in sight; and
Admiral Giustiniani, who was in supreme command of the forces, issued
out from the Lido, with an equal number of ships, to give them battle.

On his way, however, a black object was seen in the water. As they
neared it, this was seen to be the head of a swimmer. He was soon
picked up, and was found to be a Venetian citizen, named Savadia, who
had been captured by the enemy, but had managed to escape, and was
swimming towards land to warn his countrymen that the whole Genoese
fleet, of forty-seven sail, under Pietro Doria, was close at hand; and
that the six ships in the offing were simply a decoy, to tempt the
Venetians to come out and give battle.

Giustiniani at once returned to port, and scarcely had he done so, than
the whole Genoese fleet made its appearance. They approached the
passage of the Lido; but the respite that had been afforded them had
enabled the Venetians to make their preparations, and the Genoese
found, to their disappointment, that the channels of the Lido and
Malamocco were completely closed up with sunken vessels, palisades, and
chains; and they sailed away to seek another entry through which they
could strike at Venice.

Had the same precautions, that had proved so effective at the Lido and
Malamocco passages, been taken at all the other channels; Venice could
have defied all the efforts of Doria's fleet.

The city is situated on a group of small islands, rising in the midst
of a shallow basin twenty-five miles long and five wide, and separated
from the sea by a long sandbank, formed by the sediment brought down by
the rivers Piave and Adige. Through this sandbank the sea had pierced
