
Notwithstanding the passage of the Reform Bill of 1832 (S582),
political power was still held chiefly by men of property who
distrusted the masses of the people.  They feared that the widespread
distress would culminate in riots, if not in open insurrection.

The Chartist movement (S591) which speedily began (1838) seemed to
justify their apprehension.  But the dreaded revolt never came; the
evils of the times were gradually alleviated and, in some cases,
cured.  Confidence slowly took the place of distrust and fear.  When,
in June (1897), the Queen's "Diamond Jubilee" procession moved from
Buckingham Palace to St. Paul's, and thence through some of the
poorest quarters of London, none of the dense mass that filled the
streets cheered more lustily than those who must always earn their
daily bread by their daily toil.

The explanation of that change was to be found in the progress of good
government, the extension of popular rights, and the advance of
material improvements.  Let us consider these changes in their natural
order.

608. Further Extension of the Right to Vote, 1832-1894.[2]

We have already described the far-reaching effects of the Reform Bill
(S582) of 1832, which, on the one hand, put an end to many "rotten
boroughs," and on the other, granted representation in Parliament to a
number of large towns hitherto without a voice in that body.  Three
years later (1835) came the Municipal Reform Act.  It placed the
government of towns, with the exception of London,[1] in the hands of
the taxpayers who lived in them.

[2] See Summary of Constitutional History in the Appendix, p.xxvi,
S31.
[1] The ancient city of London, or London proper, is a district
covering about a square mile, and was once enclosed in walls; it is
still governed by a lord mayor, court of aldermen, and a common
council elected mainly by members of the "city" companies,
representing the medieval trade guilds (S274).  The metropolis outside
the "city" is governed by the London County Council and a number of
associate bodies, among which are the councils of twenty-eight
metropolitan boroughs.

This radical measure put a stop to the arbitrary and corrupt
management which had existed when the town officers elected themselves
and held their positions for life (S599).  Futhermore, it prevented
parliamentary candidates from buying up the entire municipal vote,--a
thing which frequently happened so long as the towns were under the
absolute control of a few individuals.

A generation passed before the next important step was taken.  Then,
as we have seen, the enactment of the Second Reform Bill (1867) (S600)
doubled the number of voters in England.  The next year an act reduced
the property qualification for the right to vote in Scotland and
Ireland; thus the ballot was largely increased throughout the United
Kingdom.

The Third Reform Act (1884) (S600) granted the right to vote for
members of Parliament to more than two million persons, chiefly to the
farm laborers and other workingmen.  Since that date, whether the
Liberals or the Conservatives[2] have been in power, "the country," as
Professor Gardiner says, "has been under democratic influence."

[2] The Whigs (S479) included two elements, one aristocratic and the
other radical.  After the passage of the Reform Bill of 1832 they took
the name of Liberals; and the Tories (S479), who found their old name
unpopular, adopted that of Conservatives.

But though these acts wrought an immense change by transferring
political power from the hands of the few to the greater part of the
nation, further progress in this direction was destined to come soon.
Originally the government of the shires, or counties, was in the hands
of the people; they gradually lost it, and the wealthy landed
proprietors obtained control.  The Local Government, or County
Councils, Act (1888) restored the power in great measure to those who
had parted with it, by putting the management of county affairs under
the direction of the County Councils elected by the householders of
the counties or shires.  These Councils look after the highways, the
sanitary condition of the towns, the education of children, and the
care of the poor.

Six years later (1894) the principle of self-government was carried
almost to the farthest point by the passage of the Parish Councils
Bill.[1] This measure did for country villages and other small places
what the Local Government Act did for the counties.  It gave back to
the inhabitants of the parishes certain rights which they had once
possessed, but which had gradually come under the control of the
squire, the parson[2], and a few privileged families.

[1] Parish: This name was given originally to a district assigned to a
bishop or priest; at present it generally refers simply to the area
which was formerly contained in such a district.
[2] The squire was the chief landholder in a village or parish; the
parson, the minister of the parish church.

Now every man and woman who has resided in the parish for a
twelvemonth has the right not only to vote for the members of the
Parish Council but to run as candidate for election to that body.  The
village parliament discusses all questions which are of public
interest to the parish.  It is in some respects more democratic even
than a New England town meeting, since it gives women a voice, a vote,
and opportunity to hold office.  Its work supplements that of the
County Councils and of Parliament.

609. Overthrow of the "Spoils System"; the Army; the "Secret Ballot,"
     1870-1872.

Meanwhile reforms not less important had been effected in the
management of the civil service.  The ancient power of the Crown to
give fat pensions to its favorites had been pared down to very modest
proportions, but another great abuse still flourished like an evil
weed in rich soil.

For generations, public offices had been regarded as public plunder,
and the watchword of the politicians was, "Every man for himself, and
the National Treasury for us all." Under this system of pillage the
successful party in an election came down like a flock of vultures
after a battle.  They secured all the "spoils," form petty clerkships
worth 100 pounds a year up to places worth thousands.

About the middle of the last century (1855) an effort was made to
break up this corrupt and corrupting system, but the real work was not
accomplished until 1870.  In that year England threw open the majority
of the positions in the civil service to competitive examination.
Henceforth the poorest day laborer, whether man or woman, might, if
competent, ask for any one of many places which formerly some
influential man or political "boss" reserved as gifts for those who
obeyed his commands.

The next year (1871) the purchase of commissions in the army was
abolished.[1] This established the merit system in the ranks, and now
military honors and military offices are open to all who can earn
them.

[1] Up to 1871 an officer retiring from the army could sell his
commission to any officer next below him in rank who had the money to
buy the position; whereas under the present system the vacancy would
necessarily fall to senior officers in the line of promotion.  In the
year following this salutary change the entire British army was
reorganized.

The Registration Act of 1843 required every voter to have his name and
residence recorded on a public list.  This did away with election
frauds to a large extent.  It was supplemented in 1872 by the
introduction of the "secret ballot" (S591).  This put an end to the
intimidation of voters and to the free fights and riots which had so
frequently made the polls a political pandemonium.  The Bribery Act of
1883 was another important measure which did much toward stopping the
wholesale purchase of votes by wealthy candidates or by powerful
corporations.

610. Reforms in Law Procedures.

During Queen Victoria's reign great changes for the better were
effected in simplifying the laws and the administration of justice.
When she came to the throne the Parliamentary Statutes at Large filled
fifty-five huge folio volumes, and the Common Law, as contained in
judicial decisions from the time of Edward II (1307), filled about
twelve hundred more.  The work of examining, digesting, and
consolidating this enormous mass of legislative and legal lore was
taken in hand (1863) and has been slowly progressing ever since.

The Judicature Acts (1873, 1877) united the chief courts in a single
High Court of Justice.  This reform did away with much confusion and
expense.  But the most striking changes for the better were those made
in the Court of Chancery (S147) and the criminal courts.

In 1825 the property belonging to suitors in the former court amounted
to nearly forty millions of pounds.[1] The simplest case might require
a dozen years for its settlement, while difficult ones consumed a
lifetime, or more, and were handed down from father to son,--a legacy
of baffled hopes, of increasing expense, of mental suffering worse
than that of hereditary disease.

[1] See Walpole's "History of England," Vol. III.

Much has been done to remedy these evils, which Dickens set forth with
such power in his novel of "Bleak House."  At one time the prospect of
reform seemed so utterly hopeless that it was customary for a prize
fighter, when he had got his opponent's neck twisted under his arm,
and held him absolutely helpless, to declare that he had his head "in
chancery"!

611. Reforms in Criminal Courts and in the Treatment of the Insane.

In criminal courts an equal reform was effected, and men accused of
burglary and murder are now allowed to have counsel to defend them,
and the right of appeal is secured; whereas, up to the era of
Victoria, they were obliged to plead their own cases as best they
might against skilled public prosecutors, who used every resource
known to the law to convict them.

Great changes for the better have also taken place in the treatment of
the insane.  Until near the close of the eighteenth century this
unfortunate class was quite generally regarded as possessed by demons,
and dealt with accordingly.  William Tuke, a member of the Society of
Friends, inaugurated a better system (1792); but the old method
continued for many years longer.  In fact, we have the highest
authority for saying that down to a pretty late period in the
nineteenth century the inmates of many asylums were worse off than the
most desperate criminals.

They were shut up in dark, and often filthy, cells, where "they were
chained to the wall, flogged, starved, and not infrequently
killed."[2] Since then, mechanical restraints have, as a rule, been
abolished, and the patients are generally treated with the care and
kindness which their condition demands.

[2] Encyclopaedia Britannica (10th and 11th editions) under
"Insanity."

612. Progress in the Education of the Masses.

We have seen that since 1837 the advance in popular education equaled
that made in the extension of suffrage and in civil service reform.
When Victoria began her reign a very large proportion of the children
of the poor were growing up in a stat bordering on barbarism.  Many of
them knew little more of books or schools than the young Hottentots in
Africa.

The marriage register shows that as late as 1840 forty per cent of the
Queen's adult subjects could not write their names in the book; by the
close of her reign (1901) the number who had to "make their mark" in
that interesting volume was only about one in ten.  This proves, as
Lord Brougham said, that "the schoolmaster" has been "abroad" in the
land.

The national system of education began, as we have already seen, in
1870 (S602).  Later, the Assisted Education Act (1891) made provision
for those who had not means to pay even a few pence a week for
instruction.  That law practically put the key of knowledge within
reach of every child in England.

613. Religious Toleration in the Universities; Payment of Church Rates
     abolished.

The universities felt the new impulse.  The abolition of religious
tests for degrees at Oxford and Cambridge (1871) threw open the doors
of those venerable seats of learning to students of every faith.
Since then colleges for women have been established at Oxford and in
the vicinity of Cambridge, and the "university-extension"
examinations, with "college settlements" in London and other large
cities, have long been doing excellent work.

The religious toleration granted in the universities was in accord
with the general movement of the age.  It wil be remembered that the
Catholics were readmitted to sit in Parliament (S573) late in the
reign of George IV (1829), and that under Victoria the Jews were
admitted (1858) to the same right (S599).  Finally Mr. Bradlaugh got
his Oaths Bill passed (1888), and so opened PArliament to persons not
only of all religious beliefs but of none.

In the meantime the compulsory payment of rates for the support of the
Church of England had been abolished (1868) (S601); and the next year
(1869) was made memorable by the just and generous act by which
Mr. Gladstone disestablished the Irish branch of the English Church
(S601).

614. Transportation and Communication.

When the Queen ascended the throne (1837), the locomotive (S584) was
threatening to supersede the stagecoach; but the progerss of steam as
a motor power on land had not been rapid, and England then had less
than 200 miles of railway open;[1] but before the end of her reign
there were nearly 22,000 miles in operation, and there are now
24,000.  At first, the passenger accommodations were limited.  Those
who could indulge in such luxuries sometimes preferred to travel in
their own private carriages placed on platform cars for
transportation.  For those who took first-class tickets there were
excellent and roomy compartments at very high prices.  The second
class fared tolerably well on uncushioned seats, but the unfortunate
third class were crowded like cattle into open trucks, without seats,
and with no roofs to keep the rain out.  But time remedied this.  Long
before the Queen celebrated her first Jubilee (S607) the workingman
could fly through the country at the rate of from thirty to fifty
miles an hour, for a penny a mile, and could have all the comforts
that a reasonable being should ask for.

[1] A part of what is now the London and Northwestern Railway.

Cheap postage (S590) came in (1840) with the extension of railways,
and in a few years the amount of mail carried increased enormously.
Every letter, for the first time, carried on it a stamp bearing a
portrait of the young Queen, and in this way the English people came
to know her better than they had ever known any preceding sovereign.
The London papers now reached the country by train.

The Telegraph began to come into use in January, 1845, between the
railway station at Paddington, a western district of London, and
Slough, near Windsor.  The government eventually purchased all the
lines, and reduced the charge on a despatch of twelve words to
sixpence to any part of the United Kingdom.  The Telephone followed
(1876), and then Wireless Telegraphy (1899).

615. Light in Dark Places; Photography; the New Surgery (1834-1895).

The invention of the friction match, 1834 (S584), the abolition of the
tax on windows (1851) (S595), with the introduction of American
petroleum, speedily dispelled the almost subterraneous gloom of the
laborer's cottage.  Meanwhile photography, which began to be used in
1839, revealed the astonishing fact that the sun is always ready not
only to make a picture but to take one, and that nothing is so humble
as to be beneath his notice.

News came across the Atlantic from Boston, 1846, that Dr. Morton had
rendered surgery painless by the use of ether.  Before a year passed
the English hospitals were employing it.  Sir James Y. Simpson of
Edinburgh introduced chloroform (1847).  These two agents have
abolished the terror of the surgeon's knife, and have lengthened life
by making it possible to perform a class of operations which formerly
very few patients had been able to bear.

A score of years later Sir Joseph Lister called attention to the
important results obtained by antiseptic methods in surgery; next came
(1895) the introduction from Germany of the marvelous X ray, by whose
help the operator can photograph and locate a bullet or other foreign
substance which he is endeavoring to extract.  Together, these
discoveries have saved multitudes of lives.

616. Progress of the Laboring Classes; Free Trade, 1846.

At the date of the Queen's accession a number of laws existed
restricting the free action of workingmen.  Only three years before
Victoria's coronation six poor agricultural laborers in Dorsetshire
were transported (1834) to penal servitude at Botany Bay, Australia,
for seven years, for peacefully combining to secure an increase of
their wages, which at that time were only six shilling a week.  In
fact, the so-called "Conspiracy Laws," which made Labor Unions liable
to prosecution as unlawful, if not actually criminal organizations,
were not wholly repealed until after the opening of the twentieth
century.

Meanwhile Parliament passed the Trade Union Acts, in 1871 and 1876,
which recognized the right of workingmen to form associations to
protect their interests by the use of all measures not forbidden by
the Common Law.[1] In 1906 the persistent political pressure of
organized labor induced a Liberal Cabinet (of which Sir Henry
Campbell-Bannerman was Prime Minister) and the invariably Conservative
House of Lords to pass a still more important act.  That measure
exempted Trade Unions from liability to pay damages for a certain
class of injuries which they might commit in carrying on a strike.[2]
During the above period of more than thirty years the unions have
gained very largely in numbers and in financial as well as political
strength.  On the other hand they now have to contend with the radical
Socialists who are seeking to convert England into a republic in which
the government would carry on all industries and would prohibit
private individuals from conducting any business whatever.

[1] One result of the organization of Trades or Labor Unions has been
the shortening of the hours of labor.  In 1894 the Government
established an eight-hour day for workingmen in dockyards and in
ordnance factories.
[2] The Trade Disputes Act of 1906.  This forbids any suit for tort
against a Trade Union.  See A. L. Lowell's "The Government of
England," II, 534; and S. Gompers in _The Outlook_ for February, 1911,
p. 269.

The unions will accomplish more still if they succeed in teaching
their members to study the condition of industry in England, to
respect the action of those workers who do not join associations, and
to see clearly that "if men have a right to combine," they must also
"have an equal right to refuse to combine."

In 1837 the English Corn Laws (S592) virtually shut out the
importation of grain from foreign countries.  The population had
outgroiwn its food supply, and bread was so dear that even the
agricultural laborer cried out.   "I be protected," said he, "but I be
starving." The long and bitter fight against the Corn Laws resulted
not only in their gradual abolition, 1846, but in the opening of
English ports to the products and manufactures of the world.  With the
exception of tobacco, wines, spirits, and a few other articles, all
imports enter the kingdom free.

But though Great Britain carries out the theory that it is better to
make things cheap for the sake of those who buy them, than it is to
make them dear for the sake of those who produce them, yet all of the
great self-governing English colonies impose protective duties[1] even
against British products (S625).  One of the interesting questions
suggested by the Queen's "Diamond Jubilee" (1897) (S607) was whether
England's children in Australia, New Zealand, and Canada would take
any steps toward forming a commercial fre-etrade union with the mother
country.  More than ten years later that point still remained under
discussion (S625).

[1] Except in certain cases, where the colonies, e.g. Canada, grant
preferential duties, or practical free trade, in certain articles
exported to the British Isles.

617. The Small Agricultural Holdings Act; the Agricultural Outlook.

Through the influence of the greatly increased popular vote, which
resulted from the Third Reform Act (S600), the farm laborers made
themselves felt in the House of Commons.  They secured the passage of
the Small Agricultural Holdings Act (1892).  This gave those who
worked on the land the privilege of purchasing from one to fifty
acres, or of taking it on lease if they preferred.[2] But,
notwithstanding the relief granted by this measure, the agricultural
problem is to-day one of the most serious England has to solve.  Just
as New England now depends in large measure on the West for its food
supply, so the British Isles depend in great measure on America for
breadstuffs.  Thousands of acres of fertile soil have gone out of
cultivation in the eastern half of the island, mainly because the
farmers cannot compete with foreign wheat.

[2] The Small Agricultural Holdings Act enables the County Council
(S600) to acquire, by voluntary arrangement, suitable land for the
purpose of reletting or reselling it to agricultural laborers and men
of small means.  Under certain safeguards the Council may advance up
to three fourths of the purchase money.

The Royal Agricultural Commission, in a report made a number of years
ago (1897), could suggest no remedy, and believed matters must grow
worse.  A leading English journal,[3] in commenting on the report,
said, "The sad and sober fact is that the English farmer's occupation
is gone, or nearly gone, never to return."

[3] The Bristol _Times and Mirror_, August 5, 1897.

The continued agricultural depression ruined many tillers of the soil,
and drove the rural population more and more into the already
overcrowded towns.  There they bid against the laboring men for work,
and so reduced wages to the lowest point.  If they failed to get work,
they became an added burden on the poor rates, and taxes rose
accordingly.

Should no remedy be found, and should land in England continue to go
out of cultivation, it is difficult to see how the majority of
proprietors can resist the temptation to break up and sell their
estates.  The tendency of an important act of Parliament (1894) is
believed by many to work in the same direction.[1]  It imposes an
inheritance tax on the heirs to landed property, which they find it
hard to meet, especially when their tenants have abandoned their
farms rather than try to pay the rent.

[1] The Consolidated Death Duties Act.

To-day a few thousand wealthy families hold the title deeds to a large
part of the soil on which more than forty millions live.  Generally
speaking, the rent they demand does not seem to be excessive.[2] It is
an open question whether England would be the gainer if, as in France,
the land should be cut up into small holdings, worked by men without
capital, and hence without power to make improvements.

[2] This is the opinion of the Royal Commission; but Gibbins's
"Industry in England" (1896), p. 441, takes the opposite view.

618. The Colonial Expansion of England.

Meanwhile, whether from an economic point of view England is gaining
or losing at home, there can be no question as to her colonial
expansion.  A glance at the accompanying maps of the world (see double
map opposite and map facing p. 420) in 1837 and in 1911 shows the
marvelous territorial growth of the British Empire.

When Victoria was crowned it had an area of less than three million
square miles; to-day it has over eleven million, or more than one
fifth of the entire land surface of the globe.  England added to her
dominions, on the average, more than one hundred and forty-five
thousand square miles of territory every year of Victoria's reign.

Canada's wonderful growth in population and wealth is but one
example.  Australia began its career (1837) as a penal colony with a
few shiploads of convicts; now it is a prosperous, powerful, and loyal
patr of the Empire (S545).  Later than the middle of the nineteenth
century, New Zealand was a mission field where cannibalism still
existed (1857); now it is one of the leaders in English civilization.

Again, when Victoria came to the throne (1837) the greater part of
Africa was simply a geographical expression; the coast had been
explored, but scarcely anything was known of the country back of it.
Through the efforts of Livingstone and those who followed him (1840-
1890), the interior was explored and the source of the Nile was
discovered (1863).  Stanley undertook the great work on the Congo
River and the "dark continent" ceased to be dark.  Trade was opened
with the interior, and the discovery of diamond mines and gold mines
in South Africa (1867, 1884) stimulated emigration.  Railways have
been pushed forward in many directions (S622), new markets are
springing up, and Africa, once the puzzle of the world, seems destined
to become one of the great fields which the Anglo-Saxon race is
determined to control, if not to possess.

On the other hand, the British West Indies have of late years greatly
declined from their former prosperity.  The English demand for cheap
sugar has encouraged the importation of beet-root sugar from Germany
and France.  This has reduced the market for cane sugar to so low a
point that there has been but little, if any, profit in raising it in
the West Indies;[1] but fruit is a success.

[1] See Brooks Adams's "America's Economic Supremacy."

619. England's Change of Feeling toward her Colonies.

One of the most striking features of the "Diamond Jubilee" celebration
(S607) was the prominence given to the Colonial Prime Ministers.
There was a time, indeed, when the men who governed England regarded
Canada and Australia as "a source of weakness," and the Colonial
Office in London knew so little of the latter country that it made
ridiculous blunders in attempting to address official despatches to
Melbourne, Australia.[2] Even as late as the middle of the last
century Disraeli, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, wrote to Lord
Malmesbury in regard to the Newfoundland fisheries, "These wretched
colonies will all be independent, too, in a few years, and are a
millstone around our necks."

[2] See Traill's "Social England," VI, 684.

Twenty years afterwards Disraeli, later Lord Beaconsfield, declared
that one of the great objects he and his party had in view was to
uphold the British Empire and to do everything to maintain its unity.
That feeling has steadily gained in power and was never stronger than
it is to-day.  Canada, Australia, and the other governing colonies
(S625) have since responded by actions as well as words, and "Imperial
Federation" has become something more than a high-sounding phrase
(SS625, 626).

620. The Condition of Ireland; International Arbitration.

But to make such federation harmonious and complete, the support of
Ireland must be obtained.  That country is the only member of the
United Kingdom whose representatives in Parliament refused, as a rule,
to take part in the celebration of the Queen's reign.  They felt that
their island had never been placed on a true equality with its
stronger and more prosperous neighbor.  In fact, the Royal Commission,
appointed to inquire into the relative taxation of England and
Ireland, reported (1897) nearly unanimously that "for a great many
years Ireland had paid annually more than 2,000,000 pounds beyond her
just proportion of taxation."[1] It has been estimated that the total
excess obtained during the Queen's reign amounted to nearly
100,000,000 pounds.

[1] McCarthy's "History of Our Own Times," V, 487.

Mr. Gladstone, the Liberal Prime Minister (1893) made a vigorous
effort to secure "Home Rule" for Ireland.  His bill granting that
country an independent Parliament passed the House of Commons by a
very large majority, but was utterly defeated in the House of Lords.
Five years later (1898) Lord Salisbury, the Conservative Prime
Minister, passed a bill which, though it did not give Ireland "Home
Rule," did give it local self-government on the same popular
foundation on which it rests in England (S608) and Scotland.
Mr. Bryce, the British Ambassador at Washington, recently said (1911)
that he was convinced that the condition of the people of Ireland had
greatly improved and was "still advancing," and that "before long
nearly all the land wouyld belong to the cultivators" (S605).

The recognition of the principle of international arbitration by
England in the Alabama case (S598), in the Bering Sea Seal Fisheries
dispute (1893), in the Venezuela boundary controversy (1896), and in
the Newfoundland Fisheries case (1910) proved that the English people
saw that the victories of peace are worth as much to a nation as the
victories of war.  The Hague Peace Conference Treaty, ratified by
Great Britain with the United States and the leading nations of Europe
and the Far East (1899), provided for the establishment of a permanent
Court of Arbitration at The Hague between all of the great powers
which signed it.  All appeals to it, however, are entirely voluntary.

Ten years earlier, a proposition to establish such a court for the
purpose of strengthening the cause of international peace would have
been looked upon as "a splendid but delusive dream."  To-day many of
the ablest men on both sides of the Atlantic believe that the time is
not far off when England and America will agree to settle by
arbitration all questions which diplomacy cannot deal with, which may
arise between them.  Sir Edward Grey, Secretary for Foreign Affairs in
Mr. Asquith's Liberal Cabinet, fears that the continued expenditure on
larger and larger armaments "will end in international revolution."
On the other hand, those who are constantly advocating the building of
more and bigger battleships admit that the Peace Party presents strong
arguments in support of its views, and that "the war against war" is
making progress.

621. Death of Gladstone; the Cabot Tower; Centennial of the First
     Savings Bank, 1899.

Meanwhile, Mr. Gladstone, the great Liberal leader, died, full of
years and honors, at his residence, Hawarden Castle, in North Wales
(1898).  The "Grand Old Man"--as his friends delighted to call him--
was buried in that Abbey at Westminster which holds so much of
England's most precious dust.  His grave is not far from the memorial
to Lord Beaconsfield, the eminent Conservative leader, who was his
lifelong rival and political opponent.

In the autumn (1898) the Cabot monument was opened at Bristol.  It is
a commanding tower, overlooking the ancient city and port from which
John Cabot (S335) sailed in the spring of 1497.  The monument
commemorates that explorer's discovery of the mainland of the New
World.  An inscription on the face of the tower expresses "the earnest
hope that Peace and Friendship may ever continue between the kindred
peoples" of England and America.

In May of the next year, 1899, the one hundredth anniversary of the
establishment of savings banks in Great Britain was celebrated.  Near
the closing year of the eighteenth century, 1799, Reverend Joseph
Smith, Vicar of Wendover in Buckinghamshire, invited the laborers of
his parish to deposit their savings with him on interest.  "Upon the
first day of the week," said he, quoting St. Paul's injuction, "let
every one of you lay by him in store."[1] He offered to receive sums
as small as twopence.  Before the end of the year he had sixty
depositors.  Eventually the government took up the scheme and
established the present system of national postal savings banks.

[1] The quotation is from I Corinthians xvi, 2.

They have done and are doing incalculable good.  At present there are
over eleven million depositors in the United Kingdom.  Most of them
belong to the wage-earning class, and they hold more than 212,000,000
pounds.  In this case certainly the grain of mustard seed, sown a few
generations ago, has produced a mighty harvest.

622. England in Egypt; Progress in Africa.

While busy at home, the English had been busy outside of their
island.  Five years after the opening of the Suez Canal (1869), Lord
Beaconsfield, then the Conservative Prime Minister, bought nearly half
of the canal property from the Governor of Egypt.  Since then England
has kept her hand on the country of the Pharaohs and the pyramids, and
kept it there greatly to the advantage of the laboring class.

About ten years later (1881), Arabi Pasha, an ambitious colonel in the
native army, raised the cry, "Down with all foreigners--Egypt for the
Egyptians!" Lord Wolseley defeated Arabi's forces, and the colonel was
banished from the country.

Two years afterwards (1883) a still more formidable rebellion broke
out in the Sudan,--a province held by Egypt.  (See map facing p. 428.)
The leader of the insurrection styled himself the Mahdi, or great
Mohammedan Prophet.  Then (1884) Gladstone sent General Gordon to
withdraw the Egyptian troops from Khartoum, the capital of the Sudan.
The Mahdi's forces shut up the heroic soldier in that city, and before
help could reach him, he and all his Egyptian troops were massacred.
No braver or truer man ever died at the post of duty, for in him was
fulfilled Wordsworth's eloquent tribute to the "Happy Warrior."[1]

[1] See Wordsworth's poems "The Happy Warrior."

Many years later, Lord Kitchener advanced against the new Mahdi, and
at Omdurman his terrible machine guns scattered the fanatical
Dervishes, or Mohammedan monks, like chaff before the whirlwind.  The
next autumn (1899) the British overtook the fugitive leader of the
Dervishes and annihilated his army.

Since then British enterprise, British capital, and American inventive
skill have transformed Egypt.  The completion of the great dam across
the Nile, at Assouan (1902), regulates the water supply for lower
Egypt.  The creation of this enormous reservoir promises to make the
Nile valley one of the richest cotton-producing regions in the world.

The "Cape to Cairo" railway, which is more than half finished, is
another British undertaking of immense importance.  (See map
opposite.)  When ready for traffic, through its whole length of nearly
six thousand miles, besides its branch lines, it will open all Eastern
Africa, from the Cape of Good Hope to the Mediterranean, to the spread
of commerce and civilization.

623. The Boers; the Boer War, 1899; Death of Queen Victoria (1901).

The history of the British in South Africa has been even more tragic
than their progress in Egypt (S622).

In the middle of the seventeenth century (1652) the Dutch took
possession of Cape Colony.  (See map opposite.)  Many Boers, or Dutch
farmers, and cattle raisers emigrated to that far distant land.  There
they were joined by Huguenots, or French Protestants, who had been
driven out of France.  All of them became slaveholders.  Early in the
nineteenth century (1814) England purchased the Cape from Holland.
Twenty years later the English Parliament bought all the negroes held
by the Boers and set them free.

Eight thousand Boers, disgusted with the loss of their slaves and with
the small price they had received for them, left the Cape (1836) and
pushed far northward into the wilderness.  Crossing the Orange River,
they founded the "Orange Free State." Another party of Boers, going
still further north, crossed the Vaal River (a tributary of the
Orange) and set up the Transvaal, or "South African Republic," on what
was practically a slaveholding foundation.  Later (1852), England, by
a treaty known as the Sand River Convention, virtually recognized the
independence of the settlers in the Transvaal, and two years
afterwards made a still more explicit recognition of the independence
of the Orange Free State.

The Zulus and other fierce native tribes bordering on the Transvaal
hated the Boers and threatened to "eat them up." Later (1877), England
thought it for her interest, and for that of the Boers as well, to
annex the Transvaal.  The English Governor did not grant the Boers the
measure of political liberty which he had promised; this led to a
revolt, and a small body of English soldiers was beaten at Majuba Hill
(1881).

Mr. Gladstone, the Liberal Prime Minister, did not think that the
conquest of the Transvaal, supposing it to be justifiable, would pay
for its cost, and he accordingly made a treaty with the people of that
country (1881).  Lord Beaconsfield thought this policy a serious
mistake, and that it would lead to trouble later on.  He said, "We
have failed to whip the boy, and we shall have to fight the man." The
Gladstone Treaty acknowledged the right of the Boers to govern
themselves, but subject to English control.  Three years later (1884)
that treaty was modified.  The Boers declared that the English then
gave up all control over them, except with regard to the power to make
treaties which might conflict with the interests of Great Britain.
But this statement the English Government emphatically denied.[1]

[1] The preamble of the Convention or agreement made between England
and the Boers in 1881 at Pretoria, the capital of the Transvaal,
secured to the Boers "complete self-government, subject to the
suzerainty of her Majesty," Queen Victoria.  In the Convention of
1884, made at London, the word "suzerainty" was dropped; but
Mr. Chamberlain, Colonial Secretary of Great Britain, contended that
it was implied or understood.  This interpretation of the agreement
President Kruger of the South African or Boer Republic absolutely
rejected.

The discovery of diamond fields in Cape Colony (1867) and of the
richest gold mines in the world (1884) in the Transvaal stimulated a
great emigration of English to South Africa.  In a few years the
"Outlanders"--as the Boers called all foreigners--outnumbered the
Boers themselves.  The "Outlanders," who worked the gold mines and
paid nearly all the taxes, complained that the laws made by the Boers
were unjust and oppressive.  They demanded the right to vote.  The
Boers, on the other hand, refused to give them that right, except
under arduous restrictions, lest the foreigners should get the upper
hand in the Transvaal Republic, and then manage it to suit themselves.

Things went on from bad to worse.  At length (1895) a prominent
Englishman of Cape Colony, Dr. Jameson, armed a small body of
"Outlanders," who undertook to get by force what they could not get by
persuasion.  The Boers captured the Revolutionists and compelled some
