biscuits and other provisions, there would then be sufficient to carry me
and my crew from Espanola to Spain. I have already said that there are
not twenty-eight leagues between Jamaica and Espanola; and I should not
have gone there, even if the ships had been in a fit condition for so
doing, because your Highnesses ordered me not to land there. God knows if
this command has proved of any service. I send this letter by means of
and by the hands of Indians; it will be a miracle if it reaches its
destination.

This is the account I have to give of my voyage. The men who accompanied
me were a hundred and fifty in number, among whom were many calculated
for pilots and good sailors, but none of them can explain whither I went
nor whence I came;[407-1] the reason is very simple: I started from a
point above the port of Brazil[407-2] in Espanola. The storm prevented me
from following my intended route, for I was obliged to go wherever the
wind drove me; at the same time I fell very sick, and there was no one
who had navigated in these parts before. However, after some days, the
wind and sea became tranquil, and the storm was succeeded by a calm, but
accompanied with rapid currents. I put into harbor at an island called
Isla de las Pozas, and then steered for mainland;[408-1] but it is
impossible to give a correct account of all our movements, because I was
carried away by the current so many days without seeing land. I
ascertained, however, by the compass and by observation, that I moved
parallel with the coast of the mainland. No one could tell under what
part of the heavens we were, and when I set out from there to come to the
island of Espanola, the pilots thought we had come to the island of St.
John, whereas it was the land of Mango, four hundred leagues to the
westward of where they said.[408-2] Let them answer and say if they know
where Veragua is situated. I assert that they can give no other account
than that they went to lands, where there was an abundance of gold, and
this they can certify surely enough; but they do not know the way to
return thither for such a purpose; they would be obliged to go on a
voyage of discovery as much as if they had never been there before.

There is a mode of reckoning derived from astronomy which is sure and
safe, and a sufficient guide to any one who understands it. This
resembles a prophetic vision.[408-3] The Indies ships[408-4] do not sail
except with the wind abaft, but this is not because they are badly built
or clumsy, but because the strong currents in those parts, together with
the wind, render it impossible to sail with the bowline,[408-5] for in
one day they would lose as much way as they might have made in seven; for
the same reason I could make no use of caravels, even though they were
Portuguese lateens.[409-1] This is the cause that they do not sail unless
with a regular breeze, and they will sometimes stay in harbor waiting for
this seven or eight months at a time; nor is this anything wonderful, for
the same very often occurs in Spain.

The nation of which Pope Pius II. describes the situation and
characteristics has now been found,[409-2] excepting the horses with the
saddles and poitrels and bridles of gold; but this is not to be wondered
at, for the lands on the sea-coast are only inhabited by fishermen, and
moreover I made no stay there, because I was in haste to proceed on my
voyage. In Cariay[409-3] and the neighboring country there are great
enchanters of a very fearful character. They would have given the world
to prevent my remaining there an hour. When I arrived they sent me
immediately two girls very showily dressed; the eldest could not be more
than eleven years of age and the other seven, and both exhibited so much
immodesty, that more could not be expected from public women; they
carried concealed about them a magic powder; when they came I gave them
some articles to dress themselves out with, and directly sent them back
to the shore.[409-4] I saw here, built on a mountain, a sepulchre as
large as a house, and elaborately sculptured; the body lay uncovered and
embalmed in it. They also spoke to me of other very excellent works of
art.[410-1] There are many species of animals both small and large, and
very different from those of our country. I had a present of two pigs,
and an Irish dog was afraid to face them. A cross-bowman had wounded an
animal like a monkey,[410-2] except that it was larger, and had a face
like a man's; the arrow had pierced it from the neck to the tail, and
since it was fierce he was obliged to cut off an arm and a leg; the pig
bristled up on seeing it and tried to get away. I, when I saw this,
ordered the _begare_[410-3] as it is called to be thrown to the pig where
he was, and though the animal was nearly dead, and the arrow had passed
quite through his body, yet he threw his tail round the snout of the
boar, and then holding him firmly, seized him by the nape of the neck
with his remaining hand, as if he were engaged with an enemy. This action
was so novel and so extraordinary, that I have thought it worth while to
describe it here. There is a great variety of animals here, but they all
die of _barra_.[410-4] I saw some very large fowls (the feathers of which
resemble wool),[410-5] lions, stags, fallow-deer and birds.

When we were so harassed with our troubles at sea, some of our men
imagined that we were under the influence of sorcery, and even to this
day entertain the same notion. Some of the people whom I discovered eat
men, as was evidenced by the brutality of their countenances. They say
that there are great mines of copper in the country, of which they make
hatchets[411-1] and other elaborate articles both cast and soldered; they
also make of it forges, with all the apparatus of the goldsmith, and
crucibles. The inhabitants go clothed; and in that province I saw some
large sheets of cotton very elaborately and cleverly worked, and others
very delicately painted in colors.[411-2] They tell me that more inland
towards Cathay they have them interwoven with gold. For want of an
interpreter we were able to learn but very little respecting these
countries, or what they contain. Although the country is very thickly
peopled, yet each nation has a very different language; indeed so much
so, that they can no more understand each other than we understand the
Arabs. I think, however, that this applies to the barbarians on the
sea-coast, and not to the people who live more inland. When I discovered
the Indies, I said that they composed the richest lordship in the world;
I spoke of gold and pearls and precious stones, of spices and the traffic
that might be carried on in them; and because all these things were not
forthcoming at once I was abused. This punishment causes me to refrain
from relating anything but what the natives tell me. One thing I can
venture upon stating, because there are so many witnesses of it, viz.,
that in this land of Veragua I saw more signs of gold in the first two
days than I saw in Espanola during fours years,[TN-10] and that there is
not a more fertile or better cultivated country in all the world, nor
one whose inhabitants are more timid; added to which there is a good
harbor, a beautiful river, and the whole place is capable of being
easily put into a state of defence. All this tends to the security of
the Christians and the permanency of their sovereignty, while it
affords the hope of great increase and honor to the Christian religion;
moreover the road hither will be as short as that to Espanola, because
there is a certainty of a fair wind for the passage. Your Highnesses are
as much lords of this country as of Xerez or Toledo; your ships if they
should go there, go to your own house. From there they will take gold;
in other lands to have what there is in them, they will have to take it
by force or retire empty-handed, and on the land they will have to trust
their persons in the hands of a savage.[412-1]

Of the other [matter] that I refrain from saying, I have already said why
I kept silent. I do not speak so, neither [do I say] that I make a
threefold affirmation in all that I have ever said or written nor that I
am at the source.[412-2] The Genoese, Venetians and all other nations
that possess pearls, precious stones, and other articles of value, take
them to the ends of the world to exchange them for gold. Gold is most
excellent; gold is treasure, and he who possesses it does all he wishes
to in this world, and succeeds in helping souls into paradise. They say
that when one of the lords of the country of Veragua dies, they bury all
the gold he possessed with his body. There were brought to Solomon at one
journey[412-3] six hundred and sixty-six quintals of gold, besides what
the merchants and sailors brought, and that which was paid in Arabia. Of
this gold he made two hundred lances[412-4] and three hundred shields,
and the flooring[412-5] which was to be above them was also of gold, and
ornamented with precious stones; many other things he made likewise of
gold, and a great number of vessels of great size, which he enriched with
precious stones. This is related by Josephus in his Chronicle _De
Antiquitatibus_; mention is also made of it in the Chronicles and in the
Book of Kings.[413-1] Josephus thinks that this gold was found in the
Aurea;[413-2] if it were so, I contend that these mines of the Aurea are
identical with those of Veragua, which, as I have said before, extends
westward twenty days' journey, and they are at an equal distance from the
Pole and the Line.[413-3] Solomon bought all of it,--gold, precious
stones, and silver,--but your Majesties need only send to seek them to
have them at your pleasure. David, in his will, left three thousand
quintals of Indian gold to Solomon, to assist in building the Temple;
and, according to Josephus, it came from these lands.[413-4] Jerusalem
and Mount Sion are to be rebuilt by the hands of Christians, who it is to
be God told by the mouth of His prophet in the fourteenth Psalm.[413-5]
The Abbot Joaquim said that he who should do this was to come from
Spain;[414-1] Saint Jerome showed the holy woman the way to accomplish
it;[414-2] and the emperor of Cathay, a long time ago, sent for wise men
to instruct him in the faith of Christ.[414-3] Who will offer himself for
this work?[414-4] Should any one do so, I pledge myself, in the name of
God, to convey him safely thither, provided the Lord permits me to return
to Spain.

The people who have sailed with me have passed through incredible toil
and danger, and I beseech your Highnesses, since they are poor, to pay
them promptly, and to be gracious to each of them according to their
respective merits; for I can safely assert, that to my belief they are
the bearers of the best news that ever was carried to Spain. With respect
to the gold which belongs to the Quibian of Veragua, and other chiefs in
the neighboring country, although it appears by the accounts we have
received of it to be very abundant, I do not think it would be well or
desirable, on the part of your Highnesses, to take possession of it in
the way of plunder; by fair dealing, scandal and disrepute will be
avoided, and all the gold will thus reach your Highnesses' treasury
without the loss of a grain.

With one month of fair weather I shall complete my voyage. As I was
deficient in ships, I did not persist in delaying my course; but in
everything that concerns your Highnesses' service, I trust in Him who
made me, and I hope also that my health will be re-established. I think
your Highnesses will remember that I had intended to build some ships in
a new manner, but the shortness of the time did not permit it. I had
certainly foreseen how things would be. I think more of this opening for
commerce, and of the lordship over such extensive mines, than of all that
has been done in the Indies.[415-1] This is not a child to be left to the
care of a stepmother.

I never think of Espanola, and Paria, and the other countries, without
shedding tears. I thought that what had occurred there would have been an
example for others; on the contrary, these settlements are now in a
languid state, although not dead, and the malady is incurable, or at
least very extensive. Let him who brought the evil come now and cure it,
if he knows the remedy, or how to apply it; but when a disturbance is on
foot, every one is ready to take the lead. It used to be the custom to
give thanks and promotion to him who placed his person in jeopardy; but
there is no justice in allowing the man who opposed this undertaking, to
enjoy the fruits of it with his children. Those who left the Indies,
avoiding the toils consequent upon the enterprise, and speaking evil of
it and me, have since returned with official appointments,--such is the
case now in Veragua: it is an evil example, and profitless both as
regards the business in which we are embarked, and as respects the
general maintenance of justice. The fear of this, with other sufficient
considerations, which I clearly foresaw, caused me to beg your
Highnesses, previously to my coming to discover these islands and
mainland, to grant me permission to govern in your royal name. Your
Highnesses granted my request; and it was a privilege and treaty granted
under the royal seal and oath, by which I was nominated viceroy, and
admiral, and governor-general of all: and your Highnesses limited the
extent of my government to a hundred leagues beyond the Azores and Cape
Verde islands, by a line passing from one pole to the other, and gave me
ample power over all that I might discover beyond this line; all which is
more fully described in the official document.[416-1]

But the most important affair of all, and that which cries most loudly
for redress, remains inexplicable to this moment. For seven years was I
at your royal court, where every one to whom the enterprise was mentioned
treated it as ridiculous; but now there is not a man, down to the very
tailors, who does not beg to be allowed to become a discoverer. There is
reason to believe, that they make the voyage only for plunder, and that
they are permitted to do so, to the great disparagement of my honor, and
the detriment of the undertaking itself.[416-2] It is right to give God
His own,--and to Caesar[416-3] that which belongs to him.[416-4] This is
a just sentiment, and proceeds from just feelings. The lands in this part
of the world, which are now under your Highnesses' sway, are richer and
more extensive than those of any other Christian power, and yet, after
that I had, by the Divine will, placed them under your high and royal
sovereignty, and was on the point of bringing your majesties into the
receipt of a very great and unexpected revenue; and while I was waiting
for ships, to convey me in safety, and with a heart full of joy, to your
royal presence, victoriously to announce the news of the gold that I had
discovered, I was arrested and thrown, with my two brothers, loaded with
irons, into a ship, stripped, and very ill-treated, without being allowed
any appeal to justice.[417-1]

Who could believe, that a poor foreigner would have risen against your
Highnesses, in such a place, without any motive or argument on his side;
without even the assistance of any other prince upon which to rely; but
on the contrary, amongst your own vassals and natural subjects, and with
my sons staying at your royal court? I was twenty-eight years old when I
came into your Highnesses' service,[417-2] and now I have not a hair upon
me that is not gray; my body is infirm, and all that was left to me, as
well as to my brothers, has been taken away and sold, even to the frock
that I wore, to my great dishonor. I cannot but believe that this was
done without your royal permission. The restitution of my honor, the
reparation of my losses, and the punishment of those who have inflicted
them, will redound to the honor of your royal character; a similar
punishment also is due to those who plundered me of my pearls, and who
have brought a disparagement upon the privileges of my admiralty. Great
and unexampled will be the glory and fame of your Highnesses, if you do
this; and the memory of your Highnesses, as just and grateful sovereigns,
will survive as a bright example to Spain in future ages. The honest
devotedness I have always shown to your Majesties' service, and the so
unmerited outrage with which it has been repaid, will not allow my soul
to keep silence, however much I may wish it: I implore your Highnesses to
forgive my complaints. I am indeed in as ruined a condition as I have
related; hitherto I have wept over others;--may Heaven now have mercy
upon me, and may the earth weep for me. With regard to temporal things, I
have not even a blanca,[418-1] for an offering; and in spiritual things,
I have ceased here in the Indies from observing the prescribed forms of
religion. Solitary in my trouble, sick, and in daily expectation of
death, surrounded by a million of hostile savages full of cruelty, and
thus separated from the blessed sacraments of our holy Church, how will
my soul be forgotten if it be separated from the body in this foreign
land? Weep for me, whoever has charity, truth, and justice! I did not
come out on this voyage to gain to myself honor or wealth; this is a
certain fact, for at that time all hope of such a thing was dead. I do
not lie when I say, that I went to your Highnesses with honest purpose of
heart, and sincere zeal in your cause. I humbly beseech your Highnesses,
that if it please God to rescue me from this place, you will graciously
sanction my pilgrimage to Rome and other holy places. May the Holy
Trinity protect your Highnesses' lives, and add to the prosperity of your
exalted position.

Done in the Indies, in the island of Jamaica, on the seventh of July, in
the year one thousand five hundred and three.

FOOTNOTES:

[389-1] The punctuation of this first paragraph has been changed in the
light of the contemporary Italian translation known as the _Lettera
Rarissima_, which is given in facsimile and English translation in
Thacher's _Christopher Columbus_, II. 671 _et seqq._

[389-2] June 29. Las Casas, III. 29.

[390-1] By the letter of the King and Queen, March 14, 1502, Columbus had
been forbidden to call at Espanola on the outward voyage. Las Casas,
_Historia de las Indias_, III. 26.

[390-2] The new governor, Ovando, who had been sent out to supersede
Bobadilla, had reached Santo Domingo in April of this year, 1502.

[390-3] Columbus was accompanied by his younger son Ferdinand and his
elder brother Bartholomew. Las Casas, III. 25.

[390-4] The translation here follows Lollis's emendation of the text
which changed the printed text, "_habia, echado a la mar, por escapar,
fasta la isola la Gallega; perdio la barca_," etc., to "_habia echado a
la mar, por escapar fasta la isla; la Gallega perdio la barca_." One of
the ships was named _La Gallega_, and there is no island of that name in
that region.

[391-1] Columbus set forth from the harbor of Santo Domingo in the storm,
Friday, July 1. The ships found refuge in the harbor of Azua on the
following Sunday, July 3. (Ferdinand Columbus in the _Historie_, ed.
1867, pp. 286-287.) Azua is about 50 miles west of Santo Domingo in a
straight line, but much farther by water. After a rest and repairs the
Admiral sailed to Yaquimo, the present Jacmel in the territory of Hayti,
into which port he went to escape another storm. He left Yaquimo, July
14. (Las Casas, III. 108; Ferdinand Columbus, _Historie_, p. 289.) He
then passed south of Jamaica, and was carried by the currents northwest
till he reached the Queen's Garden, a group of many small islands south
of Cuba and east of the Isle of Pines, so named by him in 1494 on his
exploration of the coast of Cuba.

[391-2] From the Queen's Garden he sailed south July 27 (the Porras
narrative of this voyage, Navarrete, II. 283; in English in Thacher,
_Columbus_, II. 640 _et seqq._), and after a passage of ninety leagues
sighted an island Saturday, July 30. (Porras in Thacher, II. 643.) This
was the island of Guanaja about twelve leagues north of Trujillo,
Honduras. (Las Casas, III. 109.) Here a landing was made and a canoe was
encountered which was covered with an awning and contained Indians well
clothed and a load of merchandise. Notwithstanding these indications of a
more advanced culture than had hitherto been found, the Admiral decided
not to explore the country of these Indians, which would have led him
into Yucatan and possibly Mexico, but to search for the strait which he
supposed separated Asia from the continental mass he had discovered on
his third voyage (Paria, South America). He struck the mainland near
Trujillo, naming the point Caxinas. At or near this place they landed
Sunday, August 14, to say mass. (Las Casas, III. 112; Ferdinand Columbus,
_Historie_, p. 295.) From this point he coasted very slowly, sailing in
sight of land by day and anchoring at night, distressed by storms and
headwinds, some days losing as much ground as could be gained in two,
till September 12, when he reached Cape Gracias a Dios. (Las Casas, III.
113; _Historie_, p. 297; Porras narrative in Thacher, _Columbus_, II.
644.) It will be seen from this collation of the sources that the
statements in our text are far from exact, that they are in fact a very
general and greatly exaggerated recollection of a most trying experience.
It will be remembered that Ferdinand was on this voyage, but his
narrative says nothing of any storm between July 14 when he left the
Queen's Gardens and the arrival at Guanaja, a passage which Porras says
took three days. This passage, however, Las Casas describes apparently on
the basis of this letter as having taken sixty days (_Historia_, III.
108). Next the text of the _Historie_ presents a difficulty, for it
places the tedious stormy voyage of _sixty_ leagues and _seventy_ days
between Caxinas (Trujillo) and Cape Gracias a Dios (_Historie_, p. 296),
although in another place it gives the beginning of this coasting as
after August 14 and the date of arrival at the Cape as September 12. This
last chronological difficulty may perhaps be accounted for in this way:
The original manuscript of the _Historie_ may have had "XXX dias," which
a copyist or the Italian translator may have taken for "LXX dias."

[392-1] A review of the chronology of the voyage in the preceding note
will show that no such storm of eighty-eight days' duration could have
occurred in the first part of this voyage. Columbus was only seventy-four
days in going from Santo Domingo to Cabo Gracias a Dios. Either the text
is wrong or his memory was at fault. The most probable conclusion is that
in copying either LXXXVIII got substituted for XXVIII or _Ochenta y ocho_
for _Veinte y ocho_. In that case we should have almost exactly the time
spent in going from Trujillo to Cape Gracias a Dios, August 14 to
September 12, and exact agreement between our text, the _Historie_, and
the Porras narrative.

[393-1] Twenty years, speaking approximately. This letter was written in
1503, and Columbus entered the service of Spain in 1485.

[393-2] Diego was the heir of his father's titles. He was appointed
governor of the Indies in 1508, but a prolonged lawsuit was necessary to
establish his claims to inherit his father's rights.

[393-3] Their course was down the Mosquito coast. Cariay was near the
mouth of the San Juan River of Nicaragua. Las Casas gives the date of the
arrival at Cariari, as he gives the name, as September 17 (III. 114). The
_Historie_ gives the date as September 5 and the name as Cariai (p. 297).

[393-4] Peter Martyr, _De Rebus Oceanicis_ (ed. 1574), p. 239, says that
Columbus called Ciamba the region which the inhabitants called
Quiriquetana, a name which it would seem still survives in Chiriqui
Lagoon just east of Almirante Bay. The name "Ciamba" appears on Martin
Behaim's globe, 1492, as a province corresponding to Cochin-China. It is
described in Marco Polo under the name "Chamba"; see Yule's _Marco Polo_,
II. 248-252 (bk. III., ch. V.).

[393-5] Carambaru is the present Almirante Bay, about on the border
between Costa Rica and Panama. Las Casas describes the bay as six leagues
long and over three broad with many islands and coves. He gives the name
as Caravaro (III. 118). Ferdinand Columbus's account is practically
identical.

[394-1] Veragua in this letter includes practically all of the present
republic of Panama. The western quarter of it was granted to Luis Colon,
the Admiral's grandson, in 1537, as a dukedom in partial compensation for
his renouncing his hereditary rights. Hence the title Dukes of Veragua
borne by the Admiral's descendants. The name still survives in geography
in that of the little island Escudo de Veragua, which lies off the
northern coast.

[394-2] The eve or vigil of St. Simon and St. Jude is October 27.
According to the narrative in the _Historie_, on October 7, they went
ashore at the channel of Cerabora (Carambaru). A few days later they went
on to Aburema. October 17 they left Aburema and went twelve leagues to
Guaigo, where they landed. Thence they went to Cateva (Catiba, Las Casas)
and cast anchor in a large river (the Chagres). Thence easterly to
Cobrava; thence to five towns, among which was Beragua (Veragua); the
next day to Cubiga. The distance from Cerabora to Cubiga was fifty
leagues. Without landing, the Admiral went on to Belporto (Puerto Bello),
which he so named. ("Puerto Bello, which was a matter of six leagues from
what we now call El Nombre de Dios." Las Casas, III. 121.) He arrived at
Puerto Bello November 2, and remained there seven days on account of the
rains and bad weather. (_Historie_, pp. 302-306.) Apparently Columbus put
this period of bad weather a few days too early in his recollection of
it.

[394-3] Ciguare. An outlying province of the Mayas lying on the Pacific
side of southern Costa Rica. Peter Martyr, _De Rebus Oceanicis_, p. 240,
says, "In this great tract (_i.e._, where the Admiral was) are two
districts, the near one called Taia, and the further one Maia."

[395-1] See p. 311, note 5.

[395-2] Probably _casas_, houses, should be the reading here. In the
corresponding passage of the contemporary Italian version the word is
"houses." This information, mixed as it is with Columbus's
misinterpretations of the Indian signs and distorted by his
preconceptions, was first made public in the Italian translation of this
letter in 1505 and then gave Europe its first intimations of the culture
of the Mayas.

[395-3] _I.e._, in being on either side of a peninsula, Tortosa and
Fontarabia being on opposite sides of the narrowest part of the Spanish
peninsula.

[395-4] See p. 300, note 1.

[396-1] The Spanish reads, "Lo que yo se es que el ano de noventa y
cuatro en veinte y cuatros grados al Poniente en termino de nueve horas."
The translation in the text and that in Thacher (II. 687) of the Italian
makes nonsense. The translation should be "what I know is that in the
year '94 (1494) I sailed westward on the 24th parallel (lit. on 24
degrees) a total of nine hours (lit. to a limit of nine hours)." That is,
he reckoned that he had gone 9/24 round the world on the 24th parallel,
and he knew it because there was an eclipse by which he found out the
difference in time between Europe and where he was. The "termino" of nine
hours refers to the western limit of his exploration of the southern
coast of Cuba when he concluded it was a projection of the mainland of
Asia. After reaching the conclusion that this is the correct
interpretation of this passage, I discovered that it had been given by
Humboldt in his _Kritische Untersuchungen ueber die historische
Entwickelung der geographischen Kenntnisse von der Neuen Welt_, I. 553,
and by Peschel in his _Zeitalter der Entdeckungen_, p. 97, note 2. It may
be objected to this explanation that in reality Columbus had only gone
about 75 degrees west of Cape St. Vincent in Portugal. The accurate
calculation of longitude at that time, however, was impossible, and as
will be seen in the following note Columbus's calculation was biassed by
powerful preconceptions.

[396-2] In his _Libro de Profecias_ Columbus recorded the data of this
eclipse which took place February 29, 1494, from which he drew the
conclusion, "The difference between the middle of the island Jamaica in
the Indies and the island of Cadiz in Spain is seven hours and fifteen
minutes." Navarrete, _Viages_, II. 272.

[396-3] Reading _remendiado_ or _remendado_ instead of _remedado_.

[396-4] Catigara was in China on the east side of the Gulf of Tonquin.

[396-5] Marinus of Tyre divided the earth into 24 meridians, 15 degrees
or one hour apart. His first meridian passed the Fortunate Isles, which
he supposed to be 2-1/2 degrees west of Cape St. Vincent, and his
fifteenth through Catigara, southeastern China. The inhabited world
embraced fifteen of these lines, 225 degrees, and the unknown portion
east of India and west of Spain, nine lines, or hours, or 135 degrees.
_Cf._ Vignaud, _Toscanelli and Columbus_, p. 74; Bunbury, _History of
Ancient Geography_, II. 519 _et seqq._ Columbus, therefore, according to
his calculations, had in 1494 completely covered this unknown section and
reached India (or China), and so had demonstrated the correctness of
Marinus's views. In reality his strong preconceptions as to where he was
distorted his calculations of the longitude. Ptolemy corrected Marinus's
estimate of 225 degrees from Cape St. Vincent to Sera in China, and, as
noted in Columbus's letter, placed Catigara in China (on the east side of
the Gulf of Tonquin) at twelve lines or 180 degrees west of his meridian
(2-1/2 degrees west of Cape St. Vincent). If Ptolemy was right, Columbus
had not reached India (or more exactly China) or come, on his own
calculation, within 45 degrees or 2700 geographical miles of it measured
on the equator. The outline reproduction of the map of Bartholomew
Columbus made after his return from this voyage given in Channing's
_Student's History of the United States_, p. 27 (photographic
reproduction in Bourne, _Spain in America_, p. 96) illustrates the
Admiral's ideas and conclusions. This region (_i.e._, Costa Rica and
Panama) is a southern extension of Cochin-China and Cambodia and is
connected with _Mondo Novo_, _i.e._, South America.

[397-1] The translation here adopts the emended text of Lollis,
substituting "ali[e]nde" for "al Indo" in the sentence "Marino en
Ethiopia escribe al Indo la linea equinocial." _Raccolta Colombiana_,
parte I., tomo II., p. 184. The translation of the unamended text as
printed by Major was "the same author describes the Indus in Ethiopia as
being more than four and twenty degrees from the equinoctial line."
Apparently the 24 should be 44. With these changes the statements in the
text agree with Columbus's marginalia to the _Imago Mundi_, where he
notes that the Cape of Good Hope is Agesinba and that Bartholomew Diaz
found it to be 45 degrees south of the equator. "This," he goes on,
"agrees with the dictum of Marinus, whom Ptolemy corrects, in regard to
the expedition to the Garamantes, who said it traversed 27,500 stadia
beyond the equinoctial." _Raccolta Colombiana_, parte II., tomo II., p.
377. On Marinus's exaggerated estimate of the distance covered by the
Romans in tropical Africa, see Bunbury, _History of Ancient Geography_,
II. 524.

[397-2] This is unintelligible. The Spanish is, "Tolomeo diz que la
tierra mas austral es el plazo primero." The meaning of _plazo_ is not
"boundary" but "term" (allotted time). The reading should be: "la tierra
mas austral es el praso promontorio," and the translation should be,
"Ptolemy says that the most southern land is the promontory of Prasum,"
etc. Prasum promontorium was Ptolemy's southern limit of the world. He
placed it at about 16 degrees south latitude. See Bunbury, _History of
Ancient Geography_, II. 572, and Smith's _Dictionary of Greek and Roman
Geography_, art. "Prasum Promontorium"; also Ptolemy's _Geography_, bk.
IV., ch. IX., the descriptive matter relating to Map 4 on Africa.

[398-1] _II. Esdras_, VI. 42, see p. 358, note 1.

[398-2] See the Letter of Columbus on his Third Voyage. Major, _Select
Letters of Columbus_, p. 141.

[398-3] Ptolemy reckoned the length of the degree on the equator at
62-1/2 miles. The shorter measurement of 56-2/3 was the estimate adopted
by the Arab astronomer Alfragan in the ninth century and known to
Columbus through Cardinal d'Ailly's _Imago Mundi_, the source of much if
not most of his information on the geographical knowledge and opinions of
former times. Cardinal d'Ailly's source of information about Alfragan was
Roger Bacon's _Opus Majus_. Columbus was deeply impressed with Alfragan's
estimate of the length of the degree and annotated the passages in the
_Imago Mundi_. _Cf._ _Raccolta Colombiana_, Parte I., tomo II., pp. 378,
407, and frequently. See this whole question in Vignaud, _Toscanelli and
Columbus_, p. 79 _et seqq._

[398-4] In Puerto Bello. See p. 394, note 2. Porto Bello, to use the
Anglicized form, became the great shipping port on the north side of the
isthmus for the trade with Peru. _Cf._ Bourne, _Spain in America_, p.
292.

[399-1] Columbus left Porto Bello November 9 and went eight leagues, but
the next day he turned back four and took refuge at what is now Nombre de
Dios. From the abundance of maize fields he named it Port of Provisions
(Puerto de Bastimentos). _Historie_, p. 306.

[399-2] _Me reposo atras il viento_, etc. For _reposo_ the text
apparently should be either _repuso_, "put back," or _rempujo_, "drove
back," and the translation is based on this supposition.

[399-3] They remained at Bastimentos till November 23, when they went on
to Guiga, but did not tarry but pushed on to a little harbor (November
26), which the Admiral called Retrete (Closet) because it was so small
that it could hold only five or six vessels and the entrance was only
fifteen or twenty paces wide. _Historie_, p. 306.

[399-4] That is, Columbus turns back to explore the mines on account of
the violence of the east and northeast winds. This was December 5.
_Historie_, p. 309.

[400-1] Not mentioned in the _Historie_ by name. It was the place where
they stayed from December 26 to January 3 to repair the ship _Gallega_ as
appears in the _Probanzas del Almirante_. Navarrete, _Viages_, III. 600.
It was between Rio de los Lagartos and Puerto Bello. Lollis, _Raccolta
Colombiana_, Parte I., tomo II., p. 187.

[400-2] Adopting de Lollis's text and punctuation.

[400-3] _La oposicion de Saturno con Marte tan desvaratado en costa
brava_, adopting de Lollis's text following the suggestion of the
contemporary Italian translation. According to the doctrines of astrology
the influence of Saturn was malign. "When Saturn is in the first degree
of Aries, and any other Planet in the first degree of Libra, they being
now an hundred and eighty degrees each from other, are said to be in
Opposition: A bad Aspect." William Lilly, _Christian Astrology_ (London,
1647), p. 27.

[400-4] Epiphany, January 6. It will be remembered that Columbus had
passed Veragua the previous October when working eastward. See p. 394,
note 2. He now found he could enter the river of Veragua, but found
another near by called by the Indians Yebra, but which Columbus named
Belem in memory of the coming of the three kings (the wise men of the
East) to Bethlehem. (Las Casas, III. 128; Porras in Thacher, II. 645.)
The name is still preserved attached to the river.

[401-1] _Proeses._ In nautical Spanish _prois_ or _proiza_ is a
breastfast or headfast, that is a large cable for fastening a ship to a
wharf or another ship. In Portuguese _proiz_ is a stone or tree on shore
to which the hawsers are fastened. Major interpreted it in this sense,
translating the words _las amarras y proeses_, "the cables and the
supports to which they were fastened." The interpretation given first
seems to me the correct one, especially as Ferdinand says that the flood
came so suddenly that they could not get the cables on land. _Historie_,
p. 315.

[402-1] _Quibian_ is a title, as indicated a few lines further on, and
not a proper name as Major, Irving, Markham, and others following Las
Casas have taken it to be. The Spanish is uniformly "El Quibian." Peter
Martyr says: "They call a kinglet (_regulus_) Cacicus, as we have said
elsewhere, in other places Quebi, in some places also Tiba. A chief, in
some places Sacchus, in others Jura." _De Rebus Oceanicis_, p. 241.

