the French soldier the first soldier in the world, because, in that
world, he is the one most abandoned to his own physical and moral
resources. All things having satisfied, or appearing to have satisfied,
the admiral, he paid his compliments to Raoul, and gave the last orders
for sailing, which was ordered the next morning at daybreak. He invited
the comte and his son to dine with him; but they, under a pretext of the
service, kept themselves apart. Gaining their hostelry, situated under
the trees of the great Place, they took their repast in haste, and
Athos led Raoul to the rocks which dominate the city, vast gray
mountains, whence the view is infinite, and embraces a liquid horizon,
which appears, so remote is it, on a level with the rocks themselves.

The night was fine, as it always is in these happy climates. The moon,
rising behind the rocks, unrolled, like a silver sheet, upon the blue
carpet of the sea. In the road, maneuvered silently the vessels which
had just taken their rank to facilitate the embarkation. The sea, loaded
with phosphoric light, opened beneath the hulls of the barks which
transported the baggage and munitions; every dip of the prow plowed up
this gulf of white flames; and from every oar dropped liquid diamonds.
The sailors, rejoicing in the largesses of the admiral, were heard
murmuring their slow and artless songs. Sometimes, the grinding of the
chains was mixed with the dull noise of shot falling into the holds.
These harmonies, and this spectacle, oppress the heart like fear, and
dilate it like hope. All this life speaks of death. Athos had seated
himself with his son, upon the moss, among the brambles of the
promontory. Around their heads passed and repassed large bats, carried
along in the fearful whirl of their blind chase. The feet of Raoul were
across the edge of the cliff, and bathed in that void which is peopled
by vertigo and provokes to annihilation. When the moon had risen to its
full height, caressing with its light the neighboring peaks, when the
watery mirror was illumined in its full extent, and the little red fires
had made their openings in the black masses of every ship, Athos
collected all his ideas, and all his courage, and said:

"God has made all that we see, Raoul; He has made us, also--poor atoms
mixed up with this great universe. We shine like those fires and those
stars; we sigh like those waves; we suffer like those great ships which
are worn out in plowing the waves, in obeying the wind which urges them
toward an end, as the breath of God blows us toward a port. Everything
likes to live, Raoul; and everything is beautiful in living things."

"Monsieur," said Raoul, "we have before us a beautiful spectacle!"

"How good D'Artagnan is!" interrupted. Athos, suddenly, "and what a rare
good fortune it is to be supported during a whole life by such a friend
as he is! That is what you have wanted, Raoul."

"A friend!" cried Raoul, "I have wanted a friend!"

"M. de Guiche is an agreeable companion," resumed the comte, coldly,
"but I believe, in the times in which you live, men are more engaged in
their own interests and their own pleasures than they were in our times.
You have sought a secluded life; that is a great happiness, but you have
lost your strength in it. We four, more weaned from these delicate
abstractions which constitute your joy, we furnished much more
resistance when misfortune presented itself."

"I have not interrupted you, monsieur, to tell you that I had a friend,
and that that friend is M. Guiche. Certes, he is good and generous, and,
moreover, he loves me. But I have lived under the guardianship of
another friendship, monsieur, as precious and as strong as that of which
you speak, since that is yours."

"I have not been a friend for you, Raoul," said Athos.

"Eh! monsieur, and in what respect not?"

"Because I have given you reason to think that life has but one face,
because, sad and severe, alas! I have always cut off for you, without,
God knows, wishing to do so, the joyous buds which incessantly spring
from the tree of youth; so that at this moment I repent of not having
made of you a more expansive, dissipated, animated man."

"I know why you say that, monsieur. No, it is not you who have made me
what I am; it was love which took me at the time when children have only
inclinations; it is the constancy natural to my character, which with
other creatures is but a habit. I believed that I should always be as I
was; I thought God had cast me in a path quite cleared, quite straight,
bordered with fruits and flowers. I had watching over me your vigilance
and your strength. I believed myself to be vigilant and strong. Nothing
prepared me; I fell once, and that once deprived me of courage for the
whole of my life. It is quite true that I wrecked myself. Oh, no,
monsieur! you are nothing in my past but a happiness--you are nothing in
my future but a hope! No, I have no reproach to make against life, such
as you made it for me; I bless you, and I love you ardently."

"My dear Raoul, your words do me good. They prove to me that you will
act a little for me in the time to come."

"I shall only act for you, monsieur."

"Raoul, what I have never hitherto done with respect to you, I will
henceforward do. I will be your friend, not your father. We will live in
expanding ourselves, instead of living and holding ourselves prisoners,
when you come back. And that will be soon, will it not?"

"Certainly, monsieur, for such an expedition cannot be long."

"Soon then, Raoul, soon, instead of living moderately upon my income, I
will give you the capital of my estates. It will suffice for launching
you into the world till my death; and you will give me, I hope, before
that time, the consolation of not seeing my race extinct."

"I will do all you shall command," said Raoul, much agitated.

"It is not necessary, Raoul, that your duty as aid-de-camp should lead
you into too hazardous enterprises. You have gone through your ordeal;
you are known to be good under fire. Remember that war with the Arabs is
a war of snares, ambuscades, and assassinations."

"So it is said, monsieur."

"There is never much glory in falling in an ambuscade. It is a death
which always implies a little rashness or want of foresight. Often,
indeed, he who falls in it meets with but little pity. They who are not
pitied, Raoul, have died uselessly. Still further, the conqueror laughs,
and we Frenchmen ought not to allow stupid infidels to triumph over our
faults. Do you clearly understand what I am saying to you, Raoul? God
forbid I should encourage you to avoid encounters."

"I am naturally prudent, monsieur, and I have very good fortune," said
Raoul, with a smile which chilled the heart of his poor father; "for,"
the young man hastened to add, "in twenty combats in which I have been,
I have only received one scratch."

"There is in addition," said Athos, "the climate to be dreaded: that is
an ugly end, that fever! King Saint-Louis prayed God to send him an
arrow or the plague, rather than the fever."

"Oh! monsieur, with sobriety, with reasonable exercise--"

"I have already obtained from M. de Beaufort a promise that his
dispatches shall be sent off every fortnight to France. You, as his
aid-de-camp, will be charged with expediting them, and will be sure not
to forget me."

"No, monsieur," said Raoul, almost choked with emotion.

"Besides, Raoul, as you are a good Christian, and I am one also, we
ought to reckon upon a more special protection of God and his guardian
angels. Promise me that if anything evil should happen to you on any
occasion, you will think of me at once."

"First and at once! Oh! yes, monsieur."

"And will call upon me?"

"Instantly."

"You dream of me sometimes, do you not, Raoul?"

"Every night, monsieur. During my early youth I saw you in my dreams,
calm and mild, with one hand stretched out over my head, and that it was
that made me sleep so soundly--_formerly_."

"We love each other too dearly," said the comte, "that from this moment
in which we separate, a portion of both our souls should not travel with
one and the other of us, and should not dwell where-ever we may dwell.
Whenever you may be sad, Raoul, I feel that my heart will be drowned in
sadness; and when you smile on thinking of me, be assured you will send
me, from however remote a distance, a ray of your joy."

"I will not promise you to be joyous," replied the young man: "but you
may be certain that I will never pass an hour without thinking of you,
not one hour, I swear, unless I be dead."

Athos could contain himself no longer: he threw his arm round the neck
of his son, and held him embraced with all the powers of his heart. The
moon began to be now eclipsed by twilight; a golden band surrounded the
horizon, announcing the approach of day. Athos threw his cloak over the
shoulders of Raoul, and led him back to the city, where burdens and
porters were already in motion, like a vast ant-hill. At the extremity
of the plateau, which Athos and Bragelonne were quitting, they saw a
dark shadow moving uneasily backward and forward, as if in indecision or
ashamed to be seen. It was Grimaud, who, in his anxiety, had tracked his
master, and was waiting for him.

"Oh! my good Grimaud," cried Raoul, "what do you want? You are come to
tell us it is time to be gone, have you not?"

"Alone?" said Grimaud, addressing Athos, and pointing to Raoul in a tone
of reproach, which showed to what an extent the old man was troubled.

"Oh! you are right!" cried the comte. "No, Raoul, do not go alone; no,
he shall not be left alone in a strange land, without some friendly hand
to support him, some friendly heart to recall to him all he loved!"

"I?" said Grimaud.

"You, yes, you!" cried Raoul, touched to his inmost heart.

"Alas!" said Athos, "you are very old, my good Grimaud."

"So much the better," replied the latter, with an inexpressible depth of
feeling and intelligence.

"But the embarkation is begun," said Raoul, "and you are not prepared."

"Yes," said Grimaud, showing the keys of his trunks, mixed with those of
his young master.

"But," again objected Raoul, "you cannot leave M. le Comte thus alone:
M. le Comte, whom you have never quitted?"

Grimaud turned his dimmed eyes upon Athos and Raoul, as if to measure
the strength of both. The comte uttered not a word.

"M. le Comte will prefer my going," said Grimaud.

"I should," said Athos, by an inclination of the head.

At that moment the drums suddenly rolled, and the clarions filled the
air with their inspiring notes. The regiments destined for the
expedition began to debouch from the city. They advanced to the number
of five, each composed of forty companies. Royals marched first,
distinguished by their white uniform, faced with blue. The ordonnance
colors, quartered crosswise, violet and dead leaf, with a sprinkling of
golden fleurs-de-lis, left the white-colored flag, with its
fleur-de-lised cross, to dominate over the whole. Musketeers at the
wings, with their forked sticks and their muskets on their shoulders;
pikemen in the center, with their lances, fourteen feet in length,
marched gaily toward the transports, which carried them in detail to the
ships. The regiments of Picardy, Navarre, Normandy, and Royal Vaisseau,
followed after. M. de Beaufort had known well how to select his troops.
He himself was seen closing the march, with his staff--it would take a
full hour before he could reach the sea. Raoul with Athos turned his
steps slowly toward the beach, in order to take his place when the
prince embarked. Grimaud, boiling with the ardor of a young man,
superintended the embarkation of Raoul's baggage in the admiral's
vessel. Athos, with his arm passed through that of the son he was about
to lose, absorbed in melancholy meditation, was deaf to the noise around
him. An officer came quickly toward them to inform Raoul that M. de
Beaufort was anxious to have him by his side.

"Have the kindness to tell the prince," said Raoul, "that I request he
will allow me this hour to enjoy the company of my father."

"No, no," said Athos, "an aid-de-camp ought not thus to quit his
general. Please to tell the prince, monsieur, that the vicomte will join
him immediately." The officer set off at a gallop.

"Whether we part here or part there," added the comte, "it is no less a
separation." He carefully brushed the dust off his son's coat, and
passed his hand over his hair as they walked along. "But, Raoul," said
he, "you want money. M. de Beaufort's train will be splendid, and I am
certain it would be agreeable to you to purchase horses and arms, which
are very dear things in Africa. Now, as you are not actually in the
service of the king or M. de Beaufort, and are simply a volunteer, you
must not reckon upon either pay or largesses. But I should not like you
to want for anything at Gigelli. Here are two hundred pistoles; if you
would please me, Raoul, spend them."

Raoul pressed the hand of his father, and, at the turning of a street,
they saw M. de Beaufort, mounted upon a magnificent white genet, which
replied by graceful curvets to the applauses of the women of the city.
The duc called Raoul and held out his hand to the comte. He spoke to him
for some time, with such a kindly expression, that the heart of the poor
father even felt a little comforted. It was, however, evident to both
father and son that their walk was directed to nothing less than a
punishment. There was a terrible moment--that at which, on quitting the
sands of the shore, the soldiers and sailors exchanged the last kisses
with their families and friends; a supreme moment, in which,
notwithstanding the clearness of the heavens, the warmth of the sun, of
the perfumes of the air, and the rich life that was circulating in their
veins, everything appeared black, everything appeared bitter, everything
created doubts of a God, while speaking by the mouth, even, of God. It
was customary for the admiral and his suite to embark the last: the
cannon waited to announce, with its formidable voice, that the leader
had placed his foot on board his vessel. Athos, forgetful of both the
admiral and the fleet, and of his own dignity as a strong man, opened
his arms to his son, and pressed him, convulsively, to his heart.

"Accompany us on board," said the duc, very much affected; "you will
gain a good half-hour."

"No," said Athos, "my farewell is spoken. I do not wish to speak a
second."

"Then, vicomte, embark--embark quickly!" added the prince, wishing to
spare the tears of these two men, whose hearts were bursting. And
paternally, tenderly, very much as Porthos might have done, he took
Raoul in his arms and placed him in the boat; the oars of which, at a
signal, immediately were dipped in the waves. Himself, forgetful of
ceremony, he jumped into his boat, and pushed it off with a vigorous
foot.

"Adieu!" cried Raoul.

Athos replied only by a sign, but he felt something burning on his hand;
it was the respectful kiss of Grimaud--the last farewell of the faithful
dog. This kiss given, Grimaud jumped from the step of the mole upon the
stem of a two-oared yawl, which had just been taken in tow by a
_chaland_ served by twelve galley-oars. Athos seated himself on the
mole, stunned, deaf, abandoned. Every instant took from him one of the
features, one of the shades of the pale face of his son. With his arms
hanging down, his eyes fixed, his mouth open, he remained confounded
with Raoul--in one same look, in one same thought, in one same stupor.
The sea, by degrees, carried away boats and faces, until at the distance
at which men become nothing but points--loves, nothing but remembrances,
Athos saw his son ascend the ladder of the admiral's ship, he saw him
lean upon the rail of the deck, and place himself in such a manner as to
be always an object in the eye of his father. In vain the cannon
thundered, in vain from the ship sounded a long and loud tumult,
responded to by immense acclamations from the shore; in vain did the
noise deafen the ear of the father, and the smoke obscure the cherished
object of all his aspirations. Raoul appeared to him up to the last
moment; and the imperceptible atom, passing from black to pale, from
pale to white, from white to nothing, disappeared for Athos--disappeared
very long after, for all the eyes of the spectators, had disappeared
both gallant ships and swelling sails. Toward mid-day, when the sun
devoured space, and scarcely the tops of the masts dominated the
incandescent line of the sea, Athos perceived a soft, aerial shadow
rise, and vanish as soon as seen. This was the smoke of a cannon, which
M. de Beaufort ordered to be fired as a last salute to the coast of
France. The point was buried in its turn beneath the sky, and Athos
returned painfully and slowly to his hostelry.




CHAPTER CVIII.

AMONG WOMEN.


D'Artagnan had not been able to hide his feelings from his friends so
much as he would have wished. The stoical soldier, the impassible
man-at-arms, overcome by fear and presentiments, had yielded, for a few
minutes, to human weakness. When, therefore, he had silenced his heart
and calmed the agitation of his nerves, turning toward his lackey, a
silent servant, always listening in order to obey the more promptly:

"Rabaud," said he, "mind, we must travel thirty leagues a day."

"At your pleasure, captain," replied Rabaud.

And from that moment D'Artagnan, accommodating his action to the pace of
his horse, like a true centaur, employed his thoughts about
nothing--that is to say, about everything. He asked himself why the king
had sent for him back; why the Iron Mask had thrown the silver plate at
the feet of Raoul? As to the first subject, the reply was negative; he
knew right well that the king's calling him was from necessity. He still
further knew that Louis XIV. must experience an imperious want of a
private conversation with one whom the possession of such a secret
placed on a level with the highest powers of the kingdom. But as to
saying exactly what the king's wish was, D'Artagnan found himself
completely at a loss. The musketeer had no other doubts, either, upon
the reason which had urged the unfortunate Philippe to reveal his
character and his birth. Philippe, hidden forever beneath a mask of
iron, exiled to a country where the men seemed little more than slaves
of the elements; Philippe, deprived even of the society of D'Artagnan,
who had loaded him with honors and delicate attentions, had nothing more
to see than specters and griefs in this world, and despair beginning to
devour him, he poured himself forth in complaints, in the belief that
his revelations would raise an avenger for him.

The manner in which the musketeer had been near killing his two best
friends, the destiny which had so strangely brought Athos to participate
in the great state secret, the farewell of Raoul, the obscurity of that
future which threatened to end in a melancholy death; all this threw
D'Artagnan incessantly back to the lamentable predictions and
forebodings, which the rapidity of his pace did not dissipate, as it
used formerly to do. D'Artagnan passed from these considerations to the
remembrance of the proscribed Porthos and Aramis. He saw them both,
fugitives, tracked, ruined--laborious architects of a fortune they must
lose; and, as the king called for his man of execution in the hours of
vengeance and malice, D'Artagnan trembled at the idea of receiving some
commission that would make his very heart bleed. Sometimes, when
ascending hills, when the winded horse breathed hard from his nostrils,
and heaved his flanks, the captain, left to more freedom of thought,
reflected upon the prodigious genius of Aramis, a genius of astucity and
intrigue, such as the Fronde and the civil war had produced but two.
Soldier, priest, and diplomatist; gallant, avaricious, and cunning;
Aramis had never taken the good things of this life but as
stepping-stones to rise to bad ones. Generous in spirit, if not high in
heart, he never did ill but for the sake of shining a little more
brilliantly. Toward the end of his career, at the moment of reaching
the goal like the patrician Fuscus, he had made a false step upon a
plank, and had fallen into the sea. But Porthos, the good harmless
Porthos! To see Porthos hungry, to see Mousqueton without gold lace,
imprisoned perhaps; to see Pierrefonds, Bracieux, razed to the very
stones, dishonored even to the timber--these were so many poignant
griefs for D'Artagnan, and every time that one of these griefs struck
him, he bounded like a horse at the sting of the gadfly beneath the
vaults of foliage where he has sought shade and shelter from the burning
sun.

Never was the man of spirit subjected to ennui, if his body was exposed
to fatigue; never did the man healthy of body fail to find life light,
if he had something to engage his mind. D'Artagnan, riding fast,
thinking as constantly, alighted from his horse in Paris, fresh and
tender in his muscles as the athlete preparing for the gymnasium. The
king did not expect him so soon, and had just departed for the chase
toward Meudon. D'Artagnan, instead of riding after the king, as he would
formerly have done, took off his boots, had a bath, and waited till his
majesty should return dusty and tired. He occupied the interval of five
hours in taking, as people say, the air of the house, and in arming
himself against all ill-chances. He learned that the king, during the
last fortnight, had been gloomy; that the queen-mother was ill and much
depressed; that Monsieur, the king's brother, was exhibiting a
devotional turn; that Madame had the vapors; and that M. de Guiche was
gone to one of his estates. He learned that M. Colbert was radiant; that
M. Fouquet consulted a fresh physician every day, who still did not cure
him, and that his principal complaint was one which physicians do not
usually cure, unless they are political physicians. The king, D'Artagnan
was told, behaved in the kindest manner to M. Fouquet, and did not allow
him to be ever out of his sight; but the surintendant, touched to the
heart, like one of those fine trees which a worm has punctured, was
declining daily, in spite of the royal smile, that sun of court trees.
D'Artagnan learned that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had become
indispensable to the king, that the king, during his sporting
excursions, if he did not take her with him, wrote to her frequently, no
longer verses, but, what was still much worse, prose, and that, whole
pages at a time. Thus, as the poetical Pleiad of the day said, the
_first king in the world_ was seen descending from his horse _with an
ardor beyond compare_, and on the crown of his hat scrawling bombastic
phrases, which M. de Saint-Aignan, aid-de-camp in perpetuity, carried to
La Valliere at the risk of foundering his horses. During this time, deer
and pheasants were left to the free enjoyments of their nature, hunted
so lazily, that, it was said, the art of venery ran great risk of
degenerating at the court of France. D'Artagnan then thought of the
wishes of poor Raoul, of that desponding letter destined for a woman who
passed her life in hoping, and as D'Artagnan loved to philosophize a
little occasionally, he resolved to profit by the absence of the king to
have a minute's talk with Mademoiselle de la Valliere.

This was a very easy affair: while the king was hunting, Louise was
walking with some other ladies in one of the galleries of the Palais
Royal, exactly where the captain of the musketeers had some guards to
inspect. D'Artagnan did not doubt, that if he could but open the
conversation upon Raoul, Louise might give him grounds for writing a
consolatory letter to the poor exile; and hope, or at least consolation
for Raoul, in the state of heart in which he had left him, was the sun,
was life to two men who were very dear to our captain. He directed his
course, therefore, to the spot where he knew he should find Mademoiselle
de la Valliere. D'Artagnan found La Valliere the center of a circle. In
her apparent solitude, the king's favorite received, like a queen, more
perhaps than the queen, a homage of which Madame had been so proud, when
all the king's looks were directed to her, and commanded the looks of
the courtiers. D'Artagnan, although no squire of dames, received,
nevertheless, civilities and attentions from the ladies; he was polite,
as a brave man always is, and his terrible reputation had conciliated as
much friendship among the men as admiration among the women. On seeing
him enter, therefore, they immediately accosted him; and, as is not
unfrequently the case with fair ladies, opened the attack by questions.
"Where _had_ he been? What _had_ become of him so long? Why had they not
seen him as usual make his fine horse curvet in such beautiful style, to
the delight and astonishment of the curious from the king's balcony?"

He replied that he had just come from the land of oranges. This set all
the ladies laughing. Those were times in which everybody traveled, but
in which, notwithstanding, a journey of a hundred leagues was a problem
often solved by death.

"'From the land of oranges?'" exclaimed Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente.
"From Spain?"

"Eh! eh!" said the musketeer.

"From Malta?" said Montalais.

"Ma foi! You are coming very near, ladies."

"Is it an island?" asked La Valliere.

"Mademoiselle," said D'Artagnan; "I will not give you the trouble of
seeking any further; I come from the country where M. de Beaufort is, at
this moment, embarking for Algiers."

"Have you seen the army?" asked several warlike fair ones.

"As plainly as I see you," replied D'Artagnan.

"And the fleet?"

"Yes; I saw everything."

"Have we any of us any friends there?" said Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, coldly, but in a manner to attract attention to a
question that was not without a calculated aim.

"Why?" replied D'Artagnan, "yes; there were M. de la Guillotiere, M. de
Manchy, M. de Bragelonne--"

La Valliere became pale. "M. de Bragelonne!" cried the perfidious
Athenais. "Eh, what!--is he gone to the wars?--he!"

Montalais trod upon her toe, but in vain.

"Do you know what my opinion is?" continued she, addressing D'Artagnan.

"No, mademoiselle; but I should like very much to know it."

"My opinion is, then, that all the men who go to this war, are
desperate, desponding men, whom love has treated ill; and who go to try
if they cannot find black women more kind than fair ones have been."

Some of the ladies laughed. La Valliere was evidently confused.
Montalais coughed loud enough to waken the dead.

"Mademoiselle," interrupted D'Artagnan, "you are in error when you speak
of black women at Gigelli; the women there are not black; it is true
they are not white--they are yellow."

"Yellow!" exclaimed the bevy of fair beauties.

"Eh! do not disparage it. I have never seen a finer color to match with
black eyes and a coral mouth."

"So much the better for M. de Bragelonne," said Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, with persistent malice. "He will make amends for his
loss. Poor fellow!"

A profound silence followed these words; and D'Artagnan had time to
observe and reflect that women--those mild doves--treat each other much
more cruelly than tigers and bears. But making La Valliere pale did not
satisfy Athenais; she determined to make her blush likewise. Resuming
the conversation without pause, "Do you know, Louise," said she, "that
that is a great sin on your conscience?"

"What sin, mademoiselle?" stammered the unfortunate girl, looking round
her for support, without finding it.

"Eh!--why?" continued Athenais, "the poor young man was affianced to
you; he loved you, you cast him off."

"Well, and that is a right every honest woman has," said Montalais, in
an affected tone. "When we know we cannot constitute the happiness of a
man it is much better to cast him off."

"Cast him off! or refuse him!--that's all very well," said Athenais,
"but that is not the sin Mademoiselle de la Valliere has to reproach
herself with. The actual sin, is sending poor Bragelonne to the wars;
and to wars in which death is to be met with." Louise pressed her hand
over her icy-brow. "And if he dies," continued her pitiless tormentor;
"you will have killed him. That is the sin."

Louise, half-dead, caught at the arm of the captain of the musketeers,
whose face betrayed unusual emotion. "You wished to speak with me,
Monsieur D'Artagnan," said she, in a voice broken by anger and pain.
"What had you to say to me?"

D'Artagnan made several steps along the gallery, holding Louise on his
arm; then, when they were far enough removed from the others--"What I
had to say to you, mademoiselle," replied he, "Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente has just expressed; roughly and unkindly, it is true,
but still in its entirety."

She uttered a faint cry; struck to the heart by this new wound, she went
on her way, like one of those poor birds which, struck to death, seek
the shade of the thicket to die in. She disappeared at one door, at the
moment the king was entering by another. The first glance of the king
was directed toward the empty seat of his mistress. In not perceiving La
Valliere, a frown came over his brow; but as soon as he saw D'Artagnan,
who bowed to him--"Ah! monsieur!" cried he, "you _have_ been diligent! I
am much pleased with you." This was the superlative expression of royal
satisfaction. Many men would have been ready to lay down their lives for
such a speech from the king. The maids of honor and the courtiers, who
had formed a respectful circle round the king on his entrance, drew
back, on observing he wished to speak privately with his captain of the
musketeers. The king led the way out of the gallery, after having again,
with his eyes, sought everywhere for La Valliere, whose absence he could
not account for. The moment they were out of reach of curious ears,
"Well! Monsieur d'Artagnan," said he, "the prisoner?"

"Is in his prison, sire."

"What did he say on the road?"

"Nothing, sire."

"What did he do?"

"There was a moment at which the fisherman--who took me in his boat to
Sainte-Marguerite--revolted, and did his best to kill me. The--the
prisoner defended me instead of attempting to fly."

The king became pale. "Enough!" said he; and D'Artagnan bowed. Louis
walked about his cabinet with hasty steps. "Were you at Antibes," said
he, "when Monsieur de Beaufort came there?"

"No, sire; I was setting off when Monsieur le Duc arrived."

"Ah!" which was followed by a fresh silence. "Whom did you see there?"

"A great many persons," said D'Artagnan, coolly.

The king perceived that he was unwilling to speak. "I have sent for you,
Monsieur le Capitaine, to desire you to go and prepare my lodgings at
Nantes."

"At Nantes!" cried D'Artagnan.

"In Bretagne."

"Yes, sire, it is in Bretagne. Will your majesty make so long a journey
as to Nantes?"

"The States are assembled there," replied the king. "I have two demands
to make of them: I wish to be there."

"When shall I set out?" said the captain.

"This evening--to-morrow--to-morrow evening; for you must stand in need
of rest."

"I have rested, sire."

"That is well. Then between this and to-morrow evening, when you
please."

D'Artagnan bowed as if to take his leave; but, perceiving the king very
much embarrassed, "Will your majesty," said he, stepping two paces
forward, "take the court with you?"

"Certainly I shall."

"Then your majesty will, doubtless, want the musketeers?" And the eye of
the king sank beneath the penetrating glance of the captain.

"Take a brigade of them," replied Louis.

"Is that all? Has your majesty no other orders to give me?"

"No--ah--yes."

"I am all attention, sire."

"At the castle of Nantes, which I hear is very ill arranged, you will
adopt the practice of placing musketeers at the door of each of the
principal dignitaries I shall take with me."

"Of the principal?"

"Yes."

"For instance, at the door of M. de Lyonne?"

"Yes."

"At that of M. Letellier?"

"Yes."

"Of M. de Brienne?"

"Yes."

"And of Monsieur le Surintendant?"

"Without doubt."

"Very well, sire. By to-morrow I shall have set out."

"Oh, yes; but one more word, Monsieur d'Artagnan. At Nantes you will
meet with M. le Duc de Gesvres, captain of the guards. Be sure that your
musketeers are placed before his guards arrive. Precedence always
belongs to the first comer."

"Yes, sire."

"And if M. de Gesvres should question you?"

"Question me, sire! Is it likely that M. de Gesvres should question me?"
And the musketeer, turning cavalierly on his heel, disappeared. "To
Nantes!" said he to himself, as he descended the stairs. "Why did he not
dare to say from thence to Belle-Isle?"

As he reached the great gates, one of M. Brienne's clerks came running
after him exclaiming, "Monsieur d'Artagnan. I beg your pardon--"

"What is the matter, Monsieur Ariste?"

"The king has desired me to give you this order."

"Upon your cash-box?" asked the musketeer.

"No, monsieur; upon that of M. Fouquet."


[Illustration: THEY SAW, BY THE RED FLASHES OF THE LIGHTNING AGAINST
THE VIOLET FOG WHICH THE WIND STAMPED UPON THE BANKWARD SKY, THEY SAW
PASS GRAVELY, AT SIX PACES BEHIND THE GOVERNOR, A MAN CLOTHED IN BLACK
AND MASKED BY A VISOR OF POLISHED STEEL, SOLDERED TO A HELMET OF THE
SAME NATURE, WHICH ALTOGETHER ENVELOPED THE WHOLE OF HIS
HEAD.--_Page 438._]


D'Artagnan was surprised, but he took the order, which was in the
king's own writing, and was for two hundred pistoles. "What!" thought
he, after having politely thanked M. Brienne's clerk, "M. Fouquet is to
pay for the journey, then! Mordioux! that is a bit of pure Louis XI.!
Why was not this order upon the chest of M. Colbert? He would have paid
it with such joy." And D'Artagnan, faithful to his principle of never
letting an order at sight get cold, went straight to the house of M.
Fouquet, to receive his two hundred pistoles.




CHAPTER CIX.

THE LAST SUPPER.


The surintendant had no doubt received advice of the approaching
departure, for he was giving a farewell dinner to his friends. From the
bottom to the top of the house, the hurry of the servants bearing
dishes, and the diligence of the _registres_, denoted an approaching
change in both offices and kitchen. D'Artagnan, with his order in his
hand, presented himself at the _bureaux_, when he was told it was too
late to pay cash, the chest was closed. He only replied, "On the king's
service."

The clerk, a little put out by the serious air of the captain, replied,
that "that was a very respectable reason, but that the customs of the
house were respectable likewise; and that, in consequence, he begged the
bearer to call again next day." D'Artagnan asked if he could not see M.
Fouquet. The clerk replied that M. le Surintendant did not interfere
with such details; and rudely closed the outer door in D'Artagnan's
face. But the latter had foreseen this stroke, and placed his boot
between the door and the door-case, so that the lock did not catch, and
the clerk was still nose to nose with his interlocutor. This made him
change his tone, and say, with terrified politeness, "If monsieur wishes
to speak to M. le Surintendant, he must go to the antechambers; these
are the offices, where monseigneur never comes."

"Oh! very well! Where are they?" replied D'Artagnan.

"On the other side of the court," said the clerk, delighted at being
free.

D'Artagnan crossed the court, and fell in with a crowd of servants.

"Monseigneur sees nobody at this hour," he was answered by a fellow
carrying a vermeil dish, in which were three pheasants and twelve
quails.

"Tell him," said the captain, laying hold of the servant by the end of
his dish, "that I am M. d'Artagnan, captain of his majesty's
musketeers."

The fellow uttered a cry of surprise and disappeared; D'Artagnan
following him slowly. He arrived just in time to meet M. Pellisson in
the antechamber; the latter, a little pale, came hastily out of the
dining-room to learn what was the matter. D'Artagnan smiled.

"There is nothing unpleasant, Monsieur Pellisson; only a little order to
receive the money for."

"Ah!" said Fouquet's friend, breathing more freely; and he took the
captain by the hand, and, dragging him behind him, led him into the
dining-room, where a number of friends surrounded the surintendant,
placed in the center, and buried in the cushions of a fauteuil. There
were assembled all the Epicureans who so lately at Vaux did the honors
of the mansion of wit and money of M. Fouquet. Joyous friends, for the
most part faithful, they had not fled their protector at the approach of
the storm, and, in spite of the threatening heavens, in spite of the
trembling earth, they remained there, smiling, cheerful, as devoted to
misfortune as they had been to prosperity. On the left of the
surintendant was Madame de Belliere; on his right was Madame Fouquet; as
if braving the laws of the world, and putting all vulgar reasons of
propriety to silence, the two protecting angels of this man united to
offer him, at the moment of the crisis, the support of their intertwined
arms. Madame de Belliere was pale, trembling, and full of respectful
attentions for Madame la Surintendante, who, with one hand on the hand
of her husband, was looking anxiously toward the door by which
Pellisson had gone out to bring in D'Artagnan. The captain entered at
first full of courtesy, and afterward of admiration, when, with his
infallible glance, he had divined as well as taken in the expression of
every face. Fouquet raised himself up in his chair.

"Pardon me, Monsieur d'Artagnan," said he, "if I did not come to receive
you when coming in the king's name." And he pronounced the last words
with a sort of melancholy firmness, which filled the hearts of his
friends with terror.

"Monseigneur," implied D'Artagnan, "I only come to you in the king's
name to demand payment of an order for two hundred pistoles."

The clouds passed from every brow but that of Fouquet, which still
remained overcast.

"Ah! then," said he, "perhaps you are also setting out for Nantes?"

"I do not know whither I am setting out for, monseigneur."

"But," said Madame Fouquet, recovered from her fright, "you are not
going so soon, Monsieur le Capitaine, as not to do us the honor to take
a seat with us?"

"Madame, I should esteem that a great honor done to me, but I am so
pressed for time, that, you see, I have been obliged to permit myself to
interrupt your repast to procure payment of my note."

"The reply to which shall be gold," said Fouquet, making a sign to his
intendant, who went out with the order which D'Artagnan handed to him.

"Oh!" said the latter, "I was not uneasy about the payment; the house is
good."

A painful smile passed over the pale features of Fouquet.

"Are you in pain?" asked Madame de Belliere.

"Do you feel your attack coming on?" asked Madame Fouquet.

"Neither, thank you both," said Fouquet.

"Your attack?" said D'Artagnan, in his turn; "are you unwell,
monseigneur?"

"I have a tertian fever, which seized me after the fete at Vaux."

"Caught cold in the grottoes, at night, perhaps?"

"No, no; nothing but agitation, that was all."

"The too much heart you displayed in your reception of the king," said
La Fontaine, quietly, without suspicion that he was uttering a
sacrilege.

"We cannot devote too much heart to the reception of our king," said
Fouquet, mildly, to his poet.

"Monsieur meant to say the too great ardor," interrupted D'Artagnan,
with perfect frankness and much amenity. "The fact is, monseigneur, that
hospitality was never practiced as at Vaux."

Madame Fouquet permitted her countenance to show clearly that if Fouquet
had conducted himself well toward the king, the king had not rendered
the like to the minister. But D'Artagnan knew the terrible secret. He
alone with Fouquet knew it; those two men had not, the one the courage
to complain, the other the right to accuse. The captain, to whom the two
hundred pistols were brought, was about to take leave, when Fouquet,
rising, took a glass of wine, and ordered one to be given to D'Artagnan.

"Monsieur," said he, "to the health of the king, _whatever may happen_."

"And to your health, monseigneur, _whatever may happen_," said
D'Artagnan.

He bowed, with these words of evil omen, to all the company, who rose as
soon as they heard the sound of his spurs and boots at the bottom of the
stairs.

"I, for a moment, thought it was me and not my money he wanted," said
Fouquet, endeavoring to laugh.

"You!" cried his friends; "and what for, in the name of Heaven?"

"Oh! do not deceive yourselves, my dear brothers in Epicurus!" said the
superintendent; "I will not make a comparison between the most humble
sinner on the earth and the God we adore, but remember, he gave one day
to his friends a repast which is called the Last Supper, and which was
nothing but a farewell dinner, like that which we are making at this
moment."

A painful cry of denial arose from all parts of the table. "Shut the
doors," said Fouquet, and the servants disappeared. "My friends,"
continued Fouquet, lowering his voice, "what was I formerly? What am I
now? Consult among yourselves, and reply. A man like me sinks when he
does not continue to rise. What shall we say, then, when he really
sinks? I have no more money, no more credit; I have no longer anything
but powerful enemies, and powerless friends."

"Quick!" cried Pellisson, rising. "Since you explain yourself with that
frankness, it is our duty to be frank, likewise. Yes, you are
ruined--yes, you are hastening to your ruin--stop. And, in the first
place, what money have we left?"

"Seven hundred thousand livres," said the intendant.

"Bread," murmured Madame Fouquet.

"Relays," said Pellisson, "relays, and fly!"

"Whither?"

"To Switzerland--to Savoy--but fly!"

"If monseigneur flies," said Madame Belliere, "it will be said that he
was guilty, and was afraid."

"More than that, it will be said that I have carried away twenty
millions with me."

"We will draw up memoirs to justify you," said La Fontaine. "Fly!"

"I will remain," said Fouquet. "And, besides, does not everything serve
me?"

"You have Belle-Isle," cried the Abbe Fouquet.

"And I am naturally going there, when going to Nantes," replied the
surintendant. "Patience, then, patience!"

"Before arriving at Nantes, what a distance!" said Madame Fouquet.

"Yes, I know that well," replied Fouquet. "But what is to be done there?
The king summons me to the States. I know well it is for the purpose of
ruining me; but to refuse to go would be to evince uneasiness."

"Well, I have discovered the means of reconciling everything," cried
Pellisson. "You are going to set out for Nantes."

Fouquet looked at him with an air of surprise.

"But with friends; but in your own carriage as far as Orleans; in your
barge as far as Nantes; always ready to defend yourself, if you are
attacked; to escape, if you are threatened. In fact, you will carry your
money against all chances; and, while flying, you will only have obeyed
the king; then, reaching the sea when you like, you will embark for
Belle-Isle, and from Belle-Isle you will shoot out whenever it may
please you, like the eagle which rushes into space when it has been
driven from its eyrie."

A general assent followed Pellisson's words. "Yes, do so," said Madame
Fouquet to her husband.

"Do so," said Madame Belliere.

"Do it! do it!" cried all his friends.

"I will do so," replied Fouquet.

"This very evening?"

"In an hour?"

"Immediately."

"With seven hundred thousand livres you can lay the foundation of
another fortune," said the Abbe Fouquet. "What is there to prevent our
arming corsairs at Belle-Isle?"

"And if necessary, we will go and discover a new world," added La
Fontaine, intoxicated with projects and enthusiasm.

A knock at the door interrupted this concert of joy and hope. "A courier
from the king," said the master of the ceremonies.

A profound silence immediately ensued, as if the message brought by this
courier was nothing but a reply to all the projects given birth to an
instant before. Every one waited to see what the master would do. His
brow was streaming with perspiration, and he was really suffering from
his fever at that instant. He passed into his cabinet to receive the
king's message. There prevailed, as we have said, such a silence in the
chambers, and throughout the attendance, that from the dining-room could
be heard the voice of Fouquet saying, "That is well, monsieur." This
voice was, however, broken by fatigue, trembling with emotion. An
instant after Fouquet called Gourville, who crossed the gallery amid
the universal expectation. At length, he himself reappeared among his
guests; but it was no longer the same pale, spiritless countenance they
had beheld when he left them; from pale he had become livid; and from
spiritless, annihilated. A living specter, he advanced with his arms
stretched out, his mouth parched, like a shade that comes to salute
friends of former days. On seeing him thus, every one cried out, and
every one rushed toward Fouquet. The latter, looking at Pellisson,
leaned upon the surintendante, and pressed the icy hand of the Marquise
de Belliere.

"Well!" said he, in a voice which had nothing human in it.

"What has happened, my God!" said some one to him.

Fouquet opened his right hand, which was clenched, humid, and displayed
a paper, upon which Pellisson cast a terrified glance. He read the
following lines, written by the king's hand:


     "'DEAR AND WELL-BELOVED MONSIEUR FOUQUET--Give us, upon
     that which you have left of ours, the sum of seven hundred thousand
     livres, of which we stand in need to prepare for our departure.

     "'And, as we know your health is not good, we pray God to restore
     you to health, and to have you in His holy keeping.       LOUIS.

     "'The present letter is to serve as a receipt.'"


A murmur of terror circulated through the apartment.

"Well!" cried Pellisson, in his turn, "you have received that letter?"

"Received it, yes!"

"What will you do, then?"

"Nothing, since I have received it."

"But--"

"If I have received it, Pellisson, I have paid it," said the
surintendant, with a simplicity that went to the heart of all present.

"You have paid it!" cried Madame Fouquet. "Then we are ruined!"

"Come, no useless words," interrupted Pellisson. "After money, life.
Monseigneur, to horse! to horse!"

"What, leave us!" at once cried both the women, wild with grief.

"Eh! monseigneur, in saving yourself, you save us all. To horse!"

"But he cannot hold himself on. Look at him."

"Oh! if he takes time to reflect--" said the intrepid Pellisson.

"He is right," murmured Fouquet.

"Monseigneur! monseigneur!" cried Gourville, rushing up the stairs, four
steps at once. "Monseigneur!"

"Well! What?"

"I escorted, as you desired, the king's courier with the money."

"Yes."

"Well! when I arrived at the Palais Royal, I saw--"

"Take breath, my poor friend, take breath; you are suffocating."

"What did you see?" cried the impatient friends.

"I saw the musketeers mounting on horseback," said Gourville.

"There, then!" cried all voices at once; "there, then! is there an
instant to be lost?"

Madame Fouquet rushed downstairs, calling for her horses; Madame de
Belliere flew after her, catching her in her arms, and saying:

"Madame, in the name of his safety, do not show anything, do not
manifest any alarm."

Pellisson ran to have the horses put to the carriages. And, in the
meantime, Gourville gathered in his hat all that the weeping friends
were able to throw into it of gold and silver--the last offering, the
pious alms made to misfortune by poverty. The surintendant, dragged
along by some, carried by others, was shut up in his carriage. Gourville
took the reins, and mounted the box. Pellisson supported Madame Fouquet,
who had fainted. Madame de Belliere had more strength, and was well paid
for it; she received Fouquet's last kiss. Pellisson easily explained
this precipitate departure by saying that an order from the king had
summoned the minister to Nantes.




CHAPTER CX.

IN THE CARRIAGE OF M. COLBERT.


As Gourville had seen, the king's musketeers were mounting and following
their captain. The latter, who did not like to be confined in his
proceedings, left his brigade under the orders of a lieutenant, and set
off, on his part, upon post horses, recommending his men to use all
diligence. However rapidly they might travel, they could not arrive
before him. He had time, in passing along the Rue des Petits-Champs, to
see a thing which afforded him plenty of food for thought, and
conjecture. He saw M. Colbert coming out from his house to get into his
carriage, which was stationed before the door. In this carriage
D'Artagnan perceived the hoods of two women, and being rather curious,
he wished to know the names of the women concealed beneath these hoods.
To get a glimpse at them, for they kept themselves closely covered up,
he urged his horse so near to the carriage, that he drove him against
the step with such force as to shake everything containing and
contained. The terrified women uttered, the one a faint cry, by which
D'Artagnan recognized a young woman, the other an imprecation, by which
he recognized the vigor and _aplomb_ which half a century bestows. The
hoods were thrown back: one of the women was Madame Vanel, the other was
the Duchesse de Chevreuse. D'Artagnan's eyes were quicker than those of
the ladies; he had seen and known them, while they did not recognize
him; and as they laughed at their fright, pressing each other's hands--

"Humph!" said D'Artagnan, "the old duchesse is not more difficult in her
friendships than she was formerly. She paying her court to the mistress
of M. Colbert! Poor M. Fouquet! that presages you nothing good!"

He rode on. M. Colbert got into his carriage, and this noble trio
commenced a sufficiently slow pilgrimage toward the wood of Vincennes.
Madame de Chevreuse set down Madame Vanel at her husband's house, and,
left alone with M. Colbert, she chatted upon affairs, while continuing
her ride. She had an inexhaustible fund of conversation, had that dear
duchesse, and as she always talked for the ill of others, always with a
view to her own good, her conversation amused her interlocutor, and did
not fail to leave a favorable impression behind.

She taught Colbert, who, poor man! was ignorant of it, how great a
minister he was, and how Fouquet would soon become nothing. She promised
to rally around him, when he should become surintendant, all the old
nobility of the kingdom, and questioned him as to the preponderance it
would be proper to allow La Valliere to take. She praised him, she
blamed him, she bewildered him. She showed him the secret of so many
secrets, that, for a moment, Colbert feared he must have to do with the
devil. She proved to him that she held in her hand the Colbert of
to-day, as she had held the Fouquet of yesterday; and as he asked her
very simply the reason of her hatred for the surintendant: "Why do you
yourself hate him?" said she.

"Madame, in politics," replied he, "the differences of system may bring
about divisions between men. M. Fouquet always appeared to me to
practice a system opposed to the true interests of the king."

She interrupted him.--"I will say no more to you about M. Fouquet. The
journey the king is about to take to Nantes will give a good account of
him. M. Fouquet, for me, is a man quite gone by--and for you also."

Colbert made no reply. "On his return from Nantes," continued the
duchesse, "the king, who is only anxious for a pretext, will find that
the States have not behaved well--that they have made too few
sacrifices. The States will say that the imposts are too heavy, and that
the surintendant has ruined them. The king will lay all the blame on M.
Fouquet, and then--"

"And then?" said Colbert.

"Oh! he will be disgraced. Is not that your opinion?"

Colbert darted a glance at the duchesse, which plainly said: "If M.
Fouquet be only disgraced, you will not be the cause of it."

"Your place, M. Colbert," the duchesse hastened to say, "must be quite a
marked place. Do you perceive any one between the king and yourself,
after the fall of M. Fouquet?"

"I do not understand," said he.

"You will understand. To what does your ambition aspire?"

"I have none."

"It was useless then to overthrow the surintendant, Monsieur Colbert.
That is idle."

"I had the honor to tell you, Madame--"

"Oh! yes, I know, all about the interest of the king--but, if you
please, we will speak of your own."

"Mine! that is to say the affairs of his majesty."

"In short, are you, or are you not ruining M. Fouquet? Answer without
evasion."

"Madame, I ruin nobody."

"I cannot then comprehend why you should purchase of me the letters of
M. Mazarin concerning M. Fouquet. Neither can I conceive why you have
laid those letters before the king."

Colbert, half stupefied, looked at the duchesse with an air of
constraint.

"Madame," said he, "I can less easily conceive how you, who received the
money, can reproach me on that head."

"That is," said the old duchesse, "because we must will that which we
wish for, unless we are not able to obtain what we wish."

"_Will!_" said Colbert, quite confounded by such coarse logic.

"You are not able, hein! Speak."

"I am not able, I allow, to destroy certain influences near the king."

"Which combat for M. Fouquet? What are they? Stop, let me help you."

"Do, madame."

"La Valliere?"

"Oh! very little influence; no knowledge of business, and small means.
M. Fouquet has paid his court to her."

"To defend him would be to accuse herself, would it not?"

"I think it would."

"There is still another influence, what do you say to that?"

"Is it considerable?"

"The queen-mother, perhaps?"

"Her majesty, the queen-mother, has for M. Fouquet a weakness very
prejudicial to her son."

"Never believe that," said the old duchess, smiling.

"Oh!" said Colbert, with incredulity, "I have often experienced it."

"Formerly?"

"Very recently, madame, at Vaux. It was she who prevented the king from
having M. Fouquet arrested."

"People do not always entertain the same opinions, my dear monsieur.
That which the queen may have wished recently, she would not, perhaps,
to-day."

"And why not?" said Colbert, astonished.

"Oh! the reason is of very little consequence."

"On the contrary, I think it is of great consequence; for, if I were
certain of not displeasing her majesty the queen-mother, all my scruples
would be removed."

"Well! have you never heard talk of a certain secret?"

"A secret?"

"Call it what you like. In short, the queen-mother has conceived a
horror for all those who have participated, in one fashion or another,
in the discovery of this secret, and M. Fouquet, I believe to be one of
these."

"Then," said Colbert, "we may be sure of the assent of the
queen-mother?"

"I have just left her majesty, and she assures me so."

"So be it then, madame."

"But there is something further: do you happen to know a man who was the
intimate friend of M. Fouquet, a M. d'Herblay, a bishop, I believe?"

"Bishop of Vannes."

"Well! this M. d'Herblay, who also knew the secret, the queen-mother is
having him pursued with the utmost rancor."

"Indeed!"

"So hotly pursued, that if he were dead she would not be satisfied with
anything less than his head, to satisfy her he would never speak
again."

"And is that the desire of the queen-mother?"

"An order is given for it."

"This Monsieur d'Herblay shall be sought for, madame."

"Oh! it is well known where he is."

Colbert looked at the duchesse.

"Say where, madame."

"He is at Belle-Isle-en-Mer."

"At the residence of M. Fouquet?"

"At the residence of M. Fouquet."

"He shall be taken."

It was now the duchesse's turn to smile. "Do not fancy that so easy,"
said she, "and do not promise it so lightly."

"Why not, madame?"

"Because M. d'Herblay is not one of those people who can be taken just
when you please."

"He is a rebel, then!"

"Oh! Monsieur Colbert, we folks have passed all our lives in making
rebels, and yet you see plainly, that so far from being taken, we take
others."

Colbert fixed upon the old duchesse one of those fierce looks of which
no words can convey the expression, accompanied by a firmness which was
not wanting in grandeur. "The times are gone," said he, "in which
subjects gained duchies by making war against the king of France. If M.
d'Herblay conspires, he will perish on the scaffold. That will give, or
will not give, pleasure to his enemies--that is of very little
importance to _us_."

And this _us_, a strange word in the mouth of Colbert, made the duchesse
thoughtful for a moment. She caught herself reckoning inwardly with this
man.--Colbert had regained his superiority in the conversation, and he
was desirous of keeping it.

"You ask me, madame," he said, "to have this M. d'Herblay arrested?"

"I!--I ask you nothing of the kind!"

"I thought you did, madame. But as I have been mistaken, we will leave
him alone; the king has said nothing about him."

The duchesse bit her nails.

"Besides," continued Colbert, "what a poor capture would this bishop
be! A bishop game for a king! Oh! no, no; I will not even take the least
notice of him."

The hatred of the duchesse now discovered itself.

"Game for a woman!" said she, "and the queen is a woman. If she wishes
to have M. d'Herblay arrested, she has her reasons for it. Besides, is
not M. d'Herblay the friend of him who is destined to fall?"

"Oh! never mind that," said Colbert. "This man shall be spared, if he is
not the enemy of the king. Is that displeasing to you?"

"I say nothing."

"Yes--you wish to see him in prison, in the Bastille for instance."

"I believe a secret better concealed behind the walls of the Bastille
than behind those of Belle-Isle."

"I will speak to the king about it; he will clear up the point."

"And while wailing for that enlightenment, Monsieur l'Eveque de Vannes
will have escaped. I would do so."

"Escaped! he! and whither would he escape? Europe is ours, in will, if
not in fact."

"He will always find an asylum, monsieur. It is evident you know nothing
of the man you have to do with. You do not know D'Herblay; you did not
know Aramis. He was one of those four musketeers who, under the late
king, made Cardinal de Richelieu tremble, and who, during the regency,
gave so much trouble to Monseigneur Mazarin."

"But, madame, what can he do, unless he has a kingdom to back him?"

"He has one, monsieur."

"A kingdom, he! what Monsieur d'Herblay?"

"I repeat to you, monsieur, that if he wants a kingdom, he either has
it, or will have it."

"Well, as you are so earnest that this rebel should not escape, madame,
I promise you he shall not escape."

"Belle-Isle is fortified, M. Colbert, and fortified by him."

"If Belle-Isle were also defended by him, Belle-Isle is not impregnable;
and if Monsieur l'Eveque de Vannes is shut up in Belle-Isle, well,
madame, the place will be besieged, and he will be taken."

"You may be very certain, monsieur, that the zeal which you display for
the interests of the queen-mother will affect her majesty warmly, and
that you will be magnificently rewarded for it; but what shall I tell
her of your projects respecting this man?"

"That when once taken, he shall be shut up in a fortress from which her
secret shall never escape."

"Very well, Monsieur Colbert, and we may say, that, dating from this
instant, we have formed a solid alliance; that is, you and I, and that I
am perfectly at your service."

"It is I, madame, who place myself at yours. This Chevalier d'Herblay is
a kind of Spanish spy, is he not?"

"More than that."

"A secret ambassador!"

"Higher still."

"Stop--King Philip III. of Spain is a bigot. He is, perhaps, the
confessor of Philip III."

"You must go much higher than that."

"Mordieu!" cried Colbert, who forgot himself so far as to swear in the
presence of this great lady, of this old friend of the queen-mother--of
the Duchesse de Chevreuse, in short. "He must then be the general of the
Jesuits?"

"I believe you have guessed at last," replied the duchesse.

"Ah! then, madame, this man will ruin us all if we do not ruin him; and
we must make haste to do it, too."

"That was my opinion, monsieur, but I did not dare to give it you."

"And it is fortunate for us that he has attacked the throne, and not
us."

"But, mark this well, M. Colbert. M. d'Herblay is never discouraged; and
if he has missed one blow, he will be sure to make another: he will
begin again. If he has allowed an opportunity to escape of making a king
for himself, sooner or later, he will make another, of whom, to a
certainty, you will not be prime minister."

Colbert knitted his brow with a menacing expression.

"I feel assured that a prison will settle this affair for us, madame, in
a manner satisfactory for both." The duchesse smiled again.

"Oh! if you knew," said she, "how many times Aramis has got out of
prison!"

"Oh!" replied Colbert, "we will take care he shall not get out this
time."

"But you have not attended to what I said to you just now. Do you
remember that Aramis was one of the four invincibles whom Richelieu
dreaded? And at that period the four musketeers were not in possession
of that which they have now--money and experience."

Colbert bit his lips.

"We will renounce the idea of the prison," said he, in a lower tone; "we
will find a retreat from which the invincible will not possibly escape."

"That is well spoken, our ally!" replied the duchesse. "But it is
getting late; had we not better return?"

"The more willingly, madame, from my having my preparations to make for
setting out with the king."

"To Paris!" cried the duchesse to the coachman.

And the carriage returned toward the Faubourg Saint-Antoine, after the
conclusion of the treaty which gave up to death the last friend of
Fouquet, the last defender of Belle-Isle, the ancient friend of Marie
Michon, the new enemy of the duchesse.




CHAPTER CXI.

THE TWO LIGHTERS.


D'Artagnan had set off; Fouquet likewise was gone, and he with a
rapidity which doubled the tender interest of his friends. The first
moments of this journey, or better to say, of this flight, were troubled
by the incessant fear of all the horses and all the carriages which
could be perceived behind the fugitive. It was not natural, in fact, if
Louis XIV. was determined to seize this prey, that he should allow it to
escape; the young lion was already accustomed to the chase, and he had
bloodhounds sufficiently ardent to allow him to depend upon them. But
insensibly all the fears were dispersed; the surintendant, by hard
traveling, placed such a distance between himself and his persecutors,
that no one of them could reasonably be expected to overtake him. As to
his position, his friends had made it excellent for him. Was he not
traveling to join the king at Nantes, and what did the rapidity prove
but his zeal to obey? He arrived, fatigued but reassured, at Orleans,
where he found, thanks to the care of a courier who had preceded him, a
handsome lighter of eight oars. These lighters, in the shape of
gondolas, rather wide and rather heavy, containing a small covered
chamber in shape of a deck, and a chamber in the poop, formed by a tent,
then acted as passage-boats from Orleans to Nantes, by the Loire, and
this passage, a long one in our days, appeared then more easy and
convenient than the high road, with its post hacks, or its bad, scarcely
hung carriages. Fouquet went on board this lighter, which set out
immediately. The rowers, knowing they had the honor of conveying the
surintendant of the finances, pulled with all their strength, and that
magic word, the _finances_, promised them a liberal gratification, of
which they wished to prove themselves worthy. The lighter bounded over
the tiny waves of the Loire. Magnificent weather, one of those sun
risings that empurple landscapes, left the river all its limpid
serenity. The current and the rowers carried Fouquet along as wings
carry a bird, and he arrived before Beaugency without any accident
having signalized the voyage. Fouquet hoped to be the first to arrive at
Nantes; there he would see the notables and gain support among the
principal members of the States; he would make himself necessary, a
thing very easy for a man of his merit, and would delay the catastrophe,
if he did not succeed in avoiding it entirely. "Besides," said Gourville
to him, "at Nantes, you will make out, or we will make out, the
intentions of your enemies; we will have horses always ready to convey
you to the inextricable Poitou, a bark in which to gain the sea, and
when once in the open sea, Belle-Isle is the inviolable port. You see,
besides, that no one is watching you, no one is following you." He had
scarcely finished when they discovered at a distance, behind an elbow
formed by the river, the masts of a large lighter, which was coming
down. The rowers of Fouquet's boat uttered a cry of surprise on seeing
this galley.

"What is the matter?" asked Fouquet.

"The matter is, monseigneur," replied the patron of the bark, "that it
is a truly remarkable thing--that lighter comes along like a hurricane."

Gourville started, and mounted on the deck, in order to see the better.

Fouquet did not go up with him, but he said to Gourville with a
restrained mistrust: "See what it is, dear friend."

The lighter had just passed the elbow. It came on so fast, that behind
it might be seen to tremble the white train of its wake illumined with
the fires of day.

"How they go," repeated the patron, "how they go! They must be well
paid! I did not think," he added, "that oars of wood could behave better
than ours, but those yonder prove the contrary."

"Well they may," said one of the rowers, "they are twelve, and we are
but eight."

"Twelve rowers!" replied Gourville, "twelve! impossible."

The number of eight rowers for a lighter had never been exceeded, even
for the king. This honor had been paid to Monsieur le Surintendant, much
more for the sake of haste than of respect.

"What does that mean?" said Gourville, endeavoring to distinguish
beneath the tent which was already apparent, travelers which the most
piercing eye could not yet have succeeded in discovering.

"They must be in a hurry, for it is not the king," said the patron.

Fouquet shuddered.

"By what do you know that it is not the king?" said Gourville.

"In the first place, because there is no white flag with fleurs-de-lis,
which the royal lighter always carries."

"And then," said Fouquet, "because it is impossible it should be the
king, Gourville, as the king was still in Paris yesterday."

Gourville replied to the surintendant by a look which said: "You were
there yourself yesterday."

"And by what do you make out they are in such haste?" added he, for the
sake of gaining time.

"By this, monsieur," said the patron; "these people must have set out a
long while after us, and they have already nearly overtaken us."

"Bah!" said Gourville, "who told you that they do not come from
Beaugency or from Moit, even?"

"We have seen no lighter of that shape, except at Orleans. It comes from
Orleans, monsieur, and makes great haste."

Fouquet and Gourville exchanged a glance. The patron remarked their
uneasiness, and to mislead him, Gourville immediately said:

"Some friend, who has laid a wager he would catch us; let us win the
wager, and not allow him to come up with us."

The patron opened his mouth to reply that that was impossible, when
Fouquet said with much _hauteur_:

"If it is any one who wishes to overtake us, let him come."

"We can try, monseigneur," said the patron, timidly. "Come, you fellows,
put out your strength, row, row!"

"No," said Fouquet, "stop short, on the contrary."

"Monseigneur! what folly!" interrupted Gourville, stooping toward his
ear.

"Quite short!" repeated Fouquet. The eight oars stopped, and resisting
the water, they created a retrograde motion in the lighter. It was
stopped. The twelve rowers in the other did not, at first, perceive this
maneuver, for they continued to urge on their boat so vigorously that it
arrived quickly within musket-shot. Fouquet was short-sighted, Gourville
was annoyed by the sun, which was full in his eyes: the patron alone,
with that habit and clearness which are acquired by a constant struggle
with the elements, perceived distinctly the travelers in the neighboring
lighter. "I can see them!" cried he, "there are two."

"I can see nothing," said Gourville. "You will not be long before you
distinguish them: in twenty strokes of their oars they will be within
twenty paces of us."

But what the patron announced was not realized; the lighter imitated the
movement commanded by Fouquet, and instead of coming to join its
pretended friends, it stopped short in the middle of the river.

"I cannot comprehend this," said the patron.

"Nor I, neither," said Gourville.

"You who can see so plainly the people in that lighter," resumed
Fouquet, "try to describe them to us, patron, before we are too far
off."

"I thought I saw two," replied the boatman, "I can only see one now
under the tent."

"What sort of man is he?"

"He is a dark man, large shouldered, short necked."

A little cloud at that moment passed across the azure of the heavens,
and darkened the sun. Gourville, who was still looking, with one hand
over his eyes, became able to see what he sought, and all at once,
jumping from the deck into the chamber where Fouquet awaited him:

"Colbert!" said he, in a voice broken by emotion.

"Colbert!" repealed Fouquet, "Oh! how strange! but no, it is
impossible!"

"I tell you I recognized him, and he, at the same time, so plainly
recognized me, that he has just gone into the chamber on the poop.
Perhaps the king has sent him to make us come back."

"In that case he would join us, instead of lying by. What is he doing
there?"

"He is watching us, without doubt."

"I do not like uncertainty," said Fouquet; "let us go straight up to
him."

