provisions, and fortified its sides by walls studded with volcanic
glass and by other devices, till it seemed well nigh impossible that any
should be able to force them while a score of men still lived to offer a
defence.

It was on one night in the early summer, having bid farewell to Otomie
and taking my son with me, for he was now of an age when, according to
the Indian customs, lads are brought face to face with the dangers of
battle, that I despatched the appointed companies to their stations on
the brow of the precipice, and sallied into the darksome mouth of the
pass with the few hundred men who were left to me. I knew by my spies
that the Spaniards who were encamped on the further side would attempt
its passage an hour before the daylight, trusting to finding me asleep.
And sure enough, on the following morning, so early that the first rays
of the sun had not yet stained the lofty snows of the volcan Xaca that
towered behind us, a distant murmuring which echoed through the silence
of the night told me that the enemy had begun his march. I moved down
the pass to meet him easily enough; there was no stone in it that was
not known to me and my men. But with the Spaniards it was otherwise,
for many of them were mounted, and moreover they dragged with them
two carronades. Time upon time these heavy guns remained fast in the
boulder-strewn roadway, for in the darkness the slaves who drew them
could find no places for the wheels to run on, till in the end
the captains of the army, unwilling to risk a fight at so great a
disadvantage, ordered them to halt until the day broke.

At length the dawn came, and the light fell dimly down the depths of
the vast gulf, revealing the long ranks of the Spaniards clad in their
bright armour, and the yet more brilliant thousands of their native
allies, gorgeous in their painted helms and their glittering coats of
feathers. They saw us also, and mocking at our poor array, their column
twisted forward like some huge snake in the crack of a rock, till they
came to within a hundred paces of us. Then the Spaniards raised their
battle cry of Saint Peter, and lance at rest, they charged us with their
horse. We met them with a rain of arrows that checked them a little, but
not for long. Soon they were among us, driving us back at the point of
their lances, and slaying many, for our Indian weapons could work
little harm to men and horses clad in armour. Therefore we must fly, and
indeed, flight was my plan, for by it I hoped to lead the foe to that
part of the defile where the road was narrow and the cliffs sheer,
and they might be crushed by the stones which should hail on them from
above. All went well; we fled, the Spaniards followed flushed with
victory, till they were fairly in the trap. Now a single boulder
came rushing from on high, and falling on a horse, killed him, then
rebounding, carried dismay and wounds to those behind. Another followed,
and yet another, and I grew glad at heart, for it seemed to me that the
danger was over, and that for the second time my strategy had succeeded.

But suddenly from above there came a sound other than that of the
rushing rocks, the sound of men joining in battle, that grew and grew
till the air was full of its tumult, then something whirled down from on
high. I looked; it was no stone, but a man, one of my own men. Indeed he
was but as the first rain-drop of a shower.

Alas! I saw the truth; I had been outwitted. The Spaniards, old in war,
could not be caught twice by such a trick; they advanced down the pass
with the carronades indeed because they must, but first they sent great
bodies of men to climb the mountain under shelter of the night, by
secret paths which had been discovered to them, and there on its summit
to deal with those who would stay their passage by hurling rocks upon
them. And in truth they dealt with them but too well, for my men of the
Otomie, lying on the verge of the cliff among the scrub of aloes and
other prickly plants that grew there, watching the advance of the foe
beneath, and never for one moment dreaming that foes might be upon their
flank, were utterly surprised. Scarcely had they time to seize their
weapons, which were laid at their sides that they might have the greater
freedom in the rolling of heavy masses of rock, when the enemy, who
outnumbered them by far, were upon them with a yell. Then came a fight,
short but decisive.

Too late I saw it all, and cursed the folly that had not provided
against such chances, for, indeed, I never thought it possible that the
forces of the Spaniards could find the secret trails upon the further
side of the mountain, forgetting that treason makes most things
possible.



CHAPTER XXXIV

THE SIEGE OF THE CITY OF PINES


The battle was already lost. From a thousand feet above us swelled the
shouts of victory. The battle was lost, and yet I must fight on. As
swiftly as I could I withdrew those who were left to me to a certain
angle in the path, where a score of desperate men might, for a while,
hold back the advance of an army. Here I called for some to stand at
my side, and many answered to my call. Out of them I chose fifty men
or more, bidding the rest run hard for the City of Pines, there to warn
those who were left in garrison that the hour of danger was upon
them, and, should I fall, to conjure Otomie my wife to make the best
resistance in her power, till, if it were possible, she could wring
from the Spaniards a promise of safety for herself, her child, and her
people. Meanwhile I would hold the pass so that time might be given to
shut the gates and man the walls. With the main body of those who were
left to me I sent back my son, though he prayed hard to be allowed to
stay with me. But, seeing nothing before me except death, I refused him.

Presently all were gone, and fearing a snare the Spaniards came slowly
and cautiously round the angle of the rock, and seeing so few men
mustered to meet them halted, for now they were certain that we had set
a trap for them, since they did not think it possible that such a little
band would venture to oppose their array. Here the ground lay so that
only a few of them could come against us at one time, nor could they
bring their heavy pieces to bear on us, and even their arquebusses
helped them but little. Also the roughness of the road forced them to
dismount from their horses, so that if they would attack at all, it
must be on foot. This in the end they chose to do. Many fell upon either
side, though I myself received no wound, but in the end they drove us
back. Inch by inch they drove us back, or rather those who were left
of us, at the point of their long lances, till at length they forced us
into the mouth of the pass, that is some five furlongs distant from what
was once the wall of the City of Pines.

To fight further was of no avail, here we must choose between death and
flight, and as may be guessed, for wives' and children's sake if not for
our own, we chose to fly. Across the plain we fled like deer, and after
us came the Spaniards and their allies like hounds. Happily the ground
was rough with stones so that their horses could not gallop freely, and
thus it happened that some of us, perhaps twenty, gained the gates in
safety. Of my army not more than five hundred in all lived to enter them
again, and perchance there were as many left within the city.

The heavy gates swung to, and scarcely were they barred with the massive
beams of oak, when the foremost of the Spaniards rode up to them. My bow
was still in my hand and there was one arrow left in my quiver. I set it
on the string, and drawing the bow with my full strength, I loosed
the shaft through the bars of the gate at a young and gallant looking
cavalier who rode the first of all. It struck him truly between the
joint of his helm and neck piece, and stretching his arms out wide he
fell backward over the crupper of his horse, to move no more. Then they
withdrew, but presently one of their number came forward bearing a
flag of truce. He was a knightly looking man, clad in rich armour, and
watching him, it seemed to me that there was something in his bearing,
and in the careless grace with which he sat his horse, that was familiar
to me. Reining up in front of the gates he raised his visor and began to
speak.

I knew him at once; before me was de Garcia, my ancient enemy, of whom I
had neither heard nor seen anything for hard upon twelve years. Time had
touched him indeed, which was scarcely to be wondered at, for now he was
a man of sixty or more. His peaked chestnut-coloured beard was streaked
with grey, his cheeks were hollow, and at that distance his lips seemed
like two thin red lines, but the eyes were as they had always been,
bright and piercing, and the same cold smile played about his mouth.
Without a doubt it was de Garcia, who now, as at every crisis of my
life, appeared to shape my fortunes to some evil end, and I felt as I
looked upon him that the last and greatest struggle between us was at
hand, and that before many days were sped, the ancient and accumulated
hate of one or of both of us would be buried for ever in the silence of
death. How ill had fate dealt with me, now as always. But a few minutes
before, when I set that arrow on the string, I had wavered for a moment,
doubting whether to loose it at the young cavalier who lay dead, or at
the knight who rode next to him; and see! I had slain one with whom I
had no quarrel and left my enemy unharmed.

'Ho there!' cried de Garcia in Spanish. 'I desire to speak with the
leader of the rebel Otomie on behalf of the Captain Bernal Diaz, who
commands this army.'

Now I mounted on the wall by means of a ladder which was at hand, and
answered, 'Speak on, I am the man you seek.'

'You know Spanish well, friend,' said de Garcia, starting and looking at
me keenly beneath his bent brows. 'Say now, where did you learn it? And
what is your name and lineage?'

'I learned it, Juan de Garcia, from a certain Donna Luisa, whom you knew
in your days of youth. And my name is Thomas Wingfield.'

Now de Garcia reeled in his saddle and swore a great oath.

'Mother of God!' he said, 'years ago I was told that you had taken up
your abode among some savage tribe, but since then I have been far,
to Spain and back indeed, and I deemed that you were dead, Thomas
Wingfield. My luck is good in truth, for it has been one of the great
sorrows of my life that you have so often escaped me, renegade. Be sure
that this time there shall be no escape.'

'I know well that there will be no escape for one or other of us, Juan
de Garcia,' I answered. 'Now we play the last round of the game, but do
not boast, for God alone knows to whom the victory shall be given. You
have prospered long, but a day may be at hand when your prosperity shall
cease with your breath. To your errand, Juan de Garcia.'

For a moment he sat silent, pulling at his pointed beard, and watching
him I thought that I could see the shadow of a half-forgotten fear creep
into his eyes. If so, it was soon gone, for lifting his head, he spoke
boldly and clearly.

'This is my message to you, Thomas Wingfield, and to such of the Otomie
dogs with whom you herd as we have left alive to-day. The Captain Bernal
Diaz offers you terms on behalf of his Excellency the viceroy.'

'What are his terms?' I asked.

'Merciful enough to such pestilent rebels and heathens,' he answered
sneering. 'Surrender your city without condition, and the viceroy, in
his clemency, will accept the surrender. Nevertheless, lest you should
say afterwards that faith has been broken with you, be it known to
you, that you shall not go unpunished for your many crimes. This is the
punishment that shall be inflicted on you. All those who had part or
parcel in the devilish murder of that holy saint Father Pedro, shall be
burned at the stake, and the eyes of all those who beheld it shall be
put out. Such of the leaders of the Otomie as the judges may select
shall be hanged publicly, among them yourself, Cousin Wingfield, and
more particularly the woman Otomie, daughter of Montezuma the late king.
For the rest, the dwellers in the City of Pines must surrender their
wealth into the treasury of the viceroy, and they themselves, men, women
and children, shall be led from the city and be distributed according to
the viceroy's pleasure upon the estates of such of the Spanish settlers
as he may select, there to learn the useful arts of husbandry and
mining. These are the conditions of surrender, and I am commanded to
say that an hour is given you in which to decide whether you accept or
reject them.'

'And if we reject them?'

'Then the Captain Bernal Diaz has orders to sack and destroy this city,
and having given it over for twelve hours to the mercy of the Tlascalans
and other faithful Indian allies, to collect those who may be left
living within it, and bring them to the city of Mexico, there to be sold
as slaves.'

'Good,' I said; 'you shall have your answer in an hour.' Now, leaving
the gate guarded, I hurried to the palace, sending messengers as I went
to summon such of the council of the city as remained alive. At the door
of the palace I met Otomie, who greeted me fondly, for after hearing of
our disaster she had hardly looked to see me again.

'Come with me to the Hall of Assembly,' I said; 'there I will speak to
you.'

We went to the hall, where the members of the council were already
gathering. So soon as the most of them were assembled, there were but
eight in all, I repeated to them the words of de Garcia without comment.
Then Otomie spoke, as being the first in rank she had a right to do.
Twice before I had heard her address the people of the Otomie upon these
questions of defence against the Spaniards. The first time, it may be
remembered, was when we came as envoys from Cuitlahua, Montezuma her
father's successor, to pray the aid of the children of the mountain
against Cortes and the Teules. The second time was when, some fourteen
years ago, we had returned to the City of Pines as fugitives after the
fall of Tenoctitlan, and the populace, moved to fury by the destruction
of nearly twenty thousand of their soldiers, would have delivered us as
a peace offering into the hands of the Spaniards.

On each of these occasions Otomie had triumphed by her eloquence, by the
greatness of her name and the majesty of her presence. Now things were
far otherwise, and even had she not scorned to use them, such arts would
have availed us nothing in this extremity. Now her great name was but
a shadow, one of many waning shadows cast by an empire whose glory
had gone for ever; now she used no passionate appeal to the pride and
traditions of a doomed race, now she was no longer young and the first
splendour of her womanhood had departed from her. And yet, as with her
son and mine at her side, she rose to address those seven councillors,
who, haggard with fear and hopeless in the grasp of fate, crouched in
silence before her, their faces buried in their hands, I thought that
Otomie had never seemed more beautiful, and that her words, simple as
they were, had never been more eloquent.

'Friends,' she said, 'you know the disaster that has overtaken us. My
husband has given you the message of the Teules. Our case is desperate.
We have but a thousand men at most to defend this city, the home of our
forefathers, and we alone of all the peoples of Anahuac still dare to
stand in arms against the white men. Years ago I said to you, Choose
between death with honour and life with shame! To-day again I say to
you, Choose! For me and mine there is no choice left, since whatever you
decide, death must be our portion. But with you it is otherwise. Will
you die fighting, or will you and your children serve your remaining
years as slaves?'

For a while the seven consulted together, then their spokesman answered.

'Otomie, and you, Teule, we have followed your counsels for many years
and they have brought us but little luck. We do not blame you, for the
gods of Anahuac have deserted us as we have deserted them, and the gods
alone stand between men and their evil destiny. Whatever misfortunes we
may have borne, you have shared in them, and so it is now at the end.
Nor will we go back upon our words in this the last hour of the people
of the Otomie. We have chosen; we have lived free with you, and still
free, we will die with you. For like you we hold that it is better for
us and ours to perish as free men than to drag out our days beneath the
yoke of the Teule.'

'It is well,' said Otomie; 'now nothing remains for us except to seek a
death so glorious that it shall be sung of in after days. Husband, you
have heard the answer of the council. Let the Spaniards hear it also.'

So I went back to the wall, a white flag in my hand, and presently an
envoy advanced from the Spanish camp to speak with me--not de Garcia,
but another. I told him in few words that those who remained alive of
the people of the Otomie would die beneath the ruins of their city like
the children of Tenoctitlan before them, but that while they had a spear
to throw and an arm to throw it, they would never yield to the tender
mercies of the Spaniard.


The envoy returned to the camp, and within an hour the attack began.
Bringing up their pieces of ordnance, the Spaniards set them within
little more than an hundred paces of the gates, and began to batter
us with iron shot at their leisure, for our spears and arrows could
scarcely harm them at such a distance. Still we were not idle, for
seeing that the wooden gates must soon be down, we demolished houses on
either side of them and filled up the roadway with stones and rubbish.
At the rear of the heap thus formed I caused a great trench to be dug,
which could not be passed by horsemen and ordnance till it was filled
in again. All along the main street leading to the great square of the
teocalli I threw up other barricades, protected in the front and rear by
dykes cut through the roadway, and in case the Spaniards should try to
turn our flank and force a passage through the narrow and tortuous lanes
to the right and left, I also barricaded the four entrances to the great
square or market place.

Till nightfall the Spaniards bombarded the shattered remains of the
gates and the earthworks behind them, doing no great damage beyond the
killing of about a score of people by cannon shot and arquebuss balls.
But they attempted no assault that day. At length the darkness fell and
their fire ceased, but not so our labours. Most of the men must guard
the gates and the weak spots in the walls, and therefore the building of
the barricades was left chiefly to the women, working under my command
and that of my captains. Otomie herself took a share in the toil, an
example that was followed by every lady and indeed by every woman in
the city, and there were many of them, for the women outnumbered the men
among the Otomie, and moreover not a few of them had been made widows on
that same day.

It was a strange sight to see them in the glare of hundreds of torches
split from the resin pine that gave its name to the city, as all night
long they moved to and fro in lines, each of them staggering beneath the
weight of a basket of earth or a heavy stone, or dug with wooden spades
at the hard soil, or laboured at the pulling down of houses. They never
complained, but worked on sullenly and despairingly; no groan or tear
broke from them, no, not even from those whose husbands and sons had
been hurled that morning from the precipices of the pass. They knew that
resistance would be useless and that their doom was at hand, but no cry
arose among them of surrender to the Spaniards. Those of them who spoke
of the matter at all said with Otomie, that it was better to die free
than to live as slaves, but the most did not speak; the old and the
young, mother, wife, widow, and maid, they laboured in silence and the
children laboured at their sides.

Looking at them it came into my mind that these silent patient women
were inspired by some common and desperate purpose, that all knew of,
but which none of them chose to tell.

'Will you work so hard for your masters the Teules?' cried a man in
bitter mockery, as a file of them toiled past beneath their loads of
stone.

'Fool!' answered their leader, a young and lovely lady of rank; 'do the
dead labour?'

'Nay,' said this ill jester, 'but such as you are too fair for the
Teules to kill, and your years of slavery will be many. Say, how shall
you escape them?'

'Fool!' answered the lady again, 'does fire die from lack of fuel only,
and must every man live till age takes him? We shall escape them thus,'
and casting down the torch she carried, she trod it into the earth with
her sandal, and went on with her load. Then I was sure that they had
some purpose, though I did not guess how desperate it was, and Otomie
would tell me nothing of this woman's secret.

'Otomie,' I said to her that night, when we met by chance, 'I have ill
news for you.'

'It must be bad indeed, husband, to be so named in such an hour,' she
answered.

'De Garcia is among our foes.'

'I knew it, husband.'

'How did you know it?'

'By the hate written in your eyes,' she answered.

'It seems that his hour of triumph is at hand,' I said.

'Nay, beloved, not HIS but YOURS. You shall triumph over de Garcia, but
victory will cost you dear. I know it in my heart; ask me not how or
why. See, the Queen puts on her crown,' and she pointed to the volcan
Xaca, whose snows grew rosy with the dawn, 'and you must go to the gate,
for the Spaniards will soon be stirring.'

As Otomie spoke I heard a trumpet blare without the walls. Hurrying to
the gates by the first light of day, I could see that the Spaniards were
mustering their forces for attack. They did not come at once, however,
but delayed till the sun was well up. Then they began to pour a furious
fire upon our defences, that reduced the shattered beams of the gates
to powder, and even shook down the crest of the earthwork beyond them.
Suddenly the firing ceased and again a trumpet called. Now they charged
us in column, a thousand or more Tlascalans leading the van, followed by
the Spanish force. In two minutes I, who awaited them beyond it together
with some three hundred warriors of the Otomie, saw their heads appear
over the crest of the earthwork, and the fight began. Thrice we drove
them back with our spears and arrows, but at the fourth charge the wave
of men swept over our defence, and poured into the dry ditch beyond.

Now we were forced to fly to the next earthwork, for we could not hope
to fight so many in the open street, whither, so soon as a passage had
been made for their horse and ordnance, the enemy followed us. Here the
fight was renewed, and this barricade being very strong, we held it
for hard upon two hours with much loss to ourselves and to the Spanish
force. Again we retreated and again we were assailed, and so the
struggle went on throughout the live-long day. Every hour our numbers
grew fewer and our arms fainter, but still we fought on desperately. At
the two last barricades, hundreds of the women of the Otomie fought by
the sides of their husbands and their brothers.

The last earthwork was captured by the Spaniards just as the sun sank,
and under the shadow of approaching darkness those of us that remained
alive fled to the refuge which we had prepared upon the teocalli, nor
was there any further fighting during that night.



CHAPTER XXXV

THE LAST SACRIFICE OF THE WOMEN OF THE OTOMIE


Here in the courtyard of the teocalli, by the light of burning houses,
for as they advanced the Spaniards fired the town, we mustered our array
to find that there were left to us in all some four hundred fighting
men, together with a crowd of nearly two thousand women and many
children. Now although this teocalli was not quite so lofty as that of
the great temple of Mexico, its sides were steeper and everywhere faced
with dressed stone, and the open space upon its summit was almost as
great, measuring indeed more than a hundred paces every way. This area
was paved with blocks of marble, and in its centre stood the temple of
the war-god, where his statue still sat, although no worship had been
offered to him for many years; the stone of sacrifice, the altar of
fire, and the storehouses of the priests. Moreover in front of the
temple, and between it and the stone of sacrifice, was a deep cemented
hole the size of a large room, which once had been used as a place for
the safe keeping of grain in times of famine. This pit I had caused to
be filled with water borne with great toil to the top of the pyramid,
and in the temple itself I stored a great quantity of food, so that we
had no cause to fear present death from thirst or famine.

But now we were face to face with a new trouble. Large as was the summit
of the pyramid, it would not give shelter to a half of our numbers, and
if we desired to defend it some of the multitude herded round its base
must seek refuge elsewhere. Calling the leaders of the people together,
I put the matter before them in few words, leaving them to decide what
must be done. They in turn consulted among themselves, and at length
gave me this answer: that it was agreed that all the wounded and aged
there, together with most of the children, and with them any others who
wished to go, should leave the teocalli that night, to find their way
out of the city if they could, or if not, to trust to the mercy of the
Spaniards.

I said that it was well, for death was on every side, and it mattered
little which way men turned to meet it. So they were sorted out, fifteen
hundred or more of them, and at midnight the gates of the courtyard were
thrown open, and they left. Oh! it was dreadful to see the farewells
that took place in that hour. Here a daughter clung to the neck of her
aged father, here husbands and wives bade each other a last farewell,
here mothers kissed their little children, and on every side rose up the
sounds of bitter agony, the agony of those who parted for ever. I buried
my face in my hands, wondering as I had often wondered before, how a God
whose name is Mercy can bear to look upon sights that break the hearts
of sinful men to witness.

Presently I raised my eyes and spoke to Otomie, who was at my side,
asking her if she would not send our son away with the others, passing
him off as the child of common people.

'Nay, husband,' she answered, 'it is better for him to die with us, than
to live as a slave of the Spaniards.'

At length it was over and the gates had shut behind the last of them.
Soon we heard the distant challenge of the Spanish sentries as they
perceived them, and the sounds of some shots followed by cries.

'Doubtless the Tlascalans are massacring them,' I said. But it was not
so. When a few had been killed the leaders of the Spaniards found that
they waged war upon an unarmed mob, made up for the most part of aged
people, women and children, and their commander, Bernal Diaz, a merciful
man if a rough one, ordered that the onslaught should cease. Indeed he
did more, for when all the able-bodied men, together with such children
as were sufficiently strong to bear the fatigues of travel, had been
sorted out to be sold as slaves, he suffered the rest of that melancholy
company to depart whither they would. And so they went, though what
became of them I do not know.

That night we spent in the courtyard of the teocalli, but before it was
