"A dozen of those Chouans are amusing themselves by picking us off, and
we are getting away as best we can, like poisoned rats; but by dint
of scrambling over these hedges and rocks--may the lightning blast
'em!--our compasses have got so rusty we are forced to take a rest. I
think those brigands are now somewhere near the old hovel where you see
that smoke."

"Good!" cried Gudin. "You," he added to Beau-Pied and his men, "fall
back towards the rocks through the fields, and join the line of
sentinels you'll find there. You can't go with us, because you are in
uniform. We mean to make an end of those curs now; the Gars is with
them. I can't stop to tell you more. To the right, march! and don't
administer any more shots to our own goatskins; you'll know ours by
their cravats, which they twist round their necks and don't tie."

Gudin left his two wounded men under the apple-tree, and marched towards
Galope-Chopine's cottage, which Beau-Pied had pointed out to him, the
smoke from the chimney serving as a guide.

While the young officer was thus closing in upon the Chouans, the little
detachment under Hulot had reached a point still parallel with that at
which Gudin had arrived. The old soldier, at the head of his men, was
silently gliding along the hedges with the ardor of a young man; he
jumped them from time to time actively enough, casting his wary eyes to
the heights and listening with the ear of a hunter to every noise. In
the third field to which he came he found a woman about thirty years
old, with bent back, hoeing the ground vigorously, while a small boy
with a sickle in his hand was knocking the hoarfrost from the rushes,
which he cut and laid in a heap. At the noise Hulot made in jumping
the hedge, the boy and his mother raised their heads. Hulot mistook
the young woman for an old one, naturally enough. Wrinkles, coming
long before their time, furrowed her face and neck; she was clothed so
grotesquely in a worn-out goatskin that if it had not been for a dirty
yellow petticoat, a distinctive mark of sex, Hulot would hardly have
known the gender she belonged to; for the meshes of her long black hair
were twisted up and hidden by a red worsted cap. The tatters of the
little boy did not cover him, but left his skin exposed.

"Ho! old woman!" called Hulot, in a low voice, approaching her, "where
is the Gars?"

The twenty men who accompanied Hulot now jumped the hedge.

"Hey! if you want the Gars you'll have to go back the way you came,"
said the woman, with a suspicious glance at the troop.

"Did I ask you the road to Fougeres, old carcass?" said Hulot, roughly.
"By Saint-Anne of Auray, have you seen the Gars go by?"

"I don't know what you mean," replied the woman, bending over her hoe.

"You damned garce, do you want to have us eaten up by the Blues who are
after us?"

At these words the woman raised her head and gave another look of
distrust at the troop as she replied, "How can the Blues be after you?
I have just seen eight or ten of them who were going back to Fougeres by
the lower road."

"One would think she meant to stab us with that nose of hers!" cried
Hulot. "Here, look, you old nanny-goat!"

And he showed her in the distance three or four of his sentinels, whose
hats, guns, and uniforms it was easy to recognize.

"Are you going to let those fellows cut the throats of men who are sent
by Marche-a-Terre to protect the Gars?" he cried, angrily.

"Ah, beg pardon," said the woman; "but it is so easy to be deceived.
What parish do you belong to?"

"Saint-Georges," replied two or three of the men, in the Breton patois,
"and we are dying of hunger."

"Well, there," said the woman; "do you see that smoke down there? that's
my house. Follow the path to the right, and you will come to the rock
above it. Perhaps you'll meet my man on the way. Galope-Chopine is sure
to be on watch to warn the Gars. He is spending the day in our house,"
she said, proudly, "as you seem to know."

"Thank you, my good woman," replied Hulot. "Forward, march! God's
thunder! we've got him," he added, speaking to his men.

The detachment followed its leader at a quick step through the path
pointed out to them. The wife of Galope-Chopine turned pale as she heard
the un-Catholic oath of the so-called Chouan. She looked at the gaiters
and goatskins of his men, then she caught her boy in her arms, and sat
down on the ground, saying, "May the holy Virgin of Auray and the ever
blessed Saint-Labre have pity upon us! Those men are not ours; their
shoes have no nails in them. Run down by the lower road and warn your
father; you may save his head," she said to the boy, who disappeared
like a deer among the bushes.

             *     *     *     *     *

Mademoiselle de Verneuil met no one on her way, neither Blues nor
Chouans. Seeing the column of blue smoke which was rising from the
half-ruined chimney of Galope-Chopine's melancholy dwelling, her heart
was seized with a violent palpitation, the rapid, sonorous beating of
which rose to her throat in waves. She stopped, rested her hand against
a tree, and watched the smoke which was serving as a beacon to the foes
as well as to the friends of the young chieftain. Never had she felt
such overwhelming emotion.

"Ah! I love him too much," she said, with a sort of despair. "To-day,
perhaps, I shall no longer be mistress of myself--"

She hurried over the distance which separated her from the cottage,
and reached the courtyard, the filth of which was now stiffened by the
frost. The big dog sprang up barking, but a word from Galope-Chopine
silenced him and he wagged his tail. As she entered the house Marie
gave a look which included everything. The marquis was not there. She
breathed more freely, and saw with pleasure that the Chouan had taken
some pains to clean the dirty and only room in his hovel. He now took
his duck-gun, bowed silently to his guest and left the house, followed
by his dog. Marie went to the threshold of the door and watched him as
he took the path to the right of his hut. From there she could overlook
a series of fields, the curious openings to which formed a perspective
of gates; for the leafless trees and hedges were no longer a barrier to
a full view of the country. When the Chouan's broad hat was out of
sight Mademoiselle de Verneuil turned round to look for the church at
Fougeres, but the shed concealed it. She cast her eyes over the valley
of the Couesnon, which lay before her like a vast sheet of muslin, the
whiteness of which still further dulled a gray sky laden with snow. It
was one of those days when nature seems dumb and noises are absorbed by
the atmosphere. Therefore, though the Blues and their contingent were
marching through the country in three lines, forming a triangle which
drew together as they neared the cottage, the silence was so profound
that Mademoiselle de Verneuil was overcome by a presentiment which added
a sort of physical pain to her mental torture. Misfortune was in the
air.

At last, in a spot where a little curtain of wood closed the perspective
of gates, she saw a young man jumping the barriers like a squirrel and
running with astonishing rapidity. "It is he!" she thought.

The Gars was dressed as a Chouan, with a musket slung from his shoulder
over his goatskin, and would have been quite disguised were it not for
the grace of his movements. Marie withdrew hastily into the cottage,
obeying one of those instinctive promptings which are as little
explicable as fear itself. The young man was soon beside her before the
chimney, where a bright fire was burning. Both were voiceless, fearing
to look at each other, or even to make a movement. One and the same hope
united them, the same doubt; it was agony, it was joy.

"Monsieur," said Mademoiselle de Verneuil at last, in a trembling voice,
"your safety alone has brought me here."

"My safety!" he said, bitterly.

"Yes," she answered; "so long as I stay at Fougeres your life is
threatened, and I love you too well not to leave it. I go to-night."

"Leave me! ah, dear love, I shall follow you."

"Follow me!--the Blues?"

"Dear Marie, what have the Blues got to do with our love?"

"But it seems impossible that you can stay with me in France, and still
more impossible that you should leave it with me."

"Is there anything impossible to those who love?"

"Ah, true! true! all is possible--have I not the courage to resign you,
for your sake."

"What! you could give yourself to a hateful being whom you did not love,
and you refuse to make the happiness of a man who adores you, whose life
you fill, who swears to be yours, and yours only. Hear me, Marie, do you
love me?"

"Yes," she said.

"Then be mine."

"You forget the infamous career of a lost woman; I return to it, I leave
you--yes, that I may not bring upon your head the contempt that falls on
mine. Without that fear, perhaps--"

"But if I fear nothing?"

"Can I be sure of that? I am distrustful. Who could be otherwise in
a position like mine? If the love we inspire cannot last at least it
should be complete, and help us to bear with joy the injustice of the
world. But you, what have you done for me? You desire me. Do you think
that lifts you above other men? Suppose I bade you renounce your ideas,
your hopes, your king (who will, perhaps, laugh when he hears you have
died for him, while I would die for you with sacred joy!); or suppose I
should ask you to send your submission to the First Consul so that you
could follow me to Paris, or go with me to America,--away from the world
where all is vanity; suppose I thus tested you, to know if you loved
me for myself as at this moment I love you? To say all in a word, if I
wished, instead of rising to your level, that you should fall to mine,
what would you do?"

"Hush, Marie, be silent, do not slander yourself," he cried. "Poor
child, I comprehend you. If my first desire was passion, my passion now
is love. Dear soul of my soul, you are as noble as your name, I know
it,--as great as you are beautiful. I am noble enough, I feel myself
great enough to force the world to receive you. Is it because I foresee
in you the source of endless, incessant pleasure, or because I find in
your soul those precious qualities which make a man forever love the one
woman? I do not know the cause, but this I know--that my love for you is
boundless. I know I can no longer live without you. Yes, life would be
unbearable unless you are ever with me."

"Ever with you!"

"Ah! Marie, will you not understand me?"

"You think to flatter me by the offer of your hand and name," she said,
with apparent haughtiness, but looking fixedly at the marquis as if to
detect his inmost thought. "How do you know you would love me six months
hence? and then what would be my fate? No, a mistress is the only woman
who is sure of a man's heart; duty, law, society, the interests of
children, are poor auxiliaries. If her power lasts it gives her joys and
flatteries which make the trials of life endurable. But to be your wife
and become a drag upon you,--rather than that, I prefer a passing love
and a true one, though death and misery be its end. Yes, I could be a
virtuous mother, a devoted wife; but to keep those instincts firmly in
a woman's soul the man must not marry her in a rush of passion. Besides,
how do I know that you will please me to-morrow? No, I will not bring
evil upon you; I leave Brittany," she said, observing hesitation in his
eyes. "I return to Fougeres now, where you cannot come to me--"

"I can! and if to-morrow you see smoke on the rocks of Saint-Sulpice
you will know that I shall be with you at night, your lover, your
husband,--what you will that I be to you; I brave all!"

"Ah! Alphonse, you love me well," she said, passionately, "to risk your
life before you give it to me."

He did not answer; he looked at her and her eyes fell; but he read in
her ardent face a passion equal to his own, and he held out his arms to
her. A sort of madness overcame her, and she let herself fall softly on
his breast, resolved to yield to him, and turn this yielding to great
results,--staking upon it her future happiness, which would become more
certain if she came victorious from this crucial test. But her head
had scarcely touched her lover's shoulder when a slight noise was heard
without. She tore herself from his arms as if suddenly awakened, and
sprang from the cottage. Her coolness came back to her, and she thought
of the situation.

"He might have accepted me and scorned me," she reflected. "Ah! if I
could think that, I would kill him. But not yet!" she added, catching
sight of Beau-Pied, to whom she made a sign which the soldier was quick
to understand. He turned on his heel, pretending to have seen nothing.
Mademoiselle de Verneuil re-entered the cottage, putting her finger to
her lips to enjoin silence.

"They are there!" she whispered in a frightened voice.

"Who?"

"The Blues."

"Ah! must I die without one kiss!"

"Take it," she said.

He caught her to him, cold and unresisting, and gathered from her lips a
kiss of horror and of joy, for while it was the first, it might also be
the last. Then they went together to the door and looked cautiously
out. The marquis saw Gudin and his men holding the paths leading to the
valley. Then he turned to the line of gates where the first rotten trunk
was guarded by five men. Without an instant's pause he jumped on the
barrel of cider and struck a hole through the thatch of the roof, from
which to spring upon the rocks behind the house; but he drew his head
hastily back through the gap he had made, for Hulot was on the height;
his retreat was cut off in that direction. The marquis turned and looked
at his mistress, who uttered a cry of despair; for she heard the tramp
of the three detachments near the house.

"Go out first," he said; "you shall save me."

Hearing the words, to her all-glorious, she went out and stood before
the door. The marquis loaded his musket. Measuring with his eye the
space between the door of the hut and the old rotten trunk where seven
men stood, the Gars fired into their midst and sprang forward instantly,
forcing a passage through them. The three troops rushed towards the
opening through which he had passed, and saw him running across the
field with incredible celerity.

"Fire! fire! a thousand devils! You're not Frenchmen! Fire, I say!"
called Hulot.

As he shouted these words from the height above, his men and Gudin's
fired a volley, which was fortunately ill-aimed. The marquis reached the
gate of the next field, but as he did so he was almost caught by
Gudin, who was close upon his heels. The Gars redoubled his speed.
Nevertheless, he and his pursuer reached the next barrier together; but
the marquis dashed his musket at Gudin's head with so good an aim that
he stopped his rush. It is impossible to depict the anxiety betrayed
by Marie, or the interest of Hulot and his troops as they watched the
scene. They all, unconsciously or silently, repeated the gestures which
they saw the runners making. The Gars and Gudin reached the little wood
together, but as they did so the latter stopped and darted behind a
tree. About twenty Chouans, afraid to fire at a distance lest they
should kill their leader, rushed from the copse and riddled the tree
with balls. Hulot's men advanced at a run to save Gudin, who, being
without arms, retreated from tree to tree, seizing his opportunity as
the Chouans reloaded. His danger was soon over. Hulot and the Blues met
him at the spot where the marquis had thrown his musket. At this instant
Gudin perceived his adversary sitting among the trees and out of breath,
and he left his comrades firing at the Chouans, who had retreated behind
a lateral hedge; slipping round them, he darted towards the marquis with
the agility of a wild animal. Observing this manoeuvre the Chouans set
up a cry to warn their leader; then, having fired on the Blues and their
contingent with the gusto of poachers, they boldly made a rush for them;
but Hulot's men sprang through the hedge which served them as a rampart
and took a bloody revenge. The Chouans then gained the road which
skirted the fields and took to the heights which Hulot had committed the
blunder of abandoning. Before the Blues had time to reform, the Chouans
were entrenched behind the rocks, where they could fire with impunity on
the Republicans if the latter made any attempt to dislodge them.

While Hulot and his soldiers went slowly towards the little wood to
meet Gudin, the men from Fougeres busied themselves in rifling the
dead Chouans and dispatching those who still lived. In this fearful war
neither party took prisoners. The marquis having made good his escape,
the Chouans and the Blues mutually recognized their respective positions
and the uselessness of continuing the fight; so that both sides prepared
to retreat.

"Ha! ha!" cried one of the Fougeres men, busy about the bodies, "here's
a bird with yellow wings."

And he showed his companions a purse full of gold which he had just
found in the pocket of a stout man dressed in black.

"What's this?" said another, pulling a breviary from the dead man's
coat.

"Communion bread--he's a priest!" cried the first man, flinging the
breviary on the ground.

"Here's a wretch!" cried a third, finding only two crowns in the pockets
of the body he was stripping, "a cheat!"

"But he's got a fine pair of shoes!" said a soldier, beginning to pull
them off.

"You can't have them unless they fall to your share," said the Fougeres
man, dragging the dead feet away and flinging the boots on a heap of
clothing already collected.

Another Chouan took charge of the money, so that lots might be drawn as
soon as the troops were all assembled. When Hulot returned with Gudin,
whose last attempt to overtake the Gars was useless as well as perilous,
he found about a score of his own men and thirty of the contingent
standing around eleven of the enemy, whose naked bodies were thrown into
a ditch at the foot of the bank.

"Soldiers!" cried Hulot, sternly. "I forbid you to share that clothing.
Form in line, quick!"

"Commandant," said a soldier, pointing to his shoes, at the points of
which five bare toes could be seen on each foot, "all right about the
money, but those boots," motioning to a pair of hobnailed boots with the
butt of his gun, "would fit me like a glove."

"Do you want to put English shoes on your feet?" retorted Hulot.

"But," said one of the Fougeres men, respectfully, "we've divided the
booty all through the war."

"I don't prevent you civilians from following your own ways," replied
Hulot, roughly.

"Here, Gudin, here's a purse with three louis," said the officer who
was distributing the money. "You have run hard and the commandant won't
prevent your taking it."

Hulot looked askance at Gudin, and saw that he turned pale.

"It's my uncle's purse!" exclaimed the young man.

Exhausted as he was with his run, he sprang to the mound of bodies, and
the first that met his eyes was that of his uncle. But he had hardly
recognized the rubicund face now furrowed with blue lines, and seen
the stiffened arms and the gunshot wound before he gave a stifled cry,
exclaiming, "Let us be off, commandant."

The Blues started. Hulot gave his arm to his young friend.

"God's thunder!" he cried. "Never mind, it is no great matter."

"But he is dead," said Gudin, "dead! He was my only relation, and though
he cursed me, still he loved me. If the king returns, the neighborhood
will want my head, and my poor uncle would have saved it."

"What a fool Gudin is," said one of the men who had stayed behind to
share the spoils; "his uncle was rich, and he hasn't had time to make a
will and disinherit him."

The division over, the men of Fougeres rejoined the little battalion of
the Blues on their way to the town.

             *     *     *     *     *

Towards midnight the cottage of Galope-Chopine, hitherto the scene of
life without a care, was full of dread and horrible anxiety. Barbette
and her little boy returned at the supper-hour, one with her heavy
burden of rushes, the other carrying fodder for the cattle. Entering the
hut, they looked about in vain for Galope-Chopine; the miserable chamber
never looked to them as large, so empty was it. The fire was out, and
the darkness, the silence, seemed to tell of some disaster. Barbette
hastened to make a blaze, and to light two _oribus_, the name given to
candles made of pitch in the region between the villages of Amorique
and the Upper Loire, and still used beyond Amboise in the Vendomois
districts. Barbette did these things with the slowness of a person
