in his hands. But when Hector perceived his brother Polydorus holding
his intestines in his hands, and rolled on the earth, a darkness was
immediately poured over his eyes, nor could he any longer be employed
afar off, but advanced towards Achilles, like unto a flame, brandishing
his sharp spear. On the other hand, Achilles, as soon as he saw him,
leaped up, and boasting, spoke:

   [Footnote 665: Neptune was a favourite god among the Ionians (cf.
   Mueller, Dor. vol. i. p. 417), but derived this name from Helice,
   a town in the northern coast of the Peloponnese, out of which the
   principal Achaean families were driven by Tisamenus, whose tomb
   was shown there. See Mueller, id. p. 74.]

   [Footnote 666: This is not the Polydorus of Virgil and Euripides,
   but the son of Laothoe, daughter of Altas, king of the Lelegans]

"Near is the man who has most stung my soul, who has slain my cherished
companion; no longer indeed let us dread each other through the
bridges[667] of war."

   [Footnote 667: See iv. 371.]

He spoke, and sternly regarding [him], addressed noble Hector:

"Come nearer, that thou mayest the sooner reach the end of death."

But him, not daunted, crest-tossing Hector addressed:

"O son of Peleus, do not expect to terrify me now like a little boy, at
least with words; since I myself also well know how to speak both
revilings and reproaches. I know that thou indeed art brave, and that I
am inferior to thee. But these things indeed are placed at the knees of
the gods, whether, although being inferior, I shall take away thy life,
striking thee with my spear, since my weapon also is sharp at the
point."

He spoke, and, brandishing, sent forth his spear; and Minerva with a
breath turned it back from glorious Achilles, having breathed very
gently; but it came back to noble Hector, and lay before his feet. But
Achilles, eager to slay him, rushed furiously on, shouting dreadfully;
but Apollo, as a god, very easily snatched him away, and covered him
with abundant haze. Thrice indeed swift-footed noble Achilles rushed on
with his brazen spear, and thrice he smote the deep haze. But when he
rushed on the fourth time, like unto a god, he, dreadfully chiding,
addressed to him winged words:

"Dog, now again hast thou escaped death. Assuredly evil came very near
thee, but Phoebus Apollo has now again preserved thee, to whom thou art
wont to pray, when going into the clang of spears. Yet will I certainly
finish thee, meeting thee hereafter, if indeed any of the gods be an
ally to me also. At present, however, I will go after others of the
Trojans, whomsoever I can."

So saying, he struck Dryops with his spear in the middle of the neck,
and he fell before his feet. Him then he left, and then detained
Demuchus, son of Philetor, brave and great, wounding [him] in the knee,
with his spear, whom then striking with his great sword, he deprived of
life. But attacking both, he pushed Laogonus and Dardanus, the sons of
Bias, from their chariot to the ground, wounding one with his spear, and
striking the other in close combat with his sword. Also Tros, the son of
Alastor, who came towards him, taking him by the knees, if on any terms
he would spare him, and dismiss him alive, nor slay him, taking pity on
their equal age: fool! who knew not that he would not be persuaded. For
he was by no means a tender-minded nor gentle man, but very ferocious.
He (Tros) indeed clasped his knees with his hands, desiring to
supplicate him, but he (Achilles) wounded him in the liver with his
sword; and his liver fell out, and the black blood from it filled his
bosom, and darkness veiled his eyes, wanting life. But standing near
Mulius, he smote him with his javelin on the ear, and immediately the
brazen blade went through the other ear. Then, with his large-hilted
sword, he smote Echeclus, son of Antenor, in the centre of the head, and
the whole sword became tepid with blood; but purple Death and violent
Fate seized his eyes. Then Deucalion, where the tendons of the elbow
unite, there he pierced him through his hand with his brazen spear; but
he, weighed down as to his hand, awaited him, perceiving death before
him. But he (Achilles) smiting his neck with his sword, knocked the head
off afar with its helmet, and the marrow sprang forth from the spine;
and Deucalion lay extended on the ground. Then he hastened to go towards
Rigmus, the renowned son of Pireus, who had come from fertile Thrace;
whom he smote in the middle with his javelin, and the brass was fixed in
his stomach; and he fell from his chariot: and Achilles wounded in the
back, with his sharp javelin, Areithoues, the attendant, while turning
back the steeds, and threw him from the chariot: and the horses were
thrown into confusion. And as the blazing fire burns through the deep
dells of a dry mountain, and the dense forest is consumed, and the wind
agitating, turns round the flame on all sides; thus he raged in every
direction with his spear, like unto a deity, following those that were
to be slain; and the black earth flowed with blood. As when any one
yokes broad fore-headed bulls to trample out white barley on the
well-levelled floor, and it easily becomes small beneath the feet of the
bellowing oxen; so the solid-hoofed horses, driven by magnanimous
Achilles, trod down together both corses and shields. And the whole
axletree beneath was polluted with gore, and the rings which were round
the chariot seat, which the drops from the horses' hoofs spattered, as
well as from the felloes. But the son of Peleus was eager to bear away
glory, and was polluted with gore as to his invincible hands.





                         BOOK THE TWENTY-FIRST.


                               ARGUMENT.

Having divided the Trojan army, Achilles drives one part towards the
city, and the other into the Xanthus, where he takes twelve youths
alive, in order to sacrifice them at the tomb of Patroclus. He then
slays Lycaon and Asteropaeus, deriding the river-god, Xanthus, as unable
to aid his friends. The river endeavours to overwhelm him by the aid of
Simois, but Vulcan defends him from the danger. Single combats of the
gods then follow, but they afterwards retire to Olympus. Apollo then
leads Achilles away, assuming the form of Agenor, and the Trojans are
thus enabled to regain the city.


But when they at last reached the course of the fairly-flowing river,
the eddying Xanthus, which immortal Jove begat; there separating them,
he pursued some indeed through the plain towards the city, by the [same]
way that the Greeks, on the preceding day, being astounded, had fled,
when illustrious Hector raged. By that way were they poured forth
terrified; but Juno expanded a dense cloud before them, to check them:
but the other half were rolled into the deep-flowing river, with silver
eddies. But they fell in with a great noise; and the deep streams
resounded, and the banks around murmured; but they, with clamour, swam
here and there, whirled about in the eddies.[668] As when locusts,
driven by the force of fire, fly into the air, to escape to a river, but
the indefatigable fire, suddenly kindled, blazes, and they fall, through
terror into the water: thus, by Achilles, was the resounding river of
deep-eddied Xanthus filled promiscuously with horses and men. But the
Jove-sprung [hero] left his spear upon the banks, leaning against a
tamarisk; and he leaped in, like unto a god, having only his sword, and
meditated destructive deeds in his mind. And he smote on all sides, and
a shocking lamentation arose of those who were stricken by the sword,
and the water was reddened with blood. And, as when the other fish,
flying from a mighty dolphin, fill the inmost recesses of a
safe-anchoring harbour, frightened; for he totally devours whatever he
can catch; so the Trojans hid themselves in caves along the streams of
the terrible river. But he, when he was wearied as to his hands,
slaying, chose twelve youths alive out of the river, a penalty for dead
Patroclus, the son of Menoetius. These he led out [of the river],
stupified, like fawns. And he bound their hands behind them[669] with
well-cut straps, which they themselves bore upon their twisted tunics;
and gave them to his companions to conduct to the hollow ships. But he
rushed on again, desiring to slay.

   [Footnote 668: Virg. AEn. i. 118: "Apparent rari nantes in gurgite
   vasto." With the following description may be compared AEsch. Ag.
   670: [Greek: Oromen anthoun pelagos Aigaion nekron andron Achaion
   nautikon t' ereipion]. Aristid. Panath. p. 142: [Greek: Os de
   eora ten thalattan aimati kai rothio reousan, kai panta nekron
   kai nayagion mesta].]

   [Footnote 669: As was customary with captives. Cf. Virg. AEn. ii.
   57, and Moll. on Longus, ii. 9.]

Then did he encounter the son of Dardanian Priam, Lycaon, escaping from
the river, whom he himself had formerly led away, taking him unwilling
from his father's farm, having come upon him by night: but he, with the
sharp brass, was trimming a wild fig-tree of its tender branches, that
they might become the cinctures of a chariot. But upon him came noble
Achilles, an unexpected evil; and then, conveying him in his ships, he
sold him into well-inhabited Lemnos; but the son of Jason gave his
price.[670] And from thence his guest, Imbrian Eetion, ransomed him, and
gave him many things, and sent him to noble Arisbe; whence, secretly
escaping, he reached his father's house. Returning from Lemnos, for
eleven days he was delighted in his soul, with his friends; but on the
twelfth the deity again placed him in the hands of Achilles, who was
about to send him into the [habitation] of Hades, although not willing
to go. But when swift-footed, noble Achilles perceived him naked,
without helmet and shield, neither had he a spear, for all these,
indeed, he had thrown to the ground, for the sweat overcame him, flying
from the river, and fatigue subdued his limbs beneath; but [Achilles]
indignant, thus addressed his own great-hearted soul:

   [Footnote 670: _I.e._ purchase him as a slave.]

"O gods! surely I perceive this, a great marvel, with mine eyes.
Doubtless the magnanimous Trojans whom I have slain will rise again from
the murky darkness, as now this man has returned, escaping the merciless
day, having been sold in sacred Lemnos; nor has the depth of the sea
restrained him, which restrains many against their will. But come now,
he shall taste the point of my spear, that I may know in my mind, and
learn, whether he will in like manner return thence, or whether the
fruitful earth will detain him, which detains even the mighty."

Thus he pondered, remaining still; but near him came Lycaon, in
consternation, anxious to touch his knees; for he very much wished in
his mind to escape evil death and black fate. Meanwhile noble Achilles
raised his long spear, desiring to wound him; but he ran in under it,
and, stooping, seized his knees, but the spear stuck fixed in the earth
over his back, eager to be satiated with human flesh. But he, having
grasped his knees with one hand, supplicated him, and with the other
held the sharp spear, nor did he let it go; and, supplicating, addressed
to him winged words:

"O Achilles, embracing thy knees, I supplicate thee; but do thou respect
and pity me. I am to thee in place of a suppliant, to be revered, O
Jove-nurtured one! For with thee I first tasted the fruit of Ceres on
that day when thou tookest me in the well-cultivated field, and didst
sell[671] me, leading me away from my father and friends, to sacred
Lemnos; and I brought thee the price of a hundred oxen. But now will I
redeem myself, giving thrice as many. This is already the twelfth
morning to me since I came to Troy, having suffered much, and now again
pernicious fate has placed me in thy hands. Certainly I must be hated by
father Jove, who has again given me to thee. For my mother Laothoe, the
daughter of aged Altes, brought forth short-lived me, of Altes, who
rules over the warlike Lelegans, possessing lofty Padasus, near the
Satnio: and Priam possessed his daughter, as well as many others; but
from her we two were born, but thou wilt slay both. Him, godlike
Polydorus, thou hast subdued already among the foremost infantry, when
thou smotest him with the sharp spear, and now will evil be to me here;
for I do not think that I shall escape thy hands, since a deity has
brought me near thee. Yet another thing will I tell thee, and do thou
store it in thy mind. Do not slay me, for I am not of the same womb with
Hector, who killed thy companion, both gentle and brave." Thus then,
indeed, the noble son of Priam addressed him, supplicating with words;
but he heard a stern reply.

   [Footnote 671: Hesych. [Greek: erasas eisto peras tes thalasses
   diaperasas epolysas]. See Schol. on ver. 40.]

"Fool, talk not to me of ransom, nor, indeed, mention it. Before
Patroclus fulfilled the fatal day, so long to me was it more agreeable
in my mind to spare the Trojans, and many I took alive and sold. But now
there is not [one] of all the Trojans, whom the deity shall put into my
hands before Ilium, who shall escape death; but above all of the sons of
Priam. But die thou also, my friend; why weepest thou thus? Patroclus
likewise died, who was much better than thou. Seest thou not how great I
am? both fair and great; and I am from a noble sire, and a goddess
mother bore me; but Death and violent Fate will come upon thee and me,
whether [it be] morning, evening, or mid-day;[672] whenever any one
shall take away my life with a weapon, either wounding me with a spear,
or with an arrow from the string."

   [Footnote 672: See Kennedy.]

Thus he spoke; but his knees and dear heart were relaxed. He let go the
spear, indeed, and sat down, stretching out both hands. But Achilles,
drawing his sharp sword, smote [him] at the clavicle, near the neck. The
two-edged sword penetrated totally, and he, prone upon the ground, lay
stretched out, but the black blood flowed out, and moistened the earth.
Then Achilles, seizing him by the foot, threw him into the river, to be
carried along, and, boasting, spoke winged words:

"Lie there now with the fishes,[673] which, without concern, will lap
the blood of thy wound; nor shall thy mother[674] weep, placing thee
upon the funeral couch, but the eddying Scamander shall bear thee into
the wide bosom of the ocean. Some fish, bounding through the wave, will
escape to the dark ripple,[675] in order that he may devour the white
fat of Lycaon. Perish [ye Trojans], till we attain to the city of sacred
Ilium, you flying, and I slaughtering in the rear: nor shall the
wide-flowing, silver-eddying river, profit you, to which ye have already
sacrificed many bulls, and cast solid-hoofed steeds alive into its
eddies. But even thus shall ye die an evil death, until ye all atone for
the death of Patroclus, and the slaughter of the Greeks, whom ye have
killed at the swift ships, I being absent."

   [Footnote 673: Cf. Virg. AEn. x. 555, sqq.; Longus, ii. 20:
   [Greek: alla boran [ymas] ichthyon theso katadysas].]

   [Footnote 674: Cf. Soph. Electr. 1138, sqq. with my note.]

   [Footnote 675: _I.e._ the surface.]

Thus he spoke; but the River was the more enraged at heart, and revolved
in his mind how he might make noble Achilles cease from labour, and
avert destruction from the Trojans. But meanwhile the son of Peleus,
holding his long-shadowed spear, leaped upon Asteropaeus, son of Pelegon,
desirous to kill him whom the wide-flowing Axius begat, and Periboea,
eldest of the daughters of Accessamenus; for with her had the
deep-eddying river been mingled. Against him Achilles rushed; but he,
[emerging] from the river, stood opposite, holding two spears; for
Xanthus had placed courage in his mind, because he was enraged on
account of the youths slain in battle, whom Achilles had slain in the
stream, nor pitied them. But when they were now near, advancing towards
each other, him first swift-footed, noble Achilles addressed:

"Who, and whence art thou of men, thou who darest to come against me?
Truly they are the sons of unhappy men who encounter my might." Him
again the illustrious son of Pelegon addressed: "O magnanimous son of
Peleus, why dost thou ask my race? I am from fruitful Paeonia, being far
off, leading the long-speared Paeonian heroes; and this is now the
eleventh morning to me since I came to Troy. But my descent is from the
wide-flowing Axius, who pours the fairest flood upon the earth, he who
begat Pelegon, renowned for the spear; who, men say, begat me. But now,
O illustrious Achilles, let us fight."

Thus he spake, threatening: but noble Achilles raised the Pelian ash;
but the hero Asteropaeus [took aim] with both spears at the same
time,[676] for he was ambidexter.[677] With the one spear he struck the
shield, nor did it pierce the shield completely through; for the gold
restrained it, the gift of a god; and the other slightly wounded him
upon the elbow of the right arm; and the black blood gushed out: but the
[spear passing] over him, was fixed in the earth, longing to satiate
itself with his body. But second Achilles hurled his straight-flying
ashen spear at Asteropaeus, anxiously desiring to slay him. From him
indeed he erred, and struck the lofty bank, and drove the ashen spear up
to the middle in the bank. Then the son of Peleus, drawing his sharp
sword from his thigh, eagerly leaped upon him; but he was not able to
pluck out, with his strong hand, the ashen spear of Achilles, from the
bank. Thrice, indeed, he shook it, desiring to pluck it out, and thrice
he failed in strength. And the fourth time he had determined in his
mind, bending, to snap the ashen spear of AEacides; but Achilles first,
close at hand, took away his life with the sword; for he smote him upon
the belly at the navel, and all his bowels were poured out upon the
ground, and darkness veiled him, dying, as to his eyes. Then Achilles,
leaping upon his breast, despoiled him of his arms, and boasting, spoke:

   [Footnote 676: [Greek: Amarte] is here an adverb.]

   [Footnote 677: Symmachus, Epist. ix. 105: "Pari nitore atque
   gravitate senatorias actiones et Romanae rei monumenta limasti, ut
   plane Homerica appellatione [Greek: peridexion], id est,
   aequimanum, te esse pronunciem."]

"Lie so: it is a difficult thing for thee, though descended from a
River, to contend with the sons of the most mighty Saturnian [Jove].
Thou saidst thou wert of the race of a wide-flowing River, but I boast
myself to be of the race of mighty Jove. The hero ruling over many
Myrmidons begat me, Peleus, son of AEacus; but AEacus was from Jove;
wherefore Jove is more powerful than Rivers flowing into the sea, and
the race of Jove again is more powerful than that of a river. Besides, a
very great River is at hand to thee, if it can aught defend thee; but it
is not lawful to fight with Jove, the son of Saturn. With him neither
does king Acheloues vie, nor the mighty strength of deep-flowing Oceanus,
from which flow all rivers, and every sea, and all fountains, and deep
wells; but even he dreads the bolt of the great Jove, and the dreadful
thunder, when it bellows from heaven."

He said, and plucked his brazen spear from the bank. But him he left
there, after he had taken away his life, lying in the sand, and the dark
water laved him. About him, indeed, the eels and fishes were busied,
eating [and] nibbling the fat around his kidneys. But he (Achilles)
hastened to go against the Paeonian equestrian warriors, who were already
turned to flight beside the eddying river, when they saw the bravest in
the violent conflict bravely subdued by the hands and sword of the son
of Peleus. Then he slew Thersilochus, Mydon, Astypylus, Mnesus,
Thrasius, AEnius, and Ophelestes. And now had swift Achilles slain even
more Paeonians, had not the deep-eddying River, enraged, addressed him,
likening itself to a man, and uttered a voice from its deep vortex:

"O Achilles, thou excellest, it is true, in strength, but thou doest
unworthy acts above [others], for the gods themselves always aid thee.
If indeed the son of Saturn has granted to thee to destroy all the
Trojans, at least having driven them from me, perform these arduous
enterprises along the plain. For now are my agreeable streams full of
dead bodies, nor can I any longer pour my tide into the vast sea, choked
up by the dead; whilst thou slayest unsparingly. But come, even cease--a
stupor seizes me--O chieftain of the people."

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed:

"These things shall be as thou desirest, O Jove-nurtured Scamander. But
I will not cease slaughtering the treaty-breaking[678] Trojans, before
that I enclose them in the city, and make trial of Hector, face to face,
whether he shall slay me, or I him."

   [Footnote 678: Although this meaning of [Greek: yperphialos] is
   well suited to this passage, yet Buttmann, Lexil. p. 616, Sec. 6, is
   against any such particular explanation of the word. See his
   whole dissertation.]

Thus speaking, he rushed upon the Trojans like unto a god; and the
deep-eddying River then addressed Apollo:

"Alas! O god of the silver bow, child of Jove, thou hast not observed
the counsels of Jove, who very much enjoined thee to stand by and aid
the Trojans, till the late setting evening[679] sun should come, and
overshadow the fruitful earth."

   [Footnote 679: [Greek: Deielos] has been shown by Buttmann to be
   really the _afternoon_; but he observes, p. 223, that in the
   present passage, "it is not the Attic [Greek: deile opsia], with
   which it has been compared, but by the force of [Greek: dyon],
   the actual sunset of evening. The [Greek: opse] is therefore,
   strictly speaking, redundant, and appears to be used with
   reference only to the time past, something in this way: 'Thou
   shouldst assist the Trojans until the sun sinks late in the
   west.'"]

He spoke, and spear-renowned Achilles leaped into the midst, rushing
down from the bank. But he (the River) rushed on, raging with a swoln
flood, and, turbid, excited all his waves. And it pushed along the
numerous corpses, which were in him[680] in abundance, whom Achilles had
slain. These he cast out, roaring like a bull, upon the shore; but the
living he preserved in his fair streams, concealing them among his
mighty deep gulfs. And terrible around Achilles stood the disturbed
wave, and the stream, falling upon his shield, oppressed him, nor could
he stand steady on his feet. But he seized with his hands a thriving,
large elm; and it, falling from its roots, dislodged the whole bank, and
interrupted the beautiful streams with its thick branches, and bridged
over the river itself,[681] falling completely in. Then leaping up from
the gulf, he hastened to fly over the plain on his rapid feet,
terrified. Nor yet did the mighty god desist, but rushed after him,
blackening on the surface, that he might make noble Achilles cease from
toil, and avert destruction from the Trojans. But the son of Peleus
leaped back as far as is the cast of a spear, having the impetuosity of
a dark eagle, a hunter, which is at once the strongest and the swiftest
of birds. Like unto it he rushed, but the brass clanked dreadfully upon
his breast; but he, inclining obliquely, fled from it, and it, flowing
from behind, followed with a mighty noise. As when a ditch-worker leads
a stream of water from a black-flowing fountain through plantations and
gardens, holding a spade in his hands, and throwing out the obstructions
from the channel; all the pebbles beneath are agitated as it flows
along, and, rapidly descending, it murmurs down a sloping declivity, and
outstrips even him who directs it: so the water of the river always
overtook Achilles, though being nimble; for the gods are more powerful
than mortals. As often as swift-footed, noble Achilles attempted to
oppose it, and to know whether all the immortals who possess the wide
heaven put him to flight, so often did a great billow of the river,
flowing from Jove, lave his shoulders from above; whilst he leaped up
with his feet, sad in mind, and the rapid stream subdued his knees under
him, and withdrew the sand from beneath his feet. But Pelides groaned,
looking toward the wide heaven:

   [Footnote 680: _I.e._ in the river. One translator absurdly
   renders it "through him," _i.e._ through Achilles.]

   [Footnote 681: "The circumstance of a fallen tree, which is by
   Homer described as reaching from one of its banks to the other,
   affords a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander at the
   season when we saw it."--Wood on Homer, p. 328.]

"O father Jove, how does none of the gods undertake to save me,
miserable, from the river! Hereafter, indeed, I would suffer
anything.[682] But no other of the heavenly inhabitants is so culpable
to me as my mother, who soothed me with falsehoods, and said that I
should perish by the fleet arrows of Apollo, under the wall of the armed
Trojans. Would that Hector had slain me, who here was nurtured the
bravest; then a brave man would he have slain, and have despoiled a
brave man. But now it is decreed that I be destroyed by an inglorious
death, overwhelmed in a mighty river, like a swine-herd's boy, whom, as
he is fording it, the torrent overwhelms in wintry weather."

   [Footnote 682: _I.e._ grant that I may but escape a disgraceful
   death by drowning, and I care not how I perish afterwards. The
   Scholiast compares the prayer of Ajax in p. 647: [Greek: En de
   phaei kai olesson]. Cf. AEn, i. 100, sqq. AEsch. Choeph 340; Eur.
   Andr. 1184.]

Thus he spoke; but Neptune and Minerva, very quickly advancing, stood
near him (but in body they had likened themselves to men), and, taking
his hand in their hands, strengthened him with words. But to them
earth-shaking Neptune began discourse:

"O son of Peleus, neither now greatly fear, nor yet be at all dismayed;
so great allies from among the gods are we to thee, Jove approving it, I
and Pallas Minerva, so that it is not decreed that thou shouldst be
overcome by a river. It, indeed, shall soon cease, and thou thyself
shalt see it. But let us prudently suggest, if thou be obedient, not to
stop thy hands from equally destructive war, before thou shalt have
enclosed the Trojan army within the renowned walls of Troy, whoever,
indeed, can escape: but do thou, having taken away the life of Hector,
return again to the ships; for we grant to thee to bear away glory."

They indeed having thus spoken, departed to the immortals. But he
proceeded towards the plain (for the command of the gods strongly
impelled him), and it was all filled with the overflowed water. Much
beautiful armour and corpses of youths slain in battle, floated along;
but his knees bounded up against the course of it rushing straight
forward; for Minerva had put great strength into him. Nor did Scamander
remit his strength, but was the more enraged with the son of Peleus. And
he swelled the wave of the stream, and, shouting, animated Simois:

"O dear brother, let us both, at least, restrain the force of the man,
since he will quickly destroy the great city of king Priam, for the
Trojans resist him not in battle. But aid me very quickly, and fill thy
streams of water from thy fountains, and rouse all thy rivulets, raise a
great wave, and stir up a mighty confusion of stems and stones, that we
may restrain this furious man, who now already is victorious, and is
bent on deeds equal to the gods. For I think that neither his strength
will defend him, nor his beauty at all, nor those beautiful arms, which
shall lie everywhere in the very bottom of my gulf, covered with mud.
Himself also will I involve in sand, pouring vast abundant silt around
him; nor shall the Greeks know where to gather his bones, so much slime
will I spread over him. And there forthwith shall be[683] his tomb, nor
shall there be any want to him of entombing, when the Greeks perform his
obsequies."

   [Footnote 683: Observe the force of [Greek: teteyxetai].]

He spoke, and raging aloft, turbid, he rushed upon Achilles, murmuring
with foam, with blood, and with dead bodies. Immediately the purple
water of the Jove-descended river being raised up, stood, and seized the
son of Peleus. But Juno cried aloud, fearing for Achilles, lest the
mighty deep-eddying river should sweep him away; and immediately
addressed Vulcan, her beloved son:

"Arise, Vulcan, my son; for we supposed that eddying Xanthus was equally
matched in battle against thee; but give aid with all haste, and exhibit
thy abundant flame. But I will go to excite a severe storm of Zephyrus,
and rapid Notus from the sea, which bearing a destructive conflagration,
may consume the heads and armour of the Trojans. Do thou, therefore,
burn the trees upon the banks of Xanthus, and hurl at himself with fire,
nor let him at all avert thee by kind words or threats: neither do thou
previously restrain thy might; but when I, shouting, shall give the
signal, then restrain thy indefatigable fire."

Thus she spoke; but Vulcan darted forth his fierce-burning fire. First,
indeed, he kindled a fire in the plain, and burned many dead bodies,
which were in abundance, over it, whom Achilles had slain; so that the
whole plain was dried up, and the clear water restrained. And as when an
autumnal north wind immediately dries a newly-watered garden, and
gratifies him whoever cultivates it, so was the whole plain dried, and
it consumed the dead; whereupon he turned his all-resplendent flame
against the river. The elms were burned up, and the willows and
tamarisks; the lotus was consumed, and the rushes and reeds, which grew
in great abundance round the beautiful streams of the river. Harassed
were the eels and the fishes, which through the whirlpools, [and] which
through the fair streams dived here and there, exhausted by the breath
of the various artificer Vulcan. The might of the river was burnt up,
and he spake, and addressed him:

"None of the gods, O Vulcan, can oppose thee on equal terms, nor can I
contend with thee, thus burning with fire. Cease from combat, and let
noble Achilles instantly expel the Trojans from their city; what have I
to do with contest and assistance?"

He spoke, scorched; and his fair streams boiled up. As a caldron pressed
by much fire, glows, bubbling up within on all sides, while melting the
fat of a delicately-fed sow, whilst the dry wood lies beneath it; so
were his fair streams dried up with fire, and the water boiled; nor
could he flow on, but was restrained, and the vapour [raised] by the
might of crafty Vulcan harassed him. At length, supplicating much, he
addressed to Juno winged words:

"O Juno, why does thy son press upon my stream, to annoy [me] beyond
others? nor truly am I so much to blame as all the others, as many as
are assistants to the Trojans, But I will, however, desist, if thou
biddest it; and let him also cease; and I moreover will swear this, that
I never will avert the evil day from the Trojans, not even when all
burning Troy shall be consumed with destructive fire, and the warlike
sons of the Greeks shall burn it."

But when the white-armed goddess Juno heard this, she straightway
addressed her beloved son Vulcan: "Vulcan, my illustrious son, abstain;
for it is not fitting thus to persecute an immortal god for the sake of
mortals."

Thus she spoke; and Vulcan extinguished his glowing fire, and the
refluent water immediately lowered its fair streams. But when the might
of Xanthus was subdued, then indeed they rested; for Juno restrained
herself, though enraged.

Among the other gods, however, grievous, troublesome contention fell
out, and the inclination in their minds was borne in opposite
directions. They engaged with a great tumult, and the wide earth
re-echoed, and the mighty heaven resounded around. And Jove heard it,
sitting upon Olympus, and his heart laughed with joy, when he beheld the
gods engaging in contest. Then they did not long stand apart; for
shield-piercing Mars began, and rushed first against Minerva, holding
his brazen spear, and uttered an opprobrious speech:

"Why thus, O most impudent, having boundless audacity, dost thou join
the gods in battle? Has thy great soul incited thee? Dost thou not
remember when thou didst urge Diomede, the son of Tydeus, to strike me?
And taking the spear thyself, thou didst direct it right against me, and
didst lacerate my fair flesh. Now, therefore, I think that I will
chastise thee, for all that thou hast done against me."

So saying, he struck [her] on the fringed aegis, horrible, which not even
the thunderbolt of Jove will subdue; on it gore-tainted Mars smote her
with the long spear. But she, retiring, seized in her stout hand a stone
lying in the plain, black, rugged, and great, which men of former days
had set to be the boundary of a field.[684] With this she struck fierce
Mars upon the neck, and relaxed his knees. Seven acres he covered,
falling; as to his hair he was defiled with dust; and his armour rang
round him. But Pallas Minerva laughed, and, boasting over him, addressed
to him winged words:

   [Footnote 684: The student will find some rude representations of
   these boundary-stones at page 212, sqq. of Van Goes' edition of
   the Rei Agrimensoria scriptores.]

"Fool, hast thou not yet perceived how much I boast myself to be
superior, that thou opposest thy strength to me? Thus indeed dost thou
expiate the Erinnys of thy mother, who designs mischiefs against thee,
enraged because thou hast deserted the Greeks, and dost aid the
treaty-breaking Trojans."

Thus having spoken, she turned back her bright eyes. But Venus, the
daughter of Jove, taking him by the hand, led him away, groaning very
frequently; but he with difficulty collected his spirit. But when the
white-armed goddess Juno perceived him, immediately to Minerva she
addressed winged words:

"Alas! O child of aegis-bearing Jove, invincible, see how again she,
most impudent, leads man-slaughtering Mars through the tumult, from the
glowing battle. But follow."

Thus she spoke; but Minerva rushed after, and rejoiced in her mind; and
springing upon her, smote her with her stout hand on the breast, and
dissolved her knees and dear heart. Then both of them lay upon the
fruitful earth; but she, boasting over them, spoke winged words:

"Would that all, as many as are allies to the Trojans, when they fight
against the armed Greeks, were so bold and daring, as Venus came an
assistant to Mars, to oppose my strength; then had we long since ceased
from battle, having overthrown the well-built city of Ilium."

Thus she spoke; but the white-armed goddess Juno smiled. And the
earth-shaking king addressed Apollo:

"Phoebus, why do we two stand apart? Nor is it becoming, since the
others have begun. This would be disgraceful, if we return without fight
to Olympus, and to the brazen-floored mansion of Jove. Commence, for
thou art younger by birth; for it would not be proper for me, since I am
elder, and know more things. Fool, since thou possessest a senseless
heart; nor dost at all remember those things, how many evils we suffered
round Ilium, when we alone of the gods, coming from Jove to haughty
Laomedon, laboured for a year for a stipulated hire, and he, commanding,
gave orders? I indeed built a city and wall for the Trojans, extensive
and very beautiful, that the city might be impregnable; whilst thou, O
Phoebus, didst feed, his stamping-footed, curved-horned oxen, among the
lawns of many-valed, woody Ida.[685] But when now the jocund Hours had
brought round the period of payment, then did violent Laomedon forcibly
defraud us both of all reward, and having threatened, dismissed us. And
beside,[686] he threatened that he would bind our feet and hands from
above, and sell us into distant islands; and affirmed that he would cut
off the ears of both with the brass: but we immediately returned back
with indignant mind, enraged on account of the rewards which, having
promised, he did not make good. Is it for this thou dost now gratify the
people? Why dost thou not strive along with us, that the treaty-breaking
Trojans may basely perish from the root, with their children and
modest[687] wives?"

   [Footnote 685: On this slavery of Apollo, see my note, p. 43, n.
   2. Longus, Past. iv. 10: [Greek: Eipote Apollon Laomedonti
   theteyon eboukolese, toiosde en, oios tote ephanthe Daphnis].]

   [Footnote 686: [Greek: Sun men]. I almost prefer [Greek: soi
   men], with other MSS. and Clarke.]

   [Footnote 687: Perhaps intended as a covert sneer at Helen.]

But him the far-darting king, Apollo, in turn addressed:

"O Neptune, thou wouldst not say that I am prudent, if I should now
