the pagans to such an extent that they destroyed the group of Christ
and the Woman, which Julian had caused to be removed. Cassiodorus,
Rufinus, Kedrenos, and Malala, assert that the head was saved from
destruction. It has been suggested that the group did not represent
the woman at the feet of the Saviour, but a conquered province
kneeling before the Roman emperor and addressing him as her Saviour
([Greek: SOTERI]). But this explanation seems more ingenious than
probable, because it implies that Christians, Eusebius included, had
mistaken the portrait of a Roman conqueror for that of

Christ, which would have been so different in type, dress, and
attitude. At all events, the belief that the group of Banias was a
genuine likeness was general in the fourth century. Eusebius
contributed to make it known in the Western world; and to this
diffusion we probably owe the second type of the Saviour's
physiognomy, the bearded face, the large impressive eyes, the hair
parted in the middle, and falling in locks on the shoulders.[169]

To this type belongs the bust discovered four years ago in the "locus
ad catacumbas." According to an ingenious hypothesis of Bottari,
adopted by de Rossi, the Paneas group is represented on the Lateran
sarcophagus, engraved by Roller in the second volume of his
"Catacombs," plate 58.


[Illustration: Landslip in the Cemetery of Cyriaca.]

THE CEMETERY OF CYRIACA. This, the principal cemetery of the Via
Tiburtina, was excavated in the hill above the basilica of S. Lorenzo
fuori le Mura. It is the one with which I have had most to do, because
the building of the new Camposanto, together with the sinking of the
foundations of the new tombs, has been the occasion of frequent
discoveries. One of the characteristic features of Cyriaca's cemetery
is the large number of military inscriptions from the praetorian camp
which were used to close the graves, the name of the deceased
Christian being engraved on the blank side of the slab. On December
23, 1876, a landslide of considerable extent took place along the
southern face of the rock in which the catacombs are excavated, in
consequence of which many loculi, arcosolia, and painted cubicula were
laid open. I happened to witness the accident, and was able to direct
the exploration of the graves. Among the objects discovered, I
remember a pair of silver earrings, a necklace of gold and emeralds,
sixteen inches long, clay objects of various kinds, gladiatorial and
theatrical lamps, and nine Christian tombstones. One of them was
engraved on the back of a slab from the praetorian camp, containing the
roster of one hundred and fifty soldiers from the twelfth and
fourteenth city cohorts (_cohortes urbanae_). Each individual has his
praenomen, nomen, and cognomen, carefully indicated, together with the
names of his father, tribe, and country. The men are grouped in
companies, which are indicated by the name of their captains, such as
the "company of Marcellus" or the "company of Tranquillinus," with the
consular date of the year in which Marcellus and Tranquillinus were
in command of that company. Another part of the same roster, engraved
on a slab of the same marble and size, and containing many more names,
was found a century and a half ago in the same place, and removed to
the Vatican Museum.

One of the tombs, discovered during the following January, seems to
have belonged to a lady of rank. A gold necklace and a pair of opal
earrings were found in the earth which filled the grave. Relatives or
friends of the occupants of the cubiculum had written on the plaster
words of affection and devotion, such as "Gaianus, live in Christ with
Procula;" "Semplicius, live in Christ."

It is to be regretted that, in order to make room for the daily
victims of death, the municipality of Rome should be obliged to turn
out of their graves the faithful of the third and fourth centuries who
were buried in the neighborhood of S. Lorenzo. In 1876 I witnessed the
discovery of a section of the old cemetery at the foot of the hill of
Cyriaca. The tombs were mostly sarcophagi, with reliefs, the subjects
of which are taken from the Bible. One of them, carved in the rude but
pathetic style of the fifth century, represents the crossing of the
Red Sea, and the Egyptian hosts, led by Pharaoh, following closely on
the Jews. The waves are closing over the persecutors, just as the last
of the fugitives emerges safely on the land. The "column of fire" is
represented, according to the Vitruvian rules, with base and capital;
and the costumes of the warriors of the Nile are those of Roman
_gregarii_, or privates, under Constantine. Another sarcophagus shows
the Virgin Mary, with the infant Saviour in her arms, receiving the
offering of the Eastern kings. A third represents a sort of pageant of
court dignitaries of one of the Valentinians. Besides these and many
other pieces of sculpture seventy-two inscriptions or fragments of
inscriptions were dug up, mostly from the pavement of a ruined chapel,
one of the seven by which the basilica of S. Lorenzo was surrounded in
ancient times.

[Illustration: Inscription from the tombstone of a dentist.]

[Illustration: Inscription from the grave of Alexander, a dentist.]

[Illustration: Surgeon's instruments; relief on a tombstone.]

Another inscription, discovered in 1864, deserves attention on account
of the instruments which are engraved upon it. It is a fragment from
the tomb of a dentist named Victorinus, or Celerinus, with the
representation of the instruments he used in extracting teeth. Such
representations are by no means rare on gravestones. The other two
specimens reproduced here are also from the catacombs. Alexander was a
dentist; the unknown owner of the other slab was a general surgeon,
yet the symbol of dentistry occupies the prominent place in his
display of tools. In my experience of Roman or Latin excavations, in
which thousands of tombs have been brought to light, I have hardly
ever met with a skull the teeth of which showed symptoms of decay, or
evidence of having been operated upon by a professional hand.
Specimens of filling are even more rare than those of gold plating. Of
this latter process we have now a beautiful sample in a skull
discovered in the excavations of Faleria, and exhibited in the
Faliscan Museum at the Villa Giulia, outside the Porta del Popolo. The
gold socket or plating of three molar teeth is still in excellent
condition. And here I may recall the ancient law, mentioned by Cicero
(De Leg. ii. 24), which made it illegal to bury a body with gold,
except such as had been used in fastening the teeth.


THE CEMETERY AD DUAS LAUROS (of SS. Peter and Marcellinus).[170] To
the left of the second milestone of the Via Labicana there was an
imperial villa, named _ad Duas Lauros_ (the two laurels), where the
empress Helena was buried by Constantine, and Valentinian III. was
murdered when playing with other youths, in 455. Adjoining the tomb of
the empress, which was described in chapter iv., pp. 197 sq., were two
cemeteries,--one above ground, belonging to the "Equites Singulares,"
or body guards; the other, below. The latter was the largest of the
Via Labicana, and was known in early Church annals under the same name
as the imperial villa. In 1880-82 a third and deeper network of
galleries was excavated for the sake of extracting the pozzolana, the
beds of which support the tufa and the catacombs excavated in it. Some
damage was done to the tombs, but the Italian proverb _Non tutto il
male viene per nuocere_ proved true once more on this occasion. The
excavation of the catacombs, which is generally a difficult and
costly work, and sometimes impossible, when the owner of the ground
above them objects to this form of trespassing on his estate, here
became an easy matter, the earth being simply thrown into the sandpits
from the catacombs above. The discoveries made on this occasion, added
to the descriptions and drawings left by former explorers, give us a
thorough knowledge of these labyrinths. The impression which they make
at first is rather poor; but this is due chiefly to the ravages
committed by early explorers.

The inscriptions are few and not particularly interesting, excepting
one, which was discovered in 1873, and is written in excellent style:
"Aurelius Theophilus, a citizen of Carrhae, a man of pure mind and
great innocence, at the age of twenty-three has rendered his soul to
God, his body to the earth." His native city, the Haran, or Charan of
the Bible, where Abraham lived, is known in Church annals as one of
the strongholds of paganism in Mesopotamia. When Julian the Apostate
led the Roman armies against the Persians, in 362, he halted for some
time at Carrhae, to perform impious and cruel sacrifices in the
sanctuary of Luno. A description of the crime is given by Theodoretus
in Book III. ch. xxvi. At that time Carrhae, in spite of its devotion
to the old religion, had a bishop named Vitus, who died in 381, and
was succeeded by Protogenes. According to Theodoretus, he succeeded in
"cultivating that wild field which had been covered with idolatrous
thorns." Aurelius Theophilus was probably a contemporary of these
events, as the inscription on his tombstone belongs undoubtedly to the
end of the fourth century. There are also a few inscriptions scratched
on plaster, by pilgrims who visited the three historical crypts of
Marcellinus and Peter, Gorgonius, and Tiburtius. To save devout
visitors the trouble and danger of crossing the labyrinths, each of
these crypts was made accessible directly from the ground above by
means of a staircase. The _graffiti_ are found mostly on the sides or
at the foot of these staircases, or else on the door-posts of the
crypts themselves.

The historical and religious associations of this catacomb are summed
up and illustrated in a beautiful picture representing the Saviour
with S. Paul on his right and S. Peter on his left: and, on a line
below, the four martyrs who were buried in the cemetery, Gorgonius,
Peter, Marcellinus, and Tiburtius, pointing with their right hands to
the Divine Lamb on the mountain. The heads of the two apostles are
particularly fine, and the shape of their beards most characteristic.
This well-known fresco, preserved in cubiculum no. 25 of Bosio's plan,
was discovered in 1851 by de Rossi, in a curious manner. Having
obtained from padre Marchi permission to carry the excavations towards
the cubiculum, and finding that the work proceeded too slowly for his
impatience, he crept on his hands and feet for fifty yards along the
narrow gap between the ceiling of the galleries and the earth with
which they were filled, and reached the cubiculum nearly suffocated.
Here, by means of a skylight which was not obstructed by rubbish, he
found that the place was used as a deposit for carrion, as the
half-putrefied carcass of a bull was lying under the famous fresco.

Many cubiculi were painted by one artist, whose power of invention was
rather restricted. He has but two subjects: the story of Jonah, and
the Symbolic Supper. Of this last there are four representations, all
reproduced from the same pattern, of which I give an example. A family
consisting of father, mother, and children, are sitting around a
table, upon which the [Greek: ichthus] or fish is served; the banquet
is presided over by two mystic figures, Irene or Peace on the left,
Agape or Love on the right. The head of the family addresses Peace
with these words: "Irene, da calda!" and Love, "Agape, misce mi!" The
last words are easily understood: "Give me to drink," the verb
_mescere_ being still used in the same sense in Tuscany, where a
wine-shop is sometimes called a _mescita di vino_. The meaning of the
word _calda_ is not certain. There is no doubt, as Boetticher says,
that the ancients had something to correspond to our tea: but the
_calda_ seems to have been more than an infusion; apparently it was a
mixture of hot water, wine, and drugs, that is, a sort of punch, which
was drunk mostly in winter.[171] The names written in charcoal above
the principal inscriptions in this illustration are those of Pomponio
Leto and his academicians.[172]

[Illustration: The Symbolic Supper.]

Another artist distinguished himself in these catacombs, not from
skill in design and color, but from the beautiful subjects chosen by
him for the decoration of the walls and ceilings of three
cubiculi,--compositions which may be called "The Gospel Illustrated."
They have been admirably described and reproduced by photographs and
in outline by monsignore Joseph Wilpert, in his book referred to in
the note on page 354. The intuition of this learned man in detecting
paintings which have been effaced by age, dampness, and smoke is fully
appreciated by students of Christian archaeology: but on this occasion
he accomplished a real _tour de force_. When, on December 19, I
entered the cubiculum no. 54, in which the paintings are, and he began
to point out to me outlines of figures and objects, I thought he was
laboring under an optical delusion; I could see nothing beyond a
blackened and mouldy plaster surface. My eyes, however, soon became
initiated to the new experience, and able to read the lines of this
curious palimpsest. The dark spots soon grew into shape, and lovely
groups, inspired by the purest Christian symbolism, appeared on the
walls. There are thirteen pictures, representing the following-named
subjects: the annunciation, the three magi following the star (which
is shaped like the monogram [Symbol: Chi Rho]), their adoration at
Bethlehem, the baptism of our Lord, the last judgment, the healing of
the blind, the crippled, and the woman with the issue of blood, the
woman of Samaria, the Good Shepherd (twice), the Orantes (twice).

The catacombs of SS. Peter and Marcellinus have another attraction for
students. Poor as they are in epitaphs and works of art, they contain
hundreds of names of celebrated humanists, archaeologists, and artists
who explored these depths in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
and made record of their visits. When one walks between two lines of
graves, in the almost oppressive stillness of the cemetery, with no
other company than one's thoughts, the names of Pomponius Letus and
his academicians, of Bosio, Panvinio, Avanzini, Severano, Marangoni,
Marchi, and d'Agincourt, written in bold letters, give the lonely
wanderer the impression of meeting living and dear friends; and one
wonders at the great love which these pioneers of "humanism" must have
had for antiquities, to have spent days and days, and to have held
their conferences and banquets, in places like these.

In chapter i., page 10, of "Ancient Rome," I mentioned Pomponio's
Academy, and its visits to the crypts of Callixtus. Since the
publication of my book, the subject has been investigated again and
illustrated by Giacomo Lombroso[173] and de Rossi.[174] It appears
that after the trial which the Academicians underwent at the time of
Paul II., and their unexpected liberation from the Castle of S.
Angelo, they decided to turn over a new leaf. From a fraternity which
was pagan in manners and instincts, which had made itself conspicuous
by the use of profane language, and by the celebration of profane
meetings over the tombs of the martyrs, they became the "Societas
literatorum S. Victoris et sociorum in Esquiliis," a literary society
under the patronage of S. Victor and his companion saints, namely,
Fortunatus and Genesius. Their _pontifex maximus_ became a president;
their _sacerdos_ a priest, whose duty it was to say mass on certain
anniversaries. The most important celebration fell, as before, on
April 21, the birthday of Rome. We have a description by an
eye-witness, Jacopo Volaterrano, of that which took place in 1483: "On
the Esquiline,[175] near the house of Pomponius, the society of
literary men has celebrated the birthday of Rome. Divine service was
performed by Peter Demetrius of Lucca; Paul Marsus delivered the
oration. The dinner was served in the hall adjoining the chapel of S.
Salvatore de Cornutis," etc. In 1501, after the death of Pomponius,
the anniversary meetings were held on the Capitol; the solemn mass was
sung in the church of the Aracoeli, while the banquet took place in
the Palazzo dei Conservatori. The convivial feast of 1501 was not a
success. Burckhardt describes it as _satis feriale et sine bono vino_
(commonplace and with no good wine).

Was the conversion of the Academicians a sincere one? We believe it
was not; they manifested under Sixtus V. the same feelings which had
brought them to justice under Paul II.

In the calendars of the Church of Rome only one name is registered on
April 21, that of Pope Victor. His alleged companions, Fortunatus and
Genesius, were singled out of old, disused calendars of the church of
Africa, unknown to the Latins. Why did the academicians select such
enigmatic and obscure protectors? The reason is evident. Genesius was
chosen because his name suggested an allusion to the _genesis_
(_natalis_) or birthday of Rome; Victor and Fortunatus, likewise, were
considered names of good omen, with a suggestion of the Victory and
Fortune who presided over the destinies of ancient Rome.

Under the protection of these alleged saints, Pomponius and his
friends worshipped, and celebrated the birthday of Rome, and the
goddesses connected with the city.[176]

This state of things did not wholly escape the attention of
contemporary observers. One of them, Raffaele Volaterrano, expressly
says: "Pomponius Laetus worshipped Romulus and kept the birthday of
Rome; the beginning of a campaign against religion (_initium abolendae
fidei_)."

The Roman academy found the means of keeping faithful to its
traditions, and to the spirit of its institutions, in spite of the
reform of its statutes. Victor, Fortunatus, Genesius, in whose honor
divine service was performed on April 20, did not represent to the
initiated the saints of the Church, but the fortunes of ancient Rome,
its founder, the _Paliliae_. Still, we are not yet able to discover
whether all this was done simply out of love and admiration for the
ancient world, under the influence of the Renaissance of classical
studies; or from hatred and contempt of Christian faith: _initium
abolendae fidei_.


THE END.

FOOTNOTES:

[141] Principal authorities:--Philip de Winghe: _Cod. biblioth.
Bruxell_. 17872.--Panvinius: _De Coemeteriis Urbis Romae_. Rome,
1568.--Antonio Bosio: _Roma sotterranea_; opera postuma. Roma,
1632-34.--Paolo Aringhi: _Roma subterranea novissima._ Roma, 1651 fol.
Cologne, 1659 fol.--M. A. Boldetti: _Osservazioni sopra i cimiteri de'
SS. martiri._ Roma, Salvioni, 1720.--Giovanni Bottari: _Sculture e
pitture estratte dai cimiteri di Roma._ 3 vol. Roma, 1737-54.--Filippo
Buonarroti: _Vasi antichi di vetro ornati di figure_, etc. Firenze,
1716, 4.--Raoul Rochette: _Le catacombe di Roma._ Milano,
1841.--Giuseppe Marchi: _Monumenti delle arti cristiane primitive._
Roma, Puccinelli, 1844.--Raffaele Garrucci: _Storia dell' arte
cristiana._ Roma: 6 vol. fol.; _Vetri ornati di figure in oro, trovati
nei cimiteri dei Cristiani._ Rome, Salviucci, 1858.--Louis Perret:
_Les catacombes de Rome_, etc. 6 vol. fol. Paris, 1852-1856.--De
Rossi: _Roma sotterranea cristiana._ 3 vol. fol. Roma, Salviucci,
1864; _Inscriptiones Christianae Urbis Romae._ 2 vol. fol. Rome,
1861-1887; _Bullettino di archeologia cristiana._ Roma, Salviucci,
1863-1891.--Northcote and Brownlow: _Roma sotterranea._ 2 volumes 8vo,
2d ed. London, Longmans, 1878.--Northcote: _Epitaphs of the
Catacombs._ London, Longmans, 1878.--Henry Parker: _The Catacombs of
Rome._ Oxford, Parker, 1877.

[142] See _Cod. Theodos._ ix. 17, 2.

[143] On the subject of the Jewish colony in Rome, see:--Emmanuel
Rodocanachi: _Le saint-siege et les Juifs: le Ghetto a Rome._ Paris,
Didot, 1891.--A. Bertolotti: _Les Juifs a Rome._ Revue des etudes
juives, 1881, fasc. 4.--Raffaele Garrucci: _Cimiterio degli antichi
Ebrei._ Roma, 1862.--Pietro Manfrin: _Gli Ebrei sotto la dominazione
romana._ Roma, 1888-1890.--Ettore Natali: _Il Ghetto di Roma._ Roma,
1887.--Perreau: _Education et culture des Israelites en Italie au
moyen age._ Corfou, 1885.

[144] This "poster," painted in red letters, which is now in the Museo
Nazionale, Naples, was published by Zangemeister in vol. iv., p. 13,
n. 117, of the _Corpus inscriptionum latinarum._--Prof. Mommsen, in
the _Rheinisches Museum_, xix. (1864), p. 456, contradicts the opinion
of de Rossi as regards the religious persuasion of this Fabius Eupor
(_Bullettino di archeologia cristiana_, 1864, pp. 70, 92).

[145] See Champagny: _Rome et la Judee_, p. 31, of the first edition.

[146] See Suetonius, _Domitian_, chap. 92; Dion Cassius, lxvii. 13.

[147] See Pliny, _Epistolae_, x. 67.

[148] See de Rossi: _Bullettino di archeologia cristiana_, 1868, p. 19.

[149] See _Bullettino di archeologia cristiana_, 1867, p. 76.

[150] See _Atti dell' Accademia dei Nuovi Lincei_, sessione 6 maggio,
1860.

[151] _Bullettino di archeologia cristiana_, 1863, p. 75.

[152] ... passim corpora condens Plurima sanctorum subter haec moenia
ponit.

[153] The attention of learned men had been directed towards Christian
underground Rome just ten years before this event, by the publication
of Panvinio's pamphlet _De caemeteriis urbis Romae_, 1566.

[154] _Ad ann. 575_; 130, 226.

[155] See _Bullettino di archeologia cristiana_, 1865, p. 36.

[156] See Fea: _Miscellanea_, vol. i., pp. 238, 245, etc.

[157] It is now in the Vatican Library. A good engraving is to be
found in Buonarroti's _Osservazioni sui medaglioni_, p. 497.

[158] _Historiar._, iii. 65.

[159] _Historiae_, iii. 65.

[160] The name Ampliatus belongs to servants and freedmen; it was
never used by men of rank, whether pagans or Christians.

[161] Baronius _ad Martyr_. 31 October.

[162] See Renan's _St. Paul_, lxvii.

[163] Orazio Marucchi: _Di un ipogeo scoperto nel cimitero di S.
Sebastiano._ Roma, 1879; _Un antico busto del Salvatore, etc._, in the
_Melanges de l'Ecole francaise_, 1888, p. 403.--Pietro d' Achille: _Il
sepolcro di S. Pietro._ Roma, 1867.--Giovanni B. Lugari: _Le catacombe
ossia il sepolcro apostolico dell' Appia._ Roma, 1888.--De Rossi:
_Roma sotterranea cristiana_, vol. iii., p. 427; _Il sepolcro degli
Uranii cristiani a S. Sebastiano_, in the _Bullettino di archeologia
cristiana_, 1886, p. 24.--Pietro Marchi: _Monumenti primitivi delle
arti cristiane_, p. 212, tav. xxxix-xli.

[164] _Inscriptiones Christianae_, vol. ii. 32, 77.

[165] Represented in plate ix. of the _Melanges de l'Ecole francaise
de Rome_, 1888.

[166] This is also illustrated by Martigny: _Dictionnaire_, 2d ed. p.
586.--Kraus: _Realencyclopaedie_, ii. p. 580.--Northcote and Brownlow:
_Roma Sotterranea._ London, 1879. (ii. p. 29.)--Roller: _Catacombes_,
planche i., xl. n. 2.--Garrucci: _Arte cristiana_, tav. 428,
5.--Duchesne: _Bullettino critique_, Decembre, 1882, p. 288.--De
Rossi: _Bullettino comunale_, 1889, p. 131, tav. v., vi.

[167] See:--Giovanni Marangoni: _Istoria dell' oratorio appellato
Sancta Sanctorum._ Roma, 1747.--Gaspare Bambi: _Memorie sacre
della cappella di Sancta Sanctorum._ Roma, 1775.--Giuseppe Soresini:
_Dell' immagine del SS. Salvatore ad Sancta Sanctorum._ Roma,
1675.--Benedetto Millini: _Oratorio di S. Lorenzo ad Sancta
Sanctorum._ Roma, 1616.--Raffaele Garrucci: _Storia dell' arte
cristiana_, vol. i. p. 408.--Rohault de Fleury: _Le Latran_.

[168] A pious but unfounded tradition identifies this picture of
Edessa with the one preserved in Genoa, in the church of S. Bartolomeo
degli Armeni.

[169] On the subject of the Paneas group see:--Andre Perate: _Note sur
le groupe de Paneas_, in _Melanges de l'Ecole francaise de Rome_,
1885, p. 302.--Raoul-Rochette: _Discours sur les types imitatifs qui
constituent l'art du Christianisme_, 1834.--Bayet: _Recherches pour
servir a l'histoire de la peinture en Orient_, p. 29.--Orazio
Marucchi: _Di un busto del Salvatore_, etc., in the _Melanges_, 1888,
p. 403.--Eusebius: H. E. VII., 185, edition Teubner, p. 315.--Grimouard
de St. Laurent: _Guide de l'art Chretien_, ii. p. 215.
