agitation, and with a colour which surprise and pleasure had brought at
once into his faded cheek, he exchanged the humdrum hornpipe which he
had been sawing out with reluctant and lazy bow, for the fine Scottish
air,

  You're welcome, Charlie Stuart,

which flew from his strings as if by inspiration and after a breathless
pause of admiration among the audience, was received with a clamour of
applause, which seemed to show that the name and tendency, as well as
the execution of the tune, was in the highest degree acceptable to all
the party assembled.

In the meantime, Cristal Nixon, still keeping hold of Darsie, and
following the landlord, forced his way with some difficulty through the
crowded kitchen, and entered a small apartment on the other side of it,
where they found Lilias Redgauntlet already seated. Here Nixon gave
way to his suppressed resentment, and turning sternly on Crackenthorp,
threatened him with his master's severest displeasure, because things
were in such bad order to receive his family, when he had given such
special advice that he desired to be private. But Father Crackenthorp
was not a man to be brow-beaten.

'Why, brother Nixon, thou art angry this morning,' he replied; 'hast
risen from thy wrong side, I think. You know, as well as I, that most of
this mob is of the squire's own making--gentlemen that come with their
servants, and so forth, to meet him in the way of business, as old Tom
Turnpenny says--the very last that came was sent down with Dick Gardener
from Fairladies.'

'But the blind scraping scoundrel yonder,' said Nixon, 'how dared you
take such a rascal as that across your threshold at such a time as this?
If the squire should dream you have a thought of peaching--I am only
speaking for your good, Father Crackenthorp.'

'Why, look ye, brother Nixon,' said Crackenthorp, turning his quid with
great composure, 'the squire is a very worthy gentleman, and I'll never
deny it; but I am neither his servant nor his tenant, and so he need
send me none of his orders till he hears I have put on his livery. As
for turning away folk from my door, I might as well plug up the ale-tap,
and pull down the sign--and as for peaching, and such like, the squire
will find the folk here are as honest to the full as those he brings
with him.'

'How, you impudent lump of tallow,' said Nixon, 'what do you mean by
that?'

'Nothing,' said Crackenthorp, 'but that I can tour out as well as
another--you understand me--keep good lights in my upper story--know a
thing or two more than most folk in this country. If folk will come to
my house on dangerous errands, egad they shall not find Joe Crackenthorp
a cat's-paw. I'll keep myself clear, you may depend on it, and let every
man answer for his own actions--that's my way. Anything wanted, Master
Nixon?'

'No--yes--begone!' said Nixon, who seemed embarrassed with the
landlord's contumacy, yet desirous to conceal the effect it produced on
him.

The door was no sooner closed on Crackenthorp, than Miss Redgauntlet,
addressing Nixon, commanded him to leave the room and go to his proper
place.

'How, madam?' said the fellow sullenly, yet with an air of respect,
'Would you have your uncle pistol me for disobeying his orders?'

'He may perhaps pistol you for some other reason, if you do not obey
mine,' said Lilias, composedly.

'You abuse your advantage over me, madam--I really dare not go--I am on
guard over this other miss here; and if I should desert my post, my life
were not worth five minutes' purchase.'

'Then know your post, sir,' said Lilias, 'and watch on the outside of
the door. You have no commission to listen to our private conversation,
I suppose? Begone, sir, without further speech or remonstrance, or I
will tell my uncle that which you would have reason to repent be should
know.'

The fellow looked at her with a singular expression of spite, mixed
with deference. 'You abuse your advantages, madam,' he said, 'and act as
foolishly in doing so as I did in affording you such a hank over me. But
you are a tyrant; and tyrants have commonly short reigns.'

So saying, he left the apartment.

'The wretch's unparalleled insolence,' said Lilias to her brother, 'has
given me one great advantage over him. For knowing that my uncle would
shoot him with as little remorse as a woodcock, if he but guessed at his
brazen-faced assurance towards me, he dares not since that time assume,
so far as I am concerned, the air of insolent domination which the
possession of my uncle's secrets, and the knowledge of his most secret
plans, have led him to exert over others of his family.'

'In the meantime,' said Darsie, 'I am happy to see that the landlord
of the house does not seem so devoted to him as I apprehended; and this
aids the hope of escape which I am nourishing for you and for myself. O
Lilias! the truest of friends, Alan Fairford, is in pursuit of me, and
is here at this moment. Another humble, but, I think, faithful friend,
is also within these dangerous walls.'

Lilias laid her finger on her lips, and pointed to the door. Darsie took
the hint, lowered his voice, and informed her in whispers of the arrival
of Fairford, and that he believed he had opened a communication with
Wandering Willie. She listened with the utmost interest, and had just
begun to reply, when a loud noise was heard in the kitchen, caused
by several contending voices, amongst which Darsie thought he could
distinguish that of Alan Fairford.

Forgetting how little his own condition permitted him to become the
assistant of another, Darsie flew to the door of the room, and finding
it locked and bolted on the outside, rushed against it with all
his force, and made the most desperate efforts to burst it open,
notwithstanding the entreaties of his sister that he would compose
himself and recollect the condition in which he was placed. But the
door, framed to withstand attacks from excisemen, constables, and other
personages, considered as worthy to use what are called the king's keys,
[In common parlance, a crowbar and hatchet.] 'and therewith to make
lockfast places open and patent,' set his efforts at defiance. Meantime
the noise continued without, and we are to give an account of its origin
in our next chapter.




CHAPTER XX

NARRATIVE OF DARSIE LATIMER, CONTINUED

Joe Crackenthorp's public-house had never, since it first reared
its chimneys on the banks of the Solway, been frequented by such a
miscellaneous group of visitors as had that morning become its guests.
Several of them were persons whose quality seemed much superior to
their dresses and modes of travelling. The servants who attended them
contradicted the inferences to be drawn from the garb of their masters,
and, according to the custom of the knights of the rainbow, gave many
hints that they were not people to serve any but men of first-rate
consequence. These gentlemen, who had come thither chiefly for the
purpose of meeting with Mr. Redgauntlet, seemed moody and anxious,
conversed and walked together apparently in deep conversation, and
avoided any communication with the chance travellers whom accident
brought that morning to the same place of resort.

As if Fate had set herself to confound the plans of the Jacobite
conspirators, the number of travellers was unusually great, their
appearance respectable, and they filled the public tap-room of the inn,
where the political guests had already occupied most of the private
apartments.

Amongst others, honest Joshua Geddes had arrived, travelling, as he
said, in the sorrow of the soul, and mourning for the fate of Darsie
Latimer as he would for his first-born child. He had skirted the whole
coast of the Solway, besides making various trips into the interior,
not shunning, on such occasions, to expose himself to the laugh of the
scorner, nay, even to serious personal risk, by frequenting the haunts
of smugglers, horse-jockeys, and other irregular persons, who looked
on his intrusion with jealous eyes, and were apt to consider him as
an exciseman in the disguise of a Quaker. All this labour and peril,
however, had been undergone in vain. No search he could make obtained
the least intelligence of Latimer, so that he began to fear the poor lad
had been spirited abroad--for the practice of kidnapping was then not
infrequent, especially on the western coasts of Britain--if indeed he
had escaped a briefer and more bloody fate.

With a heavy heart, he delivered his horse, even Solomon, into the hands
of the ostler, and walking into the inn, demanded from the landlord
breakfast and a private room. Quakers, and such hosts as old Father
Crackenthorp, are no congenial spirits; the latter looked askew over his
shoulder, and replied, 'If you would have breakfast here, friend, you
are like to eat it where other folk eat theirs.'

'And wherefore can I not,' said the Quaker, 'have an apartment to
myself, for my money?'

'Because, Master Jonathan, you must wait till your betters be served, or
else eat with your equals.'

Joshua Geddes argued the point no further, but sitting quietly down on
the seat which Crackenthorp indicated to him, and calling for a pint
of ale, with some bread, butter, and Dutch cheese, began to satisfy the
appetite which the morning air had rendered unusually alert.

While the honest Quaker was thus employed, another stranger entered the
apartment, and sat down near to the table on which his victuals were
placed. He looked repeatedly at Joshua, licked his parched and chopped
lips as he saw the good Quaker masticate his bread and cheese, and
sucked up his thin chops when Mr. Geddes applied the tankard to his
mouth, as if the discharge of these bodily functions by another had
awakened his sympathies in an uncontrollable degree. At last, being
apparently unable to withstand his longings, he asked, in a faltering
tone, the huge landlord, who was tramping through the room in all
corpulent impatience, whether he could have a plack-pie?'

'Never heard of such a thing, master,' said the landlord, and was about
to trudge onward; when the guest, detaining him, said, in a strong
Scottish tone, 'Ya will maybe have nae whey then, nor buttermilk, nor ye
couldna exhibit a souter's clod?'

'Can't tell what ye are talking about, master,' said Crackenthorp.

'Then ye will have nae breakfast that will come within 'the compass of a
shilling Scots?'

'Which is a penny sterling,' answered Crackenthorp, with a sneer. 'Why,
no, Sawney, I can't say as we have--we can't afford it; But you shall
have a bellyful for love, as we say in the bull-ring.'

'I shall never refuse a fair offer,' said the poverty-stricken guest;
'and I will say that for the English, if they were deils, that they are
a ceeveleesed people to gentlemen that are under a cloud.'

'Gentlemen!--humph!' said Crackenthorp--'not a blue-cap among them but
halts upon that foot.' Then seizing on a dish which still contained a
huge cantle of what had been once a princely mutton pasty, he placed
it on the table before the stranger, saying, 'There, master gentleman;
there is what is worth all the black pies, as you call them, that were
ever made of sheep's head.'

'Sheep's head is a gude thing, for a' that,' replied the guest; but
not being spoken so loud as to offend his hospitable entertainer, the
interjection might pass for a private protest against the scandal thrown
out against the standing dish of Caledonia.

This premised, he immediately began to transfer the mutton and
pie-crust from his plate to his lips, in such huge gobbets, as if he was
refreshing after a three days' fast, and laying in provisions against a
whole Lent to come.

Joshua Geddes in his turn gazed on him with surprise, having never, he
thought, beheld such a gaunt expression of hunger in the act of eating.
'Friend,' he said, after watching him for some minutes, 'if thou gorgest
thyself in this fashion, thou wilt assuredly choke. Wilt thou not take a
draught out of my cup to help down all that dry meat?'

'Troth,' said the stranger, stopping and looking at the friendly
propounder, 'that's nae bad overture, as they say in the General
Assembly. I have heard waur motions than that frae wiser counsel.'

Mr. Geddes ordered a quart of home-brewed to be placed before our friend
Peter Peebles; for the reader must have already conceived that this
unfortunate litigant was the wanderer in question.

The victim of Themis had no sooner seen the flagon, than he seized
it with the same energy which he had displayed in operating upon the
pie--puffed off the froth with such emphasis, that some of it lighted on
Mr. Geddes's head--and then said, as if with it sudden recollection of
what was due to civility, 'Here's to ye, friend. What! are ye ower grand
to give me an answer, or are ye dull o' hearing?'

'I prithee drink thy liquor, friend,' said the good Quaker; 'thou
meanest it in civility, but we care not for these idle fashions.'

'What! ye are a Quaker, are ye?' said Peter; and without further
ceremony reared the flagon to his head, from which he withdrew it not
while a single drop of 'barley-broo' remained. 'That's done you and
me muckle gude,' he said, sighing as he set down his pot; 'but twa
mutchkins o' yill between twa folk is a drappie ower little measure.
What say ye to anither pot? or shall we cry in a blithe Scots pint at
ance? The yill is no amiss.'

'Thou mayst call for what thou wilt on thine own charges, friend,' said
Geddes; 'for myself, I willingly contribute to the quenching of thy
natural thirst; but I fear it were no such easy matter to relieve thy
acquired and artificial drought.'

'That is to say, in plain terms, ye are for withdrawing your caution
with the folk of the house? You Quaker folk are but fause comforters;
but since ye have garred me drink sae muckle cauld yill--me that am no
used to the like of it in the forenoon--I think ye might as weel have
offered me a glass of brandy or usquabae--I'm nae nice body--I can drink
onything that's wet and toothsome.'

'Not a drop at my cost, friend,' quoth Geddes. 'Thou art an old man, and
hast perchance a heavy and long journey before thee. Thou art, moreover,
my countryman, as I judge from thy tongue; and I will not give thee the
means of dishonouring thy grey hairs in a strange land.'

'Grey hairs, neighbour!' said Peter, with a wink to the bystanders, whom
this dialogue began to interest, and who were in hopes of seeing the
Quaker played off by the crazed beggar, for such Peter Peebles appeared
to be. 'Grey hairs! The Lord mend your eyesight, neighbour, that disna
ken grey hairs frae a tow wig!'

This jest procured a shout of laughter, and, what was still more
acceptable than dry applause, a man who stood beside called out, 'Father
Crackenthorp, bring a nipperkin of brandy. I'll bestow a dram on this
fellow, were it but for that very word.'

The brandy was immediately brought by a wench who acted as barmaid; and
Peter, with a grin of delight, filled a glass, quaffed it off, and then
saying, 'God bless me! I was so unmannerly as not to drink to ye--I
think the Quaker has smitten me wi' his ill-bred havings,'--he was about
to fill another, when his hand was arrested by his new friend; who said
at the same time, 'No, no, friend--fair play's a jewel--time about, if
you please.' And filling a glass for himself, emptied it as gallantly
as Peter could have done. 'What say you to that, friend?' he continued,
addressing the Quaker.

'Nay, friend,' answered Joshua, 'it went down thy throat, not mine; and
I have nothing to say about what concerns me not; but if thou art a
man of humanity, thou wilt not give this poor creature the means of
debauchery. Bethink thee that they will spurn him from the door, as
they would do a houseless and masterless dog, and that he may die on the
sands or on the common. And if he has through thy means been rendered
incapable of helping himself, thou shalt not be innocent of his blood.'

'Faith, Broadbrim, I believe thou art right, and the old gentleman in
the flaxen jazy shall have no more of the comforter. Besides, we have
business in hand to-day, and this fellow, for as mad as he looks, may
have a nose on his face after all. Hark ye, father,--what is your name,
and what brings you into such an out-of-the-way corner?'

'I am not just free to condescend on my name,' said Peter; 'and as for
my business--there is a wee dribble of brandy in the stoup--it would be
wrang to leave it to the lass--it is learning her bad usages.'

'Well, thou shalt have the brandy, and be d--d to thee, if thou wilt
tell me what you are making here.'

'Seeking a young advocate chap that they ca' Alan Fairford, that has
played me a slippery trick, and ye maun ken a' about the cause,' said
Peter.

'An advocate, man!' answered the captain of the JUMPING JENNY--for it
was he, and no other, who had taken compassion on Peter's drought;
'why, Lord help thee, thou art on the wrong side of the Firth to seek
advocates, whom I take to be Scottish lawyers, not English.'

'English lawyers, man!' exclaimed Peter, 'the deil a lawyer's in a'
England.'

'I wish from my soul it were true,' said Ewart; 'but what the devil put
that in your head?'

'Lord, man, I got a grip of ane of their attorneys in Carlisle, and he
tauld me that there wasna a lawyer in England ony mair than himsell that
kend the nature of a multiple-poinding! And when I told him how this
loopy lad, Alan Fairford, had served me, he said I might bring an action
on the case--just as if the case hadna as mony actions already as one
case can weel carry. By my word, it is a gude case, and muckle has it
borne, in its day, of various procedure--but it's the barley-pickle
breaks the naig's back, and wi' my consent it shall not hae ony mair
burden laid upon it.'

'But this Alan Fairford?' said Nanty--'come--sip up the drop of brandy,
man, and tell me some more about him, and whether you are seeking him
for good or for harm.'

'For my ain gude, and for his harm, to be sure,' said Peter. 'Think of
his having left my cause in the dead-thraw between the tyneing and
the winning, and capering off into Cumberland here, after a wild
loup-the-tether lad they ca' Darsie Latimer.'

'Darsie Latimer!' said Mr. Geddes, hastily; 'do you know anything of
Darsie Latimer?'

'Maybe I do, and maybe I do not,' answered Peter; 'I am no free to
answer every body's interrogatory, unless it is put judicially, and by
form of law--specially where folk think so much of a caup of sour yill,
or a thimblefu' of brandy. But as for this gentleman, that has shown
himself a gentleman at breakfast, and will show himself a gentleman at
the meridian, I am free to condescend upon any points in the cause that
may appear to bear upon the question at issue.'

'Why, all I want to know from you, my friend, is, whether you are
seeking to do this Mr. Alan Fairford good or harm; because if you come
to do him good, I think you could maybe get speech of him--and if to do
him harm, I will take the liberty to give you a cast across the Firth,
with fair warning not to come back on such an errand, lest worse come of
it.'

The manner and language of Ewart were such that Joshua Geddes resolved
to keep cautious silence, till he could more plainly discover whether he
was likely to aid or impede him in his researches after Darsie Latimer.
He therefore determined to listen attentively to what should pass
between Peter and the seaman, and to watch for an opportunity of
questioning the former, so soon as he should be separated from his new
acquaintance.

'I wad by no means,' said Peter Peebles, 'do any substantial harm to the
poor lad Fairford, who has had mony a gowd guinea of mine, as weel as
his father before him; but I wad hae him brought back to the minding of
my business and his ain; and maybe I wadna insist further in my action
of damages against him, than for refunding the fees, and for some annual
rent on the principal sum due frae the day on which he should have
recovered it for me, plack and bawbee, at the great advising; for ye
are aware, that is the least that I can ask NOMINE DAMNI; and I have nae
thought to break down the lad bodily a'thegither--we maun live and let
live--forgie and forget.'

'The deuce take me, friend Broadbrim,' said Nanty Ewart, looking to the
Quaker, 'if I can make out what this old scarecrow means. If I thought
it was fitting that Master Fairford should see him, why perhaps it is
a matter that could be managed. Do you know anything about the old
fellow?--you seemed to take some charge of him just now.'

'No more than I should have done by any one in distress,' said Geddes,
not sorry to be appealed to; 'but I will try what I can do to find out
who he is, and what he is about in this country. But are we not a little
too public in this open room?'

'It's well thought of,' said Nanty; and at his command the barmaid
ushered the party into a side-booth, Peter attending them in the
instinctive hope that there would be more liquor drunk among them before
parting. They had scarce sat down in their new apartment, when the sound
of a violin was heard in the room which they had just left.

'I'll awa back yonder,' said Peter, rising up again; 'yon's the sound of
a fiddle, and when there is music, there's ay something ganging to eat
or drink.'

'I am just going to order something here,' said the Quaker; 'but in the
meantime, have you any objection, my good friend, to tell us your name?'

'None in the world, if you are wanting to drink to me by name and
surname,' answered Peebles; 'but, otherwise, I would rather evite your
interrogatories.'

'Friend,' said the Quaker, 'it is not for thine own health, seeing thou
hast drunk enough already--however--here, handmaiden--bring me a gill of
sherry.'

'Sherry's but shilpit drink, and a gill's a sma' measure for twa
gentlemen to crack ower at their first acquaintance. But let us see your
sneaking gill of sherry,' said Poor Peter, thrusting forth his huge
hand to seize on the diminutive pewter measure, which, according to the
fashion of the time, contained the generous liquor freshly drawn from
the butt.

'Nay, hold, friend,' said Joshua, 'thou hast not yet told me what name
and surname I am to call thee by.'

'D--d sly in the Quaker,' said Nanty, apart, 'to make him pay for his
liquor before he gives it him. Now, I am such a fool, that I should have
let him get too drunk to open his mouth, before I thought of asking him
a question.'

'My name is Peter Peebles, then,' said the litigant, rather sulkily,
as one who thought his liquor too sparingly meted out to him; 'and what
have you to say to that?'

'Peter Peebles?' repeated Nanty Ewart and seemed to muse upon something
which the words brought to his remembrance, while the Quaker pursued his
examination.

'But I prithee, Peter Peebles, what is thy further designation? Thou
knowest, in our country, that some men are distinguished by their craft
and calling, as cordwainers, fishers, weavers, or the like, and some by
their titles as proprietors of land (which savours of vanity)--now, how
may you be distinguished from others of the same name?'

'As Peter Peebles of the great plea of Poor Peter Peebles against
Plainstanes, ET PER CONTRA--if I am laird of naething else, I am ay a
DOMINUS LITIS.'

'It's but a poor lairdship, I doubt,' said Joshua.

'Pray, Mr. Peebles,' said Nanty, interrupting the conversation abruptly,
'were not you once a burgess of Edinburgh?'

'WAS I a burgess!' said Peter indignantly, 'and AM I not a burgess even
now? I have done nothing to forfeit my right, I trow--once provost and
ay my lord.'

'Well, Mr. Burgess, tell me further, have you not some property in the
Gude Town?' continued Ewart.

'Troth have I--that is, before my misfortunes, I had twa or three bonny
bits of mailings amang the closes and wynds, forby the shop and the
story abune it. But Plainstanes has put me to the causeway now. Never
mind though, I will be upsides with him yet.'

'Had not you once a tenement in the Covenant Close?' again demanded
Nanty.

'You have hit it, lad, though ye look not like a Covenanter,' said
Peter; 'we'll drink to its memory--(Hout! the heart's at the mouth o'
that ill-faur'd bit stoup already!)--it brought a rent, reckoning from
the crawstep to the groundsill, that ye might ca' fourteen punds a year,
forby the laigh cellar that was let to Lucky Littleworth.'

'And do you not remember that you had a poor old lady for your tenant,
Mrs. Cantrips of Kittlebasket?' said Nanty, suppressing his emotion with
difficulty.

'Remember! G--d, I have gude cause to remember her,' said Peter, 'for
she turned a dyvour on my hands, the auld besom! and after a' that the
law could do to make me satisfied and paid, in the way of poinding and
distrenzieing and sae forth, as the law will, she ran awa to the charity
workhouse, a matter of twenty punds Scots in my debt--it's a great shame
and oppression that charity workhouse, taking in bankrupt dyvours that
canna, pay their honest creditors.'

'Methinks, friend,' said the Quaker, 'thine own rags might teach thee
compassion for other people's nakedness.'

'Rags!' said Peter, taking Joshua's words literally; 'does ony wise body
put on their best coat when they are travelling, and keeping company
with Quakers, and such other cattle as the road affords?'

'The old lady DIED, I have heard,' said Nanty, affecting a moderation
which was belied by accents that faltered with passion.

'She might live or die, for what I care,' answered Peter the Cruel;
'what business have folk to do to live that canna live as law will, and
satisfy their just and lawful creditors?'

'And you--you that are now yourself trodden down in the very kennel,
are you not sorry for what you have done? Do you not repent having
occasioned the poor widow woman's death?'

'What for should I repent?' said Peter; 'the law was on my side--a
decreet of the bailies, followed by poinding, and an act of warding--a
suspension intented, and the letters found orderly proceeded. I followed
the auld rudas through twa courts--she cost me mair money than her lugs
were worth.'

'Now, by Heaven!' said Nanty, 'I would give a thousand guineas, if I had
them, to have you worth my beating! Had you said you repented, it had
been between God and your conscience; but to hear you boast of your
villany--Do you think it little to have reduced the aged to famine, and
the young to infamy--to have caused the death of one woman, the ruin of
another, and to have driven a man to exile and despair? By Him that made
me, I can scarce keep hands off you!

'Off me? I defy ye!' said Peter. 'I take this honest man to witness that
if ye stir the neck of my collar, I will have my action for stouthreif,
spulzie, oppression, assault and battery. Here's a bra' din, indeed,
about an auld wife gaun to the grave, a young limmer to the close-heads
and causeway, and a sticket stibbler [A student of divinity who has not
been able to complete his studies on theology.] to the sea instead of
the gallows!'

'Now, by my soul,' said Nanty, 'this is too much! and since you can feel
no otherwise, I will try if I cannot beat some humanity into your head
and shoulders.'

He drew his hanger as he spoke, and although Joshua, who had in vain
endeavoured to interrupt the dialogue to which he foresaw a violent
termination, now threw himself between Nanty and the old litigant, he
could not prevent the latter from receiving two or three sound slaps
over the shoulder with the flat side of the weapon.

Poor Peter Peebles, as inglorious in his extremity as he had been
presumptuous in bringing it on, now ran and roared, and bolted out of
the apartment and house itself, pursued by Nanty, whose passion became
high in proportion to his giving way to its dictates, and by Joshua, who
still interfered at every risk, calling upon Nanty to reflect on the
age and miserable circumstances of the offender, and upon Poor Peter
to stand and place himself under his protection. In front of the house,
however, Peter Peebles found a more efficient protector than the worthy
Quaker.




CHAPTER XXI

NARRATIVE OF ALAN FAIRFORD

Our readers may recollect that Fairford had been conducted by Dick
Gardener from the house of Fairladies to the inn of old Father
Crackenthorp, in order, as he had been informed by the mysterious Father
Buonaventure, that he might have the meeting which he desired with Mr.
Redgauntlet, to treat with him for the liberty of his friend Darsie. His
guide, by the special direction of Mr. Ambrose, had introduced him into
the public-house by a back-door, and recommended to the landlord to
accommodate him with a private apartment, and to treat him with all
civility; but in other respects to keep his eye on him, and even to
secure his person, if he saw any reason to suspect him to be a spy. He
was not, however, subjected to any direct restraint, but was ushered
into an apartment where he was requested to await the arrival of
the gentleman with whom he wished to have an interview, and who, as
Crackenthorp assured, him with a significant nod, would be certainly
there in the course of an hour. In the meanwhile, he recommended to him,
with another significant sign, to keep his apartment, 'as there were
people in the house who were apt to busy themselves about other folk's
matters.'

Alan Fairford complied with the recommendation, so long as he thought
it reasonable; but when, among a large party riding up to the house, he
discerned Redgauntlet, whom he had seen under the name of Mr. Herries
of Birrenswork, and whom, by his height and strength, he easily
distinguished from the rest, he thought it proper to go down to the
front of the house, in hopes that, by more closely reconnoitring the
party, he might discover if his friend Darsie was among them.

The reader is aware that, by doing so, he had an opportunity of breaking
Darsie's fall from his side-saddle, although his disguise and mask
prevented his recognizing his friend. It may be also recollected that
while Nixon hurried Miss Redgauntlet and her brother into the house,
their uncle, somewhat chafed at an unexpected and inconvenient
interruption, remained himself in parley with Fairford, who had already
successively addressed him by the names of Herries and Redgauntlet;
neither of which, any more than the acquaintance of the young lawyer,
he seemed at the moment willing to acknowledge, though an air of haughty
indifference, which he assumed, could not conceal his vexation and
embarrassment.

'If we must needs be acquainted, sir,' he said at last--'for which I
am unable to see any necessity, especially as I am now particularly
disposed to be private--I must entreat you will tell me at once what you
have to say, and permit me to attend to matters of more importance.'

'My introduction,' said Fairford, 'is contained in this
letter.--(Delivering that of Maxwell.)--I am convinced that, under
whatever name it may be your pleasure for the present to be known, it is
into your hands, and yours only, that it should be delivered.'

Redgauntlet turned the letter in his hand--then read the contents then
again looked upon the letter, and sternly observed, 'The seal of the
letter has been broken. Was this the case, sir, when it was delivered
into your hand?'

Fairford despised a falsehood as much as any man,--unless, perhaps, as
Tom Turnpenny might have said, 'in the way of business.' He answered
readily and firmly, 'The seal was whole when the letter was delivered to
me by Mr. Maxwell of Summertrees.'

'And did you dare, sir, to break the seal of a letter addressed to me?'
said Redgauntlet, not sorry, perhaps, to pick a quarrel upon a point
foreign to the tenor of the epistle.

'I have never broken the seal of any letter committed to my charge,'
said Alan; 'not from fear of those to whom such letter might be
addressed, but from respect to myself.'

'That is well worded,' said Redgauntlet; 'and yet, young Mr. Counsellor,
I doubt whether your delicacy prevented your reading my letter, or
listening to the contents as read by some other person after it was
opened.'

'I certainly did hear the contents read over,' said Fairford; 'and they
were such as to surprise me a good deal.'

'Now that,' said Redgauntlet, 'I hold to be pretty much the same, IN
FORO CONSCIENTIAE, as if you had broken the seal yourself. I shall hold
myself excused from entering upon further discourse with a messenger
so faithless; and you may thank yourself if your journey has been
fruitless.'

'Stay, sir,' said Fairford; 'and know that I became acquainted with the
contents of the paper without my consent--I may even say, against my
will; for Mr. Buonaventure'--

'Who?' demanded Redgauntlet, in a wild and alarmed manner--'WHOM was it
you named?'

'Father Buonaventure,' said Alan,--'a Catholic priest, as I apprehend,
whom I saw at the Misses Arthuret's house, called Fairladies.'

'Misses Arthuret!--Fairladies!--A Catholic priest!--Father
Buonaventure!' said Redgauntlet, repeating the words of Alan with
astonishment.--'Is it possible that human rashness can reach such a
point of infatuation? Tell me the truth, I conjure you, sir. I have
the deepest interest to know whether this is more than an idle legend,
picked up from hearsay about the country. You are a lawyer, and know the
risk incurred by the Catholic clergy, whom the discharge of their duty
sends to these bloody shores.'
