deaf ear to her complaints and entreaties. But once, when Fenwolf's back
was turned, she caught him gazing at her with peculiar significance, and
then comprehended the meaning of his strange conduct. He evidently only
awaited an opportunity to assist her.

Satisfied of this, she became more tranquil, and about an hour having
elapsed, during which nothing was said by the party, the low winding of
a horn was heard, and Fenwolf started to his feet, exclaiming--

"It is Herne!"

The next moment the demon huntsman rode from one of the lateral passages
into the cave. He was mounted on a wild-looking black horse, with
flowing mane and tail, eyes glowing like carbuncles, and in all respects
resembling the sable steed he had lost in the forest.

Springing to the ground, he exchanged a few words with Fenwolf in a low
tone, and delivering his steed to him, with orders to take it to the
stable, signed to Tristram to go with him, and approached Mabel.

"So you have seen Sir Thomas Wyat, I find," he said, in a stern tone.

Mabel made no answer, and did not even raise her eyes towards him.

"And he has told you he loves you, and has urged you to fly with
him--ha?" pursued Herne.

Mabel still did not dare to look up, but a deep blush overspread her
cheek.

"He was mad to venture hither," continued Herne; "but having done so, he
must take the consequences."

"You will not destroy him?" cried Mabel imploringly.

"He will perish by a hand as terrible as mine," laughed Herne--"by that
of famine. He will never quit the dungeon alive unless--"

"Unless what?" gasped Mabel.

"Unless he is leagued with me," replied Herne. "And now let him pass,
for I would speak of myself. I have already told you that I love you,
and am resolved to make you mine. You shudder, but wherefore? It is
a glorious destiny to be the' bride of the wild hunter--the fiend who
rules the forest, and who, in his broad domain, is more powerful than
the king. The old forester, Robin Hood, had his maid Marian; and what
was he compared to me? He had neither my skill nor my power. Be mine,
and you shall accompany me on my midnight rides; shall watch the fleet
stag dart over the moonlight glade, or down the lengthened vista. You
shall feel all the unutterable excitement of the chase. You shall thread
with me the tangled grove, swim the river and the lake, and enjoy a
thousand pleasures hitherto unknown to you. Be mine, and I will make you
mistress of all my secrets, and compel the band whom I will gather round
me to pay you homage. Be mine, and you shall have power of life and
death over them, as if you were absolute queen. And from me, whom all
fear, and all obey, you shall have love and worship."

"And he would have taken her hand; but she recoiled from horror.

"Though I now inspire you with terror and aversion," pursued "the time
will come when you will love me as passionately as I was beloved by one
of whom you are the image."

And she is dead? "asked Mabel, with curiosity.

"Dead!" exclaimed Herne. "Thrice fifty years have flown since she dwelt
upon earth. The acorn which was shed in the forest has grown into a
lusty oak, while trees at that time in their pride have fallen and
decayed away. Dead!--yes, she has passed from all memory save mine,
where she will ever dwell. Generations of men have gone down to the
grave since her time--a succession of kings have lodged within the
castle but I am still a denizen of the forest. For crimes I then
committed I am doomed to wander within it, and I shall haunt it, unless
released, till the crack of doom."

"Liberate me!" cried Mabel; "liberate your other prisoner and we will
pray for your release."

"No more of this!" cried Herne fiercely. "If you would not call down
instant and terrible punishment on your head--punishment that I cannot
avert, and must inflict--you will mention nothing sacred in my hearing,
and never allude to prayer, I am beyond the reach of salvation."

"Oh, say not so!" cried Mabel, in a tone of commiseration. "I will tell
you how my doom was accomplished," rejoined Herne wildly. "To gain
her of whom I have just spoken, and who was already vowed to Heaven, I
invoked the powers of darkness. I proffered my soul to the Evil One if
he would secure her to me, and the condition demanded by him was that I
should become what I am--the fiend of the forest, with power to terrify
and to tempt, and with other more fearful and fatal powers besides."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mabel.

"I grasped at the offer," pursued Herne. "She I loved became mine. But
she was speedily snatched from me by death, and since then I have known
no human passion except hatred and revenge. I have dwelt in this forest,
sometimes alone, sometimes at the head of a numerous band, but always
exerting a baneful influence over mankind. At last, I saw the image
of her I loved again appear before me, and the old passion was revived
within my breast. Chance has thrown you in my way, and mine you shall
be, Mabel."

"I will die rather," she replied, with a shudder.

"You cannot escape me," rejoined He me, with a triumphant laugh; "you
cannot avoid your fate. But I want not to deal harshly with you. I love
you, and would win you rather by persuasion than by force. Consent to be
mine, then, and I give Wyat his life and liberty."

"I cannot--I cannot!" she replied.

"Not only do I offer you Wyat's life as the price of your compliance,"
persevered Herne; "but you shall have what ever else you may
seek--jewels, ornaments, costly attire, treasure--for of such I possess
a goodly store."

"And of what use would they be to me here?" said Mabel.

"I will not always confine you to this cave," replied Herne. "You shall
go where you please, and live as you please, but you must come to me
whenever I summon you."

"And what of my grandsire?" she demanded.

"Tristram Lyndwood is no relative of yours," replied Herne. "I will now
clear up the mystery that hangs over your birth. You are the offspring
of one who for years has exercised greater sway than the king within
this realm, but who is now disgraced and ruined, and nigh his end. His
priestly vows forbid him to own you, even if he desired to do so."

"Have I seen him?" demanded Mabel.

"You have," replied Herne; "and he has seen you--and little did he know
when he sought you out, that he was essaying to maintain his own power,
and overturn that of another, by the dishonour of his daughter--though
if he had done so," he added, with a scoffing laugh, "it might not have
restrained him."

"I know whom you mean," said Mabel. "And is it possible he can be my
father?"

"It is as I have told you," replied Herne. "You now know my resolve.
To-morrow at midnight our nuptials shall take place."

"Nuptials!" echoed Mabel.

"Ay, at that altar," he cried, pointing to the Druid pile of stones;
"there you shall vow yourself to me and I to you, before terrible
witnesses. I shall have no fear that you will break your oath. Reflect
upon what I have said."

With this he placed the bugle to his lips, blew a low call upon it, and
Fenwolf and Tristram immediately answering the summons, he whispered
some instructions to the former, and disappeared down one of the side
passages.

Fenwolf's, deportment was now more sullen than before. In vain did Mabel
inquire from him what Herne was about to do with Sir Thomas Wyat. He
returned no answer, and at last, wearied by her importunity, desired her
to hold her peace. Just then, Tristram quitted the cavern for a moment,
when he instantly changed his manner, and 'said to her quickly, "I
overheard what passed between you and Herne. Consent to be mine, and I
will deliver you from him."

"That were to exchange one evil for another," she replied, "If you would
serve me, deliver Sir Thomas Wyat."

"I will only deliver him on the terms I have mentioned," replied Fenwolf.

At this moment, Tristram returned, and the conversation ceased.

Fresh logs were then thrown on the fire by Fenwolf, and, at his request,
Tristram proceeded to a hole in the rock, which served as a sort of
larder, and brought from it some pieces of venison, which were broiled
upon the embers.

At the close of the repast, of which she sparingly partook, Mabel was
conducted by Morgan Fenwolf into a small chamber opening out of the
great cavern, which was furnished like the cell she had lately occupied,
with a small straw pallet. Leaving her a lamp, Fenwolf locked the door,
and placed the key in his girdle.




IV.

     How Sir Thomas Wyat was visited by Herne in the Cell.


Made aware by the clangour of the lock, and Fenwolf's exulting laughter,
of the snare in which he had been caught, Sir Thomas Wyat instantly
sprang from his hiding-place, and rushed to the door; but being framed
of the stoutest oak, and strengthened with plates of iron, it defied all
his efforts, nerved as they were by rage and despair, to burst it
open. Mabel's shrieks, as she was dragged away, reached his ears, and
increased his anguish; and he called out loudly to her companions to
return, but his vociferations were only treated with derision.

Finding it useless to struggle further, Wyat threw himself upon the
bench, and endeavoured to discover some means of deliverance from his
present hazardous position. He glanced round the cell to see whether
there was any other outlet than the doorway, but he could discern none,
except a narrow grated loophole opening upon the passage, and contrived,
doubtless, for the admission of air to the chamber. No dungeon could be
more secure.

Raising the lamp, he examined every crevice, but all seemed solid stone.
The recess in which he had taken shelter proved to be a mere hollow in
the wall. In one corner lay a small straw pallet, which, no doubt, had
formed the couch of Mabel; and this, together with the stone bench and
rude table of the same material, constituted the sole furniture of the
place.

Having taken this careful survey of the cell, Wyat again sat down upon
the bench with the conviction that escape was out of the question; and
he therefore endeavoured to prepare himself for the worst, for it was
more than probable he would be allowed to perish of starvation. To a
fiery nature like his, the dreadful uncertainty in which he was placed
was more difficult of endurance than bodily torture. And he was destined
to endure it long. Many hours flew by, during which nothing occurred to
relieve the terrible monotony of his situation. At length, in spite of
his anxiety, slumber stole upon him unawares; but it was filled with
frightful visions.

How long he slept he knew not, but when he awoke, he found that the
cell must have been visited in the interval, for there was a manchet of
bread, part of a cold neck of venison, and a flask of wine on the table.
It was evident, therefore, that his captors did not mean to starve him,
and yielding to the promptings of appetite, he attacked the provisions,
determined to keep strict watch when his gaoler should next visit him.

The repast finished, he again examined the cell, but with no better
success than before; and he felt almost certain, from the position in
which the bench was placed, that the visitor had not found entrance
through the door.

After another long and dreary interval, finding that sleep was stealing
upon him fast, he placed the bench near the door, and leaned his back
against the latter, certain that in this position he should be awakened
if any one attempted to gain admittance in that way. His slumber was
again disturbed by fearful dreams; and he was at length aroused by a
touch upon the shoulder, while a deep voice shouted his own name in her
ears.

Starting to his feet, and scarcely able to separate the reality from
the hideous phantasms that had troubled him, he found that the door was
still fastened, and the bench unremoved, while before him stood Herne
the Hunter.

"Welcome again to my cave, Sir Thomas Wyat!" cried the demon, with a
mocking laugh. "I told you, on the night of the attempt upon the king,
that though you escaped him, you would not escape me. And so it has come
to pass. You are now wholly in my power, body and soul--ha! ha!"

"I defy you, false fiend," replied Wyat. "I was mad enough to proffer
you my soul on certain conditions; but they have never been fulfilled."

"They may yet be so," rejoined Herne.

"No," replied Wyat, "I have purged my heart from the fierce and
unhallowed passion that swayed it. I desire no assistance from you."

"If you have changed your mind, that is nought to me," rejoined the demon
derisively--"I shall hold you to your compact."

"Again I say I renounce you, infernal spirit!" cried Wyat; "you may
destroy my body--but you can work no mischief to my soul."

"You alarm yourself without reason, good Sir Thomas," replied Herne, in
a slightly sneering tone. "I am not the malignant being you suppose
me; neither am I bent upon fighting the battles of the enemy of mankind
against Heaven. I may be leagued with the powers of darkness, but I have
no wish to aid them; and I therefore leave you to take care of your soul
in your own way. What I desire from you is your service while living.
Now listen to the conditions I have to propose. You must bind yourself
by a terrible oath, the slightest infraction of which shall involve the
perdition of the soul you are so solicitous to preserve, not to disclose
aught you may see, or that may be imparted to you here. You must also
swear implicit obedience to me in all things--to execute any secret
commissions, of whatever nature, I may give you--to bring associates
to my band--and to join me in any enterprise I may propose. This oath
taken, you are free. Refuse it, and I leave you to perish."

"I do refuse it," replied Wyat boldly. "I would die a thousand deaths
rather than so bind myself. Neither do I fear being left to perish here.
You shall not quit this cell without me."

"You are a stout soldier, Sir Thomas Wyat," rejoined the demon, with a
scornful laugh; "but you are scarcely a match for Herne the Hunter, as
you will find, if you are rash enough to make the experiment. Beware!"
he exclaimed, in a voice of thunder, observing the knight lay his hand
upon his sword, "I am invulnerable, and you will, therefore, vainly
strike at me. Do not compel me to use the dread means, which I could
instantly employ, to subject you to my will. I mean you well, and would
rather serve than injure you. But I will not let you go, unless you
league yourself with me. Swear, therefore, obedience to me, and depart
hence to your friends, Surrey and Richmond, and tell them you have
failed to find me."

"You know, then, of our meeting?" exclaimed Wyat.

"Perfectly well," laughed Herne. "It is now eventide, and at midnight
the meeting will take place in the forester's hut. If you attend it not,
I will. They will be my prisoners as well as you. To preserve yourself
and save them, you must join me."

"Before I return an answer," said Wyat, "I must know what has become of
Mabel Lyndwood."

"Mabel Lyndwood is nought to you, Sir Thomas," rejoined Herne coldly.

"She is so much to me that I will run a risk for her which I would not
run for myself," replied Wyat. "If I promise obedience to you, will you
liberate her? will you let her depart with me?"

"No," said Herne peremptorily. "Banish all thoughts of her from your
breast. You will never behold her again. I will give you time for
reflection on my proposal. An hour before midnight I shall return, and
if I find you in the same mind, I abandon you to your fate."

And with these words he stepped back towards the lower end of the cell.
Wyat instantly sprang after him, but before he could reach him a flash
of fire caused him to recoil, and to his horror and amazement, he beheld
the rock open, and yield a passage to the retreating figure.

When the sulphureous smoke, with which the little cell was filled, had
in some degree cleared off, Wyat examined the sides of the rock, but
could not find the slightest trace of a secret outlet, and therefore
concluded that the disappearance of the demon had been effected by
magic.




V.

     How Mabel escaped from the Cave with Sir Thomas Wyat.


The next day Mabel was set at liberty by her gaoler, and the hours flew
by without the opportunity of escape, for which she sighed, occurring to
her. As night drew on, she became more anxious, and at last expressed a
wish to retire to her cell. When about to fasten the door, Fenwolf found
that the lock had got strained, and the bolts would not move, and he was
therefore obliged to content himself with placing a bench against it, on
which he took a seat.

About an hour after Mabel's retirement, old Tristram offered to relieve
guard with Fenwolf, but this the other positively declined, and leaning
against the door, disposed himself to slumber. Tristram then threw
himself on the floor, and in a short time all seemed buried in repose.

By-and-by, however, when Fenwolf's heavy breathing gave token of the
soundness of his sleep, Tristram raised himself upon his elbow, and
gazed round. The lamp placed upon the table imperfectly illumined the
cavern, for the fire which had been lighted to cook the evening meal
had gone out completely. Getting up cautiously, and drawing his
hunting-knife, the old man crept towards Fenwolf, apparently with the
intent of stabbing him, but he suddenly changed his resolution, and
dropped his arm.

At that moment, as if preternaturally warned, Fenwolf opened his eyes,
and seeing the old forester standing by, sprang upon him, and seized him
by the throat.

"Ah traitor!" he exclaimed; "what are you about to do?"

"I am no traitor," replied the old man. "I heard a noise in the passage
leading to Wyat's cell, and was about to rouse you, when you awakened of
your own accord, probably disturbed by the noise."

"It may be," replied Fenwolf, satisfied with the excuse, and
relinquishing his grasp. "I fancied I heard something in my dreams. But
come with me to Wyat's cell. I will not leave you here."

And snatching up the lamp, he hurried with Tristram into the passage.
They were scarcely gone, when the door of the cell was opened by Mabel,
who had overheard what had passed; and so hurriedly did she issue
forth that she over-turned the bench, which fell to the ground with
a considerable clatter. She had only just time to replace it, and to
conceal herself in an adjoining passage, when Fenwolf rushed back into
the cavern.

"It was a false alarm," he cried. "I saw Sir Thomas Wyat in his cell
through the loop-hole, and I have brought the key away with me. But I am
sure I heard a noise here."

"It must have been mere fancy," said Tristram. "All is as we left it."

"It seems so, certes," replied Fenwolf doubtfully. "But I will make
sure."

While he placed his ear to the door, Mabel gave a signal to Tristram
that she was safe. Persuaded that he heard some sound in the chamber,
Fenwolf nodded to Tristram that all was right, and resumed his seat.

In less than ten minutes he was again asleep. Mabel then emerged from
her concealment, and cautiously approached Tristram, who feigned, also,
to slumber. As she approached him, he rose noiselessly to his feet.

"The plan has succeeded," he said in a low tone. "It was I who spoiled
the lock. But come with me. I will lead you out of the cavern."

"Not without Sir Thomas Wyat," she replied; "I will not leave him here."

"You will only expose yourself to risk, and fail to deliver him,"
rejoined Tristram. "Fenwolf has the key of his cell. Nay, if you are
determined upon it, I will not hinder you. But you must find your own
way out, for I shall not assist Sir Thomas Wyat."

Motioning him to silence, Mabel crept slowly, and on the points of her
feet, towards Fenwolf.

The key was in his girdle. Leaning over him, she suddenly and
dexterously plucked it forth.

At the very moment she possessed herself of it, Fenwolf stirred, and she
dived down, and concealed herself beneath the table. Fenwolf, who had
been only slightly disturbed, looked up, and seeing Tristram in his
former position, which he had resumed when Mabel commenced her task,
again disposed himself to slumber.

Waiting till she was assured of the soundness of his repose, Mabel crept
from under the table, signed to Tristram to remain where he was, and
glided with swift and noiseless footsteps down the passage leading to
the cell.

In a moment, she was at the door--the key was in the lock--and she stood
before Sir Thomas Wyat.

A few words sufficed to explain to the astonished knight how she came
there, and comprehending that not a moment was to be lost, he followed
her forth.

In the passage, they held a brief consultation together in a low tone,
as to the best means of escape, for they deemed it useless to apply to
Tristram. The outlet with which Sir Thomas Wyat was acquainted lay
on the other side of the cavern; nor did he know how to discover the
particular passage leading to it.

As to Mabel, she could offer no information, but she knew that the
stable lay in an adjoining passage.

Recollecting, from former experience, how well the steeds were trained,
Sir Thomas Wyat eagerly caught at the suggestion, and Mabel led him
farther down the passage, and striking off through an opening on the
left, brought him, after a few turns, to a large chamber, in which two
or three black horses were kept.

Loosening one of them, Wyat placed a bridle on his neck, sprang upon his
back, and took up Mabel beside him. He then struck his heels against the
sides of the animal, who needed no further incitement to dash along the
passage, and in a few seconds brought them into the cavern.

The trampling of the horse wakened Fenwolf, who started to his feet,
and ran after them, shouting furiously. But he was too late. Goaded
by Wyat's dagger, the steed dashed furiously on, and plunging with its
double burden into the pool at the bottom of the cavern, disappeared.




VI.

     Of the Desperate Resolution formed by Tristram and Fenwolf,
     and how the Train was laid.

