the place came in at his heels.  They said that the party would
positively be arrested, or not allowed to cross the Monte Pallade.  The
passes to Meran and Botzen, and the road to Trent, were strictly guarded.
Weisspriess hurried them forward with particular orders that they should
take into custody the whole of the party, excepting the lady; her, if
arrested with the others, they were to release: her maid and the three
men were to be marched back to Cles, and there kept fast.

The game was now his own: he surveyed its pretty intricate moves as on a
map.  The character of Herr Johannes he entirely discarded: an Imperial
officer in his uniform, sword in belt, could scarcely continue that meek
performance.  'But I may admire music, and entreat her to give me a
particular note, if she has it,' said the captain, hanging in
contemplation over a coming scene, like a quivering hawk about to close
its wings.  His heart beat thick; which astonished him: hitherto it had
never made that sort of movement.

From Cles he despatched a letter to the fair chatelaine at Meran, telling
her that by dainty and skilful management of the paces, he was bringing
on the intractable heroine of the Fifteenth, and was to be expected in
about two or three days.  The letter was entrusted to Wilhelm, who took
the borrowed horse back to Trent.

Weisspriess was on the mule-track a mile above the last village ascending
to the pass, when he observed the party of prisoners, and climbed up into
covert.  As they went by he discerned but one person in female garments;
the necessity to crouch for obscurity prevented him from examining them
separately.  He counted three men and beheld one of them between
gendarmes.  'That must be my villain,' he said.

It was clear that Vittoria had chosen to go forward alone.  The captain
praised her spirit, and now pushed ahead with hunter's strides.  He
passed an inn, closed and tenantless: behind him lay the Val di Non; in
front the darker valley of the Adige: where was the prey?  A storm of
rage set in upon him with the fear that he had been befooled.  He lit a
cigar, to assume ease of aspect, whatever the circumstances might be, and
gain some inward serenity by the outer reflection of it--not altogether
without success.  'My lady must be a doughty walker,' he thought; 'at
this rate she will be in the Ultenthal before sunset.'  A wooded height
ranged on his left as he descended rapidly.  Coming to a roll of grass
dotted with grey rock, he climbed it, and mounting one of the boulders,
beheld at a distance of half-a-dozen stone-throws downward, the figure of
a woman holding her hand cup-shape to a wayside fall of water.  The path
by which she was going rounded the height he stood on.  He sprang over
the rocks, catching up his clattering steel scabbard; and plunging
through tinted leafage and green underwood, steadied his heels on a
sloping bank, and came down on the path with stones and earth and
brambles, in time to appear as a seated pedestrian when Vittoria turned
the bend of the mountain way.

Gracefully withdrawing the cigar from his mouth, and touching his breast
with turned-in fingers, he accosted her with a comical operatic effort at
her high notes

'Italia!'

She gathered her arms on her bosom and looked swiftly round: then at the
apparition of her enemy.

It is but an ironical form of respect that you offer to the prey you have
been hotly chasing and have caught.  Weisspriess conceived that he had
good reasons for addressing her in the tone best suited to his character:
he spoke with a ridiculous mincing suavity:

'My pretty sweet!  are you not tired?  We have not seen one another for
days!  Can you have forgotten the enthusiastic Herr Johannes?  You have
been in pleasant company, no doubt; but I have been all--all alone.
Think of that!  What an exceedingly fortunate chance this is!  I was
smoking dolefully, and imagining anything but such a rapture.--No, no,
mademoiselle, be mannerly.'  The captain blocked her passage.  'You must
not leave me while I am speaking.  A good governess would have taught you
that in the nursery.  I am afraid you had an inattentive governess, who
did not impress upon you the duty of recognizing friends when you meet
them!  Ha!  you were educated in England, I have heard.  Shake hands.
It is our custom--I think a better one--to kiss on the right cheek and
the left, but we will shake hands.'

'In God's name, sir, let me go on,' Vittoria could just gather voice to
utter.

'But,' cried the delighted captain, 'you address me in the tones of a
basso profundo!  It is absurd.  Do you suppose that I am to be deceived
by your artifice?--rogue that you are!  Don't I know you are a woman?
a sweet, an ecstatic, a darling little woman!'

He laughed.  She shivered to hear the solitary echoes.  There was
sunlight on the farthest Adige walls, but damp shade already filled the
East-facing hollows.

'I beg you very earnestly, to let me go on,' said Vittoria.

'With equal earnestness, I beg you to let me accompany you,' he replied.
'I mean no offence, mademoiselle; but I have sworn that I and no one but
I shall conduct you to the Castle of Sonnenberg, where you will meet the
Lenkenstein ladies, with whom I have the honour to be acquainted.  You
see, you have nothing to fear if you play no foolish pranks, like a
kicking filly in the pasture.'

'If it is your pleasure,' she said gravely; but he obtruded the bow of an
arm.  She drew back.  Her first blank despair at sight of the trap she
had fallen into, was clearing before her natural high courage.

'My little lady! my precious prima donna! do you refuse the most trifling
aid from me?  It's because I'm a German.'

'There are many noble gentlemen who are Germans,' said Vittoria.

'It 's because I'm a German; I know it is.  But, don't you see, Germany
invades Italy, and keeps hold of her?  Providence decrees it so--ask the
priests!  You are a delicious Italian damsel, and you will take the arm
of a German.'

Vittoria raised her face.  'Do you mean that I am your prisoner?'

'You did not look braver at La Scala'; the captain bowed to her.

'Ah, I forgot,' said she; 'you saw me there.  If, signore, you will do me
the favour to conduct me to the nearest inn, I will sing to you.'

'It is precisely my desire, signorina.

You are not married to that man Guidascarpi, I presume?  No, no: you are
merely his .  .  .  friend.  May I have the felicity of hearing you call
me your friend?  Why, you tremble! are you afraid of me?'

'To tell the truth, you talk too much to please me,' said Vittoria.

The captain praised her frankness, and he liked it.  The trembling of her
frame still fascinated his eyes, but her courage and the absence of all
womanly play and cowering about her manner impressed him seriously.  He
stood looking at her, biting his moustache, and trying to provoke her to
smile.

'Conduct you to the nearest inn; yes,' he said, as if musing.  'To the
nearest inn, where you will sing to me; sing to me.  It is not an
objectionable scheme.  The inns will not be choice: but the society will
be exquisite.  Say first, I am your sworn cavalier?'

'It does not become me to say that,' she replied, feigning a demure
sincerity, on the verge of her patience.

'You allow me to say it?'

She gave him a look of fire and passed him; whereat, following her, he
clapped hands, and affected to regard the movement as part of an operatic
scena.  'It is now time to draw your dagger,' he said.  'You have one,
I'm certain.'

'Anything but touch me!' cried Vittoria, turning on him.  'I know that I
am safe.  You shall teaze me, if it amuses you.'

'Am I not, now, the object of your detestation?'

'You are near being so.'

'You see!  You put on no disguise; why should I?'

This remark struck her with force.

'My temper is foolish,' she said softly.  'I have always been used to
kindness.'

He vowed that she had no comprehension of kindness; otherwise would she
continue defiant of him?  She denied that she was defiant: upon which he
accused the hand in her bosom of clutching a dagger.  She cast the dagger
at his feet.  It was nobly done, and he was not insensible to the courage
and inspiration of the act; for it checked a little example of a trial of
strength that he had thought of exhibiting to an armed damsel.

'Shall I pick it up for you?' he said.

'You will oblige me,' was her answer; but she could not control a
convulsion of her underlip that her defensive instinct told her was best
hidden.

'Of course, you know you are safe,' he repeated her previous words, while
examining the silver handle of the dagger.  'Safe?  certainly!  Here is
C. A.  to V.  .  .  .  A.  neatly engraved: a gift; so that the young
gentleman may be sure the young lady will defend herself from lions and
tigers and wild boars, if ever she goes through forests and over mountain
passes.  I will not obtrude my curiosity, but who is V .  .  .  .  A. ?'

The dagger was Carlo's gift to her; the engraver, by singular
misadventure, had put a capital letter for the concluding letter of her
name instead of little a; she remembered the blush on Carlo's face when
she had drawn his attention to the error, and her own blush when she had
guessed its meaning.

'It spells my name,' she said.

'Your assumed name of Vittoria.  And who is C. A.?'

'Those are the initials of Count Carlo Ammiani.'

'Another lover?'

'He is my sole lover.  He is my betrothed.  Oh, good God!' she threw her
eyes up to heaven; 'how long am I to endure the torture of this man in my
pathway?  Go, sir, or let me go on.  You are intolerable.  It 's the
spirit of a tiger.  I have no fear of you.'

'Nay, nay,' said Weisspriess, 'I asked the question because I am under an
obligation to run Count Carlo Ammiani through the body, and felt at once
that I should regret the necessity.  As to your not fearing me, really,
far from wishing to hurt you--'

Vittoria had caught sight of a white face framed in the autumnal forest
above her head.  So keen was the glad expression of her face, that
Weisspriess looked up.

'Come, Angelo, come to me;' she said confidently.

Weisspriess plucked his sword out, and called to him imperiously to
descend.

Beckoned downward by white hand and flashing blade, Angelo steadied his
feet and hands among drooping chestnut boughs, and bounded to Vittoria's
side.

'Now march on,' Weisspriess waved his sword; 'you are my prisoners.'

'You,' retorted Angelo; 'I know you; you are a man marked out for one of
us.  I bid you turn back, if you care for your body's safety.'

'Angelo Guidascarpi, I also know you.  Assassin!  you double murderer!
Defy me, and I slay you in the sight of your paramour.'

'Captain Weisspriess, what you have spoken merits death.  I implore of my
Maker that I may not have to kill you.'

'Fool! you are unarmed.'

Angelo took his stilet in his fist.

'I have warned you, Captain Weisspriess.  Here I stand.  I dare you to
advance.'

'You pronounce my name abominably,' said the captain, dropping his
sword's point.  'If you think of resisting me, let us have no women
looking on.' He waved his left hand at Vittoria.

Angelo urged her to go.  'Step on for our Carlo's sake.'  But it was
asking too much of her.

'Can you fight this man?' she asked.

'I can fight him and kill him.'

'I will not step on,' she said.  'Must you fight him?'

'There is no choice.'  Vittoria walked to a distance at once.

Angelo directed the captain's eyes to where, lower in the pass, there was
a level plot of meadow.

Weisspriess nodded.  'The odds are in my favour, so you shall choose the
ground.'

All three went silently to the meadow.
