He knew the exact feeling expressed by it, when one has come violently on
an errand and has done no good.

'A flea, my feathery lad, will set you flying again.'

As it was imperative in Luigi's schemes that Beppo should be set flying
again, he slipped away stealthily, and sped fast into the neighbouring
Corso, where a light English closed carriage, drawn by a pair of the
island horses, moved at a slow pace.  Two men were on the driver's seat,
one of whom Luigi hailed to come down then he laid a strip of paper on
his knee, and after thumping on the side of his nose to get a notion of
English-Italian, he wrote with a pencil, dancing upon one leg all the
while for a balance:--

     'Come, Beppo, daughter sake, now, at once, immediate,
     Beppo, signor.'

'That's to the very extremity how the little signora Inglese would
write,' said Luigi; yet cogitating profoundly in a dubitative twinkle of
a second as to whether it might not be the English habit to wind up a
hasty missive with an expediting oath.  He had heard the oath of emphasis
in that island: but he decided to let it go as it stood.  The man he had
summoned was directed to take it straightway and deliver it to one who
would be found at the house-door of the Maestro Rocco Ricci.

'Thus, like a drunken sentinel,' said Luigi, folding his arms, crossing
his legs, and leaning back.  'Forward, Matteo, my cherub.'

'All goes right?' the coachman addressed Luigi.

'As honey, as butter, as a mulberry leaf with a score of worms on it!
The wine and the bread and the cream-cheeses are inside, my dainty one,
are they?  She must not starve, nor must I.  Are our hampers fastened out
side?  Good.  We shall be among the Germans in a day and a night.  I 've
got the route, and I pronounce the name of the chateau very perfectly--
"Schloss Sonnenberg."  Do that if you can.'

The unpractised Italian coachman declined to attempt it.  He and Luigi
compared time by their watches.  In three-quarters of an hour he was to
be within hail of the maestro's house.  Thither Luigi quietly returned.

Beppo's place there was vacant.

'That's better than a draught of Asti,' said Luigi.

The lighted windows of the maestro's house, and the piano striking
corrective notes, assured him that the special rehearsal was still going
on; and as he might now calculate on two or three minutes to spare, he
threw back his coat-collar, lifted his head, and distended his chest,
apparently to chime in with the singing, but simply to listen to it.  For
him, it was imperative that he should act the thing, in order to
apprehend and appreciate it.

A hurried footing told of the approach of one whom he expected.

'Luigi!'

'Here, padrone.'

'You have the chocolate?'

'Signor Antonio, I have deposited it in the carriage.'

'She is in up there?'

'I beheld her entering.'

'Good; that is fixed fact.'  The Signor Antonio drove at his moustache
right and left.  'I give you, see, Italian money and German money: German
money in paper; and a paper written out by me to explain the value of the
German paper-money.  Silence, engine that you are, and not a man!  I am
preventive of stupidity, I am?  Do I not know that, hein?  Am I in need
of the acclamation of you, my friend?  On to the Chateau Sonnenberg:--
drive on, drive on, and one who stops you, you drive over him: the
gendarmes in white will peruse this paper, if there is any question, and
will pass you and the cage, bowing; you hear?  It is a pass; the military
pass you when you show this paper.  My good friend, Captain Weisspriess,
on the staff of General Pierson, gives it, signed, and it is effectual.
But you lose not the paper: put it away with the paper-money, quite safe.
For yourself, this is half your pay--I give you napoleons; ten.  Count.
And now--once at the Chateau Sonnenberg, I repeat, you leave her in
charge of two persons, one a woman, at the gate, and then back--frrrrr..'

Antonio-Pericles smacked on the flat of his hand, and sounded a rapid
course of wheels.

'Back, and drop not a crumb upon the road.  You have your map.  It is,
after Roveredo, straight up the Adige, by Bolzano .  .  .  say "Botzen."'

'"Botz,"' said Luigi, submissively.

'"Botz"--"Botz"--ass! fool! double idiot! "Botzon!"'  Antonio-Pericles
corrected him furiously, exclaiming to the sovereign skies, 'Though I pay
for brains, can I get them!  No.  But make a fiasco, Luigi, and not a
second ten for you, my friend: and away, out of my sight, show yourself
no more!'

Luigi humbly said that he was not the instrument of a fiasco.

Half spurning him, Antonio-Pericles snarled an end both to his advices
and his prophetic disgust of the miserable tools furnished unto masterly
minds upon this earth.  He paced forward and back, murmuring in French,
'Mon Dieu!  was there ever such a folly as in the head of this girl?  It
is her occasion:--Shall I be a Star?  Shall I be a Cinder?  It is
tomorrow night her moment of Birth!  No; she prefers to be extinguished.
For what?  For this thing she calls her country.  It is infamous.  Yes,
vile little cheat!  But, do you know Antonio-Pericles?  Not yet.  I will
nourish you, I will imprison you: I will have you tortured by love, by
the very devil of love, by the red-hot pincers of love, till you scream.
a music, and die to melt him with your voice, and kick your country to
the gutter, and know your Italy for a birthplace and a cradle of Song,
and no more, and enough! Bah!'

Having thus delivered himself of the effervescence of his internal
agitation, he turned sharply round upon Luigi, with a military stamp of
the foot and shout of the man's name.

'It is love she wants,' Antonio-Pericles resumed his savage soliloquy.
'She wants to be kindled on fire.  Too much Government of brain; not
sufficient Insurrection of heart!  There it is.  There it lies.  But,
little fool!  you shall find people with arms and shots and cannon
running all up and down your body, firing and crying out "Victory for
Love!"  till you are beaten, till you gasp "Love! love! love!"  and then
comes a beatific--oh! a heaven and a hell to your voice.  I will pay,'
the excited connoisseur pursued more deliberately: 'I will pay half my
fortune to bring this about.  I am fortified, for I know such a voice was
sent to be sublime.'  He exclaimed in an ecstasy: 'It opens the skies!'
and immediately appended: 'It is destined to suffocate the theatres!'

Pausing as before a splendid vision: 'Money--let it go like dust! I have
an object.  Sandra Belloni--you stupid Vittoria Campa!--I have millions
and the whole Austrian Government to back me, and you to be wilful,
little rebel!  I could laugh.  It is only Love you want.  Your voice is
now in a marble chamber.  I will put it in a palace of cedarwood.  This
Ammiani I let visit you in the hope that he would touch you.

Bah!  he is a patriot--not a man!  He cannot make you wince and pine, and
be cold and be hot, and--Bah!  I give a chance to some one else who is
not a patriot.  He has done mischief with the inflammable little Anna von
Lenkenstein--I know it.  Your proper lovers, you women, are the broad,
the business lovers, and Weisspriess is your man.'

Antonio-Pericles glanced up at the maestro's windows.  'Hark! it is her
voice,' he said, and drew up his clenched fists with rage, as if pumping.
'Cold as ice!  Not a flaw.  She is a lantern with no light in it--
crystal, if you like.  Hark now at Irma, the stork-neck.  Aie! what a
long way it is from your throat to your head, Mademoiselle Irma!  You
were reared upon lemons.  The split hair of your mural crown is not
thinner than that voice of yours.  It is a mockery to hear you; but you
are good enough for the people, my dear, and you do work, running up and
down that ladder of wires between your throat and your head;--you work,
it is true, you puss! sleek as a puss, bony as a puss, musical as a puss.
But you are good enough for the people.  Hola!'

This exclamation was addressed to a cavalier who was dismounting from his
horse about fifty yards down the street, and who, giving the reins to a
mounted servant, advanced to meet the Signor Antonio.

'It is you, Herr Captain von Weisspriess!'

'When he makes an appointment you see him, as a rule, my dear Pericles,'
returned the captain.

'You are out of uniform--good.  We will go up.  Remember, you are a
connoisseur, from Bonn--from Berlin--from Leipsic: not of the K.K. army!
Abjure it, or you make no way with this mad thing.  You shall see her and
hear her, and judge if she is worth your visit to Schloss Sonnenberg and
a short siege.  Good: we go aloft.  You bow to the maestro respectfully
twice, as in duty; then a third time, as from a whisper of your soul.
Vanitas, vanitatis!  You speak of the 'UT de poitrine.'  You remark:
"Albrechtsberger has said---," and you slap your head and stop.  They
think, "He is polite, and will not quote a German authority to us": and
they think, "He will not continue his quotation; in truth, he scornfully
considers it superfluous to talk of counterpoint to us poor Italians."
Your Christian name is Johann?--you are Herr Johannes.  Look at her well.
I shall not expose you longer than ten minutes to their observation.
Frown meditative; the elbow propped and two fingers in the left cheek;
and walk into the room with a stoop: touch a note of the piano, leaning
your ear to it as in detection of five-fifteenths of a shade of discord.
Frown in trouble as of a tooth.  So, when you smile, it is immense praise
to them, and easy for you.'

The names of the Signor Antonio-Pericles and Herr Johannes were taken up
to the maestro.

Tormented with curiosity, Luigi saw them enter the house.  The face and
the martial or sanguinary reputation of Captain Weisspriess were not
unknown to him.  'What has he to do with this affair?' thought Luigi, and
sauntered down to the captain's servant, who accepted a cigar from him,
but was rendered incorruptible by ignorance of his language.  He observed
that the horses were fresh, and were furnished with saddle-bags as for an
expedition.  What expedition?  To serve as escort to the carriage?--a
nonsensical idea.  But the discovery that an idea is nonsensical is not a
satisfactory solution of a difficulty.  Luigi squatted on his haunches
beside the doorstep, a little under one of the lower windows of Rocco
Ricci's house.  Earlier than he expected, the captain and Signor Antonio
came out; and as soon as the door had closed behind them, the captain
exclaimed, 'I give you my hand on it, my brave Pericles.  You have done
me many services, but this is finest of all.  She's superb.  She's a nice
little wild woman to tame.  I shall go to the Sonnenberg immediately.  I
have only to tell General Pierson that his nephew is to be prevented from
playing the fool, and I get leave at once, if there's no active work.'

'His nephew, Lieutenant Pierson, or Pole--hein?' interposed the Greek.

'That 's the man.  He 's on the Marshal's staff.  He 's engaged to the
Countess Lena von Lenkenstein.  She has fire enough, my Pericles.'

'The Countess Anna, you say?'  The Greek stretched forward his ear, and
was never so near getting it vigorously cuffed.

'Deafness is an unpardonable offence, my dear Pericles.'

Antonio-Pericles sniffed, and assented, 'It is the stupidity of the ear.'

'I said, the Countess Lena.'

'Von Lenkenstein; but I choose to be further deaf.'

'To the devil, sir.  Do you pretend to be angry?' cried Weisspriess.

'The devil, sir, with your recommendation, is too black for me to visit
him,' Antonio-Pericles rejoined.

'By heaven, Pericles, for less than what you allow yourself to say, I've
sent men to him howling!'

They faced one another, pulling at their moustachios.  Weisspriess
laughed.

'You're not a fighting man, Pericles.'

The Greek nodded affably.  'One is in my way, I have him put out of my
way.  It is easiest.'

'Ah!  easiest, is it?' Captain Weisspriess 'frowned meditative' over this
remarkable statement of a system.  'Well, it certainly saves trouble.
Besides, my good Pericles, none but an ass would quarrel with you.  I was
observing that General Pierson wants his nephew to marry the Countess
Lena immediately; and if, as you tell me, this girl Belloni, who is
called la Vittoria--the precious little woman!--has such power over him,
it's quite as well, from the General's point of view, that she should be
out of the way at Sonnenberg.  I have my footing at the Duchess of
Graath's.  I believe she hopes that I shall some day challenge and kill
her husband; and as I am supposed to have saved Major de Pyrmont's life,
I am also an object of present gratitude.  Do you imagine that your
little brown-eyed Belloni scented one of her enemies in me?'

'I know nothing of imagination,' the Signor Antonio observed frigidly.

'Till we meet!' Captain Weisspriess kissed his fingers, half as up toward
the windows, and half to the Greek.  'Save me from having to teach love
to your Irma!'

He ran to join his servant.

Luigi had heard much of the conversation, as well as the last sentence.

'It shall be to la Irma if it is to anybody,' Luigi muttered.

'Let Weisspriess--he will not awake love in her--let him kindle hate, it
will do,' said the Signor Antonio.  'She has seen him, and if he meets
her on the route to Meran, she will think it her fascination.'

Looking at his watch and at the lighted windows, he repeated his special
injunctions to Luigi.  'It is near the time.  I go to sleep.  I am
getting old: I grow nervous.  Ten-twenty in addition, you shall have, if
all is done right.  Your weekly pay runs on.  Twenty--you shall have
