store of wisdom; nay, probably magic formulas and effectual charms.

With a loud exclamation of "Here he comes!" the senator descended the
ladder; in a few minutes the door was opened with a rattling of iron
bolts, and it was with a sigh of relief that they saw the old man come
in and none attempt to follow him.

When Horapollo entered the council-chamber he found the senators sitting
on their ivory chairs with as much dignified calm as though the meeting
had been uninterrupted; but at a sign from the president they all rose
to receive the old man, and he returned their greeting with reserve, as
homage due to him. He also accepted the raised seat, which the president
quitted in his honor while he himself took one of the ordinary chairs at
his side.

The negotiation began at once, and was not disturbed by the crowd,
though still from the market-place there came a ceaseless roar, like the
breaking of distant waves and the buzzing of thousands of swarming bees.

The sage began modestly, saying that he, in his simplicity, could not
but despair of finding any help where so many wise men had failed; he
was experienced only in the lore and mysteries of the Fathers, and he
had come thither merely to tell the council what they had considered
advisable in such cases, and to suggest that their example should be
followed.

He spoke low but fluently, and a murmur of approval followed; then, when
the president went on to speak of the low state of the Nile as the root
of all the evil, the old man interrupted him, begging them to begin by
considering the particular difficulties which they might attack by their
own efforts.

The pestilence was in possession of the city; he had just come through
the quarter that had been destroyed by the fire, and had seen above
fifty sick deprived of all care and reduced to destitution. Here
something could be done; here was a way of showing the angry populace
that their advisers and leaders were not sitting with their hands in
their laps.

A councillor then proposed that the convent of St. Cecilia, or the now
deserted and dilapidated odeum should be given up to them; but Horapollo
objected explaining very clearly that such a crowd of sick in the midst
of the city would be highly dangerous to the healthy citizens. This
opinion was shared by his friend Philippus, who had indeed commended
the plan he had to propose as the only right one. Whither had their
forefathers transported, not merely their beneficent institutions,
but their vast temples and tomb-buildings which covered so much space?
Always to the desert outside the town. Arrianus had even written these
verses on the gigantic sphinx near the Pyramids.

"The gods erewhile created these far-shining forms, wisely sparing the
fields and fertile corn-bearing plain."

The moderns had forgotten thus to spare the arable land, and they
had also neglected to make good use of the desert. The dead and
plague-stricken must not be allowed to endanger the living; they must
therefore be lodged away from the town, in the Necropolis in the desert.

"But we cannot let them be under the broiling sun," cried the president.

"Still less," added another, "can we build a house for them in a day."

To this Horapollo replied:

"And who would be so foolish as to ask you to do either? But there are
linen and posts to be had in Memphis. Have some large tents pitched in
the Necropolis, and all who fall sick of the pestilence removed there at
the expense of the city and tended under their shade. Appoint three or
four of your number to carry this into execution and there will be
a shelter for the roofless sick in a few hours. How many boatmen and
shipwrights are standing idle on the quays! Call them together and in an
hour they will be at work."

This suggestion was approved. A linen-merchant present exclaimed: "I
can supply what is needed," and another who dealt in the same wares, and
exported this famous Egyptian manufacture to remote places, also put in
a word, desiring that his house might have the order as he could sell
cheaper. This squabble might have absorbed the attention of the meeting
till it rose, and perhaps have been renewed the next day, if Horapollo's
proposal that they should divide the commission equally had not been
hastily adopted.

The populace hailed the announcement that tents would be erected for the
sick in the desert, with applause from a thousand voices. The deputies
chosen to superintend the task set to work at once, and by night the
most destitute were safe under the first large hospital tent.

The old man settled some other important questions in the same way,
always appealing to the lore of the ancients.

At length he spoke of the chief subject, and he did so with great
caution and tact.

All the events of the last few weeks, he said, pointed to the conclusion
that Heaven was wroth with the hapless land of their fathers. As a sign
of their anger the Immortals had sent the comet, that terrible star
whose ominous splendor was increasing daily. To make the Nile rise
was not in the power of men; but the ancients--and here his audience
listened with bated breath--the ancients had been more intimately
familiar with the mysterious powers that rule the life of Nature than
men in the later times, whether priests or laymen. In those days every
servant of the Most High had been a naturalist and a student, and
when Egypt had been visited by such a calamity as that of this year, a
sacrifice had been offered--a precious victim against which all mankind,
nay and all his own feelings revolted; still, this sacrifice had never
failed of its effect, no, never. Here was the evidence--and he pointed
to the manuscripts in his lap.

The councillors had begun to be restless in their seats, and first the
president and then the others, one after another, exclaimed and asked:

"But the victim?"

"What did they sacrifice?"

"What about the victim?"

"Allow me to say no more about it till another time," said the old man.
"What good could it do to tell you that now? The first thing is to find
the thing that is acceptable to the gods."

"What is it?"

"Speak--do not keep us on the rack!" was shouted on all sides; but he
remained inexorable, promising only to call the council together
when the right time should come and desiring that the president would
proclaim from the balcony that Horapollo knew of a sacrifice which would
cause the Nile at last to rise. As soon as the right victim could be
found, the people should be invited to give their consent. In the time
of their forefathers it had never failed of its effect, so men, women,
and children might go home in all confidence, and await the future with
new and well-founded hopes.

And this announcement, with which the president mingled his praises of
the venerable Horapollo, had a powerful effect. The crowd hallooed with
glee, as though they had found new life. "Hail, hail!" was shouted
again and again, and it was addressed, not merely to the old man who had
promised them deliverance, but also to the Fathers of the city, who felt
as if a fearful load had fallen from their souls.

The old man's scheme was, to be sure, not pious nor rightly Christian;
but had the power of the Church been in any way effectual? And this
having failed they must of their own accord have had recourse to
means held reprobate by the priesthood. Magic and the black arts
were genuinely Egyptian; and when faith had no power, these asserted
themselves and superstition claimed its own. Though Medea had been taken
by surprise and imprisoned, this had not been done to satisfy the law,
but with a view to secretly utilizing her occult science for the benefit
of the community. In such dire need no means were too base; and though
the old man himself was horrified at those he proposed he was sure of
public approbation if only they had the desired result. If only they
could avert the calamity the sin could be expiated, and the Almighty was
so merciful!

The bishop had a seat and voice in the council, but Fate itself had
saved them from the dilemma of having to meet his remonstrances.

When Horapollo went out into the market-place he was received with
acclamations, and as much gratitude as though he had already achieved
the deliverance of the people and country.

What had he done?--Whether the work he had set going were to fail or
to succeed he could not remain in Memphis, for in either case he would
never have peace again. But that did not daunt him; it would certainly
be very good for the two women to be removed from the perilous
neighborhood of the Arab capital, and he was firmly determined to take
them away with him. For his dear Philip, too, nothing could be better
than a transplantation into other soil.

At the house of Rufinus he now learnt the fate that had fallen on Paula.

She was out the way, at any rate for the present; still, if she should
be released to-morrow or the day after, or even a month hence, she would
be as great a hindrance as ever. His plots against her must therefore be
carried out. His own isolation provoked him, and what a satisfaction
it would be if only he should succeed in stirring up the Egyptian
Christians to the heathen deed to which he was endeavoring to prompt
them.

If Paula should be condemned to death by the Arabs, the execution of the
scheme would be greatly promoted; and now the first point was to ensure
the favor of the black Vekeel, for everything depended on his consent.

Joanna and Pulcheria thought him more good-humored and amiable than they
had ever known him; his proposal that he and Philippus should join their
household was hailed with delight even by little Mary, and the women
conducted him all over the house, supporting his steps with affectionate
care. All he saw there pleased him beyond measure. Such neatness and
comfort could only exist where there was a woman's eye to direct and
watch over everything. The rooms on the ground floor, which had been the
master's, should be his, and the corresponding wing on the other
side could be made ready for Philippus. The dining-room, the large
ante-chamber, and the viridarium would be common ground, and the upper
story was large enough for the women and any guests. He would move in as
soon as he had settled some business he had in hand.

It must be something of a pleasant nature, for as the old man spoke of
it his sunken lips mumbled with satisfaction, while his sparkling eyes
seemed to say to Pulcheria: "And I have something good in store for you,
too, dear child."




CHAPTER XVII.

Paula passed a fearful night in the small, frightfully hot prison-cell
in which she and Betta were shut up. She could not sleep, and when
once she succeeded in closing her eyes she was roused by the yells and
clanking chains of the captives in the common prison and the heavy step
of another sufferer who paced the room overhead, even more restless than
herself.

Poor fellow-victim! Was it a tortured conscience that drove him hither
and thither, or was he as innocent as she was, and was it longing, love,
and anxiety that bereft him of sleep?

He was no vulgar criminal. There was no room for those in this part
of the building; and at midnight, when the noise in the large hall was
suddenly silenced, soft sounds of the lute came down to her from his
cell, and only a master could strike the strings with such skill.

She cared nothing for the stranger; but she was grateful for his gift of
music, for it diverted her thoughts from herself, and she listened with
growing interest. Glad of an excuse for rising from her hard, hot bed,
she sprang up and placed herself close to the one window, an opening
barred with iron. But then the music ceased and a conversation began
between the warder and her fellow-prisoner.

What voice was that? Did she deceive herself, or hear rightly?

Her heart stood still while she listened; and now every doubt was
silenced: It was Orion, and none other, whom she heard speaking in the
room above. Then the warder spoke his name; they were talking of her
deceased uncle; and now, as if in obedience to some sign, they lowered
their voices. She heard whispering but could not distinguish what was
said. At length parting words were uttered in louder tones, the door of
the cell was locked and the prisoner approached his window.

At this she pressed her face close to the heated iron bars, looked
upwards, listened a moment and, as nothing was stirring, she said, first
softly, and then rather louder: "Orion, Orion!"

And, from above, her name was spoken in reply. She greeted him and asked
how and when he had come hither; but he interrupted her at the first
words with a decisive: "Silence!" adding in a moment, "Look out!"

She listened in expectancy; the minutes crept on at a snail's pace to a
full half hour before he at last said: "Now!" And, in a few moments,
she held in her hand a written scroll that he let down to her by a
lutestring weighted with a scrap of wood.

She had neither light nor fire, and the night was moonless. So she
called up "Dark!" and immediately added, as he had done: "Look out."

She then tied to the string the two best roses of those Pulcheria had
brought her, and at her glad "Now!" they floated up.

He expressed his thanks in a few low chords overflowing with yearning
and passion; then all was still, for the warder had forbidden him to
sing or play at night and he dared not risk losing the man's favor.

Paula laid down again with Orion's letter in her hand, and when she felt
slumber stealing upon her, she pushed it under her pillow and ere long
was sleeping on it. When they both woke, soon after sunrise, they had
been dreaming of each other and gladly hailed the return of day.

How furious Orion had felt when the prison door closed upon him! He
longed to wrench the iron bars from the window and kick down or force
the door; and there is no more humiliating and enraging feeling for a
man than that of finding himself shut up like a wild beast, cut off from
the world to which he belongs and which he needs, both to give him all
that makes life worth having, and to receive such good as he can do and
give.

Yesterday their dungeon had seemed a foretaste of hell, they had each
been on the verge of despair; to-day what different feelings animated
them! Orion had been the victim of blow on blow from Fate--Paula had
looked forward to his return with an anxious and aching heart; to-day
how calm were their souls, though both stood in peril of death.

The legend tells us that St. Cecilia, who was led away to the rack from
her marriage feast, even in the midst of the torments of martyrdom,
listened in ecstasy to heavenly music and sweet echoes of the organ; and
how many have had the same experience! In the extremity of anguish and
danger they find greater joys than in the midst of splendor, ease and
the intoxicating pleasures of life; for what we call happiness is the
constant guest of those who have within reach that for which their souls
most ardently long, irrespective of place and outward circumstances.

So these two in their prison were what they had not been for a long
time: full of heartfelt bliss; Paula with his letter, which he had begun
at the Kadi's house, and in which he poured out his whole soul to her;
Orion in the possession of her roses, on which he feasted his eyes and
heart, and which lay before him while he wrote the following lines,
which the kindhearted warder willingly transmitted to her:

   Lo! As night in its gloom and horror fell on my prison,
   Methought the sun sank black, dark forever in death.

   I drew thy roses up, and behold! from their crimson petals
   Beamed a glory of light, a glow as of sunshine and day!

   Love! Love is the star that rose with those fragrant flowers;
   Rose, as Phoebus' car comes up from the tossing waves.

   Is not the ardent flame of a heart that burns with passion
   Like the sparkling glow-worm hid in the heart of the rose?

   While it yet was day, and we breathed in freedom and gladness,
   While the sun still shone, that light seemed small and dim;

   But now, when night has fallen, sinister, dark, portentous,
   Its kindly ray beams forth to raise our drooping souls.

   As seeds in the womb of earth break from the brooding darkness,
   Or as the soul soars free, heaven-seeking from the grave,

   So the hopeless soil of a dungeon blossoms to rapture,
   Blooms with roses of Love, more sweet than the wildling rose!

And when had Paula ever felt happier than at the moment when this
offering from her lover, this humble prison-flower, first reached her.

Old Betta could not hear the verses too often, and cried with joy, not
at the poem, but at the wonderful change it had produced in her darling.
Paula was now the radiant being that she had been at home on the
Lebanon; and when she appeared before the assembled judges in the hall
of justice they gazed at her in amazement, for never had a woman on her
trial for life or death stood in their presence with eyes so full of
happiness. And yet she was in evil straits. The just and clement Kadi,
himself the loving father of daughters, felt a pang at his heart as he
noted the delusive confidence which so evidently filled the soul of this
noble maiden.

Yes, she was in evil straits: a crushing piece of evidence was in their
hands, and the constitution of the court--which was in strict conformity
with the law must in itself be unfavorable to her. Her case was to be
tried by an equal number of Egyptians and of Arabs. The Moslems were
included because by her co-operation, Arabs had been slain; while Paula,
as a Christian and a resident in Memphis, came under the jurisdiction of
the Egyptians.

The Kadi presided, and experience had taught him that the Jacobite
members of the bench of judges kept the sentence of death in their
sleeves when the accused was of the Melchite confession. What had
especially prejudiced them against this beautiful creature he knew not;
but he easily discovered that they were hostile to the accused, and if
they should utter the verdict "guilty", and only two Arabs should echo
it, the girl's fate was sealed.

And what was the declaration which that whiterobed old man among the
witnesses desired to make--the venerable and learned Horapollo? The
glances he cast at Paula augured her no good.

It was so oppressively, so insufferably hot in the hall! Each one felt
the crushing influence, and in spite of the importance of the occasion,
the proceedings every now and then came to a stand-still and then were
hurried on again with unseemly haste.

The prisoner herself seemed happily to be quite fresh and not affected
by the sultriness of the day. It had cost her small effort to adhere to
her statement that she had had no share in the escape of the sisters,
when catechised by the ruffianly negro; but she found it hard to defy
Othman's benevolent questioning. However, there was no choice, and she
succeeded in proving that she had never quitted Memphis nor the house
of Rufinus at the time when the Arab warriors met their death between
Athribis and Doomiat. The Kadi endeavored to turn this to account for
her advantage and Obada, who had found much to whisper over with his
grey-headed neighbor on the bench reserved for witnesses, let him talk;
but no sooner had he ended than the Vekeel rose and laid before the
judges the note he had found in Orion's room.

It was undoubtedly in the young man's handwriting and addressed to
Paula, and the final words: "But do not misunderstand me. Your noble,
and only too well-founded desire to lend succor to your fellow-believers
would have sufficed...." could not fail to make a deep impression. When
the Kadi questioned Paula, however, she replied with perfect truth that
this document was absolutely unknown to her; at the same time she
did not deny that the sisters of St. Cecilia, who were of her own
confession, had always had her warmest wishes, and that she had hoped
they might succeed in asserting their rights in opposition to the
patriarch.

The deceased Mukaukas, and the Jacobite members of the town-council
even, had shared these feelings and the Arabs had never interfered with
the pious sicknurses.

The calm conciseness with which she made these statements had a
favorable effect, on her Moslem judges especially, and the Kadi began to
have some hopes for her; he desired that Orion should be called as being
best able to account for the meaning of the letter he had written but
never sent.

On this the young man appeared, and though he and Paula did their
utmost to preserve a suitable demeanor, every one could see the violent
agitation they felt at meeting each other in such a situation. Horapollo
never took his eyes off Orion, whom he now saw for the first time, and
his features put on a darkening and menacing expression.

The young man acknowledged that he had written the letter in question,
but he and Paula alike referred it to the danger with which the
sisterhood had long been threatened from the patriarch's hostility.
The assistance which, in that document, he had refused he would have
afforded readily and zealously at a later and fit season, and he could
have counted on the aid of the Arab governor Amru, who, as he would
himself confirm, shared the views of the Mukaukas George as to the nuns'
rights.

At this the old sage murmured loud enough to be heard: "Clever, very
clever!" and the Vekeel laughed aloud, exclaiming:

"I call that a cunning way of lengthening your days! Be on your guard,
my lords. These two are partners in the game and are intimately allied.
I have proof of that in my own hands. That youngster takes as good care
of the damsel's fortune as though it were his own already, and what is
more...."

Here Paula broke in. She did not know what the malicious man was going
to say, but it was something insulting beyond a doubt. And there stood
Orion, just as she had pictured him in moments of tender remembrance;
she felt his eye resting on her in ecstasy. To go up to him, to tell him
all she was feeling in this critical struggle for life or death, seemed
impossible; but as the Vekeel began to disclose to their judges matters
which concerned only herself and her lover, every impulse prompted her
to interpose and, in this fateful hour, to do her friend such service
as she once, like a coward, had shrank from. So with eager emotion, her
eyes flashing, she interrupted the negro "Stop!" she cried, "you are
wasting words and trouble. What you are trying to prove by subtlety I am
proud and glad to declare. Hear it, all of you. The son of the Mukaukas
is my betrothed!"

At the same time her eye sought to meet Orion's. And thus, in the very
extremity of danger, they enjoyed a solemn moment of the purest, deepest
happiness. Paula's eyes were moist with grateful tenderness, when Orion
exclaimed:

"You have heard from her own lips what makes the greatest bliss of my
life. The noble daughter of Thomas is my promised bride!"

There was a murmur among the Jacobite judges. 'Till this moment several
of them, oppressed by the heat, had sat dreaming with their heads sunk
on their breasts, but now they were suddenly as wide-awake and alert
as though a jet of cold water had been turned on to them, and one cried
out: "And your father, young man? You have forgotten him in a hurry!
What would he have said to such a disgrace to his blood as your marriage
to a Melchite, the daughter of those who caused your two brothers to be
murdered? Oh! if the dead could...."

"He blessed our union on his death-bed," Orion put in.

"Did he, indeed?" asked another Jacobite with sarcastic scorn. "Then the
patriarch was in the right when he refused to let the priests follow his
corpse. That I should live to be witness to such crimes!"

But such words fell on the ears of the enraptured pair like the chirping
of crickets. They felt, they cared for nothing but what this blissful
moment had brought them, and never suspected that Paula's glad avowal
had sealed her death-warrant.

The wrath of the Jacobite faction now hastened the end. The prosecutor,
an Arab, now represented how many Moslems had lost their lives in the
affair of the nuns, and once more read Orion's letter. His Christian
colleagues tried to prove that this document could only refer to the
flight, so ingeniously plotted, of the sisters; and now something
quite new and unlooked-for occurred, which gave a fresh turn to the
proceedings: the old man interrupted the Kadi to make a statement. At
this Paula's confidence rose again for the last speaker had somewhat
shaken it. She felt sure that the tried friend and adoptive father of
her faithful Philippus would take her part.

But what was this?

The old man seemed to measure her height in a glance which struck to her
heart with its fierce enmity, and then he said deliberately:

"On the morning of the nuns' flight the accused, Paula, went to the
convent and there tolled the bell. Contradict me if you can, proud
prefect's daughter; but I warn you beforehand, that in that case, I
shall be compelled to bring forward fresh charges."

At this the horror-stricken girl pictured to herself the widow and
daughter of Rufinus at her side on the condemned bench before the
judges, and felt that denial would drag her friends to destruction with
her; with quivering lips she confirmed the old man's statement.

"And why did you toll the bell?" asked the Kadi.

"To help them," replied Paula. "They are my fellow-believers, and I love
them."

"She was the originator of the treasonable and bloody scheme," cried the
Vekeel, "and did it for no other purpose than to cheat us, the rulers of
this country."

The Kadi however signed to him to be silent and bid the Jacobite counsel
for the accused speak next. He had seen her early in the day, and came
forward in the Egyptian manner with a written defence in his hand; but
it was a dull formal performance and produced no effect; though the
Kadi did his utmost to give prominence to every point that might help to
justify her, she was pronounced guilty.

Still, could her crime be held worthy of death? It was amply proved that
she had had a hand in the rescue of the nuns; but it was no less clear
that she had been far enough away from the sisters and their defenders
when the struggle with the Arabs took place. And she was a woman, and
how pardonable it seemed in a pious maiden that she should help the
fellow-believers whom she loved to evade persecution.

All this Othman pointed out in eloquent words, repeatedly and sternly
silencing the Vekeel when he sought to argue in favor of the sentence of
death; and the humane persuasiveness of the lenient judge won the hearts
of most of the Moslems.

Paula's appearance had a powerful effect, too, and not less the
circumstance that their noblest and bravest foe had been the father of
the accused.

When at length it was put to the vote the extraordinary result was that
all her fellow Christians--the Jacobites--without exception demanded
her death, while of the infidels on the judges' bench only one supported
this severe meed of punishment.

Sentence was pronounced, and as the Vekeel Obada passed close
to Orion--who was led back to his cell pale and hardly master of
himself--he said, mocking him in broken Greek: "It will be your turn
to-morrow, Son of the Mukaukas!"

Orion's lips framed the retort: "And yours, too, some day, Son of a
Slave!"--but Paula was standing opposite, and to avoid infuriating her
foe he was able to do what he never could have done else: to let the
Vekeel and Horapollo pass on without a word in reply.

As soon as the door was closed on this couple, Othman nodded approvingly
at Orion and said:

"Rightly and wisely done, my friend! The eagle should never forget that
he must not use his pinions in a cage as he does between the desert and
the sky."

He signed to the guards to lead him away, and stood apart while the
young man looked and waived an adieu to his betrothed.

Finally the Kadi went up to Paula, whose heroic composure as she heard
the sentence of death had filled him with admiration.

"The court has decided against you, noble maiden," he said. "But its
verdict can he overruled by the clemency of our Sovereign Lord the
Khaliff and the mercy of God the compassionate. Do you pray to Him--I
and a few friends will appeal to the Khaliff."

He disclaimed her gratitude, and when she, too, had been led away he
added, in the figurative language of his nation, to the friends who were
waiting for him:

"My heart aches! To have to pronounce such a verdict oppressed me like
a load; but to have an Obada for a fellow Moslem and be bound to obey
him--there is no heavier lot on earth!"




CHAPTER XVIII.

The mysterious old sage had no sooner left the judgment-hall with the
Vekeel than he begged for a private interview. Obada did not hesitate
to turn the keeper of the prison, with his wife and infant, out of his
room, and there he listened while Horapollo informed him of the fate
to which he destined the condemned girl. The old man's scheme certainly
found favor with the Negro; still, it seemed to him in many respects
so daring that, but for an equivalent service which Horapollo was in a
position to offer Obada, he would scarcely have succeeded in obtaining
his consent.

All the Vekeel aimed at was to make it very certain that Orion had had a
hand in the flight of the nuns, and chance had placed a document in the
old man's hands which seemed to set this beyond a doubt.

He had effected his removal to the widow's dwelling in the cool hours
of early morning. He had taken with him, in the first instance, only the
most valuable and important of his manuscripts, and as he was placing
these in a small desk--the very same which Rufinus had left for Paula's
use--Horapollo found in it the note which the youth had hastily written
when, after waiting in vain for Paula as she sat with little Mary,
he had at last been obliged to depart and take leave of Amru. This
wax-tablet, on which the writing was much defaced and partly illegible,
could not fail to convince the judges of Orion's guilt, and the
production of this piece of evidence enabled the old man to extort
Obada's consent to his proposal as to the mode of Paula's death. When
they finally left the warder's room, the Negro once more turned to the
keeper of the prison and told him with a snort, as he pointed to his
pretty wife and the child at her breast, that they should all three die
if he allowed Orion to quit his cell for so much as an instant.

He then swung himself on to his horse, while Horapollo rode off to the
Curia to desire the president of the council to call a meeting for that
evening; then he betook himself to his new quarters.

There he found his room carefully shaded, and as cool as was possible
in such heat. The floor had been sprinkled with water, flowers stood
wherever there was room for them, and all his properties in scrolls and
other matters had found places in chests or on shelves. There was not
a speck of dust to be seen, and a sweet pervading perfume greeted his
sensitive nostrils.

What a good exchange he had made! He rubbed his withered hands with
satisfaction as he seated himself in his accustomed chair, and when Mary
came to call him to dinner, it was a pleasure to him to jest with her.

Pulcheria must lead him through the viridarium into the dining-room; he
enjoyed his meal, and his cross, wrinkled old face lighted up amazingly
as he glanced round at his feminine associates; only Eudoxia was absent,
confined to her room by some slight ailment. He had something pleasant
to say to each; he frankly compared his former circumstances with his
present position, without disguising his heartfelt thankfulness; then,
with a merry glance at Pulcheria, he described how delightful it would
be when Philippus should come home to make the party complete--a true
and perfect star: for every Egyptian star must have five rays. The
ancients had never painted one otherwise nor graven it in stone; nay,
they had used it as the symbol for the number five.

At this Mary exclaimed: "But then I hope--I hope we shall make a
six-rayed star; for by that time poor Paula may be with us again!"

"God grant it!" sighed Dame Joanna. Pulcheria, however, asked the old
man what was wrong with him, for his face had suddenly clouded. His
cheerfulness had vanished, his tufted eyebrows were raised, and his
pinched lips seemed unwilling to part, when at length he reluctantly
said:

"Nothing--nothing is wrong.... At the same time; once for all--I loathe
that name."

"Paula?" cried the child in astonishment. "Oh! but if you knew..."

"I know more than enough," interrupted the old man. "I love you
all--all; my old heart expands as I sit in your midst; I am comfortable
here, I feel kindly towards you, I am grateful to you; every little
attention you show me does me good; for it comes from your hearts: if I
could repay you soon and abundantly--I should grow young again with joy.
You may believe me, as I can see indeed that you do. And yet," and again
his brows went up, "and yet, when I hear that name, and when you try to
win me over to that woman, or if you should even go so far as to assail
my ears with her praises--then, much as it would grieve me, I would go
back again to the place where I came from."

"Why, Horapollo, what are you saying?" cried Joanna, much distressed.

"I say," the old man went on, "I say that in her everything is
concentrated which I most hate and contemn in her class. I say that she
bears in her bosom a cold and treacherous heart; that she blights my
days and my nights; in short, that I would rather be condemned to
live under the same roof with clammy reptiles and cold-blooded snakes
than..."

"Than with her, with Paula?" Mary broke in. The eager little thing
sprang to her feet, her eyes flashed lightnings and her voice quivered
with rage, as she exclaimed: "And you not only say it but mean it? Is it
possible?"

"Not only possible, but positive, sweetheart," replied the old man,
putting out his hand to take hers, but she shrank back, exclaiming
vehemently:

"I will not be your sweetheart, if you speak so of her! A man as old as
you are ought to be just. You do not know her at all, and what you say
about her heart..."

"Gently, gently, child," the widow put in; and Horapollo answered with
peculiar emphasis.

"That heart, my little whirlwind!--it would be well for us all if we
could forget it, forget it for good or for evil. She has been tried
to-day, and that heart is sentenced to cease beating."

"Sentenced! Merciful Heaven!" shrieked Pulcheria, and as she started up
her mother cried out:

"For God's sake do not jest about such things, it is a sin.--Is it
true?--Is it possible? Those wretches, those... I see in your face it is
true; they have condemned Paula."

"As you say," replied Horapollo calmly. "The girl is to be executed."

"And you only tell us now?" wept Pulcheria, while Mary broke out:

"And yet you have been able to jest and laugh, and you--I hate you! And
if you were not such a helpless, old, old man..." But here Joanna again
silenced the child, and she asked between her sobs:

"Executed?--Will they cut off her head? And is there no mercy for her
who was as far away from that luckless fight as we were--for her, a
girl, and the daughter of Thomas?"

To which the old man replied:

"Wait a while, only wait! Heaven has perhaps chosen her for great ends.
She may be destined to save a whole country and nation from destruction
by her death. It is even possible..."

"Speak out plainly; you make me shudder with your oracular hints," cried
the widow; but he only shrugged his shoulders and said coolly:

"What we foresee is not yet known. Heaven alone can decide in such a
case. It will be well for us all--for me, for her, for Pulcheria, and
even our absent Philip, if the divinity selects her as its instrument.
But who can see into darkness? If it is any comfort to you, Joanna, I
can inform you that the soft-hearted Kadi and his Arab colleagues, out
of sheer hatred of the Vekeel, who is immeasurably their superior in
talent and strength of will, will do everything in their power...." "To
save her?" exclaimed the widow.

"To-morrow they will hold council and decide whether to send a messenger
to Medina to implore pardon for her," Horapollo went on with a horrible
smile. "The day after they will discuss who the messenger is to be, and
before he can reach Arabia fate will have overtaken the prisoner. The
Vekeel Obada moves faster than they do, and the power lies in his hands
so long as Amru is absent from Egypt. He, they say, perfectly dotes on
the Mukaukas' son, and for his sake--who knows? Paula as his betrothed."

"His betrothed?"

"He called her by that name before the judges, and congratulated himself
on his promised bride."

"Paula and Orion!" cried Pulcheria, jubilant in the midst of her tears,
and clapping her hands for joy.

"A pair indeed!" said the old man. "You may well rejoice, my girl!
Feeble hearts as you all are, respect the experience of the aged,
and bless Fate if it should lame the horse of the Kadi's
messenger!--However, you will not listen to anything oracular, so it
will be better to talk of something else."

"No, no," cried Joanna. "What can we think of but her and her fate? Oh,
Horapollo, I do not know you in this mood. What has that poor soul done
to you, persecuted as she is by the hardest fate--that noble creature
who is so dear to us all? And do you forget that the judges who have
sentenced her will now proceed to enquire what Rufinus, and we all of
us..."

"What you had to do with that mad scheme of rescue?" interrupted
Horapollo. "I will make it my business to prevent that. So long as this
old brain is able to think, and this mouth to speak, not a hair of your
heads shall be hurt."

"We are grateful to you," said Joanna. "But, if you have such power, set
to work--you know how dear Paula is to us all, how highly your friend
Philip esteems her--use your power to save her."

"I have no power, and refuse to have any," retorted the old man harshly.

"But Horapollo, Horapollo!--Come here, children!--We were to find in you
a second father--so you promised. Then prove that those were no empty
words, and be entreated by us."

The old man drew a deep breath; he rose to his feet with such vigor as
