Clement Darpent stood before me? He looked then and worn, and almost
doubtful how to address me; but Lady Ommaney said, in her hearty way:

'Come, come, young folks, you have enough to say to one another. Sit
down there and leave the ox to the children and us old folks in our
second childhood. You believe and old woman now, M. Darpent?'

'You never distrusted me?' I demanded.

He said he had never distrusted my heart, but that he had heard at all
hands of the arrangement with M. de Poligny, whose lawyer had actually
stopped proceedings on that account. My brother had indeed assured
him that he did not mean to consent; and he ought, he allowed, to have
rested satisfied with that assurance, but--He faltered a little, which
made me angry. The truth was that some cruel person had spoken to him as
if my dear Eustace and his protection would soon be removed; and while
Solivet was at hand, Eustace, in his caution, he refrained from such
intercourse with Clement as could excite suspicion. Besides, he was
a good deal away at St. Germain with the Duke. All this I did not
understand. I was vexed with Clement for having seemed to doubt us, and
I did not refrain from showing my annoyance that he should have accepted
any kind of office in the rotten French State. It seemed to me a fall
from his dignity. On this he told me that it was not purchased, and it
was serving under a true and loyal man, whom he felt bound to support.
If any one could steer between the Prince and the Cardinal, and bring
some guarantee for the people out of the confusion, it was the Keeper of
the Seals, the head of the only party who cared more for the good of the
country than their private malice and hatred.

'And,' he said diffidently, 'if under M. Mole's patronage, the steps
could be gained without loss of honour or principle, you remember that
there is a noblesse de la robe, which might remove some of Madame de
Ribaumont's objections, though I do not presume to compare it with the
blood of the Crusaders.'

I am ashamed to say that I answered, 'I should think not!' and then I am
afraid I reproached him for bartering the glorious independence that had
once rendered him far more than noble, for the mere tinsel show of rank
that all alike thought despicable. How I hate myself when I recall that
I told him that if he had done so for my sake he had made a mistake; and
as for loyalty rallying round the French Crown, I believed in no such
thing; they were all alike, and cared for nothing but their ambitions
and their hatreds.

Before anything had been said to soften these words--while he was still
standing grave and stiff, like one struck by a blow--in came the others
from the window. Meg, in fact, could not keep Cecile d'Aubepine back any
longer from hindering such shocking impropriety as out tete-a-tete.
We overheard her saving her little girl from corruption by a frightful
French fib that the gentleman in black was Mademoiselle de Ribaumont's
English priest.

I am sure out parting need have excited no suspicions. We were cold and
grave and ceremonious as Queen Anne of Austria herself, and poor Lady
Ommaney looked from one to the other of us in perplexity.

I went home between wrath and shame. I knew I had insulted Clement,
and I was really mortified and angry that he should have accepted this
French promotion instead of fleeing with us, and embracing our religion.
I hated all the French politics together a great deal too much to have
any comprehension of the patriotism that made him desire to support the
only honest and loyal party, hopeless as it was. I could not tell
Meg about our quarrel; I was glad Eustace was away at the English's
ambassador's. I felt as if one Frenchman was as good, or as bad, as
another, and I was more gracious to M. de Poligny than ever I had been
before that evening.

My mother had a reception in honour of its being Mid-Lent week. Solivet
was there, and, for a wonder, both the d'Aubepines, for the Count had
come home suddenly with message from the Prince of Conde to the Duke of
Orleans.




CHAPTER XXIX. -- MADAME'S OPPORTUNITY

(Annora's Narrative)



The Prince of Conde and Cardinal Mazarin were in arms against one
another. The Queen and her son were devoted to Mazarin. The loyal folk
in Paris held to the King, and were fain to swallow the Cardinal because
Conde was in open rebellion. Monsieur was trying to hold the balance
with the help of the Parliament, but was too great an ass to do any such
thing. The mob was against everybody, chiefly against the Cardinal, and
the brutal ruffians of the Prince's following lurked about, bullying
every one who gave them umbrage, with some hope of terrifying the
Parliament magistrates into siding with them.

It was therefore no great surprise to Eustace and Sir Francis Ommaney
the next evening, when they were coming back on foot from the Louvre, to
hear a scuffle in one of the side streets.

They saw in a moment half of dozen fellows with cudgels falling on a
figure in black, who vainly struggled to defend himself with a little
thin walking rapier. Their English blood was up in a moment two masked
figures and hearing them egging on their bravoes with 'Hola, there! At
him! Teach him to look at a lady of rank.'

The little rapier had been broken. A heavy blow had made the victim's
arm fall, he had been tripped up, and the rascals were still belabouring
him, when Eustace and Sir Francis sprang in among them, crying, 'Hold,
cowardly rascals!' striking to the right and left, though with the flat
of their swords, of which they were perfect masters, for even in their
wrath they remembered that these rogues were only tools. And no
doubt they were not recognized in the twilight, for one of the masked
gentlemen exclaimed:

'Stop, sir! this is not a matter for gentlemen. This is the way we
punish the insolence of fellows whose muddy blood would taint the swords
of a noble.'

At the same moment Eustace saw that the victim, who had begun to raise
himself, was actually Clement Darpent. He knew, too, the voice from the
mask, and, in hot wrath, exclaimed:

'Solivet, you make me regret that you are my brother, and that I cannot
punish such a cowardly outrage.'

'But I am no brother of yours!' cried d'Aubepine, flying at him. 'Thus I
treat all who dare term me coward.'

Eustace, far taller and more expert in fence, as well as with strength
of arm that all his ill-health had not destroyed, parried the thrust so
as to strike the sword out of d'Aubepine's hand, and then said:

'Go home, Monsieur. Thank your relationship to my sister that I punish
you no further, and learn that to use other men's arms to strike the
defenceless is a stain upon nobility.'

And as the wretched little Count slunk away he added

'Solivet, I had though better things of you.'

To which Solivet responded, with the pretension derived from his few
years of seniority:

'Bah! brother, you do not understand, half a foreigner as you are. This
was the only way left to me to protect my sister from the insults your
English folly had brought on her.'

Eustace made no answer. He could not speak, for the exertion and shock
had been too much for him. His mouth was filled with blood. They were
all about him in an instant then, Solivet and Darpent both in horror,
each feeling that he might in a manner have been the cause of that
bleeding, which might in a moment be fatal. Eustace himself knew best
what to do, and sat down on the step leaning against Sir Francis, so as
not to add to the danger.

The fray had been undisturbed. In that delectable city people held
aloof from such things instead of stopping them, but a doctor suddenly
appeared on the scene, 'attracted like a vulture,' as Sir Francis said;
and they had some ado to prevent him from unbuttoning Eustace's doublet
to search for a wound before they could make him understand what had
really happened. They obtained a fiacre, and Eustace was placed in it.
In this condition they brought him home and put him to bed, telling us
poor women only that he had interfered in a street fray and over-exerted
himself. It was shock enough for us to find all the improvements of a
whole year overthrown, as he lay white and still, not daring to speak.

They had agreed on the way home to keep us in ignorance, or at least to
let us think that the attack had been made by strangers, simply because
of his connection with the Big Beard. Meg's Nicolas was first to tell us
that it was M. Darpent whom they had rescued, and that he had called at
the porter's lodge on his way home to inquire for M. le Baron, bruised
all over, and evidently seriously hurt. And while still trying to
disbelieve this, another report arrived through the maidservants that M.
de Solivet and d'Aubepine had soundly cudgeled M. Darpent, and that M.
le Baron and M. d'Aubepine had fought a duel on the spot, in which my
brother had been wounded.

Meg was nearly as frantic as I was. We could not speak to Eustace, and
Solivet and d'Aubepine, finding themselves known, had both hurried away
at peep of day, for it was a serious thing to have nearly killed a man
in office; but Meg desired that if Sir Francis called to inquire for my
brother we should see him, and she also sent Nicolas to inquire for M.
Darpent, who, we heard, was confined to his bed with a broken arm.

Poor Clement! such was his reward for the interview where I had used
him so ill, and been so unjust to him. For, as we came to understand,
it really was all that wretched little Cecile's fault. She would do
anything to please that husband of hers, and she communicated to him
that she understood the secret of my resistance to the Poligny match,
and had been infinitely shocked at my behaviour at Lady Ommaney's.

The cowardly fellow had hated Clement ever since the baffling of the
attempt on Margaret. So he told Solivet, and they united in this attack,
with a half a dozen of their bravoes, got together for the occasion!
We heard the truth of the affair from Sir Francis, and it was well for
Solivet that he was out of my reach!

As for my mother, she thought it only an overflow of zeal for the honour
of the family, and held it to be my fault that her dear son had been
driven to such measures. Nothing was bad enough for the Ommaneys!
Nothing would restore my reputation but marrying the little Chevalier at
Easter. And in the midst, just as Eustace was a little better, and there
was no excuse for refusing to obey the drag of her chains, Margaret
was summoned away to attend on her absurd Princess, who was going to
Orleans, by way of keeping the Cardinal's forces out of her father's
city.

 Margaret had kept things straight.  I do not know how it was, but
peace always went away with her; and my mother did things she never
attempted when the real lady of the house was at home. And yet I might
thank my own hasty folly for much of what befell.

Eustace was much better, sitting up in his night-gown by the fire, and
ready, as I thought, to talk over everything, and redress my wrongs,
or at least comfort the wretchedness that had grown upon me daily since
that miserable quarrel with Clement. I poured it all out, and even was
mad enough to say it was his fault for delaying so long the journey to
the Hague. Clement, who had been well-nigh ready to join us and be a
good Protestant, was going back to the old delusions, and taking office
under the Government; and even if the bravoes had not killed him, he
would be spoilt for any honest Englishwoman; and I might as well take
that miserable little schoolboy, which I supposed was all my brother
wished. Then the estate would be safe enough.

Eustace could only assure me that the delay was as grievous to him as to
me. indeed, as I could see in a more reasonable mood, he had been unable
to get from Ribaumont the moneys needful for the journey, the steward
not venturing to send them while the roads were so unsafe; but when he
begged me to have patience, it seemed to sting my headstrong temper, and
I broke out in some such words as these: 'Patience! Patience! I am sick
of it. Thanks to your patience, I have lost Clement. They have all but
murdered him! and for yourself, you had better take care Millicent van
Hunker does not think that such patience is only too easy when she has
neither wealth nor beauty left!'

'Hush, Annora,' he answered, with authority and severity in his tone,
but not half what I deserved; 'there is great excuse for you, but I
cannot permit such things to be said.'

Here Tryphena came in and scolded me for making him talk; I saw how
flushed he was, and became somewhat frightened. They sent me away,
and oh! how long it was ere I was allowed to see him again! For in
the morning, after a night of repenting and grieving over my heat, and
longing to apologise for having reproached him for the delay which was
as grievous to him as to me, the first thing I heard was that M. le
Baron was much worse; he had had a night of fever; there was more
bleeding, and much difficulty of breathing. My mother was with him, and
I was on no account to be admitted.

And when I came out of my room, there sat Madame Croquelebois, who had
been sent for from the Hotel d'Aubepine to keep guard over me, day and
night; for she was lodged in that cabinet of my sister's into which my
room opened, and my door on the other side was locked. It was an insult,
for which the excuse was my interview with Clement. It made me hot and
indignant enough, but there was yet a further purpose in it.

The next thing was to send for a certain Frere Allonville, a man who had
been a doctor before he was converted and became a Dominican friar, and
who still practiced, and was aid to do cures by miracle. I know this,
that it would have been a miracle if his treatment had cured my brother,
for the first thing he did was to bleed him, the very thing that Dr.
Dirkius had always told us was the sure way to kill him, when he was
losing so much blood already. Then the friar turned out Tryphena, on the
plea that he must have a nurse who understood his language. As if poor
Tryphena, after living thirteen years in France, could not understand
the tongue quite enough for any purpose, and as if she did not know
better how to take care of Eustace than any one else! But of course the
language was not the real reason that she was shut out, and kept under
guard, as it were, just as much as I was, while a Sister of Charity was
brought in to act as my brother's nurse, under my mother, who, look you,
never had been nurse at all, and always fainted at any critical moment.

Assuredly I knew why they were thus isolating my brother from all of us.
I heard steps go upstairs, not only of the Dominican quack doctor, but
of the Abbe Montagu, who had been previously sent to convert us. The
good old Bonchamp, who had a conscience, was away at St. Germain with
Gaspard de Nidemerle, and I--I had no one to appeal to when I knew they
were harassing the very life out of my dearest, dearest brother, by
trying to make him false to the Church and the faith he had fought for.
I could do nothing--I was a prisoner; all by my own fault too; for they
would have had no such opportunity had I not been so unguarded towards
my brother. When I did meet my mother it chafed me beyond all bearing to
see her devout air of resignation and piety. Her dear son was, alas! in
the utmost danger, but his dispositions were good, and she trusted
to see him in the bosom of the true Church, and that would be a
consolation, even if he were not raised up by a miracle, which would
convince even me. Poor woman, I believe she really did expect that his
conversion would be followed by a miraculous recovery. I told her she
was killing him--and well! I don't know what I said, but I think I
frightened her, for she sent Mr. Walter Montague to see what he could do
with me.

I told him I wondered he was not ashamed of such a conversion, supposing
he made it, which I was sure he would not, as long as my brother
retained his senses.

To which he answered that Heaven was merciful, and that so long as one
was in communion with the true Church there was power to be redeemed in
the next world, if not in this.

'A sorry way of squeezing into Heaven,' I said; and then he began
arguing, as he had done a hundred times before, on the blessing and rest
he had found in the Church, after renouncing his errors. And no wonder,
for it is well known that my Lord Mandeville brought up his family to
be mere Puritans. However, I said: 'Look you here, Mr. Montagu; if my
brother, Lord Walwyn, gave himself to you of deliberate mind, with full
health and faculties, you might think him a gain indeed. Or if you like
it better, he would have a claim to the promises of your Church; but if
you merely take advantage of the weakness of a man at the point of death
to make him seem a traitor to his whole life, why, then, I should say
you trusted, more than I do, to what you call Divine promises.'

He told me--as they always do--that I knew nothing about it, and that he
should pray for me. But I had some trust that his English blood would
be guilty of no foul play. I was much more afraid of the Dominican; only
one good thing was that the man was not a priest. So went by Good Friday
and Easter Eve. They would not let me go to church for fear I should
speak to any one. Madame Croquelebois and my mother's old smirking
tire-woman, Bellote, took turns to mount guard over me. I heard worse
and worse accounts of my dear brother's bodily state, but I had one
comfort. One of the servants secretly handed Tryphena this little note
addressed to me, in feeble straggling characters:--

'Do what they may to me my will does not consent. Pray for me. If word
were taken to the K. E. W. and R.'

It was some comfort that I should have that to prove what my brother was
to the last. I made me able to weep and pray--pray as I had never prayed
before--all that night and that strange sad Easter morning, when all the
bells were ringing, and the people flocking to the churches, and I sat
cut off from them all in my chamber, watching, watching in dread of
sounds that might tell me that my dearest and only brother, my one hope,
was taken from me, body and soul, and by my fault, in great part.

Oh! what a day it was, as time went on. Madame Croquelebois went to high
mass, and Bellote remained in charge. I was, you understand, a prisoner
at large. Provided some one was attending me, I went into any room in
the house save the only one where I cared to be. And I was sitting in
the salon, with my Bible and Prayer-book before me--not reading, I fear
me, but at any rate attesting my religion, when there came up a message
that Son Altesse Royale, the Duke of Gloucester, requested to be
admitted to see Mademoiselle de Ribaumont.

Nobody made any question about admitting a Royal Highness, so up he
came, the dear boy, with his bright hazel eyes like his father's, and
his dark shining curls on his neck. He had missed me at the ambassador's
chapel, and being sure, from my absence, that my brother must be very
ill indeed, he had come himself to inquire. He could as yet speak little
French, and not understanding what they told him at the door, he had
begged to see me.

It did not take long to tell him all, for Bellote did not understand
English; I showed him the note, and he stood considering. He was not
like his brothers, he had not lived in vain all those years with his
sister Elisabeth in captivity, for there was a grave manliness about him
though he was only thirteen. He said: 'do you think Lord Walwyn would
see me? I am used to be with a sick person.'

Eagerly I sent up word. I knew my mother would never refuse entrance to
royal blood; nor did she. She sent word that the Duke would do her
son only too much honour by thus troubling himself. I did not miss
the chance of marshalling him upstairs, and gaining one sight of my
brother--oh! so sadly wasted in these few days, his cheeks flushed, his
breath labouring, his eyes worn and sleepless, as he lay, raised high on
his pillow. He looked up with pleasure into the Duke's face. My mother
was making speeches and ceremonies; but after bowing in reply, the Duke,
holding Eustace's hand, leant over him and said; 'Can I do anything for
you? Shall I send for a chaplain?'

Eustace's eye brightened, and he answered in a voice so faint that the
Prince only heard by bending over him:

'An order from the King for some one to remain--Then I need not be ever
watching---'

'I shall wait till he comes,' said the Prince and Eustace gave SUCH a
look of thankfulness, and pressed the hand that had been laid in his.

The Duke, with politeness, asked permission of my mother to write
a billet to his brother, with a report of Lord Walwyn, at the
writing-table in the room. He wrote two--one to the King, another to
the chaplain, D. Hargood, bidding him obtain orders from King Charles to
remain with Lord Walwyn; and he despatched them by the gentleman who had
followed him, asking permission of my mother to remain a little while
with my lord.

Poor mother! she could not refuse, and she did, after all, love her son
enough to be relieved, as an air of rest and confidence stole over his
features, as the princely boy sat down by him, begging that he might
spare some one fatigue while he was there. She sent me away, but would
not go herself; and I heard afterwards that the Duke sat very still,
seldom speaking. Once Eustace asked him if he had his Book of Common
Prayer, for his own had been put out of his reach.

'This is my sister's,' said the Duke, taking out a little worn velvet
book. 'Shall I read you her favourite Psalm?'

He read in a low gentle voice, trained by his ministry to his sweet
sister. He read the Easter Epistle and Gospel too; and at last Eustace,
relaxing the weary watch and guard of those dreadful days, dropped into
a calm sleep.

If a miracle of recovery could be said to have been wrought, surely it
was by Duke Henry of Gloucester.

Long and patiently the boy say there; for, as it turned out, the King
was in the Cours de la Reine playing at bowls, and it was long before he
could be found, and when Dr. Hargood brought it at last the Prince had
actually watched his friend for four hours. He might well say he had
been trained in waiting! And he himself gave the bouillon, when Eustace
awoke without the red flush, and with softer breathing!

The King had actually done more than the Duke had asked; for he had not
only given orders that the chaplain should come, and, if desired, remain
with Lord Walwyn, but he had also sent the Queen's physician, the most
skilful man at hand, to oust the Dominican. We heard that he had sworn
that it was as bad as being in a Scotch conventicler to have cowls and
hoods creeping about your bed before you were dead, and that Harry had
routed them like a very St. George.




CHAPTER XXX. -- THE NEW MAID OF ORLEANS

(Margaret's Narrative)



I was summoned to the Luxembourg Palace on the Tuesday in Holy Week,
the 25th of March. My dear brother was then apparently much better, and
gaining ground after the attack of hemorrhage caused by his exertions to
save M. Darpent from the violence of his assailants.

He did not appear to need me, since he could not venture to talk more
than a few words at a time; and, besides, my year's absence had left
me in such arrears of waiting that I could not ask for leave of absence
without weighty grounds. My mother was greatly displeased with me for
not having cut short the interview between Darpent and Annora, although
it seemed to have served her purpose by embroiling them effectually; but
she could not overlook so great an impropriety; and I confess that I
was not sorry to avoid her continual entreaties to me to give up all
intercourse alike with the Darpents and Ommneys, and all our English
