The two women, Meg and the other, nodded and motioned to Elsa to
accompany them. She considered a moment, looking first at Ramiro and
next at Adrian. Then her head dropped upon her breast, and turning
without a word she followed them up the creaking oaken stair that rose
from a niche near the wall of the ingle-nook.

"Father," said Adrian when the massive door had closed behind her and
they were left alone--"father--for I suppose that I must call you so."

"There is not the slightest necessity," broke in Ramiro; "facts, my dear
son, need not always be paraded in the cold light of day--fortunately.
But, proceed."

"What does all this mean?"

"I wish I could tell you. It appears to mean, however, that without any
effort upon your part, for you seem to me a young man singularly devoid
of resource, your love affairs are prospering beyond expectation."

"I have had nothing to do with the business; I wash my hands of it."

"That is as well. Some sensitive people might think they need a deal
of washing. You young fool," he went on, dropping his mocking manner,
"listen to me. You are in love with this pink and white piece of goods,
and I have brought her here for you to marry."

"And I refuse to marry her against her will."

"As to that you can please yourself. But somebody has got to marry
her--you, or I."

"You--_you!_" gasped Adrian.

"Quite so. The adventure is not one, to be frank, that attracts me. At
my age memories are sufficient. But material interests must be attended
to, so if you decline--well, I am still eligible and hearty. Do you see
the point?"

"No, what is it?"

"It is a sound title to the inheritance of the departed Hendrik Brant.
That wealth we might, it is true, obtain by artifice or by arms; but how
much better that it should come into the family in a regular fashion,
thereby ousting the claim of the Crown. Things in this country are
disturbed at present, but they will not always be disturbed, for in the
end somebody must give way and order will prevail. Then questions might
be asked, for persons in possession of great riches are always the mark
of envy. But if the heiress is married to a good Catholic and loyal
subject of the king, who can cavil at rights sanctified by the laws of
God and man? Think it over, my dear Adrian, think it over. Step-mother
or wife--you can take your choice."

With impotent rage, with turmoil of heart and torment of conscience,
Adrian did think it over. All that night he thought, tossing on his
rat-haunted pallet, while without the snow whirled and the wind beat. If
he did not marry Elsa, his father would, and there could be no doubt as
to which of these alternatives would be best and happiest for her.
Elsa married to that wicked, cynical, devil-possessed, battered,
fortune-hunting adventurer with a nameless past! This must be
prevented at any cost. With his father her lot _must_ be a hell; with
himself--after a period of storm and doubt perhaps--it could scarcely
be other than happy, for was he not young, handsome, sympathetic,
and--devoted? Ah! there was the real point. He loved this lady with all
the earnestness of which his nature was capable, and the thought of her
passing into the possession of another man gave him the acutest anguish.
That the man should be Foy, his half-brother, was bad enough; that it
should be Ramiro, his father, was insupportable.

At breakfast the following morning, when Elsa did not appear, the pair
met.

"You look pale, Adrian," said his father presently. "I fear that this
wild weather kept you awake last night, as it did me, although at your
age I have slept through the roar of a battle. Well, have you thought
over our conversation? I do not wish to trouble you with these incessant
family matters, but times presses, and it is necessary to decide."

Adrian looked out of the lattice at the snow, which fell and fell
without pause. Then he turned and said:

"Yes. Of the two it is best that she should marry me, though I think
that such a crime will bring its own reward."

"Wise young man," answered his father. "Under all your cloakings of
vagary I observe that you have a foundation of common-sense, just as the
giddiest weathercock is bedded on a stone. As for the reward, considered
properly it seems to be one upon which I can heartily congratulate you."

"Peace to that talk," said Adrian, angrily; "you forget that there are
two parties to such a contract; her consent must be gained, and I will
not ask it."

"No? Then I will; a few arguments occur to me. Now look here, friend, we
have struck a bargain, and you will be so good as to keep it or to take
the consequences--oh! never mind what they are. I will bring this lady
to the altar--or, rather, to that table, and you will marry her, after
which you can settle matters just exactly as you please; live with her
as your wife, or make your bow and walk away, which, I care nothing so
long as you are married. Now I am weary of all this talk, so be so good
as to leave me in peace on the subject."

Adrian looked at him, opened his lips to speak, then changed his mind
and marched out of the house into the blinding snow.

"Thank Heaven he is gone at last!" reflected his father, and called for
Hague Simon, with whom he held a long and careful interview.

"You understand?" he ended.

"I understand," answered Simon, sulkily. "I am to find this priest,
who should be waiting at the place you name, and to bring him here by
nightfall to-morrow, which is a rough job for a Christian man in such
weather as this."

"The pay, friend Simon, remember the pay."

"Oh! yes, it all sounds well enough, but I should like something on
account."

"You shall have it--is not such a labourer worthy of his hire?" replied
his employer with enthusiasm, and producing from his pocket the purse
which Lysbeth had given Adrian, with a smile of peculiar satisfaction,
for really the thing had a comic side, he counted a handsome sum into
the hand of this emissary of Venus.

Simon looked at the money, concluded, after some reflection, that it
would scarcely do to stand out for more at present, pouched it, and
having wrapped himself in a thick frieze coat, opened the door and
vanished into the falling snow.



CHAPTER XXVI

THE BRIDEGROOM AND THE BRIDE

The day passed, and through every hour of it the snow fell incessantly.
Night came, and it was still falling in large, soft flakes that floated
to the earth gently as thistledown, for now there was no wind. Adrian
met his father at meals only; the rest of the day he preferred to spend
out of doors in the snow, or hanging about the old sheds at the back of
the mill, rather than endure the society of this terrible man; this
man of mocking words and iron purpose, who was forcing him into the
commission of a great crime.

It was at breakfast on the following morning that Ramiro inquired of
Black Mag whether the Jufvrouw Brant had sufficiently recovered from
the fatigues of her journey to honour them with her presence. The woman
replied that she absolutely refused to leave her room, or even to speak
more than was necessary.

"Then," said Ramiro, "as it is important that I should have a few words
with her, be so good as to tell the young lady, with my homage, that
I will do myself the honour of waiting on her in the course of the
forenoon."

Meg departed on her errand, and Adrian looked up suspiciously.

"Calm yourself, young friend," said his father, "although the interview
will be private, you have really no cause for jealousy. At present,
remember, I am but the second string in the bow-case, the understudy who
has learnt the part, a humble position, but one which may prove useful."

At all of which gibes Adrian winced. But he did not reply, for by now he
had learned that he was no match for his father's bitter wit.

Elsa received the message as she received everything else, in silence.

Three days before, as after a fearful illness during which on several
occasions she was at the very doors of death, Lysbeth van Goorl had been
declared out of danger, Elsa, her nurse, ventured to leave her for a few
hours. That evening the town seemed to stifle her and, feeling that she
needed the air of the country, she passed the Morsch poort and walked a
little way along the banks of the canal, never noticing, poor girl, that
her footsteps were dogged. When it began to grow dusk, she halted and
stood a while gazing towards the Haarlemer Meer, letting her heart go
out to the lover who, as she thought and hoped, within a day or two
would be at her side.

Then it was that something was thrown over her head, and for a while all
was black. She awoke to find herself lying in a boat, and watching her,
two wretches, whom she recognised as those who had assailed her when
first she came to Leyden from The Hague.

"Why have you kidnapped me, and where am I going?" she asked.

"Because we are paid to do it, and you are going to Adrian van Goorl,"
was the answer.

Then she understood, and was silent.

Thus they brought her to this lonesome, murderous-looking place, where
sure enough Adrian was waiting for her, waiting with a lie upon his
lips. Now, doubtless, the end was at hand. She, who loved his brother
with all her heart and soul, was to be given forcibly in marriage to a
man whom she despised and loathed, the vain, furious-tempered traitor,
who, for revenge, jealousy, or greed, she knew not which, had not
hesitated to send his benefactor, and mother's husband, to perish in the
fires of the Inquisition.

What was she to do? Escape seemed out of the question, imprisoned as
she was on the third story of a lofty mill standing in a lonely,
snow-shrouded wilderness, cut off from the sight of every friendly face,
and spied on hour after hour by two fierce-eyed women. No, there was
only one escape for her--through the gate of death. Even this would be
difficult, for she had no weapon, and day and night the women kept guard
over her, one standing sentinel, while the other slept. Moreover, she
had no mind to die, being young and healthy, with a love to live for,
and from her childhood up she had been taught that self-slaughter is a
sin. No, she would trust in God, and overwhelming though it was, fight
her way through this trouble as best she might. The helpless find
friends sometimes. Therefore, that her strength might be preserved, Elsa
rested and ate of her food, and drank the wine which they brought to
her, refusing to leave the room, or to speak more than she was obliged,
but watching everything that passed.

On the second morning of her imprisonment Ramiro's message reached
her, to which, as usual, she made no answer. In due course also Ramiro
himself arrived, and stood bowing in the doorway.

"Have I your permission to enter, Jufvrouw?" he asked. Then Elsa,
knowing that the moment of trial had come, steeled herself for the
encounter.

"You are master here," she answered, in a voice cold as the falling snow
without, "why then do you mock me?"

He motioned to the women to leave the room, and when they had gone,
replied:

"I have little thought of such a thing, lady; the matter in hand is too
serious for smart sayings," and with another bow he sat himself down on
a chair near the hearth, where a fire was burning. Whereon Elsa rose and
stood over against him, for upon her feet she seemed to feel stronger.

"Will you be so good as to set out this matter, Senor Ramiro? Am I
brought here to be tried for heresy?"

"Even so, for heresy against the god of love, and the sentence of the
Court is that you must expiate your sin, not at the stake, but at the
altar."

"I do not understand."

"Then I will explain. My son Adrian, a worthy young man on the
whole--you know that he _is_ my son, do you not?--has had the
misfortune, or I should say the good fortune, to fall earnestly in
love with you, whereas you have the bad taste--or, perhaps, the good
taste--to give your affections elsewhere. Under the circumstances,
Adrian, being a youth of spirit and resource, has fallen back upon
primitive methods in order to bring his suit to a successful conclusion.
He is here, you are here, and this evening I understand that the priest
will be here. I need not dwell upon the obvious issue; indeed, it is a
private matter upon which I have no right to intrude, except, of course,
as a relative and a well-wisher."

Elsa made an impatient movement with her hand, as though to brush aside
all this web of words.

"Why do you take so much trouble to force an unhappy girl into a hateful
marriage?" she asked. "How can such a thing advantage you?"

"Ah!" answered Ramiro briskly, "I perceive I have to do with a woman
of business, one who has that rarest of gifts--common sense. I will
be frank. Your esteemed father died possessed of a very large fortune,
which to-day is your property as his sole issue and heiress. Under the
marriage laws, which I myself think unjust, that fortune will pass into
the power of any husband whom you choose to take. Therefore, so soon as
you are made his wife it will pass to Adrian. I am Adrian's father,
and, as it happens, he is pecuniarily indebted to me to a considerable
amount, so that, in the upshot, as he himself has pointed out more than
once, this alliance will provide for both of us. But business details
are wearisome, so I need not enlarge."

"The fortune you speak of, Senor Ramiro, is lost."

"It is lost, but I have reason to hope that it will be found."

"You mean that this is purely a matter of money?"

"So far as I am concerned, purely. For Adrian's feelings I cannot speak,
since who knows the mystery of another's heart?"

"Then, if the money were forthcoming--or a clue to it--there need be no
marriage?"

"So far as I am concerned, none at all."

"And if the money is not forthcoming, and I refuse to marry the Heer
Adrian, or he to marry me--what then?"

"That is a riddle, but I think I see an answer at any rate to half
of it. Then the marriage would still take place, but with another
bridegroom."

"Another bridegroom! Who?"

"Your humble and devoted adorer."

Elsa shuddered and recoiled a step.

"Ah!" he said, "I should not have bowed, you saw my white hairs--to the
young a hateful sight."

Elsa's indignation rose, and she answered:

"It is not your white hair that I shrink from, Senor, which in some
would be a crown of honour, but----"

"In my case suggests to you other reflections. Be gentle and spare me
them. In a world of rough actions, what need to emphasise them with
rough words?"

For a few minutes there was silence, which Ramiro, glancing out of the
lattice, broke by remarking that "The snowfall was extraordinarily heavy
for the time of year." Then followed another silence.

"I understood you just now, dear lady, to make some sort of suggestion
which might lead to an arrangement satisfactory to both of us. The exact
locality of this wealth is at present obscure--you mentioned some clue.
Are you in a position to furnish such a clue?"

"If I am in a position, what then?"

"Then, perhaps, after a few days visit to an interesting, but little
explored part of Holland, you might return to your friends as you left
them--in short as a single woman."

A struggle shook Elsa, and do what she would some trace of it appeared
in her face.

"Do you swear that?" she whispered.

"Most certainly."

"Do you swear before God that if you have this clue you will not force
me into a marriage with the Heer Adrian, or with yourself--that you will
let me go, unharmed?"

"I swear it--before God."

"Knowing that God will be revenged upon you if you break the oath, you
still swear?"

"I still swear. Why these needless repetitions?"

"Then--then," and she leant towards him, speaking in a hoarse whisper,
"believing that you, even you, will not dare to be false to such
an oath, for you, even you, must fear death, a miserable death, and
vengeance, eternal vengeance, I give you the clue: It lies in the hilt
of the sword Silence."

"The sword Silence? What sword is that?"

"The great sword of Red Martin."

Stirred out of his self-control, Ramiro struck his hand upon his knee.

"And to think," he said, "that for over twelve hours I had it hanging
on the wall of the Gevangenhuis! Well, I fear that I must ask you to be
more explicit. Where is this sword?"

"Wherever Red Martin is, that is all I know. I can tell you no more; the
plan of the hiding-place is there."

"Or was there. Well, I believe you, but to win a secret from the hilt of
the sword of the man who broke his way out of the torture-chamber of the
Gevangenhuis, is a labour that would have been not unworthy of Hercules.
First, Red Martin must be found, then his sword must be taken, which,
I think, will cost men their lives. Dear lady, I am obliged for your
information, but I fear that the marriage must still go through."

"You swore, you swore," she gasped, "you swore before God!"

"Quite so, and I shall leave--the Power you refer to--to manage the
matter. Doubtless He can attend to His own affairs--I must attend to
mine. I hope that about seven o'clock this evening will suit you, by
which time the priest and--a bridegroom will be ready."

Then Elsa broke down.

"Devil!" she cried in the torment of her despair. "To save my honour I
have betrayed my father's trust; I have betrayed the secret for which
Martin was ready to die by torment, and given him over to be hunted like
a wild beast. Oh! God forgive me, and God help me!"

"Doubtless, dear young lady, He will do the first, for your temptations
were really considerable; I, who have more experience, outwitted you,
that was all. Possibly, also, He may do the second, though many have
uttered that cry unheard. For my own sake, I trust that He was sleeping
when you uttered yours. But it is your affair and His; I leave it to be
arranged between you. Till this evening, Jufvrouw," and he bowed himself
from the room.

But Elsa, shamed and broken-hearted, threw herself upon the bed and
wept.

At mid-day she arose, hearing upon the stair the step of the woman who
brought her food, and to hide her tear-stained face went to the barred
lattice and looked out. The scene was dismal indeed, for the wind
had veered suddenly, the snow had ceased, and in place of it rain was
falling with a steady persistence. When the woman had gone, Elsa washed
her face, and although her appetite turned from it, ate of the food,
knowing how necessary it was that she should keep her strength.

Another hour passed, and there came a knock on the door. Elsa shuddered,
for she thought that Ramiro had returned to torment her. Indeed it was
almost a relief when, instead of him, appeared his son. Once glance at
Adrian's nervous, shaken face, yes, and even the sound of his uncertain
step brought hope to her heart. Her woman's instinct told her that now
she had no longer to do with the merciless and terrible Ramiro, to whose
eyes she was but a pretty pawn in a game that he must win, but with
a young man who loved her, and whom she held, therefore, at a
disadvantage--with one, moreover, who was harassed and ashamed, and
upon whose conscience, therefore, she might work. She turned upon him,
drawing herself up, and although she was short and Adrian was tall, of a
sudden he felt as though she towered over him.

"Your pleasure?" asked Elsa.

In the old days Adrian would have answered with some magnificent
compliment, or far-fetched simile lifted from the pages of romancers.
In truth he had thought of several such while, like a half-starved dog
seeking a home, he wandered round and round the mill-house in the snow.
But he was now far beyond all rhetoric or gallantries.

"My father wished," he began humbly--"I mean that I have come to speak
to you about--our marriage."

Of a sudden Elsa's delicate features seemed to turn to ice, while, to
his fancy at any rate, her brown eyes became fire.

"Marriage," she said in a strange voice. "Oh! what an unutterable coward
you must be to speak that word. Call what is proposed by any foul title
which you will, but at least leave the holy name of marriage undefiled."

"It is not my fault," he answered sullenly, but shrinking beneath her
words. "You know, Elsa, that I wished to wed you honourably enough."

"Yes," she broke in, "and because I would not listen, because you do not
please me, and you could not win me as a man wins a maid, you--you laid
a trap and kidnapped me, thinking to get by brute force that which my
heart withheld. Oh! in all the Netherlands lives there another such
an abject as Adrian called van Goorl, the base-born son of Ramiro the
galley slave?"

"I have told you that it is false," he replied furiously. "I had nothing
to do with your capture. I knew nothing of it till I saw you here."

Elsa laughed a very bitter laugh. "Spare your breath," she said, "for if
you swore it before the face of the recording Angel I would not believe
you. Remember that you are the man who betrayed your brother and your
benefactor, and then guess, if you can, what worth I put upon your
words."

In the bitterness of his heart Adrian groaned aloud, and from that groan
Elsa, listening eagerly, gathered some kind of hope.

"Surely," she went on, with a changed and softened manner, "surely you
will not do this wickedness. The blood of Dirk van Goorl lies on your
head; will you add mine to his? For be sure of this, I swear it by my
Maker, that before I am indeed a wife to you I shall be dead--or mayhap
you will be dead, or both of us. Do you understand?"

"I understand, but----"

"But what? Where is the use of this wickedness? For your soul's sake,
refuse to have aught to do with such a sin."

"But if so, my father will marry you."

It was a chance arrow, but it went home, for of a sudden Elsa's strength
and eloquence seemed to leave her. She ran to him with her hands
clasped, she flung herself upon her knees.

"Oh! help me to escape," she moaned, "and I will bless you all my life."

"It is impossible," he answered. "Escape from this guarded place,
through those leagues of melting snow? I tell you that it is
impossible."

"Then," and her eyes grew wild, "then kill him and free me. He is a
devil, he is your evil genius; it would be a righteous deed. Kill him
and free me."

"I should like to," answered Adrian; "I nearly did once, but, for my
soul's sake, I can't put a sword through my own father; it is the most
horrible of crimes. When I confessed----"

"Then," she broke in, "if this farce, this infamy must be gone through,
swear at least that you will treat it as such, that you will respect
me."

"It is a hard thing to ask of a husband who loves you more than any
woman in the world," he answered turning aside his head.

"Remember," she went on, with another flash of defiant spirit, "that
if you do not, you will soon love me better than any woman out of the
world, or perhaps we shall both settle what lies between us before the
Judgment Seat of God. Will you swear?"

He hesitated.

Oh! she reflected, what if he should answer--"Rather than this I hand
you over to Ramiro"? What if he should think of that argument? Happily
for her, at the moment he did not.

"Swear," she implored, "swear," clinging with her hands to the lappet of
his coat and lifting to him her white and piteous face.

"I make it an offering in expiation of my sins," he groaned, "you shall
go free of me."

Elsa uttered a sigh of relief. She put no faith whatever in Adrian's
promises, but at the worst it would give her time.

"I thought that I should not appeal in vain----"

"To so amusing and egregious a donkey," said Ramiro's mocking voice
speaking from the gloom of the doorway, which now Elsa observed for the
first time had swung open mysteriously.

"My dear son and daughter-in-law, how can I thank you sufficiently for
the entertainment with which you have enlivened one of the most dreary
afternoons I remember. Don't look dangerous, my boy; recall what you
have just told this young lady, that the crime of removing a parent is
one which, though agreeable, is not lightly to be indulged. Then, as to
your future arrangements, how touching! The soul of a Diana, I declare,
and the self-sacrifice of a--no, I fear that the heroes of antiquity
can furnish no suitable example. And now, adieu, I go to welcome the
gentleman you both of you so eagerly expect."

He went, and a minute later without speaking, for the situation seemed
beyond words, Adrian crept down the stairs after him, more miserable and
crushed even than he had crept up them half an hour before.



Another two hours went by. Elsa was in her apartment with Black Meg for
company, who watched her as a cat watches a mouse in a trap. Adrian had
taken refuge in the place where he slept above. It was a dreary, vacuous
chamber, that once had held stones and other machinery of the mill now
removed, the home of spiders and half-starved rats, that a lean black
cat hunted continually. Across its ceiling ran great beams, whereof the
interlacing ends, among which sharp draughts whistled, lost themselves
in gloom, while, with an endless and exasperating sound, as of a knuckle
upon a board, the water dripped from the leaky roof.

In the round living-chamber below Ramiro was alone. No lamp had been
lit, but the glow from the great turf fire played upon his face as he
sat there, watching, waiting, and scheming in the chair of black oak.
Presently a noise from without caught his quick ear, and calling to the
serving woman to light the lamp, he went to the door, opened it, and saw
a lantern floating towards him through the thick steam of falling rain.
Another minute and the bearer of the lantern, Hague Simon, arrived,
followed by two other men.

"Here he is," said Simon, nodding at the figure behind him, a short
round figure wrapped in a thick frieze cloak, from which water ran. "The
other is the head boatman."

"Good," said Ramiro. "Tell him and his companions to wait in the shed
without, where liquor will be sent to them; they may be wanted later
on."

Then followed talk and oaths, and at length the man retreated grumbling.

"Enter, Father Thomas," said Ramiro; "you have had a wet journey, I
fear. Enter and give us your blessing."

Before he answered the priest threw off his dripping, hooded cape of
Frisian cloth, revealing a coarse, wicked face, red and blear-eyed from
intemperance.

"My blessing?" he said in a raucous voice. "Here it is, Senor Ramiro,
or whatever you call yourself now. Curse you all for bringing out a holy
