Margaret de Hautlieu, an incident at which the females of the convent
expressed surprise, mingled with a great deal of horror; while that of
the males, whom the news soon reached, was qualified with a degree of
wonder, which seemed to be founded upon the very different personal
appearance of the two fugitives.

"Sacred Virgin," said a nun, "who could have conceived the hopeful
votaress, sister Ursula, so lately drowned in tears for her father's
untimely fate, capable of eloping with a boy scarce fourteen years old!"

"And, holy Saint Bride!" said the Abbot Jerome, "what could have made
so handsome a young man lend his arm to assist such a nightmare as
sister Ursula, in the commission of so great an enormity? Certainly he
can neither plead temptation nor seduction, but must have gone, as the
worldly phrase is,--to the devil with a dish-clout."

"I must disperse the soldiers to pursue the fugitives," said De
Valence, "unless this letter, which the pilgrim must have left behind
him, shall contain some explanations respecting our mysterious
prisoner."

After viewing the contents with some surprise, he read aloud,--"The
undersigned, late residing in the house of Saint Bride, do you, father
Jerome, the abbot of said house, to know, that finding you were
disposed to treat me as a prisoner and a spy, in the sanctuary to which
you had received me as a distressed person, I have resolved to use my
natural liberty, with which you have no right to interfere, and
therefore have withdrawn myself from your abbacy. Moreover, finding
that the novice called in your convent sister Ursula (who hath, by
monastic rule and discipline, a fair title to return to the world
unless she is pleased, after a year's novitiate, to profess herself
sister of your order) is determined to use such privilege, I joyfully
take the opportunity of her company in this her lawful resolution, as
being what is in conformity to the law of God, and the precepts of
Saint Bride, which gave you no authority to detain any person in your
convent by force, who hath not taken upon her irrevocably the vows of
the order.

"To you, Sir John de Walton, and Sir Aymer de Valence, knights of
England, commanding the garrison of Douglas Dale, I have only to say,
that you have acted and are acting against me under a mystery, the
solution of which is comprehended in a secret known only to my faithful
minstrel, Bertram of the many Lays, as whose son I have found it
convenient to pass myself. But as I cannot at this time prevail upon
myself personally to discover a secret which cannot well be unfolded
without feelings of shame, I not only give permission to the said
Bertram the minstrel, but I charge and command him that he tell to you
the purpose with which I came originally to the Castle of Douglas. When
this is discovered, it will only remain to express my feelings towards
the two knights, in return for the pain and agony of mind which their
violence and threats of further severities have occasioned me.

"And first respecting Sir Aymer de Valence, I freely and willingly
forgive him for having been involved in a mistake to which I myself led
the way, and I shall at all times be happy to meet with him as an
acquaintance, and never to think farther of his part in these few days'
history, saving as matter of mirth and ridicule.

"But respecting Sir John de Walton, I must request of him to consider
whether his conduct towards me, standing as we at present do towards
each, other, is such as he himself ought to forget or I ought to
forgive; and I trust he will understand me when I tell him, that all
former connexions must henceforth be at an end between him and the
supposed "AUGUSTINE."

"This is madness," said the abbot, when he had read the letter,--"very
midsummer madness; not unfrequently an accompaniment of this
pestilential disease, and I should do well in requiring of those
soldiers who shall first apprehend this youth Augustine, that they
reduce his victuals immediately to water and bread, taking care that
the diet do not exceed in measure what is necessary to sustain nature;
nay, I should be warranted by the learned, did I recommend a sufficient
intermixture of flagellation with belts, stirrup-leathers, or
surcingles, and failing those, with riding-whips, switches, and the
like."

"Hush! my reverend father," said De Valence, "a light begins to break
in upon me. John de Walton, if my suspicions be true, would sooner
expose his own flesh to be hewn from his bones, than have this
Augustine's finger stung by a gnat. Instead of treating this youth as a
madman, I for my own part, will be contented to avow that I myself have
been bewitched and fascinated; and by my honour, if I send out my
attendants in quest of the fugitives, it shall be with the strict
charge, that, when apprehended, they treat them with all respect, and
protect them, if they object to return to this house, to any honourable
place of refuge which they may desire."

"I hope," said the abbot, looking strangely confused, "I shall be first
heard in behalf of the Church concerning this affair of an abducted
nun? You see yourself, Sir Knight, that this scapegrace of a minstrel
avouches neither repentance nor contrition at his share in a matter so
flagitious."

"You shall be secured an opportunity of being fully heard," replied the
knight, "if you shall find at last that you really desire one.
Meantime, I must back, without a moment's delay, to inform Sir John de
Walton of the turn which affairs have taken. Farewell, reverend father.
By my honour we may wish each other joy that we have escaped from a
troublesome charge, which brought as much terror with it as the
phantoms of a fearful dream, and is yet found capable of being
dispelled by a cure as simple as that of awakening the sleeper. But, by
Saint Bride! both churchmen and laymen are bound to sympathise with the
unfortunate Sir John de Walton. I tell thee, father, that if this
letter"--touching the missive with his finger--"is to be construed
literally, as far as respects him, he is the man most to be pitied
betwixt the brink of Solway and the place where we now stand. Suspend
thy curiosity, most worthy churchman, lest there should be more in this
matter than I myself see; so that, while thinking that I have lighted
on the true explanation, I may not have to acknowledge that I have been
again leading you into error. Sound to horse there! Ho?" he called out
from the window of the apartment; "and let the party I brought hither
prepare to scour the woods on their return."

"By my faith!" said Father Jerome, "I am right glad that this young
nut-cracker is going to leave me to my own meditation. I hate when a
young person pretends to understand whatever passes, while his betters
are obliged to confess that it is all a mystery to them. Such an
assumption is like that of the conceited fool, sister Ursula, who
pretended to read with a single eye a manuscript which I myself could
not find intelligible with the assistance of my spectacles."

This might not have quite pleased the young knight, nor was it one of
those truths which the abbot would have chosen to deliver in his
hearing. But the knight had shaken him by the hand, said adieu, and was
already at Hazelside, issuing particular orders to little troops of the
archers and others, and occasionally chiding Thomas Dickson, who, with
a degree of curiosity which the English knight was not very willing to
excuse, had been endeavouring to get some account of the occurrences of
the night.

"Peace, fellow!" he said, "and mind thine own business, being well
assured that the hour will come in which it will require all the
attention thou canst give, leaving others to take care of their own
affairs."

"If I am suspected of any thing," answered Dickson, in a tone rather
dogged and surly than otherwise, "methinks it were but fair to let me
know what accusation is brought against me. I need not tell you that
chivalry prescribes that a knight should not attack an enemy undefied."

"When you are a knight," answered Sir Aymer de Valence, "it will be
time enough for me to reckon with you upon the points of form due to
you by the laws of chivalry. Meanwhile, you had best let me know what
share you have had in playing off the martial phantom which sounded the
rebellious slogan of Douglas in the town of that name?"

"I know nothing of what you speak," answered the goodman of Hazelside.

"See then," said the knight, "that you do not engage yourself in the
affairs of other people, even if your conscience warrants that you are
in no danger from your own."

So saying, he rode off, not waiting any answer. The ideas which filled
his head were to the following purpose.

"I know not how it is, but one mist seems no sooner to clear away than.
we find ourselves engaged in another. I take it for granted that the
disguised damsel is no other than the goddess of Walton's private
idolatry, who has cost him and me so much trouble, and some certain,
degree of misunderstanding during these last weeks. By my honour! this
fair lady is right lavish in the pardon which she has so frankly
bestowed upon me, and if she is willing to be less complaisant to Sir
John de Walton, why then--And what then?--It surely does not infer that
she would receive me into that place in her affections, from which she
has just expelled De Walton? Nor, if she did, could I avail myself of a
change in favour of myself, at the expense of my friend and companion
in arms. It were a folly even to dream of a thing so improbable. But
with respect to the other business, it is worth serious consideration.
Yon sexton seems to have kept company with dead bodies, until he is
unfit for the society of the living; and as to that Dickson of
Hazelside, as they call him, there is no attempt against the English
during these endless wars, in which that man has not been concerned;
had my life depended upon it, I could not have prevented myself from
intimating my suspicions of him, let him take it as he lists." So
saying, the knight spurred his horse, and arriving at Douglas Castle
without farther adventure, demanded in a tone of greater cordiality
than he had of late used, whether he could be admitted to Sir John de
Walton, having something of consequence to report to him. He was
immediately ushered into an apartment, in which the governor was seated
at his solitary breakfast. Considering the terms upon which they had
lately stood, the governor of Douglas Dale was somewhat surprised at
the easy familiarity with which De Valence now approached him.

"Some uncommon news," said Sir John, rather gravely, "have brought me
the honour of Sir Aymer de Valence's company."

"It is," answered Sir Aymer, "what seems of high importance to your
interest, Sir John de Walton, and therefore I were to blame if I lost a
moment in communicating it."

"I shall be proud to profit by your intelligence," said Sir John de
Walton.

"And I too," said the young knight, "am both to lose the credit of
having penetrated a mystery which blinded Sir John de Walton. At the
same time, I do not wish to be thought capable of jesting with you,
which might be the case were I, from misapprehension, to give a false
key to this matter. With your permission, then, we will proceed thus:
We go together to the place of Bertram the minstrel's confinement. I
have in my possession a scroll from the young person who was intrusted
to the care of the Abbot Jerome; it is written in a delicate female
hand, and gives authority to the minstrel to declare the purpose which
brought them to this vale of Douglas."

"It must be as you say," said Sir John de Walton, "although can scarce
see occasion for adding so much form to a mystery which can be
expressed in such small compass."

Accordingly the two knights, the warder leading the way, proceeded to
the dungeon to which the minstrel had been removed.




CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.


The doors of the stronghold being undone, displayed a dungeon such as
in those days held victims hopeless of escape, but in which the
ingenious knave of modern times would scarcely have deigned to remain
many hours. The huge rings by which the fetters were soldered together,
and attached to the human body, were, when examined minutely, found to
be clenched together by riveting so very thin, that when rubbed with
corrosive acid, or patiently ground with a bit of sandstone, the hold
of the fetters upon each other might easily be forced asunder, and the
purpose of them entirely frustrated. The locks also, large, and
apparently very strong, were so coarsely made, that an artist of small
ingenuity could easily contrive to get the better of their fastenings
upon the same principle. The daylight found its way to the subterranean
dungeon only at noon, and through a passage which was purposely made
tortuous, so as to exclude the rays of the sun, while it presented no
obstacle to wind or rain. The doctrine that a prisoner was to be
esteemed innocent until he should be found guilty by his peers, was not
understood in those days of brute force, and he was only accommodated
with a lamp or other alleviation of his misery, if his demeanour was
quiet, and he appeared disposed to give his jailor no trouble by
attempting to make his escape. Such a cell of confinement was that of
Bertram, whose moderation of temper and patience had nevertheless
procured for him such mitigations of his fate as the warder could
grant. He was permitted to carry into his cell the old book, in the
perusal of which he found an amusement of his solitude, together with
writing materials, and such other helps towards spending his time as
were consistent with his abode in the bosom of the rock, and the degree
of information with which his minstrel craft had possessed him. He
raised his head from the table as the knights entered, while the
governor observed to the young knight:--

"As you seem to think yourself possessed of the secret of this
prisoner, I leave it to you, Sir Aymer de Valence, to bring it to light
in the manner which you shall judge most expedient. If the man or his
son have suffered unnecessary hardship, it shall be my duty to make
amends--which, I suppose, can be no very important matter."

Bertram looked up, and fixed his eyes full upon the governor, but read
nothing in his looks which indicated his being better acquainted than
before with the secret of his imprisonment. Yet, upon turning his eye
towards Sir Aymer, his countenance evidently lighted up, and the glance
which passed between them was one of intelligence.

"You have my secret, then," said he, "and you know who it is that
passes under the name of Augustine?"

Sir Aymer exchanged with him a look of acquiescence; while the eyes of
the governor glancing wildly from the prisoner to the knight of
Valence, exclaimed,--

"Sir Aymer de Valence, as you are belted knight and Christian man, as
you have honour to preserve on earth, and a soul to rescue after death,
I charge you to tell me the meaning of this mystery! It may be that you
conceive, with truth, that you have subject of complaint against
me;--If so, I will satisfy you as a knight may."

The minstrel spoke at the same moment.

"I charge this knight," he said, "by his vow of chivalry, that he do
not divulge any secret belonging to a person of honour and of
character, unless he has positive assurance that it is done entirely by
that person's own consent."

"Let this note remove your scruples," said Sir Aymer, putting the
scroll into the hands of the minstrel; "and for you, Sir John de
Walton, far from retaining the least feeling of any misunderstanding
which may have existed between us, I am disposed entirely to bury it in
forgetfulness, as having arisen out of a series of mistakes which no
mortal could have comprehended. And do not be offended, my dear Sir
John, when I protest, on my knightly faith, that I pity the pain which
I think this scroll is likely to give you, and that if my utmost
efforts can be of the least service to you in unravelling this tangled
skein, I will contribute them with as much earnestness as ever I did
aught in my life. This faithful minstrel will now see that he can have
no difficulty in yielding up a secret, which I doubt not, but for the
writing I have just put into his hands, he would have continued to keep
with unshaken fidelity."

Sir Aymer now placed in De Walton's hand a note, in which he had, ere
he left Saint Bride's convent, signified his own interpretation, of the
mystery; and the governor had scarcely read the name it contained,
before the same name was pronounced aloud by Bertram, who, at the same
moment, handed to the governor the scroll which he had received from
the Knight of Valence.

The white plume which floated over the knight's cap of maintenance,
which was worn as a headpiece within doors, was not more pale in
complexion than was the knight himself at the unexpected and surprising
information, that the lady who was, in chivalrous phrase, empress of
hia thoughts, and commander of his actions, and to whom, even in less
fantastic times, he must have owed the deepest gratitude for the
generous election which she had made in his favour, was the same person
whom he had threatened with personal violence, and subjected to
hardships and affronts which he would not willingly have bestowed even
upon the meanest of her sex.

Yet Sir John de Walton seemed at first scarcely to comprehend the
numerous ill consequences which might probably follow this unhappy
complication of mistakes. He took the paper from the minstrel's hand,
and while his eye, assisted by the lamp, wandered over the characters
without apparently their conveying any distinct impression to his
understanding, De Valence even became alarmed that he was about to lose
his faculties.

"For Heaven's sake, sir," he said, "be a man, and support with manly
steadiness these unexpected occurrences--I would fain think they will
reach to nothing else--which the wit of man could not have prevented.
This fair lady, I would fain hope, cannot be much hurt or deeply
offended by a train of circumstances, the natural consequence of your
anxiety to discharge perfectly a duty upon which must depend the
accomplishment of all the hopes she had permitted you to entertain. In
God's name, rouse up, sir; let it not be said, that an apprehended
frown of a fair lady hath damped to such a degree the courage of the
boldest knight in England; be what men have called you, 'Walton the
Unwavering;' in Heaven's name, let us at least see that the lady is
indeed offended, before we conclude that she is irreconcilably so. To
whose fault are we to ascribe the source of all these errors? Surely,
with all due respect, to the caprice of the lady herself, which has
engendered such a nest of mistakes. Think of it as a man, and as a
soldier. Suppose that you yourself, or I, desirous of proving the
fidelity of our sentinels, or for any other reason, good or bad,
attempted to enter this Dangerous Castle of Douglas without giving the
password to the warders, would we be entitled to blame those upon duty,
if, not knowing our persons, they manfully refused us entrance, made us
prisoners, and mishandled us while resisting our attempt, in terms of
the orders which we ourselves had imposed upon them? What is there that
makes a difference between such a sentinel and yourself, John de
Walton, in this curious affair, which, by Heaven! would rather form a
gay subject for the minstrelsy of this excellent bard, than the theme
of a tragic lay? Come! look not thus, Sir John de Walton; be angry, if
you will, with the lady who has committed such a piece of folly, or
with me who have rode up and down nearly all night on a fool's errand,
and spoiled my best horse, in absolute uncertainty how I shall get
another till my uncle of Pembroke and I shall be reconciled; or,
lastly, if you desire to be totally absurd in your wrath, direct it
against this worthy minstrel on account of his rare fidelity, and
punish him for that for which he better deserves a chain of gold. Let
passion out, if you will; but chase this desponding gloom from the brow
of a man and a belted knight."

Sir John de Walton made an effort to speak, and succeeded with some
difficulty.

"Aymer de Valence," he said, "in irritating a madman you do but sport
with your own life;" and then remained silent.

"I am glad you can say so much," replied his friend; "for I was not
jesting when I said I would rather that you were at variance with me,
than that you laid the whole blame on yourself. It would be courteous,
I think, to set this minstrel instantly at liberty. Meantime, for his
lady's sake, I will entreat him, in all honour, to be our guest till
the Lady Augusta de Berkely shall do us the same honour, and to assist
us in our search after her place of retirement.--Good minstrel," he
continued, "you hear what I say, and you will not, I suppose, be
surprised, that in all honour and kind usage, you find yourself
detained for a short space in this Castle of Douglas?"

"You seem, Sir Knight," replied the minstrel, "not so much to keep your
eye upon the right of doing what you should, as to possess the might of
doing what you would. I must necessarily be guided by your advice,
since you have the power to make it a command."

"And I trust," continued De Valence, "that when your mistress and you
again meet, we shall have the benefit of your intercession for any
thing which we may have done to displeasure her, considering that the
purpose of our action was exactly the reverse."

"Let me," said Sir John de Walton, "say a single word. I will offer
thee a chain of gold, heavy enough to bear down the weight of these
shackles, as a sign of regret for having condemned thee to suffer so
many indignities."

"Enough said, Sir John," said De Valence; "let us promise no more till
this good minstrel shall see some sign of performance. Follow me this
way, and I will tell thee in private of other tidings, which it is
important that you should know."

So saying, he withdrew De Walton from the dungeon, and sending for the
old knight, Sir Philip de Montenay, already mentioned, who acted as
seneschal of the castle, he commanded that the minstrel should be
enlarged from the dungeon, well looked to in other respects, yet
prohibited, though with every mark of civility, from leaving the castle
without a trusty attendant.

"And now, Sir John de Walton," he said, "methinks you are a little
churlish in not ordering me some breakfast, after I have been all night
engaged in your affairs; and a cup of muscadel would, I think, be no
bad induction to a full consideration of this perplexed matter."

"Thou knowest," answered De Walton, "that thou mayest call for what
thou wilt, provided always thou tellest me, without loss of time, what
else thou knowest respecting the will of the lady, against whom we have
all sinned so grievously--and I, alas, beyond hope of forgiveness!"

"Trust me, I hope," said the Knight of Valence, "the good lady bears me
no malice, as indeed she has expressly renounced any ill-will against
me. The words, you see, are as plain as you yourself may read--'The
lady pardons poor Aymer de Valence, and willingly, for having been
involved in a mistake, to which she herself led the way; she herself
will at all times be happy to meet with him as an acquaintance, and
never to think farther of these few days' history, except as matter of
mirth and ridicule.' So it is expressly written and set down."

"Yes," replied Sir John de Walton, "but see you not that her offending
lover is expressly excluded from the amnesty granted to the lesser
offender? Mark you not the concluding paragraph?" He took the scroll
with a trembling hand, and read with a discomposed voice its closing
words. "It is even so: 'All former connexion must henceforth be at an
end between him and the supposed Augustine.' Explain to me how the
reading of these words is reconcilable to anything but their plain
sense of condemnation and forfeiture of contract, implying destruction
of the hopes of Sir John de Walton?"

"You are somewhat an older man than I, Sir Knight," answered De
Valence, "and I will grant, by far the wiser and more experienced; yet
I will uphold that there is no adopting the interpretation which you
seem to have affixed in your mind to this letter, without supposing the
preliminary, that the fair writer was distracted in her understanding,
--nay, never start, look wildly, or lay your hand on your sword, I do
not affirm this is the case. I say again, that no woman in her senses
would have pardoned a common acquaintance for his behaving to her with
unintentional disrespect and unkindness, during the currency of a
certain masquerade, and, at the same time, sternly and irrevocably
broke off with the lover to whom her troth was plighted, although his
error in joining in the offence was neither grosser nor more protracted
than that of the person indifferent to her love."

"Do not blaspheme," said Sir John do Walton; "and forgive me, if, in
justice to truth and to the angel whom I fear I have forfeited for
ever, I point out to you the difference which a maiden of dignity and
of feeling must make between an offence towards her, committed by an
ordinary acquaintance, and one of precisely the same kind offered by a
person who is bound by the most undeserved preference, by the most
generous benefits, and by every thing which can bind human feeling, to
think and reflect ere he becomes an actor in any case in which it is
possible for her to be concerned."

"Now, by mine honour," said Aymer de Valence, "I am glad to hear thee
make some attempt at reason, although it is but an unreasonable kind of
reason too, since its object is to destroy thine own hopes, and argue
away thine own chance of happiness; but if I have, in the progress of
this affair, borne me sometimes towards thee, as to give not only the
governor, but even the friend, some cause of displeasure, I will make
it up to thee now, John de Walton, by trying to convince thee in spite
of thine own perverse logic. But here comes the muscadel and the
breakfast; wilt thou take some refreshment;--or shall we go on without
the spirit of muscadel?"

"For Heaven's sake," replied De Walton, "do as thou wilt, so thou make
me clear of thy well-intended babble."

"Nay, thou shalt not brawl me out of my powers of argument," said De
Valence, laughing, and helping himself to a brimming cup of wine; "if
thou acknowledgest thyself conquered, I am contented to give the
victory to the inspiring strength of the jovial liquor."

"Do as thou listest," said De Walton, "but make an end of an argument
which thou canst not comprehend."

"I deny the charge," answered the younger knight, wiping his lips,
after having finished his draught; "and listen, Walton the Warlike, to
a chapter in the history of woman, in which thou art more unskilled
than I would wish thee to be. Thou canst not deny that, be it right or
wrong, the lady Augusta hath ventured more forward with you than is
usual upon the sea of affection; she boldly made thee her choice, while
thou wert as yet known to her only as a flower of English
chivalry,--faith, and I respect her for her frankness--but it was a
choice, which the more cold of her own sex might perhaps claim occasion
to term rash and precipitate.--Nay, be not, I pray thee, offended--I am
far from thinking or saying so; on the contrary, I will uphold with my
lance, her selection of John de Walton against the minions of a court,
to be a wise and generous choice, and her own behaviour as alike candid
and noble. But she herself is not unlikely to dread unjust
misconstruction; a fear of which may not improbably induce her, upon
any occasion, to seize some opportunity of showing an unwonted and
unusual rigour towards her lover, in order to balance her having
extended towards him, in the beginning of their intercourse, somewhat
of an unusual degree of frank encouragement. Nay, it might be easy for
her lover so far to take part against himself, by arguing as thou dost,
when out of thy senses, as to make it difficult for her to withdraw
from an argument which he himself was foolish enough to strengthen; and
thus, like a maiden too soon taken at her first nay-say, she shall
perhaps be allowed no opportunity of bearing herself according to her
real feelings, or retracting a sentence issued with consent of the
party whose hopes it destroys."

"I have heard thee, De Valence," answered the governor of Douglas Dale;
"nor is it difficult for me to admit, that these thy lessons may serve
as a chart to many a female heart, but not to that of Augusta de
Berkely. By my life, I say I would much sooner be deprived of the merit
of those few deeds of chivalry which thou sayest have procured for me
such enviable distinction, than I would act upon them with the
insolence, as if I said that my place in the lady's bosom was too
firmly fixed to be shaken even by the success of a worthier man, or by
my own gross failure in respect to the object of my attachment. No,
herself alone shall have power to persuade me that even goodness equal
to that of an interceding saint will restore me to the place in her
affections which I have most unworthily forfeited, by a stupidity only
to be compared to that of brutes."

"If you are so minded," said Aymer De Valence, "I have only one word
more--forgive me if I speak it peremptorily--the lady, as you say, and
say truly, must be the final arbitress in this question. My arguments
do not extend to insisting that you should claim her hand, whether she
herself will or no; but, to learn her determination, it is necessary
that you should find out where she is, of which I am unfortunately not
able to inform you."

"How! what mean you!" exclaimed the governor, who now only began to
comprehend the extent of his misfortune; "whither hath she fled? or
with whom?"

"She is fled, for what I know," said De Valence, "in search of a more
enterprising lover than one who is so willing to interpret every air of
frost as a killing blight to his hopes; perhaps she seeks the Black
Douglas, or some such hero of the Thistle, to reward with her lands,
her lordships, and beauty, those virtues of enterprise and courage, of
which John de Walton was at one time thought possessed. But, seriously,
events are passing around us of strange import. I saw enough last
night, on my way to Saint Bride's, to make me suspicious of every one.
I sent to you as a prisoner the old sexton of the church of Douglas. I
found him contumacious as to some enquiries which I thought it proper
to prosecute; but of this more at another time. The escape of this lady
adds greatly to the difficulties which encircle this devoted castle."

"Aymer de Valence," replied De Walton, in a solemn and animated tone,
"Douglas Castle shall be defended, as we have hitherto been able, with
the aid of heaven, to spread from its battlements the broad banner of
St. George. Come of me what lists during my life, I will die the
faithful lover of Augusta de Berkely, even although I no longer live as
her chosen knight. There are cloisters and hermitages"--

"Ay, marry are there," replied Sir Aymer; "and girdles of hemp,
moreover, and beads of oak; but all these we omit in our reckonings,
till we discover where the Lady Augusta is, and what she purposes to do
in this matter."

"You say well," replied De Walton; "let us hold counsel together by
what means we shall, if possible, discover the lady's too hasty
retreat, by which she has done me great wrong; I mean, if she supposed
her commands would not have been fully obeyed, had she honoured with
them the governor of Douglas Dale, or any who are under his command."

"Now," replied De Valence, "you again speak like a true son of
chivalry. With your permission I would summon this minstrel to our
presence. His fidelity to his mistress has been remarkable; and, as
matters stand now, we must take instant measures for tracing the place
of her retreat."




CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.

     The way is long, my children, long and rough
     The moors are dreary, and the woods are dark;
     But he that creeps from cradle on to grave,
     Unskill'd save in the velvet course of fortune,
     Hath miss'd the discipline of noble hearts.
                                            OLD PLAY.


It was yet early in the day, when, after the Governor and De Valence
had again summoned Bertram to their councils, the garrison of Douglas
was mustered, and a number of small parties, in addition to those
already despatched by De Valence from Hazelside, were sent out to scour
the woods in pursuit of the fugitives, with strict injunctions to treat
them, if overtaken, with the utmost respect, and to obey their
commands, keeping an eye, however, on the place where they might take
refuge. To facilitate this result, some who were men of discretion were
intrusted with the secret who the supposed pilgrim and the fugitive nun
really were. The whole ground, whether forest or moorland, within many
miles of Douglas Castle, was covered and traversed by parties, whose
anxiety to detect the fugitives was equal to the reward for their safe
recovery, liberally offered by De Walton and De Valence. They spared
not, meantime, to make such enquiries in all directions as might bring
to light any machinations of the Scottish insurgents which might be on
foot in those wild districts, of which, as we have said before, De
Valence, in particular, entertained strong suspicions. Their
instructions were, in case of finding such, to proceed against the
persons engaged, by arrest and otherwise, in the most rigorous manner,
such as had been commanded by De Walton himself at the time when the
Black Douglas and his accomplices had been the principal objects of his
wakeful suspicions. These various detachments had greatly reduced the
strength of the garrison; yet, although numerous, alert, and despatched
in every direction, they had not the fortune either to fall on the
trace of the Lady of Berkely, or to encounter any party whatever of the
insurgent Scottish.

Meanwhile, our fugitives had, as we have seen, set out from the convent
of St. Bride under the guidance of a cavalier, of whom the Lady Augusta
knew nothing, save that he was to guide their steps in a direction
where they would not be exposed to the risk of being overtaken. At
length Margaret de Hautlieu herself spoke upon the subject.

"You have made no enquiry," she said, "Lady Augusta, whither you are
travelling, or under whose charge, although methinks it should much
concern you to know."

"Is it not enough for me to be aware," answered Lady Augusta, "that I
am travelling, kind sister, under the protection of one to whom you
yourself trust as to a friend; and why need I be anxious for any
farther assurance of my safety?"

"Simply," said Margaret, de Hautlieu, "because the persons with whom,
from national as well as personal circumstances, I stand connected, are
perhaps not exactly the protectors to whom you, lady, can with such
perfect safety intrust yourself."

"In what sense," said the Lady Augusta, "do you use these words?"

"Because," replied Margaret de Hautlieu, "the Bruce, the Douglas,
Malcolm Fleming, and others of that party, although they are incapable
of abusing such an advantage to any dishonourable purpose, might
nevertheless, under a strong temptation, consider you as an hostage
thrown into their hands by Providence, through whom they might meditate
the possibility of gaining some benefit to their dispersed and
dispirited party."

"They might make me," answered the Lady Augusta, "the subject of such a
treaty, when I was dead, but, believe me, never while I drew vital
breath. Believe me also that, with whatever pain, shame, or agony, I
would again deliver myself up to the power of De Walton, yes, I would
rather put myself in his hands--what do I say? _his_!--I would rather
surrender myself to the meanest archer of my native country, than
combine with its foes to work mischief to merry England---my own
England--that country which is the envy of every other country, and the
pride of all who can term themselves her natives!"

"I thought that your choice might prove so," said Lady Margaret; "and
since you have honoured me with your confidence, gladly would I provide
for your liberty by placing you as nearly in the situation which you
yourself desire, as my poor means have the power of accomplishing. In
half an hour we shall be in danger of being taken by the English
parties, which will be instantly dispersed in every direction in quest
of us. Now, take notice, lady, I know a place in which I can take
refuge with my friends and countrymen, those gallant Scots, who have
never even in this dishonoured age bent the knee to Baal. For their
honour, their nicety of honour, I could in other days have answered
with my own; but of late, I am bound to tell you, they have been put to
those trials by which the most generous affections may be soured, and
driven to a species of frenzy, the more wild that it is founded
originally on the noblest feelings. A person who feels himself deprived
of his natural birthright, denounced, exposed to confiscation and
death, because he avouches the rights of his king, the cause of his
country, ceases on his part to be nice or precise in estimating the
degree of retaliation which it is lawful for him to exercise in the
requital of such injuries; and, believe me, bitterly should I lament
having guided you into a situation which you might consider afflicting
or degrading."

"In a word then," said the English lady, "what is it you apprehend I am
like to suffer at the hands of your friends, whom I must be excused for
terming rebels?"

"If," said the sister Ursula, "_your_ friends, whom I should term
oppressors and tyrants, take our land and our lives, seize our castles,
and confiscate our property, you must confess, that the rough laws of
war indulge _mine_ with the privilege of retaliation. There can be no
fear, that such men, under any circumstances, would ever exercise
cruelty or insult upon a lady of your rank; but it is another thing to
calculate that they will abstain from such means of extorting advantage
from your captivity as are common in warfare. You would not, I think,
wish to be delivered up to the English, on consideration of Sir John de
Walton surrendering the Castle of Douglas to its natural lord; yet,
were you in the hands of the Bruce or Douglas, although I can answer
for your being treated with all the respect which they have the means
of showing, yet I own, their putting you at such a ransom might be by
no means unlikely."

"I would sooner die," said the Lady Berkely, "than have my name mixed
up in a treaty so disgraceful; and De Walton's reply to it would, I am
certain, be to strike the head from the messenger, and throw it from
the highest tower of Douglas Castle."

"Where, then, lady, would you now go," said sister Ursula, "were the
choice in your power?"

"To my own castle," answered Lady Augusta, "where, if necessary, I
could be defended even against the king himself, until I could place at
least my person under the protection of the Church."

"In that case," replied Margaret de Hautlieu, "my power of rendering
you assistance is only precarious, yet it comprehends a choice which I
will willingly submit to your decision, notwithstanding I thereby
subject the secrets of my friends to some risk of being discovered and
frustrated. But the confidence which you have placed in me, imposes on
me the necessity of committing to you a like trust. It rests with you,
whether you will proceed with me to the secret rendezvous of the
Douglas and his friends, which I may be blamed for making known, and
there take your chance of the reception which you may encounter, since
I cannot warrant you of any thing save honourable treatment, so far as
your person is concerned; or if you should think this too hazardous,
make the best of your way at once for the Border; in which last case I
will proceed as far as I can with you towards the English line, and
then leave you to pursue your journey, and to obtain a guard and a
conductor among your own countrymen. Meantime, it will be well for me
if I escape being taken, since the abbot would not shrink at inflicting
upon me the death due to an apostate nun."

"Such cruelty, my sister, could hardly be inflicted upon one who had
never taken the religious vows, and who still, according to the laws of
the Church, had a right to make a choice between the world and the
veil."

"Such choice as they gave their gallant victims," said Lady Margaret,
"who have fallen into English hands during these merciless wars,--such
choice as they gave to Wallace, the Champion of Scotland,--such as they
gave to Hay, the gentle and the free,--to Sommerville, the flower of
chivalry,--and to Athol, the blood relation of King Edward himself--all
of whom were as much traitors, under which name they were executed, as
Margaret de Hautlieu is an apostate nun, and subject to the rule of the
cloister."

She spoke with some eagerness, for she felt as if the English lady
imputed to her more coldness than she was, in such doubtful
circumstances, conscious of manifesting.

"And after all," she proceeded, "you, Lady Augusta de Berkely, what do
you venture, if you run the risk of falling into the hands of your
lover? What dreadful risk do you incur? You need not, methinks, fear
being immured between four walls, with a basket of bread and a cruise
of water, which, were I seized, would be the only support allowed to me
for the short space that my life would be prolonged. Nay, even were you
to be betrayed to the rebel Scots, as you call them, a captivity among
the hills, sweetened by the hope of deliverance, and rendered tolerable
by all the alleviations which the circumstances of your captors allowed
them the means of supplying, were not, I think, a lot so very hard to
endure."

"Nevertheless," answered the Lady of Berkely, "frightful enough it must
have appeared to me, since, to fly from such, I threw myself upon your
guidance."

"And, whatever you think or suspect," answered the novice, "I am as
true to you as ever was one maiden to another; and as sure as ever
sister Ursula was true to her vows, although they were never completed,
so will I be faithful to your secret, even at the risk of betraying my
own."

"Hearken, lady!" she said, suddenly pausing, "do you hear that?"

The sound to which she alluded was the same imitation of the cry of an
owlet, which the lady had before heard under the walls of the convent.

"These sounds," said Margaret de Hautlieu, "announce that one is near,
more able than I am to direct us in this matter. I must go forward and
speak with him; and this man, our guide, will remain by you for a
little space; nor, when he quits your bridle, need you wait for any
other signal, but ride forward on the woodland path, and obey the
advice and directions which will be given you."

"Stay! stay! sister Ursula!" cried the Lady de Berkely--"abandon me not
in this moment of uncertainty and distress!"

"It must be, for the sake of both," returned Margaret de Hautlieu. "I
also am in uncertainty--I also am in distress--and patience and
obedience are the only virtues which can save us both."

So saying, she struck her horse with the riding rod, and moving briskly
forward, disappeared among the tangled boughs of a thicket. The Lady of
Berkely would have followed her companion, but the cavalier who
attended them laid a strong hand upon the bridle of her palfrey, with a
look which implied that he would not permit her to proceed in that
direction. Terrified, therefore, though she could not exactly state a
reason why, the Lady of Berkely remained with her eyes fixed upon the
thicket, instinctively, as it were, expecting to see a band of English
archers, or rugged Scottish insurgents, issue from its tangled skirts,
and doubtful which she should have most considered as the objects of
her terror. In the distress of her uncertainty, she again attempted to
move forward, but the stern check which her attendant again bestowed
upon her bridle, proved sufficiently that in restraining her wishes,
the stranger was not likely to spare the strength which he certainly
possessed. At length, after some ten minutes had elapsed, the cavalier
withdrew his hand from her bridle, and pointing with his lance towards
the thicket, through which there winded a narrow, scarce visible path,
seemed to intimate to the lady that her road lay in that direction, and
that he would no longer prevent her following it.

"Do you not go with me?" said the lady, who, having been accustomed to
this man's company since they left the convent, had by degrees come to
look upon him as a sort of protector. He, however, gravely shook his
head, as if to excuse complying with a request, which it was not in his
power to grant; and turning his steed in a different direction, retired
at a pace which soon carried him from her sight. She had then no
alternative but to take the path of the thicket, which had been
followed by Margaret de Hautlieu, nor did she pursue it long before
coming in sight of a singular spectacle. The trees grew wider as the
lady advanced, and when she entered the thicket, she perceived that,
though hedged in as it were by an enclosure of copsewood, it was in the
interior altogether occupied by a few of the magnificent trees, such as
seemed to have been the ancestors of the forest, and which, though few
in number, were sufficient to overshade all the unoccupied ground, by
the great extent of their complicated branches. Beneath one of these
lay stretched something of a grey colour, which, as it drew itself
together, exhibited the figure of a man sheathed in armour, but
strangely accoutred, and in a manner so bizarre, as to indicate some of
the wild fancies peculiar to the knights of that period. His armour was
ingeniously painted, so as to represent a skeleton; the ribs being
constituted by the corselet and its back-piece. The shield represented
an owl with its wings spread, a device which was repeated upon the
helmet, which appeared to be completely covered by an image of the same
bird of ill omen. But that which was particularly calculated to excite
surprise in the spectator, was the great height and thinness of the
figure, which, as it arose from the ground, and placed itself in an
erect posture, seemed rather to resemble an apparition in the act of
extricating itself from the grave, than that of an ordinary man rising
upon his feet. The horse, too, upon which the lady rode, started back
and snorted, either at the sudden change of posture of this ghastly
specimen of chivalry, or disagreeably affected by some odour which
accompanied his presence. The lady herself manifested some alarm, for
although she did not utterly believe she was in the presence of a super
natural being, yet, among all the strange half-frantic disguises of
chivalry this was assuredly the most uncouth which she had ever seen;
and, considering how often the knights of the period pushed their
dreamy fancies to the borders of insanity, it seemed at best no very
safe adventure to meet? one accoutred in the emblems of the King of
Terrors himself, alone, and in the midst of a wild forest. Be the
knight's character and purposes what they might, she resolved, however,
to accost him in the language and manner observed in romances upon such
occasions, in the hope even that if he were a madman he might prove a
peaceable one, and accessible to civility.

"Sir Knight," she said, in as firm a tone as she could assume, "right
sorry am I, if, by my hasty approach, I have disturbed your solitary
meditations. My horse, sensible I think of the presence of yours,
brought me hither, without my being aware whom or what I was to
encounter."

"I am one," answered the stranger, in a solemn tone, "whom few men seek
to meet, till the time comes that they can avoid me no longer."

"You speak, Sir Knight," replied the Lady de Berkely, "according to the
dismal character of which it has pleased you to assume the distinction.
May I appeal to one whose exterior is so formidable, for the purpose of
requesting some directions to guide me through this wild wood; as, for
instance, what is the name of the nearest castle, town, or hostelry,
and by what course I am best likely to reach such?"

"It is a singular audacity," answered the Knight of the Tomb, "that
would enter into conversation with him who is termed the Inexorable,
the Unsparing, and the Pitiless, whom even the most miserable forbears
to call to his assistance, lest his prayers should be too soon
answered."

"Sir Knight," replied the Lady Augusta, "the character which you have
assumed, unquestionably for good reasons, dictates to you a peculiar
course of speech; but although your part is a sad one, it does not, I
should suppose, render it necessary for you to refuse those acts of
civility to which you must have bound yourself in taking the high vows
of chivalry."

"If you will trust to my guidance," replied the ghastly figure, "there
is only one condition upon which I can grant you the information which
you require; and that is, that you follow my footsteps without any
questions asked as to the tendency of our journey."

"I suppose I must submit to your conditions," she answered, "if you are
indeed pleased to take upon yourself the task of being my guide. In my
heart I conceive you to be one of the unhappy gentlemen of Scotland,
who are now in arms, as they say, for the defence of their liberties. A
rash undertaking has brought me within the sphere of your influence,
and now the only favour I have to request of you, against whom I never
did, nor planned any evil, is the guidance which your knowledge of the
country permits you easily to afford me in my way to the frontiers of
England. Believe that what I may see of your haunts or of your
practices, shall be to me things invisible, as if they were actually
concealed by the sepulchre itself, of the king of which it has pleased
you to assume the attributes; and if a sum of money, enough to be the
ransom of a wealthy earl, will purchase such a favour at need, such a
ransom will be frankly paid, and with as much fidelity as ever it was
rendered by a prisoner to the knight by whom he was taken. Do not
reject me, princely Bruce--noble Douglas--if indeed it is to either of
these that I address myself in this my last extremity--men speak of
both as fearful enemies, but generous knights and faithful friends. Let
me entreat you to remember how much you would wish your own friends and
connexions to meet with compassion under similar circumstances, at the
hands of the knights of England."

"And have they done so?" replied the Knight, in a voice more gloomy
than before, "or do you act wisely, while imploring the protection of
one whom you believe to be a true Scottish knight, for no other reason
than the extreme and extravagant misery of his appearance?--is it, I
say, well or wise to remind him of the mode in which the lords of
England have treated the lovely maidens and the high-born dames of
Scotland? Have not their prison cages been suspended from the
battlements of castles, that their captivity might be kept in view of
every base burgher, who should desire to look upon the miseries of the
noblest peeresses, yea, even the Queen of Scotland? [Footnote: The
Queen of Robert the Bruce, and the Countess of Buchan, by whom, as one
of Macduff's descent, he was crowned at Scone, were secured in the
manner described.] Is this a recollection which can inspire a Scottish
knight with compassion towards an English lady? or is it a thought
which can do aught but swell the deeply sworn hatred of Edward
Plantagenet, the author of these evils, that boils in every drop of
Scottish blood which still feels the throb of life? No;--it is all you
can expect, if, cold and pitiless as the sepulchre I represent, I leave
you unassisted in the helpless condition in which you describe yourself
to be."

"You will not be so inhuman," replied the lady; "in doing so you must
surrender every right to honest fame, which you have won either by
sword or lance. You must surrender every pretence to that justice which
affects the merit of supporting the weak against the strong. You must
make it your principle to avenge the wrongs and tyranny of Edward
Plantagenet upon the dames and damosels of England, who have neither
access to his councils, nor perhaps give him their approbation in his
wars against Scotland."

"It would not then," said the Knight of the Sepulchre, "induce you to
depart from your request, should I tell you the evils to which you
would subject yourself should we fall into the hands of the English
troops, and should they find you under such ill-omened protection as my
own?"

"Be assured," said the lady, "the consideration of such an event does
not in the least shake my resolution, or desire of confiding in your
protection. You may probably know who I am, and may judge how far even,
Edward would hold himself entitled to extend punishment towards me."

"How am I to know you," replied the ghastly cavalier, "or your
circumstances? They must be extraordinary indeed, if they could form a
