The Long Parliament assembled on the third of November, one thousand six
hundred and forty-one.  That day week the Earl of Strafford arrived from
York, very sensible that the spirited and determined men who formed that
Parliament were no friends towards him, who had not only deserted the
cause of the people, but who had on all occasions opposed himself to
their liberties.  The King told him, for his comfort, that the Parliament
'should not hurt one hair of his head.'  But, on the very next day Mr.
Pym, in the House of Commons, and with great solemnity, impeached the
Earl of Strafford as a traitor.  He was immediately taken into custody
and fell from his proud height.

It was the twenty-second of March before he was brought to trial in
Westminster Hall; where, although he was very ill and suffered great
pain, he defended himself with such ability and majesty, that it was
doubtful whether he would not get the best of it.  But on the thirteenth
day of the trial, Pym produced in the House of Commons a copy of some
notes of a council, found by young SIR HARRY VANE in a red velvet cabinet
belonging to his father (Secretary Vane, who sat at the council-table
with the Earl), in which Strafford had distinctly told the King that he
was free from all rules and obligations of government, and might do with
his people whatever he liked; and in which he had added--'You have an
army in Ireland that you may employ to reduce this kingdom to obedience.'
It was not clear whether by the words 'this kingdom,' he had really meant
England or Scotland; but the Parliament contended that he meant England,
and this was treason.  At the same sitting of the House of Commons it was
resolved to bring in a bill of attainder declaring the treason to have
been committed: in preference to proceeding with the trial by
impeachment, which would have required the treason to be proved.

So, a bill was brought in at once, was carried through the House of
Commons by a large majority, and was sent up to the House of Lords.  While
it was still uncertain whether the House of Lords would pass it and the
King consent to it, Pym disclosed to the House of Commons that the King
and Queen had both been plotting with the officers of the army to bring
up the soldiers and control the Parliament, and also to introduce two
hundred soldiers into the Tower of London to effect the Earl's escape.
The plotting with the army was revealed by one GEORGE GORING, the son of
a lord of that name: a bad fellow who was one of the original plotters,
and turned traitor.  The King had actually given his warrant for the
admission of the two hundred men into the Tower, and they would have got
in too, but for the refusal of the governor--a sturdy Scotchman of the
name of BALFOUR--to admit them.  These matters being made public, great
numbers of people began to riot outside the Houses of Parliament, and to
cry out for the execution of the Earl of Strafford, as one of the King's
chief instruments against them.  The bill passed the House of Lords while
the people were in this state of agitation, and was laid before the King
for his assent, together with another bill declaring that the Parliament
then assembled should not be dissolved or adjourned without their own
consent.  The King--not unwilling to save a faithful servant, though he
had no great attachment for him--was in some doubt what to do; but he
gave his consent to both bills, although he in his heart believed that
the bill against the Earl of Strafford was unlawful and unjust.  The Earl
had written to him, telling him that he was willing to die for his sake.
But he had not expected that his royal master would take him at his word
quite so readily; for, when he heard his doom, he laid his hand upon his
heart, and said, 'Put not your trust in Princes!'

The King, who never could be straightforward and plain, through one
single day or through one single sheet of paper, wrote a letter to the
Lords, and sent it by the young Prince of Wales, entreating them to
prevail with the Commons that 'that unfortunate man should fulfil the
natural course of his life in a close imprisonment.'  In a postscript to
the very same letter, he added, 'If he must die, it were charity to
reprieve him till Saturday.'  If there had been any doubt of his fate,
this weakness and meanness would have settled it.  The very next day,
which was the twelfth of May, he was brought out to be beheaded on Tower
Hill.

Archbishop Laud, who had been so fond of having people's ears cropped off
and their noses slit, was now confined in the Tower too; and when the
Earl went by his window to his death, he was there, at his request, to
give him his blessing.  They had been great friends in the King's cause,
and the Earl had written to him in the days of their power that he
thought it would be an admirable thing to have Mr. Hampden publicly
whipped for refusing to pay the ship money.  However, those high and
mighty doings were over now, and the Earl went his way to death with
dignity and heroism.  The governor wished him to get into a coach at the
Tower gate, for fear the people should tear him to pieces; but he said it
was all one to him whether he died by the axe or by the people's hands.
So, he walked, with a firm tread and a stately look, and sometimes pulled
off his hat to them as he passed along.  They were profoundly quiet.  He
made a speech on the scaffold from some notes he had prepared (the paper
was found lying there after his head was struck off), and one blow of the
axe killed him, in the forty-ninth year of his age.

This bold and daring act, the Parliament accompanied by other famous
measures, all originating (as even this did) in the King's having so
grossly and so long abused his power.  The name of DELINQUENTS was
applied to all sheriffs and other officers who had been concerned in
raising the ship money, or any other money, from the people, in an
unlawful manner; the Hampden judgment was reversed; the judges who had
decided against Hampden were called upon to give large securities that
they would take such consequences as Parliament might impose upon them;
and one was arrested as he sat in High Court, and carried off to prison.
Laud was impeached; the unfortunate victims whose ears had been cropped
and whose noses had been slit, were brought out of prison in triumph; and
a bill was passed declaring that a Parliament should be called every
third year, and that if the King and the King's officers did not call it,
the people should assemble of themselves and summon it, as of their own
right and power.  Great illuminations and rejoicings took place over all
these things, and the country was wildly excited.  That the Parliament
took advantage of this excitement and stirred them up by every means,
there is no doubt; but you are always to remember those twelve long
years, during which the King had tried so hard whether he really could do
any wrong or not.

All this time there was a great religious outcry against the right of the
Bishops to sit in Parliament; to which the Scottish people particularly
objected.  The English were divided on this subject, and, partly on this
account and partly because they had had foolish expectations that the
Parliament would be able to take off nearly all the taxes, numbers of
them sometimes wavered and inclined towards the King.

I believe myself, that if, at this or almost any other period of his
life, the King could have been trusted by any man not out of his senses,
he might have saved himself and kept his throne.  But, on the English
army being disbanded, he plotted with the officers again, as he had done
before, and established the fact beyond all doubt by putting his
signature of approval to a petition against the Parliamentary leaders,
which was drawn up by certain officers.  When the Scottish army was
disbanded, he went to Edinburgh in four days--which was going very fast
at that time--to plot again, and so darkly too, that it is difficult to
decide what his whole object was.  Some suppose that he wanted to gain
over the Scottish Parliament, as he did in fact gain over, by presents
and favours, many Scottish lords and men of power.  Some think that he
went to get proofs against the Parliamentary leaders in England of their
having treasonably invited the Scottish people to come and help them.
With whatever object he went to Scotland, he did little good by going.  At
the instigation of the EARL OF MONTROSE, a desperate man who was then in
prison for plotting, he tried to kidnap three Scottish lords who escaped.
A committee of the Parliament at home, who had followed to watch him,
writing an account of this INCIDENT, as it was called, to the Parliament,
the Parliament made a fresh stir about it; were, or feigned to be, much
alarmed for themselves; and wrote to the EARL OF ESSEX, the commander-in-
chief, for a guard to protect them.

It is not absolutely proved that the King plotted in Ireland besides, but
it is very probable that he did, and that the Queen did, and that he had
some wild hope of gaining the Irish people over to his side by favouring
a rise among them.  Whether or no, they did rise in a most brutal and
savage rebellion; in which, encouraged by their priests, they committed
such atrocities upon numbers of the English, of both sexes and of all
ages, as nobody could believe, but for their being related on oath by eye-
witnesses.  Whether one hundred thousand or two hundred thousand
Protestants were murdered in this outbreak, is uncertain; but, that it
was as ruthless and barbarous an outbreak as ever was known among any
savage people, is certain.

The King came home from Scotland, determined to make a great struggle for
his lost power.  He believed that, through his presents and favours,
Scotland would take no part against him; and the Lord Mayor of London
received him with such a magnificent dinner that he thought he must have
become popular again in England.  It would take a good many Lord Mayors,
however, to make a people, and the King soon found himself mistaken.

Not so soon, though, but that there was a great opposition in the
Parliament to a celebrated paper put forth by Pym and Hampden and the
rest, called 'THE REMONSTRANCE,' which set forth all the illegal acts
that the King had ever done, but politely laid the blame of them on his
bad advisers.  Even when it was passed and presented to him, the King
still thought himself strong enough to discharge Balfour from his command
in the Tower, and to put in his place a man of bad character; to whom the
Commons instantly objected, and whom he was obliged to abandon.  At this
time, the old outcry about the Bishops became louder than ever, and the
old Archbishop of York was so near being murdered as he went down to the
House of Lords--being laid hold of by the mob and violently knocked
about, in return for very foolishly scolding a shrill boy who was yelping
out 'No Bishops!'--that he sent for all the Bishops who were in town, and
proposed to them to sign a declaration that, as they could no longer
without danger to their lives attend their duty in Parliament, they
protested against the lawfulness of everything done in their absence.
This they asked the King to send to the House of Lords, which he did.
Then the House of Commons impeached the whole party of Bishops and sent
them off to the Tower:

Taking no warning from this; but encouraged by there being a moderate
party in the Parliament who objected to these strong measures, the King,
on the third of January, one thousand six hundred and forty-two, took the
rashest step that ever was taken by mortal man.

Of his own accord and without advice, he sent the Attorney-General to the
House of Lords, to accuse of treason certain members of Parliament who as
popular leaders were the most obnoxious to him; LORD KIMBOLTON, SIR
ARTHUR HASELRIG, DENZIL HOLLIS, JOHN PYM (they used to call him King Pym,
he possessed such power and looked so big), JOHN HAMPDEN, and WILLIAM
STRODE.  The houses of those members he caused to be entered, and their
papers to be sealed up.  At the same time, he sent a messenger to the
House of Commons demanding to have the five gentlemen who were members of
that House immediately produced.  To this the House replied that they
should appear as soon as there was any legal charge against them, and
immediately adjourned.

Next day, the House of Commons send into the City to let the Lord Mayor
know that their privileges are invaded by the King, and that there is no
safety for anybody or anything.  Then, when the five members are gone out
of the way, down comes the King himself, with all his guard and from two
to three hundred gentlemen and soldiers, of whom the greater part were
armed.  These he leaves in the hall; and then, with his nephew at his
side, goes into the House, takes off his hat, and walks up to the
Speaker's chair.  The Speaker leaves it, the King stands in front of it,
looks about him steadily for a little while, and says he has come for
those five members.  No one speaks, and then he calls John Pym by name.
No one speaks, and then he calls Denzil Hollis by name.  No one speaks,
and then he asks the Speaker of the House where those five members are?
The Speaker, answering on his knee, nobly replies that he is the servant
of that House, and that he has neither eyes to see, nor tongue to speak,
anything but what the House commands him.  Upon this, the King, beaten
from that time evermore, replies that he will seek them himself, for they
have committed treason; and goes out, with his hat in his hand, amid some
audible murmurs from the members.

No words can describe the hurry that arose out of doors when all this was
known.  The five members had gone for safety to a house in
Coleman-street, in the City, where they were guarded all night; and
indeed the whole city watched in arms like an army.  At ten o'clock in
the morning, the King, already frightened at what he had done, came to
the Guildhall, with only half a dozen lords, and made a speech to the
people, hoping they would not shelter those whom he accused of treason.
Next day, he issued a proclamation for the apprehension of the five
members; but the Parliament minded it so little that they made great
arrangements for having them brought down to Westminster in great state,
five days afterwards.  The King was so alarmed now at his own imprudence,
if not for his own safety, that he left his palace at Whitehall, and went
away with his Queen and children to Hampton Court.

It was the eleventh of May, when the five members were carried in state
and triumph to Westminster.  They were taken by water.  The river could
not be seen for the boats on it; and the five members were hemmed in by
barges full of men and great guns, ready to protect them, at any cost.
Along the Strand a large body of the train-bands of London, under their
commander, SKIPPON, marched to be ready to assist the little fleet.
Beyond them, came a crowd who choked the streets, roaring incessantly
about the Bishops and the Papists, and crying out contemptuously as they
passed Whitehall, 'What has become of the King?'  With this great noise
outside the House of Commons, and with great silence within, Mr. Pym rose
and informed the House of the great kindness with which they had been
received in the City.  Upon that, the House called the sheriffs in and
thanked them, and requested the train-bands, under their commander
Skippon, to guard the House of Commons every day.  Then, came four
thousand men on horseback out of Buckinghamshire, offering their services
as a guard too, and bearing a petition to the King, complaining of the
injury that had been done to Mr. Hampden, who was their county man and
much beloved and honoured.

When the King set off for Hampton Court, the gentlemen and soldiers who
had been with him followed him out of town as far as
Kingston-upon-Thames; next day, Lord Digby came to them from the King at
Hampton Court, in his coach and six, to inform them that the King
accepted their protection.  This, the Parliament said, was making war
against the kingdom, and Lord Digby fled abroad.  The Parliament then
immediately applied themselves to getting hold of the military power of
the country, well knowing that the King was already trying hard to use it
against them, and that he had secretly sent the Earl of Newcastle to
Hull, to secure a valuable magazine of arms and gunpowder that was there.
In those times, every county had its own magazines of arms and powder,
for its own train-bands or militia; so, the Parliament brought in a bill
claiming the right (which up to this time had belonged to the King) of
appointing the Lord Lieutenants of counties, who commanded these train-
bands; also, of having all the forts, castles, and garrisons in the
kingdom, put into the hands of such governors as they, the Parliament,
could confide in.  It also passed a law depriving the Bishops of their
votes.  The King gave his assent to that bill, but would not abandon the
right of appointing the Lord Lieutenants, though he said he was willing
to appoint such as might be suggested to him by the Parliament.  When the
Earl of Pembroke asked him whether he would not give way on that question
for a time, he said, 'By God! not for one hour!' and upon this he and the
Parliament went to war.

His young daughter was betrothed to the Prince of Orange.  On pretence of
taking her to the country of her future husband, the Queen was already
got safely away to Holland, there to pawn the Crown jewels for money to
raise an army on the King's side.  The Lord Admiral being sick, the House
of Commons now named the Earl of Warwick to hold his place for a year.
The King named another gentleman; the House of Commons took its own way,
and the Earl of Warwick became Lord Admiral without the King's consent.
The Parliament sent orders down to Hull to have that magazine removed to
London; the King went down to Hull to take it himself.  The citizens
would not admit him into the town, and the governor would not admit him
into the castle.  The Parliament resolved that whatever the two Houses
passed, and the King would not consent to, should be called an ORDINANCE,
and should be as much a law as if he did consent to it.  The King
protested against this, and gave notice that these ordinances were not to
be obeyed.  The King, attended by the majority of the House of Peers, and
by many members of the House of Commons, established himself at York.  The
Chancellor went to him with the Great Seal, and the Parliament made a new
Great Seal.  The Queen sent over a ship full of arms and ammunition, and
the King issued letters to borrow money at high interest.  The Parliament
raised twenty regiments of foot and seventy-five troops of horse; and the
people willingly aided them with their money, plate, jewellery, and
trinkets--the married women even with their wedding-rings.  Every member
of Parliament who could raise a troop or a regiment in his own part of
the country, dressed it according to his taste and in his own colours,
and commanded it.  Foremost among them all, OLIVER CROMWELL raised a
troop of horse--thoroughly in earnest and thoroughly well armed--who
were, perhaps, the best soldiers that ever were seen.

In some of their proceedings, this famous Parliament passed the bounds of
previous law and custom, yielded to and favoured riotous assemblages of
the people, and acted tyrannically in imprisoning some who differed from
the popular leaders.  But again, you are always to remember that the
twelve years during which the King had had his own wilful way, had gone
before; and that nothing could make the times what they might, could,
would, or should have been, if those twelve years had never rolled away.



THIRD PART


I shall not try to relate the particulars of the great civil war between
King Charles the First and the Long Parliament, which lasted nearly four
years, and a full account of which would fill many large books.  It was a
sad thing that Englishmen should once more be fighting against Englishmen
on English ground; but, it is some consolation to know that on both sides
there was great humanity, forbearance, and honour.  The soldiers of the
Parliament were far more remarkable for these good qualities than the
soldiers of the King (many of whom fought for mere pay without much
caring for the cause); but those of the nobility and gentry who were on
the King's side were so brave, and so faithful to him, that their conduct
cannot but command our highest admiration.  Among them were great numbers
of Catholics, who took the royal side because the Queen was so strongly
of their persuasion.

The King might have distinguished some of these gallant spirits, if he
had been as generous a spirit himself, by giving them the command of his
army.  Instead of that, however, true to his old high notions of royalty,
he entrusted it to his two nephews, PRINCE RUPERT and PRINCE MAURICE, who
were of royal blood and came over from abroad to help him.  It might have
been better for him if they had stayed away; since Prince Rupert was an
impetuous, hot-headed fellow, whose only idea was to dash into battle at
all times and seasons, and lay about him.

The general-in-chief of the Parliamentary army was the Earl of Essex, a
gentleman of honour and an excellent soldier.  A little while before the
war broke out, there had been some rioting at Westminster between certain
officious law students and noisy soldiers, and the shopkeepers and their
apprentices, and the general people in the streets.  At that time the
King's friends called the crowd, Roundheads, because the apprentices wore
short hair; the crowd, in return, called their opponents Cavaliers,
meaning that they were a blustering set, who pretended to be very
military.  These two words now began to be used to distinguish the two
sides in the civil war.  The Royalists also called the Parliamentary men
Rebels and Rogues, while the Parliamentary men called _them_ Malignants,
and spoke of themselves as the Godly, the Honest, and so forth.

The war broke out at Portsmouth, where that double traitor Goring had
again gone over to the King and was besieged by the Parliamentary troops.
Upon this, the King proclaimed the Earl of Essex and the officers serving
under him, traitors, and called upon his loyal subjects to meet him in
arms at Nottingham on the twenty-fifth of August.  But his loyal subjects
came about him in scanty numbers, and it was a windy, gloomy day, and the
Royal Standard got blown down, and the whole affair was very melancholy.
The chief engagements after this, took place in the vale of the Red Horse
near Banbury, at Brentford, at Devizes, at Chalgrave Field (where Mr.
Hampden was so sorely wounded while fighting at the head of his men, that
he died within a week), at Newbury (in which battle LORD FALKLAND, one of
the best noblemen on the King's side, was killed), at Leicester, at
Naseby, at Winchester, at Marston Moor near York, at Newcastle, and in
many other parts of England and Scotland.  These battles were attended
with various successes.  At one time, the King was victorious; at another
time, the Parliament.  But almost all the great and busy towns were
against the King; and when it was considered necessary to fortify London,
all ranks of people, from labouring men and women, up to lords and
ladies, worked hard together with heartiness and good will.  The most
distinguished leaders on the Parliamentary side were HAMPDEN, SIR THOMAS
FAIRFAX, and, above all, OLIVER CROMWELL, and his son-in-law IRETON.

During the whole of this war, the people, to whom it was very expensive
and irksome, and to whom it was made the more distressing by almost every
family being divided--some of its members attaching themselves to one
side and some to the other--were over and over again most anxious for
peace.  So were some of the best men in each cause.  Accordingly,
treaties of peace were discussed between commissioners from the
Parliament and the King; at York, at Oxford (where the King held a little
Parliament of his own), and at Uxbridge.  But they came to nothing.  In
all these negotiations, and in all his difficulties, the King showed
himself at his best.  He was courageous, cool, self-possessed, and
clever; but, the old taint of his character was always in him, and he was
never for one single moment to be trusted.  Lord Clarendon, the
historian, one of his highest admirers, supposes that he had unhappily
promised the Queen never to make peace without her consent, and that this
must often be taken as his excuse.  He never kept his word from night to
morning.  He signed a cessation of hostilities with the blood-stained
Irish rebels for a sum of money, and invited the Irish regiments over, to
help him against the Parliament.  In the battle of Naseby, his cabinet
was seized and was found to contain a correspondence with the Queen, in
which he expressly told her that he had deceived the Parliament--a
mongrel Parliament, he called it now, as an improvement on his old term
of vipers--in pretending to recognise it and to treat with it; and from
which it further appeared that he had long been in secret treaty with the
Duke of Lorraine for a foreign army of ten thousand men.  Disappointed in
this, he sent a most devoted friend of his, the EARL OF GLAMORGAN, to
Ireland, to conclude a secret treaty with the Catholic powers, to send
him an Irish army of ten thousand men; in return for which he was to
bestow great favours on the Catholic religion.  And, when this treaty was
discovered in the carriage of a fighting Irish Archbishop who was killed
in one of the many skirmishes of those days, he basely denied and
deserted his attached friend, the Earl, on his being charged with high
treason; and--even worse than this--had left blanks in the secret
instructions he gave him with his own kingly hand, expressly that he
might thus save himself.

At last, on the twenty-seventh day of April, one thousand six hundred and
forty-six, the King found himself in the city of Oxford, so surrounded by
the Parliamentary army who were closing in upon him on all sides that he
felt that if he would escape he must delay no longer.  So, that night,
having altered the cut of his hair and beard, he was dressed up as a
servant and put upon a horse with a cloak strapped behind him, and rode
out of the town behind one of his own faithful followers, with a
clergyman of that country who knew the road well, for a guide.  He rode
towards London as far as Harrow, and then altered his plans and resolved,
it would seem, to go to the Scottish camp.  The Scottish men had been
invited over to help the Parliamentary army, and had a large force then
in England.  The King was so desperately intriguing in everything he did,
that it is doubtful what he exactly meant by this step.  He took it,
anyhow, and delivered himself up to the EARL OF LEVEN, the Scottish
general-in-chief, who treated him as an honourable prisoner.  Negotiations
between the Parliament on the one hand and the Scottish authorities on
the other, as to what should be done with him, lasted until the following
February.  Then, when the King had refused to the Parliament the
concession of that old militia point for twenty years, and had refused to
Scotland the recognition of its Solemn League and Covenant, Scotland got
a handsome sum for its army and its help, and the King into the bargain.
He was taken, by certain Parliamentary commissioners appointed to receive
him, to one of his own houses, called Holmby House, near Althorpe, in
Northamptonshire.

While the Civil War was still in progress, John Pym died, and was buried
with great honour in Westminster Abbey--not with greater honour than he
deserved, for the liberties of Englishmen owe a mighty debt to Pym and
Hampden.  The war was but newly over when the Earl of Essex died, of an
illness brought on by his having overheated himself in a stag hunt in
Windsor Forest.  He, too, was buried in Westminster Abbey, with great
state.  I wish it were not necessary to add that Archbishop Laud died
upon the scaffold when the war was not yet done.  His trial lasted in all
nearly a year, and, it being doubtful even then whether the charges
brought against him amounted to treason, the odious old contrivance of
the worst kings was resorted to, and a bill of attainder was brought in
against him.  He was a violently prejudiced and mischievous person; had
had strong ear-cropping and nose-splitting propensities, as you know; and
had done a world of harm.  But he died peaceably, and like a brave old
man.



FOURTH PART


When the Parliament had got the King into their hands, they became very
anxious to get rid of their army, in which Oliver Cromwell had begun to
acquire great power; not only because of his courage and high abilities,
but because he professed to be very sincere in the Scottish sort of
Puritan religion that was then exceedingly popular among the soldiers.
They were as much opposed to the Bishops as to the Pope himself; and the
very privates, drummers, and trumpeters, had such an inconvenient habit
of starting up and preaching long-winded discourses, that I would not
have belonged to that army on any account.

So, the Parliament, being far from sure but that the army might begin to
preach and fight against them now it had nothing else to do, proposed to
disband the greater part of it, to send another part to serve in Ireland
against the rebels, and to keep only a small force in England.  But, the
army would not consent to be broken up, except upon its own conditions;
and, when the Parliament showed an intention of compelling it, it acted
for itself in an unexpected manner.  A certain cornet, of the name of
JOICE, arrived at Holmby House one night, attended by four hundred
horsemen, went into the King's room with his hat in one hand and a pistol
in the other, and told the King that he had come to take him away.  The
King was willing enough to go, and only stipulated that he should be
publicly required to do so next morning.  Next morning, accordingly, he
appeared on the top of the steps of the house, and asked Comet Joice
before his men and the guard set there by the Parliament, what authority
he had for taking him away?  To this Cornet Joice replied, 'The authority
of the army.'  'Have you a written commission?' said the King.  Joice,
pointing to his four hundred men on horseback, replied, 'That is my
commission.'  'Well,' said the King, smiling, as if he were pleased, 'I
never before read such a commission; but it is written in fair and
legible characters.  This is a company of as handsome proper gentlemen as
I have seen a long while.'  He was asked where he would like to live, and
he said at Newmarket.  So, to Newmarket he and Cornet Joice and the four
hundred horsemen rode; the King remarking, in the same smiling way, that
he could ride as far at a spell as Cornet Joice, or any man there.

The King quite believed, I think, that the army were his friends.  He
said as much to Fairfax when that general, Oliver Cromwell, and Ireton,
went to persuade him to return to the custody of the Parliament.  He
preferred to remain as he was, and resolved to remain as he was.  And
when the army moved nearer and nearer London to frighten the Parliament
into yielding to their demands, they took the King with them.  It was a
deplorable thing that England should be at the mercy of a great body of
soldiers with arms in their hands; but the King certainly favoured them
at this important time of his life, as compared with the more lawful
power that tried to control him.  It must be added, however, that they
treated him, as yet, more respectfully and kindly than the Parliament had
done.  They allowed him to be attended by his own servants, to be
splendidly entertained at various houses, and to see his children--at
Cavesham House, near Reading--for two days.  Whereas, the Parliament had
