
This specimen of the military eloquence of the conqueror of Montebello
was received with deafening applause. Three times the minister of war
endeavored to make reply; and three times the bravos cut him short. At
last, however, silence came, and Berthier expressed himself as follows:

"To raise on the banks of the Seine these trophies won on the banks of
the Nile; to hang beneath the domes of our temples, beside the flags of
Vienna, of Petersburg, of London, the banners blessed in the mosques of
Byzantium and Cairo; to see them here, presented by the same warriors,
young in years, old in glory, whom Victory has so often crowned--these
things are granted only to Republican France.

"Yet this is but a part of what he has done, that hero, in the flower
of his age covered with the laurels of Europe, he, who stood a victor
before the Pyramids, from the summits of which forty centuries looked
down upon him while, surrounded by his warriors and learned men, he
emancipated the native soil of art and restored to it the lights of
civilization.

"Soldiers, plant in this temple of the warrior virtues those ensigns
of the Crescent, captured on the rocks of Canopus by three thousand
Frenchmen from eighteen thousand Ottomans, as brave as they were
barbarous. Let them bear witness, not to the valor of the French
soldier--the universe itself resounds to that--but to his unalterable
constancy, his sublime devotion. Let the sight of these banners console
you, veteran warriors, you, whose bodies, gloriously mutilated on the
field of honor, deprive your courage of other exercise than hope and
prayer. Let them proclaim from that dome above us, to all the enemies
of France, the influence of genius, the value of the heroes who captured
them; forewarning of the horrors of war all those who are deaf to our
offers of peace. Yes, if they will have war, they shall have it--war,
terrible and unrelenting!

"The nation, satisfied, regards the Army of the East with pride.

"That invincible army will learn with joy that the First Consul is
watchful of its glory. It is the object of the keenest solicitude on the
part of the Republic. It will hear with pride that we have honored it
in our temples, while awaiting the moment when we shall imitate, if need
be, on the fields of Europe, the warlike virtues it has displayed on the
burning sands of Africa and Asia.

"Come, in the name of that army, intrepid general, come in the name of
those heroes among whom you now appear, and receive an embrace in token
of the national gratitude.

"And in the moment when we again take up our arms in defence of our
independence (if the blind fury of kings refuses the peace we offer),
let us cast a branch of laurel on the ashes of Washington, that hero who
freed America from the yoke of our worst and most implacable enemy.
Let his illustrious shade tell us of the glory which follows a nation's
liberator beyond the grave!"

Bonaparte now came down from his platform, and in the name of France was
embraced by Berthier.

M. de Fontanes, who was appointed to pronounce the eulogy on Washington,
waited courteously until the echoes of the torrent of applause, which
seemed to fall in cascades through the vast amphitheatre, had died away.
In the midst of these glorious individualities, M. de Fontanes was a
curiosity, half political, half literary. After the 18th Fructidor he
was proscribed with Suard and Laharpe; but, being perfectly hidden in a
friend's house, and never going out except at night, he managed to avoid
leaving France. Nevertheless, an accident, impossible to foresee, had
betrayed him. He was knocked down one night on the Place du Carrousel
by a runaway horse, and was recognized by a policeman, who ran to
his assistance. But Fouche, who was at once informed, not only of his
presence in France, but also of his actual hiding-place, pretended to
know nothing of him.

A few days after the 18th Brumaire, Maret, who became later the Duc
de Bassano, Laplace, who continued to be simply a man of science, and
Regnault de Saint-Jean-d'Angely, who died mad, spoke to the First Consul
of M. de Fontanes and of his presence in Paris,

"Present him to me," replied the First Consul simply.

M. de Fontanes was presented to Bonaparte, who, recognizing his supple
nature and the unctuous flattery of his eloquence, chose him to deliver
the eulogy on Washington, and perhaps something of his own at the same
time.

M. de Fontanes' address was too long to be reported here; all that we
shall say about it is, that it was precisely what Bonaparte desired.

That evening there was a grand reception at the Luxembourg. During the
ceremony a rumor was spread that the First Consul contemplated removing
to the Tuileries. Persons who were either bold or curious ventured on
a few words to Josephine. She, poor woman, who still saw before her the
tumbrel and the scaffold of Marie Antoinette, had an instinctive horror
of all that might connect her with royalty; she therefore hesitated to
reply and referred all questions to her husband.

Then another rumor began to be bruited about which served as a
counterpoise to the former. Murat, it was said, had asked the hand of
Mademoiselle Caroline Bonaparte in marriage. But this marriage was not
without its obstacles; Bonaparte had had a quarrel, lasting over a year,
with the man who aspired to the honor of becoming his brother-in-law.
The cause of this quarrel will seem rather strange to our readers.

Murat, the lion of the army; Murat, whose courage had become proverbial;
Murat, who might well have been taken by a sculptor as a model for
the god of war; Murat, on one occasion, when he must have slept ill or
breakfasted badly, had a moment of weakness.

It happened before Mantua, in which city Wurmser, after the battle of
Rivoli, was forced to shut himself up with twenty-eight thousand men;
General Miollis, with four thousand only, was investing the place.
During a sortie attempted by the Austrians, Murat, at the head of five
hundred men, received an order to charge three thousand. Murat charged,
but feebly. Bonaparte, whose aide-de-camp he then was, was so irritated
that he would not suffer him to remain about him. This was a great blow
to Murat, all the more because he was at that time desirous of becoming
the general's brother-in-law; he was deeply in love with Caroline
Bonaparte.

How had that love come about? It can be told in two words. Perhaps
those who read our books singly are surprised that we sometimes dwell on
certain details which seem somewhat long drawn out for the book in which
they appear. The fact is, we are not writing isolated books, but, as we
have already said, we are filling, or trying to fill, an immense frame.
To us, the presence of our characters is not limited to their appearance
in one book. The man you meet in one book may be a king in a second
volume, and exiled or shot in a third.

Balzac did a great and noble work with a hundred aspects, and he
called it the "Comedie Humaine." Our work, begun at the same time as
his--although, be it understood, we do not praise it--may fitly be
called "The Drama of France."

Now, let us return to Murat, and tell how this love, which had so
glorious and, possibly, so fatal an influence on his destiny, came to
him.

In 1796, Murat was sent to Paris, charged with the duty of presenting
to the Directory the flags and banners taken by the French army at the
battles of Dego and Mondovi. During this voyage he made the acquaintance
of Madame Bonaparte and Madame Tallien. At Madame Bonaparte's house he
again met Mademoiselle Caroline Bonaparte. We say _again_, for that was
not the first time he had met the woman who was to share the crown of
Naples with him. They had met in Rome, at her brother's house, and, in
spite of the rivalry of a young and handsome Roman prince, she had shown
him a marked preference.

The three women combined to obtain for him the rank of general of
brigade from the Directory. Murat returned to the Army of Italy, more in
love than ever, and, in spite of his new rank, he solicited and obtained
the favor of remaining with the general-in-chief as aide-de-camp.
Unhappily, the fatal sortie took place soon after, in consequence of
which he fell in disgrace with Bonaparte. This disgrace had for awhile
all the characteristics of actual enmity. Bonaparte dismissed him from
his service as aide-de-camp, and transferred him to Neille's division,
and then to that of Baraguey-d'Hilliers. The result was, that when
Bonaparte returned to Paris after the treaty of Tolentino, Murat did not
accompany him.

This did not at all suit the female triumvirate, who had taken the young
general under its direction. The beautiful intriguers entered into
the campaign, and as the expedition to Egypt was then preparing, they
induced the minister of war to send Murat with it. He embarked in the
same ship as Bonaparte, namely the "Orient," but the latter did not
address a single word to him during the voyage. After they reached
Alexandria, Murat was at first unable to break the icy barrier opposed
to him by the general, who, more to put him at a distance from his
own person than to give him an opportunity to distinguish himself,
confronted him with Mourad Bey. But, during that campaign, Murat
performed such prodigies of valor that he effaced, by such bravery, the
memory of that momentary weakness; he charged so intrepidly, so madly at
Aboukir, that Bonaparte had not the heart to bear him further malice.

Consequently Murat had returned to France with Bonaparte. He had
powerfully co-operated with him on the 18th and especially on the 19th
Brumaire. He was, therefore, restored to full favor, and, as a proof of
that favor, had received the command of the Consular guard.

He thought this the moment to declare his love, a love already
well-known to Josephine, who favored it; for which she had two reasons.
In the first place, she was a woman in the most charming acceptation
of the word; that is to say, all the gentler passions of women were
attractive to her. Joachim loved Caroline, Caroline loved Joachim; that
was enough to make her wish to protect their love. In the second place,
Bonaparte's brothers detested Josephine; Joseph and Lucien were her
bitterest enemies, and she was not sorry to make herself two ardent
friends in Caroline and Murat. She therefore encouraged the latter to
approach Bonaparte on the subject.

Three days before the ceremony we have just described, Murat had entered
Bonaparte's study, and, after endless hesitation and circumlocution, had
proffered his request.

It is probable that the love of the young pair was no news to Bonaparte,
who, however, received it with stern gravity, and contented himself
with replying that he would think it over. The matter, in fact, required
thinking over. Bonaparte came of a noble family, Murat was the son of an
innkeeper. The alliance at such a moment might have great significance.
Was the First Consul, in spite of his noble birth, in spite of the
exalted rank to which he had raised himself, not only sufficiently
republican, but also sufficiently democratic to mingle his blood with
that of the common people.

He did not reflect long; his strong, good sense, and his logical mind,
told him that he had every interest in allowing the marriage, and he
gave his consent to it the same day.

The double news of this marriage and of the removal to the Tuileries was
launched on the public at the same time; the one was to counterpoise
the other. The First Consul was about to occupy the palace of the former
kings, to sleep in the bed of the Bourbons, as they said at that time,
but he gave his sister to the son of an innkeeper!

And now, it may be asked, what dowry did the future Queen of Naples
bring to the hero of Aboukir? Thirty thousand francs and a diamond
necklace, which the First Consul took from his wife, being too poor to
buy one. Josephine, who was very fond of her necklace, pouted a little;
but the gift, thus obtained, was a triumphant reply to those who claimed
that Bonaparte had made a fortune in Italy; besides, why had she taken
the interests of the young couple so to heart? She had insisted on
marrying them, and she ought to contribute to the dowry.

The result of this clever combination was that on the day when the
Consuls left the Luxembourg for the "palace of the government," escorted
by the _son of an innkeeper_, soon to be Bonaparte's brother-in-law, it
did not occur to those who saw the procession pass to do otherwise than
admire and applaud. And, in truth, what could be more admirable and
worthy of applause than those processions, which had at their head such
men as Murat, Moreau, Junot, Duroc, Augereau, and Massena?

A grand review had been ordered to take place that same day in the
square of the Carrousel. Madame Bonaparte was to be present--not, to be
sure, in the balcony of the clock-tower, that being evidently too royal,
but at the window of Lebrun's apartment in the Pavilion of Flora.

Bonaparte started at one o'clock precisely from the Luxembourg, escorted
by three thousand picked men, among them the splendid regiment of the
Guides, created three years earlier as a bodyguard to Bonaparte during
the Italian campaign, in consequence of a great danger he had escaped
on one occasion. He was resting in a small chateau, after the exhaustion
attendant upon the passage of the Mincio, and was preparing to take a
bath, when a retreating Austrian detachment, losing its way, invaded
the chateau, which had no other guard than the sentries. Bonaparte had
barely time to escape in his shirt.

A curious difficulty, which deserves to be recorded, arose on the
morning of this removal, which took place the 30th Pluviose, year
VIII. The generals, of course, had their horses and the ministers their
carriages, but the other functionaries had not yet judged it expedient
to go to such an expense. Carriages were therefore lacking. They were
supplied from the hackney coach-stands, and slips of paper of the same
color as the carriages were pasted over their numbers.

The carriage of the First Consul alone was harnessed with six white
horses, but as the three consuls were in the same carriage, Bonaparte
and Cambaceres on the front seat, and Lebrun on the back, it was, after
all, but two horses apiece. Besides, were not these six white horses
given to the commander-in-chief by the Emperor Francis himself, after
the treaty of Campo-Formio, a trophy in themselves?

The carriage crossed a part of Paris, following the Rue de Thionville,
the Quai Voltaire, and the Pont-Royal. From the archway of the Carrousel
to the great portal of the Tuileries the Consular guard lined the way.
As Bonaparte passed through the archway, he raised his head and read the
inscription it bore. That inscription was as follows:

          AUGUST 10, 1792.
  ROYALTY IS ABOLISHED IN FRANCE
    AND SHALL NEVER RISE AGAIN.

An almost imperceptible smile flickered on the First Consul's lips.

At the door of the Tuileries, Bonaparte left the carriage and sprang
into the saddle to review the troops. When he appeared on his war-horse
the applause burst forth wildly on all sides.

After the review was over, he placed himself in front of the
clock-tower, with Murat on his right, Lannes at his left, and the
glorious staff of the Army of Italy behind him. Then began the march
past.

And now it was that one of those inspirations came to him which engrave
themselves forever on the hearts of soldiers. As the flags of the 30th,
the 96th, and the 33d demi-brigades were borne past him, and he saw
that, of those banners, there remained but a stick and a few rags,
riddled with balls and blackened with powder, he took his hat from his
head and bowed.

Then, when the march was over, he dismounted from his horse, and, with
a firm step, he walked up the grand stairway of the Valois and the
Bourbons.

That night, when he was alone with Bourrienne, the latter asked: "Well,
general, are you satisfied?"

"Yes," replied Bonaparte, dreamily, "everything went off nicely, didn't
it?"

"Wonderfully well."

"I saw you standing near Madame Bonaparte at the ground-floor window of
the Pavilion of Flora."

"I saw you, too, general; you were reading the inscription on the arch
of the Carrousel."

"Yes," said Bonaparte, "'August 10,1792. Royalty is abolished in France,
and shall never rise again.'"

"Shall I have it removed?" asked Bourrienne.

"Useless," replied the First Consul, "it will fall of itself." Then,
with a sigh, he added: "Bourrienne, do you know whom I missed to-day?"

"No, general."

"Roland. What the devil is he doing that he doesn't give me any news of
himself?"

We are about to see what Roland was doing.




CHAPTER XLV. THE FOLLOWER OF TRAILS

The reader will not have forgotten the situation in which the escort of
chasseurs found the Chambery mail-coach.

The first thing they did was to look for the obstacle which prevented
Roland from getting out. They found the padlock and wrenched off the
door.

Roland bounded from the coach like a tiger from its cage. We have said
that the ground was covered with snow. Roland, hunter and soldier, had
but one idea--to follow the trail of the Companions of Jehu. He had seen
them disappear in the direction of Thoissy; but he believed they were
not likely to continue in that direction because, between them and the
little town ran the Saone, and there were no bridges across the river
between Belleville and Macon. He ordered the escort and the conductor
to wait for him on the highroad, and alone and on foot, without even
waiting to reload his pistols, he started on the tracks of Morgan and
his companions.

He was not mistaken. A mile from the highroad the fugitives had come
to the river; there they had halted, probably deliberating, for the
trampling of their horses' hoofs was plainly visible; then they had
separated into two troops, one going up the river to Macon, and the
other descending it in the direction of Belleville.

This separation was doubtless intended to puzzle their pursuers, if
they were pursued. Roland had heard the parting call of the leader:
"To-morrow night, you know where!" He had no doubt, therefore, that
whichever trail he followed, whether up or down--if the snow did not
melt too fast--would lead him to the rendezvous, where, either together
or singly, the Companions of Jehu were certain to assemble.

He returned upon his own tracks, ordered the conductor to put on the
boots thrown aside by the pretended postilion, mount the horse and
take the coach to the next relay, namely Belleville. The sergeant of
chasseurs and four of his men, who knew how to write, were to accompany
the conductor and sign his report of what had occurred. Roland forbade
all mention of himself and where he had gone, lest the brigands should
get word of his future plans. The rest of the escort were to carry back
their colonel's body, and make deposition on their own account, along
the same lines as the conductor, to the authorities, and equally without
mention of Roland.

These orders given, the young man dismounted a chasseur and took his
horse, selecting the one he thought most serviceable. Then he reloaded
his pistols, and put them in the holsters in place of the regulation
weapons of the dismounted chasseur. Having done this, and promised the
conductor and the chasseurs a speedy vengeance, conditioned, however, on
their keeping his present proceedings secret, he mounted the horse and
rode off in the direction he had already investigated.

When he reached the spot where the two troops had separated, he had to
decide between the different trails. He chose that which descended the
Saone toward Belleville. He had excellent reason for making this choice,
although it might possibly take him out of his way for six or eight
miles. In the first place he was nearer Belleville than Macon; then he
had spent twenty-four hours at Macon, and might be recognized there,
whereas he had never stopped at Belleville longer than the time required
to change horses when accident brought him there by post.

The events we have just recorded had taken barely an hour to happen.
Eight o'clock was striking from the church clock at Thoissy when Roland
started in pursuit of the fugitives. The way was plain; five or six
horses had left their imprint on the snow; one of these horses had
paced.

Roland jumped the two or three brooks which watered the space he had to
cross to reach Belleville. A hundred yards from the town he paused, for
here the trail separated again; two of the six travellers had turned to
the right, that is to say, they had struck away from the river, the
four others to the left, continuing on their way to Belleville. At the
outskirts of the town, another secession had taken place; three of the
riders had gone round the town, one had entered it.

Roland followed the latter, sure that he could recover the traces of the
others. The one who had entered the town and followed the main street
had stopped at a pretty house between court and garden, numbered 67. He
had rung and some one had let him in; for through the iron grating could
be seen traces of footsteps, and beside them the tracks of a horse being
led to the stable.

It was quite evident that one, at least, of the Companions of Jehu
had stopped there. By going to the mayor of the town, exhibiting his
authority, and asking for gendarmes, Roland could have arrested him at
once. But that was not his object; he did not wish to arrest a solitary
individual; he wanted to catch the whole company in a trap.

He made a note in his mind of No. 67, and continued on his way. He
crossed the entire town and rode a few hundred paces beyond it without
meeting any fresh traces. He was about to return, when it occurred to
him that, if the tracks of the three riders reappeared anywhere, it
would be at the head of the bridge. And there, sure enough, he found the
hoof-prints of three horses, which were undoubtedly those he sought, for
one of them paced.

Roland galloped in pursuit. On reaching Monceaux--same precaution,
the riders had skirted the village; but Roland was too good a scout to
trouble himself about that. He kept on his way, and at the other end of
Monceaux he recovered the fugitives' tracks. Not far from Chatillon one
of the three horses had left the highroad, turning to the right toward
a little chateau, standing on a hill a short distance from the road
between Chatillon and Trevoux. This time the three remaining riders,
evidently believing they had done enough to mislead any one who might be
following, had kept straight on through Chatillon and taken the road to
Neuville.

The direction taken by the fugitives was eminently satisfactory to
Roland; they were undoubtedly on their way to Bourg; if they had not
intended to go there they would have taken the road to Marlieux. Now,
Bourg was the headquarters Roland had himself chosen for the centre
of his own operations; it was his own town, and he knew, with the
minuteness of boyish knowledge, every bush, every ruin, every cavern in
the neighborhood.

At Neuville the riders had skirted the village. Roland did not trouble
himself about a ruse, already known and thwarted; but on the other side
he found but one trail. He could not be mistaken in that horse, however;
it was the pacer. Certain of recovering the trail again, Roland retraced
his steps. The two riders had separated at a road leading off to Vannes;
one had taken that road, the other had skirted the village, which, as
we have said, was on the road to Bourg. This was the one to follow;
besides, the gait of the horse made it easier, as it could not be
confused with any other. Moreover, he was on his way to Bourg, and
between Neuville and Bourg there was but one other village, that of
Saint-Denis. For the rest, it was not probable that the solitary rider
intended to go further than Bourg.

Roland continued on his way with more eagerness than ever, convinced
that he was nearing the end. In fact the rider had not skirted Bourg,
but had boldly entered the town. There, it seemed to Roland that the
man had hesitated, unless this hesitation were a last ruse to hide his
tracks. But after ten minutes spent in following his devious tracks
Roland was sure of his facts; it was not trickery but hesitation.

The print of a man's steps came from a side street; the traveller and
the pedestrian had conferred together for a moment, and then the former
had evidently employed the latter as a guide. From that point on, the
footsteps of a man went side by side with those of the horse. Both came
to an end at the hotel de la Belle-Alliance. Roland remembered that the
horse wounded in the attack at Les Carronnieres had been brought to this
inn. In all probability there was some connivance between the inn-keeper
and the Companion of Jehu. For the rest, in all probability the rider
would stay there until the next evening. Roland felt by his own fatigue
that the man he was following must need rest. And Roland, in order
not to force his horse and the better to reconnoitre the tracks he was
following, had taken six hours to do thirty miles.

Three o'olock was striking from the truncated bell-tower of Notre-Dame.
Roland debated what to do. Should he stop at some inn in the town?
Impossible, he was too well known in Bourg; besides, his horse with
its cavalry saddle-cloth would excite suspicion. It was one of the
conditions of success that his presence at Bourg should remain unknown.

He could hide at the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines and keep on the watch,
but could he trust the servants? Michel and Jacques would hold their
tongues, Roland was sure of them; but Charlotte, the jailer's daughter,
she might gossip. However, it was three o'clock in the morning, every
one was asleep, and the safest plan was certainly to put himself in
communication with Michel. Michel would find some way of concealing his
presence.

To the deep regret of his horse, who had no doubt scented a stable,
Roland wheeled about and rode off in the direction of Pont-d'Ain. As he
passed the church of Brou he glanced at the barrack of the gendarmes,
where, in all probability, they and their captain were sleeping the
sleep of the righteous.

Roland cut through the little strip of forest which jutted into the
road. The snow deadened the sound of his horse's hoofs. Branching into
the road from the other side, he saw two men slinking along in the
ditch, carrying a deer slung by its forelegs to a sapling. He thought he
recognized the cut of the two men, and he spurred his horse to overtake
them. The men were on the watch; they turned, saw the rider, who was
evidently making for them, flung the animal into the ditch, and made for
the shelter of the forest of Seillon.

"Hey, Michel!" cried Roland, more and more convinced that he had to do
with his own gardener.

Michel stopped short; the other man kept on his way across the fields.

"Hey, Jacques!" shouted Roland.

The other man stopped. If they were recognized, it was useless to fly;
besides, there was nothing hostile in the call; the voice was friendly,
rather than threatening.

"Bless me!" said Jacques, "it sounds like M. Roland."

"I do believe it is he," said Michel.

And the two men, instead of continuing their flight, returned to the
highroad.

Roland had not heard what the two poachers had said, but he had guessed.

"Hey, the deuce! of course it is I," he shouted.

A minute more and Michel and Jacques were beside him. The questions
of father and son were a crossfire, and it must be owned they had good
reason for amazement. Roland, in civilian's dress, on a cavalry horse,
at three in the morning, on the road from Bourg to the chateau! The
young officer cut short all questions.

"Silence, poachers!" said he, "put that deer behind me and be off at
trot to the chateau. No one must know of my presence there, not even my
sister."

Roland spoke with military precision, and both men knew that when he
gave an order there was no replying. They picked up the deer, put it
behind his saddle, and followed the gentle trot of the horse at a run.
There was less than a mile to do, and it took but ten minutes. At a
short distance from the chateau, Roland pulled up. The two men went
forward as scouts to see if all were quiet. Satisfied on that point,
they made a sign to Roland to advance.

Roland came, dismounted, found the door of the lodge open, and entered.
Michel took the horse to the stable and carried the deer to the kitchen;
for Michel belonged to that honorable class of poachers, who kill game
for the pleasure of killing, and not for the selfish interest of sale.
There was no need for precaution, either for horse or deer; for Amelie
took no more notice of what went on in the stable than of what they
served her to eat.

During this time Jacques lighted the fire. When Michel returned he
brought the remains of a leg of mutton and some eggs for an omelet.
Jacques made up a bed in the office.

Roland warmed himself and ate his supper without saying a word. The two
men looked at each other with an astonishment that was not devoid of a
certain degree of anxiety. A rumor of the expedition to Seillon had got
about, and it was whispered that Roland had led it. Apparently, he had
returned for another similar expedition.

When Roland had finished his supper he looked up and saw Michel.

"Ah! so there you are?" he exclaimed.

"I am waiting for Monsieur's orders."

"Here they are; listen carefully."

"I'm all ears."

"It's a question of life or death; of more than that, of my honor."

"Speak, Monsieur Roland."

Roland pulled out his watch.

"It is now five o'clock. When the inn of the Belle-Alliance opens, be
there, as if you were just sauntering by; then stop a minute to chat
with whoever opens it."

"That will probably be Pierre."

"Pierre or another; find out from him who the traveller is who arrived
last night on a pacing horse. You know what pacing is, don't you?"

"The deuce! You mean a horse that goes like a bear, both feet forward at
the same time."

"Bravo! You can also find out whether the traveller is leaving this
morning, or whether he proposes to spend the day at the hotel, can't
you?"

"Of course I can find that out."

"Well, when you have found out all that, come and tell me; but remember,
not a word about my being here. If any one asks about me, say that they
had a letter from me yesterday, and that I was in Paris with the First
Consul."

"That's understood."

Michel departed. Roland went to bed and to sleep, leaving Jacques to
guard the building.

When Roland awoke Michel had returned. He had found out all that his
master desired to know. The horseman who had arrived in the night was
to leave the next morning, and on the travellers' register, which
every innkeeper was obliged by law to keep in those days, was entered:
"Saturday, 30th Pluviose, _ten at night_; the citizen Valensolle, from
Lyons going to Geneva." Thus the alibi was prepared; for the register
would prove that the citizen Valensolle had arrived at ten o'clock, and
it was impossible that he could have assisted in robbing the mail-coach
near the Maison-Blanche at half-past eight and yet have reached the
Hotel de la Belle-Alliance at ten.

But what impressed Roland the most was that the man he had followed
through the night, and whose name and retreat he had just discovered,
was none other than the second of Alfred de Barjols, whom he himself
had killed in a duel near the fountain of Vaucluse; and that that second
was, in all probability, the man who had played the part of ghost at the
Chartreuse of Seillon.

So, then, the Companions of Jehu were not mere thieves, but, on the
contrary, as rumor said, gentlemen of good family, who, while the noble
Bretons were laying down their lives for the royalist cause in the West,
were, here in the East, braving the scaffold to send to the combatants
the money they took from the government.




CHAPTER XLVI. AN INSPIRATION

We have seen that during the pursuit of the preceding night Roland could
have arrested one or two of the men he was pursuing. He could now do
the same with M. de Valensolle, who was probably, like Roland himself,
taking a day's rest after a night of great fatigue.

To do it he had only to write a line to the captain of gendarmes, or to
the colonel of dragoons, who had assisted him during that ineffectual
search at Seillon. Their honor was concerned in the affair. They could
instantly surprise M. de Valensolle in bed, and at the cost of two
pistol shots--two men killed or wounded--he would be taken.

But M. de Valensolle's arrest would give warning to the rest of the
band, who would instantly put themselves in safety beyond the frontier.
It was better, therefore, to keep to his first idea; to go slowly, to
follow the different trails which must converge to one centre, and, at
the risk of a general engagement, throw a net over the whole company.

To do that, M. de Valensolle must not be arrested. It was better to
follow him on his pretended journey to Geneva, which was probably but a
blind to foil investigation. It was therefore agreed that Roland, whose
disguise, however good, was liable to be penetrated, should remain
at the lodge, and Michel and Jacques should head off the game. In all
probabilities, M. de Valensolle would not set out from the inn before
nightfall.

Roland made inquiries of Michel about the life his sister had led since
her mother's departure. He learned that she had never once left the
grounds during that time. Her habits were still the same, except for the
walks and visits she had made with Madame de Montrevel.

She rose at seven or eight in the morning, sketched or practiced her
music till breakfast, and afterward read or employed herself at some
kind of embroidery, or took advantage of the sunshine to go out with
Charlotte to the river. Sometimes she bade Michel unfasten the little
boat, and then, well wrapped in furs, would row up the Reissouse as far
as Montagnac or down to Saint-Just. During these trips she spoke to no
one. Then she dined. After dinner, she retired to her bedroom and did
not appear again.

By half-past six, therefore, Michel and Jacques could decamp without
arousing any suspicion as to their where-about; and, accordingly, at
that hour they took their blouses, game-bags and guns, and started.
Roland had given them their instructions. They were to follow the pacing
horse until they had ascertained his destination, or until they had
lost all trace of him. Michel was to lie in wait opposite the inn of the
Belle-Alliance; Jacques was to station himself outside of Bourg,
just where the main road divides into three branches, one going to
Saint-Amour, another to Saint-Claude, and the third to Nantua. This last
was at the same time the highroad to Geneva. It was evident that unless
M. de Valensolle returned upon his steps, which was not probable, he
would take one or another of these three roads.

The father started in one direction, the son in another. Michel went
toward the town by the road to Pont-d'Ain, passing the church of Brou.
Jacques crossed the Reissouse, followed the right bank of the little
river, and found himself, after walking a few hundred yards beyond the
town, at the sharp angle made by the parting of the three roads. Father
and son reached their separate posts at about the same time.

At this particular moment, that is to say, about seven o'clock, the
stillness and solitude surrounding the Chateau des Noires-Fontaines was
broken by the arrival of a post-chaise, which stopped before the iron
gate. A servant in livery got off the box and pulled the chain of the
bell.

It was Michel's business to open the gate, but Michel was away, as we
know. Amelie and Charlotte probably counted on him, for the bell was
rung three times before any one answered it. At last the maid appeared
at the head of the stairs calling Michel. Michel made no reply. Finally,
protected by the locked gates, Charlotte ventured to approach them. In
spite of the obscurity she recognized the servant.

"Ah, is it you, Monsieur James?" she cried, somewhat reassured. James
was Sir John's confidential valet.

"Yes, mademoiselle, it is I, or rather it is Sir John."

The carriage door opened at this moment, and his master's voice was
heard saying: "Mademoiselle Charlotte, will you tell your mistress that
I have just arrived from Paris, that I have called to leave my card, and
to ask permission, not to be received this evening, but to be allowed to
call to-morrow, if she will grant me that favor. Ask her at what hour I
shall least inconvenience her."

Mademoiselle Charlotte had a high opinion of Sir John, consequently
she acquitted herself of the commission with the utmost alacrity. Five
minutes later she returned to announce that Sir John would be received
the next day between twelve and one o'clock.

Roland knew what the Englishman had come for. In his mind the marriage
was an accomplished fact, and he regarded Sir John already as his
brother-in-law. He hesitated a moment as to whether he should or should
not make himself known to Sir John, and tell his friend about his
projects; but he reflected that Sir John was not a man to let him work
them out alone. He, too, had a revenge to take on the Companions of
Jehu; he would certainly insist on taking part in the expedition,
whatever it was. And that expedition, however it might result, was
certain to be dangerous, and another disaster might befall him. Roland's
luck, as Roland well knew, did not extend to his friends. Sir John,
grievously wounded, had barely escaped with his life, and the colonel
of dragoons had been killed outright. He therefore allowed Sir John to
drive away without giving any sign of his own proximity.

As for Charlotte, she did not seem in the least surprised that Michel
was not there to open the gate. Evidently they were accustomed to his
absences, and they did not disturb either the mistress or the maid.
For the rest, Roland knew his sister well enough to understand this
indifference. Amelie, feeble under a moral suffering wholly unsuspected
by Roland, who attributed to simple nervous crises the fluctuations of
his sister's character, Amelie was strong and brave before real danger.
That was no doubt why she felt no fear about remaining with Charlotte
alone in the lonely house, without other protection than that afforded
by the two gardeners, who spent their nights in poaching.

As for ourselves, we know that Michel and his son did really serve their
mistress' desire more in absenting themselves thus frequently from the
chateau than in staying near it. Their absence left the coast clear
for Morgan, [and that] was all Amelie really cared about.

That evening and part of the night went by without bringing Roland any
news. He tried to sleep, but succeeded ill. He fancied every minute that
he heard some one at the door. The day was just beginning to glimmer
through the shutters when the door did actually open. Michel and Jacques
were returning, and this is what had happened to them:

They had each gone to his post, Michel at the inn door, Jacques to the
junction of the roads. Twenty paces from the door Michel had met Pierre,
and three words sufficed to show him that M. de Valensolle was still at
the inn. The latter had announced that, as he had a long journey before
him, he would let his horse rest and would not start until nightfall.
Pierre did not doubt that he was going to Geneva, as he said.

Michel proposed a glass of wine to Pierre. Pierre accepted. After that,
Michel was sure of being warned of any change. Pierre was the hostler,
and nothing could be done in the stable without his knowledge. A lad
attached to the inn promised to convey the news to Michel, in return
for which Michel gave him three charges of powder with which to make
firecrackers.

At midnight the traveller had not yet started; they had drunk four
bottles of wine, but Michel had partaken sparingly of them. He had found
means to pour three of the four bottles into Pierre's glass, where they
did not long remain. At midnight the wine-shop closed, and Michel having
nowhere to go for the four hours that still remained until daybreak,
Pierre offered him a bed of straw in the stable. Michel accepted. The
two friends went back arm-in-arm; Pierre staggering, Michel pretending
to stagger.

At three o'clock in the morning the servant of the hotel awakened
Michel. The traveller wanted his horse. Michel, pretending that he must
be off to see to his game, also rose. His toilet was not long in making;
he had only to shake the straw from his hair, game-bag, and blouse,
after which he took leave of his friend Pierre and hid himself at the
corner of the street.

Fifteen minutes later the gate opened and a man rode out on a pacing
horse. It was M. de Valensolle. He took the street that led to the
Geneva road. Michel followed without concealment, whistling a hunting
air. Only, as Michel could not run for fear of attracting the rider's
notice, he lost sight of him before long. But Jacques was there, thought
he, waiting at the fork of the roads. Yes, Jacques had been there,
but he had been there for over six hours of a winter's night, in five
degrees of cold. Had he the courage to stand six hours in the snow and
kick his soles against a tree?

Thinking thus, Michel took a short cut through the streets and lanes,
running at full speed; but horse and rider, in spite of his haste, had
gone faster than he. He reached the fork of the roads. All was silent
and solitary. The snow, trampled the day before, a Sunday, no longer
showed distinct tracks. The steps of the horse were lost in the mud of
the road. Nor did he waste further time in vain searching. He wondered
what had become of Jacques; but his poacher's eye soon told him.

Jacques had stood on watch at the foot of a tree. For how long? It was
difficult to say, but long enough to become very cold. The snow was well
beaten down by his heavy hunting-boots. He had evidently tried to keep
warm by walking up and down. Then suddenly he must have remembered a
little mud hut on the other side of the road, such as the road-menders
build as a shelter against the rain. He had gone down the ditch and
crossed the road. His trail, lost for a moment in the centre of the
road, was visible on the snow at either side. This trail formed a
diagonal line, making straight for the hut. It was evidently in the hut
that Jacques had passed the night. But when had he left it? And why
had he left it? The first question was unanswerable. But to the most
inexperienced scout the second was plain enough. He had left it to
follow M. de Valensolle. The same footsteps that had approached the hut
were to be seen going, as they left it, in the direction of Ceyzeriat.

The traveller had really taken the road to Geneva. Jacques' footsteps
showed it plainly. The stride was long, like that of a man running, and
he had followed the road behind the trees, evidently to conceal himself
from the rider. At a wretched tavern, one of those with the legend
inscribed over its door: "Here we give food and drink, equestrian and
pedestrian lodgings," the trail stopped. It was clear that the rider had
stopped before this inn, for Jacques had also paused behind a tree some
twenty feet distant, where the snow was-trampled. Then, probably after
the gate had closed on horse and rider, Jacques had left his tree,
crossed the road, this time with hesitation, his short steps leading,
not to the door, but to the window.

Michel put his own feet in his son's footprints and reached the window.
Through the chinks in the shutter the interior, when lighted, could be
seen; but now all was dark, and Michel could see nothing. But Jacques
had certainly looked through the window; no doubt it was then lighted,
and he had been able to see something.

Where had he gone on leaving the window? Round the house, close to the
wall. This excursion was easy to follow. The snow was virgin. As for
his purpose in going round the house that was not difficult to make out.
Jacques, like a lad of sense, had concluded that the traveller had not
left a good hotel, saying that he was going to Geneva, to put up at a
miserable tavern a mile from the town.

He must have ridden through the yard and gone out by some other exit.
Jacques had, therefore, skirted the house in the hope of recovering the
trail, if not of the horse, at least of the rider on the other side.

Sure enough, from a small gate in the rear, opening toward the forest
that extends from Coterz to Ceyzeriat, footsteps could be seen advancing
