"Eh?"

"Thrust out one of his eyes, and he will find his tongue."

It was done.

"Will you answer now?"

The poor wretch only howled.

"Thrust out the other."

"No, not that! Mercy: I will tell. He is gone by this four hours. How
have you not met him?"

"Fool! The hoofs point onward there."

"Ay,"--and the fellow could hardly hide a grin,--"but he had shod all
his horses backwards."

A storm of execration followed. They might be thrown twenty miles out of
their right road by the stratagem.

"So you had seen Hereward, and would not tell. Put out his other eye,"
said Taillebois, as a vent to his own feelings.

And they turned their horses' heads, and rode back, leaving the man
blind in the forest.

The day was waning now. The fog hung heavy on the treetops, and dripped
upon their heads. The horses were getting tired, and slipped and
stumbled in the deep clay paths. The footmen were more tired still, and,
cold and hungry, straggled more and more. The horse-tracks led over an
open lawn of grass and fern, with here and there an ancient thorn, and
round it on three sides thick wood of oak and beech, with under copse of
holly and hazel. Into that wood the horse-tracks led, by a path on which
there was but room for one horse at a time.

"Here they are at last!" cried Ivo. "I see the fresh footmarks of men,
as well as horses. Push on, knights and men at-arms."

The Abbot looked at the dark, dripping wood, and meditated.

"I think that it will be as well for some of us to remain here;
and, spreading our men along the woodside, prevent the escape of the
villains. _A moi, hommes d'armes!_"

"As you like. I will go in and bolt the rabbit; and you shall snap him
up as he comes out."

And Ivo, who was as brave as a bull-dog, thrust his horse into the path,
while the Abbot sat shivering outside. "Certain nobles of higher rank,"
says Peter de Blois, "followed his example, not wishing to rust their
armor, or tear their fine clothes, in the dank copse."

The knights and men-at-arms straggled slowly into the forest, some by
the path, some elsewhere, grumbling audibly at the black work before
them. At last the crashing of the branches died away, and all was still.

Abbot Thorold sat there upon his shivering horse, shivering himself as
the cold pierced through his wet mail; and as near an hour past, and no
sign of foe or friend appeared, he cursed the hour in which he took
off the beautiful garments of the sanctuary to endure those of the
battle-field. He thought of a warm chamber, warm bath, warm footcloths,
warm pheasant, and warm wine. He kicked his freezing iron feet in the
freezing iron stirrup. He tried to blow his nose with his freezing iron
hand; but dropt his handkerchief into the mud, and his horse trod on it.
He tried to warble the song of Roland; but the words exploded in a cough
and a sneeze. And so dragged on the weary hours, says the chronicler,
nearly all day, till the ninth hour. But never did they see coming out
of the forest the men who had gone in.

A shout from his nephew, Sir Ascelin, made all turn their heads. Behind
them, on the open lawn, in the throat between the woods by which they
had entered, were some forty knights, galloping toward them.

"Ivo?"

"No!" almost shrieked the Abbot. "There is the white-bear banner. It is
Hereward."

"There is Winter on his left," cried one. "And there, with the standard,
is the accursed monk, Ranald of Ramsey."

And on they came, having debouched from the wood some two hundred yards
off, behind a roll in the lawn, just far enough off to charge as soon as
they were in line.

On they came, two deep, with lances high over their shoulders, heads and
heels well down, while the green tufts flew behind them, "_A moi, hommes
d'armes!_" shouted the Abbot. But too late. The French turned right
and left. To form was impossible, ere the human whirlwind would be upon
them.

Another half-minute and with a shout of "A bear! a bear. The Wake! the
Wake!" they were struck, ridden through, hurled over, and trampled into
the mud.

"I yield. Grace! I yield!" cried Thorold, struggling from under his
horse; but there was no one to whom to yield. The knights' backs
were fifty yards off, their right arms high in the air, striking and
stabbing.

The battle was "_a l'outrance_." There was no quarter given that day.

   "And he that came live out thereof
       Was he that ran away."

The Abbot tried to make for the wood, but ere he could gain it, the
knights had turned, and one rode straight at him, throwing away a broken
lance, and drawing his sword.

Abbot Thorold may not have been the coward which Peter of Blois would
have him, over and above being the bully which all men would have him;
but if so, even a worm will turn; and so did the Abbot: he drew sword
from thigh, got well under his shield, his left foot forward, and struck
one blow for his life, and at the right place,--his foe's bare knee.

But he had to do with a warier man than himself. There was a quick jerk
of the rein; the horse swerved round, right upon him, and knocked him
head over heels; while his blow went into empty air.

"Yield or die!" cried the knight, leaping from his horse, and kneeling
on his head.

"I am a man of God, an abbot, churchman, Thorold."

"Man of all the devils!" and the knight lugged him up, and bound his
arms behind him with the abbot's own belt.

"Ahoi! Here! I have caught a fish. I have got the Golden Borough in my
purse!" roared he. "How much has St. Peter gained since we borrowed of
him last, Abbot? He will have to pay out the silver pennies bonnily, if
he wishes to get back thee."

"Blaspheme not, godless barbarian!" Whereat the knight kicked him.

"And you have Thorold the scoundrel, Winter?" cried Hereward, galloping
up. "And we have three or four more dainty French knights, and a
viscount of I know not where among them. This is a good day's work. Now
for Ivo and his tail."

And the Abbot, with four or five more prisoners, were hoisted on to
their own horses, tied firmly, and led away into the forest path.

"Do not leave a wounded man to die," cried a knight who lay on the lawn.

"Never we. I will come back and put you out of your pain," quoth some
one.

"Siward! Siward Le Blanc! Are you in this meinie?" cried the knight in
French.

"That am I. Who calls?"

"For God's sake save him!" cried Thorold. "He is my own nephew, and I
will pay--"

"You will need all your money for yourself," said Siward the White,
riding back.

"Are you Sir Ascelin of Ghent?"

"That am I, your host of old."

"I wish I had met you in better company. But friends we are, and friends
must be."

And he dismounted, and did his best for the wounded man, promising to
return and fetch him off before night, or send yeomen to do so.

As he pushed on through the wood, the Abbot began to see signs of
a fight; riderless horses crashing through the copse, wounded men
straggling back, to be cut down without mercy by the English. The war
had been "_a l'outrance_" for a long while. None gave or asked quarter.
The knights might be kept for ransom: they had money. The wretched men
of the lower classes, who had none, were slain: as they would have slain
the English.

Soon they heard the noise of battle; and saw horsemen and footmen
pell-mell, tangled in an abattis, from behind which archers and
cross-bowmen shot them down in safety.

Hereward dashed forward, with the shout of Torfrida; and at that the
French, taken in the flank, fled, and were smitten as they fled, hip and
thigh.

Hereward bade them spare a fugitive, and bring him to him.

"I give you your life; so run, and carry my message. That is
Taillebois's banner there forward, is it not?"

"Yes."

"Then go after him, and tell him,--Hereward has the Abbot of Burgh, and
half a dozen knights, safe by the heels. And unless Ivo clears the wood
of his men by nightfall, I will hang every one of them up for the crows
before morning."

Ivo got the message, and having had enough fighting for the day,
drew off, says the chronicler, for the sake of the Abbot and his
fellow-captives.

Two hours after the Abbot and the other prisoners were sitting, unbound,
but unarmed, in the forest encampment, waiting for a right good meal,
with Torfrida bustling about them, after binding up the very few wounded
among their own men.

Every courtesy was shown them; and their hearts were lifted up, as they
beheld approaching among the trees great caldrons of good soup; forest
salads; red deer and roe roasted on the wood embers; spits of pheasants
and partridges, larks and buntings, thrust off one by one by fair hands
into the burdock leaves which served as platters; and last, but not
least, jacks of ale and wine, appearing mysteriously from a cool old
stone quarry. Abbot Thorold ate to his heart's content, complimented
every one, vowed he would forswear all Norman cooks and take to the
greenwood himself, and was as gracious and courtly as if he had been at
the new palace at Winchester.

And all the more for this reason,--that he had intended to overawe the
English barbarians by his polished Norman manners. He found those of
Hereward and Torfrida, at least, as polished as his own.

"I am glad you are content, Lord Abbot," said Torfrida; "I trust you
prefer dining with me to burning me, as you meant to do."

"I burn such peerless beauty! I injure a form made only for the courts
of kings! Heaven and all saints, knighthood and all chivalry, forbid.
What Taillebois may have said, I know not! I am no more answerable for
his intentions than I am for his parentage,--or his success this day.
Let churls be churls, and wood-cutters wood-cutters. I at least, thanks
to my ancestors, am a gentleman."

"And, as a gentleman, will of course contribute to the pleasure of your
hosts. It will surely please you to gratify us with one stave at least
of that song, which has made your name famous among all knights,"
holding out a harp.

"I blush; but obey. A harp in the greenwood? A court in the wilderness!
What joy!"

And the vain Abbot took the harp, and said,--"These, if you will allow
my modesty to choose, are the staves on which I especially pride myself.
The staves which Taillefer--you will pardon my mentioning him--"

"Why pardon? A noble minstrel he was, and a brave warrior, though our
foe. And often have I longed to hear him, little thinking that I should
hear instead the maker himself."

So said Hereward; and the Abbot sang--those wondrous staves, where
Roland, left alone of all the Paladins, finds death come on him fast.
And on the Pyrenaean peak, beneath the pine, he lays himself, his "face
toward the ground, and under him his sword and magic horn, that Charles,
his lord, may say, and all his folk, The gentle count, he died a
conqueror"; and then "turns his eyes southward toward Spain, betakes
himself to remember many things; of so many lands which he conquered
valiantly; of pleasant France; of the men of his lineage; of
Charlemagne, his lord, who brought him up. He could not help to weep
and sigh, but yet himself he would not forget. He bewailed his sins, and
prayed God's mercy:--True Father, who ne'er yet didst lie, who raised
St. Lazarus from death, and guarded Daniel from the lions, guard my soul
from all perils, for the sins which in my life I did! His right glove
then he offered to God; St. Gabriel took it from his hand; on his arm
the chief bowed down, with joined hands he went unto his end. God sent
down his angel cherubim, and St. Michael, whom men call 'del peril.'
Together with them, St. Gabriel, he came; the soul of the count they
bore to Paradise."

And the Abbot ended, sadly and gently, without that wild "Aoi!" the
war-cry with which he usually ends his staves. And the wild men of
the woods were softened and saddened by the melody; and as many as
understood French, said, when he finished, "Amen! so may all good
knights die!"

"Thou art a great maker, Abbot! They told truths of thee. Sing us more
of thy great courtesy."

And he sang them the staves of the Olifant, the magic horn,--how Roland
would not sound it in his pride, and sounded it at Turpin's bidding, but
too late; and how his temples burst with that great blast, and Charles
and all his peers heard it through the gorges, leagues away in France.
And then his "Aoi" rang forth so loud and clear, like any trumpet blast,
under the oaken glades, that the wild men leaped to their feet, and
shouted, "Health to the gleeman! Health to the Abbot Thorold!"

"I have won them," thought the Abbot to himself. Strange mixture that
man must have been, if all which is told of him is true; a very typical
Norman, compact of cunning and ferocity, chivalry and poetry, vanity
and superstition, and yet able enough to help to conquer England for the
Pope.

Then he pressed Hereward to sing, with many compliments; and Hereward
sang, and sang again, and all his men crowded round him as the outlaws
of Judaea may have crowded round David in Carmel or Hebron, to hear,
like children, old ditties which they loved the better the oftener they
heard them.

"No wonder that you can keep these knights together, if you can charm
them thus with song. Would that I could hear you singing thus in
William's hall."

"No more of that, Sir Abbot. The only music which I have for William is
the music of steel on steel."

Hereward answered sharply, because he was half of Thorold's mind.

"Now," said Torfrida, as it grew late, "we must ask our noble guest
for what he can give us as easily and well as he can song,--and that is
news. We hear naught here in the greenwood, and must throw oneself on
the kindness of a chance visitor."

The Abbot leapt at the bait, and told them news, court gossip, bringing
in great folks' names and his own, as often and as familiarly mingled as
he could.

"What of Richilda?" asked Torfrida.

"Ever since young Arnoul was killed at Cassel--"

"Arnoul killed?" shrieked Torfrida.

"Is it possible that you do not know?"

"How should I know, shut up in Ely for--years it seems."

"But they fought at Cassel three months before you went to Ely."

"Be it so. Only tell me. Arnoul killed!"

Then the Abbot told, not without feeling, a fearful story.

Robert the Frison and Richilda had come to open war, and Gerbod the
Fleming, Earl of Clueter, had gone over from England to help Robert.
William had sent Fitz-Osbern, Earl of Hereford, the scourge and tyrant
of the Welsh, to help Richilda. Fitz Osbern had married her, there and
then. She had asked help of her liege lord, the King of France, and he
had sent her troops. Robert and Richilda had fought on St. Peter's day,
1071,--nearly two years before, at Bavinchorum, by Cassel.

Richilda had played the heroine, and routed Robert's left wing, taken
him prisoner, and sent him off to St. Omer. Men said that she had done
it by her enchantments. But her enchantments betrayed her nevertheless.
Fitz Osbern, her bridegroom, fell dead. Young Arnoul had two horses
killed under him. Then Gerbod smote him to the ground, and Richilda and
her troops fled in horror. Richilda was taken, and exchanged for the
Frison; at which the King of France, being enraged, had come down and
burnt St. Omer. Then Richilda, undaunted, had raised fresh troops to
avenge her son. Then Robert had met them at Broqueroie by Mons, and
smote them with a dreadful slaughter. [Footnote: The place was called
till late, and may be now, "The Hedges of Death."] Then Richilda had
turned and fled wildly into a convent; and, so men said, tortured
herself night and day with fearful penances, if by any means she might
atone for her great sins.

Torfrida heard, and laid her head upon her knees, and wept so bitterly,
that the Abbot entreated pardon for having pained her so much.

The news had a deep and lasting effect on her. The thought of Richilda
shivering and starving in the squalid darkness of a convent, abode by
her thenceforth. Should she ever find herself atoning in like wise for
her sorceries,--harmless as they had been; for her ambitions,--just as
they had been; for her crimes? But she had committed none. No, she
had sinned in many things: but she was not as Richilda. And yet in the
loneliness and sadness of the forest, she could not put Richilda from
before the eyes of her mind.

It saddened Hereward likewise. For Richilda he cared little. But that
boy. How he had loved him! How he had taught him to ride, and sing, and
joust, and handle sword, and all the art of war. How his own rough soul
had been the better for that love. How he had looked forward to the day
when Arnoul should be a great prince, and requite him with love. Now
he was gone. Gone? Who was not gone, or going? He seemed to himself the
last tree in the forest. When should his time come, and the lightning
strike him down to rot beside the rest? But he tost the sad thoughts
aside. He could not afford to nourish them. It was his only chance of
life, to be merry and desperate.

"Well!" said Hereward, ere they hapt themselves up for the night. "We
owe you thanks, Abbot Thorold, for an evening worthy of a king's court,
rather than a holly-bush."

"I have won him over," thought the Abbot.

"So charming a courtier,--so sweet a minstrel,--so agreeable a
newsmonger,--could I keep you in a cage forever, and hang you on a
bough, I were but too happy: but you are too fine a bird to sing in
captivity. So you must go, I fear, and leave us to the nightingales. And
I will take for your ransom--"

Abbot Thorold's heart beat high.

"Thirty thousand silver marks."

"Thirty thousand fiends!"

"My beau Sire, will you undervalue yourself? Will you degrade yourself?
I took Abbot Thorold, from his talk, to be a man who set even a higher
value on himself than other men set on him. What higher compliment can I
pay to your vast worth, than making your ransom high accordingly, after
the spirit of our ancient English laws? Take it as it is meant, beau
Sire; be proud to pay the money; and we will throw you Sir Ascelin into
the bargain, as he seems a friend of Siward's."

Thorold hoped that Hereward was drunk, and might forget, or relent; but
he was so sore at heart that he slept not a wink that night. But in
the morning he found, to his sorrow, that Hereward had been as sober as
himself.

In fine, he had to pay the money; and was a poor man all his days.

"Aha! Sir Ascelin," said Hereward apart, as he bade them all farewell
with many courtesies. "I think I have put a spoke in your wheel about
the fair Alftruda."

"Eh? How? Most courteous victor?"

"Sir Ascelin is not a very wealthy gentleman."

Ascelin laughed assent.

"Nudus intravi, nudus exeo--England; and I fear now, this mortal life
likewise."

"But he looked to his rich uncle the Abbot, to further a certain
marriage-project of his. And, of course, neither my friend Gilbert of
Ghent, nor my enemy William of Normandy, are likely to give away so rich
an heiress without some gratification in return."

"Sir Hereward knows the world, it seems."

"So he has been told before. And, therefore, having no intention that
Sir Ascelin, however worthy of any and every fair lady, should marry
this one; he took care to cut off the stream at the fountain-head. If he
hears that the suit is still pushed, he may cut off another head beside
the fountain's."

"There will be no need," said Ascelin, laughing again. "You have very
sufficiently ruined my uncle, and my hopes."

"My head?" said he, as soon as Hereward was out of hearing. "If I do not
cut off thy head ere all is over, there is neither luck nor craft left
among Normans. I shall catch the Wake sleeping some day, let him be
never so wakeful."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

HOW ALFTRUDA WROTE TO HEREWARD.


The weary months ran on, from summer into winter, and winter into summer
again, for two years and more, and neither Torfrida nor Hereward were
the better for them. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: and a
sick heart is but too apt to be a peevish one. So there were fits of
despondency, jars, mutual recriminations. "If I had not taken your
advice, I should not have been here." "If I had not loved you so well,
I might have been very differently off,"--and so forth. The words were
wiped away the next hour, perhaps the next minute, by sacred kisses; but
they had been said, and would be recollected, and perhaps said again.

Then, again, the "merry greenwood" was merry enough in the summer tide,
when shaughs were green, and

   "The woodwele sang, and would not cease,
      Sitting upon the spray.
    So loud, it wakened Robin Hood
      In the greenwood where he lay."

But it was a sad place enough, when the autumn fog crawled round the
gorse, and dripped off the hollies, and choked alike the breath and
the eyesight; when the air sickened with the graveyard smell of rotting
leaves, and the rain-water stood in the clay holes over the poached and
sloppy lawns.

It was merry enough, too, when they were in winter quarters in friendly
farm-houses, as long as the bright sharp frosts lasted, and they tracked
the hares and deer merrily over the frozen snows; but it was doleful
enough in those same farm-houses in the howling wet weather, when wind
and rain lashed in through unglazed window, and ill-made roof, and there
were coughs and colds and rheumatisms, and Torfrida ached from head to
foot, and once could not stand upright for a whole month together, and
every cranny was stuffed up with bits of board and rags, keeping out
light and air as well as wind and water; and there was little difference
between the short day and the long night; and the men gambled and
wrangled amid clouds of peat-reek, over draughtboards and chessmen which
they had carved for themselves, and Torfrida sat stitching and sewing,
making and mending, her eyes bleared with peat-smoke, her hands sore
and coarse from continual labor, her cheek bronzed, her face thin and
hollow, and all her beauty worn away for very trouble. Then sometimes
there was not enough to eat, and every one grumbled at her; or some
one's clothes were not mended, and she was grumbled at again. And
sometimes a foraging party brought home liquor, and all who could
got drunk to drive dull care away; and Hereward, forgetful of all her
warnings, got more than was good for him likewise; and at night she
coiled herself up in her furs, cold and contemptuous; and Hereward
coiled himself up, guilty and defiant, and woke her again and again with
startings and wild words in his sleep. And she felt that her beauty
was gone, and that he saw it; and she fancied him (perhaps it was only
fancy) less tender than of yore; and then in very pride disdained to
take any care of her person, and said to herself, though she dare not
say it to him, that if he only loved her for her face, he did not love
her at all. And because she fancied him cold at times, she was cold
likewise, and grew less and less caressing, when for his sake, as well
as her own, she should have grown more so day by day.

Alas for them! there are many excuses. Sorrow may be a softening
medicine at last, but at first it is apt to be a hardening one; and
that savage outlaw life which they were leading can never have been a
wholesome one for any soul of man, and its graces must have existed
only in the brains of harpers and gleemen. Away from law, from
self-restraint, from refinement, from elegance, from the very sound of a
church-going bell, they were sinking gradually down to the level of the
coarse men and women whom they saw; the worse and not the better parts
of both their characters were getting the upper hand; and it was but too
possible that after a while the hero might sink into the ruffian, the
lady into a slattern and a shrew.

But in justice to them be it said, that neither of them had complained
of the other to any living soul. Their love had been as yet too perfect,
too sacred, for them to confess to another (and thereby confess to
themselves) that it could in any wise fail. They had each idolized the
other, and been too proud of their idolatry to allow that their idol
could crumble or decay.

And yet at last that point, too, was reached. One day they were
wrangling about somewhat, as they too often wrangled, and Hereward in
his temper let fall the words. "As I said to Winter the other day, you
grow harder and harder upon me."

Torfrida started and fixed on him wide, terrible, scornful eyes "So you
complain of me to your boon companions?"

And she turned and went away without a word. A gulf had opened between
them. They hardly spoke to each other for a week.

Hereward complained of Torfrida? What if Torfrida should complain of
Hereward? But to whom? Not to the coarse women round her; her pride
revolted from that thought;--and yet she longed for counsel, for
sympathy,--to open her heart but to one fellow-woman. She would go to
the Lady Godiva at Crowland, and take counsel of her, whether there was
any method (for so she put it to herself) of saving Hereward; for she
saw but too clearly that he was fast forgetting all her teaching, and
falling back to a point lower than that even from which she had raised
him up.

To go to Crowland was not difficult. It was mid-winter. The dikes were
all frozen. Hereward was out foraging in the Lincolnshire wolds. So
Torfrida, taking advantage of his absence, proposed another foraging
party to Crowland itself. She wanted stuff for clothes, needles, thread,
what not. A dozen stout fellows volunteered at once to take her. The
friendly monks of Crowland would feast them royally, and send them
home heaped with all manner of good things; while as for meeting Ivo
Taillebois's men, if they had but three to one against them, there was
a fair chance of killing a few, and carrying off their clothes and
weapons, which would be useful. So they made a sledge, tied beef-bones
underneath it, put Torfrida thereon, well wrapped in deer and fox and
badger skin, and then putting on their skates, swept her over the fen to
Crowland, singing like larks along the dikes.

And Torfrida went in to Godiva, and wept upon her knees; and Godiva wept
likewise, and gave her such counsel as she could,--how if the woman will
keep the men heroic, she must keep herself not heroic only, but devout
likewise; how she herself, by that one deed which had rendered her name
famous then, and famous (though she never dreamt thereof) now, and it
may be to the end of time,--had once for all, tamed, chained, and as it
were converted, the heart of her fierce young lord; and enabled her to
train him in good time into the most wise, most just, most pious, of all
King Edward's earls.

And Torfrida said yes, and yes, and yes, and felt in her heart that she
knew all that already. Had not she, too, taught, entreated, softened,
civilized? Had not she, too, spent her life upon a man, and that man a
wolf's-head and a landless outlaw, more utterly than Godiva could ever
have spent hers on one who lived lapped in luxury and wealth and power?
Torfrida had done her best, and she had failed, or at least fancied in
her haste that she had failed.

What she wanted was, not counsel, but love. And she clung round the Lady
Godiva, till the broken and ruined widow opened all her heart to her,
and took her in her arms, and fondled her as if she had been a babe. And
the two women spoke few words after that, for indeed there was nothing
to be said. Only at last, "My child, my child," cried Godiva, "better
for thee, body and soul, to be here with me in the house of God, than
there amid evil spirits and deeds of darkness in the wild woods."

"Not a cloister, not a cloister," cried Torfrida, shuddering, and half
struggling to get away.

"It is the only place, poor wilful child, the only place this side the
grave, in which, we wretched creatures, who for our sins are women born,
can find aught of rest or peace. By us sin came into the world, and
Eve's curse lies heavy on us to this day, and our desire is to our
lords, and they rule over us; and when the slave can work for her master
no more, what better than to crawl into the house of God, and lay down
our crosses at the foot of His cross and die? You too will come here,
Torfrida, some day, I know it well. You too will come here to rest."

"Never, never," shrieked Torfrida, "never to these horrid vaults. I will
die in the fresh air! I will be buried under the green hollies; and the
nightingales as they wander up from my own Provence, shall build and
sing over my grave. Never, never!" murmured she to herself all the more
eagerly, because something within her said that it would come to pass.

The two women went into the church to Matins, and prayed long and
fervently. And at the early daybreak the party went back laden with good
things and hearty blessings, and caught one of Ivo Taillebois's men by
the way, and slew him, and got off him a new suit of clothes in which
the poor fellow was going courting; and so they got home safe into the
Bruneswald.

But Torfrida had not found rest unto her soul. For the first time in her
life since she became the bride of Hereward, she had had a confidence
concerning him and unknown to him. It was to his own mother,--true. And
yet she felt as if she had betrayed him: but then had he not betrayed
her? And to Winter of all men?

It might have been two months afterwards that Martin Lightfoot put a
letter into Torfrida's hand.

The letter was addressed to Hereward; but there was nothing strange in
Martin's bringing it to his mistress. Ever since their marriage, she
had opened and generally answered the very few epistles with which her
husband was troubled.

She was going to open this one as a matter of course, when glancing at
the superscription she saw, or fancied she saw, that it was in a woman's
hand. She looked at it again. It was sealed plainly with a woman's seal;
and she looked up at Martin Lightfoot. She had remarked as he gave her
the letter a sly significant look in his face.

"What doest thou know of this letter?" she inquired sharply.

"That it is from the Countess Alftruda, whomsoever she may be."

A chill struck through her heart. True, Alftruda had written before,
only to warn Hereward of danger to his life,--and hers. She might be
writing again, only for the same purpose. But still, she did not wish
that either Hereward, or she, should owe Alftruda their lives, or
anything. They had struggled on through weal and woe without her, for
many a year. Let them do so without her still. That Alftruda had once
loved Hereward she knew well. Why should she not? The wonder was to
her that every woman did not love him. But she had long since gauged
Alftruda's character, and seen in it a persistence like her own, yet as
she proudly hoped of a lower temper; the persistence of the base weasel,
not of the noble hound: yet the creeping weasel might endure, and win,
when the hound was tired out by his own gallant pace. And there was a
something in the tone of Alftruda's last letter which seemed to tell her
that the weasel was still upon the scent of its game. But she was too
proud to mistrust Hereward, or rather, to seem to mistrust him. And
yet--how dangerous Alftruda might be as a rival, if rival she choose to
be. She was up in the world now, free, rich, gay, beautiful, a favorite
at Queen Matilda's court, while she--

"How came this letter into thy hands?" asked she as carelessly as she
could.

"I was in Peterborough last night," said Martin, "concerning little
matters of my own, and there came to me in the street a bonny young page
with smart jacket on his back, smart cap on his head, and smiles and
bows, and 'You are one of Hereward's men,' quoth he."

