
"In a word, to make so many kings of my vassals. Sir Philip, would you
make a fratricide of me?--You remember well my brother Charles--he was
no sooner Duke of Guyenne, than he died.--And what will be left to the
descendant and representative of Charlemagne, after giving away these
rich provinces, save to be smeared with oil [a king, priest, or prophet
was consecrated by means of oil] at Rheims, and to eat their dinner
under a high canopy?"

"We will diminish your Majesty's concern on that score, by giving you
a companion in that solitary exaltation," said Philip de Comines.
"The Duke of Burgundy, though he claims not at present the title of an
independent king, desires nevertheless to be freed in future from the
abject marks of subjection required of him to the crown of France--it
is his purpose to close his ducal coronet with an imperial arch, and
surmount it with a globe, in emblem that his dominions are independent."

"And how dares the Duke of Burgundy, the sworn vassal of France,"
exclaimed Louis, starting up, and showing an unwonted degree of emotion,
"how dares he propose such terms to his Sovereign, as, by every law of
Europe, should infer a forfeiture of his fief?"

"The doom of forfeiture it would in this case be difficult to enforce,"
answered De Comines calmly. "Your Majesty is aware that the strict
interpretation of the feudal law is becoming obsolete even in the
Empire, and that superior and vassal endeavour to mend their situation
in regard to each other, as they have power and opportunity.

"Your Majesty's interferences with the Duke's vassals in Flanders will
prove an exculpation of my master's conduct, supposing him to insist
that, by enlarging his independence, France should in future be debarred
from any pretext of doing so."

"Comines, Comines!" said Louis, arising again, and pacing the room in a
pensive manner, "this is a dreadful lesson on the text Vae victis! [woe
to the vanquished!]--You cannot mean that the Duke will insist on all
these hard conditions?"

"At least I would have your Majesty be in a condition to discuss them
all."

"Yet moderation, De Comines, moderation in success, is--no one knows
better than you--necessary to its ultimate advantage."

"So please your Majesty, the merit of moderation is, I have observed,
most apt to be extolled by the losing party. The winner holds in more
esteem the prudence which calls on him not to leave an opportunity
unimproved."

"Well, we will consider," replied the King; "but at least thou hast
reached the extremity of your Duke's unreasonable exaction? there can
remain nothing--or if there does, for so thy brow intimates--what is
it--what indeed can it be--unless it be my crown? which these previous
demands, if granted, will deprive of all its lustre?"

"My lord," said De Comines, "what remains to be mentioned, is a thing
partly--indeed in a great measure within the Duke's own power, though he
means to invite your Majesty's accession to it, for in truth it touches
you nearly."

"Pasques Dieu!" exclaimed the King impatiently, "what is it?--Speak out,
Sir Philip--am I to send him my daughter for a concubine, or what other
dishonour is he to put on me?"

"No dishonour, my Liege; but your Majesty's cousin, the illustrious Duke
of Orleans--"

"Ha!" exclaimed the King; but De Comines proceeded without heeding the
interruption.

"--having conferred his affections on the young Countess Isabelle de
Croye, the Duke expects your Majesty will, on your part, as he on his,
yield your assent to the marriage, and unite with him in endowing the
right noble couple with such an appanage, as, joined to the Countess's
estates, may form a fit establishment for a Child of France."

"Never, never!" said the King, bursting out into that emotion which he
had of late suppressed with much difficulty, and striding about in
a disordered haste, which formed the strongest contrast to the self
command which he usually exhibited.

"Never, never!--let them bring scissors, and shear my hair like that
of the parish fool, whom I have so richly resembled--let them bid the
monastery or the grave yawn for me, let them bring red hot basins to
sear my eyes--axe or aconite--whatever they will, but Orleans shall
not break his plighted faith to my daughter, or marry another while she
lives!"

"Your Majesty," said De Comines, "ere you set your mind so keenly
against what is proposed, will consider your own want of power to
prevent it. Every wise man, when he sees a rock giving way, withdraws
from the bootless attempt of preventing the fall."

"But a brave man," said Louis, "will at least find his grave beneath
it. De Comines, consider the great loss, the utter destruction, such a
marriage will bring upon my kingdom. Recollect, I have but one feeble
boy, and this Orleans is the next heir--consider that the Church hath
consented to his union with Joan, which unites so happily the interests
of both branches of my family, think on all this, and think too that
this union has been the favourite scheme of my whole life--that I have
schemed for it, fought for it, watched for it, prayed for it--and sinned
for it. Philip de Comines, I will not forego it! Think man, think!--pity
me in this extremity, thy quick brain can speedily find some substitute
for this sacrifice--some ram to be offered up instead of that project
which is dear to me as the Patriarch's only son was to him. [Isaac,
whose father Abraham, in obedience to the command of God, was about to
sacrifice him upon the altar when a ram appeared, which Abraham offered
in his stead.] Philip, pity me!--you at least should know that, to men
of judgment and foresight, the destruction of the scheme on which
they have long dwelt, and for which they have long toiled, is more
inexpressibly bitter than the transient grief of ordinary men, whose
pursuits are but the gratification of some temporary passion--you, who
know how to sympathize with the deeper, the more genuine distress of
baffled prudence and disappointed sagacity--will you not feel for me?"

"My Lord and King," replied De Comines, "I do sympathize with your
distress in so far as duty to my master--"

"Do not mention him!" said Louis, acting, or at least appearing to act,
under an irresistible and headlong impulse, which withdrew the usual
guard which he maintained over his language. "Charles of Burgundy
is unworthy of your attachment. He who can insult and strike his
councillors--he who can distinguish the wisest and most faithful among
them by the opprobrious name of Booted Head!"

The wisdom of Philip de Comines did not prevent his having a high sense
of personal consequence; and he was so much struck with the words
which the King uttered, as it were, in the career of a passion which
overleaped ceremony, that he could only reply by repetition of the words
"Booted Head! It is impossible that my master the Duke could have so
termed the servant who has been at his side since he could mount a
palfrey--and that too before a foreign monarch!--it is impossible!"

Louis instantly saw the impression he had made, and avoiding alike
a tone of condolence, which might have seemed insulting, and one of
sympathy, which might have savoured of affectation; he said, with
simplicity, and at the same time with dignity, "My misfortunes make
me forget my courtesy, else I had not spoken to you of what it must be
unpleasant for you to hear. But you have in reply taxed me with having
uttered impossibilities--this touches my honour; yet I must submit to
the charge, if I tell you not the circumstances which the Duke, laughing
until his eyes ran over, assigned for the origin of that opprobrious
name, which I will not offend your ears by repeating. Thus, then, it
chanced. You, Sir Philip de Comines, were at a hunting match with the
Duke of Burgundy, your master; and when he alighted after the chase, he
required your services in drawing off his boots. Reading in your looks,
perhaps, some natural resentment of this disparaging treatment, he
ordered you to sit down in turn, and rendered you the same office he
had just received from you. But offended at your understanding him
literally, he no sooner plucked one of your boots off than he brutally
beat it about your head till the blood flowed, exclaiming against the
insolence of a subject who had the presumption to accept of such a
service at the hand of his Sovereign; and hence he, or his privileged
fool, Le Glorieux, is in the current habit of distinguishing you by the
absurd and ridiculous name of Tete botte, which makes one of the Duke's
most ordinary subjects of pleasantry."

[The story is told more bluntly, and less probably, in the French
memoirs of the period, which affirm that Comines, out of a presumption
inconsistent with his excellent good sense, had asked of Charles of
Burgundy to draw off his boots, without having been treated with any
previous familiarity to lead to such a freedom. I have endeavoured to
give the anecdote a turn more consistent with the sense and prudence of
the great author concerned. S.]

While Louis thus spoke, he had the double pleasure of galling to the
quick the person whom he addressed--an exercise which it was in his
nature to enjoy, even where he had not, as in the present case, the
apology that he did so in pure retaliation--and that of observing that
he had at length been able to find a point in De Comines's character
which might lead him gradually from the interests of Burgundy to those
of France. But although the deep resentment which the offended courtier
entertained against his master induced him at a future period to
exchange the service of Charles for that of Louis, yet, at the present
moment, he was contented to throw out only some general hints of his
friendly inclination towards France, which he well knew the King would
understand how to interpret. And indeed it would be unjust to stigmatize
the memory of the excellent historian with the desertion of his
master on this occasion, although he was certainly now possessed with
sentiments much more favourable to Louis than when he entered the
apartment.

He constrained himself to laugh at the anecdote which Louis had
detailed, and then added, "I did not think so trifling a frolic would
have dwelt on the mind of the Duke so long as to make it worth telling
again. Some such passage there was of drawing off boots and the like, as
your Majesty knows that the Duke is fond of rude play; but it has been
much exaggerated in his recollection. Let it pass on."

"Ay, let it pass on," said the King; "it is indeed shame it should have
detained us a minute.--And now, Sir Philip, I hope you are French so far
as to afford me your best counsel in these difficult affairs. You have,
I am well aware, the clew to the labyrinth, if you would but impart it."

"Your Majesty may command my best advice and service," replied De
Comines, "under reservation always of my duty to my own master."

This was nearly what the courtier had before stated; but he now repeated
it in a tone so different that, whereas Louis understood from the former
declaration that the reserved duty to Burgundy was the prime thing to
be considered, so he now saw clearly that the emphasis was reversed, and
that more weight was now given by the speaker to his promise of counsel
than to a restriction which seemed interposed for the sake of form and
consistency. The King resumed his own seat, and compelled De Comines to
sit by him, listening at the same time to that statesman as if the
words of an oracle sounded in his ears. De Comines spoke in that low and
impressive tone which implies at once great sincerity and some caution,
and at the same time so slowly as if he was desirous that the King
should weigh and consider each individual word as having its own
peculiar and determined meaning.

"The things," he said, "which I have suggested for your Majesty's
consideration, harsh as they sound in your ear, are but substitutes for
still more violent proposals brought forward in the Duke's counsels, by
such as are more hostile to your Majesty. And I need scarce remind your
Majesty, that the more direct and more violent suggestions find readiest
acceptance with our master, who loves brief and dangerous measures
better than those that are safe, but at the same time circuitous."

"I remember," said the King. "I have seen him swim a river at the
risk of drowning, though there was a bridge to be found for riding two
hundred yards."

"True, Sire; and he that weighs not his life against the gratification
of a moment of impetuous passion will, on the same impulse, prefer the
gratification of his will to the increase of his substantial power."

"Most true," replied the King; "a fool will ever grasp rather at the
appearance than the reality of authority. And this I know to be true of
Charles of Burgundy. But, my dear friend De Comines, what do you infer
from these premises?"

"Simply this, my lord," answered the Burgundian, "that as your Majesty
has seen a skilful angler control a large and heavy fish, and finally
draw him to land by a single hair, which fish had broke through a tackle
tenfold stronger, had the fisher presumed to strain the line on him,
instead of giving him head enough for all his wild flourishes; even so
your Majesty, by gratifying the Duke in these particulars on which he
has pitched his ideas of honour, and the gratification of his revenge,
may evade many of the other unpalatable propositions at which I have
hinted; and which--including, I must state openly to your Majesty, some
of those through which France would be most especially weakened--will
slide out of his remembrance and attention, and, being referred to
subsequent conferences and future discussion, may be altogether eluded."

"I understand you, my good Sir Philip; but to the matter," said the
King. "To which of those happy propositions is your Duke so much wedded
that contradiction will make him unreasonable and untractable?"

"To any or to all of them, if it please your Majesty, on which you
may happen to contradict him. This is precisely what your Majesty must
avoid; and to take up my former parable, you must needs remain on the
watch, ready to give the Duke line enough whenever he shoots away under
the impulse of his rage. His fury, already considerably abated, will
waste itself if he be unopposed, and you will presently find him become
more friendly and more tractable."

"Still," said the' King, musing, "there must be some particular demands
which lie deeper at my cousin's heart than the other proposals. Were I
but aware of these, Sir Philip."

"Your Majesty may make the lightest of his demands the most important
simply by opposing it," said De Comines, "nevertheless, my lord, thus
far I can say, that every shadow of treaty will be broken off, if your
Majesty renounce not William de la Marck and the Liegeois."

"I have already said that I will disown them," said the King, "and well
they deserve it at my hand; the villains have commenced their uproar at
a moment that might have cost me my life."

"He that fires a train of powder," replied the historian, "must expect
a speedy explosion of the mine.--But more than mere disavowal of their
cause will be expected of your Majesty by Duke Charles, for know that
he will demand your Majesty assistance to put the insurrection down, and
your royal presence to witness the punishment which he destines for the
rebels."

"That may scarce consist with our honour, De Comines," said the King.

"To refuse it will scarcely consist with your Majesty's safety," replied
De Comines. "Charles is determined to show the people of Flanders that
no hope, nay, no promise, of assistance from France will save them in
their mutinies from the wrath and vengeance of Burgundy."

"But, Sir Philip, I will speak plainly," answered the King. "Could we
but procrastinate the matter, might not these rogues of Liege make
their own part good against Duke Charles? The knaves are numerous and
steady.--Can they not hold out their town against him?"

"With the help of the thousand archers of France whom your Majesty
promised them, they might have done something, but--"

"Whom I promised them?" said the King. "Alas! good Sir Philip! you much
wrong me in saying so."

"But without whom," continued De Comines, not heeding the interruption,
"as your Majesty will not now likely find it convenient to supply them,
what chance will the burghers have of making good their town, in whose
walls the large breaches made by Charles after the battle of St. Tron
are still unrepaired; so that the lances of Hainault, Brabant, and
Burgundy may advance to the attack twenty men in front?"

"The improvident idiots!" said the King. "If they have thus neglected
their own safety, they deserve not my protection. Pass on--I will make
no quarrel for their sake."

"The next point, I fear, will sit closer to your Majesty's heart," said
De Comines.

"Ah!" replied the King, "you mean that infernal marriage! I will not
consent to the breach of the contract betwixt my daughter Joan and my
cousin of Orleans--it would be wresting the sceptre of France from
me and my posterity; for that feeble boy, the Dauphin, is a blighted
blossom, which will wither without fruit. This match between Joan and
Orleans has been my thought by day, my dream by night.--I tell thee, Sir
Philip, I cannot give it up!--Besides, it is inhuman to require me,
with my own hand, to destroy at once my own scheme of policy, and the
happiness of a pair brought up for each other."

"Are they, then, so much attached?" said De Comines.

"One of them at least," said the King, "and the one for whom I am bound
to be most anxious. But you smile, Sir Philip--you are no believer in
the force of love."

"Nay," said De Comines, "if it please you, Sire, I am so little an
infidel in that particular that I was about to ask whether it would
reconcile you in any degree to your acquiescing in the proposed marriage
betwixt the Duke of Orleans and Isabelle de Croye, were I to satisfy you
that the Countess's inclinations are so much fixed on another, that it
is likely it will never be a match?"

King Louis sighed. "Alas," he said, "my good and dear friend, from
what sepulchre have you drawn such dead comfort? Her inclinations,
indeed!--Why, to speak truth, supposing that Orleans detested my
daughter Joan, yet, but for this ill ravelled web of mischance, he must
needs have married her; so you may conjecture how little chance there
is of this damsel's being able to refuse him under a similar compulsion,
and he a Child of France besides.--Ah, no, Philip! little fear of her
standing obstinate against the suit of such a lover.--Varium et mutabile
[(semper femina): woman is always inconstant and capricious], Philip."

"Your Majesty may, in the present instance, undervalue the obstinate
courage of this young lady. She comes of a race determinately wilful;
and I have picked out of Crevecoeur that she has formed a romantic
attachment to a young squire, who, to say truth, rendered her many
services on the road."

"Ha!" said the King--"an Archer of my Guards, by name Quentin Durward?"

"The same, as I think," said De Comines; "he was made prisoner along
with the Countess, travelling almost alone together."

"Now, our Lord and our Lady, and Monseigneur Saint Martin, and
Monseigneur Saint Julian, be praised every one of them!" said the King,
"and all laud and honour to the learned Galeotti; who read in the stars
that this youth's destiny was connected with mine! If the maiden be so
attached to him as to make her refractory to the will of Burgundy, this
Quentin hath indeed been rarely useful to me."

"I believe, my lord," answered the Burgundian, "according to
Crevecoeur's report, that there is some chance of her being sufficiently
obstinate; besides, doubtless, the noble Duke himself, notwithstanding
what your Majesty was pleased to hint in way of supposition, will not
willingly renounce his fair cousin, to whom he has been long engaged."

"Umph!" answered the King--"but you have never seen my daughter Joan.--A
howlet, man!--an absolute owl, whom I am ashamed of! But let him be only
a wise man, and marry her, I will give him leave to be mad par amours
for the fairest lady in France.--And now, Philip, have you given me the
full map of your master's mind?"

"I have possessed you, Sire, of those particulars on which he is at
present most disposed to insist. But your Majesty well knows that
the Duke's disposition is like a sweeping torrent, which only passes
smoothly forward when its waves encounter no opposition; and what may be
presented to chafe him info fury, it is impossible even to guess. Were
more distinct evidence of your Majesty's practices (pardon the phrase,
when there is so little time for selection) with the Liegeois
and William de la Marck to occur unexpectedly, the issue might be
terrible.--There are strange news from that country--they say La Marck
hath married Hameline, the elder Countess of Croye."

"That old fool was so mad on marriage that she would have accepted
the hand of Satan," said the King; "but that La Marck, beast as he is,
should have married her, rather more surprises me."

"There is a report also," continued De Comines, "that an envoy, or
herald, on La Marck's part, is approaching Peronne; this is like to
drive the Duke frantic with rage--I trust that he has no letters or the
like to show on your Majesty's part?"

"Letters to a Wild Boar!" answered the King.--"No, no, Sir Philip, I was
no such fool as to cast pearls before swine.--What little intercourse
I had with the brute animal was by message, in which I always employed
such low bred slaves and vagabonds that their evidence would not be
received in a trial for robbing a hen roost."

"I can then only further recommend," said De Comines, taking his leave,
"that your Majesty should remain on your guard, be guided by events,
and, above all, avoid using any language or argument with the Duke which
may better become your dignity than your present condition."

"If my dignity," said the King, "grow troublesome to me--which it seldom
doth while there are deeper interests to think of--I have a special
remedy for that swelling of the heart.--It is but looking into a certain
ruinous closet, Sir Philip, and thinking of the death of Charles the
Simple; and it cures me as effectually as the cold bath would cool a
fever.--And now, my friend and monitor, must thou be gone? Well, Sir
Philip, the time must come when thou wilt tire reading lessons of state
policy to the Bull of Burgundy, who is incapable of comprehending your
most simple argument.--If Louis of Valois then lives, thou hast a friend
in the Court of France. I tell thee, my Philip, it would be a blessing
to my kingdom should I ever acquire thee; who, with a profound view
of subjects of state, hast also a conscience, capable of feeling and
discerning between right and wrong. So help me our Lord and Lady, and
Monseigneur Saint Martin, Oliver and Balue have hearts as hardened as
the nether millstone; and my life is embittered by remorse and penances
for the crimes they make me commit. Thou, Sir Philip, possessed of
the wisdom of present and past times, canst teach how to become great
without ceasing to be virtuous."

"A hard task, and which few have attained," said the historian; "but
which is yet within the reach of princes who will strive for it.
Meantime, Sire, be prepared, for the Duke will presently confer with
you."

Louis looked long after Philip when he left the apartment, and at length
burst into a bitter laugh. "He spoke of fishing--I have sent him home, a
trout properly tickled!--And he thinks himself virtuous because he took
no bribe, but contented himself with flattery and promises, and the
pleasure of avenging an affront to his vanity!--Why, he is but so much
the poorer for the refusal of the money--not a jot the more honest. He
must be mine, though, for he hath the shrewdest head among them. Well,
now for nobler game! I am to face this leviathan Charles, who will
presently swim hitherward, cleaving the deep before him. I must, like a
trembling sailor, throw a tub overboard to amuse him. But I may one day
find the chance of driving a harpoon into his entrails!"

[If a ship is threatened by a school of whales, a tub is thrown into the
sea to divert their attention. Hence to mislead an enemy, or to create a
diversion in order to avoid a danger.]

[Scott says that during this interesting scene Comines first realized
the great powers of Louis, and entertained from this time a partiality
to France which allured him to Louis's court in 1472. After the death of
Louis he fell under the suspicion of that sovereign's daughter and was
imprisoned in one of the cages he has so feelingly described. He was
subjected to trial and exiled from court, but was afterwards employed by
Charles VIII in one or two important missions. He died at his Castle
of Argenton in 1509, and was regretted as one of the most profound
statesmen, and the best historian of his age.]



CHAPTER XXXI: THE INTERVIEW

     Hold fast thy truth, young soldier.--Gentle maiden,
     Keep you your promise plight--leave age its subtleties,
     And gray hair'd policy its maze of falsehood,
     But be you candid as the morning sky,
     Ere the high sun sucks vapours up to stain it.

     THE TRIAL


On the perilous and important morning which preceded the meeting of the
two Princes in the Castle of Peronne, Oliver le Dain did his master the
service of an active and skilful agent, making interest for Louis in
every quarter, both with presents and promises; so that when the Duke's
anger should blaze forth, all around should be interested to smother,
and not to increase, the conflagration. He glided like night, from tent
to tent, from house to house, making himself friends, but not in the
Apostle's sense, with the Mammon of unrighteousness. As was said of
another active political agent, "his finger was in every man's palm, his
mouth was in every man's ear;" and for various reasons, some of which
we have formerly hinted at, he secured the favour of many Burgundian
nobles, who either had something to hope or fear from France, or who
thought that, were the power of Louis too much reduced, their own Duke
would be likely to pursue the road to despotic authority, to which his
heart naturally inclined him, with a daring and unopposed pace.

Where Oliver suspected his own presence or arguments might be less
acceptable, he employed that of other servants of the King; and it
was in this manner that he obtained, by the favour of the Count de
Crevecoeur, an interview betwixt Lord Crawford, accompanied by Le
Balafre, and Quentin Durward, who, since he had arrived at Peronne, had
been detained in a sort of honourable confinement. Private affairs were
assigned as the cause of requesting this meeting; but it is probable
that Crevecoeur, who was afraid that his master might be stirred up in
passion to do something dishonourably violent towards Louis, was not
sorry to afford an opportunity to Crawford to give some hints to the
young Archer, which might prove useful to his master.

The meeting between the countrymen was cordial and even affecting.

"Thou art a singular youth," said Crawford, stroking the head of young
Durward, as a grandsire might do that of his descendant. "Certes, you
have had as meikle good fortune as if you had been born with a lucky
hood on your head."

"All comes of his gaining an Archer's place at such early years," said
Le Balafre; "I never was so much talked of, fair nephew, because I was
five and twenty years old before I was hors de page [passed out of the
rank of the page]."

"And an ill looking mountainous monster of a page thou wert, Ludovic,"
said the old commander, "with a beard like a baker's shool, and a back
like old Wallace Wight [so called because of his vigour and activity]."

"I fear," said Quentin, with downcast eyes, "I shall enjoy that title
to distinction but a short time--since it is my purpose to resign the
service of the Archer Guard."

Le Balafre was struck almost mute with astonishment, and Crawford's
ancient features gleamed with displeasure. The former at length
mustered words enough to say, "Resign!--leave your place in the Scottish
Archers!--such a thing was never dreamed of. I would not give up my
situation to be made Constable of France."

"Hush! Ludovic," said Crawford; "this youngster knows better how to
shape his course with the wind than we of the old world do. His journey
hath given him some pretty tales to tell about King Louis; and he is
turning Burgundian, that he may make his own little profit by telling
them to Duke Charles."

"If I thought so," said Le Balafre, "I would cut his throat with my own
hand, were he fifty times my sister's son."

"But you would first inquire whether I deserved to be so treated, fair
kinsman?" answered Quentin; "and you, my lord, know that I am no tale
bearer; nor shall either question or torture draw out of me a word to
King Louis's prejudice, which may have come to my knowledge while I was
in his service.--So far my oath of duty keeps me silent. But I will not
remain in that services in which, besides the perils of fair battle with
mine enemies, I am to be exposed to the dangers of ambuscade on the part
of my friends."

"Nay, if he objects to lying in ambuscade," said the slow witted Le
Balafre, looking sorrowfully at the Lord Crawford, "I am afraid, my
lord, that all is over with him! I myself have had thirty bushments
break upon me, and truly I think I have laid in ambuscade twice as often
myself, it being a favourite practice in our King's mode of making war."

"It is so indeed, Ludovic," answered Lord Crawford; "nevertheless, hold
your peace, for I believe I understand this gear better than you do."

"I wish to Our Lady you may, my lord," answered Ludovic; "but it
wounds me to the very midriff, to think my sister's son should fear an
ambushment."

"Young man," said Crawford, "I partly guess your meaning. You have met
foul play on the road where you travelled by the King's command, and you
think you have reason to charge him with being the author of it."

"I have been threatened with foul play in the execution of the King's
commission," answered Quentin; "but I have had the good fortune to elude
it--whether his Majesty be innocent or guilty in the matter, I leave to
God and his own conscience. He fed me when I was a-hungered--received me
when I was a wandering stranger. I will never load him in his adversity
with accusations which may indeed be unjust, since I heard them only
from the vilest mouths."

"My dear boy--my own lad!" said Crawford, taking him in his arms.--"Ye
think like a Scot, every joint of you! Like one that will forget a cause
of quarrel with a friend whose back is already at the wall, and remember
nothing of him but his kindness."

"Since my Lord Crawford has embraced my nephew," said Ludovic Lesly,
"I will embrace him also--though I would have you to know that to
understand the service of an ambushment is as necessary to a soldier as
it is to a priest to be able to read his breviary."

"Be hushed, Ludovic," said Crawford; "ye are an ass, my friend, and ken
not the blessing Heaven has sent you in this braw callant.--And now tell
me, Quentin, my man, hath the King any advice of this brave, Christian,
and manly resolution of yours, for, poor man, he had need, in his
strait, to ken what he has to reckon upon. Had he but brought the whole
brigade of Guards with him!--But God's will be done.--Kens he of your
purpose, think you?"

"I really can hardly tell," answered Quentin; "but I assured his learned
Astrologer, Martius Galeotti, of my resolution to be silent on all that
could injure the King with the Duke of Burgundy. The particulars which
I suspect, I will not (under your favour) communicate even to your
lordship; and to the philosopher I was, of course, far less willing to
unfold myself."

"Ha!--ay!" answered Lord Crawford.--"Oliver did indeed tell me that
Galeotti prophesied most stoutly concerning the line of conduct you were
to hold; and I am truly glad to find he did so on better authority than
the stars."

"He prophesy!" said Le Balafre, laughing; "the stars never told him that
honest Ludovic Lesly used to help yonder wench of his to spend the fair
ducats he flings into her lap."

"Hush! Ludovic," said his captain, "hush! thou beast, man!--If thou
dost not respect my gray hairs, because I have been e'en too much of a
routier myself, respect the boy's youth and innocence, and let us have
no more of such unbecoming daffing."

"Your honour may say your pleasure," answered' Ludovic Lesly; "but, by
my faith, second sighted Saunders Souplesaw, the town souter of Glen
Houlakin, was worth Galeotti, or Gallipotty, or whatever ye call him,
twice told, for a prophet. He foretold that all my sister's children,
would die some day; and he foretold it in the very hour that the
youngest was born, and that is this lad Quentin--who, no doubt, will one
day die, to make up the prophecy--the more's the pity--the whole curney
of them is gone but himself. And Saunders foretold to myself one day,
that I should be made by marriage, which doubtless will also happen in
due time, though it hath not yet come to pass--though how or when, I can
hardly guess, as I care not myself for the wedded state, and Quentin is
but a lad. Also, Saunders predicted--"

"Nay," said Lord Crawford, "unless the prediction be singularly to the
purpose, I must cut you short, my good Ludovic; for both you and I must
now leave your nephew, with prayers to Our Lady to strengthen him in the
good mind he is in; for this is a case in which a light word might do
more mischief than all the Parliament of Paris could mend. My blessing
with you, my lad; and be in no hurry to think of leaving our body;
for there will be good blows going presently in the eye of day, and no
ambuscade."

"And my blessing, too, nephew," said Ludovic Lesly; "for, since you
have satisfied our most noble captain, I also am satisfied, as in duty
bound."

"Stay, my lord," said Quentin, and led Lord Crawford a little apart from
his uncle. "I must not forget to mention that there is a person besides
in the world, who, having learned from me these circumstances, which it
is essential to King Louis's safety should at present remain concealed,
may not think that the same obligation of secrecy, which attaches to me
as the King's soldier, and as having been relieved by his bounty, is at
all binding on her."

"On her!" replied Crawford; "nay, if there be a woman in the secret, the
Lord have mercy, for we are all on the rocks again!"

"Do not suppose so, my lord," replied Durward, "but use your interest
with the Count of Crevecoeur to permit me an interview with the Countess
Isabelle of Croye, who is the party possessed of my secret, and I doubt
not that I can persuade her to be as silent as I shall unquestionably
myself remain, concerning whatever may incense the Duke against King
Louis."

The old soldier mused for a long time--looked up to the ceiling, then
down again upon the floor--then shook his head--and at length said,
"There is something in all this, which, by my honour, I do not
understand. The Countess Isabelle of Croye!--an interview with a lady
of her birth, blood, and possessions!--and thou a raw Scottish lad,
so certain of carrying thy point with her? Thou art either strangely
confident, my young friend, or else you have used your time well upon
