Seven volleys of arrows followed one upon the other, and in the very
thick of the discharges Dick was touched from behind upon the arm, and
found a page holding out to him a leathern jack, strengthened with bright
plates of mail.

"It is from my Lord of Gloucester," said the page.  "He hath observed,
Sir Richard, that ye went unarmed."

Dick, with a glow at his heart at being so addressed, got to his feet
and, with the assistance of the page, donned the defensive coat.  Even as
he did so, two arrows rattled harmlessly upon the plates, and a third
struck down the page, mortally wounded, at his feet.

Meantime the whole body of the enemy had been steadily drawing nearer
across the market-place; and by this time were so close at hand that Dick
gave the order to return their shot.  Immediately, from behind the
barrier and from the windows of the houses, a counterblast of arrows
sped, carrying death.  But the Lancastrians, as if they had but waited
for a signal, shouted loudly in answer; and began to close at a run upon
the barrier, the horsemen still hanging back, with visors lowered.

Then followed an obstinate and deadly struggle, hand to hand.  The
assailants, wielding their falchions with one hand, strove with the other
to drag down the structure of the barricade.  On the other side, the
parts were reversed; and the defenders exposed themselves like madmen to
protect their rampart.  So for some minutes the contest raged almost in
silence, friend and foe falling one upon another.  But it is always the
easier to destroy; and when a single note upon the tucket recalled the
attacking party from this desperate service, much of the barricade had
been removed piecemeal, and the whole fabric had sunk to half its height,
and tottered to a general fall.

And now the footmen in the market-place fell back, at a run, on every
side.  The horsemen, who had been standing in a line two deep, wheeled
suddenly, and made their flank into their front; and as swift as a
striking adder, the long, steel-clad column was launched upon the ruinous
barricade.

Of the first two horsemen, one fell, rider and steed, and was ridden down
by his companions.  The second leaped clean upon the summit of the
rampart, transpiercing an archer with his lance.  Almost in the same
instant he was dragged from the saddle and his horse despatched.

And then the full weight and impetus of the charge burst upon and
scattered the defenders.  The men-at-arms, surmounting their fallen
comrades, and carried onward by the fury of their onslaught, dashed
through Dick's broken line and poured thundering up the lane beyond, as a
stream bestrides and pours across a broken dam.

Yet was the fight not over.  Still, in the narrow jaws of the entrance,
Dick and a few survivors plied their bills like woodmen; and already,
across the width of the passage, there had been formed a second, a
higher, and a more effectual rampart of fallen men and disembowelled
horses, lashing in the agonies of death.

Baffled by this fresh obstacle, the remainder of the cavalry fell back;
and as, at the sight of this movement, the flight of arrows redoubled
from the casements of the houses, their retreat had, for a moment, almost
degenerated into flight.

Almost at the same time, those who had crossed the barricade and charged
farther up the street, being met before the door of the Chequers by the
formidable hunchback and the whole reserve of the Yorkists, began to come
scattering backward, in the excess of disarray and terror.

Dick and his fellows faced about, fresh men poured out of the houses; a
cruel blast of arrows met the fugitives full in the face, while
Gloucester was already riding down their rear; in the inside of a minute
and a half there was no living Lancastrian in the street.

Then, and not till then, did Dick hold up his reeking blade and give the
word to cheer.

Meanwhile Gloucester dismounted from his horse and came forward to
inspect the post.  His face was as pale as linen; but his eyes shone in
his head like some strange jewel, and his voice, when he spoke, was
hoarse and broken with the exultation of battle and success.  He looked
at the rampart, which neither friend nor foe could now approach without
precaution, so fiercely did the horses struggle in the throes of death,
and at the sight of that great carnage he smiled upon one side.

"Despatch these horses," he said; "they keep you from your vantage.
Richard Shelton," he added, "ye have pleased me.  Kneel."

The Lancastrians had already resumed their archery, and the shafts fell
thick in the mouth of the street; but the duke, minding them not at all,
deliberately drew his sword and dubbed Richard a knight upon the spot.

"And now, Sir Richard," he continued, "if that ye see Lord Risingham,
send me an express upon the instant.  Were it your last man, let me hear
of it incontinently.  I had rather venture the post than lose my stroke
at him.  For mark me, all of ye," he added, raising his voice, "if Earl
Risingham fall by another hand than mine, I shall count this victory a
defeat."

"My lord duke," said one of his attendants, "is your grace not weary of
exposing his dear life unneedfully?  Why tarry we here?"

"Catesby," returned the duke, "here is the battle, not elsewhere.  The
rest are but feigned onslaughts.  Here must we vanquish.  And for the
exposure--if ye were an ugly hunchback, and the children gecked at you
upon the street, ye would count your body cheaper, and an hour of glory
worth a life.  Howbeit, if ye will, let us ride on and visit the other
posts.  Sir Richard here, my namesake, he shall still hold this entry,
where he wadeth to the ankles in hot blood.  Him can we trust.  But mark
it, Sir Richard, ye are not yet done.  The worst is yet to ward.  Sleep
not."

He came right up to young Shelton, looking him hard in the eyes, and
taking his hand in both of his, gave it so extreme a squeeze that the
blood had nearly spurted.  Dick quailed before his eyes.  The insane
excitement, the courage, and the cruelty that he read therein filled him
with dismay about the future.  This young duke's was indeed a gallant
spirit, to ride foremost in the ranks of war; but after the battle, in
the days of peace and in the circle of his trusted friends, that mind, it
was to be dreaded, would continue to bring forth the fruits of death.



CHAPTER III--THE BATTLE OF SHOREBY (Concluded)


Dick, once more left to his own counsels, began to look about him.  The
arrow-shot had somewhat slackened.  On all sides the enemy were falling
back; and the greater part of the market-place was now left empty, the
snow here trampled into orange mud, there splashed with gore, scattered
all over with dead men and horses, and bristling thick with feathered
arrows.

On his own side the loss had been cruel.  The jaws of the little street
and the ruins of the barricade were heaped with the dead and dying; and
out of the hundred men with whom he had begun the battle, there were not
seventy left who could still stand to arms.

At the same time, the day was passing.  The first reinforcements might be
looked for to arrive at any moment; and the Lancastrians, already shaken
by the result of their desperate but unsuccessful onslaught, were in an
ill temper to support a fresh invader.

There was a dial in the wall of one of the two flanking houses; and this,
in the frosty winter sunshine, indicated ten of the forenoon.

Dick turned to the man who was at his elbow, a little insignificant
archer, binding a cut in his arm.

"It was well fought," he said, "and, by my sooth, they will not charge us
twice."

"Sir," said the little archer, "ye have fought right well for York, and
better for yourself.  Never hath man in so brief space prevailed so
greatly on the duke's affections.  That he should have entrusted such a
post to one he knew not is a marvel.  But look to your head, Sir Richard!
If ye be vanquished--ay, if ye give way one foot's breadth--axe or cord
shall punish it; and I am set if ye do aught doubtful, I will tell you
honestly, here to stab you from behind."

Dick looked at the little man in amaze.

"You!" he cried.  "And from behind!"

"It is right so," returned the archer; "and because I like not the affair
I tell it you.  Ye must make the post good, Sir Richard, at your peril.
O, our Crookback is a bold blade and a good warrior; but, whether in cold
blood or in hot, he will have all things done exact to his commandment.
If any fail or hinder, they shall die the death."

"Now, by the saints!" cried Richard, "is this so?  And will men follow
such a leader?"

"Nay, they follow him gleefully," replied the other; "for if he be exact
to punish, he is most open-handed to reward.  And if he spare not the
blood and sweat of others, he is ever liberal of his own, still in the
first front of battle, still the last to sleep.  He will go far, will
Crookback Dick o' Gloucester!"

The young knight, if he had before been brave and vigilant, was now all
the more inclined to watchfulness and courage.  His sudden favour, he
began to perceive, had brought perils in its train.  And he turned from
the archer, and once more scanned anxiously the market-place.  It lay
empty as before.

"I like not this quietude," he said.  "Doubtless they prepare us some
surprise."

And, as if in answer to his remark, the archers began once more to
advance against the barricade, and the arrows to fall thick.  But there
was something hesitating in the attack.  They came not on roundly, but
seemed rather to await a further signal.

Dick looked uneasily about him, spying for a hidden danger.  And sure
enough, about half way up the little street, a door was suddenly opened
from within, and the house continued, for some seconds, and both by door
and window, to disgorge a torrent of Lancastrian archers.  These, as they
leaped down, hurriedly stood to their ranks, bent their bows, and
proceeded to pour upon Dick's rear a flight of arrows.

At the same time, the assailants in the market-place redoubled their
shot, and began to close in stoutly upon the barricade.

Dick called down his whole command out of the houses, and facing them
both ways, and encouraging their valour both by word and gesture,
returned as best he could the double shower of shafts that fell about his
post.

Meanwhile house after house was opened in the street, and the
Lancastrians continued to pour out of the doors and leap down from the
windows, shouting victory, until the number of enemies upon Dick's rear
was almost equal to the number in his face.  It was plain that he could
hold the post no longer; what was worse, even if he could have held it,
it had now become useless; and the whole Yorkist army lay in a posture of
helplessness upon the brink of a complete disaster.

The men behind him formed the vital flaw in the general defence; and it
was upon these that Dick turned, charging at the head of his men.  So
vigorous was the attack, that the Lancastrian archers gave ground and
staggered, and, at last, breaking their ranks, began to crowd back into
the houses from which they had so recently and so vaingloriously sallied.

Meanwhile the men from the market-place had swarmed across the undefended
barricade, and fell on hotly upon the other side; and Dick must once
again face about, and proceed to drive them back.  Once again the spirit
of his men prevailed; they cleared the street in a triumphant style, but
even as they did so the others issued again out of the houses, and took
them, a third time, upon the rear.

The Yorkists began to be scattered; several times Dick found himself
alone among his foes and plying his bright sword for life; several times
he was conscious of a hurt.  And meanwhile the fight swayed to and fro in
the street without determinate result.

Suddenly Dick was aware of a great trumpeting about the outskirts of the
town.  The war-cry of York began to be rolled up to heaven, as by many
and triumphant voices.  And at the same time the men in front of him
began to give ground rapidly, streaming out of the street and back upon
the market-place.  Some one gave the word to fly.  Trumpets were blown
distractedly, some for a rally, some to charge.  It was plain that a
great blow had been struck, and the Lancastrians were thrown, at least
for the moment, into full disorder, and some degree of panic.

And then, like a theatre trick, there followed the last act of Shoreby
Battle.  The men in front of Richard turned tail, like a dog that has
been whistled home, and fled like the wind.  At the same moment there
came through the market-place a storm of horsemen, fleeing and pursuing,
the Lancastrians turning back to strike with the sword, the Yorkists
riding them down at the point of the lance.

Conspicuous in the mellay, Dick beheld the Crookback.  He was already
giving a foretaste of that furious valour and skill to cut his way across
the ranks of war, which, years afterwards upon the field of Bosworth, and
when he was stained with crimes, almost sufficed to change the fortunes
of the day and the destiny of the English throne.  Evading, striking,
riding down, he so forced and so manoeuvred his strong horse, so aptly
defended himself, and so liberally scattered death to his opponents, that
he was now far ahead of the foremost of his knights, hewing his way, with
the truncheon of a bloody sword, to where Lord Risingham was rallying the
bravest.  A moment more and they had met; the tall, splendid, and famous
warrior against the deformed and sickly boy.

Yet Shelton had never a doubt of the result; and when the fight next
opened for a moment, the figure of the earl had disappeared; but still,
in the first of the danger, Crookback Dick was launching his big horse
and plying the truncheon of his sword.

Thus, by Shelton's courage in holding the mouth of the street against the
first attack, and by the opportune arrival of his seven hundred
reinforcements, the lad, who was afterwards to be handed down to the
execration of posterity under the name of Richard III., had won his first
considerable fight.



CHAPTER IV--THE SACK OF SHOREBY


There was not a foe left within striking distance; and Dick, as he looked
ruefully about him on the remainder of his gallant force, began to count
the cost of victory.  He was himself, now that the danger was ended, so
stiff and sore, so bruised and cut and broken, and, above all, so utterly
exhausted by his desperate and unremitting labours in the fight, that he
seemed incapable of any fresh exertion.

But this was not yet the hour for repose.  Shoreby had been taken by
assault; and though an open town, and not in any manner to be charged
with the resistance, it was plain that these rough fighters would be not
less rough now that the fight was over, and that the more horrid part of
war would fall to be enacted.  Richard of Gloucester was not the captain
to protect the citizens from his infuriated soldiery; and even if he had
the will, it might be questioned if he had the power.

It was, therefore, Dick's business to find and to protect Joanna; and
with that end he looked about him at the faces of his men.  The three or
four who seemed likeliest to be obedient and to keep sober he drew aside;
and promising them a rich reward and a special recommendation to the
duke, led them across the market-place, now empty of horsemen, and into
the streets upon the further side.

Every here and there small combats of from two to a dozen still raged
upon the open street; here and there a house was being besieged, the
defenders throwing out stools and tables on the heads of the assailants.
The snow was strewn with arms and corpses; but except for these partial
combats the streets were deserted, and the houses, some standing open,
and some shuttered and barricaded, had for the most part ceased to give
out smoke.

Dick, threading the skirts of these skirmishers, led his followers
briskly in the direction of the abbey church; but when he came the length
of the main street, a cry of horror broke from his lips.  Sir Daniel's
great house had been carried by assault.  The gates hung in splinters
from the hinges, and a double throng kept pouring in and out through the
entrance, seeking and carrying booty.  Meanwhile, in the upper storeys,
some resistance was still being offered to the pillagers; for just as
Dick came within eyeshot of the building, a casement was burst open from
within, and a poor wretch in murrey and blue, screaming and resisting,
was forced through the embrasure and tossed into the street below.

The most sickening apprehension fell upon Dick.  He ran forward like one
