at his own impertinence; Capt L.--was So provoked at the insolence that
he cought the puppy and threw it with great violence at him and Struck
him in the breast and face, Seazed his tomahawk, and Shewed him by Sign
that if he repeeted his insolence that he would tomahawk him, the
fellow withdrew apparently much mortified and we continued our Dinner
without further Molestation. after dinner we continued our rout 4 miles
to the enterance of Colter's Creek about 1/2 a mile above the rapid
where we Sunk the 1st Canoe as we decended the river last fall. We
encamped on the lower Side of this Creek a little distance from two
Lodges of the Chopunnish nation haveing traviled 201/2 miles to day one
of those Lodges Contained 8 families, the other was much the largest we
have yet seen. it is 156 feet long and about 15 feet wide built of mats
and Straw, in the form of the roof of a house haveing a number of Small
dores on each Side, is closed at the ends and without divisions in the
intermediate Space. this lodge at least 30 families. their fires are
kindled in a row in the Center of the Lodge and about 10 feet assunder.
all the Lodges of these people are formed in this manner. we arrived
here extreemly hungary and much fatigued, but no articles of
merchindize in our possession would induce them to let us have any
article of Provisions except a Small quantity of bread of Cows and some
of those roots dryed. We had Several applications to assist their Sick
which we refused unless they would let us have Some dogs or horses to
eat. a man whose wife had an absess formed on the Small of her back
promised a horse in the morning provided we would administer to her, I
examined the absess and found it was too far advanced to be cured. I
told them her case was desperate. agreeably to thir request I opened
the absess. I then introduced a tent and dressed it with bisilican; and
prepared Some dozes of the flour of Sulpher and Creem of tarter which
were given with directions to be taken on each morning. a little girl
and Sundery other patients were brought to me for Cure but we posponed
our opperations untill the morning; they produced us Several dogs but
they were So pore that they were unfit to eat. This is the residence of
one of four principal Cheafs of the nation whome they call
Neesh-ne-park-ke-ook or the Cut nose from the circumstance of his nose
being Cut by the Snake Indians with a launce in battle. to this man we
gave a Medal of the Small Size with a likeness of the President. he may
be a great Chief but his Countinance has but little inteligence and his
influence among his people appears very inconsiderable. a number of
Indians besides the inhabitents of these Lodges gathered about us this
evening and encamped in the timbered bottom on the Creek near us. We
met with a Snake indian man at this place through whome we Spoke at
Some length to the nativs this evening with respect to the object which
had enduced us to visit their Country. this address was induced at this
moment by the Suggestions of an old man who observed to the nativs that
he thought we were bad men and had Come most probably in order to kill
them.--this impression if really entertained I believe we effected;
they appeared well Satisfied with what we Said to them, and being
hungary and tired we retired to rest at 11 oClock.--We-ark-koomt
rejoined us this evening. this man has been of infinate Service to us
on Several former occasions and through him we now offered our address
to the nativs-.




[Lewis, May 6, 1806]
Tuesday May 6th 1806.
This morning the husband of the sick woman was as good as his word, he
produced us a young horse in tolerable order which we immediately
killed and butchered. the inhabitants seemed more accomodating this
morning; they sold us some bread. we received a second horse for
medecine and prescription for a little girl with the rheumatism. Capt.
C. dressed the woman again this morning who declared that she had
rested better last night than she had since she had been sick. sore
eyes is an universal complaint with all the natives we have seen on the
west side of the Rocky mountains. Capt. C. was busily engaged for
several hours this morning in administering eye-water to a croud of
applicants. we once more obtained a plentifull meal, much to the
comfort of all the party. I exchanged horses with We-ark'-koomt and
gave him a small flag with which he was much gratifyed. the sorrel I
obtained is an eligant strong active well broke horse perfictly
calculated for my purposes. at this place we met with three men of a
nation called the Skeets-so-mish who reside at the falls of a large
river disharging itself into the Columbia on it's East side to the
North of the entrance of Clark's river. this river they informed us
headed in a large lake in the mountains and that the falls below which
they resided was at no great distance from the lake. these people are
the same in their dress and appearance with the Chopunnish, tho their
language is intirely different a circumstance which I did not learn
untill we were about to set out and it was then too late to take a
vocabulary. The river here called Clark's river is that which we have
heretofore called the Flathead river, I have thus named it in honour of
my worthy friend and fellow traveller Capt. Clark. for this stream we
know no indian name and no whiteman but ourselves was ever on it's
principal branches. the river which Fidler calls the great lake river
may possibly be a branch of it but if so it is but a very
inconsiderable branch and may as probably empty itself into the
Skeetssomish as into that river. the stream which I have heretofore
called Clark's river has it's three principal sources in mountains
Hood, Jefferson & the Northern side of the S. W. Mountains and is of
course a short river. this river I shall in future call the
To-wannahiooks river it being the name by which it is called by the
Eneshur nation. The Kooskooske river may be safely navigated at present
all the rocks of the shoals and rapids are perfectly covered; the
current is strong, the water clear and cold. this river is rising
fast.The timber of this river which consists principally of the long
leafed pine commences about 2 miles below our present camp on Colter's
Creek. it was two oclock this evening before we could collect our
horses. at 3 P.M. we set out accompanyed by the brother of the twisted
hair and We arkkoomt. I directed the horse which we had obtained for
the purpose of eating to be led as it was yet unbroke, in performing
this duty a quarrel ensued between Drewyer and Colter. we continued our
march this evening along the river 9 miles to a lodge of 6 families,
built of sticks mats & dryed hay in the same form of those heretofore
discribed. we passed a lodge of 3 families at 4 ms. on the road. no
provision of any discription was to be obtained of these people. a
little after dark our young horse broke the rope by which he was
confined and made his escape much to the chagrine of all who
recollected the keenness of their appetites last evening. the brother
of the twisted hair and Wearkkoomt with 10 or 12 others encamped with
us this evening.-

the natives have a considerable salmon fishery up Colter's Creek. this
stream extends itself to the pirs of the rocky mountain and in much the
greater part of it's course passes through a well timbered pine country
it is 25 yds. wide and discharges a large body of water. the banks low
and bed formed of pebbles.--had a small shower of rain this evening.




[Clark, May 6, 1806]
Tuesday May 6th 1806
This morning the Susband of the Sick woman was as good as his word. he
produced us a young horse in tolerable order which we imedeately had
killed and butchered. the inhabitents Seemed more accommodating this
morning. they Sold us Some bread. we received a Second horse for
Medecine & procription to a little girl with the rhumitism whome I had
bathed in worm water, and anointed her a little with balsom Capivia. I
dressed the woman again this morning who declared that She had rested
better last night than She had Since She had been sick. Sore Eyes is an
universal Complaint among all the nations which we have Seen on the
West Side of the rocky Mountains. I was busily imployed for several
hours this morning in administering eye water to a Croud of applicants.
we once more obtained a plentiful meal, much to the Comfort of all the
party. Capt Lewis exchanged horses with We ark koomt and gave him a
small flag with which he was much pleased and gratifyed. the Sorrel
which Cap L. obtained is a Strong active well broke horse-. At this
place we met with three men of a nation Called the Skeetsso-mish who
reside at the falls of a Small river dischargeing itself into the
Columbia on its East Side to the South of the enterance of Clarks
river. this river they informed us headed in a large lake in the
mountains and that the falls below which they reside was at no great
distance from the lake. these people are the Same in their dress and
appearance with the Chopunnish, tho their language is entirely
different. one of them gave me his whip which was a twisted Stick 18
Ins. in length at one end a pice of raw hide Split So as to form two
Strings about 20 inches in length as a lash, to the other end a String
passed through a hole and fastened at each end for a loope to Slip over
the wrist. I gave in return for this whip a fathom of narrow binding.
The River here Calld. Clarks river is that which we have heretofore
Called Flathead river. Capt. Lewis has thought proper to Call this
after myself for this Stream we know no Indhan name and no white man
but our Selves was ever on this river. The river which Fiddler call's
the great Lake river may possiably be a branch of it, but if So it is
but a very inconsiderable branch, and may as probably empty itself into
the Columbia above as into Clarks river. the Stream which the party has
heretofore Called Clarks river imedeately above the great falls, has
it's three principal branches in Mountains Jefferson, Hood and the
Northern Side of the S. W. Mountains and is of course a Short river.
this river is Called by the Skillutes & Eneshure Nations Towannahhiooks
which is also the name they Call those bands of Snake indians who Come
on this river every Spring to Catch the Salmon-. The Kooskooske river
may be Safely navigated at present all the rocks of the Sholes and
rapids are perfectlly Covered; the Current is Strong, the water Clear
and Cold. this river is riseing fast-. The timber of this river which
consists principally of the long leafed pine which commences about 2
miles below our present encampment on Colters Creek. it was 2 P M. this
evening before we could collect our horses. at 3 P M. we Set out
accompanied by the brother of the twisted hair and We-ark-koomt. we
derected the horse which I had obtained for the purpose of eateing to
be led as it was unbroke, in performing this duty a quarrel ensued
between Drewyer and Colter-. We Continued our march along the river on
its North Side 9 miles to a lodge of 6 families built of Sticks mats
and dryed Hay. of the Same form of those heretofore discribed. we
passed a Lodge of 3 families at 4 ms. on the river, no provisions of
any discription was to be obtained of these people. a little after dark
our young horse broke the rope by which he was Confined and made his
escape much to the chagrine of all who recollected the keenness of
their appetites last evening. the brother of the twisted hair &
wearkkoomt with 10 others encamped with us this evening

The nativs have a Considerable Salmon fishery up Colters Creek. this
Stream extends itself to the Spurs of the Rocky Mountain and in much
the greater part of its Course passes through a well timbered pine
Country. it is 25 yds. wide and discharges a large body of water. the
banks low and bead formed of pebbles-. had a Small Shower of rain this
evening. The Chopunnish about the Mouth of the Kooskooske bury their
dead on Stoney hill Sides generally, and as I was informed by an Indian
who made Signs that they made a hole in the Grown by takeing away the
Stones and earth where they wished to deposit the dead body after which
they laid the body which was previously raped in a robe and Secured
with Cords. over the body they placed Stones So as to form a Sort of
arch on the top of which they put Stones and earth So as to Secure the
body from the wolves and birds &c. they Sometimes inclose the grave
with a kind of Sepulcher like the roof of a house formed of the canoes
of the disceased. they also Sacrifice the favorite horses of the
disceased. the bones of many of which we See on and about the graves.




[Lewis, May 7, 1806]
Wednesday May 7th 1806.
This morning we collected our horses and set out early accompanyed by
the brother of the twisted hair as a guide; Wearkkoomt and his party
left us. we proceeded up the river 4 miles to a lodge of 6 families
just below the entrance of a small creek, here our guide recommended
our passing the river. he informed us that the road was better on the
South side and that game was more abundant also on that side near the
entrance of the Chopunnish river. we determined to pursue the rout
recommended by the guide and accordingly unloaded our horses and
prepared to pass the river which we effected by means of one canoe in
the course of 4 hours. a man of this lodge produced us two canisters of
powder which he informed us he had found by means of his dog where they
had been buried in a bottom near the river some miles above, they were
the same which we had buryed as we decended the river last fall. as he
had kept them safe and had honesty enough to return them to us we gave
him a fire steel by way of compensation. during our detention at the
river we took dinner, after which or at 3 P.M. we renewed our march
along the river about 2 ms. over a difficult stony road, when we left
the river and asscended the hills to the wright which are here
mountains high. the face of the country when you have once ascended the
river hills is perfectly level and partially covered with the
longleafed pine. the soil is a dark rich loam thickly covered with
grass and herbatious plants which afford a delightfull pasture for
horses. in short it is a beautifull fertile and picteresque country.
Neeshneparkeeook overtook us and after riding with us a few miles
turned off to the wright to visit some lodges of his people who he
informed me were geathering roots in the plain at a little distance
from the road. our guide conducted us through the plain and down a
steep and lengthey hill to a creek which we called Musquetoe Creek in
consequence of being infested with swarms of those insects on our
arrival at it. this is but an inconsiderable stream about 6 yds. wide
heads in the plains at a small distance and discharges itself into the
Kooskooke 9 miles by water below the entrance of the Chopunnish river.
we struck this creek at the distance of 5 ms. from the point at which
we left the river our cours being a little to the S. of East. ascending
the creek one mile on the S. E. side we arrived at an indian incampment
of six lodges which appeared to have been recently evacuated. here we
remained all night having traveled 12 miles only. the timbered country
on this side of the river may be said to commence near this creek, and
on the other side of the river at a little distance from it the timber
reaches as low as Colter's Creek. the earth in many parts of these
plains is thrown up in little mounds by some animal whose habits are
similar to the Sallemander, like that animal it is also invisible;
notwithstanding I have observed the work of this animal thoughout the
whole course of my long tract from St. Louis to the Pacific ocean I
have never obtained a view of this animal. the Shoshone man of whom I
have before made mention evertook us this evening with Neeshneparkeeook
and remained with us this evening.--we suped this evening as we had
dined on horse-beef. we saw several deer this evening and a great
number of the tracks of these animals we determined to remain here
untill noon tomorrow in order to obtain some venison and accordingly
gave orders to the hunters to turn out early in the morning.--he Spurs
of the rocky Mountains which were in view from the high plain today
were perfectly covered with snow. the Indians inform us that the snow
is yet so deep on the mountains that we shall not be able to pass them
untill the next full moon or about the first of June; others set the
time at still a more distant period. this unwelcom inteligence to men
confined to a diet of horsebeef and roots, and who are as anxious as we
are to return to the fat plains of the Missouri and thence to our
native homes. The Chopunnish bury their dead in Sepulchres formed of
boards like the roofs of houses. the corps is rolled in skins and laid
on boards above the surface of the earth. they are laid in several teer
one over another being seperated by a board only above and below from
other corps. I did observe some instances where the body was laid in an
indifferent woden box which was placed among other carcased rolled in
skin in the order just mentioned. they sacrifice horses canoes and
every other speceis of property to their ded. the bones of many horses
are seen laying about those sepulchres. this evening was cold as usual.




[Clark, May 7, 1806]
Wednesday May 7th 1806
This morning we collected our horses and Set out early accompanied by
the brother of the twisted hair as a guide; Wearkkoomt and his party
left us. we proceeded up the river 4 miles to a lodge of 6 families
just below the enterance of a Small Creek, here our guide recommended
our passing the river, he informed us that the road was better on the
South Side, and that game was more abundant also on that Side near the
enterance of Chopunnish river. we deturmined to pursue the rout
recommended by the guide, and accordingly unloaded our horses and
prepared to pass the river which we effected by means of one Canoe in
the Course of 4 hours. a man of this lodge produced us two Canisters of
Powder which he informed us he had found by means of his dog where they
had been berried in the bottom near the river a fiew miles above. they
were the Same which we had burried as we decended the river last fall.
as he had kept them Safe and had honisty enough to return them to us,
we gave him a fire Steel by way of Compensation. dureing our detention
at the river we took dinner. after which we renewed our march along the
S. E. Side of the river about 2 miles over a dificuelt Stoney road,
when we left the river and assended the hills to the right which are
here mountains high. the face of the Country when you have once
assended the river hills, is perfectly level and partially Covered with
the long leafed pine. the Soil is a dark rich loam, thickly Covered
with grass and herbatious plants which afford a delightfull pasture for
horses. in Short it is a butifull fertile picteresque Country.
Neeshneparkeeook over took us and after rideing with us a fiew miles
turned off to the right to visit some lodges of his people who he
informed us were gathering roots in the plains at a little distance
from the road. our guide Conducted us through the plain and down a
Steep and lengthy hill to a Creek which we Call Musquetoe Creek in
consequence of being infested with Sworms of those insects on our
arival at it. this is but an inconsiderable Stream about 6 yards wide
heads in the plains at a Short distance and discharges itself into the
Kooskooske 9 ms. by water below the forks. we Struck this Creek at the
distance of 5 miles from the point at which we left the river our
course being a little to the S. of East. we proceeded up the Creek one
Mile and on the S. E. Side we arived at an old Indian incampment of Six
Lodges which appeared to have been recently evacuated. here we remained
all night haveing traveled 12 ms. only. the timbered Country on this
Side of the river may be Said to Commence a Short distance below this
Creek, and on the other Side of the river at a little distance from it
the timber reaches as low as Colter's Creek. the earth in maney parts
of those plains is thown up in little mounds by Some animal whose
habits are Similar to the Sallemander, like that animal it is also
invisible; notwithstanding I have observed the work of this animal
throughout the whole course of my trail from St. Louis to the Pacific
Ocian, I have never obtained a View of this animal. The Shoshone man of
whome I have before mentioned over took us this evening with Neesh
neparkeeook or Cut nose and remained with us this evening. we Suped
this evening as we had done on horse beef. we Saw Several deer this
evening, and a great number of the tracks of these animals we
deturmined to remain here untill noon tomorrow in order to obtain some
venison, and accordingly gave orders to the hunters to turn out early
in the morning. The Spurs of the rocky mountains which were in view
from the high plain to day were perfectly Covered with Snow. The
Indians inform us that the Snow is yet So deep on the Mountains that we
Shall not be able to pass them untill after the next full moon or about
the first of June. others Set the time at a more distant period. this
unwelcom intiligence to men confined to a diet of horsebeef and roots,
and who are as anxious as we are to return to the fat plains of the
Missouri, and thence to our native homes. The Chopunnish bury their
dead in different ways as I have obseved, besides that already
discribed they scaffold Some and deposit others in Sepulchers, those
are rearly to be Seen in this upper part of the Columbian Waters. the
one already discribed is the most Common. they all Sacrifice horses,
Canoes and every Species of property to the dead. the bones of maney
horses are Seen lyeing about those repositaries of the dead &c.-.

I observed in all the Lodges which we have passed Since we Crossed
Lewis's river decoys, or Stocking heads as they are Sometimes called.
these decoys are for the deer and is formed of the Skin of the head and
upper portion of the neck of that animale extended in the nateral Shape
by means of a fiew little Sticks placed within. the hunter when he Sees
a deer conseals himself and with his hand givs to the decoy the action
of a deer at feed, and this induces the deer within arrowshot; in this
mode the Indians near the woody country hunt on foot in Such places
where they cannot pursue the deer with horses which is their favourite
method when the grounds will permit-.-. The orniments worn by the
Chopunnish are, in their nose a Single Shell of wampom, the pirl &
beeds are Suspended from the ears. beads are worn arround their wrists,
neck and over their Sholders crosswise in the form of a double Sash-.
the hair of the men is Cewed in two rolls which hang on each side in
front of the body. Collars of bears Claws are also Common; but the
article of dress on which they appear to bestow most pains and
orniments is a kind of collar or brestplate; this is most Commonly a
Strip of otter skins of about Six inches Wide taken out of the Center
of the Skin it's whole length including the head. this is dressed with
the hair on, this is tied around the neck & hangs in front of the body
the tail frequently reaching below their knees; on this Skin in front
is attatched pieces of pirl, beeds, wampom, pices of red Cloth and in
Short whatever they conceive most valuable or ornamental-.-.




[Lewis, May 8, 1806]
Thursday May 8th 1806.
Most of the hunters turned out by light this morning a few others
remained without our permission or knoledge untill late in the morning,
we chid them severely for their indolence and inattention to the order
of last evening. about 8 OCk. Sheilds returned with a small deer on
which we breakfasted. by 11 A.M. all our hunters returned, Drewyer and
Cruzatte brought each a deer, Collins wounded another which my dog
caught at a little distance from the camp. our stock of provision now
consisted of 4 deer and the remnant of the horse which we killed at
Colter's Creek. Sheilds killed a duck of an uncommon kind. the head
beak and wing of which I preserved. the beak is remarkably wide and
obtusely pointed, on it's edges it is furnished with a sceries of teeth
very long and fine not unlike the teeth of a comb. the belley is of a
brick red, the lower part of the neck white, the upper part or but of
the wing is a sky blue, underneath which a narrow stripe of white
succeeds marking the wing transversly, the large feathers are of a dark
colour. tail short and pointed and consists of 12 dark brown feathers.
the back is black and sides white; legs yellow and feet formed like the
Duckinmallard which it also resembles in size and form. the eye is
moderately large, puple black and iris of an orrange colour. the
colours and appearance of the female is precisely that of the
duckinmallard only, reather smaller. we are informed that the natives
in this quarter were much distressed for food in the course of the last
winter; they were compelled to collect the moss which grows on the pine
which they boiled and eat; near this camp I observed many pine trees
which appear to have been cut down about that season which they inform
us was done in order to collect the seed of the longleafed pine which
in those moments of distress also furnishes an article of food; the
seed of this speceis of pine is about the size and much the shape of
the seed of the large sunflower; they are nutricious and not unpleasent
when roasted or boiled, during this month the natives also peal this
pine and eat the succulent or inner bark. in the creek near our
encampment I observed a falling trap constructed on the same plan with
those frequent seen in the atlantic states for catching the fish
decending the stream Capt. C. took several small trout from this trap.
Neesh-ne-park-kee-ook and several other indians joined us this morning.
we gave this cheif and the indians with us some venison, horsebeef, the
entrels of the four deer, and four fawns which were taken from two of
the does that were killed, they eat none of their food raw, tho the
entrals had but little preperation and the fawns were boiled and
consumed hair hide and entrals. these people sometimes eat the flesh of
the horse tho they will in most instances suffer extreem hunger before
they will kill their horses for that purpose, this seems reather to
proceede from an attatchment to this animal, than a dislike to it's
flesh for I observe many of them eat very heartily of the horsebeef
which we give them. The Shoshone man was displeased because we did not
give him as much venison as he could eat and in consequence refused to
interpret, we took no further notice of him and in the course of a few
hours he became very officious and seemed anxious to reinstate himself
in our good opinons. the relation of the twisted hair and
Neeshneparkkeook gave us a sketch of the principall watercourses West
of the Rocky Mountains a copy of which I preserved; they make the main
Southwardly branch of Lewis's river much more extensive than the other,
and place many villages of the Shoshonees on it's western side. at half
after 3 P.M. we departed; for the lodge of the Twisted hair accompanyed
by the Cheif and sundry other indians. the relation of the twisted hair
left us. the road led us up a steep and high hill to a high and level
plain mostly untimbered, through which we passed parrallel with the
river about 4 miles when we met the Twisted hair and a party of six
men. to this Cheif we had confided the care of our horses and a part of
our saddles when we decended the river last fall. the Twisted hair
received us very coolly an occurrence as unexpected as it was
unaccountable to us. he shortly began to speak with a loud voice and in
a angry manner, when he had ceased to speak he was answered by the
Cutnose Cheif or Neeshneparkkeook; we readily discovered that a violet
quarrel had taken place between these Cheifs but at that instant knew
not the cause; we afterwards learnt that it was on the subject of our
horses. this contreversy between the cheifs detained us about 20
minutes; in order to put an end to this dispute as well as to releive
our horses from the embarasment of their loads, we informed the Cheifs
that we should continue our march to the first water and encamp
accordingly we moved on and the Indians all followed. about two miles
on the road we arrived at a little branch which run to the wright. here
we encamped for the evening having traveled 6 miles today. the two
cheifs with their little bands formed seperate camps at a short
distance from ours, they all appeared to be in an ill humour. we had
been informed some days since that the natives had discovered the
deposit of our saddles and taken them away and that our horses were
much scattered. we were very anxious to learn the particulars or truth
of these reports from the twisted hair, as it must in some measure
govern us in the establishment of our perminent camp which in
consequence of our detention by the snow of the mountains has become
necessary. to obtain our horses and saddles as quickly as possible is
our wish, and we are somewhat apprehensive that this difference which
has taken place between these Chiefs may millitate against our
operations in this rispect. we were therefore desireous to bring about
a good understanding between them as soon as possible. The Shoshone boy
refused to speak, he aledged it was a quarrel between two Cheifs and
that he had no business with it; it was in vain that we urged that his
interpreting what we said on this subject was not taking the responsibil
ity of the inteference on himself, he remained obstenately silent.
about an hour after we had encamped Drewyer returned from hunting we
sent him to the Twisted hair to make some enquiries relative to our
horses and saddles and to ask him to come and smoke with us. The
Twisted hair accepted the invitation and came to our fire. The twisted
hair informed us that accordingly to the promis he had made us when he
seperated from us at the falls of the Columbia he collected our horses
on his return and took charge of them, that about this time the Cutnose
or Neeshneparkkeook and Tun-nach'-emoo-tools or the broken arm returned
from a war excurtion against the Shoshonees on the South branch of
Lewis's river which had caused their absence when we were in this
neighbourhood. that these men became dissatisfyed with him in
consequence of our having confided the horses to his care and that they
were eternally quarreling with him insomuch that he thought it best as
he was an old man to relinquish any further attention to the horses,
that they had consequently become scattered; that most of the horses
were near this place, a part were in the forks between the Chopunnish
and Kooskooske rivers and three or four others were at the lodge of the
broken Arm about half a days march higher up the river. he informed us
with rispect to our saddles that on the rise of the water this spring
the earth had fallen from the door of the cash and exposed the saddles,
he being informed of their situation had taken them up and placed them
in another cash where they were at this time; he said it was probable
that a part of them had fallen into the water but of this he was not
certain. The Twisted hair said if we would spend the day tomorrow at
his lodge which was a few miles only from hence and on the road leading
to the Broken arm's lodge, he would collect such of our horses as were
near this place and our saddles, that he would also send some young men
over the Kooskooske to collect those in the forks and bring them to the
lodge of the broken Arm to met us. he advised us to go to the lodge of
the broken Arm as he said he was a Cheif of great emenence among them,
and promised to accompany us thither if we wished him. we told him that
we should take his advice in every particular, that we had confided the
horses to his care and expected that he would collect them and deliver
them to us which when he performed we should pay him the two guns and
amunition we had promised him for that service. he seemed much pleased
and promised his utmost exertions. we sent Drewyer to the Cutnose who
also came to our fire and smoked with ourselves and the Twisted hair we
took occasion in the course of the evening to express our regret that
there should be a misunderstanding between these Cheifs; the Cutnose
told us in the presents of the Twisted hair that he the twisted hair
was a bad old man that he woar two faces, that in stead of taking care
of our horses as he had promised us that he had suffered his young men
to ride them hunting and had injured them very much; that this was the
cause why himself and the Broken arm had forbid his using them. the
other made no reply. we informed the Cutnose of our intention of
spending tomorrow at the Twisted hair's lodge in order to collect our
horses and saddles and that we should proceede the next day to the
Broken Arm's lodge, he appeared well satisfyed with this arrangement
and said he would continue with us, and would give us any assistance in
his power; he said he knew the broken arm expected us at his lodge and
that he had two bad horses for us, metaphorically speaking a present of
two good horses. he said the broken arm had learnt our want of
provision and had sent four of his young men with a supply to meet us
but that they had taken a different road and had missed us.--about 10
P.M. our guests left us and we layed down to rest.




[Clark, May 8, 1806]
Thursday 8th of May 1806.
This morning our hunters was out by the time it was light. about 8
oClock Shields brought in a Small deer, on which we brackfast by 11
A.M. all our hunters returned Drewyer & P. Crusat brought in a Deer
each & Collins wounded one which our Dog Caught near our Camp. Total of
our Stock of provisions 4 deer & Some horse flesh. on the Small Creek
which passes our Camp, the nativs have laterly encamped and as we are
informed have been much distressed for provisions, they have fallen a
number of Small pine in the vicinity of this Encampment for the Seed
which is in the bur of which they eate. we are informed that they were
Compelled to Collect the moss off the pine boil & eate it in the latter
part of the last Winter. on the Creek near our Camp I observed a kind
of trap which was made with great panes to catch the Small fish which
pass down with the Stream This was a dam formed of Stone So as to
Collect the water in a narrow part not exceeding 3 feet wide from which
place the water Shot with great force and Scattered through Some Small
willows Closely connected and fastened with bark. this mat of willow
Switches was about 4 feet wide and 6 long lying in a horozontal
position, fastened at the extremety. the Small fish which fell on those
willows was washed on the Willows where they untill taken off &c. I
cought or took off those willows 9 Small trout from 3 to 7 Inches in
length. Soon after I returned from the fishery an Indian came from a
fishery of a Similar kind a little above with 12 Small fish which he
offered me which I declined axcepting as I found from his Signs that
his house was a Short distance above, and that those fisheries afforded
the principal part of the food for his Children. The Great Chief of the
Bands below who has a cut nose joined us this morning. we gave the
interals with 4 young fauns which was in two of the deer killed to day
to the Indians also some of our deer & horse flesh. the Paunch of the
deer they eate without any preperation further than washing them a
little. the fauns they boiled and eate every part of them even the
Skins with the hair. The Snake Indian was much displeased that he was
not furnished with as much Deer as he could eate. he refused to Speake
to the wife of Shabono, through whome we Could understand the nativs.
we did not indulge him and in the after part of the day he Came too and
Spoke verry well. one of the Indians drew me a Sketch of the river (See
the latter part of this book) in this Sketch he makes the 1st large
Southerly fork of Lewis's river much the longest and on which great
numbers of the Snake Indians reside &c. at ____ P.M. we loaded up and
Set on on the roade leading as we were informed to the lodge of the
twisted hair, the Chief in whoes Care we had left our horses. we were
accompanied by the Cut nose Chief our old Chief who had accompanied us
down the river and Several men. we assended the hills which was Steep
and emencely high to a leavel rich Country thinly timbered with pine.
we had not proceeded more than 4 miles before we met the twisted hair
and Several men meeting of us. we were verry coolly recved by the
twisted hair. he Spoke aloud and was answered by the Cut Nose. we Could
not learn what they Said. but plainly discovered that a
missunderstanding had taken place between them. we made Signs to them
that we Should proceed on to the next water and encamp. accordingly I
set out and they all followed. we had not proceeded far before the road
Crossed a Small handsom Stream on which we encamped. The parties of
those two Chiefs took different positions at Some distance from each
other and all appeared Sulkey. after we had formed our Camp we Sent
Drewyer with a pipe to Smoke with the twisted hair and lern the Cause
of the dispute between him and the Cut nose, and also to invite him to
our fire to Smoke with us. The twisted hair came to our fire to Smoke
we then Sent drewyer to the Cut Noses fire with the Same directions. he
returned and informed us that the Cut nose Said he would join us in a
fiew minits. it appears that the Cause of the quarrel between those two
men is about our horses. and we cannot lern the particulars of this
quarrel which probably originated through jelousy on the part of the
Cut nose who blames the twisted hair for Suffer our horses to be rode,
and want water dureing the Winter &c. twisted hair Says the horses were
taken from him &c. The Cut nose joined us in a Short time We Smoked
with all the party of both Chiefs, and told them that we were Sorry to
find them at varience with each other the cut nose said that the
twisted hair was a bad man and wore two fases, that he had not taken
care of our horses as was expected. that himself an the broken arm had
Caused our horses to be Watered in the winter and had them drove
together, and that if we would proceed on to the village of the great
Chief whome we had left a flag last fall the broken arm he would Send
for our horses, that he had himself three of them. he also informed us
that the great Chief hering of our distressed Situation had Sent his
Son and 4 men to meet us and have us furnished on the way &c. that the
young men had missed us and Could never over take us untill this time.
that the great chief had 2 bad horses for us and expected us to go to
his lodge which was near the river and about half a days march above
&c. The twisted hair told us that he wished to Smoke with us at his
lodge which was on the road leading to the Great Chiefs lodge, and but
a fiew miles a head. if we would delay at his lodge tomorrow he would
go after our Saddles and horses which was near the place we made our
Canoes last fall. we deturmined to Set out early in the morning and
proceed on to the lodge of the twisted hair and Send for our Saddles
and powder which we had left burried mear the forks. and the day after
tomorrow to proceed on to the lodge of the Grand Chief. accordingly we
informed the Indians of our intentions. we all Smoked and conversed
untill about 10 P M. the Indians retired and we lay down. Derected 5
hunters to turn out early in the morning to hunt and meet us at the
twisted hair's lodge.




[Lewis, May 9, 1806]
Friday May 9th 1806.
We sent out several hunters early this morning with instructions to
meet us at the lodge of the Twisted hair. Collecting our horses
detained us untill 9 A.M. when we charged our packhorses and set out.
our rout lay through a level rich country similar to that of yesterday;
at the distance of 6 miles we arrived at the lodge of the twisted hair;
this habitation was built in the usual form with sticks mats and dryed
hay, and contained 2 firs and about 12 persons. even at this small
habitation there was an appendage of the soletary lodge, the retreat of
the tawny damsels when nature causes them to be driven into coventry;
here we halted as had been previously concerted, and one man with 2
horses accompayed the twisted hair to the canoe camp, about 4 ms. in
quest of the saddles. the Twisted hair sent two young men in surch of
our horses agreeably to his promis. The country along the rocky
mountains for several hundred miles in length and about 50 in width is
level extreemly fertile and in many parts covered with a tall and open
growth of the longleafed pine. near the watercouses the hills are steep
and lofty tho are covered with a good soil not remarkably stony and
possess more timber than the level country. the bottom lands on the
watercourses are reather narrow and confined tho fertile & seldom
inundated. this country would form an extensive settlement; the climate
appears quite as mild as that of similar latitude on the Atlantic coast
if not more so and it cannot be otherwise than healthy; it possesses a
fine dry pure air. the grass and many plants are now upwards of knee
high. I have no doubt but this tract of country if cultivated would
produce in great abundance every article essentially necessary to the
comfort and subsistence of civillized man. to it's present inhabitants
nature seems to have dealt with a liberal hand, for she has distributed
a great variety of esculent plants over the face of the country which
furnish them a plentiful) store of provision; these are acquired with
but little toil, and when prepared after the method of the natives
afford not only a nutricious but an agreeable food. among other roots
those called by them the Quawmash and Cows are esteemed the most
agreeable and valuable as they are also the most abundant. the cows is
a knobbed root of an irregularly rounded form not unlike the Gensang in
form and consistence. this root they collect, rub of a thin black rhind
which covers it and pounding it expose it in cakes to the sun. these
cakes ate about an inch and 1/4 thick and 6 by 18 in width, when dryed
they either eat this bread alone without any further preperation, or
boil it and make a thick muselage; the latter is most common and much
the most agreeable. the flavor of this root is not very unlike the
gensang.--this root they collect as early as the snows disappear in the
spring and continue to collect it until) the quawmash supplys it's
place which happens about the latter end of June. the quawmash is also
collected for a few weaks after it first makes it's appearance in the
spring, but when the scape appears it is no longer fit for use untill
the seed are ripe which happens about the time just mentioned, and then
the cows declines. the latter is also frequently dryed in the sun and
pounded afterwards and then used in making soope.--I observed a few
trees of the larch and a few small bushes of the balsam fir near the
lodge of the Twisted hair. at 2 P.M. our hunters joined us Drewyer
killed a deer but lost it in the river. a few pheasants was the produce
of the hunt. we procured a few roots of cows of which we made scope.
late in the evening The Twisted hair and Willard returned; they brought
about half of our saddles, and some powder and lead which had been
buried at that place. my saddle was among the number of those which
were lost. about the same time the young men arrived with 21 of our
horses. the greater part of our horses were in fine order. five of them
appeared to have been so much injured by the indians riding them last
fall that they had not yet recovered and were in low order. three
others had soar backs. we had these horses caught and hubbled. the
situation of our camp was a disagreeable one in an open plain; the wind
blew violently and was cold. at seven P.M. it began to rain and hail,
at 9 it was succeeded by a heavy shower of snow which continued untill
the next morning.--several indians joined us this evening from the
village of the broken arm or Tunnachemootoolt and continued all night.
The man who had imposed himself on us as a relation of the twisted hair
rejoined us this evening we found him an impertinent proud supercilious
fellow and of no kind of rispectability in the nation, we therefore did
not indulge his advances towards a very intimate connection. The
Cutnose lodged with the twisted hair I beleive they have become good
friends again. several indians slept about us.




[Clark, May 9, 1806]
Friday 9th May 1806
The hunters Set out very early agreeable to their derections. we were
detained untill 9 A.M. for our horses which were much Scattered at
which time we Collected our horses and Set out and proceeded on through
a butifull open rich Country for 6 miles to the Camp of the twisted
hair. this Campment is formed of two Lodges built in the usial form of
mats and Straw. the largest and principal Lodge is Calculated for 2
fires only and Contains about ____ persons. the Second lodge is Small &
appears to be intended for the Sick women who always retire to a
Seperate lodge when they have the ____ this Custom is Common to all the
nations on this river as well as among all other Indian nations with
whom I am acquainted. at the distance of 2 miles we passd. a lodge of 2
fires on a fork of the road which leads to the right Situated on a
Small branch which falls into Musquetor Creek. before 2 P M all our
hunters joined us haveing killed only one deer which was lost in the
river and a pheasent. Soon after we halted at the lodge of the twisted
hair he Set out with two boys and Willard with a pack horse down to the
river near the place we made the Canoes for our Saddles and a Cannister
of powder and Some lead buried there, also a part of our horses which
resorted near that place. late in the evening they returned with 21 of
our horse and about half of our Saddles with the powder and ball. The
greater part of the horses were in fine order, tho five of them had
been rode & worsted in Such a manner last fall by the Inds. that they
had not recovered and are in very low order, and 3 with Sore backs. we
had all the recovered horses Cought & hobbled. we precured Some pounded
roots of which a Supe was made thick on which we Suped. the wind blew
hard from the S. W. accompanied with rain untill from 7 oClock untill 9
P.M. when it began to Snow and Continued all night. Several Indians
Came from the village of the Chief with whome we had left a flag and
Continued with us all night. they slept in the house of the twisted
hair and two of them along Side of us.




[Lewis, May 10, 1806]
Saturday May 10th 1806.
This morning the snow continued falling 1/2 after 6 A.M. when it
ceased, the air keen and cold, the snow 8 inches deep on the plain; we
collected our horses and after taking a scant breakfast of roots we set
out for the village of Tunnachemootoolt; our rout lay through an open
plain course S. 35 E. and distance 16 ms. the road was slippery and the
snow clogged to the horses feet, and caused them to trip frequently.
the mud at the sources of the little ravines was deep black and well
supplyed with quawmash. Drewyer turned off to the left of the road in
order to hunt and did not join us this evening. at 4 in the afternoon
we decended the hills to Commearp Creek and arrived at the Village of
Tunnachemootoolt, the cheeif at whos lodge we had left a flag last
fall. this flag was now displayed on a staff placed at no great
distance from the lodge. underneath the flag the Cheif met my friend
Capt. C. who was in front and conducted him about 80 yds. to a place on
the bank of the creek where he requested we should encamp; I came up in
a few minutes and we collected the Cheifs and men of consideration
smoked with them and stated our situation with rispect to provision.
the Cheif spoke to his people and they produced us about 2 bushels of
the Quawmas roots dryed, four cakes of the bread of cows and a dryed
salmon trout. We thanked them for this store of provision but informed
them that our men not being accustomed to live on roots alone we feared
it would make them sick, to obviate which we proposed exchangeing a
good horse in reather low order for a young horse in tolerable order
with a view to kill. the hospitality of the cheif revolted at the aydea
of an exchange, he told us that his young men had a great abundance of
young horses and if we wished to eat them we should by furnished with
as many as we wanted. accordingly they soon produced us two fat young
horses one of which we killed, the other we informed them we would
pospone killing untill we had consumed the one already killed. This is
a much greater act of hospitality than we have witnessed from any
nation or tribe since we have passed the Rocky mountains. in short be
it spoken to their immortal honor it is the only act which deserves the
appellation of hospitallity which we have witnessed in this quarter. we
informed these people that we were hungry and fatiegued at this moment,
that when we had eaten and refreshed ourselves we would inform them who
we were, from whence we had come and the objects of our resurches. a
principal Cheif by name Ho-hast,-ill-pilp arrived with a party of fifty
men mounted on eligant horses. he had come on a visit to us from his
village which is situated about six miles distant near the river. we
invited this man into our circle and smoked with him, his retinue
continued on horseback at a little distance. after we had eaten a few
roots we spoke to them as we had promised; and gave Tinnachemootoolt
and Hohastillpilp each a medal; the former one of the small size with
the likeness of Mr. Jefferson and the latter one of the sewing medals
struck in the presidency of Washington, we explained to them the
desighn and the importance of medals in the estimation of the whites as
well as the red men who had been taught their value. The Cheif had a
large conic lodge of leather erected for our reception and a parsel of
wood collected and laid at the door after which he invited Capt. C. and
myself to make that lodge our home while we remained with him. we had a
fire lighted in this lodge and retired to it accompanyed by the Cheifs
and as many of the considerate men as could croud in a circcle within
it. here after we had taken a repast on some horsebeef we resumed our
council with the indians which together with smoking the pipe occupyed
the ballance of the evening. I was surprised to find on decending the
hills of Commearp Cr. to find that there had been no snow in the
bottoms of that stream. it seems that the snow melted in falling and
decended here in rain while it snowed on the plains. the hills are
about six hundred feet high about one fourth of which distance the snow
had decended and still lay on the sides of the hills. as these people
had been liberal with is with rispect to provision I directed the men
not to croud their lodge surch of food in the manner hunger has
compelled them to do at most lodges we have passed, and which the
Twisted hair had informed me was disgreeable to the natives. but their
previous want of hospitality had induced us to consult their
enclinations but little and suffer our men to obtain provision from
them on the best terms they could. The village of the broken arm as I
have heretofore termed it consists of one house only which is 150 feet
in length built in the usual form of sticks matts and dry grass. it
contains twenty four fires and about double that number of families.
from appearances I presume they could raise 100 fighting men. the noise
of their women pounding roots reminds me of a nail factory. The indians
seem well pleased, and I am confident that they are not more so than
our men who have their somachs once more well filled with horsebeef and
mush of the bread of cows.--the house of coventry is also seen here.-




[Clark, May 10, 1806]
Saturday 10th of May 1806
This morning the Snow continued falling untill 1/2 past 6 A M when it
Seased. the air keen and Cold the Snow 8 inches deep on the plain. we
Collected our horses and after takeing a Scanty brackfast of roots, we
Set out for the Village of the Chief with a flag, and proceeded on
through an open plain. the road was Slipry and the Snow Cloged and
caused the horses to trip very frequently. the mud at heads of the
Streams which we passed was deep and well Supplied with the Car mash.
Drewyer turned off the road to hunt near the river to our lef and did
not join us to day. at 4 P M we arrived at the Village of Tin
nach-e-moo-toolt the Chief whome We had left a flag. this flag was
hoisted on a pole unde the flag the Chief met me and Conducted me to a
Spot near a Small run about 80 paces from his Lodges where he requested
me to halt which I did. Soon after Cap Lewis who was in the rear Came
up and we Smoked with and told this Chief our Situation in respect to
provisions. they brought foward about 2 bushels of quawmash 4 Cakes of
bread made of roots and a dried fish. we informed the Chief that our
Party was not accustomed to eate roots without flesh & proposed to
exchange Some of our oald horses for young ones to eate. they Said that
they would not exchange horses, but would furnish us with Such as we
wished, and produced 2 one of which we killed and informd. them that we
did not wish to kill the other at this time. we gave Medals to the
broken arm or Tin-nach-e-moo tolt and Hoh-halt-ill-pitp two principal
Chiefs of the Chopunnish Natn. and was informed that there was one
other Great Chief (in all 4) who had but one eye. he would be here
tomorrow. a large Lodge of Leather was pitched and Capt. Lewis and my
Self was envited into it. we entered and the Chief and principal men
came into the lodge and formed a Circle a parcel of wood was Collected
and laid at the dore and a fire made in this Conic lodge before we
entered it. the Chief requested that we might make the Lodge our homes
while we remained with him. here after we had taken a repast on roots &
horse beef we resumed our Council with the indians which together with
Smokeing took up the ballance of the evening. I was Supprised to find
decending the hill to Commearp Creek to find that there had been no
snow in the bottoms of that Stream. it seams that the Snow melted in
falling and decended here in rain while it snowed in the plain. the
hills are about Eight hundred feet high about 1/4 of which distance the
Snow had decended and Still lay on the Sides of the hill. as those
people had been liberal I directed the men not to croud their Lodge in
serch of food the manner hunger has Compelled them to do, at most
lodges we have passed, and which the Twisted Hair had informed us was
disagreeable to the nativs. but their previous want of hospitality had
enduced us to consult their enclinations but little and Suffer our men
to obtain provisions from them on the best terms they could.

The Village of the broken Arm consists of one house or Lodge only which
is 150 feet in length built in the usial form of Sticks, Mats and dry
grass. it contains 24 fires and about double that number of families.
from appearance I prosume they could raise 100 fighting men. the noise
of their women pounding the cows roots remind me of a nail factory. The
Indians appear well pleased, and I am Confident that they are not more
so than our men who have their Stomach once more well filled with horse
beef and the bread of cows. Those people has Shewn much greater acts of
hospitallity than we have witnessed from any nation or tribe Since we
have passed the rocky Mountains. in Short be it Spoken to their
immortal honor it is the only act which diserves the appelation of
hospitallity which we have witnessed in this quarter.




[Lewis, May 11, 1806]
Sunday May 11th 1806.
The last evening we were much crouded with the indians in our lodge,
the whole floor of which was covered with their sleeping carcases. we
arrose early and took breakfast. at 8 A.M. a Cheif of great note among
these people arrived from his village or lodge on the S. side of
Lewis's River. this is a stout fellow of good countenance about 40
years of age and has lost the left eye. his name is Yoom-park'-kar-tim.
to this man we gave a medal of the smal kind. those with the likeness
of Mr. Jefferson have all been disposed of except one of the largest
size which we reserve for some great Cheif on the Yellow rock river. we
now pretty fully informed ourselves that Tunnachemootoolt,
Neeshneparkkeeook, Yoomparkkartim and Hohastillpilp were the principal
Cheif of the Chopunnish nation and ranked in the order here mentioned;
as all those cheifs were present in our lodge we thought it a
favourable time to repeat what had been said yesterday and to enter
more minutely into the views of our government with rispect to the
inhabitants of this western part of the continent, their intention of
establishing trading houses for their releif, their wish to restore
peace and harmony among the natives, the strength power and wealth of
our nation &c. to this end we drew a map of the country with a coal on
a mat in their way and by the assistance of the snake boy and our
interpretters were enabled to make ourselves understood by them altho
it had to pass through the French, Minnetare, Shoshone and Chopunnish
languages. the interpretation being tedious it ocupyed nearly half the
day before we had communicated to them what we wished. they appeared
highly pleased. after this council was over we amused ourselves with
shewing them the power of magnetism, the spye glass, compass, watch,
air-gun and sundry other articles equally novel and incomprehensible to
them. they informed us that after we had left the Minnetares last
spring that three of their people had visited that nation and that they
had informed them of us and had told them that we had such things in
our possession but that they could not place confidence in the
information untill they had now witnessed it themselves.--A young man,
son of a conspicuous Cheif among these people who was killed not long
since by the Minnetares of Fort de Prarie, brought and presented us a
very fine mare and colt. he said he had opened his ears to our councils
and would observe them strictly, and that our words had made his heart
glad. he requested that we would accept this mear and colt which he
gave in token of his determination to pursue our advise.--about 3 P.M.
Drewyer arrived with 2 deer which he had killed. he informed us that
the snow still continued to cover the plain. many of the natives apply
to us for medical aid which we gave them cheerfully so far as our skill
and store of medicine would enable us. schrofela, ulsers, rheumatism,
soar eyes, and the loss of the uce of their limbs are the most common
cases among them. the latter case is not very common but we have seen
thee instances of it among the Chopunnish. it is a very extraordinary
complaint. a Cheif of considerable note at this place has been
afflicted with it for three years, he is incapable of moving a single
limb but lies like a corps in whatever position he is placed, yet he
eats heartily, digests his food perfectly, injoys his understanding,
his pulse are good, and has retained his flesh almost perfectly, in
short were it not that he appears a little pale from having lain so
long in the shade he might well be taken for a man in good health. I
suspect that their confinement to a diet of roots may give rise to all
those disorders except the rheumatism & soar eyes, and to the latter of
these, the state of debility incident to a vegetable diet may
measureably contribute.--The Chopunnish notwithstanding they live in
the crouded manner before mentioned are much more clenly in their
persons and habitations than any nation we have seen since we left the
Ottoes on the river Platte.--The Twisted hair brought us six of our
horses.




[Clark, May 11, 1806]
Sunday 11th May 1806
Some little rain last night. we were Crouded in the Lodge with Indians
who continued all night and this morning Great numbers were around us.
The One Eyed Chief Yoom-park-kar-tim arived and we gave him a medal of
the Small Size and Spoke to the Indians through a Snake boy Shabono and
his wife. we informed them who we were, where we Came from & our
intentions towards them, which pleased them very much. a young man Son
to the great Chief who was killed not long Sence by the Indians from
the N. E. brought an elegant mare and Coalt and Gave us. and Said he
had opend. his ears to what we had Said and his heart was glad and
requested us to take this mare and Coalt as a token of his
deturmination to pursue our Councels &c. The twisted hair brough Six of
our horses all in fine order. Great numbers of Indians apply to us for
medical aide which we gave them Cherfully So far as our Skill and Store
of Medicine would enable us. Schrofla, ulsers, rhumitism, Sore eyes,
and the loss of the use of their Limbs are the most common cases among
them. the latter Case is not very common but We have Seen 3 instances
of it among the Chopunnish. a very extroadinery complnt. about 3 P.M.
Geo. drewyer arived with 2 deer which he had killed. he informed us
that the Snow Still Continued to cover the plains. We are now pretty
well informed that Tunnachemootoolt, Hohastillpilp, Neshneparkkeeook,
and Yoomparkkartim were the principal Chiefs of the Chopunnish Nation
and ranked in the order here mentioned; as all those chiefs were
present in our lodge we thought it a favourable time to repeet what had
been said and to enter more minutely into the views of our government
with respect to the inhabitents of this Western part of the Continent,
their intention of establishing tradeing houses for their relief, their
wish to restore peace and harmony among the nativs, the Strength welth
and powers of our Nation &c. to this end we drew a map of the Country
with a coal on a mat in their way, and by the assistance of the Snake
boy and our intrepeters were enabled to make ourselves under stood by
them altho it had to pass through French, Minnetare, Shoshone and
Chopunnish languages. the interpretation being tegious it occupied the
greater part of the day, before we had communicated to them what we
wished. they appeared highly pleased. after this Council was over we
amused ourselves with Shewing them the power of Magnetism, the Spye
glass, compass, watch, air gun and Sundery other articles equally novel
and incomprehensible to them. they informed us that after we left the
Menetares last Spring that 3 of their people had visited that nation,
and that they had informed them of us, and had told them that we had
Such things in our possession but that they Could not place Confidence
in the information untill they had now witnessed it themselves

In the evening a man was brought in a robe by four Indians and laid
down near me. they informed me that this man was a Chief of
Considerable note who has been in the Situation I see him for 5 years.
this man is incapable of moveing a single limb but lies like a corps in
whatever position he is placed, yet he eats hartily, dejests his food
perfectly, enjoys his under standing, his pulse are good, and has
retained his flesh almost perfectly; in Short were it not that he
appears a little pale from having been So long in the Shade, he might
well be taken for a man in good health. I Suspect that their
Confinement to a deet of roots may give rise to all the disordes of the
Nativs of this quarter except the Rhumitism & Sore eyes, and to the
latter of those, the State of debility incident to a vegitable diet may
measureably contribute.-. The Chopunnish not withstanding they live in
the Crouded manner before mentioned are much more clenly in their
persons and habitations than any nation we have Seen Sence we left the
Illinois. These nativs take their fish in the following manner to wit.
a Stand Small Stage or warf consisting of Sticks and projecting about
10 feet into the river and about 3 feet above the water on the
extremity of this the fisherman stands with his guilt or a Skooping Net
which differ but little in their form those Commonly used in our
Country it is formed thus with those nets they take the Suckers and
also the Salmon trout and I am told the Salmon also.




[Lewis, May 12, 1806]
Monday May 12th 1806.
This morning a great number of indians collected about us as usual. we
took an early breakfast and Capt. C. began to administer eyewater to a
croud of at least 50 applicants. The Indians held a council among
themselves this morning with rispect to the subjects on which we had
spoken to them yesterday. the result as we learnt was favourable. they
placed confidence in the information they had received and resolved to
pusue our advise. after this council was over the principal Cheif or
the broken Arm, took the flour of the roots of cows and thickened the
scope in the kettles and baskets of all his people, this being ended he
made a harangue the purport of which was making known the deliberations
of their council and impressing the necessity of unanimity among them
and a strict attention to the resolutions which had been agreed on in
councill; he concluded by inviting all such men as had resolved to
abide by the decrees of the council to come and eat and requested such
as would not be so bound to shew themselves by not partaking of the
feast. I was told by one of our men who was present, that there was not
a dissenting voice on this great national question, but all swallowed
their objections if any they had, very cheerfully with their mush.
during the time of this loud and animated harangue of the Cheif the
women cryed wrung their hands, toar their hair and appeared to be in
the utmost distress. after this cerimony was over the Cheifs and
considerate men came in a body to where we were seated at a little
distance from our tent, and two young men at the instance of the
nation, presented us each with a fine horse. we caused the cheifs to be
seated and gave them each a flag a pound of powder and fifty balls. we
also gave powder and ball to the two young men who had presented the
horses. Neeshneeparkkeeook gave Drewyer a good horse. The band of
Ten-nach-e-moo-toolt have six guns which they acquired from the
Minnetaries and appear anxious to obtain arms and amunition. after they
had received those presents the Cheifs requested we would retire to the
tent whither they accompanied us, they now informed us that they wished
to give an answer to what we had said to them the preceeding day, but
also informed us that there were many of their people waiting in great
pain at that moment for the aid of our medecine. it was agreed between
Capt. C. and myself that he should attend the sick as he was their
favorite phisician while I would here and answer the Cheifs. The father
of Hohastillpilp was the orrator on this occasion. he observed that
they had listened with attention to our advise and that the whole
nation were resolved to follow it, that they had only one heart and one
tongue on this subject. he said they were fully sensible of the
advantages of peace and that the ardent desire which they had to
cultivate peace with their neighbours had induced his nation early last
summer to send a pipe by 3 of their brave men to the Shoshonees on the
S. side of Lewis's river in the Plains of Columbia, that these people
had murdered these men, which had given rise to the war expedition
against that nation last fall; that their warriors had fallen in with
the shoshonees at that time and had killed 42 of them with the loss of
3 only on their part; that this had satisfyed the blood of their
disceased friends and that they would never again make war against the
Shoshonees, but were willing to receive them as friends. that they
valued the lives of their young men too much to wish them to be engaged
in war. That as we had not yet seen the black foot Indians and the
Minnetares of Fort de Prarie they did not think it safe to venture over
to the Plains of the Missouri, where they would fondly go provided
those nations would not kill them. that when we had established our
forts on the Missouri as we had promised, they would come over and
trade for arms Amunition &c. and live about us. that it would give them
much pleasure to be at peace with these nations altho they had shed
much of their blood. he said that the whitemen might be assured of
their warmest attatchment and that they would alwas give them every
assistance in their power; that they were poor but their hearts were
good. he said that some of their young men would go over with us to the
Missouri and bring them the news as we wished, and that if we could
make a peace between themselves and their enimies on the other side of
the mountain their nation would go over to the Missouri in the latter
end of the summer. on the subject of one of their cheifs accompanying
us to the Land of the whitemen they could not yet determine, but that
they would let us know before we left them. that the snow was yet so
deep in the mountain if we attempted to pass we would certainly perish,
and advised us to remain untill after the next full moon when the said
the snow would disappear and we could find grass for our horses.--when
the oald man had concluded I again spoke to them at some length with
which they appeared highly gratifyed. after smoking the pipe which was
about 2 P.M. they gave us another fat horse to kill which was
thankfully received by the party. Capt C. now joined us having just
made an end of his medical distrabution. we gave a phiol of eyewater to
the Broken Arm, and requested that he would wash the eyes of such as
might apply for that purpose, and that when it was exhausted we would
replenish the phiol. he was much pleased with this present. we now gave
the Twisted hair one gun and a hundred balls and 2 lbs. of powder in
part for his attention to our horses and promised the other gun and a
similar quantity of powder and lead when we received the ballance of
our horses. this gun we had purchased of the indians below for 2
Elkskins. this evening three other of our original stock of horses were
produced, they were in fine order as well as those received yesterday.
we have now six horses out only, as our old guide Toby and his son each
took a horse of ours when they returned last fall. these horses are
said to be on the opposite side of the river at no great distance from
this place. we gave the young men who had delivered us the two horses
this morning some ribbon, blue wampum and vermillion, one of them gave
me a hansome pare of legings and the Broken Arm gave Capt. C. his
shirt, in return for which we gave him a linin shirt.--we informed the
indians of our wish to pass the river and form a camp at some proper
place to fish, hunt, and graize our horses untill the snows of the
mountains would permit us to pass. they recommended a position a few
miles distant from hence on the opposite side of the river, but
informed us that there was no canoe at this place by means of which we
could pass our baggage over the river, but promised to send a man early
in the morning for one which they said would meet us at the river by
noon the next day. The indians formed themselves this evening into two
large parties and began to gamble for their beads and other ornaments.
the game at which they played was that of hiding a stick in their hands
which they frequently changed acompanying their opperations with a
song. this game seems common to all the nations in this country, and
dose not differ from that before discribed of the Shoshonees on the S.
E. branch of Lewis's river. we are anxious to procure some guides to
accompany us on the different routs we mean to take from Travellers
rest; for this purpose we have turned our attention to the Twisted hair
who has several sons grown who are well acquainted as well as himself
with the various roads in those mountains. we invited the old fellow to
remove his family and live near us while we remained; he appeared
gratifyed with this expression of our confidence and promissed to do
so.--shot at a mark with the indians, struck the mark with 2 balls.
distn. 220 yds.




[Clark, May 12, 1806]
Monday 12th May 1806
a fine Morning great number of Indians flock about us as usial. after
brackfast I began to administer eye water and in a fiew minits had near
40 applicants with Sore eyes, and maney others with other Complaints
most Common Rhumatic disorders & weaknesses in the back and loins
perticularly the womin. the Indians had a grand Council this morning
after which we were presented each with a horse by two young men at the
instance of the nation. we caused the chiefs to be Seated and gave then
each a flag a pint of Powder and 50 balls to the two young men who had
presented the horses we also gave powder and ball. The broken arm or
Tun na the mootoolt pulled off his leather Shirt and gave me. I in
return gave him a Shirt. we retired into the Lodge and the natives
Spoke to the following purpote, i e they had listened to our advice and
that the whole nation were deturmined to follow it, that they had only
one heart and one tongue on this Subject. explained the Cause of the
War with the Shoshones. they wished to be at peace with all nations &
Some of their Men would accompany us to the Missouri &c. &c. as a great
number of men women & Children were wateing and requesting medical
assistance maney of them with the most Simple Complaints which Could be
easily releived, independent of maney with disorders intirely out of
the power of Medison all requesting Some thing, we agreed that I Should
administer and Capt L--to here and answer the Indians. I was closely
employed until 12 P.M. administering eye water to about 40 grown
persons. Some Simple Cooling Medicenes to the disabled Chief, to
Several women with rhumatic effections & a man who had a Swelled hip
&c. &c-. in the evening three of our horses were brought all in fine
order. we have now only Six remaining out. we gave to each a Chief a
pint of Powder and 50 Balls a Small flag and to the two young men who
delivered us the horses we gave also powder & Ball and Some blue wompom
& ribin. all appeared much pleased-. Those people are much affraid of
the black foot indians, and the Big bellies of Fort deprarie
establishment. those indians kill great numbers of this nation whenever
they pass over to hunt on the Missouri. one of our men bought a horse
for a fiew Small articles of an Indian. The Indians brought up a fat
horse and requested us to kill and eate it as they had nothing else to
offer us to eate. The Cut nose made a present of a horse to Drewyer at
the Same time the two horses were offered to Capt. Lewis & my self. The
horses of those people are large well formed and active. Generally in
fine order. Sore backs Caused by rideing them either with out Saddles,
or with pads which does not prevent the wate of the rider pressing
imedeately on the back bone, and weathers of the horse. the Indians
formed two partis and plaied for their heeds. we gave the twisted hair
a gun, powder & 100 ball in part for takeing care of our horses &c.

and wish him to Camp near us untill we Crossed the Mountains which he
agreeed to do, and was much pleased we have turned our attentions
towards the twisted hair who has Several Sons grown who are well
acquainted as well as himself with the various roads through the rocky
Mountains and will answer very well as guides to us through those
Mountains-In the Council to day the father of Hohastillpelp Said the
Chopunnish were fully Convinced of the advantages of peace and ardently
wished to cultivate peace with their neighbours. early last Summer 3 of
their brave men were Sent with a pipe to the Shoshones on the S E. fork
of Lewis's river in the Plains of Columbia, their pipe was disreguarded
and their 3 men murdered, which had given rise to the War expedition
against that nation last fall; that their warriers had fallen in with
and killed 42 of the Shoshones with the loss of 3 men only on their
part; that this had Satisfied the blood of the deceased friends and
they would never again make war against the Shoshones, but were willing
to receve them as friends-. That as we had not Seen the Indians towards
Fort de prere they did not think it Safe to venture over to the Plains
of the Missouri, where they would fondly go provided those nations
would not kill them. I gave a vial of eye water to the Broken arm for
to wash the eyes of all who applied to him and told him when it was out
we would replenish it again




[Lewis, May 13, 1806]
Tuesday May 13th 1806.
This morning Capt. C. as usual was busily engaged with his patients
untill eleven OCk. at 1 P.M. we collected our horses and set out for
the river escorted by a number of the natives on horseback. we followed
the creek downwards about two miles, passing a stout branch at 1 m.
which flowed in on the wright. our course S. E. we now entered an
extensive open bottom of the Kooskooske R. through which we passed
nearly N. about 11/2 miles and halted on the bank of the river at the
place appointed to meet the canoe. the man had set out early this
morning for the purpose but had not yet arrived with the canoe we
therefore unloaded our horses and turned them out to graize. as the
canoe did not arrive untill after sunset we remained here all night; a
number of the natives continued with us. in the evening we tryed the
speed of several of our horses. these horses are active strong and well
formed. these people have immence numbers of them 50, 60 or a hundred
hed is not unusual for an individual to possess. The Chopunnish are in
general stout well formed active men. they have high noses and many of
them on the acqueline order with cheerfull and agreeable countenances;
their complexions are not remarkable. in common with other savage
nations of America they extract their beards but the men do not
uniformly extract the hair below, this is more particularly confined to
the females. I observed several men among them whom I am convinced if
they had shaved their beards instead of extracting it would have been
as well supplyed in this particular as any of my countrymen. they
appear to be cheerfull but not gay; they are fond of gambling and of
their amusements which consist principally in shooting their arrows at
a bowling target made of willow bark, and in riding and exercising
themselves on horseback, racing &c. they are expert marksmen and good
riders. they do not appear to be so much devoted to baubles as most of
the nations we have met with, but seem anxious always to obtain
articles of utility, such as knives, axes, tommahawks, kettles blankets
and mockerson alls. blue beads however may form an exception to this
remark; this article among all the nations of this country may be
justly compared to goald or silver among civilized nations. They are
generally well cloathed in their stile. their dress consists of a long
shirt which reaches to the middle of thye, long legings which reach as
high as the waist, mockersons, and robes. these are formed of various
skins and are in all rispects like those particularly discribed of the
Shoshones. their women also dress like the Shoshones. their ornaments
consist of beads shells and peices of brass variously attatched to
their dress, to their ears arrond their necks wrists arms &c. a bando
of some kind usually surrounds the head, this is most frequently the
skin of some fir animal as the fox otter &c. tho they have them also of
dressed skin without the hair. the ornament of the nose is a single
shell of the wampum. the pirl and beads are suspended from the ears.
beads are woarn arround their wrists necks and over their sholders
crosswise in the form of a double sash. the hair of the men is cewed in
two rolls which hang on each side in front of the body as before
discribed of other inhabitants of the Columbia. collars of bears claws
are also common; but the article of dress on which they appear to bstow
most pains and ornaments is a kind of collar or brestplate; this is
most commonly a strip of otterskin of about six inches wide taken out
of the center of the skin it's whole length including the head. this is
dressed with the hair on; a hole is cut lengthwise through the skin
near the head of the animal sufficiently large to admit the head of the
person to pass. thus it is placed about the neck and hangs in front of
the body the tail frequently reaching below their knees; on this skin
in front is attatched peices of pirl, beads, wampum peices of red cloth
and in short whatever they conceive most valuable or ornamental. I
observed a tippit woarn by Hohastillpilp, which was formed of human
scalps and ornamented with the thumbs and fingers of several men which
he had slain in battle. their women brade their hair in two tresses
which hang in the same position of those of the men. they also wear a
cap or cup on the head formed of beargrass and cedar bark. the men also
frequently attatch some small ornament to a small plat of hair on the
center of the crown of their heads.




[Clark, May 13, 1806]
Tuesday 13th May 1806.
a fine morning I administered to the Sick and gave directions. we
collected all our horses and Set out at 1 P.M. and proceeded down the
Creek to the Flat head River a Short distance below the enterance of
the Creek at the distance of 3 miles from the Village. at this place we
expected to have met the Canoe which was promised to be furnished us,
and for which an indian Set out very early this morning. we halted at
the Flat Head River unloaded our horses and turnd. them out to feed.
Several Indians accompanied us to the river and Continued untill
evening. The man who Set out early this morning to the forks of this
river for a Canoe and was to meet us at this place. as the Canoe did
not arive untill after Sun set we remained all night; in the evening we
tried the Speed of Several of our horses. these horses are strong
active and well formed. Those people have emence numbers of them 50 or
60 or a Hundred head is not unusial for an individual to possess.

The Chopunnish are in general Stout well formd active men. they have
high noses and maney of them on the acqueline order with chearfull and
agreeable countinances; their complexions are not remarkable. in common
with other Indian Nations of America they extract their beard, but the
men do not uniformly extract the hair below, this is more particularly
confined to the females. they appear to be cheerfull but not gay; they
are fond of gambling and of their amusements which consists principally
in shooting their arrows at a targit made of Willow bark, and in
rideing and exersiseing themselves on horsback, raceing &c. they are
expirt marks men & good riders. they do not appear to be So much
devoted to baubles as most of the nations we have met with, but Seen
anxious always to riceve articles of utility, Such as knives, axes,
Kittles, blankets & Mockerson awls. blue beeds however may form an
exception to this remark; This article among all the nations of this
Country may be justly compared to gold and Silver among civilized
nations. They are generally well clothed in their Stile. their dress
Consists of a long shirt which reaches to the middle of leg, long
legins which reach as high as the waist, mockersons & robe. those are
formed of various skins and are in all respects like those of the
Shoshone. Their orniments consists of beeds, Shells and peices of brass
variously attached to their dress, to their ears arround theire necks
wrists arms &c. a band of Some kind usially Serounds the head, this is
most frequently the Skin of Some fer animal as the fox otter &c.; I
observed a tippet worn by Hohastillpilp, which was formed of Humane
Scalps and ornemented with the thumbs and fingers of Several men which
he had Slain in battle. they also were a coller or breast plate of
otter Skin orniminted with Shells beeds & quills. the women brade their
hair in two tresses which hang in the same position of those of the
men, which ar Cewed and hang over each sholder. &c




[Lewis, May 14, 1806]
Wednesday May 14th 1806.
The morning was fair, we arrose early and dispatched a few of our
hunters to the opposite side of the river, and employed a part of the
men in transporting our baggage to the opposite shore wile others were
directed to collect the horses; at 10 A.M. we had taken our baggage
over and collected our horses, we then took breakfast, after which we
drove our horses into the river which they swam without accedent and
all arrived safe on the opposite shore. the river is 150 yds. wide at
this place and extreemly rapid. tho it may be safely navigated at this
season, as the water covers all the rocks which lie in it's bed to a
considerable debth. we followed our horses and again collected them,
after which we removed our baggage to a position which we had
previously selected for our permanent camp about half a mile below.
this was a very eligible spot for defence it had been an ancient
habitation of the indians; was sunk about 4 feet in the ground and
raised arround it's outer edge about three 1/2 feet with a good wall of
eath. the whole was a circle of about 30 feet in diameter. arround this
we formed our tents of sticks and grass facing outwards and deposited
our baggage within the sunken space under a shelter which we
constructed for the purpose. our situation was within 40 paces of the
river in an extentsive level bottom thinly timbered with the longleafed
pine. here we are in the vicinity of the best hunting grounds from
indian information, are convenient to the salmon which we expect daily
and have an excellent pasture for our horses. the hills to the E and
North of us are high broken and but partially timbered; the soil is
rich and affords fine grass. in short as we are compelled to reside a
while in this neighbourhood I feel perfectly satisfyed with our
position.immediately after we had passed the river Tunnachemootoolt and
Hosastillpilp arrived on the south side with a party of a douzen of
their young men; they began to sing in token of friendship as is their
custom, and we sent the canoe over for them. they left their horses and
came over accompanyed by several of their party among whom were the 2
young men who had presented us with two horses in behalf of the nation;
one of these was the son of Tunnachemootoolt and the other the son of
the Cheif who was killed by the Minnetares of Fort de Prarie last year
and the same who had given us the mare and Colt. we received them at
our camp and smoked with them; after some hours Hohastillpilp with much
cerimony presented me with a very eligant grey gelding which he had
brought for that purpose. I gave him in return a handkercheif 200 balls
and 4 lbs. of powder. with which he appeared perfectly satisfyed.
Collins killed two bear this morning and was sent with two others in
quest of the meat; with which they returned in the evening; the mail
bear was large and fat the female was of moderate size and reather
meagre. we had the fat bear fleaced in order to reserve the oil for the
mountains. both these bear were of the speceis common to the upper part
of the missouri. they may be called white black grzly brown or red bear
for they are found of all those colours. perhaps it would not be
unappropriate to designate them the variagated bear. we gave the
indians who were about 15 in number half the female bear, with the
sholder head and neck of the other. this was a great treat to those
poor wretches who scarcely taist meat once a month. they immediately
prepared a brisk fire of dry wood on which they threw a parsel of
smooth stones from the river, when the fire had birnt down and heated
the stones they placed them level and laid on a parsel of pine boughs,
on these they laid the flesh of the bear in flitches, placing boughs
between each course of meat and then covering it thickly with pine
boughs; after this they poared on a small quantity of water and covered
the whoe over with earth to the debth of four inches. in this situation
they suffered it to remain about 3 hours when they took it out. I
taisted of this meat and found it much more tender than that which we
had roasted or boiled, but the strong flavor of the pine distroyed it
for my pallate. Labuish returned late in the evening and informed us
that he had killed a female bear and two large cubbs, he brought with
him several large dark brown pheasants which he had also killed.
Shannon also returned with a few pheasants and two squirrells. we have
found our stone horses so troublesome that we indeavoured to exchange
them with the Chopunnish for mears or gelings but they will not
exchange altho we offer 2 for one; we came to a resolution to castrate
them and began the operation this evening one of the indians present
offered his services on this occasion. he cut them without tying the
string of the stone as is usual, and assures us that they will do much
better in that way; he takes care to scrape the string very clean and
to seperate it from all the adhereing veigns before he cuts it. we
shall have an opportunity of judging whether this is a method
preferable to that commonly practiced as Drewyer has gelded two in the
usual way. The indians after their feast took a pipe or two with us and
retired to rest much pleased with their repast. these bear are
tremendious animals to them; they esteem the act of killing a bear
equally great with that of an enimy in the field of action.--I gave the
claws of those which Collins killed to Hohastillpilp.




[Clark, May 14, 1806]
Wednesday 14th of May 1806
a fine day. we had all our horses Collected by 10 a.m. dureing the time
we had all our baggage Crossed over the Flat head River which is rapid
and about 150 yards wide. after the baggage was over to the North Side
we Crossed our horss without much trouble and hobbled them in the
bottom after which we moved a Short distance below to a convenient
Situation and formed a Camp around a very conveniant Spot for defence
where the Indiands had formerly a house under ground and hollow circler
Spot of about 30 feet diamieter 4 feet below the Serfce and a Bank of 2
feet above this Situation we Concluded would be Seffiently convenient
to hunt the wood lands for bear & Deer and for the Salmon fish which we
were told would be here in a fiew days and also a good Situation for
our horses. the hills to the E. & N. of us are high broken & but
partially timbered; the soil rich and affords fine grass. in Short as
we are Compelled to reside a while in this neighbourhood I feel
perfectly Satisfied with our position. imediately after we had Crossed
the river the Chief Called the broken Arm or Tin nach-e-moo toll
another principal Chief Hoh-host'-ill-pitp arived on the opposite Side
and began to Sing. we Sent the Canoe over and those Chiefs, the Son of
the broken arm and the Sone of a Great Chief who was killed last year
by the Big bellies of Sas kas she win river. those two young men were
the two whome gave Capt Lewis and my self each a horse with great
serimony in behalf of the nation a fiew days ago, and the latter a most
elligant mare & colt the morning after we arived at the Village. Hohast
ill pilt with much Serimoney presented Capt. Lewis with an elegant Gray
horse which he had brought for that purpose. Capt Lewis gave him in
return a Handkerchief two hundred balls and four pouds of powder with
which he appeared perfictly Satisfyed, and appeared much pleased.

Soon after I had Crossed the river and during the time Cap Lewis was on
the opposit Side John Collins whome we had Sent out verry early this
morning with Labiech and Shannon on the North Side of the river to
hunt, Came in and informed me, that he had killed two Bear at about 5
miles distant on the up lands. one of which was in good order. I
imediately depatched Jo. Fields & P. Wiser with him for the flesh. we
made Several attempts to exchange our Stalions for Geldings or mars
without success we even offered two for one. those horses are
troublesom and Cut each other very much and as we Can't exchange them
we think it best to Castrate them and began the opperation this evening
one of the Indians present offered his Services on this occasion. he
Cut them without tying the String of the Stone as is usial. he Craped
it very Clean & Seperate it before he Cut it. about Meredian Shannon
Came in with two Grows & 2 Squireles Common to this Country. his
mockersons worn out obliged to come in early.

Collins returned in the evening with the two bears which he had killed
in the morning one of them an old hee was in fine order, the other a
female with Cubs was Meagure. we gave the Indians about us 15 in number
two Sholders and a ham of the bear to eate which they cooked in the
following manner. to wit on a brisk fire of dryed wood they threw a
parcel of Small Stones from the river, when the fire had burnt down and
heated the Stone, they placed them level and laid on a parsel of pine
boughs, on those they laid the flesh of the bear in flitches, placeing
boughs between each course of meat and then Covering it thickly with
pine boughs; after this they poared on a Small quantity of water, and
Covered the whole over with earth to the debth of 4 inches. in this
Situation they Suffered it to remain about 3 hours when they took it
out fit for use. at 6 oClock P M Labiech returned and informed us that
he had killed a female Bear and two Cubs, at a long distance from Camp
towards the mountains. he brought in two large dark brown pheasents
which he had also killed Shannon also returned also with a few black
Pheasents and two squirels which he had killed in the wood land towards
Collins Creek. This nation esteem the Killing of one of those
tremendeous animals (the Bear) equally great with that of an enemy in
the field of action-. we gave the Claws of those bear which Collins had
killed to Hohastillpelp.




[Lewis, May 15, 1806]
Thursday May 15th 1806.
This morning early Reubin Fields in surching for his horse saw a large
bear at no great distance from camp; several men went in pursuit of the
bear, they followed his trail a considerable distance but could not
come up with him. Labuish and Shannon set out with a view to establish
a hunting camp and continuing several days, two others accompanyed them
in order to bring in the three bear which Labuish had killed. Drewyer
and Cruzatte were sent up the river; Sheilds R. Feilds and Willard
hunted in the hills near the camp they returned in the evening with a
few pheasants only and reported that there was much late appearance of
bear, but beleived that they had gone off to a greater distance. at 11
A.M. the men returned with the bear which Labuich had killed. These
bear gave me a stronger evidence of the various coloured bear of this
country being one speceis only, than any I have heretofore had. The
female was black with a considerable proportion of white hairs
intermixed and a white spot on the breast, one of the young bear was
jut black and the other of a light redish brown or bey colour. the poil
of these bear were infinitely longer finer and thicker than the black
bear their tallons also longer and more blont as if woarn by diging
roots. the white and redish brown or bey coloured bear I saw together
on the Missouri; the bey and grizly have been seen and killed together
here for these were the colours of those which Collins killed
yesterday. in short it is not common to find two bear here of this
speceis precisely of the same colour, and if we were to attempt to
distinguish them by their collours and to denominate each colour a
distinct speceis we should soon find at least twenty. some bear nearly
white have also been seen by our hunters at this place. the most
striking differences between this speceis of bear and the common black
bear are that the former are larger, have longer tallons and tusks,
prey more on other animals, do not lie so long nor so closely in winter
quarters, and will not climb a tree tho eversoheardly pressed. the
variagated bear I beleive to be the same here with those on the
missouri but these are not as ferocious as those perhaps from the
circumstance of their being compelled from the scarcity of game in this
quarter to live more on roots and of course not so much in the habit of
seizing and devouring living animals. the bear here are far from being
as passive as the common black bear they have attacked and faught our
hunters already but not so fiercely as those of the Missouri. there are
also some of the common black bear in this neighbourhood. Frazier, J.
Fields and Wiser complain of violent pains in their heads, and Howard
and York are afflicted with the cholic. I attribute these complaints to
their diet of roots which they have not been accustomed.
Tunnachemootoolt and 12 of his young men left us this morning on their
return to their village. Hohastillpilp and three old men remained
untill 5 in the evening when they also departed. at 1 P.M. a party of
14 natives on horseback passed our camp on a hunting excurtion; they
were armed with bows and arrows and had decoys for the deer these are
the skins of the heads and upper portions of the necks of the deer
extended in their natural shape by means of a fraim of little sticks
placed within. the hunter when he sees a deer conceals himself and with
his hand gives to the decoy the action of a deer at feed; and thus
induces the deer within arrowshot; in this mode the indians hunt on
foot in the woodlands where they cannot pursue the deer with horses
which is their favorite method when the ground will permit.--we had all
of our horses driven together today near our camp, which we have
directed shall be done each day in order to familiarize them to each
other. several of the horses which were gelded yesterday are much
swolen particularly those cut by Drewyer, the others bled most but
appear much better today than the others.

we had our baggage better secured under a good shelter formed of grass;
we also strengthened our little fortification with pine poles and
brush, and the party formed themselves very comfortable tents with
willow poles and grass in the form of the orning of a waggon, these
were made perfectly secure as well from the heat of the sun as from
rain. we had a bower constructed for ourselves under which we set by
day and sleep under the part of an old sail now our only tent as the
leather lodge has become rotten and unfit for use. about noon the sun
shines with intense heat in the bottoms of the river. the air on the
tom of the river hills or high plain forms a distinct climate, the air
is much colder, and vegitation is not as forward by at least 15 or
perhaps 20 days. the rains which fall in the river bottoms are snows on
the plain. at the distance of fifteen miles from the river and on the
Eastern border of this plain the Rocky Mountains commence and present
us with winter it it's utmost extreem. the snow is yet many feet deep
even near the base of these mountains; here we have summer spring and
winter within the short space of 15 or 20 miles.--Hohastillpilp and the
three old men being unable to pass the river as the canoe had been
taken away, returned to our camp late in the evening and remained with
us all night.




[Clark, May 15, 1806]
Thursday 15th of May 1806
This morning Reubin Fields went out to hunt his horse very early and
Saw a large bear and no great distance from Camp. Several men went in
pursute of the bear, and prosued his trail Some time without gitting
Sight of this Monster. Shannon went out with Labeach to hunt and
continue out 3 days, Gibson and Hall accompanied them for the meat
Labeech killed yesterday which they brought in by 11 A M. this Morning
the female was black with white hares intermixed and a white Spot on
the breast the Cubs were about the Size of a dog also pore. one of them
very black and the other a light redish brown or bey colour. These bear
give me a Stronger evidence of the various Coloured bear of this
Country being one Specie only, than any I have heretofore had. Several
other Colours have been seen. Drewyer and Peter Crusat went up the
river. John Shields, R. Fields and Willard hunted in the hills near
Camp and returned before 2 P. M without killing any thing except a fiew
Grows. they saw but few deer. Some bear Sign. Frazur Jo. Fields and
Peter Wizer Complain of a violent pain in their heads. Howard and York
with violent Cholicks. the Cause of those disorders we are unable to
account for. their diet and the Sudin Change of Climate must
contribute. The Great Chief Tin nach-e-moo-tolt (or broken Arm) and 12
of the young men of his nation left us today about 11 oClock and
Crossed the river to his Village Hoh-hast-ill-pilt and 3 old men
Continued with us untill about 5 P. M when they left us and returnd. to
their Village. a party of 14 Indians passed our Camp about 1 P.M. on
their way to the leavel uplands to run and kill the deer with their
horses and Bows and arrows. Some of them were also provided with deers
heads Cased for the purpose of decoying the deer. those men continued
withus but a fiew minits and proceeded on. Those people hunt most
Commonly on horse back Seround the Deer or Goat which they find in the
open plains & kill them with their arrows. tho they Sometimes hunt the
deer on foot & decoy them. we had all of our horses drove together to
day with a view to fermilurize them to each other. those that were Cut
yesterday are Stiff and Several of them much Swelled. we had all our
baggage Secured and Covered with a rouf of Straw. our little
fortification also completely Secured with brush around which our Camp
is formed. the Greater part of our Security from the rains &c. is the
grass which is formed in a kind of ruff So as to turn the rain
Completely and is much the best tents we have. as the days are worm &c.
we have a bowry made to write under which we find not only comfortable
but necessary, to keep off the intence heet of the Sun which has great
effect in this low bottom. on the high plains off the river the Climate
is entirely different cool. Some Snow on the north hill Sides near the
top and vegetation near 3 weeks later than in the river bottoms. and
the rocky Mountains imedeately in view covered Several say 4 & 5 feet
deep with Snow. here I behold three different Climats within a fiew
miles a little before dark Hoh-hast-ill-pilt and the 3 old men & one
other returned to our Camp and informed us the Canoe was a great way
off and they could not cross this evening.




[Lewis, May 16, 1806]
Friday May 16th 1806.
Drewyer's horse left his camp last night and was brought to us this
morning by an indian who informed us he had found him a considerable
distance towards the mountains. Hohastillpilp and all the natives left
us about noon and informed us that they were going up the river some
distance to a place at which they expected to fine a canoe, we gave
them the head and neck of a bear, a part of which they eat and took the
ballance with them. these people sometimes kill the variagated bear
when they can get them in the open plain where they can pursue them on
horseback and shoot them with their arrows. the black bear they more
frequently kill as they are less ferocious. our sick men are much
better today. Sahcargarmeah geathered a quantity of the roots of a
speceis of fennel which we found very agreeable food, the flavor of
this root is not unlike annis seed, and they dispell the wind which the
roots called Cows and quawmash are apt to create particularly the
latter. we also boil a small onion which we find in great abundance,
with other roots and find them also an antidote to the effects of the
others. the mush of roots we find adds much to the comfort of our
diet.--we sent out several hunters this morning but they returned about
11 A.M. without success; they killed a few pheasants only. at 5 P.M.
Drewyer and Cruzatte returned having killed one deer only. Drewyer had
wounded three bear which he said were as white as sheep but had
obtained neither of them. they informed us that the hunting was but bad
in the quarter they had been, the Country was broken and thickly
covered in most parts with underbrush. a little after dark Shannon and
Labuish returned with one deer; they informed us that game was wild and
scarce, that a large creek (Collins Creek) ran parallel with the river
at the distance of about 5 or 6 miles which they found impracticable to
pass with their horses in consequence of the debth and rapidity of it's
current. beyond this creek the Indians inform us that there is great
abundance of game. Sergt. Pryor and Collins who set out this morning on
a hunting excurtion did not return this evening.--I killed a snake near
our camp, it is 3 feet 11 Inches in length, is much the colour of the
rattlesnake common to the middle atlantic states, it has no poisonous
teeth. it has 218 scutae on the abdomen and fifty nine squamae or half
formed scutae on the tail. the eye is of moderate size, the iris of a
dark yellowish brown and puple black. there is nothing remarkable in
the form of the head which is not so wide across the jaws as those of
the poisonous class of snakes usually are.--I preserved the skin of
this snake.




[Clark, May 16, 1806]
Friday 16th May 1806
a cloudy morning with Some rain which continued untill Meridean at
intervales, but very moderately. a man and boy Came to our Camp at 11
A. M with Drewyers Horse which he informed us he found at a long
distance towards the Mtns. this horse must have Strayed from Drewyers
Camp last night. Hohhastillpelt and all the nativs left us at merdn.
and went up the river with a view to Cross at Some distance above where
they expected to find a Canoe.

we gave those people a head and Neck of the largest bear a part of
which they eate and the balance they Carefully took with them for their
children. The Indians of this Country Seldom kill the bear they are
very much afraid of them and the killing of a white or Grzley bear, is
as great a feet as two of their enimy. the fiew of those Animals which
they Chance to kill is found in the leavel open lands and pursued on
horses & killed with their Arrows. they are fond of the flesh of this
animal and eate emoderately of it when they have a Sufficiency to
indulge themselves. The men who were complaining of the head ake and
Cholicks yesterday and last night are much better to day. Shabonos
Squar gatherd a quantity of fenel roots which we find very paleatiable
and nurishing food. the Onion we also find in abundance and boil it
with our meat. Shields rode out and hunted in the morning without
Suckcess he returned at 11 A.M. having killed only a black wood pecker
with a red breast as discribed hereafter. A snake which resembles the
rattle Snake in colour and Spots on the Skin, longer and inosent. at 5
P M Drewyer and Crusat returned haveing killed only one Deer only. D.
Shot 3 White bear but Could get neither of them. they inform us that
the hunting in the derection they were is very bad. the country hilly &
brushey. a little after dark Shannon & Labiech came in from the Chass.
Shannon killed one deer which he brought in. this deer being the only
animal they Could kill. they informed that a large Creek (Collens's
Creek) run parrelal with the river at about 5 or 6 miles distant
between which there was but little game, and the Creek being high rapid
and the Smothe rocks in the bottom rendered it impossible for them to
pass it on hors back. Sergt. Pryor and Collins who Set out early this
morning hunting have not returned. we derected that the horses be drove
up in future at 12 oClock on each day




[Lewis, May 17, 1806]
Saturday May 17th 1806.
It rained the greater part of the last night and this morning untill 8
OCk. the water passed through flimzy covering and wet our bed most
perfectly in shot we lay in the water all the latter part of the night.
unfortunately my chronometer which for greater security I have woarn in
my fob for ten days past, got wet last night; it seemed a little
extraordinary that every part of my breechies which were under my head,
should have escaped the moisture except the fob where the time peice
was. I opened it and founded it nearly filled with water which I
carefully drained out exposed it to the air and wiped the works as well
as I could with dry feathers after which I touched them with a little
bears oil. several parts of the iron and steel works were rusted a
little which I wiped with all the care in my power. I set her to going
and from her apparent motion hope she has sustained no material
injury.--at 9 A.M. Sergt. Pryor and Collins returned, Sergt. Pryor
brought the Skin and flesh of a black bear which he had killed; Collins
had also killed a very large variegated bear but his horse having
absconded last evening was unable to bring it. they had secured this
meat perfectly from the wolves or birds and as it was at a considerable
distance we did not think proper to send for it today. neither of these
bear were in good order. as the bear are reather ferocious and we are
obliged to depend on them pincipally for our subsistence we thought it
most advisable to direct at least two hunters to go together, and they
accordingly peared themselves out for this purpose. we also apportioned
the horses to the several hunters in order that they should be equally
rode and thereby prevent any horse being materially injured by being
too constantly hunted. we appointed the men not hunters to take charge
of certain horses in the absence of the hunters and directed the
hunters to set out in different directions early in the morning and not
return untill they had killed some game. it rained moderately the
greater part of the day and snowed as usual on the plain. Sergt. Pryor
informed me that it was shoe deep this morning when he came down. it is
somewhat astonishing that the grass and a variety of plants which are
now from a foot to 18 inches high on these plains sustain no injury
from the snow or frost; many of those plants are in blume and appear to
be of a tender susceptable texture. we have been visited by no indians
today, and occurrence which has not taken place before since we left
the Narrows of the Columbia.--I am pleased at finding the river rise so
rapidly, it now doubt is attributeable to the meting snows of the
mountains; that icy barier which seperates me from my friends and
Country, from all which makes life esteemable.--patience, patience




[Clark, May 17, 1806]
Saturday 17th May 1806
rained moderately all the last night and this morning untill we are
wet. The little river on which we are encamped rise Sepriseingly fast.
at 9 A.M. Sergt. Pryor and Collins returned with the flesh and Skin of
a Black bear on Sgt. Pryors horse. Collins's horse haveing run off from
him yesterday. they informed us that they had each killed a Bear
neither of which were fat. the one which they left in the woods was of
the white Species and very large we did not think it necessary in the
cours of this day to Send for the flesh of the bear left in the woods.
the rains of the last night unfortunately wet the Crenomuter in the fob
of Capt. L. breaches. which has never before been wet Since we Set out
on this expedition. her works were cautiously wiped and made dry by
Capt. L. and I think She will recive no injury from this misfortune &c.
we arranged the hunters and horses to each hunter and directed them to
turn out in the morning early and continue out untill they Killed
Something. others arranged so as to take care of the hunters horses in
their absence. rained moderately all day. at the Same time Snowed on
the mountains which is in to the S. E. of us. no Indians visit us to
day which is a Singular circumstance as we have not been one day
without Indians Since we left the long narrows of the Columbia. the
fiew worm days which we have had has melted the Snows in the Mountains
and the river has rose considerably. that icy barier which Seperates me
from my friends and Country, from all which makes life estimable, is
yet white with the Snow which is maney feet deep. I frequently Consult
the nativs on the subject of passing this tremendious barier which now
present themselves to our view for great extent, they all appear to
agree as to the time those Mountains may be passed which is about the
Middle of June.

Sergt. pryor informs me that the Snow on the high plains from the river
was Shoe deep this morning when he Came down. it is somewhat
estonishing that the grass and a variety of Plants Sustain no injurey
from the Snow or frost; Maney of those plants are in blume and appear
to be of tender susceptable texture. At the distance of 18 Miles from
the river and on the Eastern border of the high Plain the Rocky
Mountain Commences and presents us with Winter here we have Summer,
Spring and Winter in the Short Space of twenty or thirty miles




[Lewis, May 18, 1806]
Sunday May 18th 1806.
Twelve hunters turned out this morning in different directions
agreeably to the order of last evening. Potts and Whitehouse
accompanied Collins to the bear he had killed on the 16th inst. with
which they returned in the afternoon. the colours of this bear was a
mixture of light redish brown white and dark brown in which the bey or
redish brown predominated, the fur was bey as well as the lower pertion
of the long hairs, the white next succeeded in the long hairs which at
their extremites were dark brown, this uncommon mixture might be termed
a bey grizzle.

our indian woman was busily engaged today in laying in a store of the
fennel roots for the Rocky mountains. these are called by the Shoshones
year-pah. at 2 P.M. 3 Indians who had been hunting towards the place at
which we met with Chopunnish last fall, called by them the quawmash
grounds, called at our camp; they informed us that they had been
hunting several days and had killed nothing; we gave them a small peice
of meat which they told us they would reserve for their small children
who were very hungary; we smoked with them and they shortly after
departed. early this morning the natives erected a lodge on the
opposite side of the river near a fishing stand a little above us. no
doubt to be in readiness for the salmon, the arrival of which they are
so ardently wishing as well as ourselves. this stand is a small stage
are warf constructed of sticks and projecting about 10 feet into the
river and about 3 feet above the surface of the water on the extremity
of this the fisherman stands with his scooping net, which differ but
little in their form from those commonly used in our country it is
formed thus. the fisherman exercised himself some hours today but I
believe without success. at 3 P.M. J. Fields returned very unwell
having killed nothing. shortly after an old man and woman arrived; the
former had soar eyes and the latter complained of a lax and rheumatic
effections. we gave the woman some creem of tartar and flour of
sulpher, and washed the old man's eyes with a little eyewater. a little
before dark Drewyer R. Fields and LaPage returned having been also
unsuccessfull they had killed a hawk only and taken the part of a
salmon from an Eagle, the latter altho it was of itself not valuable
was an agreeable sight as it gave us reason to hope that the salmon
would shortly be with us. these hunters had scowered the country
between the Kooskooske and Collins's Creek from hence to their junction
about 10 miles and had seen no deer or bear and but little sign of
either. shortly after dark it began to rain and continued raining
moderately all night. the air was extreemly cold and disagreeable and
we lay in the water as the preceeding night.




[Clark, May 18, 1806]
Sunday 18th May 1806
Cloudy morning 12 hunters turned out this morning in different
directions agreeably to the order of yesterday. Potts and Whitehouse
accompanied Collins to the bear which he had killed on the 16th and
brought in the flesh and Skin. this bear was not large but remarkably
light coloured the hair of it as also the hair of all those which has
been killed is very thick and long. The Squar wife to Shabono busied
her Self gathering the roots of the fenel Called by the Snake Indians
Year-pah for the purpose of drying to eate on the Rocky mountains.
those roots are very paliatiable either fresh rosted boiled or dried
and are generally between the Size of a quill and that of a mans fingar
and about the length of the latter. at 2 P.M. 3 Indians who had been
out hunting towards the place we met with the Chopunnish last fall,
which place they Call the quarmash grounds. those men had been out
Several days and killed nothing. we gave them a Small piece of meat
which they told us they would reserve for their Small Children who was
very hungary. we Smoked with them and they departed. The nativs made a
lodge on the opposit bank of the river a little above us at a fishing
place. as all communication is cut off between us and the nativs on the
opposit Side of the river, we cannot Say by whome or for what service
that lodge has been errected as no one has been near it Since it was
errected this morning. at 3 P M Jo. Field returned from the chase
without killing any thing he complains of being unwell. Son after an
old man and a woman arived the man with Sore eyes, and the woman with a
gripeing and rhumatic effections. I gave the woman a dose of creme of
tarter and flour of Sulphur, and the man Some eye water. a little
before night Rueben Field Drewyer and LaPage returned haveing killed
nothing but a large hawk they had hunted in the point between the
Kooskooske and Collins's Creek and Saw but little Sign of either deer
or Bear. the evening Cloudy, Soon after dark it began to rain and
rained moderately all night-. LaPage took a Salmon from an Eagle at a
Short distance below our Camp. this is induces us to believe that the
Salmon is in this river and most probably will be here in great numbers
in the Course of a fiew days.




[Lewis, May 19, 1806]
Monday May 19th 1806.
It continued to rain this morning untill 8 OCk. when it became fair. We
sent Charbono, Thompson, Potts, Hall and Wiser over the river to a
village above in order to purchase some roots to eat with our lean bear
meat. for this purpose we gave them a few awls, Kniting pins and
Armbands. we were informed that there was a canoe at the village in
which they could pass the river. I sent Joseph and R. Feilds up the
river in surch of the horse which I rode over the Rocky mountains last
fall. he had been seen yesterday with a parse) of indian horses and has
become almost wild. at 11 A.M. Thompson returned from the village
accompanied by a train of invalids consisting of 4 men 8 women and a
child. The men had soar eyes and the women in addition to soar eyes had
a variety of other complaints principally rheumatic; a weakness and
pain in the loins is a common complaint with their women. eyewater was
administered to all; to two of the women cathartics were given, to a
third who appeared much dejected and who from their account of her
disease we supposed it to be histerical, we gave 30 drops of Laudanum.
the several parts of the others where the rheumatic pains were seated
were well rubed with volitile linniment. all of those poor wretches
thought themselves much benefited and all returned to their village
well satisfyed. at 5 P.M. or marketers returned with about 6 bushels of
the cows roots and a considerable quanty of bread of the same
materials. late in the evening Reubin and Joseph Feilds returned with
my horse; we had him immediately castrated together with two others by
Drewyer in the ordinary. we amused ourselves about an hour this
afternoon in looking at the men running their horses. several of those
horses would be thought fleet in the U States. a little after dark
Sheilds and Gibson returned unsuccessful) from the chase. they had seen
some deer but no bear.




[Clark, May 19, 1806]
Monday 19th May 1806
Rained this morning untill 8 oClock when it Cleared off and became
fair-. we Sent Shabono, Thomson, Potts, Hall & Wizer over to the
Villages above to purchase Some roots to eate with our pore bear meat,
for which purchase we gave them a fiew Awls, Knitting pins, & arm bans
and directed them to proceed up on this Side of the river opposit to
the Village and Cross in the Cano which we are informed is at that
place. Sent Jo. & Reuben Field up the river a Short distance after the
horse which Capt. Lewis rode over the mountains last fall, which horse
was Seen yesterday with a gangue of Indian horses, and is Very wild-.
about 11 oClock 4 men and 8 Women Came to our Camp with Thompson who
went to the Village very early this morning. those Men applyed for Eye
water and the Women had a Variety of Complaints tho the most general
Complaint was the Rhumitism, pains in the back and the Sore eyes, they
also brought fowd. a very young Child whome they Said had been very
Sick-. I administered eye water to all, two of the women I gave a
carthartic, one whose Spirets were very low and much hipedz I gave 30
drops of Lodomem, and to the others I had their backs hips legs thighs
& arms well rubed with Volitile leniment all of those pore people
thought themselves much benifited by what had been done for them, and
at 3 P.M. they all returned to their Villages well satisfied. at 5 P.M.
Potts, Shabono &c. returned from the Village with about 6 bushels of
the root the nativs Call Cowse and Some bread of the Same root. Rubin &
Jos. Fields returned with the horse Capt. Lewis rode across the rocky
mountains we had this horse imedeately Cut with 2 others which we had
not before thought proper to Castrate. we amused ourselves about an
hour this after noon looking at the men run their horses, Several of
them would be thought Swift horses in the atlantic States. a little
after dark John Shields and Gibson returned haveing killed nothing.
they Saw Some deer but Saw no bear.




[Lewis, May 20, 1806]
Tuesday May 20th 1806.
It rained the greater part of last night and continued this morning
untill noon when it cleared away about an hour and then rained at
intervals untill 4 in the evening. our covering is so indifferent that
Capt C. and myself lay in the water the greater part of the last night.
Drewyer, and the two Feildses set out on a hunting excurtion towards
the mountains. Shannon and Colter came in unsuccessfull, they had
wounded a bear and a deer last evening but the night coming on they
were unable to pursue them, and the snow which fell in the course of
the night and this morning had covered the blood and rendered all
further pursuit impracticable. at 2 P.M. Labuish arrived with a large
buck of the Mule deer speceis which he had killed on Collins's Creek
yesterday. he had left Cruzatte and Collins on the Creek where they
were to wait his return. he informed us that it was snowing on the
plain while it was raining at our camp in the river bottom. late in the
evening Labuish and LaPage set out to join Collins and Cruzatte in
order to resume their hunt early tomorrow morning. this evening a party
of indians assembled on the opposite bank of the river and viewed our
camp with much attention for some time and retired.--at 5 P.M. Frazier
who had been permitted to go to the village this morning returned with
a pasel of Roots and bread which he had purchased. brass buttons is an
article of which these people are tolerably fond, the men have taken
advantage of their prepossession in favour of buttons and have devested
themselves of all they had in possesson which they have given in
exchange for roots and bread.




[Clark, May 20, 1806]
Tuesday 20th May 1806
rained the greater part of the last night and this morning untill
meridean when it Cleared away for an hour and began to rain and rained
at entervals untill 4 P.M. our Covering was so indefferent that Capt
Lewis and my self was wet in our bed all the latter part of the night.
Drewyer, Jos. & R. Fields Set out to towards the mountains. Shannon &
Colter Came in without any thing. they had Seen and Shot at a Bear and
a Deer neither of which they Could get. both of those Animals they must
have Wounded Mortally, but the night Comeing on prevented their
following them, and this morning the Snow had Covered the tracks and
hid the blood and prevented their getting either of them.

at 2 P.M. Labiech Came in with a large Buck of the Mule Deer Speces
which he had killed on Collins's Creek yesterday. he left Collins and
Peter Crusat on the Creek at which place they would Continue untill his
return. he informd. us that it was Snowing on the leavel plains on the
top of the hill all the time it was raining in the bottom at our Camp.
Labiech & Lapage returned to Collins & Crusat in the evening late for
the purpose of Pursueing the hunt in the Morning early. Several Indians
came to the opposit side of the River and viewed us some time. at 5 P M
Frazur who had leave to go to the Village returned with Some roots
which he had purchased. cloudy &c.




[Lewis, May 21, 1806]
Wednesday May 21st 1806.
It rained a few hours this morning. Sheilds and Gibson set out to hunt
towards the mountains. Collins came to camp at noon and remained about
2 hours; he has killed nothing since he left us last. we set five men
at work to make a canoe for the purpose of fishing and passing the
river. the Indians have already promised us a horse for this canoe when
we have no longer any uce for her. as our tent was not sufficient to
shelter us from the rain we had a lodge constructed of willow poles and
grass in the form of the orning of a waggon closed at one end. this we
had made sufficiently large to sleep in and to shelter the most
important part of our baggage. it is perfectly secure against the rain
sun and wind and affords us much the most comfortable shelter we have
had since we left Fort Clatsop. today we divided the remnant of our
store of merchandize among our party with a view that each should
purchase therewith a parsel of roots and bread from the natives as his
stores for the rocky mountains for there seems but little probability
that we shall be enabled to make any dryed meat for that purpose and we
cannot as yet form any just idea what resource the fish will furnish
us. each man's stock in trade amounts to no more than one awl, one
Kniting pin, a half an ounce of vermillion, two nedles, a few scanes of
thead and about a yard of ribbon; a slender stock indeed with which to
lay in a store of provision for that dreary wilderness. we would make
the men collect these roots themselves but there are several speceis of
hemlock which are so much like the cows that it is difficult to
discriminate them from the cows and we are affraid that they might
poison themselves. the indians have given us another horse to kill for
provision which we keep as a reserved store. our dependence for
subsistence is on our guns, the fish we may perhaps take, the roots we
can purchase from the natives and as the last alternative our horses.
we eat the last morsel of meat which we had for dinner this evening,
yet nobody seems much conserned about the state of provision. Willard,
Sergt. Ordway and Goodrich were permitted to visit the village today;
the former returned in the evening with some roots and bread, the two
last remaining all night. one of our party brought in a young sandhill
crain it was about the size of a pateridge and of a redish brown
colour, it appeared to be about 5 or six days old; these crains are
abundant in this neighbourhood.




[Clark, May 21, 1806]
Wednesday 21st May 1806
rained this morning. Shields and Gibson Set out to hunt towards the
mountains. Collins Came in to day and Stayed in about two hours, he has
killed nothing Since he went out last. we Set 5 Men at work to build a
Canoe for the purpose of takeing fish and passing the river and for
which we can get a good horse. as our tent is not Sufficient to keep
off the rain we are Compelled to have Some other resort for a Security
from the repeeted Showers which fall. we have a small half circular
place made and Covered with grass which makes a very Secure Shelter for
us to Sleep under. We devided our Store of merchindize amongst our
party for the purpose of precureing Some roots &c. of the nativs to
each mans part amounted to about an awl Knitting pin a little paint and
Some thread & 2 Needles which is but a Scanty dependance for roots to
take us over those Great Snowey Barriers (rocky mountains) which is and
will be the Cause of our Detention in this neighbourhood probably
untill the 10 or 15 of June. they are at this time Covered deep with
Snow. the plains on the high Country above us is also covered with
Snow. Serjt. Ordway, Goodrich, & Willard went to the village to day to
precure a fiew roots. we eate the last of our meat for Dinner to day,
and our only Certain dependance is the roots we Can precure from the
nativs for the fiew articles we have left those roots with what Game we
Can precure from the wods will probably last us untill the arival of
the Salmon. if they Should not; we have a horse in Store ready to be
killed which the indians have offered to us. Willard returned from the
Village. Sergt. Ordway and Goodrich Continued all night. one of the men
brought me a young Sandhill Crain which was about 5 or 6 days old it
was of a yellowish brown Colour, about the Size of a partridge. Those
Crains are very abundant in every part of this country in pars of two,
and Sometimes three together.

the party had gathered roots with leaves still attached they probably
could have been sorted with Indian assistance. However, the parsley
family (Apiaceae) is one of the most diverse and confusing plant
families in the region, and Lewis could not be sure that the men would
not bring back some other poisonous species not well known to the
Indians. The decision to purchase roots was probably prudent.




[Lewis, May 22, 1806]
Thursday May 22ed 1806.
A fine morning we exposed all our baggage to air and dry as well as our
store of roots and bread purchased from the natives. permited Windsor
and McNeal to go to the indian village. Sergt. Ordway and Goodrich
returned this morning with a good store of roots and bread. about noon
2 indian men came down the river on a raft and continued at our camp
about 3 hours and returned to their village. we.sent out Shannon and
Colter to hunt towards the mountains. we sent Sergt. Pryor down to the
entrance of Collins's Creek to examine the country and look out for a
good position for an encampment on the river below that Creek, having
determined to remove our camp below that crek if it continues high, as
soon as we have completed our canoe, as the country to which we are
confined to hunt at present is limited by this creek and river to a
very narrow tract, and game have already become scarce. if we can
