        What of the men?
           The men were bred in England,
        The bowmen, the yeomen,
           The lads of the dale and fell,
        Here's to you and to you,
        To the hearts that are true,
           And the land where the true hearts dwell.

"They sing very joyfully," said Du Guesclin, "as though they were going
to a festival."

"It is their wont when there is work to be done."

"By Saint Paul!" quoth Sir Nigel, "it is in my mind that they come too
late, for I cannot see how we are to come down from this tower."

"There they come, the hearts of gold!" cried Aylward. "See, they move
out from the shadow. Now they cross the meadow. They are on the further
side of the moat. Hola camarades, hola! Johnston, Eccles, Cooke,
Harward, Bligh! Would ye see a fair lady and two gallant knights done
foully to death?"

"Who is there?" shouted a deep voice from below. "Who is this who speaks
with an English tongue?"

"It is I, old lad. It is Sam Aylward of the Company; and here is your
captain, Sir Nigel Loring, and four others, all laid out to be grilled
like an Easterling's herrings."

"Curse me if I did not think that it was the style of speech of old
Samkin Aylward," said the voice, amid a buzz from the ranks. "Wherever
there are knocks going there is Sammy in the heart of it. But who are
these ill-faced rogues who block the path? To your kennels, canaille!
What! you dare look us in the eyes? Out swords, lads, and give them the
flat of them! Waste not your shafts upon such runagate knaves."

There was little fight left in the peasants, however, still dazed by the
explosion, amazed at their own losses and disheartened by the arrival of
the disciplined archers. In a very few minutes they were in full flight
for their brushwood homes, leaving the morning sun to rise upon a
blackened and blood-stained ruin, where it had left the night before the
magnificent castle of the Seneschal of Auvergne. Already the white lines
in the east were deepening into pink as the archers gathered round the
keep and took counsel how to rescue the survivors.

"Had we a rope," said Alleyne, "there is one side which is not yet on
fire, down which we might slip."

"But how to get a rope?"

"It is an old trick," quoth Aylward. "Hola! Johnston, cast me up a rope,
even as you did at Maupertuis in the war time."

The grizzled archer thus addressed took several lengths of rope from his
comrades, and knotting them firmly together, he stretched them out in
the long shadow which the rising sun threw from the frowning keep. Then
he fixed the yew-stave of his bow upon end and measured the long, thin,
black line which it threw upon the turf.

"A six-foot stave throws a twelve-foot shadow," he muttered. "The keep
throws a shadow of sixty paces. Thirty paces of rope will be enow and to
spare. Another strand, Watkin! Now pull at the end that all may be safe.
So! It is ready for them."

"But how are they to reach it?" asked the young archer beside him.

"Watch and see, young fool's-head," growled the old bowman. He took a
long string from his pouch and fastened one end to an arrow.

"All ready, Samkin?"

"Ready, camarade."

"Close to your hand then." With an easy pull he sent the shaft
flickering gently up, falling upon the stonework within a foot of where
Aylward was standing. The other end was secured to the rope, so that in
a minute a good strong cord was dangling from the only sound side of the
blazing and shattered tower. The Lady Tiphaine was lowered with a noose
drawn fast under the arms, and the other five slid swiftly down, amid
the cheers and joyous outcry of their rescuers.



CHAPTER XXXII. HOW THE COMPANY TOOK COUNSEL ROUND THE FALLEN TREE.


"Where is Sir Claude Latour?" asked Sir Nigel, as his feet touched
ground.

"He is in camp, near Montpezat, two hours' march from here, my fair
lord," said Johnston, the grizzled bowman who commanded the archers.

"Then we shall march thither, for I would fain have you all back at Dax
in time to be in the prince's vanguard."

"My lord," cried Alleyne, joyfully, "here are our chargers in the field,
and I see your harness amid the plunder which these rogues have left
behind them."

"By Saint Ives! you speak sooth, young squire," said Du Guesclin. "There
is my horse and my lady's jennet. The knaves led them from the stables,
but fled without them. Now, Nigel, it is great joy to me to have seen
one of whom I have often heard. Yet we must leave you now, for I must be
with the King of Spain ere your army crosses the mountains."

"I had thought that you were in Spain with the valiant Henry of
Trastamare."

"I have been there, but I came to France to raise succor for him. I
shall ride back, Nigel, with four thousand of the best lances of France
at my back, so that your prince may find he hath a task which is worthy
of him. God be with you, friend, and may we meet again in better times!"

"I do not think," said Sir Nigel, as he stood by Alleyne's side looking
after the French knight and his lady, "that in all Christendom you will
meet with a more stout-hearted man or a fairer and sweeter dame. But
your face is pale and sad, Alleyne! Have you perchance met with some
hurt during the ruffle?"

"Nay, my fair lord, I was but thinking of my friend Ford, and how he sat
upon my couch no later than yesternight."

Sir Nigel shook his head sadly. "Two brave squires have I lost," said
he. "I know not why the young shoots should be plucked, and an old weed
left standing, yet certes there must be some good reason, since God hath
so planned it. Did you not note, Alleyne, that the Lady Tiphaine did
give us warning last night that danger was coming upon us?"

"She did, my lord."

"By Saint Paul! my mind misgives me as to what she saw at Twynham
Castle. And yet I cannot think that any Scottish or French rovers could
land in such force as to beleaguer the fortalice. Call the Company
together, Aylward; and let us on, for it will be shame to us if we are
not at Dax upon the trysting day."

The archers had spread themselves over the ruins, but a blast upon a
bugle brought them all back to muster, with such booty as they could
bear with them stuffed into their pouches or slung over their shoulders.
As they formed into ranks, each man dropping silently into his place,
Sir Nigel ran a questioning eye over them, and a smile of pleasure
played over his face. Tall and sinewy, and brown, clear-eyed,
hard-featured, with the stern and prompt bearing of experienced
soldiers, it would be hard indeed for a leader to seek for a choicer
following. Here and there in the ranks were old soldiers of the French
wars, grizzled and lean, with fierce, puckered features and shaggy,
bristling brows. The most, however, were young and dandy archers, with
fresh English faces, their beards combed out, their hair curling from
under their close steel hufkens, with gold or jewelled earrings gleaming
in their ears, while their gold-spangled baldrics, their silken belts,
and the chains which many of them wore round their thick brown necks,
all spoke of the brave times which they had had as free companions. Each
had a yew or hazel stave slung over his shoulder, plain and serviceable
with the older men, but gaudily painted and carved at either end with
the others. Steel caps, mail brigandines, white surcoats with the red
lion of St. George, and sword or battle-axe swinging from their belts,
completed this equipment, while in some cases the murderous maule or
five-foot mallet was hung across the bowstave, being fastened to their
leathern shoulder-belt by a hook in the centre of the handle. Sir
Nigel's heart beat high as he looked upon their free bearing and
fearless faces.

For two hours they marched through forest and marshland, along the left
bank of the river Aveyron; Sir Nigel riding behind his Company, with
Alleyne at his right hand, and Johnston, the old master bowman, walking
by his left stirrup. Ere they had reached their journey's end the knight
had learned all that he would know of his men, their doings and their
intentions. Once, as they marched, they saw upon the further bank of the
river a body of French men-at-arms, riding very swiftly in the direction
of Villefranche.

"It is the Seneschal of Toulouse, with his following," said Johnston,
shading his eyes with his hand. "Had he been on this side of the water
he might have attempted something upon us."

"I think that it would be well that we should cross," said Sir Nigel.
"It were pity to balk this worthy seneschal, should he desire to try
some small feat of arms."

"Nay, there is no ford nearer than Tourville," answered the old archer.
"He is on his way to Villefranche, and short will be the shrift of any
Jacks who come into his hands, for he is a man of short speech. It
was he and the Seneschal of Beaucaire who hung Peter Wilkins, of the
Company, last Lammastide; for which, by the black rood of Waltham! they
shall hang themselves, if ever they come into our power. But here are
our comrades, Sir Nigel, and here is our camp."

As he spoke, the forest pathway along which they marched opened out into
a green glade, which sloped down towards the river. High, leafless trees
girt it in on three sides, with a thick undergrowth of holly between
their trunks. At the farther end of this forest clearing there stood
forty or fifty huts, built very neatly from wood and clay, with the
blue smoke curling out from the roofs. A dozen tethered horses and mules
grazed around the encampment, while a number of archers lounged about:
some shooting at marks, while others built up great wooden fires in the
open, and hung their cooking kettles above them. At the sight of their
returning comrades there was a shout of welcome, and a horseman, who
had been exercising his charger behind the camp, came cantering down
to them. He was a dapper, brisk man, very richly clad, with a round,
clean-shaven face, and very bright black eyes, which danced and sparkled
with excitement.

"Sir Nigel!" he cried. "Sir Nigel Loring, at last! By my soul we have
awaited you this month past. Right welcome, Sir Nigel! You have had my
letter?"

"It was that which brought me here," said Sir Nigel. "But indeed, Sir
Claude Latour, it is a great wonder to me that you did not yourself lead
these bowmen, for surely they could have found no better leader?"

"None, none, by the Virgin of L'Esparre!" he cried, speaking in the
strange, thick Gascon speech which turns every _v_ into a _b_. "But you
know what these islanders of yours are, Sir Nigel. They will not be led
by any save their own blood and race. There is no persuading them.
Not even I, Claude Latour Seigneur of Montchateau, master of the high
justice, the middle and the low, could gain their favor. They must needs
hold a council and put their two hundred thick heads together, and then
there comes this fellow Aylward and another, as their spokesmen, to say
that they will disband unless an Englishman of good name be set over
them. There are many of them, as I understand, who come from some great
forest which lies in Hampi, or Hampti--I cannot lay my tongue to the
name. Your dwelling is in those parts, and so their thoughts turned to
you as their leader. But we had hoped that you would bring a hundred men
with you."

"They are already at Dax, where we shall join them," said Sir Nigel.
"But let the men break their fast, and we shall then take counsel what
to do."

"Come into my hut," said Sir Claude. "It is but poor fare that I can lay
before you--milk, cheese, wine, and bacon--yet your squire and yourself
will doubtless excuse it. This is my house where the pennon flies before
the door--a small residence to contain the Lord of Montchateau."

Sir Nigel sat silent and distrait at his meal, while Alleyne hearkened
to the clattering tongue of the Gascon, and to his talk of the glories
of his own estate, his successes in love, and his triumphs in war.

"And now that you are here, Sir Nigel," he said at last, "I have many
fine ventures all ready for us. I have heard that Montpezat is of no
great strength, and that there are two hundred thousand crowns in the
castle. At Castelnau also there is a cobbler who is in my pay, and who
will throw us a rope any dark night from his house by the town wall. I
promise you that you shall thrust your arms elbow-deep among good silver
pieces ere the nights are moonless again; for on every hand of us are
fair women, rich wine, and good plunder, as much as heart could wish."

"I have other plans," answered Sir Nigel curtly; "for I have come hither
to lead these bowmen to the help of the prince, our master, who may have
sore need of them ere he set Pedro upon the throne of Spain. It is my
purpose to start this very day for Dax upon the Adour, where he hath now
pitched his camp."

The face of the Gascon darkened, and his eyes flashed with resentment.
"For me," he said, "I care little for this war, and I find the life
which I lead a very joyous and pleasant one. I will not go to Dax."

"Nay, think again, Sir Claude," said Sir Nigel gently; "for you have
ever had the name of a true and loyal knight. Surely you will not hold
back now when your master hath need of you."

"I will not go to Dax," the other shouted.

"But your devoir--your oath of fealty?"

"I say that I will not go."

"Then, Sir Claude, I must lead the Company without you."

"If they will follow," cried the Gascon with a sneer. "These are not
hired slaves, but free companions, who will do nothing save by their own
good wills. In very sooth, my Lord Loring, they are ill men to trifle
with, and it were easier to pluck a bone from a hungry bear than to lead
a bowman out of a land of plenty and of pleasure."

"Then I pray you to gather them together," said Sir Nigel, "and I will
tell them what is in my mind; for if I am their leader they must to Dax,
and if I am not then I know not what I am doing in Auvergne. Have my
horse ready, Alleyne; for, by St. Paul! come what may, I must be upon
the homeward road ere mid-day."

A blast upon the bugle summoned the bowmen to counsel, and they gathered
in little knots and groups around a great fallen tree which lay athwart
the glade. Sir Nigel sprang lightly upon the trunk, and stood with
blinking eye and firm lips looking down at the ring of upturned warlike
faces.

"They tell me, bowmen," said he, "that ye have grown so fond of ease and
plunder and high living that ye are not to be moved from this pleasant
country. But, by Saint Paul! I will believe no such thing of you, for
I can readily see that you are all very valiant men, who would scorn to
live here in peace when your prince hath so great a venture before him.
Ye have chosen me as a leader, and a leader I will be if ye come with
me to Spain; and I vow to you that my pennon of the five roses shall, if
God give me strength and life, be ever where there is most honor to
be gained. But if it be your wish to loll and loiter in these glades,
bartering glory and renown for vile gold and ill-gotten riches, then
ye must find another leader; for I have lived in honor, and in honor I
trust that I shall die. If there be forest men or Hampshire men amongst
ye, I call upon them to say whether they will follow the banner of
Loring."

"Here's a Romsey man for you!" cried a young bowman with a sprig of
evergreen set in his helmet.

"And a lad from Alresford!" shouted another.

"And from Milton!"

"And from Burley!"

"And from Lymington!"

"And a little one from Brockenhurst!" shouted a huge-limbed fellow who
sprawled beneath a tree.

"By my hilt! lads," cried Aylward, jumping upon the fallen trunk, "I
think that we could not look the girls in the eyes if we let the prince
cross the mountains and did not pull string to clear a path for him.
It is very well in time of peace to lead such a life as we have had
together, but now the war-banner is in the wind once more, and, by these
ten finger-bones! if he go alone, old Samkin Aylward will walk beside
it."

These words from a man as popular as Aylward decided many of the
waverers, and a shout of approval burst from his audience.

"Far be it from me," said Sir Claude Latour suavely, "to persuade you
against this worthy archer, or against Sir Nigel Loring; yet we have
been together in many ventures, and perchance it may not be amiss if I
say to you what I think upon the matter."

"Peace for the little Gascon!" cried the archers. "Let every man have
his word. Shoot straight for the mark, lad, and fair play for all."

"Bethink you, then," said Sir Claude, "that you go under a hard rule,
with neither freedom nor pleasure--and for what? For sixpence a day,
at the most; while now you may walk across the country and stretch out
either hand to gather in whatever you have a mind for. What do we not
hear of our comrades who have gone with Sir John Hawkwood to Italy? In
one night they have held to ransom six hundred of the richest noblemen
of Mantua. They camp before a great city, and the base burghers come
forth with the keys, and then they make great spoil; or, if it please
them better, they take so many horse-loads of silver as a composition;
and so they journey on from state to state, rich and free and feared by
all. Now, is not that the proper life for a soldier?"

"The proper life for a robber!" roared Hordle John, in his thundering
voice.

"And yet there is much in what the Gascon says," said a swarthy fellow
in a weather-stained doublet; "and I for one would rather prosper in
Italy than starve in Spain."

"You were always a cur and a traitor, Mark Shaw," cried Aylward. "By
my hilt! if you will stand forth and draw your sword I will warrant you
that you will see neither one nor the other."

"Nay, Aylward," said Sir Nigel, "we cannot mend the matter by broiling.
Sir Claude, I think that what you have said does you little honor, and
if my words aggrieve you I am ever ready to go deeper into the matter
with you. But you shall have such men as will follow you, and you may
go where you will, so that you come not with us. Let all who love
their prince and country stand fast, while those who think more of a
well-lined purse step forth upon the farther side."

Thirteen bowmen, with hung heads and sheepish faces, stepped forward
with Mark Shaw and ranged themselves behind Sir Claude. Amid the
hootings and hissings of their comrades, they marched off together to
the Gascon's hut, while the main body broke up their meeting and set
cheerily to work packing their possessions, furbishing their weapons,
and preparing for the march which lay before them. Over the Tarn and the
Garonne, through the vast quagmires of Armagnac, past the swift-flowing
Losse, and so down the long valley of the Adour, there was many a
long league to be crossed ere they could join themselves to that dark
war-cloud which was drifting slowly southwards to the line of the snowy
peaks, beyond which the banner of England had never yet been seen.



CHAPTER XXXIII. HOW THE ARMY MADE THE PASSAGE OF RONCESVALLES.


The whole vast plain of Gascony and of Languedoc is an arid and
profitless expanse in winter save where the swift-flowing Adour and her
snow-fed tributaries, the Louts, the Oloron and the Pau, run down to
the sea of Biscay. South of the Adour the jagged line of mountains which
fringe the sky-line send out long granite claws, running down into the
lowlands and dividing them into "gaves" or stretches of valley. Hillocks
grow into hills, and hills into mountains, each range overlying its
neighbor, until they soar up in the giant chain which raises its
spotless and untrodden peaks, white and dazzling, against the pale blue
wintry sky.

A quiet land is this--a land where the slow-moving Basque, with his flat
biretta-cap, his red sash and his hempen sandals, tills his scanty farm
or drives his lean flock to their hill-side pastures. It is the country
of the wolf and the isard, of the brown bear and the mountain-goat, a
land of bare rock and of rushing water. Yet here it was that the will of
a great prince had now assembled a gallant army; so that from the Adour
to the passes of Navarre the barren valleys and wind-swept wastes were
populous with soldiers and loud with the shouting of orders and the
neighing of horses. For the banners of war had been flung to the wind
once more, and over those glistening peaks was the highway along which
Honor pointed in an age when men had chosen her as their guide.

And now all was ready for the enterprise. From Dax to St. Jean
Pied-du-Port the country was mottled with the white tents of Gascons,
Aquitanians and English, all eager for the advance. From all sides the
free companions had trooped in, until not less than twelve thousand of
these veteran troops were cantoned along the frontiers of Navarre. From
England had arrived the prince's brother, the Duke of Lancaster, with
four hundred knights in his train and a strong company of archers. Above
all, an heir to the throne had been born in Bordeaux, and the prince
might leave his spouse with an easy mind, for all was well with mother
and with child.

The keys of the mountain passes still lay in the hands of the shifty and
ignoble Charles of Navarre, who had chaffered and bargained both with
the English and with the Spanish, taking money from the one side to hold
them open and from the other to keep them sealed. The mallet hand of
Edward, however, had shattered all the schemes and wiles of the plotter.
Neither entreaty nor courtly remonstrance came from the English prince;
but Sir Hugh Calverley passed silently over the border with his company,
and the blazing walls of the two cities of Miranda and Puenta de la
Reyna warned the unfaithful monarch that there were other metals besides
gold, and that he was dealing with a man to whom it was unsafe to lie.
His price was paid, his objections silenced, and the mountain gorges lay
open to the invaders. From the Feast of the Epiphany there was mustering
and massing, until, in the first week of February--three days after the
White Company joined the army--the word was given for a general advance
through the defile of Roncesvalles. At five in the cold winter's morning
the bugles were blowing in the hamlet of St. Jean Pied-du-Port, and by
six Sir Nigel's Company, three hundred strong, were on their way for the
defile, pushing swiftly in the dim light up the steep curving road; for
it was the prince's order that they should be the first to pass through,
and that they should remain on guard at the further end until the whole
army had emerged from the mountains. Day was already breaking in the
east, and the summits of the great peaks had turned rosy red, while the
valleys still lay in the shadow, when they found themselves with the
cliffs on either hand and the long, rugged pass stretching away before
them.

Sir Nigel rode his great black war-horse at the head of his archers,
dressed in full armor, with Black Simon bearing his banner behind him,
while Alleyne at his bridle-arm carried his blazoned shield and his
well-steeled ashen spear. A proud and happy man was the knight, and many
a time he turned in his saddle to look at the long column of bowmen who
swung swiftly along behind him.

"By Saint Paul! Alleyne," said he, "this pass is a very perilous place,
and I would that the King of Navarre had held it against us, for it
would have been a very honorable venture had it fallen to us to win a
passage. I have heard the minstrels sing of one Sir Roland who was slain
by the infidels in these very parts."

"If it please you, my fair lord," said Black Simon, "I know something
of these parts, for I have twice served a term with the King of Navarre.
There is a hospice of monks yonder, where you may see the roof among the
trees, and there it was that Sir Roland was slain. The village upon the
left is Orbaiceta, and I know a house therein where the right wine of
Jurancon is to be bought, if it would please you to quaff a morning
cup."

"There is smoke yonder upon the right."

"That is a village named Les Aldudes, and I know a hostel there also
where the wine is of the best. It is said that the inn-keeper hath a
buried treasure, and I doubt not, my fair lord, that if you grant me
leave I could prevail upon him to tell us where he hath hid it."

"Nay, nay, Simon," said Sir Nigel curtly, "I pray you to forget these
free companion tricks. Ha! Edricson, I see that you stare about you, and
in good sooth these mountains must seem wondrous indeed to one who hath
but seen Butser or the Portsdown hill."

The broken and rugged road had wound along the crests of low hills,
with wooded ridges on either side of it over which peeped the loftier
mountains, the distant Peak of the South and the vast Altabisca, which
towered high above them and cast its black shadow from left to right
across the valley. From where they now stood they could look forward
down a long vista of beech woods and jagged rock-strewn wilderness, all
white with snow, to where the pass opened out upon the uplands beyond.
Behind them they could still catch a glimpse of the gray plains of
Gascony, and could see her rivers gleaming like coils of silver in the
sunshine. As far as eye could see from among the rocky gorges and the
bristles of the pine woods there came the quick twinkle and glitter of
steel, while the wind brought with it sudden distant bursts of martial
music from the great host which rolled by every road and by-path towards
the narrow pass of Roncesvalles. On the cliffs on either side might also
be seen the flash of arms and the waving of pennons where the force of
Navarre looked down upon the army of strangers who passed through their
territories.

"By Saint Paul!" said Sir Nigel, blinking up at them, "I think that
we have much to hope for from these cavaliers, for they cluster very
thickly upon our flanks. Pass word to the men, Aylward, that they
unsling their bows, for I have no doubt that there are some very
worthy gentlemen yonder who may give us some opportunity for honorable
advancement."

"I hear that the prince hath the King of Navarre as hostage," said
Alleyne, "and it is said that he hath sworn to put him to death if there
be any attack upon us."

"It was not so that war was made when good King Edward first turned his
hand to it," said Sir Nigel sadly. "Ah! Alleyne, I fear that you will
never live to see such things, for the minds of men are more set upon
money and gain than of old. By Saint Paul! it was a noble sight when two
great armies would draw together upon a certain day, and all who had
a vow would ride forth to discharge themselves of it. What noble
spear-runnings have I not seen, and even in an humble way had a part in,
when cavaliers would run a course for the easing of their souls and for
the love of their ladies! Never a bad word have I for the French, for,
though I have ridden twenty times up to their array, I have never yet
failed to find some very gentle and worthy knight or squire who was
willing to do what he might to enable me to attempt some small feat of
arms. Then, when all cavaliers had been satisfied, the two armies would
come to hand-strokes, and fight right merrily until one or other had the
vantage. By Saint Paul! it was not our wont in those days to pay gold
for the opening of passes, nor would we hold a king as hostage lest
his people come to thrusts with us. In good sooth, if the war is to be
carried out in such a fashion, then it is grief to me that I ever came
away from Castle Twynham, for I would not have left my sweet lady had I
