arguments he used on this point cannot exactly be known, for Sir
Everard was never supposed strong in the powers of persuasion; but the
young officer, immediately after this transaction, rose in the army
with a rapidity far surpassing the usual pace of unpatronised
professional merit, although, to outward appearance, that was all he
had to depend upon.

The shock which Sir Everard encountered upon this occasion, although
diminished by the consciousness of having acted virtuously and
generously had its effect upon his future life. His resolution of
marriage had been adopted in a fit of indignation; the labour of
courtship did not quite suit the dignified indolence of his habits; he
had but just escaped the risk of marrying a woman who could never love
him, and his pride could not be greatly flattered by the termination of
his amour, even if his heart had not suffered. The result of the whole
matter was his return to Waverley-Honour without any transfer of his
affections, notwithstanding the sighs and languishments of the fair
tell-tale, who had revealed, in mere sisterly affection, the secret of
Lady Emily's attachment, and in despite of the nods, winks, and
innuendos of the officious lady mother, and the grave eulogiums which
the Earl pronounced successively on the prudence, and good sense, and
admirable dispositions, of his first, second, third, fourth, and fifth
daughters.

The memory of his unsuccessful amour was with Sir Everard, as with many
more of his temper, at once shy, proud, sensitive, and indolent, a
beacon against exposing himself to similar mortification, pain, and
fruitless exertion for the time to come. He continued to live at
Waverley-Honour in the style of an old English gentleman, of an ancient
descent and opulent fortune. His sister, Miss Rachel Waverley, presided
at his table; and they became, by degrees, an old bachelor and an
ancient maiden lady, the gentlest and kindest of the votaries of
celibacy.

The vehemence of Sir Everard's resentment against his brother was but
short-lived; yet his dislike to the Whig and the placeman, though
unable to stimulate him to resume any active measures prejudicial to
Richard's interest, in the succession to the family estate, continued
to maintain the coldness between them. Richard knew enough of the
world, and of his brother's temper, to believe that by any
ill-considered or precipitate advances on his part, he might turn
passive dislike into a more active principle. It was accident,
therefore, which at length occasioned a renewal of their intercourse.
Richard had married a young woman of rank, by whose family interest and
private fortune he hoped to advance his career. In her right he became
possessor of a manor of some value, at the distance of a few miles from
Waverley-Honour.

Little Edward, the hero of our tale, then in his fifth year, was their
only child. It chanced that the infant with his maid had strayed one
morning to a mile's distance from the avenue of Brerewood Lodge, his
father's seat. Their attention was attracted by a carriage drawn by six
stately long-tailed black horses, and with as much carving and gilding
as would have done honour to my lord mayor's. It was waiting for the
owner, who was at a little distance inspecting the progress of a
half-built farm-house. I know not whether the boy's nurse had been a
Welsh--or a Scotch-woman, or in what manner he associated a shield
emblazoned with three ermines with the idea of personal property, but
he no sooner beheld this family emblem than he stoutly determined on
vindicating his right to the splendid vehicle on which it was
displayed. The Baronet arrived while the boy's maid was in vain
endeavouring to make him desist from his determination to appropriate
the gilded coach-and-six. The rencontre was at a happy moment for
Edward, as his uncle had been just eyeing wistfully, with something of
a feeling like envy, the chubby boys of the stout yeoman whose mansion
was building by his direction. In the round-faced rosy cherub before
him, bearing his eye and his name, and vindicating a hereditary title
to his family, affection, and patronage, by means of a tie which Sir
Everard held as sacred as either Garter or Blue-mantle, Providence
seemed to have granted to him the very object best calculated to fill
up the void in his hopes and affections. Sir Everard returned to
Waverley-Hall upon a led horse, which was kept in readiness for him,
while the child and his attendant were sent home in the carriage to
Brerewood Lodge, with such a message as opened to Richard Waverley a
door of reconciliation with his elder brother.

Their intercourse, however, though thus renewed, continued to be rather
formal and civil than partaking of brotherly cordiality; yet it was
sufficient to the wishes of both parties. Sir Everard obtained, in the
frequent society of his little nephew, something on which his
hereditary pride might found the anticipated pleasure of a continuation
of his lineage, and where his kind and gentle affections could at the
same time fully exercise themselves. For Richard Waverley, he beheld in
the growing attachment between the uncle and nephew the means of
securing his son's, if not his own, succession to the hereditary
estate, which he felt would be rather endangered than promoted by any
attempt on his own part towards a closer intimacy with a man of Sir
Everard's habits and opinions.

Thus, by a sort of tacit compromise, little Edward was permitted to
pass the greater part of the year at the Hall, and appeared to stand in
the same intimate relation to both families, although their mutual
intercourse was otherwise limited to formal messages and more formal
visits. The education of the youth was regulated alternately by the
taste and opinions of his uncle and of his father. But more of this in
a subsequent chapter.





CHAPTER III

EDUCATION


The education of our hero, Edward Waverley, was of a nature somewhat
desultory. In infancy his health suffered, or was supposed to suffer
(which is quite the same thing), by the air of London. As soon,
therefore, as official duties, attendance on Parliament, or the
prosecution of any of his plans of interest or ambition, called his
father to town, which was his usual residence for eight months in the
year, Edward was transferred to Waverley-Honour, and experienced a
total change of instructors and of lessons, as well as of residence.
This might have been remedied had his father placed him under the
superintendence of a permanent tutor. But he considered that one of his
choosing would probably have been unacceptable at Waverley-Honour, and
that such a selection as Sir Everard might have made, were the matter
left to him, would have burdened him with a disagreeable inmate, if not
a political spy, in his family. He therefore prevailed upon his private
secretary, a young man of taste and accomplishments, to bestow an hour
or two on Edward's education while at Brerewood Lodge, and left his
uncle answerable for his improvement in literature while an inmate at
the Hall. This was in some degree respectably provided for. Sir
Everard's chaplain, an Oxonian, who had lost his fellowship for
declining to take the oaths at the accession of George I, was not only
an excellent classical scholar, but reasonably skilled in science, and
master of most modern languages. He was, however, old and indulgent,
and the recurring interregnum, during which Edward was entirely freed
from his discipline, occasioned such a relaxation of authority, that
the youth was permitted, in a great measure, to learn as he pleased,
what he pleased, and when he pleased. This slackness of rule might have
been ruinous to a boy of slow understanding, who, feeling labour in the
acquisition of knowledge, would have altogether neglected it, save for
the command of a taskmaster; and it might have proved equally dangerous
to a youth whose animal spirits were more powerful than his imagination
or his feelings, and whom the irresistible influence of Alma would have
engaged in field-sports from morning till night. But the character of
Edward Waverley was remote from either of these. His powers of
apprehension were so uncommonly quick as almost to resemble intuition,
and the chief care of his preceptor was to prevent him, as a sportsman
would phrase it, from over-running his game--that is, from acquiring
his knowledge in a slight, flimsy, and inadequate manner. And here the
instructor had to combat another propensity too often united with
brilliancy of fancy and vivacity of talent--that indolence, namely, of
disposition, which can only be stirred by some strong motive of
gratification, and which renounces study as soon as curiosity is
gratified, the pleasure of conquering the first difficulties exhausted,
and the novelty of pursuit at an end. Edward would throw himself with
spirit upon any classical author of which his preceptor proposed the
perusal, make himself master of the style so far as to understand the
story, and, if that pleased or interested him, he finished the volume.
But it was in vain to attempt fixing his attention on critical
distinctions of philology, upon the difference of idiom, the beauty of
felicitous expression, or the artificial combinations of syntax. 'I can
read and understand a Latin author,' said young Edward, with the
self-confidence and rash reasoning of fifteen, 'and Scaliger or Bentley
could not do much more.' Alas! while he was thus permitted to read only
for the gratification of his amusement, he foresaw not that he was
losing for ever the opportunity of acquiring habits of firm and
assiduous application, of gaining the art of controlling, directing,
and concentrating the powers of his mind for earnest investigation--an
art far more essential than even that intimate acquaintance with
classical learning which is the primary object of study.

I am aware I may be here reminded of the necessity of rendering
instruction agreeable to youth, and of Tasso's infusion of honey into
the medicine prepared for a child; but an age in which children are
taught the driest doctrines by the insinuating method of instructive
games, has little reason to dread the consequences of study being
rendered too serious or severe. The history of England is now reduced
to a game at cards, the problems of mathematics to puzzles and riddles,
and the doctrines of arithmetic may, we are assured, be sufficiently
acquired by spending a few hours a week at a new and complicated
edition of the Royal Game of the Goose. There wants but one step
further, and the Creed and Ten Commandments may be taught in the same
manner, without the necessity of the grave face, deliberate tone of
recital, and devout attention, hitherto exacted from the well-governed
childhood of this realm. It may, in the meantime, be subject of serious
consideration, whether those who are accustomed only to acquire
instruction through the medium of amusement may not be brought to
reject that which approaches under the aspect of study; whether those
who learn history by the cards may not be led to prefer the means to
the end; and whether, were we to teach religion in the way of sport,
our pupils may not thereby be gradually induced to make sport of their
religion. To our young hero, who was permitted to seek his instruction
only according to the bent of his own mind, and who, of consequence,
only sought it so long as it afforded him amusement, the indulgence of
his tutors was attended with evil consequences, which long continued to
influence his character, happiness, and utility.

Edward's power of imagination and love of literature, although the
former was vivid and the latter ardent, were so far from affording a
remedy to this peculiar evil, that they rather inflamed and increased
its violence. The library at Waverley-Honour, a large Gothic room, with
double arches and a gallery, contained such a miscellaneous and
extensive collection of volumes as had been assembled together, during
the course of two hundred years, by a family which had been always
wealthy, and inclined, of course, as a mark of splendour, to furnish
their shelves with the current literature of the day, without much
scrutiny or nicety of discrimination. Throughout this ample realm
Edward was permitted to roam at large. His tutor had his own studies;
and church politics and controversial divinity, together with a love of
learned ease, though they did not withdraw his attention at stated
times from the progress of his patron's presumptive heir, induced him
readily to grasp at any apology for not extending a strict and
regulated survey towards his general studies. Sir Everard had never
been himself a student, and, like his sister, Miss Rachel Waverley, he
held the common doctrine, that idleness is incompatible with reading of
any kind, and that the mere tracing the alphabetical characters with
the eye is in itself a useful and meritorious task, without
scrupulously considering what ideas or doctrines they may happen to
convey. With a desire of amusement, therefore, which better discipline
might soon have converted into a thirst for knowledge, young Waverley
drove through the sea of books like a vessel without a pilot or a
rudder. Nothing perhaps increases by indulgence more than a desultory
habit of reading, especially under such opportunities of gratifying it.
I believe one reason why such numerous instances of erudition occur
among the lower ranks is, that, with the same powers of mind, the poor
student is limited to a narrow circle for indulging his passion for
books, and must necessarily make himself master of the few he possesses
ere he can acquire more. Edward, on the contrary, like the epicure who
only deigned to take a single morsel from the sunny side of a peach,
read no volume a moment after it ceased to excite his curiosity or
interest; and it necessarily happened, that the habit of seeking only
this sort of gratification rendered it daily more difficult of
attainment, till the passion for reading, like other strong appetites,
produced by indulgence a sort of satiety.

Ere he attained this indifference, however, he had read, and stored in
a memory of uncommon tenacity, much curious, though ill-arranged and
miscellaneous information. In English literature he was master of
Shakespeare and Milton, of our earlier dramatic authors, of many
picturesque and interesting passages from our old historical
chronicles, and was particularly well acquainted with Spenser, Drayton,
and other poets who have exercised themselves on romantic fiction, of
all themes the most fascinating to a youthful imagination, before the
passions have roused themselves and demand poetry of a more sentimental
description. In this respect his acquaintance with Italian opened him
yet a wider range. He had perused the numerous romantic poems, which,
from the days of Pulci, have been a favourite exercise of the wits of
Italy, and had sought gratification in the numerous collections of
novelle, which were brought forth by the genius of that elegant though
luxurious nation, in emulation of the 'Decameron.' In classical
literature, Waverley had made the usual progress, and read the usual
authors; and the French had afforded him an almost exhaustless
collection of memoirs, scarcely more faithful than romances, and of
romances so well written as hardly to be distinguished from memoirs.
The splendid pages of Froissart, with his heart-stirring and
eye-dazzling descriptions of war and of tournaments, were among his
chief favourites; and from those of Brantome and De la Noue he learned
to compare the wild and loose, yet superstitious, character of the
nobles of the League with the stern, rigid, and sometimes turbulent
disposition of the Huguenot party. The Spanish had contributed to his
stock of chivalrous and romantic lore. The earlier literature of the
northern nations did not escape the study of one who read rather to
awaken the imagination than to benefit the understanding. And yet,
knowing much that is known but to few, Edward Waverley might justly be
considered as ignorant, since he knew little of what adds dignity to
man, and qualifies him to support and adorn an elevated situation in
society.

The occasional attention of his parents might indeed have been of
service to prevent the dissipation of mind incidental to such a
desultory course of reading. But his mother died in the seventh year
after the reconciliation between the brothers, and Richard Waverley
himself, who, after this event, resided more constantly in London, was
too much interested in his own plans of wealth and ambition to notice
more respecting Edward than that he was of a very bookish turn, and
probably destined to be a bishop. If he could have discovered and
analysed his son's waking dreams, he would have formed a very different
conclusion.





CHAPTER IV

CASTLE-BUILDING


I have already hinted that the dainty, squeamish, and fastidious taste
acquired by a surfeit of idle reading had not only rendered our hero
unfit for serious and sober study, but had even disgusted him in some
degree with that in which he had hitherto indulged.

He was in his sixteenth year when his habits of abstraction and love of
solitude became so much marked as to excite Sir Everard's affectionate
apprehension. He tried to counterbalance these propensities by engaging
his nephew in field-sports, which had been the chief pleasure of his
own youthful days. But although Edward eagerly carried the gun for one
season, yet when practice had given him some dexterity, the pastime
ceased to afford him amusement.

In the succeeding spring, the perusal of old Isaac Walton's fascinating
volume determined Edward to become 'a brother of the angle.' But of all
diversions which ingenuity ever devised for the relief of idleness,
fishing is the worst qualified to amuse a man who is at once indolent
and impatient; and our hero's rod was speedily flung aside. Society and
example, which, more than any other motives, master and sway the
natural bent of our passions, might have had their usual effect upon
the youthful visionary. But the neighbourhood was thinly inhabited, and
the home-bred young squires whom it afforded were not of a class fit to
form Edward's usual companions, far less to excite him to emulation in
the practice of those pastimes which composed the serious business of
their lives.

There were a few other youths of better education and a more liberal
character, but from their society also our hero was in some degree
excluded. Sir Everard had, upon the death of Queen Anne, resigned his
seat in Parliament, and, as his age increased and the number of his
contemporaries diminished, had gradually withdrawn himself from
society; so that when, upon any particular occasion, Edward mingled
with accomplished and well-educated young men of his own rank and
expectations, he felt an inferiority in their company, not so much from
deficiency of information, as from the want of the skill to command and
to arrange that which he possessed. A deep and increasing sensibility
added to this dislike of society. The idea of having committed the
slightest solecism in politeness, whether real or imaginary, was agony
to him; for perhaps even guilt itself does not impose upon some minds
so keen a sense of shame and remorse, as a modest, sensitive, and
inexperienced youth feels from the consciousness of having neglected
etiquette or excited ridicule. Where we are not at ease, we cannot be
happy; and therefore it is not surprising that Edward Waverley supposed
that he disliked and was unfitted for society, merely because he had
not yet acquired the habit of living in it with ease and comfort, and
of reciprocally giving and receiving pleasure.

The hours he spent with his uncle and aunt were exhausted in listening
to the oft-repeated tale of narrative old age. Yet even there his
imagination, the predominant faculty of his mind, was frequently
excited. Family tradition and genealogical history, upon which much of
Sir Everard's discourse turned, is the very reverse of amber, which,
itself a valuable substance, usually includes flies, straws, and other
trifles; whereas these studies, being themselves very insignificant and
trifling, do nevertheless serve to perpetuate a great deal of what is
rare and valuable in ancient manners, and to record many curious and
minute facts which could have been preserved and conveyed through no
other medium. If, therefore, Edward Waverley yawned at times over the
dry deduction of his line of ancestors, with their various
intermarriages, and inwardly deprecated the remorseless and protracted
accuracy with which the worthy Sir Everard rehearsed the various
degrees of propinquity between the house of Waverley-Honour and the
doughty barons, knights, and squires to whom they stood allied; if
(notwithstanding his obligations to the three ermines passant) he
sometimes cursed in his heart the jargon of heraldry, its griffins, its
moldwarps, its wyverns, and its dragons, with all the bitterness of
Hotspur himself, there were moments when these communications
interested his fancy and rewarded his attention.

The deeds of Wilibert of Waverley in the Holy Land, his long absence
and perilous adventures, his supposed death, and his return on the
evening when the betrothed of his heart had wedded the hero who had
protected her from insult and oppression during his absence; the
generosity with which the Crusader relinquished his claims, and sought
in a neighbouring cloister that peace which passeth not away;
[Footnote: See Note 2.]--to these and similar tales he would hearken
till his heart glowed and his eye glistened. Nor was he less affected
when his aunt, Mrs. Rachel, narrated the sufferings and fortitude of
Lady Alice Waverley during the Great Civil War. The benevolent features
of the venerable spinster kindled into more majestic expression as she
told how Charles had, after the field of Worcester, found a day's
refuge at Waverley-Honour, and how, when a troop of cavalry were
approaching to search the mansion, Lady Alice dismissed her youngest
son with a handful of domestics, charging them to make good with their
lives an hour's diversion, that the king might have that space for
escape. 'And, God help her,' would Mrs. Rachel continue, fixing her
eyes upon the heroine's portrait as she spoke, 'full dearly did she
purchase the safety of her prince with the life of her darling child.
They brought him here a prisoner, mortally wounded; and you may trace
the drops of his blood from the great hall door along the little
gallery, and up to the saloon, where they laid him down to die at his
mother's feet. But there was comfort exchanged between them; for he
knew, from the glance of his mother's eye, that the purpose of his
desperate defence was attained. Ah! I remember,' she continued, 'I
remember well to have seen one that knew and loved him. Miss Lucy Saint
Aubin lived and died a maid for his sake, though one of the most
beautiful and wealthy matches in this country; all the world ran after
her, but she wore widow's mourning all her life for poor William, for
they were betrothed though not married, and died in--I cannot think of
the date; but I remember, in the November of that very year, when she
found herself sinking, she desired to be brought to Waverley-Honour
once more, and visited all the places where she had been with my
grand-uncle, and caused the carpets to be raised that she might trace
the impression of his blood, and if tears could have washed it out, it
had not been there now; for there was not a dry eye in the house. You
would have thought, Edward, that the very trees mourned for her, for
their leaves dropt around her without a gust of wind, and, indeed, she
looked like one that would never see them green again.'

From such legends our hero would steal away to indulge the fancies they
excited. In the corner of the large and sombre library, with no other
light than was afforded by the decaying brands on its ponderous and
ample hearth, he would exercise for hours that internal sorcery by
which past or imaginary events are presented in action, as it were, to
the eye of the muser. Then arose in long and fair array the splendour
of the bridal feast at Waverley-Castle; the tall and emaciated form of
its real lord, as he stood in his pilgrim's weeds, an unnoticed
spectator of the festivities of his supposed heir and intended bride;
the electrical shock occasioned by the discovery; the springing of the
vassals to arms; the astonishment of the bridegroom; the terror and
confusion of the bride; the agony with which Wilibert observed that her
heart as well as consent was in these nuptials; the air of dignity, yet
of deep feeling, with which he flung down the half-drawn sword, and
turned away for ever from the house of his ancestors. Then would he
change the scene, and fancy would at his wish represent Aunt Rachel's
tragedy. He saw the Lady Waverley seated in her bower, her ear strained
to every sound, her heart throbbing with double agony, now listening to
the decaying echo of the hoofs of the king's horse, and when that had
died away, hearing in every breeze that shook the trees of the park,
the noise of the remote skirmish. A distant sound is heard like the
rushing of a swoln stream; it comes nearer, and Edward can plainly
distinguish the galloping of horses, the cries and shouts of men, with
straggling pistol-shots between, rolling forwards to the Hall. The lady
starts up--a terrified menial rushes in--but why pursue such a
description?

As living in this ideal world became daily more delectable to our hero,
interruption was disagreeable in proportion. The extensive domain that
surrounded the Hall, which, far exceeding the dimensions of a park, was
usually termed Waverley-Chase, had originally been forest ground, and
still, though broken by extensive glades, in which the young deer were
sporting, retained its pristine and savage character. It was traversed
by broad avenues, in many places half grown up with brush-wood, where
the beauties of former days used to take their stand to see the stag
coursed with greyhounds, or to gain an aim at him with the crossbow. In
one spot, distinguished by a moss-grown Gothic monument, which retained
the name of Queen's Standing, Elizabeth herself was said to have
pierced seven bucks with her own arrows. This was a very favourite
haunt of Waverley. At other times, with his gun and his spaniel, which
served as an apology to others, and with a book in his pocket, which
perhaps served as an apology to himself, he used to pursue one of these
long avenues, which, after an ascending sweep of four miles, gradually
narrowed into a rude and contracted path through the cliffy and woody
pass called Mirkwood Dingle, and opened suddenly upon a deep, dark, and
small lake, named, from the same cause, Mirkwood-Mere. There stood, in
former times, a solitary tower upon a rock almost surrounded by the
water, which had acquired the name of the Strength of Waverley, because
in perilous times it had often been the refuge of the family. There, in
the wars of York and Lancaster, the last adherents of the Red Rose who
dared to maintain her cause carried on a harassing and predatory
warfare, till the stronghold was reduced by the celebrated Richard of
Gloucester. Here, too, a party of Cavaliers long maintained themselves
under Nigel Waverley, elder brother of that William whose fate Aunt
Rachel commemorated. Through these scenes it was that Edward loved to
'chew the cud of sweet and bitter fancy,' and, like a child among his
toys, culled and arranged, from the splendid yet useless imagery and
emblems with which his imagination was stored, visions as brilliant and
as fading as those of an evening sky. The effect of this indulgence
upon his temper and character will appear in the next chapter.





CHAPTER V

CHOICE OF A PROFESSION


From the minuteness with which I have traced Waverley's pursuits, and
the bias which these unavoidably communicated to his imagination, the
reader may perhaps anticipate, in the following tale, an imitation of
the romance of Cervantes. But he will do my prudence injustice in the
supposition. My intention is not to follow the steps of that inimitable
author, in describing such total perversion of intellect as
misconstrues the objects actually presented to the senses, but that
more common aberration from sound judgment, which apprehends
occurrences indeed in their reality, but communicates to them a
tincture of its own romantic tone and colouring. So far was Edward
Waverley from expecting general sympathy with his own feelings, or
concluding that the present state of things was calculated to exhibit
the reality of those visions in which he loved to indulge, that he
dreaded nothing more than the detection of such sentiments as were
dictated by his musings. He neither had nor wished to have a confidant,
with whom to communicate his reveries; and so sensible was he of the
ridicule attached to them, that, had he been to choose between any
punishment short of ignominy, and the necessity of giving a cold and
composed account of the ideal world in which he lived the better part
of his days, I think he would not have hesitated to prefer the former
infliction. This secrecy became doubly precious as he felt in advancing
life the influence of the awakening passions. Female forms of exquisite
grace and beauty began to mingle in his mental adventures; nor was he
long without looking abroad to compare the creatures of his own
imagination with the females of actual life.

The list of the beauties who displayed their hebdomadal finery at the
parish church of Waverley was neither numerous nor select. By far the
most passable was Miss Sissly, or, as she rather chose to be called,
Miss Cecilia Stubbs, daughter of Squire Stubbs at the Grange. I know
not whether it was by the 'merest accident in the world,' a phrase
which, from female lips, does not always exclude malice prepense, or
whether it was from a conformity of taste, that Miss Cecilia more than
once crossed Edward in his favourite walks through Waverley-Chase. He
had not as yet assumed courage to accost her on these occasions; but
the meeting was not without its effect. A romantic lover is a strange
idolater, who sometimes cares not out of what log he frames the object
of his adoration; at least, if nature has given that object any
passable proportion of personal charms, he can easily play the Jeweller
and Dervise in the Oriental tale, [Footnote: See Hoppner's tale of The
Seven Lovers.] and supply her richly, out of the stores of his own
imagination, with supernatural beauty, and all the properties of
intellectual wealth.

But ere the charms of Miss Cecilia Stubbs had erected her into a
positive goddess, or elevated her at least to a level with the saint
her namesake, Mrs. Rachel Waverley gained some intimation which
determined her to prevent the approaching apotheosis. Even the most
simple and unsuspicious of the female sex have (God bless them!) an
instinctive sharpness of perception in such matters, which sometimes
goes the length of observing partialities that never existed, but
rarely misses to detect such as pass actually under their observation.
Mrs. Rachel applied herself with great prudence, not to combat, but to
elude, the approaching danger, and suggested to her brother the
necessity that the heir of his house should see something more of the
world than was consistent with constant residence at Waverley-Honour.

Sir Everard would not at first listen to a proposal which went to
separate his nephew from him. Edward was a little bookish, he admitted,
but youth, he had always heard, was the season for learning, and, no
doubt, when his rage for letters was abated, and his head fully stocked
with knowledge, his nephew would take to field-sports and country
business. He had often, he said, himself regretted that he had not
spent some time in study during his youth: he would neither have shot
nor hunted with less skill, and he might have made the roof of Saint
Stephen's echo to longer orations than were comprised in those zealous
Noes, with which, when a member of the House during Godolphin's
administration, he encountered every measure of government.

Aunt Rachel's anxiety, however, lent her address to carry her point.
Every representative of their house had visited foreign parts, or
served his country in the army, before he settled for life at
Waverley-Honour, and she appealed for the truth of her assertion to the
genealogical pedigree, an authority which Sir Everard was never known
to contradict. In short, a proposal was made to Mr. Richard Waverley,
that his son should travel, under the direction of his present tutor
Mr. Pembroke, with a suitable allowance from the Baronet's liberality.
The father himself saw no objection to this overture; but upon
mentioning it casually at the table of the minister, the great man
looked grave. The reason was explained in private. The unhappy turn of
Sir Everard's politics, the minister observed, was such as would render
it highly improper that a young gentleman of such hopeful prospects
should travel on the Continent with a tutor doubtless of his uncle's
choosing, and directing his course by his instructions. What might Mr.
Edward Waverley's society be at Paris, what at Rome, where all manner
of snares were spread by the Pretender and his sons--these were points
for Mr. Waverley to consider. This he could himself say, that he knew
his Majesty had such a just sense of Mr. Richard Waverley's merits,
that, if his son adopted the army for a few years, a troop, he
believed, might be reckoned upon in one of the dragoon regiments lately
returned from Flanders.

A hint thus conveyed and enforced was not to be neglected with
impunity; and Richard Waverley, though with great dread of shocking his
brother's prejudices, deemed he could not avoid accepting the
commission thus offered him for his son. The truth is, he calculated
much, and justly, upon Sir Everard's fondness for Edward, which made
him unlikely to resent any step that he might take in due submission to
parental authority. Two letters announced this determination to the
Baronet and his nephew. The latter barely communicated the fact, and
pointed out the necessary preparations for joining his regiment. To his
brother, Richard was more diffuse and circuitous. He coincided with
him, in the most flattering manner, in the propriety of his son's
seeing a little more of the world, and was even humble in expressions
of gratitude for his proposed assistance; was, however, deeply
concerned that it was now, unfortunately, not in Edward's power exactly
to comply with the plan which had been chalked out by his best friend
and benefactor. He himself had thought with pain on the boy's
inactivity, at an age when all his ancestors had borne arms; even
Royalty itself had deigned to inquire whether young Waverley was not
now in Flanders, at an age when his grandfather was already bleeding
for his king in the Great Civil War. This was accompanied by an offer
of a troop of horse. What could he do? There was no time to consult his
brother's inclinations, even if he could have conceived there might be
objections on his part to his nephew's following the glorious career of
his predecessors. And, in short, that Edward was now (the intermediate
steps of cornet and lieutenant being overleapt with great agility)
Captain Waverley, of Gardiner's regiment of dragoons, which he must
join in their quarters at Dundee in Scotland, in the course of a month.

Sir Everard Waverley received this intimation with a mixture of
feelings. At the period of the Hanoverian succession he had withdrawn
from parliament, and his conduct in the memorable year 1715 had not
been altogether unsuspected. There were reports of private musters of
tenants and horses in Waverley-Chase by moonlight, and of cases of
carbines and pistols purchased in Holland, and addressed to the
Baronet, but intercepted by the vigilance of a riding officer of the
excise, who was afterwards tossed in a blanket on a moonless night, by
an association of stout yeomen, for his officiousness. Nay, it was even
said, that at the arrest of Sir William Wyndham, the leader of the Tory
party, a letter from Sir Everard was found in the pocket of his
night-gown. But there was no overt act which an attainder could be
founded on, and government, contented with suppressing the insurrection
of 1715, felt it neither prudent nor safe to push their vengeance
farther than against those unfortunate gentlemen who actually took up
arms.

Nor did Sir Everard's apprehensions of personal consequences seem to
correspond with the reports spread among his Whig neighbours. It was
well known that he had supplied with money several of the distressed
Northumbrians and Scotchmen, who, after being made prisoners at Preston
in Lancashire, were imprisoned in Newgate and the Marshalsea, and it
was his solicitor and ordinary counsel who conducted the defence of
some of these unfortunate gentlemen at their trial. It was generally
supposed, however, that, had ministers possessed any real proof of Sir
Everard's accession to the rebellion, he either would not have ventured
thus to brave the existing government, or at least would not have done
so with impunity. The feelings which then dictated his proceedings were
those of a young man, and at an agitating period. Since that time Sir
Everard's Jacobitism had been gradually decaying, like a fire which
burns out for want of fuel. His Tory and High-Church principles were
kept up by some occasional exercise at elections and quarter-sessions;
but those respecting hereditary right were fallen into a sort of
abeyance. Yet it jarred severely upon his feelings, that his nephew
should go into the army under the Brunswick dynasty; and the more so,
as, independent of his high and conscientious ideas of paternal
authority, it was impossible, or at least highly imprudent, to
interfere authoritatively to prevent it. This suppressed vexation gave
rise to many poohs and pshaws which were placed to the account of an
incipient fit of gout, until, having sent for the Army List, the worthy
Baronet consoled himself with reckoning the descendants of the houses
of genuine loyalty, Mordaunts, Granvilles, and Stanleys, whose names
were to be found in that military record; and, calling up all his
feelings of family grandeur and warlike glory, he concluded, with logic
something like Falstaff's, that when war was at hand, although it were
shame to be on any side but one, it were worse shame to be idle than to
be on the worst side, though blacker than usurpation could make it. As
for Aunt Rachel, her scheme had not exactly terminated according to her
wishes, but she was under the necessity of submitting to circumstances;
and her mortification was diverted by the employment she found in
fitting out her nephew for the campaign, and greatly consoled by the
prospect of beholding him blaze in complete uniform. Edward Waverley
himself received with animated and undefined surprise this most
unexpected intelligence. It was, as a fine old poem expresses it, 'like
a fire to heather set,' that covers a solitary hill with smoke, and
illumines it at the same time with dusky fire. His tutor, or, I should
say, Mr. Pembroke, for he scarce assumed the name of tutor, picked up
about Edward's room some fragments of irregular verse, which he
appeared to have composed under the influence of the agitating feelings
occasioned by this sudden page being turned up to him in the book of
life. The doctor, who was a believer in all poetry which was composed
by his friends, and written out in fair straight lines, with a capital
at the beginning of each, communicated this treasure to Aunt Rachel,
who, with her spectacles dimmed with tears, transferred them to her
commonplace book, among choice receipts for cookery and medicine,
favourite texts, and portions from High-Church divines, and a few
songs, amatory and Jacobitical, which she had carolled in her younger
days, from whence her nephew's poetical tentamina were extracted when
the volume itself, with other authentic records of the Waverley family,
were exposed to the inspection of the unworthy editor of this memorable
history. If they afford the reader no higher amusement, they will
serve, at least, better than narrative of any kind, to acquaint him
with the wild and irregular spirit of our hero:--

    Late, when the Autumn evening fell
    On Mirkwood-Mere's romantic dell,
    The lake return'd, in chasten'd gleam,
    The purple cloud, the golden beam:
    Reflected in the crystal pool,
    Headland and bank lay fair and cool;
    The weather-tinted rock and tower,
    Each drooping tree, each fairy flower,
    So true, so soft, the mirror gave,
    As if there lay beneath the wave,
    Secure from trouble, toil, and care,
    A world than earthly world more fair.


    But distant winds began to wake,
    And roused the Genius of the Lake!
    He heard the groaning of the oak,
    And donn'd at once his sable cloak,
    As warrior, at the battle-cry,
    Invests him with his panoply:
    Then, as the whirlwind nearer press'd
    He 'gan to shake his foamy crest
    O'er furrow'd brow and blacken'd cheek,
    And bade his surge in thunder speak.
    In wild and broken eddies whirl'd.
    Flitted that fond ideal world,
    And to the shore in tumult tost
    The realms of fairy bliss were lost.

    Yet, with a stern delight and strange,
    I saw the spirit-stirring change,
    As warr'd the wind with wave and wood,
    Upon the ruin'd tower I stood,
    And felt my heart more strongly bound,
    Responsive to the lofty sound,
    While, joying in the mighty roar,
    I mourn'd that tranquil scene no more.

    So, on the idle dreams of youth,
    Breaks the loud trumpet-call of truth,
    Bids each fair vision pass away,
    Like landscape on the lake that lay,
    As fair, as flitting, and as frail,
    As that which fled the Autumn gale.--
    For ever dead to fancy's eye
    Be each gay form that glided by,
    While dreams of love and lady's charms
    Give place to honour and to arms!

In sober prose, as perhaps these verses intimate less decidedly, the
transient idea of Miss Cecilia Stubbs passed from Captain Waverley's
heart amid the turmoil which his new destinies excited. She appeared,
indeed, in full splendour in her father's pew upon the Sunday when he
attended service for the last time at the old parish church, upon which
occasion, at the request of his uncle and Aunt Rachel, he was induced
(nothing both, if the truth must be told) to present himself in full
uniform.

There is no better antidote against entertaining too high an opinion of
others than having an excellent one of ourselves at the very same time.
Miss Stubbs had indeed summoned up every assistance which art could
afford to beauty; but, alas! hoop, patches, frizzled locks, and a new
mantua of genuine French silk, were lost upon a young officer of
dragoons who wore for the first time his gold-laced hat, jack-boots,
and broadsword. I know not whether, like the champion of an old
ballad,--

    His heart was all on honour bent,
    He could not stoop to love;
    No lady in the land had power
    His frozen heart to move;

or whether the deep and flaming bars of embroidered gold, which now
fenced his breast, defied the artillery of Cecilia's eyes; but every
arrow was launched at him in vain.

    Yet did I mark where Cupid's shaft did light;
    It lighted not on little western flower,
    But on bold yeoman, flower of all the west,
    Hight Jonas Culbertfield, the steward's son.

Craving pardon for my heroics (which I am unable in certain cases to
resist giving way to), it is a melancholy fact, that my history must
here take leave of the fair Cecilia, who, like many a daughter of Eve,
after the departure of Edward, and the dissipation of certain idle
visions which she had adopted, quietly contented herself with a
pisaller, and gave her hand, at the distance of six months, to the
aforesaid Jonas, son of the Baronet's steward, and heir (no unfertile
prospect) to a steward's fortune, besides the snug probability of
succeeding to his father's office. All these advantages moved Squire
Stubbs, as much as the ruddy brown and manly form of the suitor
influenced his daughter, to abate somewhat in the article of their
gentry; and so the match was concluded. None seemed more gratified than
Aunt Rachel, who had hitherto looked rather askance upon the
presumptuous damsel (as much so, peradventure, as her nature would
permit), but who, on the first appearance of the new-married pair at
church, honoured the bride with a smile and a profound curtsy, in
presence of the rector, the curate, the clerk, and the whole
congregation of the united parishes of Waverley cum Beverley.
