
"Ay, that is the question," said Wildrake; "for look you, sir--that men
do go from hence is certain--but how they go, or to what quarter"--

Cromwell stood attentive, expecting some useful hint from the careless
impetuosity of the cavalier, upon the route which the King might have
taken.

--"Or to what quarter, as I said before, why, your Excellency, Master
Oliver, may e'en find that out yourself."

As he uttered the last words he unsheathed his rapier, and made a full
pass at the General's body. Had his sword met no other impediment than
the buff jerkin, Cromwell's course had ended on the spot. But, fearful
of such attempts, the General wore under his military dress a shirt of
the finest mail, made of rings of the best steel, and so light and
flexible that it was little or no encumbrance to the motions of the
wearer. It proved his safety on this occasion, for the rapier sprung in
shivers; while the owner, now held back by Everard and Holdenough, flung
the hilt with passion on the ground, exclaiming, "Be damned the hand
that forged thee!--To serve me so long, and fail me when thy true
service would have honoured us both for ever! But no good could come of
thee, since thou wert pointed, even in jest, at a learned divine of the
Church of England."

In the first instant of alarm,--and perhaps suspecting Wildrake might be
supported by others, Cromwell half drew from his bosom a concealed
pistol, which he hastily returned, observing that both Everard and the
clergyman were withholding the cavalier from another attempt.

Pearson and a soldier or two rushed in--"Secure that fellow," said the
General, in the indifferent tone of one to whom imminent danger was too
familiar to cause irritation--"Bind him--but not so hard, Pearson;"--for
the men, to show their zeal, were drawing their belts, which they used
for want of cords, brutally tight round Wildrake's limbs. "He would have
assassinated me, but I would reserve him for his fit doom."

"Assassinated!--I scorn your words, Master Oliver," said Wildrake; "I
proffered you a fair duello."

"Shall we shoot him in the street, for an example?" said Pearson to
Cromwell; while Everard endeavoured to stop Wildrake from giving further
offence.

"On your life harm him not; but let him be kept in safe ward, and well
looked after," said Cromwell; while the prisoner exclaimed to Everard,
"I prithee let me alone--I am now neither thy follower, nor any man's,
and I am as willing to die as ever I was to take a cup of liquor.--And
hark ye, speaking of that, Master Oliver, you were once a jolly fellow,
prithee let one of thy lobsters here advance yonder tankard to my lips,
and your Excellency shall hear a toast, a song, and a--secret."

"Unloose his head, and hand the debauched beast the tankard," said
Oliver; "while yet he exists, it were shame to refuse him the element he
lives in."

"Blessings on your head for once," said Wildrake, whose object in
continuing this wild discourse was, if possible, to gain a little delay,
when every moment was precious. "Thou hast brewed good ale, and that's
warrant for a blessing. For my toast and my song, here they go
together--

  Son of a witch,
  Mayst thou die in a ditch,
    With the hutchers who back thy quarrels;
  And rot above ground,
  While the world shall resound
    A welcome to Royal King Charles.

And now for my secret, that you may not say I had your liquor for
nothing--I fancy my song will scarce pass current for much--My secret
is, Master Cromwell--that the bird is flown--and your red nose will be
as white as your winding-sheet before you can smell out which way."

"Pshaw, rascal," answered Cromwell, contemptuously, "keep your scurrile
jests for the gibbet foot."

"I shall look on the gibbet more boldly," replied Wildrake, "than I have
seen you look on the Royal Martyr's picture."

This reproach touched Cromwell to the very quick.--"Villain!" he
exclaimed; "drag him hence, draw out a party, and--But hold, not now--to
prison with him--let him be close watched, and gagged, if he attempts to
speak to the sentinels--Nay, hold--I mean, put a bottle of brandy into
his cell, and he will gag himself in his own way, I warrant you--When
day comes, that men can see the example, he shall be gagged after my
fashion."

During the various breaks in his orders, the General was evidently
getting command of his temper; and though he began in fury, he ended
with the contemptuous sneer of one who overlooks the abusive language of
an inferior. Something remained on his mind notwithstanding, for he
continued standing, as if fixed to the same spot in the apartment, his
eyes bent on the ground, and with closed hand pressed against his lips,
like a man who is musing deeply. Pearson, who was about to speak to him,
drew back, and made a sign to those in the room to be silent.

Master Holdenough did not mark, or, at least, did not obey it.
Approaching the General, he said, in a respectful but firm tone, "Did I
understand it to be your Excellency's purpose that this poor man shall
die next morning?"

"Hah!" exclaimed Cromwell, starting from his reverie, "what say'st
thou?"

"I took leave to ask, if it was your will that this unhappy man should
die to-morrow?"

"Whom saidst thou?" demanded Cromwell: "Markham Everard--shall he die,
saidst thou?"

"God forbid!" replied Holdenough, stepping back--"I asked whether this
blinded creature, Wildrake, was to be so suddenly cut off?"

"Ay, marry is he," said Cromwell, "were the whole General Assembly of
Divines at Westminster--the whole Sanhedrim of Presbytery--to offer bail
for him."

"If you will not think better of it, sir," said Holdenough, "at least
give not the poor man the means of destroying his senses--Let me go to
him as a divine, to watch with him, in case he may yet be admitted into
the vineyard at the latest hour--yet brought into the sheepfold, though
he has neglected the call of the pastor till time is wellnigh closed
upon him."

"For God's sake," said Everard, who had hitherto kept silence, because
he knew Cromwell's temper on such occasions, "think better of what you
do!"

"Is it for thee to teach me?" replied Cromwell; "think thou of thine own
matters, and believe me it will require all thy wit.--And for you,
reverend sir, I will have no father-confessors attend my prisoners--no
tales out of school. If the fellow thirsts after ghostly comfort, as he
is much more like to thirst after a quartern of brandy, there is
Corporal Humgudgeon, who commands the _corps de garde_, will preach and
pray as well as the best of ye.--But this delay is intolerable--Comes
not this fellow yet?"

"No, sir," replied Pearson. "Had we not better go down to the Lodge? The
news of our coming hither may else get there before us."

"True," said Cromwell, speaking aside to his officer, "but you know
Tomkins warned us against doing so, alleging there were so many
postern-doors, and sallyports, and concealed entrances in the old house,
that it was like a rabbit-warren, and that an escape might be easily
made under our very noses, unless he were with us, to point out all the
ports which should be guarded. He hinted, too, that he might be delayed
a few minutes after his time of appointment--but we have now waited
half-an-hour."

"Does your Excellency think Tomkins is certainly to be depended upon?"
said Pearson.

"As far as his interest goes, unquestionably," replied the General. "He
has ever been the pump by which I have sucked the marrow out of many a
plot, in special those of the conceited fool Rochecliffe, who is goose
enough to believe that such a fellow as Tomkins would value any thing
beyond the offer of the best bidder. And yet it groweth late--I fear we
must to the Lodge without him--Yet, all things well considered, I will
tarry here till midnight.--Ah! Everard, thou mightest put this gear to
rights if thou wilt! Shall some foolish principle of fantastic punctilio
have more weight with thee, man, than have the pacification and welfare
of England; the keeping of faith to thy friend and benefactor, and who
will be yet more so, and the fortune and security of thy relations? Are
these, I say, lighter in the balance than the cause of a worthless boy,
who, with his father and his father's house, have troubled Israel for
fifty years?"

"I do not understand your Excellency, nor at what service you point,
which I can honestly render," replied Everard. "That which is dishonest
I should be loth that you proposed."

"Then this at least might suit your honesty, or scrupulous humour, call
it which thou wilt," said Cromwell. "Thou knowest, surely, all the
passages about Jezebel's palace down yonder?--Let me know how they may
be guarded against the escape of any from within."

"I cannot pretend to aid you in this matter," said Everard; "I know not
all the entrances and posterns about Woodstock, and if I did, I am not
free in conscience to communicate with you on this occasion."

"We shall do without you, sir," replied Cromwell, haughtily; "and if
aught is found which may criminate you, remember you have lost right to
my protection."

"I shall be sorry," said Everard, "to have lost your friendship,
General; but I trust my quality as an Englishman may dispense with the
necessity of protection from any man. I know no law which obliges me to
be spy or informer, even if I were in the way of having opportunity to
do service in either honourable capacity."

"Well, sir," said Cromwell, "for all your privileges and qualities, I
will make bold to take you down to the Lodge at Woodstock to-night, to
enquire into affairs in which the State is concerned.--Come hither,
Pearson." He took a paper from his pocket, containing a rough sketch or
ground-plan of Woodstock Lodge, with the avenues leading to it.--"Look
here," he said, "we must move in two bodies on foot, and with all
possible silence--thou must march to the rear of the old house of
iniquity with twenty file of men, and dispose them around it the wisest
thou canst. Take the reverend man there along with you. He must be
secured at any rate, and may serve as a guide. I myself will occupy the
front of the Lodge, and thus having stopt all the earths, thou wilt come
to me for farther orders--silence and dispatch is all.--But for the dog
Tomkins, who broke appointment with me, he had need render a good
excuse, or woe to his father's son!--Reverend sir, be pleased to
accompany that officer.--Colonel Everard, you are to follow me; but
first give your sword to Captain Pearson, and consider yourself as under
arrest."

Everard gave his sword to Pearson without any comment, and with the most
anxious presage of evil followed the Republican General, in obedience to
commands which it would have been useless to dispute.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER THE THIRTY-FIRST.


  "Were my son William here but now,
    He wadna fail the pledge."
  Wi' that in at the door there ran
    A ghastly-looking page--
  "I saw them, master, O! I saw,
    Beneath the thornie brae,
  Of black-mail'd warriors many a rank;
    'Revenge!' he cried, 'and gae.'"

  HENRY MACKENZIE.

The little party at the Lodge were assembled at supper, at the early
hour of eight o'clock. Sir Henry Lee, neglecting the food that was
placed on the table, stood by a lamp on the chimney-piece, and read a
letter with mournful attention.

"Does my son write to you more particularly than to me, Doctor
Rochecliffe?" said the knight. "He only says here, that he will return
probably this night; and that Master Kerneguy must be ready to set off
with him instantly. What can this haste mean? Have you heard of any new
search after our suffering party? I wish they would permit me to enjoy
my son's company in quiet but for a day."

"The quiet which depends on the wicked ceasing from troubling," said Dr.
Rochecliffe, "is connected, not by days and hours, but by minutes. Their
glut of blood at Worcester had satiated them for a moment, but their
appetite, I fancy, has revived."

"You have news, then, to that purpose?" said Sir Henry.

"Your son," replied the Doctor, "wrote to me by the same messenger: he
seldom fails to do so, being aware of what importance it is that I
should know every thing that passes. Means of escape are provided on the
coast, and Master Kerneguy must be ready to start with your son the
instant he appears."

"It is strange," said the knight; "for forty years I have dwelt in this
house, man and boy, and the point only was how to make the day pass over
our heads; for if I did not scheme out some hunting match or hawking, or
the like, I might have sat here on my arm-chair, as undisturbed as a
sleeping dormouse, from one end of the year to the other; and now I am
more like a hare on her form, that dare not sleep unless with her eyes
open, and scuds off when the wind rustles among the fern."

"It is strange," said Alice, looking at Dr. Rochecliffe, "that the
roundhead steward has told you nothing of this. He is usually
communicative enough of the motions of his party; and I saw you close
together this morning."

"I must be closer with him this evening," said the Doctor gloomily; "but
he will not blab."

"I wish you may not trust him too much," said Alice in reply.--"To me,
that man's face, with all its shrewdness, evinces such a dark
expression, that methinks I read treason in his very eye."

"Be assured, that matter is looked to," answered the Doctor, in the same
ominous tone as before. No one replied, and there was a chilling and
anxious feeling of apprehension which seemed to sink down on the company
at once, like those sensations which make such constitutions as are
particularly subject to the electrical influence, conscious of an
approaching thunder-storm.

The disguised Monarch, apprised that day to be prepared on short notice
to quit his temporary asylum, felt his own share of the gloom which
involved the little society. But he was the first also to shake it off,
as what neither suited his character nor his situation. Gaiety was the
leading distinction of the former, and presence of mind, not depression
of spirits, was required by the latter.

"We make the hour heavier," he said, "by being melancholy about it. Had
you not better join me, Mistress Alice, in Patrick Carey's jovial
farewell?--Ah, you do not know Pat Carey--a younger brother of Lord
Falkland's?"

"A brother of the immortal Lord Falkland's, and write songs!" said the
Doctor.

"Oh, Doctor, the Muses take tithe as well as the Church," said Charles,
"and have their share in every family of distinction. You do not know
the words, Mistress Alice, but you can aid me, notwithstanding, in the
burden at least--

  'Come, now that we're parting, and 'tis one to ten
  If the towers of sweet Woodstock I e'er see agen,
  Let us e'en have a frolic, and drink like tall men,
    While the goblet goes merrily round.'"

The song arose, but not with spirit. It was one of those efforts at
forced mirth, by which, above all other modes of expressing it, the
absence of real cheerfulness is most distinctly animated. Charles stopt
the song, and upbraided the choristers.

"You sing, my dear Mistress Alice, as if you were chanting one of the
seven penitential psalms; and you, good Doctor, as if you recited the
funeral service."

The Doctor rose hastily from the table, and turned to the window; for
the expression connected singularly with the task which he was that
evening to discharge. Charles looked at him with some surprise; for the
peril in which he lived, made him watchful of the slightest motions of
those around him--then turned to Sir Henry, and said, "My honoured host,
can you tell any reason for this moody fit, which has so strangely crept
upon us all?"

"Not I, my dear Louis," replied the knight; "I have no skill in these
nice quillets of philosophy. I could as soon undertake to tell you the
reason why Bevis turns round three times before he lies down. I can only
say for myself, that if age and sorrow and uncertainty be enough to
break a jovial spirit, or at least to bend it now and then, I have my
share of them all; so that I, for one, cannot say that I am sad merely
because I am not merry. I have but too good cause for sadness. I would I
saw my son, were it but for a minute."

Fortune seemed for once disposed to gratify the old man; for Albert Lee
entered at that moment. He was dressed in a riding suit, and appeared to
have travelled hard. He cast his eye hastily around as he entered. It
rested for a second on that of the disguised Prince, and, satisfied with
the glance which he received in lieu, he hastened, after the fashion of
the olden day, to kneel down to his father, and request his blessing.

"It is thine, my boy," said the old man; a tear springing to his eyes as
he laid his hand on the long locks, which distinguished the young
cavalier's rank and principles, and which, usually combed and curled
with some care, now hung wild and dishevelled about his shoulders. They
remained an instant in this posture, when the old man suddenly started
from it, as if ashamed of the emotion which he had expressed before so
many witnesses, and passing the back of his hand hastily across his
eyes, bid Albert get up and mind his supper, "since I dare say you have
ridden fast and far since you last baited--and we'll send round a cup to
his health, if Doctor Rochecliffe and the company pleases--Joceline,
thou knave, skink about--thou look'st as if thou hadst seen a ghost."

"Joceline," said Alice, "is sick for sympathy--one of the stags ran at
Phoebe Mayflower to-day, and she was fain to have Joceline's assistance
to drive the creature off--the girl has been in fits since she came
home."

"Silly slut," said the old knight--"She a woodman's daughter!--But,
Joceline, if the deer gets dangerous, you must send a broad arrow
through him."

"It will not need, Sir Henry," said Joceline, speaking with great
difficulty of utterance--"he is quiet enough now--he will not offend in
that sort again."

"See it be so," replied the knight; "remember Mistress Alice often walks
in the Chase. And now, fill round, and fill too, a cup to thyself to
overred thy fear, as mad Will has it. Tush, man, Phoebe will do well
enough--she only screamed and ran, that thou might'st have the pleasure
to help her. Mind what thou dost, and do not go spilling the wine after
that fashion.--Come, here is a health to our wanderer, who has come to
us again."

"None will pledge it more willingly than I," said the disguised Prince,
unconsciously assuming an importance which the character he personated
scarce warranted; but Sir Henry, who had become fond of the supposed
page, with all his peculiarities, imposed only a moderate rebuke upon
his petulance. "Thou art a merry, good-humoured youth, Louis," he said,
"but it is a world to see how the forwardness of the present generation
hath gone beyond the gravity and reverence which in my youth was so
regularly observed towards those of higher rank and station--I dared no
more have given my own tongue the rein, when there was a doctor of
divinity in company, than I would have dared to have spoken in church in
service time."

"True, sir," said Albert, hastily interfering; "but Master Kerneguy had
the better right to speak at present, that I have been absent on his
business as well as my own, have seen several of his friends, and bring
him important intelligence."

Charles was about to rise and beckon Albert aside, naturally impatient
to know what news he had procured, or what scheme of safe escape was now
decreed for him. But Dr. Rochecliffe twitched his cloak, as a hint to
him to sit still, and not show any extraordinary motive for anxiety,
since, in case of a sudden discovery of his real quality, the violence
of Sir Henry Lee's feelings might have been likely to attract too much
attention.

Charles, therefore, only replied, as to the knight's stricture, that he
had a particular title to be sudden and unceremonious in expressing his
thanks to Colonel Lee--that gratitude was apt to be unmannerly--finally,
that he was much obliged to Sir Henry for his admonition; and that quit
Woodstock when he would, "he was sure to leave it a better man than he
came there."

His speech was of course ostensibly directed towards the father; but a
glance at Alice assured her that she had her full share in the
compliment.

"I fear," he concluded, addressing Albert, "that you come to tell us our
stay here must be very short."

"A few hours only," said Albert--"just enough for needful rest for
ourselves and our horses. I have procured two which are good and tried.
But Doctor Rochecliffe broke faith with me. I expected to have met some
one down at Joceline's hut, where I left the horses; and finding no
person, I was delayed an hour in littering them down myself, that they
might be ready for to-morrow's work--for we must be off before day."

"I--I--intended to have sent Tomkins--but--but"--hesitated the Doctor,
"I"--

"The roundheaded rascal was drunk, or out of the way, I presume," said
Albert. "I am glad of it--you may easily trust him too far."

"Hitherto he has been faithful," said the Doctor, "and I scarce think he
will fail me now. But Joceline will go down and have the horses in
readiness in the morning."

Joceline's countenance was usually that of alacrity itself on a case
extraordinary. Now, however, he seemed to hesitate.

"You will go with me a little way, Doctor?" he said, as he edged himself
closely to Rochecliffe.

"How? puppy, fool, and blockhead," said the knight, "wouldst thou ask
Doctor Rochecliffe to bear thee company at this hour?--Out, hound!--get
down to the kennel yonder instantly, or I will break the knave's pate of
thee."

Joceline looked with an eye of agony at the divine, as if entreating him
to interfere in his behalf; but just as he was about to speak, a most
melancholy howling arose at the hall-door, and a dog was heard
scratching for admittance.

"What ails Bevis next?" said the old knight. "I think this must be
All-Fools-day, and that every thing around me is going mad!"

The same sound startled Albert and Charles from a private conference in
which they had engaged, and Albert ran to the hall-door to examine
personally into the cause of the noise.

"It is no alarm," said the old knight to Kerneguy, "for in such cases
the dog's bark is short, sharp, and furious. These long howls are said
to be ominous. It was even so that Bevis's grandsire bayed the whole
livelong night on which my poor father died. If it comes now as a
presage, God send it regard the old and useless, not the young, and
those who may yet serve King and country!"

The dog had pushed past Colonel Lee, who stood a little while at the
hall-door to listen if there were any thing stirring without, while
Bevis advanced into the room where the company were assembled, bearing
something in his mouth, and exhibiting, in an unusual degree, that sense
of duty and interest which a dog seems to show when he thinks he has the
charge of something important. He entered therefore, drooping his long
tail, slouching his head and ears, and walking with the stately yet
melancholy dignity of a war-horse at his master's funeral. In this
manner he paced through the room, went straight up to Joceline, who had
been regarding him with astonishment, and uttering a short and
melancholy howl, laid at his feet the object which he bore in his mouth.
Joceline stooped, and took from the floor a man's glove, of the fashion
worn by the troopers, having something like the old-fashioned gauntleted
projections of thick leather arising from the wrist, which go half way
up to the elbow, and secure the arm against a cut with a sword. But
Joceline had no sooner looked at what in itself was so common an object,
than he dropped it from his hand, staggered backward, uttered a groan,
and nearly fell to the ground.

"Now, the coward's curse be upon thee for an idiot!" said the knight,
who had picked up the glove, and was looking at it--"thou shouldst be
sent back to school, and flogged till the craven's blood was switched
out of thee--What dost thou look at but a glove, thou base poltroon, and
a very dirty glove, too? Stay, here is writing--Joseph Tomkins? Why,
that is the roundheaded fellow--I wish he hath not come to some
mischief, for this is not dirt on the cheveron, but blood. Bevis may
have bit the fellow, and yet the dog seemed to love him well too, or the
stag may have hurt him. Out, Joceline, instantly, and see where he
is--wind your bugle."

"I cannot go," said Joliffe, "unless"--and again he looked piteously at
Dr. Rochecliffe, who saw no time was to be lost in appeasing the
ranger's terrors, as his ministry was most needful in the present
circumstances.--"Get spade and mattock," he whispered to him, "and a
dark lantern, and meet me in the Wilderness."

Joceline left the room; and the Doctor, before following him, had a few
words of explanation with Colonel Lee. His own spirit, far from being
dismayed on the occasion, rather rose higher, like one whose natural
element was intrigue and danger. "Here hath been wild work," he said,
"since you parted. Tomkins was rude to the wench Phoebe--Joceline and he
had a brawl together, and Tomkins is lying dead in the thicket, not far
from Rosamond's Well. It will be necessary that Joceline and I go
directly to bury the body; for besides that some one might stumble upon
it, and raise an alarm, this fellow Joceline will never be fit for any
active purpose till it is under ground. Though as stout as a lion, the
under-keeper has his own weak side, and is more afraid of a dead body
than a living one. When do you propose to start to-morrow?"

"By daybreak, or earlier," said Colonel Lee; "but we will meet again. A
vessel is provided, and I have relays in more places than one--we go off
from the coast of Sussex; and I am to get a letter at ----, acquainting
me precisely with the spot."

"Wherefore not go off instantly?" said the Doctor.

"The horses would fail us," replied Albert; "they have been hard ridden
to-day."

"Adieu," said Rochecliffe, "I must to my task--Do you take rest and
repose for yours. To conceal a slaughtered body, and convey on the same
night a king from danger and captivity, are two feats which have fallen
to few folks save myself; but let me not, while putting on my harness,
boast myself as if I were taking it off after a victory." So saying he
left the apartment, and, muffling himself in his cloak, went out into
what was called the Wilderness.

The weather was a raw frost. The mists lay in partial wreaths upon the
lower grounds; but the night, considering that the heavenly bodies were
in a great measure hidden by the haze, was not extremely dark. Dr.
Rochecliffe could not, however, distinguish the under-keeper until he
had hemmed once or twice, when Joceline answered the signal by showing a
glimpse of light from the dark lantern which he carried. Guided by this
intimation of his presence, the divine found him leaning against a
buttress which had once supported a terrace, now ruinous. He had a
pickaxe and shovel, together with a deer's hide hanging over his
shoulder.

"What do you want with the hide, Joceline," said Dr. Rochecliffe, "that
you lumber it about with you on such an errand?"

"Why, look you, Doctor," he answered, "it is as well to tell you all
about it. The man and I--he there--you know whom I mean--had many years
since a quarrel about this deer. For though we were great friends, and
Philip was sometimes allowed by my master's permission to help me in
mine office, yet I knew, for all that, Philip Hazeldine was sometimes a
trespasser. The deer-stealers were very bold at that time, it being just
before the breaking out of the war, when men were becoming unsettled--
And so it chanced, that one day, in the Chase, I found two fellows, with
their faces blacked and shirts over their clothes, carrying as prime a
buck between them as any was in the park. I was upon them in the
instant--one escaped, but I got hold of the other fellow, and who should
it prove to be but trusty Phil Hazeldine! Well, I don't know whether it
was right or wrong, but he was my old friend and pot-companion, and I
took his word for amendment in future; and he helped me to hang up the
deer on a tree, and I came back with a horse to carry him to the Lodge,
and tell the knight the story, all but Phil's name. But the rogues had
been too clever for me; for they had flayed and dressed the deer, and
quartered him, and carried him off, and left the hide and horns, with a
chime, saying,--

  'The haunch to thee,
  The breast to me,
  The hide and the horns for the keeper's fee.'

And this I knew for one of Phil's mad pranks, that he would play in
those days with any lad in the country. But I was so nettled that I made
the deer's hide be curried and dressed by a tanner, and swore that it
should be his winding-sheet or mine; and though I had long repented my
rash oath, yet now, Doctor, you see what it is come to--though I forgot
it, the devil did not."

"It was a very wrong thing to make a vow so sinful," said Rochecliffe;
"but it would have been greatly worse had you endeavoured to keep it.
Therefore, I bid you cheer up," said the good divine; "for in this
unhappy case, I could not have wished, after what I have heard from
Phoebe and yourself, that you should have kept your hand still, though I
may regret that the blow has proved fatal. Nevertheless, thou hast done
even that which was done by the great and inspired legislator, when he
beheld an Egyptian tyrannizing over a Hebrew, saving that, in the case
present, it was a female, when, says the Septuagint, _Percussum Egyptium
abscondit sabulo_; the meaning whereof I will explain to you another
time. Wherefore, I exhort you not to grieve beyond measure; for although
this circumstance is unhappy in time and place, yet, from what Phoebe
hath informed me of yonder wretch's opinions, it is much to be regretted
that his brains had not been beaten out in his cradle, rather than that
he had grown up to be one of those Grindlestonians, or Muggletonians, in
whom is the perfection of every foul and blasphemous heresy, united with
such an universal practice of hypocritical assentation as would deceive
their master, even Satan himself."

"Nevertheless, sir," said the forester, "I hope you will bestow some of
the service of the Church on this poor man, as it was his last wish,
naming you, sir, at the same time; and unless this were done, I should
scarce dare to walk out in the dark again for my whole life."

"Thou art a silly fellow; but if," continued the Doctor, "he named me as
he departed, and desired the last rites of the Church, there was, it may
be, a turning from evil and a seeking to good even in his last moments;
and if Heaven granted him grace to form a prayer so fitting, wherefore
should man refuse it? All I fear is the briefness of time."

"Nay, your reverence may cut the service somewhat short," said Joceline;
"assuredly he does not deserve the whole of it; only if something were
not to be done, I believe I should flee the country. They were his last
words; and methinks he sent Bevis with his glove to put me in mind of
them."

"Out, fool! Do you think," said the Doctor, "dead men send gauntlets to
the living, like knights in a romance; or, if so, would they choose dogs
to carry their challenges? I tell thee, fool, the cause was natural
enough. Bevis, questing about, found the body, and brought the glove to
you to intimate where it was lying, and to require assistance; for such
is the high instinct of these animals towards one in peril."

"Nay, if you think so, Doctor," said Joceline--"and, doubtless, I must
say, Bevis took an interest in the man--if indeed it was not something
worse in the shape of Bevis, for methought his eyes looked wild and
fiery, as if he would have spoken."

As he talked thus, Joceline rather hung back, and, in doing so,
displeased the Doctor, who exclaimed, "Come along, thou lazy laggard!
Art thou a soldier, and a brave one, and so much afraid of a dead man?
Thou hast killed men in battle and in chase, I warrant thee."

"Ay, but their backs were to me," said Joceline. "I never saw one of
them cast back his head, and glare at me as yonder fellow did, his eye
retaining a glance of hatred, mixed with terror and reproach, till it
became fixed like a jelly. And were you not with me, and my master's
concerns, and something else, very deeply at stake, I promise you I
would not again look at him for all Woodstock."

"You must, though," said the Doctor, suddenly pausing, "for here is the
place where he lies. Come hither deep into the copse; take care of
stumbling--Here is a place just fitting, and we will draw the briars
over the grave afterwards."

As the Doctor thus issued his directions, he assisted also in the
execution of them; and while his attendant laboured to dig a shallow and
mishapen grave, a task which the state of the soil, perplexed with
roots, and hardened by the influence of the frost, rendered very
difficult, the divine read a few passages out of the funeral service,
partly in order to appease the superstitious terrors of Joceline, and
partly because he held it matter of conscience not to deny the Church's
rites to one who had requested their aid in extremity.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER THE THIRTY SECOND.


  Case ye, case ye,--on with your vizards.
             HENRY IV.

The company whom we had left in Victor Lee's parlour were about to
separate for the night, and had risen to take a formal leave of each
other, when a tap was heard at the hall-door. Albert, the vidette of the
party, hastened to open it, enjoining, as he left the room, the rest to
remain quiet, until he had ascertained the cause of the knocking. When
he gained the portal, he called to know who was there, and what they
wanted at so late an hour.

"It is only me," answered a treble voice.

"And what is your name, my little fellow?" said Albert.

"Spitfire, sir," replied the voice without.

"Spitfire?" said Albert.

"Yes, sir," replied the voice; "all the world calls me so, and Colonel
Everard himself. But my name is Spittal for all that."

"Colonel Everard? arrive you from him?" demanded young Lee.

"No, sir; I come, sir, from Roger Wildrake, esquire, of
Squattlesea-mere, if it like you," said the boy; "and I have brought a
token to Mistress Lee, which I am to give into her own hands, if you
would but open the door, sir, and let me in--but I can do nothing with a
three-inch board between us."

"It is some freak of that drunken rakehell," said Albert, in a low
voice, to his sister, who had crept out after him on tiptoe.

"Yet, let us not be hasty in concluding so," said the young lady; "at
this moment the least trifle may be of consequence.--What tokens has
Master Wildrake sent me, my little boy?"

"Nay, nothing very valuable neither," replied the boy; "but he was so
anxious you should get it, that he put me out of window as one would
chuck out a kitten, that I might not be stopped by the soldiers."

"Hear you?" said Alice to her brother; "undo the gate, for God's sake."
Her brother, to whom her feelings of suspicion were now sufficiently
communicated, opened the gate in haste, and admitted the boy, whose
appearance, not much dissimilar to that of a skinned rabbit in a livery,
or a monkey at a fair, would at another time have furnished them with
amusement. The urchin messenger entered the hall, making several odd
bows, and delivered the woodcock's feather with much ceremony to the
young lady, assuring her it was the prize she had won upon a wager about
