Thereupon he ordered all the men to lie down under shelter of the bushes
on the slopes facing the shore, and on no account to show themselves on
the higher ground. Then he sent a Walloon officer of the regiment to the
Pomeranian seneschal of the old castle of Rugenwalde which belonged to
Bogislaus IV, Duke of Pomerania, to inform him that a body of Scotch
troops in the service of the Swedish king had been cast on the coast,
and begging him to supply them with a few muskets, some dry powder, and
bullets, promising if he would do so that the Scotch would clear the
town of its Imperial garrison.

The castle itself, which was a very old feudal building, was held only
by the retainers of the duke, and the seneschal at once complied
with Munro's request, for the Duke of Pomerania, his master, although
nominally an ally of the Imperialists, had been deprived of all
authority by them, and the feelings of his subjects were entirely with
the Swedes.

Fifty old muskets, some ammunition, and some food were sent out by a
secret passage to the Scots. There was great satisfaction among the men
when these supplies arrived. The muskets which had been brought ashore
were cleaned up and loaded, and the feeling that they were no longer
in a position to fall helplessly into the hands of any foe who might
discover them restored the spirits of the troops, and fatigue and hunger
were forgotten as they looked forward to striking a blow at the enemy.

"What did the colonel mean by saying that our position was well nigh as
bad as that of the Sinclairs?" Malcolm asked Captain Hector Munro, who
with two or three other officers was sheltering under a thick clump of
bushes.

"That was a bad business," Captain Munro replied. "It happened now nigh
twenty years ago. Colonel Monkhoven, a Swedish officer, had enlisted
2300 men in Scotland for service with Gustavus, and sailed with them and
with a regiment 900 strong raised by Sinclair entirely of his own clan
and name. Sweden was at war with Denmark, and Stockholm was invested by
the Danish fleet when Monkhoven arrived with his ships. Finding that he
was unable to land, he sailed north, landed at Trondheim, and marching
over the Norwegian Alps reached Stockholm in safety, where the
appearance of his reinforcements discouraged the Danes and enabled
Gustavus to raise the siege.

"Unfortunately Colonel Sinclair's regiment had not kept with Monkhoven,
it being thought better that they should march by different routes so as
to distract the attention of the Norwegians, who were bitterly
hostile. The Sinclairs were attacked several times, but beat off their
assailants; when passing, however, through the tremendous gorge of
Kringellen, the peasantry of the whole surrounding country gathered in
the mountains. The road wound along on one side of the gorge. So steep
was the hill that the path was cut in solid rock which rose almost
precipitously on one side, while far below at their feet rushed a rapid
torrent. As the Sinclairs were marching along through this rocky gorge a
tremendous fire was opened upon them from the pine forests above, while
huge rocks and stones came bounding down the precipice.

"The Sinclairs strove in vain to climb the mountainside and get at their
foes. It was impossible, and they were simply slaughtered where they
stood, only one man of the whole regiment escaping to tell the story."

"That was a terrible massacre indeed," Malcolm said. "I have read of a
good many surprises and slaughters in our Scottish history, but never of
such complete destruction as that only one man out of 900 should escape.
And was the slaughter never avenged?"

"No," Munro replied. "We Scots would gladly march north and repay these
savage peasants for the massacre of our countrymen, but the King of
Sweden has had plenty of occupation for his Scotchmen in his own wars.
What with the Russians and the Poles and the Danes his hands have been
pretty full from that day to this, and indeed an expedition against the
Norsemen is one which would bring more fatigue and labour than profit.
The peasants would seek shelter in their forests and mountains, and
march as we would we should never see them, save when they fell upon us
with advantage in some defile."

At nightfall the troops were mustered, and, led by the men who had
brought the arms, they passed by the secret passage into the castle,
and thence sallied suddenly into the town below. There they fell upon a
patrol of Imperial cavalry, who were all shot down before they had
time to draw their swords. Then scattering through the town, the whole
squadron of cuirassiers who garrisoned it were either killed or taken
prisoners. This easy conquest achieved, the first care of Munro was to
feed his troops. These were then armed from the stores in the town, and
a strong guard being placed lest they should be attacked by the Austrian
force, which was, they learned, lying but seven miles away, on the other
side of the river, the troops lay down to snatch a few hours of needed
rest.

In the morning the country was scoured, and a few detached posts of the
Austrians captured. The main body then advanced and blew up the bridge
across the river. Five days later an order came from Oxenstiern, to
whom Munro had at once despatched the news of his capture of Rugenwalde,
ordering him to hold it to the last, the position being a very valuable
one, as opening an entrance into Pomerania.

The passage of the river was protected by entrenchments, strong redoubts
were thrown up round Rugenwalde, and parties crossing the river in boats
collected provisions and stores from the country to the very gates of
Dantzig. The Austrians rapidly closed in upon all sides, and for nine
weeks a constant series of skirmishes were maintained with them.

At the end of that time Sir John Hepburn arrived from Spruce, having
pushed forward by order of Oxenstiern by forced marches to their relief.
Loud and hearty was the cheering when the two Scotch regiments united,
and the friends, Munro and Hepburn, clasped hands. Not only had they
been at college together, but they had, after leaving St. Andrews,
travelled in companionship on the Continent for two or three years
before taking service, Munro entering that of France, while Hepburn
joined Sir Andrew Gray as a volunteer when he led a band to succour the
Prince Palatine at the commencement of the war.

"I have another old friend in my regiment, Hepburn," the colonel
said after the first greeting was over--"Nigel Graheme, of course you
remember him."

"Certainly I do," Hepburn exclaimed cordially, "and right glad will I
be to see him again; but I thought your regiment was entirely from the
north."

"It was originally," Munro said; "but I have filled up the gaps with men
from Nithsdale and the south. I was pressed for time, and our glens of
Farre and Strathnaver had already been cleared of all their best men.
The other companies are all commanded by men who were with us at St.
Andrews--Balfour, George Hamilton, and James Scott."

"That is well," Hepburn said. "Whether from the north or the south
Scots fight equally well; and with Gustavus 'tis like being in our own
country, so large a proportion are we of his majesty's army. And now,
Munro, I fear that I must supersede you in command, being senior to
you in the service, and having, moreover, his majesty's commission as
governor of the town and district."

"There is no one to whom I would more willingly resign the command. I
have seen some hard fighting, but have yet my name to win; while you,
though still only a colonel, are famous throughout Europe."

"Thanks to my men rather than to myself," Hepburn said, "though, indeed,
mine is no better than the other Scottish regiments in the king's
service; but we have had luck, and in war, you know, luck is
everything."

There were many officers in both regiments who were old friends and
acquaintances, and there was much feasting that night in the Scotch
camp. In the morning work began again. The peasants of the district,
8000 strong, were mustered and divided into companies, armed and
disciplined, and with these and the two Scotch regiments Hepburn
advanced through Pomerania to the gates of Colberg, fifty miles away,
clearing the country of the Austrians, who offered, indeed, but a faint
resistance.

The Lord of Kniphausen, a general in the Swedish service, now arrived
with some Swedish troops, and prepared to besiege the town. The rest
of Munro's regiment accompanied him, having arrived safely at their
destination, and the whole were ordered to aid in the investment
of Colberg, while Hepburn was to seize the town and castle of
Schiefelbrune, five miles distant, and there to check the advance of the
Imperialists, who were moving forward in strength towards it.

Hepburn performed his mission with a party of cavalry, and reported that
although the castle was dilapidated it was a place of strength, and that
it could be held by a resolute garrison; whereupon Munro with 500 men of
his regiment was ordered to occupy it. Nigel Graheme's company was one
of those which marched forward on the 6th of November, and entering
the town, which was almost deserted by its inhabitants, set to work to
prepare it for defence. Ramparts of earth and stockades were hastily
thrown up, and the gates were backed by piles of rubbish to prevent them
being blown in by petards.

Scarcely were the preparations completed before the enemy were seen
moving down the hillside.

"How many are there of them, think you?" Malcolm asked Lieutenant
Farquhar.

"I am not skilled in judging numbers, Malcolm, but I should say that
there must be fully five thousand."

There were indeed eight thousand Imperialists approaching, led by the
Count of Montecuculi, a distinguished Italian officer, who had with
him the regiments of Coloredo, Isslani, Goetz, Sparre, and Charles
Wallenstein, with a large force of mounted Croats.

Munro's orders were to hold the town as long as he could, and afterwards
to defend the castle to the last man. The Imperial general sent in a
message requesting him to treat for the surrender of the place; but
Munro replied simply, that as no allusion to the word treaty was
contained in his instructions he should defend the place to the last.
The first advance of the Imperialists was made by the cavalry covered by
1000 musketeers, but these were repulsed without much difficulty by the
Scottish fire.

The whole force then advanced to the attack with great resolution.
Desperately the Highlanders defended the town, again and again the
Imperialists were repulsed from the slight rampart, and when at last
they won their way into the place by dint of numbers, every street,
lane, alley, and house was defended to the last. Malcolm was almost
bewildered at the din, the incessant roll of musketry, the hoarse shouts
of the contending troops, the rattling of the guns, and the shrieks of
pain.

Every time the Imperialists tried to force their way in heavy columns
up the streets the Scots poured out from the houses to resist them, and
meeting them pike to pike hurled them backwards. Malcolm tried to keep
cool, and to imitate the behaviour of his senior officers, repeating
their orders, and seeing that they were carried out.

Time after time the Austrians attempted to carry the place, and were
always hurled back, although outnumbering the Scots by nigh twenty
to one. At last the town was in ruins, and was on fire in a score of
places. Its streets and lanes were heaped with dead, and it was no
longer tenable. Munro therefore gave orders that the houses should
everywhere be set on fire, and the troops fall back to the castle.

Steadily and in good order his commands were carried out, and with
levelled pikes, still facing the enemy, the troops retired into the
castle. The Imperial general, seeing how heavy had been his losses in
carrying the open town, shrank from the prospect of assaulting a castle
defended by such troops, and when night fell he quietly marched away
with the force under his command.



CHAPTER III SIR JOHN HEPBURN


Munro's first care, when he found that the Imperialists had retreated
in the direction of Colberg, was to send out some horsemen to discover
whether the Swedes were in a position to cover that town. The men
returned in two hours with the report that Field Marshal Horn, with the
Swedish troops from Stettin, had joined Kniphausen and Hepburn, and were
guarding the passage between the enemy and Colberg.

Two days later a message arrived to the effect that Sir Donald Mackay,
who had now been created Lord Reay, had arrived to take the command of
his regiment, and that Nigel Graheme's company was to march and join
him; while Munro with the rest of his command was to continue to hold
the Castle of Schiefelbrune.

Shortly afterwards General Bauditzen arrived with 4000 men and 18 pieces
of cannon to press the siege of Colberg, which was one of the strongest
fortresses in North Germany. On the 13th of November the news arrived
that Montecuculi was again advancing to raise the siege; and Lord Reay
with his half regiment, Hepburn with half his regiment, and a regiment
of Swedish infantry marched out to meet him, Kniphausen being in
command. They took up a position in a little village a few miles from
the town; and here, at four o'clock in the morning, they were attacked
by the Imperialists, 7000 strong. The Swedish infantry fled almost
without firing a shot, but the Scottish musketeers of Hepburn and Reay
stood their ground.

For a time a desperate conflict raged. In the darkness it was utterly
impossible to distinguish friend from foe, and numbers on both sides
were mown down by the volleys of their own party. In the streets and
gardens of the little village men fought desperately with pikes and
clubbed muskets. Unable to act in the darkness, and losing many men from
the storm of bullets which swept over the village, the Swedish cavalry
who had accompanied the column turned and fled; and being unable to
resist so vast a superiority of force, Kniphausen gave the word, and the
Scotch fell slowly back under cover of the heavy mist which rose with
the first breath of day, leaving 500 men, nearly half their force, dead
behind them.

Nigel Graheme's company had suffered severely; he himself was badly
wounded. A lieutenant and one of the ensigns were killed, with thirty of
the men, and many others were wounded with pike or bullet. Malcolm had
had his share of the fighting. Several times he and the men immediately
round him had been charged by the Imperialists, but their long pikes had
each time repulsed the assaults.

Malcolm had before this come to the conclusion, from the anecdotes he
heard from the officers who had served through several campaigns, that
the first quality of an officer is coolness, and that this is even more
valuable than is reckless bravery. He had therefore set before himself
that his first duty in action was to be perfectly calm, to speak without
hurry or excitement in a quiet and natural tone.

In his first fight at Schiefelbrune he had endeavoured to carry this
out, but although he gained much commendation from Nigel and the other
officers of the company for his coolness on that occasion, he had by no
means satisfied himself; but upon the present occasion he succeeded
much better in keeping his natural feelings in check, forcing himself to
speak in a quiet and deliberate way without flurry or excitement, and in
a tone of voice in no way raised above the ordinary. The effect had been
excellent, and the soldiers, in talking over the affair next day, were
loud in their praise of the conduct of the young ensign.

"The lad was as cool as an old soldier," one of the sergeants said, "and
cooler. Just as the Austrian column was coming on for the third time,
shouting, and cheering, and sending their bullets in a hail, he said to
me as quietly as if he was giving an order about his dinner, 'I think,
Donald, it would be as well to keep the men out of fire until the last
moment. Some one might get hurt, you see, before the enemy get close
enough to use the pikes.' And then when they came close he said, 'Now,
sergeant, I think it is time to move out and stop them.' When they came
upon us he was fighting with his half pike with the best of us. And when
the Austrians fell back and began to fire again, and we took shelter
behind the houses, he walked about on the road, stooping down over those
who had fallen, to see if all were killed, and finding two were alive he
called out, 'Will one of you just come and help me carry these men under
shelter? They may get hit again if they remain here.' I went out to him,
but I can tell you I didn't like it, for the bullets were coming along
the road in a shower. His helmet was knocked off by one, and one of the
men we were carrying in was struck by two more bullets and killed, and
the lad seemed to mind it no more than if it had been a rainstorm in the
hills at home. I thought when we left Nithsdale that the captain was in
the wrong to make so young a boy an officer, but I don't think so now.
Munro himself could not have been cooler. If he lives he will make a
great soldier."

The defence of the Scots had been so stubborn that Montecuculi abandoned
his attempt to relieve Colberg that day, and so vigilant was the watch
which the besiegers kept that he was obliged at last to draw off his
troops and leave Colberg to its fate. The place held out to the 26th of
February, when the garrison surrendered and were allowed to march out
with the honours of war, with pikes carried, colours flying, drums
beating, matches lighted, with their baggage, and with two pieces of
cannon loaded and ready for action. They were saluted by the army as
they marched away to the nearest town held by the Austrians, and as they
passed by Schiefelbrune Munro's command were drawn up and presented
arms to the 1500 men who had for three months resisted every attempt to
capture Colberg by assault.

Nigel Graheme's wound was so severe that he was obliged for a time to
relinquish the command of his company, which he handed over to Herries.

As there had been two vacancies among the officers Malcolm would
naturally have been promoted to the duties of lieutenant, but at his
urgent request his uncle chose for the purpose a young gentleman of good
family who had fought in the ranks, and had much distinguished himself
in both the contests. Two others were also promoted to fill up the
vacancies as ensigns.

The troops after the capture of Colberg marched to Stettin, around which
town they encamped for a time, while Gustavus completed his preparations
for his march into Germany. While a portion of his army had been
besieging Colberg, Gustavus had been driving the Imperialists out of the
whole of Pomerania. Landing on the 24th of June with an army in all of
15,000 infantry, 2000 cavalry, and about 3000 artillery, he had, after
despatching troops to aid Munro and besiege Colberg, marched against the
Imperialists under Conti. These, however, retreated in great disorder
and with much loss of men, guns, and baggage, into Brandenburg; and in
a few weeks after the Swedish landing only Colberg, Greifswald, and
Demming held out. In January Gustavus concluded a treaty with France,
who agreed to pay him an annual subsidy of 400,000 thalers on the
condition that Gustavus maintained in the field an army of 30,000
infantry and 6000 cavalry, and assured to the princes and peoples whose
territory he might occupy the free exercise of their religion. England
also promised a subsidy, and the Marquis of Hamilton was to bring over
6000 infantry; but as the king did not wish openly to take part in
the war this force was not to appear as an English contingent. Another
regiment of Highlanders was brought over by Colonel John Munro of
Obstell, and also a regiment recruited in the Lowlands by Colonel Sir
James Lumsden.

Many other parties of Scotch were brought over by gentlemen of rank.
Four chosen Scottish regiments, Hepburn's regiment, Lord Reay's
regiment, Sir James Lumsden's musketeers, and Stargate's corps, were
formed into one brigade under the command of Hepburn. It was called the
Green Brigade, and the doublets, scarfs, feathers, and standards were
of that colour. The rest of the infantry were divided into the Yellow,
Blue, and White Brigades.

One evening when the officers of Reay's regiment were sitting round the
campfire Lieutenant Farquhar said to Colonel Munro:

"How is it that Sir John Hepburn has, although still so young, risen to
such high honour in the counsel of the king; how did he first make his
way?"

"He first entered the force raised by Sir Andrew Gray, who crossed from
Leith to Holland, and then uniting with a body of English troops under
Sir Horace Vere marched to join the troops of the Elector Palatine. It
