
"I cannot exactly say," replied Blaize, "but he seemed to go straight
into the fields."

"He is no doubt gone to the plague-pit," replied the other. "You are now
at liberty," he added to Blaize, "and I counsel you to make the best of
your way home. Say nothing to your master of what has occurred. The city
walls lie in that direction."

Overjoyed to be released, Blaize ran off as fast as his legs could carry
him, and never stopped till he reached Moorgate. Meanwhile, Leonard had
reached the place of meeting. As he stood by the rail surrounding the
plague-pit, he thought of Mr. Bloundel's singular dream, and almost
hoping to be similarly favoured, flung himself on his knees, and
besought Amabel, if it were possible, to appear to him. But his
entreaties produced no result. The chill blast whistled past him, and,
mindful of what had been told him, he was fain to interpret this into an
answer to his request. The night was bitterly cold, and Leonard, whose
limbs were almost stiffened by long kneeling, walked round and round the
enclosure at a quick pace to put his blood into circulation. As the hour
of midnight was tolled forth by the neighbouring churches, he heard
footsteps, and could just detect a figure advancing towards him.

"Are you there?" was asked in the voice of Thirlby. Leonard replied in
the affirmative, and the other instantly joined him.

"Have you mentioned our meeting to any one?" inquired Leonard. "I ask,
because I was warned by the Earl of Rochester not to attend it."

"Strange!" exclaimed Thirlby, musingly. "However, do not let us waste
time. I am about to leave London, perhaps this country--for ever. But I
could not depart without an interview with you. You are aware of my
strong attachment to my poor lost child. My daughter Isabella now
supplies her place in my heart. She is the only being I love on earth,
for my son has alienated himself from my affections. All I desire is to
see her happy. This, I find, can only be accomplished in one way."

Here he paused for a moment, but as Leonard made no remark, he
proceeded. "Why should I hesitate to declare it," he said, "since it was
for that object I brought you hither? She loves you--devotedly loves
you--and if her wishes were opposed, I should tremble for the
consequences. Now listen to me. Situated as you are, you never can wed
her. I will, however, point out a means by which you can raise yourself
to distinction in a short time, and so entitle yourself to claim her
hand. I will supply you with money--more than you can require--will
place you at court--near the king's person--and if you act under my
direction, your rise is certain. I have extorted a promise to this
effect from my own son. I told him my object, and that if he did not
make your fortune, I could ruin him by revealing myself. I may, perhaps,
pay the penalty of my crime on the scaffold; but I may also escape. In
the latter case, my reappearance would be fatal to him. He has consented
to cooperate with me, to watch over your fortunes, and, as soon as you
have attained sufficient eminence, to bestow his sister upon you. Now do
you understand?"

"I do," replied Leonard; "and I understand also against whom the Earl of
Rochester warned me."

"And you consent," demanded Thirlby.

Leonard, was about to answer, when he felt a light and trembling hand
placed upon his own. "Do not answer inconsiderately, Leonard," said a
low, sweet voice, which he recognised as that of the Lady Isabella; "I
am here to receive your determination."

"I am glad of it," replied the apprentice. "The deep devotion you have
displayed towards me deserves to be requited. I will strive to render
myself worthy of you, and I feel that by so doing I shall best fulfil
the injunctions of her who lies beside us. Henceforth, Lady Isabella, I
wholly devote myself to you."

A murmur of delight escaped her. "My blessings on you both!" exclaimed
her father. "Give me your hand, Isabella," he added, taking it and
placing it in that of the apprentice. "Here, beside the grave of her
whom you both loved, I affiance you. Pursue the course I point out to
you, Leonard, and she will soon be yours."

As he spoke, the light of a lantern was suddenly thrown upon them,
disclosing two persons who had noiselessly approached. They were Lord
Argentine and Pillichody. "You affirm more than you have warrant for, my
lord," said the former. "I will never consent to this ill-assorted and
dishonourable union; and, so far from permitting it, will oppose it to
the utmost of my power. If this presumptuous apprentice dares to raise
his views towards my sister, let him look to himself. Your safety lies
in instant flight. The officers are in search of you."

"They shall find me," replied Thirlby, sternly.

"As you please," rejoined Argentine. "Come with me, Isabella," he added
to his sister. But she flew with a cry towards Leonard.

"Ah!" exclaimed her brother, drawing his sword. "Do you dare to detain,
her? Deliver her to me, villain, instantly!"

"Not when thus menaced, my lord," rejoined Leonard, likewise drawing his
sword, and standing upon the defensive.

"Then look to yourself," replied Argentine, assaulting him.

Isabella uttered a wild shriek, and Thirlby tried to rush between them.
But before they could be separated, Lord Argentine's fury had exposed
him to his adversary, whose sword passed through his body. He fell to
the ground, weltering in his blood. While Leonard stood stupefied and
confounded at what had occurred, and Isabella, uttering a loud cry,
threw herself upon the body and tried to stanch the wound--two men, with
halberds in their hands rushed forward, and seizing Thirlby, cried, "We
arrest you as a murderer!"

Thirlby, who seemed utterly overcome by surprise and horror, offered no
Resistance. At this juncture Leonard felt his arm seized by a
bystander--he did not know whom--and scarcely conscious of what was
taking place, suffered himself to be dragged from the scene.




BOOK THE SIXTH.

SEPTEMBER, 1666.


I.

THE FIRE-HALL.

About nine o'clock on the night of Saturday, the second of September,
1666--and rather more than nine months after the incidents last
related,--three men took their way from Smithfield to Islington. They
proceeded at a swift pace and in silence, until, having mounted the
steep hill on which the suburb in question is situated, they halted at a
short distance from the high walls surrounding the great water-works
formed by the New-River-head. The night was dark, but free from cloud,
in consequence of a strong easterly wind which prevailed at the time.

"It is dark in London now," observed one of the three persons to his
companions as he cast his eye in the direction of the great city, that
lay buried in gloom beneath them; "but there will be light enough soon."

"A second dawn, and brighter than the first, shall arise upon it,"
replied one of his companions, a tall, gaunt man, whose sole covering
was a sheepskin, girded round his loins. "Such a flame shall be kindled
within it, as hath not been seen since showers of brimstone and fire
descended upon the sinful cities of the plain. 'The Lord shall come with
flames of fire,'" he added, pointing his long staff towards the city.
"'He shall make them like a fiery oven, in the time of his wrath. They
shall be utterly consumed.'"

"Amen!" exclaimed the third person, who stood near him, in a deep voice,
and with something of a foreign accent.

"Not so loud, friends," rejoined the first speaker. "Let us set about
the task. I will ascertain that no one is on the watch."

With this he moved towards the water-works, and skirting the circular
walls, to satisfy himself that all was secure, he returned to his
companions, and they proceeded to the principal entrance to the place.
Noiselessly unlocking the gates, the leader of the party admitted the
others into an open space of some extent, in the midst of which was a
large reservoir of water. He then gave each of them a small key, and
bidding them use despatch, they began to turn the cocks of the leaden
pipes connected with the reservoir, while he hastened to the further end
of the inclosure, and employed himself in a similar manner. In this way,
and in less than a quarter of an hour, the whole of the cocks were
stopped.

"And now give me the keys," said the leader.

Taking them as they were offered, he added his own to the number, and
flung them as far as he could into the reservoir, laughing slightly as
the noise of the splash occasioned by their fall into the water reached
the ears.

"They will not be found till this pool is drained," he observed to his
companions. "And now let us go. Our business here is done."

"Stay yet a moment," cried Solomon Eagle, who was standing at the brink
of the reservoir, with his eyes fixed upon it. "Stay!" he cried,
arresting him. "A vision rises before me. I see in this watery mirror a
representation of the burning city. And what are those fearful forms
that feed the flames? Fiends, in our likeness--fiends! And see how wide
and far the conflagration spreads. The whole city is swallowed up by an
earthquake. It sinks to the bottomless pit--down--down!"

"No more of this," cried the leader, impatiently. "Come along." And,
followed by the others, he rushed to the gates, and locking them after
him, flung the key away.

"A hundred pounds were paid to the servant of the chief officer of the
works to bring those keys to me," he said, "and he executed his
commission faithfully and well. Water will be vainly sought for to
quench the conflagration."

"I like not the vision I have just beheld," said Solomon Eagle, in a
troubled tone. "It seems to portend mischief."

"Think of it no more," rejoined the leader, "or regard it as it was--a
phantom created by your overheated imagination. Yon city has sinned so
deeply, that it is the will of Heaven it should be destroyed; and it has
been put into our hearts by the Supreme Power to undertake the terrible
task. We are the chosen instruments of the divine displeasure.
Everything favours the design--the long-continued dry weather--the
strong easterly wind, which will bear the flames into the heart of the
city--the want of water, occasioned by the stopping of these pipes, the
emptying of the various aqueducts, and the destruction of the Thames
water-tower, which we have accomplished. Everything favours it, I say,
and proves that the hand of Heaven directs us. Yes, London shall fall!
We have received our commission from on high, and must execute it,
regardless of the consequences. For my own part, I feel as little
compunction to the task, as the thunderbolt launched from on high does
for the tree it shivers."

"Philip Grant has uttered my sentiments exactly," said the man who, it
has been mentioned, spoke with a slight foreign accent. "I have neither
misgiving nor compunction. You appear to have forgotten your own
denunciations, brother."

"Not so, Brother Hubert," rejoined the enthusiast, "and I now recognise
in the vision a delusion of the Evil One to turn me from my holy
purpose. But it has failed. The impious and impenitent city is doomed,
and nothing can save it. And yet I would fain see it once more as I
beheld it this morn when day arose upon it for the last time, from the
summit of Saint Paul's. It looked so beautiful that my heart smote me,
and tears started to my eyes, to think that those goodly habitations,
those towers, temples, halls, and palaces, should so soon be levelled
with the dust."

"Hear what the prophet saith," rejoined Hubert. "'Thou hast defiled thy
sanctuaries by the multitude of thine iniquities, by the iniquity of thy
traffic. Therefore will I bring forth a fire from the midst of thee, and
will bring thee to ashes upon the earth, in the sight of all those that
behold thee.'"

Solomon Eagle flung himself upon his knees, and his example was imitated
by the others. Having recited a prayer in a low deep tone, he arose, and
stretching out his arms, solemnly denounced the city. As he pronounced
the words, a red and fiery star shot from the dark vault of the sky, and
seemed to fall in the midst of the city.

"Did you not see that sign?" cried Grant, eagerly. "It heralds us to our
task."

So saying, he ran swiftly down the hill, and, followed by the others,
did not slacken his pace till they reached the city. They then shaped
their course more slowly towards Saint Paul's, and having gained the
precincts of the cathedral, Solomon Eagle, who now assumed the place of
leader, conducted them to a small door on the left of the great northern
entrance, and unlocking it, ushered them into a narrow passage behind
the rich carved work of the choir. Traversing it, they crossed the mid
aisle, and soon reached the steps leading to Saint Faith's. It was
profoundly dark, but they were all well acquainted with the road, and
did not miss their footing. It required, however, some caution to thread
the ranks of the mighty pillars filling the subterranean church. But at
last this was accomplished, and they entered the vault beyond the
charnel, where they found Chowles and Judith Malmayns. The former was
wrapped in a long black cloak, and was pacing to and fro within the
narrow chamber. When Solomon Eagle appeared, he sprang towards him, and
regarding him inquiringly, cried, "Have you done it?--have you done it?"

The enthusiast replied in the affirmative. "Heaven be praised!"
exclaimed Chowles. And he skipped about with the wildest expressions of
delight. A gleam of satisfaction, too, darted from Judith's savage eyes.
She had neither risen nor altered her position on the arrival of the
party, but she now got up, and addressed the enthusiast. A small iron
lamp, suspended by a chain from the vaulted roof, lighted the chamber.
The most noticeable figure amidst the group was that of Solomon Eagle,
who, with his blazing eyes, long jet-black locks, giant frame, and tawny
skin, looked like a supernatural being. Near him stood the person
designated as Robert Hubert. He was a young man, and appeared to have
lived a life of great austerity. His features were thin; his large black
eyes set in deep caverns; his limbs seemed almost destitute of flesh;
and his looks wild and uncertain, like those of an insane person. His
tattered and threadbare garb resembled that of a French ecclesiastic.
The third person, who went by the name of Philip Grant, had a powerful
frame, though somewhat bent, and a haughty deportment and look, greatly
at variance with his miserable attire and haggard looks. His beard was
long and grizzled, and his features, though sharpened by care, retained
some traces of a noble expression. A few minutes having passed in
conversation, Grant observed to the enthusiast, "I must now leave you
for a short time. Give me the key that I may let myself out."

"You are not going to betray us?" cried Chowles, suspiciously.

"Why should I betray you?" rejoined Grant, sternly. "I am too anxious
for the event to disclose it."

"True, true," replied Chowles.

"_I_ do not mistrust you, brother," observed Solomon Eagle, giving him
the key.

"I know whither you are going," observed Judith Malmayns. "You are about
to warn Mr. Bloundel and his partner--apprentice no longer--Leonard
Holt, of the approaching conflagration. But your care will be thrown
away."

"Does she speak the truth, brother?" demanded Hubert, raising his eyes
from the Bible which he was reading in the corner of the vault.

"I will do nothing to endanger the design," rejoined Grant; "of that
rest assured."

With this, he strode forth, traversed Saint Faith's, and,
notwithstanding the gloom, reached, without difficulty, the little door
by which he had entered the cathedral. Issuing from it, he took the way,
as Judith had surmised, to Wood-street, and pausing before the grocer's
door, knocked against it. The summons was presently answered by Blaize;
and to Grant's inquiries whether his master was within, he replied,
"Which of my masters did you mean? I have two."

"The younger," replied Grant, "Leonard Holt."

"So far you are fortunate," rejoined Blaize. "Mr. Bloundel has retired
to rest, but Mr. Holt is still downstairs. Pray what may be your
business with him at this hour? It should be important."

"It is important," rejoined Grant, "and does not admit of a moment's
delay. Tell him so."

Eyeing the stranger with a look of suspicion, the porter was about to
enter into a parley with him, when Leonard himself cut it short, and
learning the nature of the application, desired Grant to follow him into
the adjoining room. The nine months which had passed over Leonard's head
since he was last brought under notice, had wrought a material change in
his appearance. He had a grave and thoughtful air, somewhat inclining to
melancholy, but in other respects he was greatly improved. His health
was completely restored, and the thoughtful expression added character
to his handsome physiognomy, and harmonised well with his manly and
determined bearing. He was habited plainly, but with some degree of
taste. As Judith Malmayns had intimated, he was now Mr. Bloundel's
partner, and his whole appearance denoted his improved circumstances.
The alteration did not escape the notice of the stranger, who regarded
him with much curiosity, and closed the door behind him as he entered
the room.

"You are looking much better than when we last met, Leonard Holt," he
said, in tones that made his hearer start, "and I am glad to perceive
it. Prosperity seems to attend your path, and you deserve it; whereas
misery and every other ill--and I deserve them--dog mine."

"I did not recognise you at first, Mr. Thirlby," replied Leonard; "for,
in truth, you are much changed. But you desire to speak with me on a
matter of importance. Can I aid you? You may need money. Here is my
purse."

"I do not want it," replied the other, scornfully rejecting the offer.
"I have a proposal to make to you."

"I shall be glad to hear it," replied Leonard. "But first tell me how
you effected your escape after your arrest on that disastrous night
when, in self-defence, and unintentionally, I wounded your son, Lord
Argentine?"

"Would you had killed him!" cried the other, fiercely. "I have lost all
feelings of a father for him. He it was who contrived my arrest, and he
would have gladly seen me borne to the scaffold, certain it would have
freed him from me for ever. I was hurried away by the officers from the
scene of strife, and conveyed to the Tun at Cornhill, which you know has
been converted into a round-house, and where I was locked up for the
night. But while I was lying on the floor of my prison, driven well-nigh
frantic by what had occurred, there were two persons without labouring
to effect my deliverance--nor did they labour in vain. These were
Chowles and Judith, my foster-sister, and whom, you may remember, I
suspected--and most unfairly--of intending my betrayal. By means of a
heavy bribe, they prevailed on one of the officers to connive at my
escape. An iron bar was removed from the window of my prison, and I got
through the aperture. Judith concealed me for some days in the vaults of
Saint Faith's, after which I fled into the country, where I wandered
about for several months, under the name of Philip Grant. Having learnt
that my son though severely hurt by you, had recovered from his wound,
and that his sister, the Lady Isabella, had accompanied him to his seat
in Staffordshire, I proceeded thither, and saw her, unknown to him. I
found her heart still true to you. She told me you had disappeared
immediately after the termination of the conflict, and had not been
heard of till her brother was out of danger, when you returned to
Wood-street."

"The information was correct," replied Leonard. "I was dragged away by a
person whom I did not recognise at the time, but who proved to be the
Earl of Rochester. He conducted me to a place of safety, thrust a purse
into my hand, and left me. As soon as I could do so with safety, I
returned to my master's house. But how long have you been in London?"

"Nearly a month," replied Grant. "And now let me ask you one question.
Do you ever think of Isabella?"

"Often, very often," replied Leonard. "But as I dare not indulge the
hope of a union with her, I have striven to banish her image from my
mind."

"She cannot forget _you_, Leonard," rejoined Grant. "And now to my
proposal. I have another plan for your aggrandisement that cannot fail.
I am in possession of a monstrous design, the revelation of which will
procure you whatever you desire. Ask a title from the king, and he will
give it; and when in possession of that title, demand the hand of the
Lady Isabella, and her proud brother will not refuse you. Call in your
porter--seize me. I will offer a feigned resistance. Convey me before
the king. Make your own terms with him. He will accede to them. Will you
do it?"

"No," replied Leonard, "I will not purchase the daughter at the price of
the father's life."

"Heed me not," replied Grant, supplicatingly, "I am wholly indifferent
to life. And what matters it whether I am dragged to the scaffold for
one crime or another?"

"You plead in vain," returned Leonard, firmly.

"Reflect," cried Grant, in an agonised tone. "A word from you will not
only win you Isabella, but save the city from destruction."

"Save the city!" exclaimed Leonard. "What mean you?"

"Swear to comply with my request, and you shall know. But not
otherwise," replied Grant.

"I cannot--I cannot," rejoined Leonard; "and unfortunately you have said
too much for your own safety. I must, though most reluctantly, detain
you."

"Hear me, Leonard, and consider well what you do," cried Grant, planting
himself before the door. "I love you next to my daughter, and chiefly
because she loves you. I have told you I have a design to discover, to
which I am a party--a hellish, horrible design--which threatens this
whole city with destruction. It is your duty, having told you thus much,
to arrest me, and I will offer no resistance. Will you not turn this to
your advantage? Will you not make a bargain with the king?"

"I have said I will not," rejoined Leonard.

"Then be warned by me," rejoined Grant. "Arouse your partner. Pack up
all your goods and make preparations for instant flight, for the danger
will invade you before you are aware of it."

"Is it fire?" demanded Leonard, upon whose mind the denunciations of
Solomon Eagle now rushed.

"You will see," replied Grant, with a terrible laugh. "You will repent
your determination when it is too late. Farewell."

"Hold!" cried Leonard, advancing towards him, and trying to lay hands
upon him, "I arrest you in the king's name."

"Off!" exclaimed Grant, dashing him forcibly backwards. And striking
down Blaize, who tried to stop him in the passage, he threw open the
street-door, and disappeared. Fearful of pursuit, Grant took a
circuitous route to Saint Paul's, and it was full half an hour after the
interview above related before he reached the cathedral. Just as he
passed through the small door, the clock tolled forth the hour of
midnight, and when he gained the mid aisle, he heard footsteps
approaching, and encountered his friends.

"We had given you up," said Chowles, "and fearing you intended us some
treachery, were about to do the job without you."

"I have been unavoidably detained," replied Grant. "Let us about it at
once."

"I have got the fire-balls with me," observed Hubert.

"It is well," returned Grant.

Quitting the cathedral, they proceeded to Thames-street, and tracking it
to Fish-street-hill, struck off on the right into an alley that brought
them to Pudding-lane.

"This is the house," said Chowles, halting before a two-storied wooden
habitation, over the door of which was suspended the sign of the "Wheat
Sheaf, with the name THOMAS FARRYNER, BAKER, inscribed beneath it.

"And here," said Hubert, "shall begin the great fire of London."

As he said this, he gave a fire-ball to Solomon Eagle, who lighted the
fuze at Chowles's lantern. The enthusiast then approached a window of
the baker's shop, and breaking a small pane of glass within it, threw
the fire-ball into the room. It alighted upon a heap of chips and fagots
lying near a large stack of wood used for the oven, and in a few minutes
the whole pile had caught and burst into a flame, which, quickly
mounting to the ceiling, set fire to the old, dry, half-decayed timber
that composed it.


II.

THE FIRST NIGHT OF THE FIRE.

Having seen the stack of wood kindled, and the flames attack the
building in such a manner as to leave no doubt they would destroy it,
the incendiaries separated, previously agreeing to meet together in half
an hour at the foot of London Bridge; and while the others started off
in different directions, Chowles and Judith retreated to a neighbouring
alley commanding a view of the burning habitation.

"At last the great design is executed," observed Chowles, rubbing his
hands gleefully. "The fire burns right merrily, and will not soon be
extinguished. Who would have thought we should have found such famous
assistants as the two madmen, Solomon Eagle and Robert Hubert--and your
scarcely less mad foster-brother, Philip Grant? I can understand the
motives that influenced the two first to the deed, but not those of the
other."

"Nor I," replied Judith, "unless he wishes in some way or other to
benefit Leonard Holt by it. For my part, I shall enjoy this fire quite
as much on its own account as for the plunder it will bring us. I should
like to see every house in this great city destroyed."

"You are in a fair way of obtaining your wish," replied Chowles; "but
provided I have the sacking of them, I don't care how many are saved.
Not but that such a fire will be a grand sight, which I should be sorry
to miss. You forget, too, that if Saint Paul's should be burnt down, we
shall lose our hoards. However, there's no chance of that."

"Not much," replied Judith, interrupting him. "But see! the baker has at
last discovered that his dwelling is on fire. He bursts open the window,
and, as I live, is about to throw himself out of it."

As she spoke, one of the upper windows in the burning habitation was
burst open, and a poor terrified wretch appeared at it in his
night-dress, vociferating in tones of the wildest alarm, "Fire!
fire!--help! help!"

"Shall we go forward?" said Chowles. Judith hesitated for a moment, and
then assenting, they hurried towards the spot.

"Can we give you any help, friend?" cried Chowles.

"Take care of this," rejoined the baker, flinging a bag of money to the
ground, "and I will endeavour to let down my wife and children. The
staircase is on fire, and we are almost stifled with smoke. God help
us!" And the exclamation was followed by fearful shrieks from within,
followed by the appearance of a woman, holding two little children in
her arms, at the window.

"This must be money," said Judith, utterly heedless of the fearful scene
occurring above, and taking up the bag and chinking it; "silver, by the
sound. Shall we make off with it?"

"No, no," replied Chowles, "we must not run any risk for such a paltry
booty. Let us bide our time."

At this juncture, the baker, who had disappeared for a few seconds from
the window, again presented himself at it, and, with some difficulty,
forced a feather bed through it, which was instantly placed by Chowles
in such a position beneath, as to break the fall of the descending
parties. Tying a couple of sheets together, and fastening one end round
his wife's waist, the baker lowered her and the children to the ground.
They alighted in safety; but just as he was about to follow their
example, the floor of the room gave way, and though he succeeded in
springing through the window, he missed the feather bed, and broke his
leg in the fall. He was picked up by Chowles and Judith, and placed upon
the bed in a state of insensibility, and was soon afterwards conveyed
with his family to the house of a neighbour.

Meanwhile, the fire had spread to the houses on either side of the
unfortunate man's habitation, and both of them being built entirely of
wood, they were almost instantly in flames. The alarm too had become
general; the inhabitants of the adjoining houses were filled with
indescribable terror, and the narrow street was speedily crowded with
persons of both sexes, who had rushed from their beds to ascertain the
extent of the danger. All was terror and confusion. The fire-bells of
Saint Margaret's, Saint George's, and Saint Andrew's, in Botolph-lane,
began to toll, and shouts were heard on every side, proving that the
whole neighbourhood was roused.

To add to the general distress, a report was raised that a house in
Fish-street-hill was on fire, and it was soon found to be true, as an
immense volume of flames burst forth in that quarter. While the rest of
the spectators, distracted by this calamity, and hardly knowing what to
do, hurried in the direction of the new fire, Chowles and Judith eyed
each other askance, and the former whispered to his companion, "This is
another piece of Hubert's handiwork."

The two wretches now thought it time to bestir themselves. So much
confusion prevailed, that they were wholly unobserved, and under the
plea of rendering assistance, they entered houses and carried off
whatever excited their cupidity, or was sufficiently portable. No
wealthy house had been attacked as yet, and therefore their spoil was
but trifling. The poor baker seemed to be the bearer of ill-luck, for he
had not been many minutes in his new asylum before it likewise caught
fire. Another house, too, in Fish-street-hill, and lower down than the
first, was observed to be burning, and as this was out of the current of
the wind, and consequently could not have been occasioned by the showers
of sparks that marked its course, a cry was instantly raised that
incendiaries were abroad, and several suspicious-looking persons were
seized in consequence.

Meantime no efforts had been made to stop the progress of the original
conflagration in Pudding-lane, which continued to rage with the greatest
fury, spreading from house to house with astonishing rapidity. All the
buildings in this neighbourhood being old, and of wood, which was as dry
as tinder, a spark alighting upon them would have sufficed to set them
on fire. It may be conceived, therefore, what must have been the effect
of a vast volume of flame, fanned by a powerful wind. House after house
caught, as if constructed of touchwood, and the fire roared and raged to
such a degree, that those who stood by were too much terrified to render
any effectual assistance. Indeed, the sole thought that now seemed to
influence all was the preservation of a portion of their property. No
one regarded his neighbour, or the safety of the city. The narrow street
was instantly filled with goods and furniture of all kinds, thrown out
of the windows or pushed out of the doors; but such was the fierceness
of the fire, and the extraordinary rapidity with which it advanced, that
the very articles attempted to be saved were seized by it, and thus
formed a means of conveying it to the opposite houses.

In this way a number of persons were inclosed for a short time between
two fires, and seemed in imminent danger of being burned to death. The
perilous nature of their situation was, moreover, increased by a sudden
and violent gust of wind, which, blowing the flames right across the
street, seemed to envelop all within them. The shrieks that burst from
the poor creatures thus involved were most appalling. Fortunately, they
sustained no greater damage than was occasioned by the fright and a
slight scorching, for the next moment the wind shifted, and, sweeping
back the flames, they were enabled to effect their retreat. Chowles and
Judith were among the sufferers, and in the alarm of the moment lost all
the booty they had obtained.

Soon after this the whole street was on fire. All idea of preserving
their property was therefore abandoned by the inhabitants, and they
thought only of saving themselves. Hundreds of half-naked persons of
both sexes rushed towards Thames-street in search of a place of refuge.
The scene was wholly without parallel for terror. Many fires had
occurred in London, but none that raged with such fierceness as the
present conflagration, or promised to be so generally destructive. It
gathered strength and fury each moment, now rising high into the air in
a towering sheet of flame, now shooting forward like an enormous dragon
vomiting streams of fire upon its foes. All at once the flames changed
colour, and were partially obscured by a thick black smoke. A large
warehouse filled with resin, tar, and other combustible matters, had
caught fire, and the dense vapour proceeded from the burning pitch. But
it cleared off in a few minutes, and the flames burnt more brightly and
fiercely than ever.

Up to this time, none of the civic authorities having arrived, several
persons set off to give information of the calamity to the lord mayor
(Sir Thomas Bludworth), and the other magistrates. A small party of the
watch were on the spot, but they were unable to render any effectual
assistance. As the conflagration advanced, those occupying houses in its
track quitted them, and left their goods a prey to the numerous
plunderers, who were now gathered together pursuing their vocation like
unhallowed beings amid the raging element. The whole presented a scene
of the wildest alarm, confusion, and license. Vociferations, oaths,
shrieks, and outcries of every description stunned the ear. Night was
turned into day. The awful roaring of the flames was ever and anon
broken by the thundering fall of some heavy roof. Flakes of fire were
scattered far and wide by the driving wind, carrying destruction
wherever they alighted, and spreading the conflagration on all sides,
till it seemed like a vast wedge of fire driven into the heart of the
city. And thus it went on, swallowing up all before it, like an
insatiate monster, and roaring for very joy. Meanwhile, the incendiaries
had met, as concerted, near the foot of the bridge, and all except
Philip Grant seemed to rejoice in the progress of the conflagration.
Chowles made some comment upon his moody looks and silence, and
whispered in his ear, "You have now an opportunity of retrieving your
fortune, and may make yourself richer than your son. Take my advice, and
do not let it pass."

"Away, tempter!" cried Grant--"I have lighted a fire within my breast
which never will be quenched."

"Poh, poh!" rejoined Judith; "do not turn faint-hearted now."

"The fire rages fiercely," cried Solomon Eagle, gazing at the vast sheet
of flame overtopping the buildings near them, "but we must keep it
alive. Take the remainder of the fire-balls, Hubert, and cast them into
some of the old houses in Crooked-lane."

Hubert prepared to obey. "I will go with you, and point out the best
spots," said Chowles. "Our next place of rendezvous must be the vaults
beneath Saint Faith's."

"Agreed!" exclaimed the others. And they again separated, Hubert and
Chowles to kindle fresh fires, and Grant to watch the conflagration at a
distance. As to Solomon Eagle, he rushed towards the scene of
destruction, and forcing himself into the midst of the crowd, mounted a
post, crying in a loud voice:

"I told you a second judgment would come upon you on account of your
iniquities, and you now find that I avouched the truth. The Lord himself
hath come to preach to you, as he did in the fiery mount of Sinai, and a
terrible exhortation it shall be, and one ye shall not easily forget.
This fire shall not be quenched till the whole city is laid prostrate.
Ye doubted my words when I told you of the plague; ye laughed at me and
scoffed me; but ye became believers in the end, and now conviction is
forced upon you a second time. You will vainly attempt to save your
dwellings. It is the Lord's will they should be destroyed, and man's
efforts to avert the judgment will be ineffectual!"

While the majority listened to him with fear and trembling, and regarded
him as a prophet, a few took the opposite view of the question, and
coupling his appearance with the sudden outbreak of the fire, were
disposed to regard him as an incendiary. They therefore cried out--"He
has set fire to our houses. Down with him! down with him!"

Other voices joined in the outcry, and an attempt was made to carry the
menace into effect; but a strong party rallied round the enthusiast, who
derided the attempts of his opponents. Planting himself on the steps of
Saint Margaret's Church, he continued to pour forth exhortations to the
crowd, until he was driven into the interior of the pile by the
fast-approaching flames. The whole body of the church was filled with
poor wretches who had sought refuge within it, having brought with them
such of their goods as they were able to carry off. But it soon became
evident that the sacred structure would be destroyed, and their screams
and cries on quitting it were truly heartrending. Solomon Eagle was the
last to go forth, and he delayed his departure till the flames burst
through the windows. Another great storehouse of oil, tar, cordage,
hemp, flax, and other highly inflammable articles, adjoining the church,
had caught fire, and the flames speedily reached the sacred fabric. The
glass within the windows was shivered; the stone bars split asunder; and
the seats and other woodwork withinside catching fire, the flames
ascended to the roof, and kindled its massive rafters.

Great efforts were now made to check the fire. A few of the cumbrous and
unmanageable engines of the day were brought to the spot, but no water
could be obtained. All the aqueducts, pipes, and sluices were dry, and
the Thames water-tower was found to be out of order, and the pipes
connected with it empty. To add to the calamity, the tide was out, and
it was not only difficult, but dangerous, to obtain water from the
river. The scanty supply served rather to increase than check the
flames. All sorts of rumours prevailed among the crowd. It could no
longer be doubted that the fire, which kept continually breaking out in
fresh places, was the work of incendiaries, and it was now supposed that
it must have been caused by the French or the Dutch, with both of which
nations the country was then at war, and the most fearful anticipations
that it was only the prelude of a sudden invasion were entertained. Some
conjectured it might be the work of the Papists; and it chancing that a
professor of that religion was discovered among the mob, he was with
difficulty rescued from their fury by the watch, and conveyed to
Newgate. Other persons, who were likewise suspected of being
incendiaries, were conveyed with him.

This, though it satisfied the multitude, did not check the progress of
the fire, nor put a stop to the terror and tumult that prevailed. Every
moment a fresh family were turned into the street, and by their cries
added to the confusion. The plunderers had formed themselves into bands,
pillaging everything they could lay hands on--carrying off boxes, goods,
and coffers, breaking into cellars, broaching casks of spirits and ale,
and emptying flasks of wine. Hundreds of persons who did not join in the
pillage made free with the contents of the cellars, and a large portion
of the concourse was soon in a state of intoxication.

Thus, wild laughter and exclamations of frenzied mirth were heard amid
the wailings of women and the piteous cries of children. It was indeed
dreadful to see the old and bed-ridden forced into the street to seek a
home where they could; nor yet less dreadful to behold others roused
from a bed of sickness at dead of night, and by such a fearful summons.
Still, fanned by the wind, and fed by a thousand combustible matters,
the fire pressed fearfully on, devouring all before it, and increasing
