enough of our faith, I pray you baptize him straightway."

There was rain water in the font, sparkling and clear, and without
any delay or doubt the good man came forward and stood thereby,
while I yet held Raud's hand as his godfather.

"What know you of our faith, my son?" said the monk in his gentle
voice.

Now of his own accord Raud faced to the eastward, and clasping his
hands before him, spoke the words of the Creed, slowly and
haltingly maybe, but with knowledge thereof, and all that little
company, standing hushed until he ended, answered "Amen" with one
voice.

Then again, untaught by us he turned to the west, where the sun was
even now sinking, and lifting his right hand very solemnly he put
away from him the false gods of his forefathers, and the golden
sunlight made his face very glorious, as I thought.

"It is well, my son," said the old monk.

So he was baptized, and I gave him the new name of Cyneward
{xxii}, for the memory of Eadmund the King and what he did for
him in saving him from torture as best he might. And surely he was
the first fruit of the martyrdom of him whose head he had borne.

Then when all was done he took up his burden again, softly and
reverently, saying:

"Life I took, and life has been given me. This is not the old way
of life for life, but it is better."

So he gave back the head to the monks, and they, wondering at him,
but greatly rejoicing, took it, and stood awhile pondering where we
might safely bestow it.

Then came one of the villagers, telling of a stone-walled chamber
that had been a well in days long gone by, hard by the church
porch. That we found after some labour, moving much ruin from over
it, and therein we placed the bones and head of our king, covering
it again until better days should come. And I, thinking of my
riches in the hands of Ingild, promised that when it might be done
I would see to raising the church afresh, to be over the ashes of
the king.

So our little company parted, and Cyneward, who had been Raud, and
I went back with the elder monk and the farm folk to our place,
going slowly in the warm twilight, with our hearts at rest, and
full of the wonders we had seen that day.

Only one thing would the monk and I ask Cyneward, for we wondered
how he had learned our faith so well. And that he answered gladly.

"Ever as Wulfric and I escaped from the vengeance of Ingvar towards
Hedeby I wondered that one should be strong enough to defy the Asir
and their godar for the sake of the new faith. So I sat in the
church of Ansgar among the other heathen and heard somewhat. And
again in London of late, where Guthrum will have no man harmed for
his religion, I have listened and learnt more. So when I needed
them, the words were ready. Now, therefore, both in life and death,
Wulfric, my master, I thank you."

But I was silent, knowing how much greater a part in this I might
have had. For I thought that, but for the need of proving my faith
or denying it, I should have surely been as a heathen among heathen
in those days in Jutland. Yet Beorn asked me to pray for him, and
that I had done, and it had kept me mindful when I had else
forgotten.

So began the work Humbert the Bishop foretold before he died, and
that monk of his who saved his own life at Humbert's bidding for
the work, saw it, and rejoiced.

After this, in a week's time, Cyneward and I took horse and rode
away to London, for the dame's son came back to me, having found
Ingild, bringing me messages from him, and also from Egfrid and
many more. And all was well. At that time I could not reward as I
would those good people who had thus cared for me, but I would send
presents when I might. Yet they said they needed naught from me but
to see me again at some time, which I promised, as well for my own
love of them as for their asking.

We went unharmed and unquestioned, for all the land was at peace.
Truly there were new-made huts where farmsteads had been, and at
the town gates were Danish axemen instead of our spearmen as of
old. Yet already in the hayfields Dane and Anglian wrought
together, and the townsmen stood on Colchester Hill beside the
Danish warriors, listening while gleeman and scald sang in rivalry
to please both.

Little of change was there in London town, save again the
scarlet-cloaked Danish guards and watchmen. Few enough of these
there were, and indeed the host left but small parties in the towns
behind them in our land. Yet those few could hold the country in
peace, because men knew that at their back was the might of
Ingvar's awful host, which came on a land unawares, marching more
swiftly than rumour could fly before it, so that not one might know
where the next blow would fall until suddenly the war beacons of
flaming villages flared up, and it was too late to do aught but
fly.

Yet in our land was none to fight for. No king had we to follow the
martyr. Ethelred had left us alone, and already in the hearts of
men grew up the thought that the strong hand of the Dane meant
peace.

In the house of good old Ingild, my second father, as he would have
me hold him, was rest at last. And there I found all whom I held
dear gathered to meet me on the night when I came, for they had
fled by ship, as they had hoped, and had reached London safely.



CHAPTER XV. THE MESSAGE OF HALFDEN THE KING.


Now when I had been in London for a fortnight, Cyneward, whom
Ingild would by no means suffer to live elsewhere than in his house
with me, went to Guthrum as was his duty, and told him that I had
come. Whereupon he sent to me, asking again that I would speak with
him.

On that I took counsel with Ingild and Egfrid, and the thane his
father, and they thought it well that I should do so.

"This Dane," said the thane, "is lord of East Anglia by the might
of the strong hand, and it seems to us that we might have a worse
ruler. At any rate we shall have peace, and no more trouble with
Danes while he is here. As for Ethelred, he is no more to us. Even
if he overcomes the Danes in the end, it is not likely that we will
own Wessex overlords again unless we must."

That was the word of all with whom I spoke, and in the end, when it
was certain that the Danes meant to stay, and that help from
Ethelred was none, East Anglia owned Guthrum as king quietly and
with none to say a word against it, so securing a peace that should
last.

But to this I could not bring myself as yet, because of what I had
seen, and that the hand of Ingvar was behind Guthrum.

"Go to him at least," said Ingild, "and find what he needs of you.
Then will be time to say more."

So at his advice I went, and I found Guthrum in Ethelred's great
house, where he sat in little state, doing justice in open hall
where many citizens were gathered. And I saw him do even-handed
right to both Dane and Saxon, and that pleased me, for already I
had liked the man's honest face and free bearing.

He greeted me well, taking me aside presently with Cyneward into a
private chamber. And there he told me that he would ask me to do a
favour towards him.

I answered that what I might I would do gladly, so that he asked me
not to break faith with my own people.

"I would ask no man to do that," he said. "Tell me what I may not
ask you."

"Shall I speak plainly?" I said.

"Aye, plainly as you will."

"Then, Guthrum, I may not own Ingvar for overlord. Nor can I allow
that you have more than right of conquest over us."

"Plain speaking, in good sooth," he said, laughing a little, "but
what I expected from Wulfric of Reedham. However, I am ruler in
East Anglia by that right you speak of, and I have a mind to be as
fair in it as I may. Now, I think you can help me."

This honest saying warmed my heart to him somewhat, and weary
enough of his lawman's work this warrior looked. Yet I was not sure
that he would not try to use me to make his hold on the land more
sure.

"Tell me in what way that may be," I said, therefore.

"Let me come and ask you of this and that when I am in a strait
owing to knowing naught of Saxon ways. Then can I say to a Dane,
'Thus says Wulfric, Lodbrok's friend,' and to an Anglian, 'So says
the Thane of Reedham.' Then I think I shall do well, for I would
fain be fair."

"I will ever be ready to do that, Guthrum," I said; and I held out
my hand to him, for I could not help it.

So he took it and wrung it warmly.

"Now must I go back to Thetford very soon," he said. "Come back
that you may be near me."

"I must live here, in London now," I said; for I would by no means
live with his court, nor did I think that he should have thought it
of me after my words.

"Why not go back to your own place now? I can see you often at
Reedham."

"That is an ill jest," I said; for I thought nothing so sad as
going back to see that dear home of mine but a blackened heap of
ruins, nor would I ever ask any who might have seen the place
concerning it, knowing how the Danish ships had burnt all the coast
villages.

Guthrum looked at me as if puzzled.

"No jest, Thane," he said; "why not go back?"

"To ruins--what good?" I answered.

"Now I think you mean that you will not take your land at my
hands," he said.

"That were to own you king."

"Then, Wulfric, my friend, if I may call you so, that the lands of
a friend are not mine to give and take I need not tell you. Nor do
we harm the lands of a friend. There is one place in East Anglia
that no Dane has harmed, or will harm--the place that sheltered
Jarl Lodbrok. And there is one man whose folk, from himself to the
least of all, are no foes of ours--and that is the Thane of
Reedham. Ah! now I see that I have gladdened you, and I think that
you will come."

"This seems almost impossible," I said, in my wonder and gladness.

"Nay, but word went round our host that it was to be so. There you
might have bided all unknowing that war was near you. You do but go
back of your own free will."

Now I was fain to say that I would at once go back to my place, but
there was one thing yet that I would say to Guthrum.

"Will you let the Christian folk be unharmed?"

"Little will our people care," he said, "when once they have
settled down, what gods a man worships. Nor would I have any
meddled with because of their faith."

"Now am I most willing to help you," I said; "and I will say
this--so are you likely in the end to be hailed king indeed."

"That is well," he answered, flushing a little. "But there is one
man whom I will never ask to own me as king, and that is yourself.
But if you do so of your own will, it will be better yet."

So we parted, each as I think pleased with the other, and I knew
that East Anglia had found a wise ruler in Guthrum the Dane.

Straightway now I told my people the good news that Reedham was
safe. The longships came up to Norwich time after time now; and
there had been but one thought among us, and that was that our
place could not have escaped the destruction that had fallen on all
the shore and riverside villages.

Then Ingild said:

"These Danes have come as our forefathers came here, to take a new
and better country for themselves, but the strife between them and
us is not as the strife between alien peoples. They are our kin,
but between us and the Welsh was hatred of race. They will settle
down, and never will East Anglia pass from Danish hands, even if
Ethelred of Wessex makes headway enough to be owned as overlord of
England by them. Now therefore is there one place in all England
where peace has come, and to that place I would go to end my days.
Here in London the tide of war will ebb and flow ever. Let me go
down with you to Reedham, my son, that I may die in peace."

So we did but wait until he had set all his affairs in order,
selling his house and merchandise and the like. Then we hired a
ship that came from the Frankish coast and waited for cargo in the
Thames, and sailed at the end of July to Reedham. With us were
Egfrid and Eadgyth and my mother and Cyneward, who would by no
means leave me, and to whom Guthrum willingly gave leave to go with
us.

We came easily to Reedham, and very strange it was to me to see two
Danish longships lying in our roads, while our own shore boats were
alongside, the men talking idly together on deck or over gunwale in
all friendliness. Stranger yet it was to see the black ruins of
farms and church on the southern shores of the river mouth, and at
Reedham all things safe and smiling as ever.

Then was a wondrous welcome for us on our little staithe, and all
the village crowded down to greet us. Nor were the men from the
Danish ships behindhand in that matter, for they too would welcome
Lodbrok's friends.

So we came home, and soon the old life began again as if naught had
altered, but for the loss of loved faces round us. Yet in peace or
war that must come, and in a little while we grew content, and even
happy.

Soon Guthrum came to Thetford, and many times rode over to me,
asking me many things. And all men spoke well of him, so that
Egfrid's father and some other thanes owned him as king, and took
their lands as at his hands, coming back to rebuild their houses.
For as yet none of the greater Danish chiefs chose lands among us,
since it seemed likely that in a little while all England would be
before them, and in any case the power of Ethelred must be broken
before there could be peace.

Now when the first pleasure of return was over, I myself began to
be restless in my mind, seeing the quiet happiness of Egfrid in his
marriage, and thinking how far I was from Osritha, whom I loved in
such sort that well I knew that I should never wed any other. And I
would watch some Danish ship when she passed our village, going
homewards, longing to sail in her and seek the place where
Lodbrok's daughter yet lived beyond the broad seas.

But presently, at the summer's very end, I knew from the Danes that
Ingvar had gone back to Denmark, called there by some rumour of
trouble brewing at home in his absence; and that made it yet harder
for me, if possible, for on Ingvar I would not willingly look
again, nor would I think of Osritha but as apart from him.

So the winter wore away. The host was quiet in winter quarters in
Mercia, and the Danes in our country grew friendly with us, harming
no man.

These men, I could see, would fain bide in peace, settling down,
being tired of war, and liking the new country, where there was
room and to spare for all.

In early spring Guthrum went to the host on the Wessex borders,
taking command in Ingvar's place.

For Hubba went to Northumbria, there to complete his conquests, and
Halfden was on the western borders of Wessex. And before he went
Guthrum took great care for the good ordering of our land--and that
he might leave it at all at that time was enough to show that he
feared no revolt against him.

