    this, Aristotle will pronounce him mad; you, however, Lucullus, must
    defend the Stoics and spurn Aristotle from you, while you will not
    allow me even to doubt (119). How much better to be free, as I am and
    not compelled to find an answer to all the riddles of the universe!
    (120) Nothing can exist, say you, apart from the deity. Strato,
    however, says he does not need the deity to construct the universe. His
    mode of construction again differs from that of Democritus. I see some
    good in Strato, yet I will not assent absolutely either to his system
    or to yours (121). All these matters lie far beyond our ken. We know
    nothing of our bodies, which we can dissect, while we have not the
    advantage of being able to dissect the constitution of things or of the
    earth to see whether she is firmly fixed or hovers in mid air (122).
    Xenophanes, Hicetas, Plato and Epicurus tell strange things of the
    heavenly bodies. How much better to side with Socrates and Aristo, who
    hold that nothing can be known about them! (123) Who knows the nature
    of mind? Numberless opinions clash, as do those of Dicaearchus, Plato
    and Xenocrates. Our _sapiens_ will be unable to decide (124). If you
    say it is better to choose any system rather than none, I choose
    Democritus. You at once upbraid me for believing such monstrous
    falsehoods (125). The Stoics differ among themselves about physical
    subjects, why will they not allow me to differ from them? (126) Not
    that I deprecate the study of Physics, for moral good results from it
    (127). Our _sapiens_ will be delighted if he attains to anything which
    seems to resemble truth. Before I proceed to Ethics, I note your
    weakness in placing all perceptions on the same level. You must be
    prepared to asseverate no less strongly that the sun is eighteen times
    as large as the earth, than that yon statue is six feet high. When you
    admit that all things can be perceived no more and no less clearly than
    the size of the sun, I am almost content (128).

Sec.116. _Tres partes_: cf. I. 19. _Et a vobismet_: "and especially by you".
The threefold division was peculiarly Stoic, though used by other schools,
cf. Sext. _P.H._ II. 13 (on the same subject) [Greek: hoi Stoikoi kai alloi
tines]. For other modes of dividing philosophy see Sext. _A.M._ VII. 2. _At
illud ante_: this is my em. for the MSS. _velut illud ante_, which probably
arose from a marginal variant "_vel ut_" taking the place of _at_; cf. a
similar break in 40 _sed prius_, also in 128 _at paulum ante_. Such breaks
often occur in Cic., as in _Orator_ 87 _sed nunc aliud_, also _T.D._ IV. 47
_repenam fortasse, sed illud ante._ For _velut_ Halm writes _vel_ (which
Bait. takes), Dav. _verum_. _Inflatus tumore_: cf. _De Off._ I. 91 _inflati
opinionibus._ Bentl. read _errore_. _Cogere_: this word like [Greek:
anankazein] and [Greek: biazesthai] often means simply to argue
irresistibly. _Initia_: as in 118, bases of proof, themselves naturally
incapable of proof, so [Greek: archai] in Gk. _Digitum_: cf. 58, 143.
_Punctum esse_ etc.: [Greek: semeion estin ou meros outhen] (Sext. _P.H._
III. 39), [Greek: stigme] = [Greek: to ameres] (_A.M._ IX. 283, 377).
_Extremitatem_: = [Greek: epiphaneian]. _Libramentum_: so this word is used
by Pliny (see Forc.) for the slope of a hill. _Nulla crassitudo_: in Sext.
the [Greek: epiphaneia] is usually described not negatively as here, but
positively as [Greek: mekos meta platous] (_P.H._ III. 39), [Greek: peras]
(_extremitas_) [Greek: somatos duo echon diastaseis, mekos kai platos]
(_A.M._ III. 77). _Liniamentum ... carentem_: a difficult passage. Note (1)
that the line is defined in Greek as [Greek: mekos aplates]. (Sext. as
above), (2) that Cic. has by preference described the point and surface
negatively. This latter fact seems to me strong against the introduction of
_longitudinem_ which Ursinus, Dav., Orelli, Baiter and others propose by
conjecture. If anything is to be introduced, I would rather add _et
crassitudine_ before _carentem_, comparing I. 27 _sine ulla specie et
carentem omni illa qualitate_. I have merely bracketed _carentem_, though I
feel Halm's remark that a verb is wanted in this clause as in the other
two, he suggests _quod sit sine_. Hermann takes _esse_ after _punctum_ as
strongly predicative ("there _is_ a point," etc.), then adds _similiter_
after _liniamentum_ and ejects _sine ulla_. Observe the awkwardness of
having the _line_ treated of after the _superficies_, which has induced
some edd. to transpose. For _liniamentum_ = _lineam_ cf. _De Or._ I. 187.
_Si adigam_: the fine em. of Manut. for _si adiiciamus_ of MSS. The
construction _adigere aliquem ius iurandum_ will be found in Caes. _Bell.
Civ._ I. 76, II. 18, qu. by Dav., cf. also Virg. _Aen._ III. 56 _quid non
mortalia pectora cogis auri sacra fames?_ _Sapientem nec prius_: this is
the "_egregia lectio_" of three of Halm's MSS. Before Halm _sapientemne_
was read, thus was destroyed the whole point of the sentence, which is
_not_ that the _sapiens_ will swear to the size of the sun after he has
seen Archimedes go through his calculations, _but_ that the _sapiens_,
however true he admits the bases of proof to be which Archimedes uses, will
_not_ swear to the truth of the elaborate conclusions which that geometer
rears upon them. Cicero is arguing as in 128 against the absurdity of
attaching one and the same degree of certainty to the simplest and the most
complex truths, and tries to condemn the Stoic _sapiens_ out of his own
mouth, cf. esp. _nec ille iurare posset_ in 123. _Multis partibus_: for
this expression see Munro on Lucr. I. 734, for the sense cf. 82, 123, 126,
128. _Deum_: see 126.

Sec.117. _Vim_: = [Greek: ananken], cf. _cogere_ in 116. _Ne ille_: this
asseverative _ne_ is thus always closely joined with pronouns in Cic.
_Sententiam eliget et_: MSS. have (by _dittographia_ of _m_, _eli_) added
_melius_ after _sententiam_, and have also dropped _et_. Dav. wished to
read _elegerit_, comparing the beginning of 119. _Insipiens eliget_: cf.
115 _quale est a non sapiente explicari sapientiam?_ and 9 _statuere qui
sit sapiens vel maxime videtur esse sapientis_. _Infinitae quaestiones_:
[Greek: theseis], general propositions, opposed to _finitae quaestiones_,
limited propositions, Gk. [Greek: hypotheseis]. Quintal III. 5, 5 gives as
an ex. of the former _An uxor ducenda_, of the latter _An Catoni ducenda_.
These _quaestiones_ are very often alluded to by Cic. as in _D.F._ I. 12,
IV. 6, _De Or._ I. 138, II. 65--67, _Topica_ 79, _Orat._ 46, cf. also
Quint. X. 5, II. _E quibus omnia constant_: this sounds like Lucretius,
_omnia_ = [Greek: to pan].

Sec.118. For these _physici_ the student must in general be referred to R. and
P., Schwegler, and Grote's _Plato_ Vol. I. A more complete enumeration of
schools will be found in Sext. _P.H._ III. 30 sq. Our passage is imitated
by Aug _De Civ. Dei_ XVIII. 37. _Concessisse primas_: Cic. always considers
Thales to be _sapientissimus e septem_ (_De Leg._ II. 26). Hence Markland
on Cic. _Ad Brutum_ II. 15, 3 argued that that letter cannot be genuine,
since in it the supremacy among the seven is assigned to Solon.
_Infinitatem naturae_: [Greek: to apeiron], _naturae_ here = [Greek:
ousias]. _Definita_: this is opposed to _infinita_ in _Topica_ 79, so
_definire_ is used for _finire_ in _Orat._ 65, where Jahn qu. _Verr._ IV.
115. _Similis inter se_: an attempt to translate [Greek: homoiomereias].
_Eas primum_, etc.: cf. the exordium of Anaxagoras given from Diog. II. 6
in R. and P. 29 [Greek: panta chremata en homou eita nous elthon auta
diekosmese]. _Xenophanes ... deum_: Eleaticism was in the hands of Xenoph.
mainly theological. _Neque natum unquam_: cf. _neque ortum unquam_ in 119.
_Parmenides ignem_: cf. Arist. _Met. A._ 5 qu. R. and P. 94. He only
hypothetically allowed the existence of the phenomenal world, after which
he made two [Greek: archai, thermon kai psychron touton de to men kata men
to hon thermon tattei, thateron de kata to me on]. _Heraclitus_: n. on I.
39. _Melissus_: see Simplicius qu. R. and P. 101, and esp. [Greek: to eon
aiei ara en te kai estai]. _Plato_: n. on I. 27. _Discedent_: a word often
used of those vanquished in a fight, cf. Hor. _Sat._ I. 7, 17.

Sec.119. _Sic animo ... sensibus_: knowledge according to the Stoics was
homogeneous throughout, no one thing could be more or less known than
another. _Nunc lucere_: cf. 98, also 128 _non enim magis adsentiuntur_,
etc. _Mundum sapientem_: for this Stoic doctrine see _N.D._ I. 84, II. 32,
etc. _Fabricata sit_: see 87 n. _Solem_: 126. _Animalis intellegentia_:
reason is the essence of the universe with the Stoics, cf. Zeller 138--9,
also 28, 29 of Book I. _Permanet_: the deity is to the Stoic [Greek: pneuma
endiekon di holou tou kosmou] (Plut. _De Plac. Phil._ I. 7 qu. R. and P.
375), _spiritus per omnia maxima ac minima aequali intentione diffusus._
(Seneca, _Consol. ad Helvid._ 8, 3 qu. Zeller 147). _Deflagret_: the Stoics
considered the [Greek: kosmos phthartos], cf. Diog. VII. 141, Zeller
156--7. _Fateri_: cf. _tam vera quam falsa cernimus_ in 111. _Flumen
aureum_: Plut. _Vita Cic._ 24 alludes to this ([Greek: hoti chrysiou
potamos eie reontos]). This is the constant judgment of Cic. about
Aristotle's style. Grote, _Aristot._ Vol I. p. 43, quotes _Topica_ 3, _De
Or._ I. 49, _Brut._ 121, _N.D._ II. 93, _De Inv._ II. 6, _D.F._ I. 14, _Ad
Att._ II. 1, and discusses the difficulty of applying this criticism to the
works of Aristotle which we possess. _Nulla vis_: cf. I. 28. _Exsistere_:
Walker conj. _efficere_, "_recte ut videtur_" says Halm. Bait. adopts it.
_Ornatus_: = [Greek: kosmos].

Sec.120. _Libertas ... non esse_: a remarkable construction. For the Academic
liberty see Introd. p. 18. _Quod tibi est_: after these words Halm puts
merely a comma, and inserting _respondere_ makes _cur deus_, etc. part of
the same sentence. Bait. follows. _Nostra causa_: Cic. always writes _mea,
tua, vestra, nostra causa_, not _mei, tui, nostri, vestri_, just as he
writes _sua sponte_, but not _sponte alicuius_. For the Stoic opinion that
men are the chief care of Providence, see _N.D._ I. 23, II. 37, _D.F._ III.
67, _Ac._ I. 29 etc., also Zeller. The difficulties surrounding the opinion
are treated of in Zeller 175, _N.D._ II. 91--127. They supply in Sext.
_P.H._ I. 32, III. 9--12 an example of the refutation of [Greek: nooumena]
by means of [Greek: nooumena]. _Tam multa ac_: MSS. om. _ac_, which I
insert. Lactantius qu. the passage without _perniciosa_. _Myrmecides_: an
actual Athenian artist, famed for minute work in ivory, and especially for
a chariot which a fly covered with its wings, and a ship which the wings of
a bee concealed. See Plin. _Nat. Hist._ VII. 21, XXXVI. 5.

Sec.121. _Posse_: n. on I. 29. _Strato_: R. and P. 331. _Sed cum_: _sed_ often
marks a very slight contrast, there is no need to read _et_, as Halm.
_Asperis ... corporibus_: cf. fragm. 28 of the _Ac. Post._, also _N.D._ I.
66. _Somnia_: so _N.D._ I. 18 _miracula non disserentium philosophorum sed
somniantium_, _ib._ I. 42 _non philosophorum iudicia sed delirantium
somnia_, also _ib._ I. 66 _flagitia Democriti_. _Docentis_: giving _proof_.
_Optantis_: Guietus humorously conj. _potantis,_ Durand _oscitantis_ (cf.
_N.D._ I. 72), others _opinantis_. That the text is sound however may be
seen from _T.D._ II. 30 _optare hoc quidem est non docere_, _De Fato_ 46,
_N.D._ I. 19 _optata magis quam inventa_, _ib._ III. 12 _doceas oportet nec
proferas_; cf. also _Orat._ 59 _vocis bonitas optanda est, non est enim in
nobis_, i.e. a good voice is a thing to be prayed for, and not to be got by
exertion. There is a similar Greek proverb, [Greek: euche mallon e
aletheia], in Sext. _P.H._ VIII. 353. _Magno opere_: Hermann wishes to read
_onere_. The phrase _magnum onus_ is indeed common (cf. _De Or._ I. 116),
but _magnum opus_, in the sense of "a great task," is equally so, cf.
_T.D._ III. 79, 84, _Orat._ 75. _Modo hoc modo illud_: 134.

Sec.122. _Latent ista_: see n. on fragm. 29 of the _Ac. Post._; for _latent_
cf. I. 45. Aug. _Cont. Ac._ II. 12, III. 1 imitates this passage.
_Circumfusa_: cf. I. 44, and 46 of this book. _Medici_: cf. _T.D._ I. 46
_Viderentur_: a genuine passive, cf. 25, 39, 81. _Empirici_: a school of
physicians so called. _Ut ... mutentur_: exactly the same answer was made
recently to Prof. Huxley's speculations on protoplasm; he was said to have
assumed that the living protoplasm would have the same properties as the
dead. _Media pendeat_: cf. _N.D._ II. 98, _De Or._ III. 178.

Sec.123. _Habitari ait_: for this edd. qu. Lactant. _Inst._ III. 23, 12.
_Portenta_: "monstrosities these," cf. _D.F._ IV. 70. _Iurare_: cf. 116.
_Neque ego_, etc.: see fragm. 30 of _Ac. Post._ [Greek: Antipodas]: this
doctrine appears in Philolaus (see Plut. _Plac. Phil._ III. 11 qu. R. and
P. 75), who give the name of [Greek: antichthon] to the opposite side of
the world. Diog. VIII. 26 (with which passage cf. Stob. _Phys._ XV. 7)
mentions the theory as Pythagorean, but in another passage (III. 24) says
that Plato first invented the name. The word [Greek: antipous] seems to
occur first in Plat. _Tim._ 63 A. The existence of [Greek: antipodes]; was
of course bound up with the doctrine that the universe or the world is a
globe (which is held by Plat. in the _Tim._ and by the Stoics, see Stob.
_Phys._ XV. 6, Diog. VII. 140), hence the early Christian writers attack
the two ideas together as unscriptural. Cf. esp Aug. _De Civ. Dei_ XVI. 9.
_Hicetas_: he was followed by Heraclides Ponticus and some Pythagoreans.
Sext. _A.M._ X. 174 speaks of the followers of Aristarchus the
mathematician as holding the same doctrine. It seems also to be found in
Philolaus, see R. and P. 75. _Theophrastus_: who wrote much on the history
of philosophy, see R. and P. 328. _Platonem_: the words of Plato (_Tim._ 40
B) are [Greek: gen de trophon men hemeteran, eillomenen de peri ton dia
pantos polon tetamenon]. _Quid tu, Epicure_: the connection is that Cic.,
having given the crotchets of other philosophers about [Greek: physike],
proceeds to give the peculiar crotchet of Epic. _Putas solem ... tantum_: a
hard passage. _Egone? ne bis_ is the em. of Lamb. for MSS. _egone vobis_,
and is approved by Madv., who thus explains it (_Em._ 185) "_cum
interrogatum esset num tantulum (quasi pedalem 82) solem esse putaret,
Epic. non praecise definit (tantum enim esse censebat quantus videretur vel
paulo aut maiorem aut minorem) sed latius circumscribit, ne bis quidem
tantum esse, sed inter pedalem magnitudinem et bipedalem_". (_D.F._ I. 20)
This explanation though not quite satisfactory is the best yet given.
Epicurus' absurdity is by Cic. brought into strong relief by stating the
outside limit to which Epic. was prepared to go in estimating the sun's
size, i.e. twice the apparent size. _Ne ... quidem_ may possibly appear
strange, cf. however _ne maiorem quidem_ in 82. _Aristo Chius_: for this
doctrine of his see R. and P. 358.

Sec.124. _Quid sit animus_: an enumeration of the different ancient theories
is given in _T.D._ I. 18--22, and by Sext. _A.M._ VII. 113, who also speaks
in _P.H._ II. 31 of the [Greek: polle kai anenytos mache] concerning the
soul. In _P.H._ II. 57 he says [Greek: Gorgias oude dianoian einai phesi].
_Dicaearcho_: _T.D._ I. 21. _Tres partis_: in Plato's _Republic_. _Ignis_:
Zeno's opinion, _T.D._ I. 19. _Animam_: _ib._ I. 19. _Sanguis_: Empodocles,
as in _T.D._ I. 19 where his famous line [Greek: haima gar anthropois
perikardion esti noema] is translated, see R. and P. 124. _Ut Xenocrates_:
some edd. read _Xenocrati_, but cf. I. 44, _D.F._ II. 18, _T.D._ III. 76.
_Numerus_: so Bentl. for _mens_ of MSS., cf. I. 39, _T.D._ I. 20, 41. An
explanation of this Pythagorean doctrine of Xenocrates is given in R. and
P. 244. _Quod intellegi_ etc.: so in _T.D._ I. 41 _quod subtiliter magis
quam dilucide dicitur_. _Momenta_ n. on I. 45.

Sec.125. _Verecundius_: cf. 114 _subadroganter_. _Vincam animum_: a common
phrase in Cic., cf. _Philipp._ XII. 21. _Queru potissimum? quem?_: In
repeated questions of this kind Cic. usually puts the corresponding case of
_quisnam_, not _quis_, in the second question, as in _Verr._ IV. 5. The
mutation of Augustine _Contra Ac._ III. 33 makes it probable that _quemnam_
was the original reading here. Zumpt on _Verr._ qu. Quint. IX. 2, 61, Plin.
_Epist._ I. 20, who both mention this trick of style, and laud it for its
likeness to impromptu. _Nobilitatis_: this is to be explained by referring
to 73--75 (_imitari numquam nisi clarum, nisi nobilem_), where Cic.
protests against being compared to a demagogue, and claims to follow the
aristocracy of philosophy. The attempts of the commentators to show that
Democr. was literally an aristocrat have failed. _Convicio_: cf. 34.
_Completa et conferta_: n. on I. 27. _Quod movebitur ... cedat_: this is
the theory of motion disproved by Lucr. I. 370 sq., cf. also _N.D._ II. 83.
Halm writes _quo quid_ for _quod_ (with Christ), and inserts _corpus_
before _cedat_, Baiter following him. The text is sound. Trans. "whatever
body is pushed, gives way." _Tam sit mirabilis_: n. on I. 25.
_Innumerabilis_: 55. _Supra infra_: n. on 92. _Ut nos nunc simus_, etc.: n.
on fragm. 13 of _Ac. Post._ _Disputantis_: 55. _Animo videre_: cf. 22.
_Imagines_: [Greek: eidola], which Catius translated (_Ad Fam._ XV. 16) by
_spectra_, Zeller 432. _Tu vero_: etc. this is all part of the personal
_convicium_ supposed to be directly addressed to Cic. by the Antiocheans,
and beginning at _Tune aut inane_ above. _Commenticiis_: a favourite word
of Cic., cf. _De Div._ II. 113.

Sec.126. _Quae tu_: elliptic for _ut comprobem quae tu comprobas_ cf. 125.
_Impudenter_: 115. _Atque haud scio_: _atque_ here = [Greek: kaitoi], "and
yet," n. on 5 _ac vereor_. _Invidiam_: cf. 144. _Cum his_: i.e. _aliis cum
his_. _Summus deus_: "the highest form of the deity" who was of course one
in the Stoic system. Ether is the finest fire, and [Greek: pyr technikon]
is one of the definitions of the Stoic deity, cf. I. 29, Zeller 161 sq.
_Solem_: as of course being the chief seat of fire. _Solis autem ... nego
credere_: Faber first gave _ac monet_ for MSS. _admonens_, which Halm
retains, Manut. then restored to its place _permensi refertis_, which MSS.
have after _nego_. _Hic_, which MSS. have after _decempeda_, Madv. turns
into _hunc_, while _hoc_, which stands immediately after _nego_, he ejects
(_Em._ 187). _Ergo_ after _vos_ is of course analeptic. Halm departs
somewhat from this arrangement. _Leniter_: Halm and Hermann _leviter_; the
former reads _inverecundior_ after Morgenstern, for what reason it is
difficult to see.

Sec.127. _Pabulum_: similar language in _D.F._ II. 46. _Consideratio
contemplatioque_: Cic. is fond of this combination, as _De Off._ I. 153;
cf. Wesenberg on _T.D._ V. 9, who qu. similar combinations from _D.F._ V.
11, 58. _Elatiores_: MSS. mostly have _latiores_. Halm with Lamb. reads
_altiores_, in support of which reading Dav. qu. _D.F._ II. 51, Val.
Flaccus _Argon._ II. 547, add Virg. _Aen._ VI. 49, Cic. _Orat._ 119.
_Exigua et minima_: [Greek: smikra kai elachista]. Madv. on _D.F._ V. 78
notes that except here Cic. always writes _exigua et paene minima_ or
something of the kind. _Occultissimarum_: n. on I. 15. _Occurit ...
completur_: MSS. have _occuret_ mostly, if that is retained _complebitur_
must be read. Madv. _Opusc._ II. 282 takes _occurit_, explaining it as a
perfect, and giving numerous exx. of this sequence of tenses, cf. also
Wesenb. on _T.D._ IV. 35.

Sec.128. _Agi secum_: cf. _nobiscum ageret_ in 80. _Simile veri_: cf. 66.
_Notionem_: = _cognitionem_, [Greek: epistemen]. _At paulum_: MSS. _et_
Halm _sed._; cf. _at illud ante_ in 116. _Si quae_: Halm and many edd. have
_se, quae_. But the _se_ comes in very awkwardly, and is not needed before
the infinitive. Madv. indeed (_Em._ 114), after producing many exx. of the
reflexive pronoun omitted, says that he doubts about this passage because
_considero_ does not belong to the class of verbs with which this usage is
found, but he produces many instances with _puto_, which surely stands on
the same level. _Non magis_: so in 119 _nec magis approbabit nunc lucere_,
etc. The sunlight was the stock example of a most completely cognisable
phenomenon; hence the Academics showed their hostility to absolute
knowledge by refusing [Greek: ton helion homologein einai katalepton]
(Galen _De Opt. Gen. Dicendi_ 497 B qu. P. Valentia 304 ed. Or.). _Cornix_:
for the Stoic belief in divination see Zeller 349--358. _Signum illud_: the
_xystus_ (9) was adorned with statues; edd. qu. Plin. _Nat. Hist._ XXXIV.
8. _Duodeviginti_: 82, I just note that _octodecim_ is not used by Cic.
_Sol quantus sit_: 91. _Omnium rerum ... comprehendendi_: not a case of a
plural noun with a singular gerund like _spe rerum potiendi_, etc., but of
two genitives depending in different ways on the same word (_definitio_).
M. _Em._ 197 qu. Plat. _Leg._ 648 E [Greek: ten panton hettan phoboumenos
anthropon toi pomatos], _Brut._ 163 _Scaevolae dicendi elegantia_, _De Or._
III. 156. Other exx. in _M.D.F._ I. 14. For the turn of expression cf.
_T.D._ IV. 62 _omnium philosophorum una est ratio medendi_, _Lael._ 78
_omnium horum vitiorum una cautio est_, also 51 of this book.

    Sec.Sec.129--141. Summary. What contention is there among philosophers about
    the ethical standard! I pass by many abandoned systems like that of
    Herillus but consider the discrepancies between Xenophanes, Parmenides,
    Zeno of Elea, Euclides, Menedemus, Aristo, Pyrrho, Aristippus,
    Epicurus, Callipho, Hieronymus, Diodorus, Polemo, Antiochus, Carneades
    (129-131). If I desire to follow the Stoics, Antiochus will not allow
    me, while if I follow Polemo, the Stoics are irate (132). I must be
    careful not to assent to the unknown, which is a dogma common to both
    you, Lucullus, and myself (133). Zeno thinks virtue gives happiness.
    "Yes," says Antiochus, "but not the greatest possible." How am I to
    choose among such conflicting theories? (134) Nor can I accept those
    points in which Antiochus and Zeno agree. For instance, they regard
    emotion as harmful, which the ancients thought natural and useful
    (135). How absurd are the Stoic Paradoxes! (136) Albinus joking said to
    Carneades "You do not think me a praetor because I am not a _sapiens_."
    "That," said Carneades, "is Diogenes' view, not mine" (137). Chrysippus
    thinks only three ethical systems can with plausibility be defended
    (138). I gravitate then towards one of them, that of pleasure. Virtue
    calls me back, nor will she even allow me to join pleasure to herself
    (139). When I hear the several pleadings of pleasure and virtue, I
    cannot avoid being moved by both, and so I find it impossible to choose
