earthquake was heard.

All looked back towards Malkin Tower. The structure was seen to
rock--flames burst from the earth--and with a tremendous explosion heard
for miles ground, and which shook the ground even where Nicholas and the
others stood, the whole of the unhallowed fabric, from base to summit,
was blown into the air, some of the stones being projected to an
extraordinary distance.

A mine charged with gunpowder, it appeared, had been laid beneath its
vaults by Demdike, with a view to its destruction at some future period,
and this circumstance being known to Nance, she had fired the train.

Not one of the robbers within the tower escaped. The bodies of all were
found next day, crushed, burned, or frightfully mutilated.




CHAPTER VI.--HOGHTON TOWER.


About a month after the occurrence last described, and early on a fine
morning in August, Nicholas Assheton and Richard Sherborne rode forth
together from the proud town of Preston. Both were gaily attired in
doublets and hose of yellow velvet, slashed with white silk, with
mantles to match, the latter being somewhat conspicuously embroidered on
the shoulder with a wild bull worked in gold, and underneath it the
motto, "_Malgre le Tort_." Followed at a respectful distance by four
mounted attendants, the two gentlemen had crossed the bridge over the
Ribble, and were wending their way along the banks of a tributary
stream, the Darwen, within a short distance of the charming village of
Walton-le-Dale, when they perceived a horseman advancing slowly towards
them, whom they instantly hailed as Richard Assheton, and pushing
forward, were soon beside him. Both were much shocked by the young man's
haggard looks, and inquired anxiously as to his health, but Richard bade
them, with a melancholy smile, not be uneasy, for all would be well with
him erelong.

"All will be over with you, lad, if you don't mind; and that's, perhaps,
what you mean," replied Nicholas; "but as soon as the royal festivities
at Hoghton are over, I'll set about your cure; and, what's more, I'll
accomplish it--for I know where the seat of the disease lies better than
Dr. Morphew, your family physician at Middleton. 'Tis near the heart,
Dick--near the heart. Ha! I see I have touched you, lad. But, beshrew
me, you are very strangely attired--in a suit of sable velvet, with a
black Spanish hat and feather, for a festival! You look as if going to a
funeral I am fearful his Majesty may take it amiss. Why not wear the
livery of our house?"

"Nay, if it comes to that," rejoined Richard, "why do not you and
Sherborne wear it, instead of flaunting like daws in borrowed plumage? I
scarce know you in your strange garb, and certainly should not take you
for an Assheton, or aught pertaining to our family, from your gaudy
colours and the strange badge on your shoulder."

"I don't wonder at it, Dick," said Nicholas; "I scarce know myself; and
though the clothes I wear are well made enough, they seem to sit
awkwardly on me, and trouble me as much as the shirt of Nessus did
Hercules of old. For the nonce I am Sir Richard Hoghton's retainer. I
must own I was angry with myself when I saw Sir Ralph Assheton with his
long train of gentlemen, all in murrey-coloured cloaks and doublets, at
Myerscough Lodge, while I, his cousin, was habited like one of another
house. And when I would have excused my apparent defection to Sir Ralph,
he answered coldly, 'It was better as it was, for he could scarcely have
found room for me among his friends.'"

"Do not fret yourself, Nicholas," rejoined Sherborne; "Sir Ralph cannot
reasonably take offence at a mere piece of good-nature on your part. But
this does not explain why Richard affects a colour so sombre."

"I am the retainer of one whose livery is sombre," replied the young
man, with a ghastly smile. "But enough of this," he added, endeavouring
to assume a livelier air; "I suppose you are on the way to Hoghton
Tower. I thought to reach Preston before you were up, but I might have
recollected you are no lag-a-bed, Nicholas, not even after hard drinking
overnight, as witness your feats at Whalley. To be frank with you, I
feared being led into like excesses, and so preferred passing the night
at the quiet little inn at Walton-le-Dale, to coming on to you at the
Castle at Preston, which I knew would be full of noisy roysterers."

"Full it was, even to overflowing," replied the squire; "but you should
have come, Dick, for, by my troth! we had a right merry night of it.
Stephen Hamerton, of Hellyfield Peel, with his wife, and her sister,
sweet Mistress Doll Lister, supped with us; and we had music, dancing,
and singing, and abundance of good cheer. Nouns! Dick, Doll Lister is a
delightful lass, and if you can only get Alizon out of your head, would
be just the wife for you. She sings like an angel, has the most
captivating sigh-and-die-away manner, and the prettiest rounded figure
ever bodice kept in. Were I in your place I should know where to
choose. But you will see her at Hoghton to-day, for she is to be at the
banquet and masque."

"Your description does not tempt me," said Richard; "I have no taste for
sigh-and-die-away damsels. Dorothy Lister, however, is accounted fair
enough; but, were she fascinating as Venus herself, in my present mood I
should not regard her."

"I' faith, lad, I pity you, if such be the case," shrugging his
shoulders, more in contempt than compassion.

"Waste not your sympathy upon me," replied Richard; "but, tell me, how
went the show at Preston yesterday?"

"Excellently well, and much to his Majesty's satisfaction," answered the
squire. "Proud Preston never was so proud before, and never with such
good reason; for if the people be poor, according to the proverb, they
take good care to hide their poverty. Bombards were fired from the
bridge, and the church bells rang loud enough to crack the steeple, and
bring it down about the ears of the deafened lieges. The houses were
hung with carpets and arras; the streets strewn ankle deep with sand and
sawdust; the cross in the market-place was bedecked with garlands of
flowers like a May-pole; and the conduit near it ran wine. At noon there
was more firing; and, amidst flourishes of trumpets, rolling of drums,
squeaking of fifes, and prodigious shouting, bonnie King Jamie came to
the cross, where a speech was made him by Master Breares, the Recorder;
after which the corporation presented his Majesty with a huge silver
bowl, in token of their love and loyalty. The King seemed highly pleased
with the gift, and observed to the Duke of Buckingham, loud enough to be
heard by the bystanders, who reported his speech to me, 'God's santie!
it's a braw bicker, Steenie, and might serve for a christening-cup, if
we had need of siccan a vessel, which, Heaven be praised, we ha'e na!'
After this there was a grand banquet in the town-hall; and when the heat
of the day was over the King left with his train for Hoghton Tower,
visiting the alum mines on the way thither. We are bidden to breakfast
by Sir Richard, so we must push on, Dick, for his Majesty is an early
riser, like myself. We are to have rare sport to-day. Hunting in the
morning, a banquet, and, as I have already intimated, a masque at night,
in which Sir George Goring and Sir John Finett will play, and in which I
have been solicited to take the drolling part of Jem Tospot--nay, laugh
not, Dick, Sherborne says I shall play it to the life--as well as to
find some mirthful dame to enact the companion part of Doll Wango. I
have spoken with two or three on the subject, and fancy one of them will
oblige me. There is another matter on which I am engaged. I am to
present a petition to his Majesty from a great number of the lower
orders in this county, praying they may be allowed to take their
diversions, as of old accustomed, after divine service on Sundays; and,
though I am the last man to desire any violation of the Sabbath, being
somewhat puritanically inclined as they now phrase it, yet I cannot
think any harm can ensue from lawful recreation and honest exercise.
Still, I would any one were chosen to present the petition rather than
myself."

"Have no misgivings on the subject," said Richard, "but urge the matter
strongly; and if you need support, I will give you all I can, for I feel
we are best observing the divine mandate by making the Sabbath a day of
rest, and observing it cheerfully. And this, I apprehend, is the
substance of your petition?"

"The whole sum and substance," replied Nicholas; "and I have reason to
believe his Majesty's wishes are in accordance with it."

"They are known to be so," said Sherborne.

"I am glad to hear it," cried Richard. "God save King James, the friend
of the people!"

"Ay, God save King James!" echoed Nicholas; "and if he I grant this
petition he will prove himself their friend, for he will I have all the
clergy against him, and will be preached against from half the pulpits
in the kingdom."

"Little harm will ensue if it should be so," replied Richard; "for he
will be cheered and protected by the prayers of a grateful and happy
people."

They then rode on for a few minutes in silence, after which; Richard
inquired--

"You had brave doings at Myerscough Lodge, I suppose, Nicholas?"

"Ay, marry had we," answered the squire, "and the feasting must have
cost Ned Tyldesley a pretty penny. Besides the King and his own
particular attendants, there were some dozen noblemen and their
followers, including the Duke of Buckingham, who moves about like a king
himself, and I know not how many knights and gentlemen. Sherborne and I
rode over from Dunnow, and reached the forest immediately after the King
had entered it in his coach; so we took a short cut through the woods,
and came up just in time to join Sir Richard Hoghton's train as he was
riding up to his Majesty. Fancy a wide glade, down which a great gilded
coach is slowly moving, drawn by eight horses, and followed by a host of
noblemen and gentlemen in splendid apparel, their esquires and pages
equally richly arrayed, and equally well mounted; and, after these,
numerous falconers, huntsmen, prickers, foresters, and yeomen, with
staghounds in leash, and hawk on fist, all ready for the sport. Fancy
all this if you can, Dick, and then conceive what a brave sight it must
have been. Well, as I said, we came up in the very nick of time, for
presently the royal coach stopped, and Sir Richard Hoghton, calling all
his gentlemen around him, and bidding us dismount, and we followed him,
and drew up, bareheaded, before the King, while Sir Richard pointed out
to his Majesty the boundaries of the royal forest, and told him he
would find it as well stocked with deer as any in his kingdom. Before
putting an end to the conference, the King complimented the worthy
Knight on the gallant appearance of his train, and on learning we were
all gentlemen, graciously signified his pleasure that some of us should
be presented to him. Amongst others, I was brought forward by Sir
Richard, and liking my looks, I suppose, the King was condescending
enough to enter into conversation with me; and as his discourse chiefly
turned on sporting matters, I was at home with him at once, and he
presently grew so familiar with me, that I almost forgot the presence in
which I stood. However, his Majesty seemed in no way offended by my
freedom, but, on the contrary, clapped me on the shoulder, and said,
'Maister Assheton, for a country gentleman, you're weel-mannered and
weel-informed, and I shall be glad to see more of you while I stay in
these parts.' After this, the good-natured monarch mounted his horse,
and the hunting began, and a famous day's work we made of it, his
Majesty killing no fewer than five fine bucks with his own hand."

"You are clearly on the road to preferment, Nicholas," observed Richard,
with a smile. "You will outstrip Buckingham himself, if you go on in
this way."

"So I tell him," observed Sherborne, laughing; "and, by my faith! young
Sir Gilbert Hoghton, who, owing to his connexion by marriage with
Buckingham, is a greater man than his father, Sir Richard, looked quite
jealous; for the King more than once called out to Nicholas in the
chase, and took the wood-knife from him when he broke up the last deer,
which is accounted a mark of especial favour."

"Well, gentlemen," said the squire, "I shall not stand in my own light,
depend upon it; and, if I should bask in court-sunshine, you shall
partake of the rays. If I do become master of the household, in lieu of
the Duke of Richmond, or master of the horse and cupbearer to his
Majesty, in place of his Grace of Buckingham, I will not forget you."

"We are greatly indebted to you, my Lord Marquess of Downham and Duke of
Pendle Hill, that is to be," rejoined Sherborne, taking off his cap with
mock reverence; "and perhaps, for the sake of your sweet sister and my
spouse, Dorothy, you will make interest to have me appointed gentleman
of the bedchamber?"

"Doubt it not--doubt it not," replied Nicholas, in a patronising tone.

"My ambition soars higher than yours, Sherborne," said Richard; "I must
be lord-keeper of the privy seal, or nothing."

"Oh! what you will, gentlemen, what you will!" cried Nicholas; "you can
ask me nothing I will not grant--always provided I have the means."

A turn in the road now showed them Hoghton Tower, crowning the summit
of an isolated and conical hill, about two miles off. Rising proudly in
the midst of a fair and fertile plain, watered by the Ribble and the
Darwen, the stately edifice seemed to command the whole country. And so
King James thought, as, from the window of his chamber, he looked down
upon the magnificent prospect around him, comprehending on the one hand
the vast forests of Myerscough and Bowland, stretching as far as the
fells near Lancaster; and, on the other, an open but still undulating
country, beautifully diversified with wood and water, well-peopled and
well-cultivated, green with luxuriant pastures, yellow with golden
grain, or embowered with orchards, boasting many villages and small
towns, as well as two lovely rivers, which, combining their currents at
Walton-le-Dale, gradually expanded till they neared the sea, which could
be seen gleaming through openings in the distant hills. As the King
surveyed this fair scene, and thought how strong was the position of the
mansion, situated as it was upon high cliffs springing abruptly from the
Darwen, and how favourably circumstanced, with its forests and park, for
the enjoyment of the chase, of which he was passionately fond, how
capable of defence, and how well adapted for a hunting-seat, he sighed
to think it did not belong to the crown. Nor was he wrong in his
estimate of its strength, for in after years, during the civil wars, it
held out stoutly against the parliamentary forces, and was only reduced
at last by treachery, when part of its gate-tower was blown up,
destroying an officer and two hundred men, "in that blast most wofully."

Though the hour was so early, the road was already thronged, not only
with horsemen and pedestrians of every degree from Preston, but with
rude lumbering vehicles from the neighbouring villages of Plessington,
Brockholes and Cuerden, driven by farmers, who, with their buxom dames
and cherry-cheeked daughters, decked out in holiday finery, hoped to
gain admittance to Hoghton Tower, or, at all events, obtain a peep of
the King as he rode out to hunt. Most of these were saluted by Nicholas,
who scrupled not to promise them admission to the outer court of the
Tower, and even went so far as to offer some of the comelier damsels a
presentation to the King. Occasionally, the road was enlivened by
strains of music from a band of minstrels, by a song or a chorus from
others, or by the gamesome tricks of a party of mummers. At one place, a
couple of tumblers and a clown were performing their feats on a cloth
stretched on the grass beneath a tree. Here the crowd collected for a
few minutes, but presently gave way to loud shouts, attended by the
cracking of whips, proceeding from two grooms in the yellow and white
livery of Sir Richard Hoghton, who headed some half-dozen carts filled
with provisions, carcases of sheep and oxen, turkeys and geese, pullets
and capons, fish, bread, and vegetables, all bent for Hoghton Tower;
for though Sir Richard had made vast preparations for his guests, he
found his supplies, great as they were, wholly inadequate to their
wants. Cracking their whips in answer to the shouts with which they were
greeted, the purveyors galloped on, many a hungry wight looking
wistfully after them.

Nicholas and his companions were now at the entrance to Hoghton Park,
through which the Darwen coursed, after washing the base of the rocky
heights on which the mansion was situated. Here four yeomen of the
guard, armed with halberts, and an officer, were stationed, and no one
was admitted without an order from Sir Richard Hoghton. Possessing a
pass, the squire and his companions with their attendants were, of
course, allowed to enter; but the throng accompanying them were sent
over the bridge, and along a devious road skirting the park, which,
though it went more than a mile round, eventually brought them to their
destination.

Hoghton Park, though not very extensive, boasted a great deal of
magnificent timber, and in some places was so thickly wooded, that,
according to Dr. Kuerden, "a man passing through it could scarcely have
seen the sun shine at middle of day." Into one of these tenebrous groves
the horsemen now plunged, and for some moments were buried in the gloom
produced by matted and overhanging boughs. Issuing once more into the
warm sunshine, they traversed a long and beautiful silvan glade, skirted
by ancient oaks, with mighty arms and gnarled limbs--the patriarchs of
the forest. In the open ground on the left were scattered a few
ash-trees, and beneath them browsed a herd of fallow deer; while
crossing the lower end of the glade was a large herd of red deer, for
which the park was famous, the hinds tripping nimbly and timidly away,
but the lordly stags, with their branching antlers, standing for a
moment at gaze, and disdainfully regarding the intruders on their
domain. Little did they think how soon and severely their courage would
be tried, or how soon the _mort_ would be sounded for their _pryse_ by
the huntsman. But if, happily for themselves, the poor leathern-coated
fools could not foresee their doom, it was not equally hidden from
Nicholas, who predicted what would ensue, and pointed out one noble hart
which he thought worthy to die by the King's own hand. As if he
understood him, the stately beast tossed his antlered head aloft, and
plunged into the adjoining thicket; but the squire noted the spot where
he had disappeared.

The glade led them into the chase, a glorious hunting-ground of about
two miles in circumference, surrounded by an amphitheatre of wood, and
studded by noble forest trees. Variety and beauty were lent to it by an
occasional knoll crowned with timber, or by numerous ferny dells and
dingles. As the horsemen entered upon the chase, they observed at a
short distance from them a herd of the beautiful, but fierce wild
cattle, originally from Bowland Forest, and still preserved in the park.
White and spangled in colour, with short sharp horns, fine eyes, and
small shapely limbs, these animals were of untameable fierceness,
possessed of great cunning, and ever ready to assault any one who
approached them. They would often attack a solitary individual, gore
him, and trample him to death. Consequently, they were far more dreaded
than the wild-boars, with which, as with every other sort of game, the
neighbouring woods were plentifully stocked. Well aware of the danger
they ran, the party watched the herd narrowly and distrustfully, and
would have galloped on; but this would only have provoked pursuit, and
the wild cattle were swifter than any horses. Suddenly, a milkwhite bull
trotted out from the rest of the herd, bellowing fiercely, lashing his
sides with his tail, and lowering his head to the ground, as if
meditating an attack. His example was speedily followed by the others,
and the whole herd began to beat ground and roar loudly. Much alarmed by
these hostile manifestations, the party were debating whether to stand
the onset, or trust to the fleetness of their steeds for safety; when
just as the whole herd, with tails erect and dilated nostrils, were
galloping towards them, assistance appeared in the persons of some ten
or a dozen mounted prickers, who, armed with long poles pointed with
iron, issued with loud shouts from an avenue opening upon the chase. At
sight of them, the whole herd wheeled round and fled, but were pursued
by the prickers till they were driven into the depths of the furthest
thicket. Six of the prickers remained watching over them during the day,
in order that the royal hunting-party might not be disturbed, and the
woods echoed with the bellowing of the angry brutes.

While this was going forward, the squire and his companions,
congratulating themselves on their narrow escape, galloped off, and
entered the long avenue of sycamores, from which the prickers had
emerged.

At the head of a steep ascent, partly hewn out of the rock, and partly
skirted by venerable and majestic trees, forming a continuation of the
avenue, rose the embattled gate-tower of the proud edifice they were
approaching, and which now held the monarch of the land, and the highest
and noblest of his court as guests within its halls. From the top of the
central tower of the gateway floated the royal banner, while at the very
moment the party reached the foot of the hill, they were saluted by a
loud peal of ordnance discharged from the side-towers, proclaiming that
the King had arisen; and, as the smoke from the culverins wreathed round
the standard, a flourish of trumpets was blown from the walls, and
martial music resounded from the court.

Roused by these stirring sounds, Nicholas spurred his horse up the rocky
ascent; and followed closely by his companions, who were both nearly as
much excited as himself, speedily gained the great gateway--a massive
and majestic structure, occupying the centre of the western front of the
mansion, and consisting of three towers of great strength and beauty,
the mid-tower far overtopping the other two, as in the arms of Old
Castile, and sustaining, as was its right, the royal standard. On the
platform stood the trumpeters with their silk-fringed clarions, and the
iron mouths of the culverins, which had been recently discharged,
protruded through the battlements. The arms and motto of the Hoghtons,
carved in stone, were placed upon the gateway, with the letters T.H.,
the initials of the founder of the tower. Immediately above the arched
entrance was the sculptured figure of a knight slaying a dragon.

In front of the gateway a large crowd of persons were assembled,
consisting of the inferior gentry of the neighbourhood, with their
wives, daughters, and servants, clergymen, attorneys, chirurgeons,
farmers, and tradesmen of all kind from the adjoining towns of
Blackburn, Preston, Chorley, Haslingden, Garstang, and even Lancaster.
Representatives in some sort or other of almost every town and village
in the county might be found amongst the motley assemblage, which, early
as it was, numbered several hundreds, many of those from the more
distant places having quitted their homes soon after midnight.
Admittance was naturally sought by all; but here the same rule was
observed as at the park gate, and no one was allowed to enter, even the
base court, without authority from the lord of the mansion. The great
gates were closed, and two files of halberdiers were drawn up under the
deep archway, to keep the passage clear, and quell disturbance in case
any should occur; while a gigantic porter, stationed in front of the
wicket, rigorously scrutinised the passes. These precautions naturally
produced delay; and, though many of the better part of the crowd were
entitled to admission, it was not without much pushing and squeezing,
and considerable detriment to their gay apparel, that they were enabled
to effect their object.

The comfort of those outside the walls had not, however, been altogether
neglected by Sir Richard Hoghton, for sheds were reared under the trees,
where stout March beer, together with cheese and bread, or oaten cakes
and butter, were freely distributed to all applicants; so that, if some
were disappointed, few were discontented, especially when told that the
gates would be thrown open at noon, when, during the time the King and
the nobles feasted in the great banquet-hall, they might partake of a
wild bull from the park, slaughtered expressly for the occasion, which
was now being roasted whole within the base court. That the latter was
no idle promise they had the assurance of thick smoke rising above the
walls, laden with the scent of roast meat, and, moreover, they could see
through the wicket a great fire blazing and crackling on the green,
with a huge carcass on an immense spit before it, and a couple of
turn-broaches basting it.

As Nicholas and his companions forced their way through this crowd,
which was momently receiving additions as fresh arrivals took place, the
squire recognised many old acquaintances, and was nodding familiarly
right and left, when he encountered a woman's eye fixed keenly upon him,
and to his surprise beheld Nance Redferne. Nance, who had lost none of
her good looks, was very gaily attired, with her fine chestnut hair
knotted with ribbons, her stomacher similarly adorned, and her red
petticoat looped up, so as to display an exceedingly trim ankle and
small foot; and, under other circumstances, Nicholas might not have
minded staying to chat with her, but just now it was out of the
question, and he hastily turned his head another way. As ill luck,
however, would have it, a stoppage occurred at the moment, during which
Nance forced her way up to him, and, taking hold of his arm, said in a
low tone--

"Yo mun tae me in wi' ye, squoire."

"Take you in with me--impossible!" cried Nicholas.

"Nah! it's neaw impossible," rejoined Nance, pertinaciously; "yo con do
it, an yo shan. Yo owe me a good turn, and mun repay it now."

"But why the devil do you want to go in?" cried Nicholas, impatiently.
"You know the King is the sworn enemy of all witches, and, amongst this
concourse, some one is sure to recognise you and betray you. I cannot
answer for your safety if I do take you in. In my opinion, you were
extremely unwise to venture here at all."

"Ne'er heed my wisdom or my folly, boh do as ey bid yo, or yo'n repent
it," said Nance.

"Why, you can get in without my aid," observed the squire, trying to
laugh it off. "You can easily fly over the walls."

"Ey ha' left my broomstick a-whoam," replied Nance--"boh no more
jesting. Win yo do it?"

"Well, well, I suppose I must," replied Nicholas, "but I wash my hands
of the consequences. If ill comes of it, I am not to blame. You must go
in as Doll Wango--that is, as a character in the masque to be enacted
to-night--d'ye mark?"

Nance signified that she perfectly understood him.

The whole of this hurried discourse, conducted in an under-tone, passed
unheard and unnoticed by the bystanders. Just then, an opening took
place amid the crowd, and the squire pushed through it, hoping to get
rid of his companion, but he hoped in vain, for, clinging to his saddle,
she went on along with him.

They were soon under the deep groined and ribbed arch of the gate, and
Nance would have been here turned back by the foremost halberdier, if
Nicholas had not signified somewhat hastily that she belonged to his
party. The man smiled, and offered no further opposition; and the
gigantic porter next advancing, Nicholas exhibited his pass to him,
which appearing sufficiently comprehensive to procure admission for
Richard and Sherborne, they instantly availed themselves of the licence,
while the squire fumbled in his doublet for a further order for Nance.
At last he produced it, and after reading it, the gigantic warder
exclaimed, with a smile illumining his broad features--

"Ah! I see;--this is an order from his worship, Sir Richard, to admit a
certain woman, who is to enact Doll Wango in the masque. This is she, I
suppose?" he added, looking at Nance.

"Ay, ay!" replied the squire.

"A comely wench, by the mass!" exclaimed the porter. "Open the gate."

"No--not yet--not yet, good porter, till my claim be adjusted," cried
another woman, pushing forward, quite as young and comely as Nance, and
equally gaily dressed. "I am the real Doll Wango, though I be generally
known as Dame Tetlow. The squire engaged me to play the part before the
King, and now this saucy hussy has taken my place. But I'll have my
rights, that I will."

"Odd's heart! two Doll Wangos!" exclaimed the porter, opening his eyes.

"Two!--Nay, beleedy! boh there be three!" exclaimed an immensely tall,
stoutly proportioned woman, stepping up, to the increased confusion of
the squire, and the infinite merriment of the bystanders, whose laughter
had been already excited by the previous part of the scene. "Didna yo
tell me at Myerscough to come here, squire, an ey, Bess Baldwyn, should
play Doll Wango to your Jem Tospot?"

"Play the devil! for that's what you all seem bent upon doing,"
exclaimed the squire, impatiently. "Away with you! I can have nothing to
say to you!"

"You gave me the same promise at the Castle at Preston last night," said
Dame Tetlow.

"I had been drinking, and knew not what I said," rejoined Nicholas,
angrily.

"Boh yo promised me a few minutes ago, an yo're sober enough now," cried
Nance.

"Ey dunna knoa that," rejoined Dame Baldwyn, looking reproachfully at
him. "Boh what ey dun knoa is, that nother o' these squemous queans shan
ge in efore me."

And she looked menacingly at them, as if determined to oppose their
ingress, much to the alarm of the timorous Dame Tetlow, though Nance
returned her angry glances unmoved.

"For Heaven's sake, my good fellow, let them all three in!" said
Nicholas, in a low tone to the porter, at the same time slipping a gold
piece into his hand, "or there's no saying what may be the consequence,
for they're three infernal viragos. I'll take the responsibility of
their admittance upon myself with Sir Richard."

"Well, as your worship says, I don't like to see quarrelling amongst
women," returned the porter, in a bland tone, "so all three shall go in;
and as to who is to play Doll Wango, the master of the ceremonies will
settle that, so you need give yourself no more concern about it; but if
I were called on to decide," he added, with an amorous leer at Dame
Baldwyn, whose proportions so well matched his own, "I know where my
choice would light. There, now!" he shouted, "Open wide the gate for
Squire Nicholas Assheton of Downham, and the three Doll Wangos."

And, all obstacles being thus removed, Nicholas passed on with the three
females amidst the renewed laughter of the bystanders. But he got rid of
his plagues as soon as he could; for, dismounting and throwing his
bridle to an attendant, he vouchsafed not a word to any of them, but
stepped quickly after Richard and Sherborne, who had already reached the
great fire with the bull roasting before it.

Appropriated chiefly to stables and other offices, the base court of
Hoghton Tower consisted of buildings of various dates, the greater part
belonging to Elizabeth's time, though some might be assigned to an
earlier period, while many alterations and additions had been recently
made, in anticipation of the king's visit. Dating back as far as Henry
II., the family had originally fixed their residence at the foot of the
hill, on the banks of the Darwen; but in process of time, swayed by
prouder notions, they mounted the craggy heights above, and built a
tower upon their crest. It is melancholy to think that so glorious a
pile, teeming with so many historical recollections, and so
magnificently situated, should be abandoned, and suffered to go to
decay;--the family having, many years ago, quitted it for Walton Hall,
near Walton-le-Dale, and consigned it to the occupation of a few
gamekeepers. Bereft of its venerable timber, its courts grass-grown, its
fine oak staircase rotting and dilapidated, its domestic chapel
neglected, its marble chamber broken and ruinous, its wainscotings and
ceilings cracked and mouldering, its paintings mildewed and half
effaced, Hoghton Tower presents only the wreck of its former grandeur.
Desolate indeed are its halls, and their glory for ever departed!
However, this history has to do with it in the season of its greatest
splendour; when it glistened with silks and velvets, and resounded with
loud laughter and blithe music; when stately nobles and lovely dames
were seen in the gallery, and a royal banquet was served in the great
hall; when its countless chambers were filled to overflowing, and its
passages echoed with hasty feet; when the base court was full of
huntsmen and falconers, and enlivened by the neighing of steeds and the
baying of hounds; when there was daily hunting in the park, and nightly
dancing and diversion in the hall,--it is with Hoghton Tower at this
season that the present tale has to do, and not with it as it is
now--silent, solitary, squalid, saddening, but still whispering of the
glories of the past, still telling of the kingly pageant that once
graced it.

The base court was divided from the court of lodging by the great hall
and domestic chapel. A narrow vaulted passage on either side led to the
upper quadrangle, the facade of which was magnificent, and far superior
in uniformity of design and style to the rest of the structure, the
irregularity of which, however, was not unpleasing. The whole frontage
of the upper court was richly moulded and filleted, with ranges of
mullion and transom windows, capitals, and carved parapets crowned with
stone balls. Marble pillars, in the Italian style, had been recently
placed near the porch, with two rows of pilasters above them, supporting
a heavy marble cornice, on which rested the carved escutcheon of the
family. A flight of stone steps led up to the porch, and within was a
wide oak staircase, so gentle of ascent that a man on horseback could
easily mount it--a feat often practised in later days by one of the
descendants of the house. In this part of the mansion all the principal
apartments were situated, and here James was lodged. Here also was the
green room, so called from its hangings, which he used for private
conferences, and which was hung round with portraits of his unfortunate
mother, Mary, Queen of Scots; of her implacable enemy, Queen Elizabeth;
of his consort, Anne of Bohemia: and of Sir Thomas Hoghton, the founder
of the tower. Adjoining it was the Star-Chamber, occupied by the Duke of
Buckingham, with its napkin panelling, and ceiling "fretted with golden
fires;" and in the same angle were rooms occupied by the Duke of
Richmond, the Earls of Pembroke and Nottingham, and Lord Howard of
Effingham. Below was the library, whither Doctor Thomas Moreton, Bishop
of Chester, and his Majesty's chaplain, with the three puisne judges of
the King's Bench, Sir John Doddridge, Sir John Crooke, and Sir Robert
Hoghton, all of whom were guests of Sir Richard, resorted; and in the
adjoining wing was the great gallery, where the whole of the nobles and
courtiers passed such of their time--and that was not much--as was not
occupied in feasting or out-of-doors' amusements.

Long corridors ran round the upper stories in this part of the mansion,
and communicated with an endless series of rooms, which, numerous as
they were, were all occupied, and, accommodation being found impossible
for the whole of the guests, many were sent to the new erections in the
base court, which had been planned to meet the emergency by the
magnificent and provident host. The nobles and gentlemen were, however,
far outnumbered by their servants, and the confusion occasioned by the
running to and fro of the various grooms of the chambers, was
indescribable. Doublets had to be brushed, ruffs plaited, hair curled,
beards trimmed, and all with the greatest possible expedition; so that,
as soon as day dawned upon Hoghton Tower, there was a prodigious racket
from one end of it to the other. Many favoured servants slept in
truckle-beds in their masters' rooms; but others, not so fortunate, and
unable to find accommodation even in the garrets--for the smallest
rooms, and those nearest the roof, were put in requisition--slept upon
the benches in the hall, while several sat up all night carousing in the
great kitchen, keeping company with the cooks and their assistants, who
were busied all the time in preparations for the feasting of the morrow.

Such was the state of things inside Hoghton Tower early on the eventful
morning in question, and out of doors, especially in the base court
which Nicholas was traversing, the noise, bustle, and confusion were
equally great. Wide as was the area, it was filled with various
personages, some newly arrived, and seeking information as to their
quarters--not very easily obtained, for it seemed every body's business
to ask questions, and no one's to answer them--some gathered in groups
round the falconers and huntsmen, who had suddenly risen into great
importance; others, and these were for the most part smart young pages,
in brilliant liveries, chattering, and making love to every pretty
damsel they encountered, putting them out of countenance by their
licence and strange oaths, and rousing the anger of their parents, and
the jealousy of their rustic admirers; others, of a graver sort, with
dress of formal cut, and puritanical expression of countenance,
shrugging their shoulders, and looking sourly on the whole
proceedings--luckily they were in the minority, for the generality of
the groups were composed of lively and light-hearted people, bent
apparently upon amusement, and tolerably certain of finding it. Through
these various groups numerous lackeys were passing swiftly and
continuously to and fro, bearing a cap, a mantle, or a sword, and
pushing aside all who interfered with their progress, with a "by your
leave, my masters--your pardon, fair mistress"--or, "out of my way,
knave!" and, as the stables occupied one entire angle of the court,
there were grooms without end dressing the horses at the doors, watering
them at the troughs, or leading them about amid the admiring or
criticising bystanders. The King's horses were, of course, objects of
special attraction, and such as could obtain a glimpse of them and of
the royal coach thought themselves especially favoured. Besides what was
going forward below, the windows looking into the court were all full of
curious observers, and much loud conversation took place between those
placed at them and their friends underneath. From all this some idea
will be formed of the tremendous din that prevailed; but though with
much confusion there was no positive disorder, still less brawling, for
yeomen of the guard being stationed at various points, perfect order was
maintained. Several minstrels, mummers, and merry-makers, in various
fantastic habits, swelled the throng, enlivening it with their strains
or feats; and amongst other privileged characters admitted was a Tom o'
Bedlam, a half-crazed licensed beggar, in a singular and picturesque
garb, with a plate of tin engraved with his name attached to his left
arm, and a great ox's horn, which he was continually blowing, suspended
by a leathern baldric from his neck.

Scarcely had Nicholas joined his companions, than word was given that
the king was about to attend morning prayers in the domestic chapel.
Upon this, an immediate rush was made in that direction by the crowd;
but the greater part were kept back by the guard, who crossed their
halberts to prevent their ingress, and a few only were allowed to enter
the antechamber leading to the chapel, amongst whom were the squire and
his companions.

Here they were detained within it till service was over, and, as prayers
were read by the Bishop of Chester, and the whole Court was present,
this was a great disappointment to them. At the end of half an hour two
very courtly personages came forth, each bearing a white wand, and,
announcing that the King was coming forth, the assemblage immediately
divided into two lines to allow a passage for the monarch. Nicholas
Assheton informed Richard in a whisper that the foremost and stateliest
of the two gentlemen was Lord Stanhope of Harrington, the
vice-chamberlain, and the other, a handsome young man of slight figure
and somewhat libertine expression of countenance, was the renowned Sir
John Finett, master of the ceremonies. Notwithstanding his
licentiousness, however, which was the vice of the age and the stain of
the court, Sir John was a man of wit and address, and perfectly
conversant with the duties of his office, of which he has left
satisfactory evidence in an amusing tractate, "Finetti Philoxenis."

Some little time elapsed before the King made his appearance, during
which the curiosity of such as had not seen him, as was the case with
Richard, was greatly excited. The young man wondered whether the
pedantic monarch, whose character perplexed the shrewdest, would answer
his preconceived notions, and whether it would turn out that his
portraits were like him. While these thoughts were passing through his
mind, a shuffling noise was heard without, and King James appeared at
the doorway. He paused there for a moment to place his plumed and
jewelled cap upon his head, and to speak a word with Sir John Finett,
and during this Richard had an opportunity of observing him. The
portraits _were_ like, but the artists had flattered him, though not
much. There was great shrewdness of look, but there was also a vacant
expression, which seemed to contradict the idea of profound wisdom
generally ascribed to him. When in perfect repose, which they were not
for more than a minute, the features were thoughtful, benevolent, and
pleasing, and Richard began to think him quite handsome, when another
change was wrought by some remark of Sir John Finett. As the Master of
the Ceremonies told his tale, the King's fine dark eyes blazed with an
unpleasant light, and he laughed so loudly and indecorously at the close
of the narrative, with his great tongue hanging out of his mouth, and
tears running down his cheeks, that the young man was quite sickened.
The King's face was thin and long, the cheeks shaven, but the lips
clothed with mustaches, and a scanty beard covered his chin. The hair
was brushed away from the face, and the cap placed at the back of the
head, so as to exhibit a high bald forehead, of which he was
prodigiously vain. James was fully equipped for the chase, and wore a
green silk doublet, quilted, as all his garments were, so as to be
dagger-proof, enormous trunk-hose, likewise thickly stuffed, and buff
boots, fitting closely to the leg, and turned slightly over at the knee,
with the edges fringed with gold. This was almost the only appearance of
finery about the dress, except a row of gold buttons down the jerkin.
Attached to his girdle he wore a large pouch, with the mouth drawn
together by silken cords, and a small silver bugle was suspended from
his neck by a baldric of green silk. Stiffly-starched bands, edged with
lace, and slightly turned down on either side of the face, completed his
attire. There was nothing majestic, but the very reverse, in the King's
deportment, and he seemed only kept upright by the exceeding stiffness
of his cumbersome clothes. With the appearance of being corpulent, he
was not so in reality, and his weak legs and bent knees were scarcely
able to support his frame. He always used a stick, and generally sought
the additional aid of a favourite's arm.

In this instance the person selected was Sir Gilbert Hoghton, the eldest
son of Sir Richard, and subsequent owner of Hoghton Tower. Indebted for
the high court favour he enjoyed partly to his graceful person and
accomplishments, and partly to his marriage, having espoused a daughter
of Sir John Aston of Cranford, who, as sister of the Duchess of
Buckingham, and a descendant of the blood royal of the Stuarts, was a
great help to his rapid rise, the handsome young knight was skilled in
all manly exercises, and cited as a model of grace in the dance.
Constant in attendance upon the court, he frequently took part in the
masques performed before it. Like the King, he was fully equipped for
hunting; but greater contrast could not have been found than between his
tall fine form and the King's ungainly figure. Sir Gilbert had remained
behind with the rest of the courtiers in the chapel; but, calling him,
James seized his arm, and set forward at his usual shambling pace. As he
went on, nodding his head in return to the profound salutations of the
assemblage, his eye rolled round them until it alighted on Richard
Assheton, and, nudging Sir Gilbert, he asked--

"Wha's that?--a bonnie lad, but waesome pale."

Sir Gilbert, however, was unable to answer the inquiry; but Nicholas,
who stood beside the young man, was determined not to lose the
opportunity of introducing him, and accordingly moved a step forward,
and made a profound obeisance.

"This youth, may it please your Majesty," he said, "is my cousin,
Richard Assheton, son and heir of Sir Richard Assheton of Middleton, one
of your Majesty's most loyal and devoted servants, and who, I trust,
will have the honour of being presented to you in the course of the
day."

"We trust so, too, Maister Nicholas Assheton--for that, if we dinna
forget, is your ain name," replied James; "and if the sire resembles the
son, whilk is not always the case, as our gude freend, Sir Gilbert, is
evidence, being as unlike his worthy father as a man weel can be; if, as
we say, Sir Richard resembles this callant, he must be a weel-faur'd
gentleman. But, God's santie, lad! how cam you in sic sad and sombre
abulyiements? Hae ye nae braw claes to put on to grace our coming? Black
isna the fashion at our court, as Sir Gilbert will tell ye, and, though
a suit o' sables may become you, it's no pleasing in our sight. Let us
see you in gayer apparel at dinner."

Richard, who was considerably embarrassed by the royal address, merely
bowed, and Nicholas again took upon himself to answer for him.

"Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon him," he said; "but he is
unaccustomed to court fashions, having passed all his time in a wild and
uncivilized district, where, except on rare and happy occasions like the
present, the refined graces of life seldom reach us."

"Weel, we wouldna be hard upon him," said the King, good-naturedly; "and
mayhap the family has sustained some recent loss, and he is in
mourning."

"I cannot offer that excuse for him, sire," replied Nicholas, who began
to flatter himself he was making considerable progress in the monarch's
good graces. "It is simply an affair of the heart."

"Puir chiel! we pity him," cried the King. "And sae it is a hopeless
suit, young sir?" he added to Richard. "Canna we throw in a good word
for ye? Do we ken the lassie, and is she to be here to-day?"

"I am quite at a loss how to answer your Majesty's questions," replied
Richard, "and my cousin Nicholas has very unfairly betrayed my secret."

"Hoot, toot! na, lad," exclaimed James; "it wasna he wha betrayed your
secret, but our ain discernment that revealed it to us. We kenned your
ailment at a glance. Few things are hidden from the King's eye, and we
could tell ye mair aboot yoursel', and the lassie you're deeing for, if
we cared to speak it; but just now we have other fish to fry, and must
awa' and break our fast, of the which, if truth maun be spoken, we stand
greatly in need; for creature comforts maun be aye looked to as weel as
spiritual wants, though the latter should be ever cared for first, as
is our ain rule; and in so doing we offer an example to our subjects,
which they will do weel to follow. Later in the day, we will talk
further to you on the subject; but, meanwhile, gie us the name of your
lassie loo."

"Oh! spare me, your Majesty," cried Richard.

"Her name is Alizon Nutter," interposed Nicholas.

"What! a daughter of Alice Nutter of Rough Lee?" exclaimed James.

"The same, sire," replied Nicholas, much surprised at the extent of
information manifested by the King.

"Why, saul o' my body! man, she's a witch--a witch! d'ye ken that?"
cried the King, with a look of abhorrence; "a mischievous and malignant
vermin, with which this pairt of our realm is sair plagued, but which,
with God's help, we will thoroughly extirpate. Sae the lass is a
daughter of Alice Nutter, ha! That accounts for your grewsome looks,
lad. Odd's life! I see it all now. I understand what is the matter with
you. Look at him, Sir Gilbert--look at him, I say! Does naething strike
you as strange about him?"

"Nothing more than that he is naturally embarrassed by your Majesty's
mode of speech," replied the knight.

"You lack the penetration of the King, Sir Gilbert," cried James. "I
will tell you what ails him. He is bewitchit--forespoken."

Exclamations were uttered by all the bystanders, and every eye was fixed
on Richard, who felt ready to sink to the ground.

"I affirm he is bewitchit," continued the King; "and wha sae likely to
do it as the glamouring hizzie that has ensnared him? She has ill bluid
in her veins, and can chant deevil's cantrips as weel as the mither, or
ony gyre-carline o' them a'."

"You are mistaken, sire," cried Richard, earnestly. "Alizon will be here
to-day with my father and sister, and, if you deign to receive her, I am
sure you will judge her differently."

"We shall perpend the point of receiving her," replied the King,
gravely. "But we are rarely mista'en, young man, and seldom change our
opinion except upon gude grounds, and those you arena like to offer us.
Belike ye hae been lang ill?"

"Oh! no, your Majesty, I was suddenly seized, about a month ago,"
replied Richard.

"Suddenly seized--eh!" exclaimed James, winking cunningly at those near
him; "and ye swarfit awa' wi' the pain? I guessed it. And whaur was
Alizon the while?"

"At that time she was a guest at Middleton," replied Richard; "but it is
impossible my illness can in any way be attributed to her. I will answer
with my life for her perfect innocence."

"You may have to answer wi' your life for your misplaced faith in her,"
said the King; "but I tell you naething--naething wicked, at all
events--is impossible to witches, and the haill case, even by your own
showin', is very suspicious. I have heard somewhat of the story of Alice
Nutter, but not the haill truth--but there are folk here wha can
enlighten us mair fully. Thus much I do ken--that she is a notorious
witch, and a fugitive from justice; though siblins you, Maister Nicholas
Assheton, could give an inkling of her hiding-place if you were so
disposed. Nay, never look doited, man," he added, laughing, "I bring nae
charges against you. Ye arena on your trial noo. But this is a serious
matter, and maun be seriously considered before we dismiss it. You say
