of the leaders to pay, in all, about a million dollars in fines.
Dr. Jameson was sent to England and imprisoned for a short time.  A
committee appointed by Parliament investigated the invasion of the
Transvaal and charged Cecil J. Rhodes, then Prime Minister of Cape
Colony, with having helped on the raid.  From this time the feeling of
hatred between the Boers and the "Outlanders" grew more and more
intense.  Lord Salisbury, the Conservative Prime Minister, believed,
with his party, that the time had come for decisive action on the part
of the Government.  The fires so long smoldered now burst into flame,
and England resolved to fight to maintain her authority in the
Transvaal.

War began in the autumn of 1899, and the Orange Free State united with
the Transvaal against Great Britain.  (See map facing p. 428.)  The
Boers took up arms for independence.  The English forces under Lord
Roberts began fighting, first in behalf of the "Outlanders," next to
keep the British Empire together, and, finally, "to extend English
law, liberty, and civilization."

Mr. Chamberlain, who was in Lord Salisbury's Cabinet (S534), agreed
with his chief that the sword must settle the question, but he said
that the contest in South Africa would be "a long war, a bitter war,
and a costly war." Events proved the truth of part of his prediction.
The contest was certainly "bitter," for it carried sorrow and death
into many thousand homes.  It was "costly," too, for the total expense
to England amounted to nearly 200,000,000 pounds.

England finally overthrew and formally annexed (1901) the two Boer
republics, aggregating over one hundred and sixty-seven thousand
square miles.  But to accomplish that work she was forced to send two
hundred and fifty thousand men to South Africa,--the largest army she
ever put into a field in the whole course of her history.  The great
majority of the English people believed that the war was inevitable.
But there was an active minority who insisted that it was really
undertaken in behalf of the South African mine owners.  They did not
hesitate to condemn the "Jingo" policy[1] of the Government as
disastrous to the best interests of the country.  In the midst of the
discussion Queen Victoria died (January 22, 1901).  The Prince of
Wales succeeded to the crown under the title of King Edward VII.

[1] Lord Beaconsfield, the Conservative Prime Minister (1874-1880),
made several petty wars in South Africa and in Afghanistan.  A popular
music-hall song glorified his work, declaring:
                "We don't want to fight, but by Jingo, if we do,
                 We've got the ships, we've got the men,
                 We've got the money, too."

624. Summary.

Queen Victoria's reign of sixty-three years--the longest in English
history--was remarkable in many ways.

The chief political events were:

1. The establishment of the practical supremacy of the House of
   Commons, shown by the fact that the Sovereign was now obliged to
   give up the power of removing the Prime Minister or members of his
   Cabinet without the consent of the House, or of retaining them
   contrary to its desire.
2. The broadening of the basis of suffrage and the extension of the
   principle of local self-government.
3. The abolition of the requirement of property qualification for
   Parliamentary candidates; the admission of Jews to Parliament; and
   the overthrow of the Spoils System.
4. The repeals of the Corn Laws; the adoption of the Free-Trade
   policy; and the Emancipation of Labor.
5. The Small Agricultural Holdings Act; the Irish Land Acts; the
   abolition of Church rates; and the disestablishment of the Irish
   branch of the Church of England.
6. The arbitration of the Alabama case.
7. The progress of transportation and of the rapid transmission of
   intelligence was marked by the extension of railways to all parts
   of hte British Isles and to many other parts of the Empire; the
   introduction of the telegraph and the telephone; the laying of the
   Atlantic cable; the introduction of penny postage; the rise of
   cheap newspapers, of photography, of wireless telegraphy, and of
   the use of electricity to drive street cars and machinery.
8. The progress of education was marked by the establishment of
   practically free elementary schools, free libraries, and the
   abolition of religious tests in the universities.
9. The progress of science and philosophy was shown by the
   introduction of painless and also of antiseptic surgery, the use of
   the German X ray, and the rise and spread of the Darwinian theory
   of Evolution.
10. Other events having far-reaching results were the terrible Irish
    famine, the Opium War, the Crimean War, the rebellion in India,
    the Trent affair, the war in the Sudan, and the great Boer War.
11. Finally, we see the important work accomplished in India, Egypt,
    and other parts of Africa; the acquisition of the control of the
    Suez Canal; and the great expansion of the power of the Empire in
    Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.


                        EDWARD VII--1901-1910

625. End of the Boer War (1902); Completion of Imperial Federation,
     1910.

Not long after Edward VII came to the throne the Boers (S623) laid
down their arms (1902) and recognized the King as their true and
lawful Sovereign.  The announcement set the "joy bells" ringing all
over Great Britain.

Under Edward VII the Crown became the center of a greart movement for
more complete Imperial Unity.  We have seen that the process of
forming a federation of Great Britain and her widely scattered
colonies had made good progress under Victoria (SS618, 619).  She had
seen the creation of the Dominion of Canada (1867), the Dominion of
New Zealand (1875), and the consolidation of the six Australian
colonies into the Commonwealth of Australia (1901).  Nine years later
(1910) the four states which had been the scene of the Boer War (S623)
were consolidated in like manner and received the name of the Union of
South Africa.[1]  Boer and Briton seem now to have made up their minds
to live together as one family, and, as farmers and stock raisers,
they will work out their destiny on the land.  Speaking of the
political significance of this event, a prominent official in South
Africa said, "Without the influence of King Edward I, I do not think
the union could have been effected."

[1] The Union of South Africa is formed of the states of the Cape of
Good Hope, the Transvaal, and the Orange Free State.  Lord Gladstone,
son of the late W.E. Gladstone, was appointed Governor of the new
Commonwealth, and General Botha, who had commanded in the Boer army,
was made Prime Minister.

The establishment of the Union of South Africa completed the framework
of the Imperial Federation (SS618, 619).  Admiral Mahan, of the
American navy, classes the expansion of the British Empire with that
of the expansion of the United States, and declares that it ranks as
one of the foremost facts of "contemporaneous history."  The
Commonwealth of Australia and the Union of South Africa (with the
Dominion of New Zealand) mark the southern limit of the Imperial
Federation.  The Dominion of Canada marks its northeren limit.  (See
map facing p. 422.)

All these British possessions enjoy a degree of self-government which
falls but little short of entire independence.  In fact, commercially
they are independent, for, as we have seen (S616), while England
maintains free trade, her colonies still keep up a strict protective
tariff and impose duties even on British imports.  Notwithstanding
this difference, all the colonies are loyal subjects of the English
Crown, and all stand ready to defend the English flag.

626. The League of Empire.

While this successful movement toward Imperial Federation was going
on, the organization of the League of Empire had been formed (1901) to
cooperate with it and strengthen it.

The League is nonpolitical and nonsectarian.  It aims to unite the
different parts of the Imperial Federation by intellectual and moral
bonds.  It appeals to the whole body of the people of the Empire, but
it deals especially with the children in the schools.  It endeavors to
educate them in the duties of citizenship, and it calls on them to
salute the national flag as the symbol of patriotism, of unity, and of
loyalty.  A little later, Empire Day was established (1904) as a
public holiday to help forward the work of the League.  King Edward
gave it his hearty encouragement, and it is celebrated throughout the
British Isles and the self-governing colonies of the Imperial
Federation.

627.  The King's Influence in Behalf of Peace.

While seeking to make all England and English dominions in one spirit,
King Edward constantly used his influence to maintain peace both at
home and abroad.  He was a man whose natural kindliness of heart
endowed him with the double power of making and of keeping friends.
Furthermore, he was a born diplomatist.  He saw at once the best
method of handling the most difficult questions.  Those who knew him
intimately said that "he always did the right thing, at the right
time, in the right way."

To a great extent he was a creator of international confidence.  In
his short reign he succeeded in overcoming the old race feeling which
made England and France regard each other as enemies.  Again, Russia
and England had been on unfriendly terms for nearly two generations,
but the King, by his strong personal influence, brought the two
countries to understand each other better.

He saw that Europe needed peace.  He saw that the outbreak of a
general war would strike the laboring man a terrible blow, and would
destroy the fruits of his toil.  When he ascended the throne (1901)
the contest with the Boers in South Africa was still going on.
General Botha, one of the Boer leaders, publicly stated that the King
did everything in his power to secure the establishment of an
honorable and permanent peace between the combatants.  More than that,
even, he was in favor of granting a large measure of self-government
to the very people who had only just laid down the arms with which
they had been fighting him.

But the King's influence for good was not limited to the Old World.
It extended across the Atlantic.  Mr. Choate, who was formerly our
ambassador to England, said that Edward VII endeavored to remove every
cause of friction between Great Britain and America.  While he lay on
a sick bed he signed a treaty relating to the Panama Canal, which made
"it possible for the United States to construct the waterway and to
protect it forever."[1]

[1] This was the treaty repealing the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty of 1850.
See the address of Honorable Joseph H. Choate before the New York
Chamber of Commerce, June 2, 1910.

628. The Politcal Battle in England; Labor gets into Parliament, 1906.

But the King's success in international politics did not secure peace
in the field of home politics.  Organized labor had long been bent on
pushing its way into Parliament.  In a few cases, like that of Joseph
Arch (S600), it had elected a representative,[2] but these were
scattered victories which made no great impression.

[2] Besides Joseph Arch, such men as John Burns and J. Keir Hardie.

The real upheaval came in the General Election of 1906.  That contest
wrought a silent revolution.  Up to that date, with very few
exceptions, the wealthy class was the only one which had been
represented in the House of Commons.  Furthermore, it cost a good deal
of money for any candidate to get into the House, and as members drew
no pay, it cost a good deal more money to remain there.

In 1906 the Liberal Party and the Labor Party gained a sweeping
victory over the Conservative Party, and Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman,
the Liberal Prime Minister, came into power, 1906-1908.  Out of the
six hundred and seventy members who had been elected to the House of
Commons, fifty-four came from the ranks of the workingmen,--those to
whom life means an unending struggle to live.[3]  The combined Labor
voters sent these men to represent them in Parliament, and then raised
a fund to meet the expense of keeping them there.[4]

[3] John Burns, who was one of the earliest workingmen to enter
Parliament as a Labor leader, said of himself, "Came into the world
with a struggle, struggling now, with prospects of continuing it."
[4] But later, the Court of Appeal (S588) decided that the Labor Party
could not legally compel any member of the Labor Union to contribute
to this fund against his will.  Now (1911) Parliament pays all members
of the Commons (see S591).

These "Laborites," as they are popularly called, claim that their
influence secured the passage of the Old Age Pensions Act (1908), for
the relief of the aged and deserving poor; the Act for Feeding
Destitute School Children; and the Act establishing Labor Exchanges
(1909) throughout the country to help those who are looking for work.

The entrance of the working class and of the Socialists into
Parliament marks the transference of power from the House of Commons
directly to the mass of the people.  Public opinion is now the real
active force in legislation, and the lawmakers are eager to know what
"the man in the street" and the "man with the hoe" are thinking.

This closeness of touch between Parliament and People has evident
advantages, but it also has at least one serious drawback.  In times
of great public excitement it might lead to hasty legislation, unless
the House of Lords should be able to interpose and procure the further
consideration of questions of vital importance which it would be
dangerous to attempt to settle offhand (S631).

629. The Budget; Woman Suffrage; the Content with the Lords.

Mr. Asquith, the Liberal Prime Minister,[1] found that the Government
must raise a very large amount of money to defray the heavy cost of
the old-age pensions (S628) and the far heavier cost of eight new
battleships.  Mr. Lloyd George, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or
Secretary of the Treasury, brought in a Budget[2] which roused excited
and long-continued debate.  The Chancellor's measure called for a
great increase of taxes on real estate in towns and cities where the
land had risen in value, and on land containing coal, iron, or other
valuable minerals.[3]

[1] Mr. Asquith succeeded Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman, the Liberal
Prime Minister (S628), who died in the spring of 1908.
[2] The official estimate of the amount of money which the Government
must raise by taxation to meet its expenses for the year, together
with the scheme of taxation proposed, are called the Budget.
[3] In all cases where the owner of the land had himself done nothing
to produce the rise in value, the Chancellor called that rise the
"unearned increment," and held that the owner should be taxed for it
accordingly.  Most great landowners and many small ones execrate the
man who made a practical application of this unpalatable phrase.

The House of Commons passed the Budget (1909), but the House of Lords,
which includes the wealthiest landowners in the British Isles,
rejected it.  They declared that it was not only unjust and
oppressive, but that it was a long step toward the establishment of
socialism, and that it threatened to lead to the confiscation of
private property in land.  A bitter conflict ensued between the two
branches of Parliament.

This contest was rendered harder by the actions of a small number of
turbulent women, who demanded complete suffrage but failed to get it
(SS599, 608).[1] Adopting the methods of a football team, they
endeavored to force themselves into the House of Commons; they
interrupted public meetings, smashed winows, assaulted members of the
Cabinet, and, in one case, tried to destroy the ballots at the
polls,--in short, they broke the laws in order to convince the country
of their fitness to take part in making them.  Over six hundred of
these offenders were put in prison, not because they asked for "Votes
for Women," but because they deliberately, persistently, and
recklessly misconducted themselves.

[1] The great majority of woman suffragists refused to adopt these
violent methods.

630. A New Parliamentary Election; the Lords accept the Budget.

The rejection of the Budget by the House of Lords (S629) caused a new
Parliamentary election (1910).  The Liberal Party with the Labor Party
again won the victory, but with a decidedly diminished majority.
Mr. Asquith, the Liberal Prime Minister, declared that the policy of
the Liberal Government forbade any concessions whatever to the Lords.
The Lords thought it unwise to carry the contest further, and when the
new Parliament met they bowed to the inevitable and reluctantly voted
to accept the Budget,--land taxes and all.[2]

[2] The Liberal Party in power threatened, in case the Lords continued
to refuse to accept the Budget, that they would either request the
King to create a sufficient number of Liberal Peers to carry it
(S582), or that they would make the country go through another
election.

631. New Warships; a New Domesday Book; Death of King Edward.

This acceptance of the Budget made the Government feel reasonably sure
that it would get the 16,000,000 pounds required to pay for eight new
battleships (S629).  It also encouraged the War Department to spend a
considerable sum in experimenting with military airships as a means of
defense against invasion.  Great Britain, like Germany, believes that
such vessels have become a necessity; for since a foreigner flew
across the Channel and landed at Dover (1909), England has felt that
her navy on the sea must be supplemented by a navy above the sea.  Two
of these government airships are now frequently seen cricling at
express speed around the great dome of St. Paul's.

The Government also began preparations for the compilation of a new
Domesday Book (S120), which should revalue all the land in the British
Isles, in order to establish a permanent vasis for increased
taxation.[1]  The House of Commons furthermore took up the debate on
adopting measures for limiting the power of Lords to veto bills passed
by the Commons.  While they were so engaged King Edward died (May 6,
1910); his son was crowned in 1911, with the title of George V.

[1] The last general valuation of the land was made in 1692; it was
then fixed at 9,000,000 pounds.  The land tax, based on this
valuation, has yielded about 2,000,000 pounds annually.  The
Government expects that the new valuation will yield much more.

In the summer of 1911 Mr. Asquith, the Liberal Prime Minister, after
prolonged and heated discussion, forced the House of Lords to accept
the Veto Bill, which is now law.  He did this by using the same threat
which enable Earl Grey to carry the Reform Bill of 1832 (S582).  The
Veto Act makes it impossible for the House of Lords to defeat any
Public Bill which the House of Commons has passed for three successive
sessions, extending over a period of not less than two years.  This
momentous Act was passed at a critical time when the great Dockers
Strike had practically closed the port of London, and had cut off the
chief food supply of the city.  A little later, the Prime Minister
passed the Salary Bill, which pays the members of the House of Commons
400 pounds annually (S591).  Next, the Government passed (1911) the
Workmen's Compulsory Insurance Bill against sickness and
unemployment.  The worker and his employer contribute small sums
weekly, the Government gives the rest.  The law has an excellent
motive.

632. General Summary of the Development of the English Nation.

Such is the condition of the English nation in the twentieth century
and in the reign of King George V.  Looking back to the time when
Caesar landed in Britain, we see that since that period an island
which then had a population of a few thousand "barbarians" (SS4, 18)
has gradually become the center of a great and powerful empire (SS14,
15).

The true history of the country began, however, not with Caesar's
landing, but with the Saxon invasion in 449, about five centuries
later.  Then the fierce blue-eyed German and Scandinavian races living
on the shores of the Baltic and North Seas took possession of Britain.
They, with the help of the primitive British, or Celtic, stock, laid
the foundation of a new nation.  Their speech in a modified form,
their laws, and their customs became in large degree permanent.

Later, missionaries from Rome converted this mixed population to the
Christian faith.  They baptized Britain with the name England, which
it has ever since retained (S50).

In the eleventh century the Normans, who sprang originally from the
same stock as the Northmen and Saxons, conquered the island.  They
grafted onto the civilization which they found there certain elements
of Continental civilization (S126).  Eventually the Saxon yeoman and
the Norman knight joined hands and fortunes, and became one people
(S192).

This union was first unmistakable recognized in the provisions of
Magna Carta (S199).  When in 1215 the barons forced King John to grant
that memorable document they found it expedient to protect the rights
of every class of the population.  Then nobles, clergy, farmers,
townsmen, and laborers whether bond or free, stood, as it were,
shoulder to shoulder.

The rise of free towns marked another long step forward (S183).  That
movement secured to their inhabitants many precious privileges of
self-government.  Then the Wat Tyler insurrection of a subsequent
period (S251) led gradually to the emancipation of that numerous class
which had long been in partial bondage (S252).

Meanwhile the real unity of the people clearly showed itself at the
time when the Crown began to tax the poor as well as the rich.  The
moment the King laid hands on the tradesman's and the laborer's
pockets they demanded to have their share in making the laws.  Out of
that demand, made in 1265, rose the House of Commons (SS213, 217).  It
was a body, as its name implies, composed of representatives chosen
mainly from the people and by the people.

Next, after generations of arduous struggle, followed by the King's
grant of the Petition of Right (S432) and then by the great Civil War
(SS441, 450), it was finally settled that the House of Commons, and
the House of Commons alone, had complete power over the nation's
purse.  From that time the King knew, once for all, that he could not
take the people's money unless it was granted by the people's vote
(S588).

After the flight of James II Parliament passed the Bill of Rights in
1689 and in 1701 the Act of Settlement (S497).  These two
revolutionary measures wrought a radical change in the government of
England.  They deliberately set aside the old order of hereditary
royal succession and established a new order which made the King
directly dependent on the people for his title and his power to rule
(S497).  About the same time, Parliament passed the Toleration Act,
which granted a larger degree of religious liberty (S496), and in 1695
the House of Commons took action which secured the freedom of the
press (S498).

Less than thirty years afterwards another radical change took place.
Hitherto the King had appointed his own private Council, or Cabinet
(S476), but when George I came to the htrone from Germany he could
speak no English.  One of the members of the Cabinet became Prime
Minister in 1721, and the King left the management of the government
to him and his assoaciates (S534).

Two generations later another great change occurred.  Watt's invention
of a really practical steam engine in 1785, together with the rapid
growth of manufacturing towns in the Midlands and the North of
England, brought on an "Industrial Revolution" (S563).  A factory
population grew up, which found itself without any representation in
Parliament.  The people of that section demanded that this serious
inequality be righted.  Their persistent efforts compelled the passage
of the great Reform Bill of 1832.  That measure (S582) broke up the
political monopoly hitherto enjoyed in large degree by the
landholders, and distributed much of the power among the middle
classes.

The next important change took place at the accession of Victoria
(1837).  The principle was then finally established that the ruling
power of the government does not center in the Crown but in the
Cabinet (S534).  Furthermore, it was settled that the Prime Minister
and his Cabinet are responsible solely to the House of Commons, which
in its turn is responsible only to the expressed will of the majority
of the nation (S587).

In the course of the next half century the Reform Bills of 1867 and
1884 extended the suffrage to the great majority of the population
(S600).  A little more than twenty years later, in 1906, the combined
Liberal and Labor parties gained an overwhelming victory at the
polls.  This secured the workingmen fifty-four seats in Parliament
(S628), whereas, up to that time, they had never had more than three
or four.  It then became evident that a new power had entered the
House of Commons.  From that date the nation has fully realized that
although England is a monarchy in name, yet it is a republic in fact.
The slow progress of time has at length given to the British people--
English, Scotch, Welsh, and Irish--the great gift of practical
liberty; but along with it, it has imposed that political
responsibility which is always the price which must be paid for the
maintenance of liberty.

633. Characteristics of English History; the Unity of the
     English-Speaking Race; Conclusion.

This rapid and imperfect sketch shows what has been accomplished by
the people of Britain.  Other European peoples may have developed
earlier, and made, perhaps, more rapid advances in certain forms of
civilization, but none have surpassed, nay, none have equaled, the
English-speaking race in the practical characer and permanence of its
progress.

Guizot says[1] that the true order of national development in free
government is, first, to convert the natural liberties of man into
clearly defined political rights; and, next, to guarantee the security
of those rights by the establishment of forces capable of maintaining
them.

[1] Guizot's "History of Representative Government," lect. vi.

Nowhere do we find better illustrations of this truth than in the
history of England, and of the colonies which England has planted.
For the fact cannot be too strongly emphasized that *in European
history England stands as the leader in the development of
constitutional Government* (SS199, 497).  Trial by jury (S176), the
legal right to resist oppression (S261), legislative representation
(SS213, 217), religious freedom (S496), the freedom of the press
(S498), and, finally, the principle that all political power is a
trust held for the public good,[1]--these are the assured results of
Anglo-Saxon growth, and the legitimate heritage of every nation of
Anglo-Saxon descent.

[1] Macaulay's "Essay on Sir Robert Walpole."

It is no exaggeration to say that the best men and the best minds in
England, without distinction of rank or class, are now laboring for
the advancement of the people.  They see, what has never been so
clearly seen before, that the nation is a unit, that the welfare of
each depends ultimately on the welfare of all, and that the higher a
man stands and the greater his wealth and privileges, so much the more
is he bound to extend a helping hand to those less favored than
himself.

The Socialists, it is true, demand the abolition of private property
in land and the nationalizing not only of the soil but of all mines,
railways, waterworks, and docks in the kingdom.  Thus far, however,
they have shown no disposition to attain their objects by violent
action.  England, by nature conservative, is slow to break the bond of
historic continuity which connects her present with her past.

"Do you think we shall ever have a second revolution?" the Duke of
Wellington was once asked. "We may," answered the great general, "but
if we do, it will come by act of Parliament." That reply probably
expresses the general temper of the people, who believe that they can
gain by the ballot more than they can by an appeal to force, knowing
that theirs is

            "A land of settled government,
             A land of just and old renown,
             Where freedom broadens slowly down,
             From precedent to precedent."[2]

[2] Tennyson's "You Ask Me Why."

It is impossible for the great majority of Americans not to take a
deep interest in this movement, for we can never forget that English
history is in a very large degree our history, and that England is, as
Hawthorne likes to call it, "our old home."

In fact, if we go back less than three centuries, the record of
America becomes one with that of the mother country, which first
discovered (SS335, 421) and first permanently settled this, and which
gave us for leaders and educators Washington, Franklin, the Adamses,
and John Harvard.  In descent by far the greater part of us are of
English blood or of blood akin to it.[1] We owe to England--that is,
to the British Isles and to the different races which have met and
mingled there--much of our language, literature, law, legislative
forms of government, and the essential features of our civilization.
In fact, without a knowledge of her history, we cannot rightly
understand our own.

[1] In 1840 the population of the United States, in round numbers, was
17,000,000, of whom the greater part were probably of English
descent.  Since then there has been an enormous immigration, 40 per
cent of which were from the British Isles; but it is perhaps safe to
say that three quarters of our present population are those were were
living here in 1840, with their descendents.  Of the immigrants (up to
1890) coming from non-English-speaking races, the Germans and
Scandinavians predominated, and it is to them, as we have seen, that
the English, in large measure, owe their origin (SS37-39, 126).  It
should be noted here that the word "English" is used so as to include
the people of the United Kingdom and their descendants on both sides
of the Atlantic.

Standing on her soil, we possess practically the same personal rights
that we do in America; we speak the same tongue, we meet with the same
familiar names.  We feel that whatever is glorious in her past is ours
also; that Westminster Abbey belongs as much to us as to her, for our
ancestors helped to build its walls and their dust is gathered in its
tombs; that Shakespeare and Milton belong to us in like manner, for
they wrote in the language we speak, for the instruction and delight
of our fathers' fathers, who beat back the Spanish Armada and gave
their lives for liberty on the fields of Marston Moor and Naseby.

Let it be granted that grave issues have arisen in the past to
separate us; yet, after all, our interests and our sympathies, like
our national histories, have more in common than they have apart.  The
progress of each country now reacts for good on the other.[2]

[2] In this connection the testimony of Captain Alfred T. Mahan, in
his recent work, "The Problem of Asia," is worth quoting here.  He
says (p. 187), speaking of our late war with Spain: "The writer has
been assured, by an authority in which he entirely trusts, that to a
proposition made to Great Britain to enter into a combination to
constrain the use of our [United States] power,--as Japan was five
years ago constrained by the joint action of Russia, France, and
Germany,--the reply [of Great Britain] was not only a positive refusal
to enter into such a combination [against the United States], but an
assurance of active resistance to it if attempted...Call such an
attitude [on the part of England toward the United States] friendship,
or policy, as you will--the name is immaterial; the fact is the
essential thing and will endure, because it rests upon solid
interest."

If we consider the total combined population of the United States and
of the British Empire, we find that to-day upwards of 150,000,000
people speak the English tongue and are governed by the fundamental
principles of that Common Law which has its root in English soil.
This population holds possession of more than 15,000,000 square miles
of the earth's surface,--an area much larger than that of the united
continents of North America and Europe.  By far the greater part of
the wealth and power of the globe is theirs.

They have expanded by their territorial and colonial growth as no
other people have.  They have absorbed and assimilated the multitudes
of emigrants from every quarter of the globe that have poured into
their dominions.

The result is that the inhabitants of the British Isles, of Australia,
of New Zealand, of a part of South Africa, of the United States, and
of Canada practically form one great Anglo-Saxon race,[1] diverse in
origin, separated by distance, but everywhere exhibiting the same
spirit of intelligent enterprise and of steady, resistless growth.
Thus considered, America and England are necessary one to the other.
Their interests now and in the future are essentially the same.  Bothe
contries are virtually pledged to make every effort to maintain
liberty and self-government, and also to maintain mutual peace by
arbitration.

[1] Such apparent exceptions as the Dutch in South Africa, the French
in Canada, and the Negroes in the United States do not essentially
affect the truth of this statement, since in practice the people of
these races uphold the great fundamental principles on which all
Anglo-Saxon government rests.

In view of these facts let us say, with an eminent thinker[2] whose
intellectual home was on both sides of the Atlantic: "Whatever there
be between the two nations to forget and forgive, is forgotten and
forgiven.  If the two peoples, which are one, be true to their duty,
who can doubt that the destinies of the world must be in large measure
committed to their hands?"

[2] Dean Farrar, Address on General Grant, Westminster Abbey, 1885.


         General Summary of English Constitutional History[1]

[1] This Summary is inserted for the benefit of those who desire a
compact, connected view of the development of the English
Constitution, such as may be conveniently used either for reference,
for a general review of the subject, or for purposes of special
study. --D.H.M.

For authorities, see Stubbs (449-1485); Hallam (1485-1760); May (1760-
1870); Amos (1870-1880); see also Hansard and Cobbett's "Parliamentary
History," the works of Freeman, Taswell-Langmead (the best one-volume
Constitutional History), Feilden's Manual, and A. L. Lowell's "The
Government of England," 2 vols., in the Classified List of Books
beginning on page xxxvi.

The references inserted in parentheses are to sections in the body of
the history.

1. Origin and Primitive Government of the English People.

The main body of the English people did not originate in Britain, but
in Northwestern Germany.  The Jutes, Saxons, and Angles were
independent, kindred tribes living on the banks of the Elbe and its
vicinity.

They had no written laws, but obeyed time-honored customs which had
all the force of laws.  All matters of public importance were decided
by each tribe at meetings held in the open air.  There every freeman
had an equal voice in the decision.  There the people chose their
rulers and military leaders; they discussed questions of peace and
war; finally, acting as a high court of justice, they tried criminals
and settled disputes about property.

In these rude methods we see the beginning of the English
Constitution.  Its growth has been the slow work of centuries, but the
great principles underlying it have never changed.  At every stage of
their progress the English people and their descendants throughout the
globe have claimed the right of self-government; and, if we except the
period of the Norman Conquest, whenever that right has been
persistently withheld or denied, the people have risen in arms and
regained it.

2. Conquest of Britain; Origin and Power of the King.

After the Romans abandoned Britain the English invaded the island
449(?), and in the course of a hundred and fifty years conquered it
and established a number of rival settlements.  The native Britons
were, in great part, killed off or driven to take refuge in Wales and
Cornwall.

The conquerors brought to their new home the methods of government and
modes of life to which they had been accustomed in Germany.  A cluster
of towns--that is, a small number of enclosed habitations (S103)--
formed a hundred (a district having either a hundred families or able
to furnish a hundred warriors); a cluster of hundreds formed a shire
or county.  Each of these divisions had its public meeting, composed
of all its freemen or their representatives, for the management of its
own affairs.  But a state of war--for the English tribes fought each
other as well as fought the Britons--made a strong central government
necessary.  For this reason the leader of each tribe was made king.
At first he was chosen, at large, by the entire tribe; later, unless
there was some good reason for a different choice, the King's eldest
son was selected as his successor. Thus the right to rule was
practically fixed in the line of a certain family descent.

The ruler of each of these petty kingdoms acted as commander-in-chief
in war, and as supreme judge in law.

3. The Witenagemot, or General Council.

In all other respects the King's authority was limited--except when he
was strong enough to get his own way--by the Witenagemot, or General
Council.  This body consisted of the chief men of each kingdom acting
in behalf of its people.[1] IT exercised the following powers: (1) It
elected the King, and if the people confirmed the choice, he was
crowned.  (2) If the King proved unsatisfactory, the Council might
depose him and choose a successor.  (3) The King, with the consent of
the Council, made the laws,--that is, he declared the customs of the
tribe.  (4) The King, with the Council, appointed the chief officers
of the kingdom (after the introduction of Christianity this included
the bishops); but the King alone appointed the sheriff, to represent
him and collect the revenue in each shire.  (5) The Council confirmed
or denied grants of portions of the public lands made by the King to
private persons.  (6) The Council acted as the high court of justice,
the King sitting as supreme judge.  (7) The Council, with the King,
discussed all questions of importance,--such as the levying of taxes,
and the making of treaties; smaller matters were left to the towns,
hundreds, and shires to settle for themselves.  After the
consolidation of the different English kingdoms into one, the
Witenagemot expanded into the National Council.  In it we see "the
