[402-2] "_Una mozada de oro._" _Mozada_ is not given in any of the
Spanish dictionaries I have consulted. The Academy dictionary gives
_mojoda_ as a square measure, deriving it from the low Latin _modiata_
from _modius_. Perhaps one should read _mojada_ instead of _mozada_ and
give it a meaning similar to that of _modius_ or about a peck. Major's
translation follows the explanation of De Verneuil, who says: "_Mozada
signifie la mesure que peut porter un jeune garcon_."

[403-1] The mouth of the river was closed by sand thrown up by the
violent storms outside. _Historie_, p. 321.

[403-2] The teredo.

[403-3] During the weeks that he was shut in the River Belem Columbus had
his brother explore the country. The prospects for a successful colony
led him to build a small settlement and to plan to return to Spain for
re-enforcements and supplies. The story is told in detail in the
_Historie_ and by Irving, _Columbus_, II. 425-450, and more briefly by
Markham, _Columbus_, pp. 259-207. This was the first settlement projected
on the American Continent. The hostility of the Indians culminating in
this attack rendered the execution of the project impracticable. In the
manuscript copy of Las Casas's _Historia de las Indias_ Las Casas noted
on the margin of the passage containing the account of this incident,
"This was the first settlement that the Spaniards made on the mainland,
although in a short time it came to naught." See Thacher, _Columbus_, II.
608.

[404-1] De Lollis points out that these striking words are a paraphrase
of the famous lines in Seneca's _Medea_, Chorus, Act II.:--

Venient annis saecula seris Quibus Oceanus vincula rerum Laxet, et ingens
pateat tellus, Tethysque novos detegat orbes Nec sit terris ultima Thule.

Columbus copied these verses into his _Libro de las Profecias_ and
translated them. Navarrete, _Viages_, II. 272.

[404-2] Accepting de Lollis's emended text.

[405-1] "Quando se aia de proveer de socorro, se proveera de todo."

[405-2] April 16, 1503.

[405-3] Cuba. According to Ferdinand Columbus the course was as follows:
The Admiral followed the coast of the isthmus eastward beyond El Retrete
to a place he named Marmoro (near Punto de Mosquitos) somewhat west of
the entrance to the Gulf of Darien; then May 1 in response to the urgency
of the pilots he turned north. May 10 they sighted two little islands,
Caymanos Chicos, and the 12th they reached the Queen's Garden just south
of Cuba (see p. 301, note 1). The next day they landed in Cuba and
secured supplies. It is significant of the tenacity of Columbus's
conviction that Cuba was a part of the mainland of Asia that he here
calls it Mago (_i.e._, Mango). June 12, 1494, when he had explored the
southern coast of Cuba, he reached this conviction and compelled his
officers and crew to take oath that "it (_i.e._, Cuba) is mainland and in
particular the province of Mango." Navarrete, _Viages_, II. 144. (The
affidavits are translated in Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 327.) Mangi
(southern China) is described by Marco Polo at great length. In the
second Toscanelli letter Quinsay is said to be "in the province of Mangi,
_i.e._, near the province of Cathay." It is noted several times in
Columbus's marginalia to Marco Polo.

[406-1] _Alli me torne a reposar atras la fortuna._ De Lollis, following
the Italian translation, reads: _Alli me torne a reposar atras la
fortuna_, etc. "There the storm returned to drive me back; I stopped in
the same island in a safer port." As this gives an unknown meaning to
_reposar_, he suggests that Columbus may have written _repujar_, "to
drive."

[406-2] June 23. _Historie_, p. 334.

[407-1] On the contrary the narrative of Diego de Porras, which he
prepared after his return to Spain in November, 1504, is a much clearer
account of the voyage in most respects than this letter of Columbus's.
For it, see Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 640-646. Porras relates that during
this voyage the Admiral took all the charts away that the seamen had had.
Thacher, _Columbus_, II. 646.

[407-2] "_El puerto de Jaquimo_ [Jacmel], which he called the port of
Brasil." Las Casas, _Historia_, III. 108.

[408-1] Cuba.

[408-2] The pilots thought that they were east of Espanola when Columbus
turned north, and consequently thought that Cuba (Mango) was Porto Rico
(San Juan). _Cf._ _Historie_, p. 333.

[408-3] _I.e._, in that it is clear to one who understands it, and blind
to one who does not.

[408-4] _Las naos de las Indias_, _i.e._, the large ships for the Indies,
_i.e._, Espanola.

[408-5] Bow-lines are ropes employed to keep the windward edges of the
principal sails steady, and are only used when the wind is so unfavorable
that the sails must be all braced sideways, or close hauled to the wind.
(Major.)

[409-1] _I.e._, rigged with lateen sails in the Portuguese fashion.

[409-2] Columbus, in his marginal notes to his copy of the _Historia
Rerum ubique Gestarum_ of Pope Pius II. (Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini;
Venice, 1477), summarized the description of the Massagetae in ch. XII.
in part as follows: they "use golden girths and golden bridles and silver
breast-pieces and have no iron but plenty of copper and gold." _Raccolta
Colombiana_, parte I., tomo II., p. 300. This description of the
Massagetae goes back to Herodotus. While some habits ascribed to the
Massagetae were like what Columbus observed in Veragua, their home was
nowhere near eastern China.

[409-3] See p. 393, note 3.

[409-4] The account in the _Historie_ is radically at variance with this.
The girls were brought on board and "showed themselves very brave since
although the Christians in looks, acts, and race were very strange, they
gave no signs of distress or sadness, but maintained a cheerful and
modest (_honesto_) bearing, wherefore they were very well treated by the
Admiral who gave them clothes and something to eat and then sent them
back." _Historie_, p. 299. Ferdinand gives the ages as eight and fourteen
and says nothing of witchcraft except that the Indians were frightened
and thought they were being bewitched when Bartholomew the next day
ordered the ships' clerks to write down the replies he got to his
questions; _ibid._

[410-1] A specimen of the Maya sculptures, of which such imposing remains
are found in Yucatan. The translation follows Lollis's emendation, which
substitutes _mirrado_ for _mirando_.

[410-2] _Gato paulo_. On this name, see p. 341, note 3. Ferdinand, in the
_Historie_, relates this incident in more detail, from which it is clear
that the pigs were peccaries which had been captured by the men. On the
other hand, Ulloa, the Italian translator of the _Historie_,
mistranslated _gato paulo_ by "gatto," "cat."

[410-3] _Begare._ Columbus in recollecting this incident transferred to
the monkey the Indian name of the wild pigs. The _begare_ is the
"peccary," a native of America. Oviedo, lib. XII., cap. XX, gives
_baquira_ as the name of wild pigs in Nicaragua, and _baquira_ and
_begare_ are obviously identical.

[410-4] For the word _barra_ no explanation can be offered except what is
derived from the context. As the Italian has _diverse malattie_, "divers
diseases," de Lollis suggests that _barra_ should be _varias_ and that
_maladias_ was somehow dropped from the text.

[410-5] _Leones._ The American lion or puma.

[411-1] A misunderstanding. The Mayas made no metal tools. Brinton, _The
American Race_, p. 156.

[411-2] Possibly Columbus may have seen some Maya codices, of which such
remarkable specimens have been preserved.

[412-1] Considering Columbus's experience at Veragua this account
exhibits boundless optimism. Still it is not to be forgotten that through
the conquest of Mexico to the north this prediction was rather strikingly
fulfilled.

[412-2] It is not clear to what Columbus refers in this sentence.

[412-3] _De un camino._ The texts to which Columbus refers just below
show that this should read _de un ano_, in one year.

[412-4] In the Latin version of Josephus used by Columbus the Greek
thyreos, a target, was rendered _lancea_. See _Raccolta Colombiana_,
parte I., tomo II., p. 367.

[412-5] _Tablado._ In the Italian translation _tavolato_, a "partition
wall," "wainscoting," also "floor." _Tablado_ also means "scaffold" and
"stage" or "staging." We have here a curious series of mistakes. The
Greek text of Josephus has ekpomata, "cups." The old Latin translator,
perhaps having a defective text, took ekpomata apparently to be
equivalent to pomata, which has as its secondary meaning, "lids," and
translated it by the uncommon word _coopercula_, "lids" (_cf._ Georges,
_Lateinischdeutsches Handwoerterbuch, sub voce cooperculum_). The meaning
of this word Columbus guessed at, not having the text before him to see
the connection, and from its derivation from _cooperio_, "to cover,"
took it to be a "covering" in the sense of flooring, or perhaps ceiling,
above where the shields were hung "in the house of the forest of
Lebanon," and rendered it _tablado_. The whole passage from the old
Latin version (published in 1470 and frequently later), Columbus copied
into a fly-leaf of his copy of the _Historia Rerum ubique Gestarum_ of
Pope Pius II. See _Raccolta Colombiana_, parte I., tomo II., pp.
366-367.

[413-1] Josephus, _Antiquities of the Jews_, bk. VIII., ch. VII., sect.
4; _I. Kings_, X. 14, 15; _II. Chronicles_, IX. 13, 14.

[413-2] The Chersonesus Aurea of Ptolemy, or the Malay Peninsula.

[413-3] That is, Veragua and the Golden Chersonese are in the same
latitude.

[413-4] Josephus wrote that the gold came from the "Land of Gold," "_a
terra que vocatur aurea_," as the passage in the Latin version reads.
The Greek is, apo tes chryses kaloumenes ges. Josephus gives no further
identification of the location.

[413-5] I have not been able to verify this reference. There is nothing
in the fourteenth Psalm relating to this matter, nor is the fourteenth
Psalm mentioned among the many citations from the Psalms in the _Libro de
las Profecias_.

[414-1] In his _Libro de las Profecias_ Columbus wrote, "El abad
Johachin, calabres, diso que habia de salir de Espana quien havia de
redificar la Casa del Monte Sion." "The abbot Joachim, the Calabrian,
said that he who was destined to rebuild the House of Mount Sion was to
come from Spain." Lollis remarks that Columbus interpreted in his own way
the "Oraculum Turcicum," which concludes the thirty prophecies of Joachim
of Flora in regard to the popes. In the edition (Venice, 1589) which
Lollis had seen, this prophecy was interpreted to mean Charles VIII. of
France. _Raccolta Colombiana_, parte II., tomo II., p. 83.

[414-2] The reference to St. Jerome I have not found in Columbus's
marginalia.

[414-3] The father and uncle of Marco Polo had been given this mission by
Cublay Kaan. See Marco Polo, bk. I., ch. VII. Opposite the passage in his
copy of the Latin Marco Polo which he had, Columbus wrote, "magnus kam
misit legatos ad pontificem." _Raccolta Colombiana_, parte II., tomo II.,
p. 446.

[414-4] The recovery of the Holy Sepulchre had been long a cherished
object with Columbus. See the Journal of the First Voyage, December 26;
the letter to Pope Alexander VI., February, 1502 (Navarrete, _Viages_,
II. 280), and his _Libra de Profecias_, a collection of Scripture texts
compiled under his supervision relating to the restoration of Zion, etc.
_Raccolta Colombiana_, parte I., tomo II., pp. 77-160.

[415-1] An opinion abundantly justified through the conquest of Mexico
and the establishment of the kingdom of New Spain.

[416-1] See the Capitulation, pp. 77, 78 above. The limit mentioned was
fixed by the Papal Demarcation line; the limit agreed upon by Spain and
Portugal was 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands.

[416-2] A reference to such voyages as those of Vicente Yanez Pinzon,
Hojeda, Diego de Lepe, and Rodrigo de Bastidas which occurred in
1499-1502. _Cf._ Bourne, _Spain in America_, pp. 67-71, and for details
Irving, _Columbus_, III. 15-62.

[416-3] Accepting de Lollis's emendation _a Cesar_ instead of the MS.
reading _acetar_ which Navarrete printed _aceptar_. The Italian has _a
Cesaro_.

[416-4] "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and
unto God, the things which are God's." _Matthew_, XXII. 21.

[417-1] At Espanola in 1500 by Bobadilla. _Cf._ the letter to the nurse
above, p. 380.

[417-2] This is one of the most important passages bearing upon the age
of Columbus. As he came to Spain at the end of 1484 according to
Ferdinand Columbus, _Historie_, ch. XII., Peschel fixed his birth in
1456, _Zeitalter der Entdeckungen_, p. 76. The majority of modern
critics, however, have agreed upon the basis of notarial documents in
Genoa that 1446 was the date of his birth and propose therefore to emend
the text here by substituting "treinta y ocho" for "veinte y ocho." On
the various dates set for his birth see Vignaud, _The Real Birth-date of
Christopher Columbus_. Vignaud fixes upon 1451.

[418-1] _Blanca_, a copper coin worth about one-third of a cent.

[Illustration: The New World in the Cantino Chart of 1502, showing the
state of geographical knowledge at the time of the death of Columbus.]




ORIGINAL NARRATIVES OF THE VOYAGES OF JOHN CABOT




INTRODUCTION


John Cabot, the Venetian sailor who took the first English ship across
the Atlantic, was not a writer like Columbus, and consequently our
knowledge of his projects and his achievements is limited to what is
derived from the reports of other men who knew him or his son and from
certain official documents. In general our material may be classified
into: (_a_) English official documents, (_b_) reports derived from John
Cabot himself, and (_c_) reports or records derived more or less directly
from Sebastian Cabot. The materials in _a_ and _b_ are harmonious; those
in classes _b_ and _c_, on the other hand, are practically
irreconcilable. The result of this conflict of testimony has been to
discredit Sebastian Cabot and to lead many scholars to believe that he
tried to ascribe to himself what his father did. Other critics reluctant
to bring so serious a charge against a man who held honorable positions
in Spain and later in England believe that the material in class _c_
relates to the second voyage--that of 1498, and that by a mistake it was
in the minds of the narrators confused with the voyage of 1497. For a
presentation of all the original material the reader may be referred to
H. Harrisse, _John Cabot the Discoverer of North America, and Sebastian
his Son_ (London, 1896), and to G.E. Weare, _Cabot's Discovery of North
America_ (London, 1897). G.P. Winship, _Cabot Bibliography_ (London,
1900), gives a complete guide to the Cabot literature. For a brief
account of the voyages and of the Cabot question see E.G. Bourne, _Spain
in America_ (New York, 1904), pp. 54-63. The most important recent
monograph is H.P. Biggar, _The Voyages of the Cabots and of the
Corte-Reals_, in _Revue Hispanique_, tome X. (Paris, 1903).

The material presented here consists of the private letters of two
Italians sojourning in London in 1497-1498, and the official despatch of
the junior Spanish ambassador at the English court.

E.G.B.




THE VOYAGES OF JOHN CABOT

LETTER OF LORENZO PASQUALIGO TO HIS BROTHERS ALVISE AND FRANCESCO,
     MERCHANTS IN VENICE[423-1]


The Venetian, our countryman, who went with a ship from Bristol to find
new islands, has returned, and says that 700 leagues hence he discovered
mainland, the territory of the Grand Cham (_Gram Cam_).[423-2] He coasted
for 300 leagues and landed; he did not see any person, but he has brought
hither to the King certain snares which had been set to catch game, and a
needle for making nets; he also found some cut trees, wherefore he
supposed there were inhabitants. Being in doubt he returned to his ship.

He was three months on the voyage, and this is certain, and on his return
he saw two islands[423-3] but would not land, so as not to lose time, as
he was short of provisions. The King is much pleased with this. He says
that the tides are slack and do not flow as they do here.

The King has promised that in the spring our countryman shall have ten
ships, armed to his order, and at his request has conceded him all the
prisoners, except traitors, to go with him as he has requested. The King
has also given him money wherewith to amuse himself till then,[424-1] and
he is now at Bristol with his wife, who is also Venetian, and with his
sons; his name is Zuam Talbot,[424-2] and he is styled the great admiral.
Vast honor is paid him; he dresses in silk, and these English run after
him like mad people, so that he can enlist as many of them as he pleases,
and a number of our own rogues besides.

The discoverer of these things planted on his new-found land a large
cross, with one flag of England and another of St. Mark, by reason of his
being a Venetian, so that our banner has floated very far afield.

London, 23 August 1497.


FIRST LETTER OF RAIMONDO DE SONCINO, AGENT OF THE DUKE OF MILAN, TO THE
DUKE[424-3]

... Also some months ago his Majesty sent out a Venetian, who is a very
good mariner, and has good skill in discovering new islands, and he has
returned safe, and has found two very large and fertile new islands;
having likewise discovered the Seven Cities,[425-1] 400 leagues from
England, on the western passage. This next spring his Majesty means to
send him with fifteen or twenty ships.


SECOND LETTER OF RAIMONDO DE SONCINO TO THE DUKE OF MILAN[425-2]

_Most Illustrious and Excellent My Lord_:--

Perhaps among your Excellency's many occupations, it may not displease
you to learn how his Majesty here has won a part of Asia without a stroke
of the sword. There is in this kingdom a Venetian fellow, Master John
Caboto by name, of fine mind, greatly skilled in navigation, who seeing
that those most serene kings, first he of Portugal, and then the one of
Spain, have occupied unknown islands, determined to make a like
acquisition for his Majesty aforesaid.[425-3] And having obtained royal
grants that he should have the usufruct of all that he should discover,
provided that the ownership of the same is reserved to the crown, with a
small ship and eighteen persons he committed himself to fortune; and
having set out from Bristol, a western port of this kingdom, and passed
the western limits of Ireland, and then standing to the northward he
began to sail toward the Oriental regions, leaving (after a few days) the
North Star on his right hand; and, having wandered about considerably,
at last he struck mainland, where, having planted the royal banner and
taken possession on behalf of this King, and taken certain tokens, he has
returned thence. The said Master John, as being foreign-born and poor,
would not be believed if his comrades, who are almost all Englishmen and
from Bristol, did not testify that what he says is true. This Master John
has the description of the world in a chart, and also in a solid globe
which he has made, and he shows where he landed, and that going toward
the east he passed considerably beyond the country of the Tanais.[426-1]
And they say that it is a very good and temperate country, and they think
that Brazil-wood[426-2] and silk grow there; and they affirm that that
sea is covered with fishes, which are caught not only with the net but
with baskets, a stone being tied to them in order that the baskets may
sink in the water. And this I heard the said Master John relate.

And the aforesaid Englishmen, his comrades, say that they will bring so
many fishes that this kingdom will no longer have need of Iceland, from
which country there comes a very great store of fish which are called
stock-fish.[427-1] But Master John has set his mind on something greater;
for he expects to go farther on toward the East[427-2] from that place
already occupied, constantly hugging the shore, until he shall be over
against an island, by him called Cipango, situated in the equinoctial
region, where he thinks all the spices of the world, and also the
precious stones, originate;[427-3] and he says that in former times he
was at Mecca, whither spices are brought by caravans from distant
countries,[427-4] and that those who brought them, on being asked where
the said spices grow, answered that they do not know, but that other
caravans come to their homes with this merchandise from distant
countries, and these [caravans] again say that they are brought to them
from other remote regions. And he argues thus,--that if the Orientals
affirmed to the Southerners that these things come from a distance from
them, and so from hand to hand, presupposing the rotundity of the earth,
it must be that the last ones get them at the North toward the
West;[428-1] and he said it in such a way, that, having nothing to gain
or lose by it, I too believe it: and what is more, the King here, who is
wise and not lavish, likewise puts some faith in him; for (ever) since
his return he has made good provision for him, as the same Master John
tells me. And it is said that, in the spring, his Majesty aforenamed will
fit out some ships, and will besides give him all the convicts, and they
will go to that country to make a colony, by means of which they hope to
establish in London a greater emporium of spices than there is in
Alexandria; and the chief men of the enterprise are of Bristol, great
sailors, who, now that they know where to go, say that it is not a voyage
of more than fifteen days, nor do they ever have storms after they get
away from Hibernia. I have also talked with a Burgundian, a comrade of
Master John's, who confirms everything, and wishes to return thither
because the Admiral (for so Master John already entitles himself)[428-2]
has given him an island; and he has given another one to a barber of his
from Castiglione-of-Genoa, and both of them regard themselves as Counts,
nor does my Lord the Admiral esteem himself anything less than a Prince.
I think that with this expedition there will go several poor Italian
monks, who have all been promised bishoprics. And, as I have become a
friend of the Admiral's, if I wished to go thither I should get an
archbishopric. But I have thought that the benefices which your
Excellency has in store for me are a surer thing; and therefore I beg
that if these should fall vacant in my absence, you will cause possession
to be given to me, taking measures to do this rather where it is needed,
in order that they be not taken from me by others, who because they are
present can be more diligent than I, who in this country have been
brought to the pass of eating ten or twelve dishes at every meal, and
sitting at table three hours at a time twice a day,[429-1] for the sake
of your Excellency, to whom I humbly commend myself.

Your Excellency's
Very humble servant,
RAIMONDO.

London, Dec. 18, 1497.


DESPATCH TO FERDINAND AND ISABELLA FROM PEDRO DE AYALA JUNIOR AMBASSADOR
     AT THE COURT OF ENGLAND, JULY 25, 1498[429-2]

I think your Majesties have already heard that the King of England has
equipped a fleet in order to discover certain islands and mainland which
he was informed some people from Bristol, who manned a few ships[430-1]
for the same purpose last year, had found. I have seen the map which the
discoverer has made, who is another Genoese, like Colon [and?][430-2] who
has been in Seville and in Lisbon, asking assistance for this discovery.
The people of Bristol have, for the last seven years, sent out every year
two, three, or four light ships (_caravelas_), in search of the island of
Brazil and the seven cities,[430-3] according to the fancy of this
Genoese. The King determined to send out [ships], because, the year
before, they brought certain news that they had found land. The fleet
consisted of five vessels, which carried provisions for one year. It is
said that one of them, in which another Fai [Friar?] Buil[430-4] went,
has returned to Ireland in great distress, the ship being much damaged.
The Genoese continued his voyage. I, having seen the route which they
took, and the distance they sailed, find that what they have found, or
what they are in search of, is what your Highnesses already possess since
it is, in fine, what fell to your Highnesses by the treaty with
Portugal.[430-5] It is expected that they will be back in the month of
September. I inform your Highnesses in regard to it. The king of England
has often spoken to me on this subject. He hoped to derive great
advantage from it. I think it is not further distant than four hundred
leagues. I told him that, in my opinion, the land was already in the
possession of your Majesties; but, though I gave him my reasons, he did
not like it. Because I believe that your Highnesses will presently
receive information in regard to all this matter, and the chart or map
which this man has made, I do not now send it; it is here and it,
according to my opinion, is false, in order to make it appear that they
are not the said islands.

FOOTNOTES:

[423-1] This letter was received in Venice on September 23, 1497, and a
copy of it was incorporated by Marino Sanuto in his diary. It was first
brought to light by Rawdon Brown in his _Ragguagli sulla Vita e sulle
Opere di Marin Sanuto_, etc. (Venezia, 1837). It was published in English
in a generally accessible form in 1864 in the _Calendar of State Papers_,
_Venetian Series_, I. 262, edited by Rawdon Brown. The translation here
given is a revision of Brown's version. Another translation is printed in
Markham, _The Journal of Columbus_ (London, 1893).

[423-2] This reference to the Grand Cham probably indicates familiarity
with Columbus's views of what he had discovered as expressed in his
letters to Santangel and to Sanchez; see above, p. 268.

The landfall of John Cabot has been the subject of prolonged discussion.
Labrador, Newfoundland, and Cape Breton are the principal places
advocated. Of late years, owing to the vigorous and learned arguments of
Dr. S.E. Dawson there has been an increasing disposition to accept Cape
Breton on Cape Breton Island as the most probable location. See Winship,
_Cabot Bibliography_, for the literature.

[423-3] The words "to starboard" have been inserted at this point in all
English translations. Biggar has pointed out that the words _al dreto_ so
translated are Venetian dialect for _addietro_, which is an alternate
form for the more common _indietro_, back. The earlier translators
thought _al dreto_ equivalent to _al dritto_, on the right. _Al tornar al
dreto_ means simply "in going back."

[424-1] "August 10, 1497: To hym that founde the New Isle, 10L." British
Museum, Add. MSS. No. 7099, 12 Henry VII., fol. 41. From Weare, _Cabot's
Discovery of North America_, 124.

[424-2] So in Sanuto's text. This form indicates perhaps that Pasqualigo
had only heard the name and not seen it written.

[424-3] This letter was found in the archives of the Sforza family in
Milan. The manuscript is apparently no longer extant. There are two
somewhat divergent texts. The one translated here is the one sent by
Rawdon Brown to the Public Record Office in London. Both are printed in
Weare, _Cabot's Discovery_, pp. 142-143. The translation given here is by
Rawdon Brown as printed in the _Calendar of State Papers, Venetian
Series_, I. 259-260.

[425-1] The Seven Cities was a legendary island in the Atlantic. They are
all placed and named on the legendary island of Antilia on the map of
Grazioso Benincasa in 1482. See E.G. Bourne, _Spain in America_, pp. 6
and 7, and Kretschmer, _Die Entdeckung Amerikas_, Atlas, plate 4.
Columbus reported in Portugal that he had discovered Antilia (see p. 225,
note 1); hence the deduction either of John Cabot or of Raimondo that the
region explored by Cabot, being far to the west in the ocean, was the
same as that visited by Columbus. _Cf._ also art. "Brazil, Island of,"
_Encyclopaedia Britannica_.

[425-2] This letter is preserved in the Archivio di Stato in Milan. It
was first published in the _Annuario Scientifico del 1865_ (Milan, 1866).
It was first printed in English in Winsor, _Narrative and Critical
History of America_, III. 54-55 (Boston, 1884), in the chapter by Charles
Deane, entitled "The Voyages of the Cabots." This translation was revised
by Professor B.H. Nash of Harvard University and is given here with only
one or two slight changes.

[425-3] In this passage Cabot's immediate impulse is attributed to the
voyages of Columbus and their results.

[426-1] No satisfactory explanation of this can be given. Bellemo, in the
_Raccolta Colombiana_, pt. III., vol. I., p. 197, interprets this
sentence to mean that Cabot showed on the globe the place he had reached
on the voyage and then to that statement the remark is added, referring
to earlier journeys, "and going toward the east he has passed
considerably beyond the land of the Tanais." Tanais is the Latin name for
the Don, and at the mouth of the Don was the important Venetian trading
station of La Tana. _Cf._ Biggar, _Voyages of the Cabots and
Corte-Reals_, pp. 33-34, note. Biggar dissents from this interpretation.
I would offer the conjecture that "the land of the Tanais" stands for the
land of Tana. In Marco Polo the kingdom of Tana, on the western side of
India, is described as powerful and having an extensive commerce. See
Marco Polo, pt. III., ch. XXX. Raimondo, if unfamiliar with Marco Polo,
would understand La Tana by Tana and then naturally assume that "the
country of Tana" was a slip for "country of the Tanais." Cabot on the
other hand might have heard of Tana when in Mecca without getting any
very definite idea of its location except that it was far to the East in
India. The phrase "toward the East," like the one earlier in the letter
"toward the Oriental regions," is used of the ultimate destination, not
the direction, and of the destination as a known spot always thought of
in Europe as "the East."

[426-2] _El brasilio_ for _el legno brasilio_. Brazil wood was an East
Indian red wood imported into Europe. It is the _Caesalpina sappan_. Its
bright color led to its being compared to glowing coals, _brazia_,
_brascia_, etc., Eng. brazier, and then to its being called, as it were,
"glowing coals wood," _lignum brasile_, _lignum brasilium_, etc., and in
Italian most commonly _brasile_ and _verzino_, a popular corruption.
Heyd, _Histoire du Commerce du Levant au Moyen-Age_, II. 587. On the
transference of the name of this wood to a mythical island in the
Atlantic and then, after the discoveries, to the present country of
Brazil which produced dye-woods similar to _Brasilio_, see Yule's art.
"Brazil, Island of," _Encyclopaedia Britannica_, and Winsor, _Narrative
and Critical History_, I. 49-51.

[427-1] _Stochfissi._ The English word "stockfish" Italianized. Of the
English fish trade with Iceland, Biggar gives a full account, _Voyages of
the Cabots_, pp. 53-62, making frequent citations from G.W. Dasent,
_Icelandic Annals_, IV. 427-437. He quotes also a passage from the
_Libell of English Policy_, 1436, beginning:

"Of Yseland to wryte is lytille nede Save of stokfische;" etc.



[427-2] _El Levante_, here again as a known place, oriented from Europe.
His destination, not the direction of his route.

[427-3] In Cabot's mind the Cipango of Marco Polo is confused with the
Spice Islands. Marco Polo says nothing of the production of spices in his
account of Cipango. The confusion is probably to be traced to Columbus's
reports that he had discovered Cipango and that the islands he had
discovered produced spices.
