"Then you will do it," said Sir Edward quietly.  "Choose your men, and I
will do the same."

Five minutes later, amidst the mocking jeers of the men behind the
breastwork, a fresh attack was made, and as Mark reached the front, he
ducked down to avoid a thrust from a lance, crept close to the wall and,
followed by Nick Garth and Ram Jennings, turned the end of the stones,
climbed on, and reached the stone-strewn cliffs behind.

Then, knowing that the two men, in their fierce energy and hate, would
be quite close, Mark turned suddenly, drew himself up, sword in hand--
his followers letting their pikes slip through their hands, and holding
them close up to the heads--and leaped down inside the breastwork, his
father simultaneously coming over at the other flank.

There was not much force in either attack, but it proved effectual by
its suddenness, throwing the defenders into confusion.

These rallied directly, and pikes were swung round and directed at the
flanking parties, but the momentary check gave the men in front the
opportunity to rush close up to the breastwork, which now became their
protection, the defenders, having fallen back, becoming in turn exposed.

The fight now became furious, for the marauders began to back toward the
mouth of the cave, giving way step by step, as the length of their line
was gradually contracted by one after another dashing in, till all had
passed into the narrow passage, the first men blocking the way with the
heads of their pikes, while their fellows stooped and crept beneath,
till the last was in safety.  It is needless to say that an attempt to
follow would have meant instant death.

A cheer now rose from the attacking party, who had achieved the taking
of the outwork, and Sir Edward forced his way to his son's side, to clap
him on the shoulder, as he stood just out of reach of the defenders'
bristling pikes, which effectually barred the way.

"We have them now, Mark," he cried.  "Pass the word there for Daniel
Rugg."

But a low growl on the other side of the wall told that there was no
need to pass any word.  As soon as he saw that there was a chance for
the next step, Dan had signed to Dummy, who trotted forward with
lantern, fuse, and powder-bag, and father and son climbed into the
little fort a few feet away from the opening into the cavern.

"Silence!" roared Sir Edward now--"you within there, lay down your arms,
and march out at once."

A defiant yell came from the holders of the pikes, enraging Nick Garth
to such an extent that he picked up a block of stone from the top of the
breastwork, raised it above his head, and dashed it into the doorway,
Ram Jennings following suit with another.

The stones crashed in among the pikes with plenty of rattling, and a
burst of yells followed as the men picked up a couple more.

"Stop, there," cried Sir Edward sternly.  "You can do no good, and I
want the wall left sound for our own protection."

Nick growled savagely, but he obeyed, and the men all stood fast at the
cavern's mouth with presented pikes, ready to attack if any movement was
made by the defenders, while Dan Rugg and his son quickly prepared their
missile.

"Ready," shouted Dan from where he stood inside the wall with, his back
to the men, and with Dummy looking intensely interested standing ready
with the lantern.

"You, in there," cried Sir Edward now, "will you surrender?"

"No," cried a hoarse voice from inside.  "Go back with your ragged pack
of hungry hounds, or we'll come and burn you out as we did the other
idiot."

"Once more," cried Sir Edward, who still hesitated to proceed to the
sternest measures; "will you give up your prisoners and surrender?"

"Bah!  Laugh at him, boys," cried the same hoarse voice: and another
derisive yell arose.

"Out with you, my lads," cried Sir Edward; and his men sprang over the
wall again.

"You too, Mark," said Sir Edward; and Mark followed, while Dan Rugg came
close up with his bag of powder and fuse carefully tied in.

"Lay it as near as you can, so as to be out of reach of the pikes."

"No good, Sir Edward," said the man in a husky whisper.  "Out with you.
I'm going to light the fuse, and go right close, and heave it in over
their pikes."

"But that is too dangerous for you."

"Not it.  I know to a quarter of a minute when it will fire, and I shall
hold it till then.  That'll give me time to jump the wall.  Quick, sir,
please."

It was no time for hesitation, and feeling that his old servant at the
mine could be trusted, Sir Edward climbed the wall, and Dummy, showing
his teeth in a satisfied grin, opened the door of the lantern.

The next moment Dan had held the end of the short fuse he had provided
to the candle, and a slight spluttering began.

"Over with you," growled Dan, as his son snapped to the lantern door.

"Take care of yourself, daddy," said the boy coolly.

"You be off," growled Dan, and Dummy placed the lantern on the top of
the breastwork, and vaulted over amongst the men, who were crouching
down behind, to be out of the blast.

All this had taken place unknown to the defenders, who, from the
narrowness of the entrance, were shut off from seeing the quaint,
sardonic face of the old miner, as he stood holding the bag, with the
burning fuse spluttering and sending up its curls of greyish smoke.

The men held their breath, and Mark's eyes dilated as he watched the
brave old fellow holding the bag, in the full knowledge that if he held
the powder a moment too long he must be shattered to pieces.

It was a combination of the familiarity which breeds contempt and the
confidence born of long experience which made Dan Rugg stand there so
coolly for what seemed to be a long time before turning as he watched
the burning fuse.

"Heads down there," he said suddenly; "she's going off."

There was a quick movement, but Mark felt as if he was held by a
nightmare dream, and he stood there watching, as the old man took a
couple of steps forward, and now for the first time in full sight of
those who held the fence of cross pikes.

In an instant there was a wild yell, and the pikes went down with their
heads to the stones, and disappeared, but it was as Dan Rugg raised the
bag above his head, and hurling it right into the cavern passage, he
started aside to the shelter of the wall, while now by a step aside Mark
also reached shelter.  Then there was a roar and a burst of flame and
smoke came as from the mouth of a cannon, and the men sprang up again to
cheer.

"Steady--steady!" cried Sir Edward.  "Now, my lads, over the wall with
you, and follow me; never mind the smoke.  Rugg, have another charge
ready; we shall want it soon."

"Ay, Sir Edward, that was a failure.  I didn't hold it long enough.
They had time to get away."

Sir Edward and his son entered the murk, and had to feel their way, and
halted.

"Light torches," cried Mark: and half-a-dozen were lit and passed in,
when once more the party advanced, expecting to be attacked, but the
blast had produced a scare, though it had done no serious harm, save
tearing down a few stones, and instead of attacking, the marauders stood
on their defence in the place familiar to Mark and some of the men.

There was again the same bristling array of pikes in the opening; and
after a renewed summons to surrender, the old miner proceeded coolly to
prepare a second bag of powder.

This was fired, but the explosion did not take place till some time
after the defenders of the cavern had retreated; and for a while the
passage was so stifling with the fumes that it was impossible to go on,
so the party had to draw back to allow them to be dissipated.

At last it was deemed prudent to proceed, and once more the advance was
ordered, the men eagerly obeying; and with torches adding their smoke to
that already hanging in the gloomy cracks and vaults, they pressed on
till once more the way was blocked.

It was no array of spear-points in a narrow passage, but in this case
the solid blocking of a wall of stone, built-up with care, the stones
well wedged in, a narrow opening left for the retreat of the defenders
having been filled up since their last retreat, and the wonder to those
who examined it was that it had been so quickly secured.

The choice of position, though, had been well made, for the passage was
not above four feet wide at this point, and the roof had sunk till it
was in this particular spot only five in height.

Once more the powder was brought forward by Dummy, the bag laid close to
the bottom stones, the fuse added, and lit, and the party retired to a
safe distance, to wait until the powder had swept the barrier away.

The explosion was long in coming, and when it did, with a mighty roar,
an hour had to be passed before another advance was made, but no farther
than the wall, which was found apparently quite uninjured, though the
powder had brought down a huge mass from the roof.

"Pull it down," said Sir Edward impatiently, and a couple of the men--
there was no room for more--attacked the well-fitted stones, but only
for one to start back with a cry of rage and pain, his hand to his side.

"Hurt?" cried Mark excitedly, and he ran to the man's aid, to be sent
staggering back by a heavy blow.

It was Sir Edward's turn to rush to his son, and he too reeled as he
received a thrust, but in the case of both, the pike-thrusts did not
penetrate their clothes, the point of the weapon having been turned,
unknown to the man who used it, by a thrust against the rock.

It was a warning, and throwing the light of the torches well upon the
built-up wall, a couple of the men found the holes through which the
thrusts had been made, and advancing cautiously to send their pikes
through, had to leap back again, for the enemy thrust at them.  Nick
struck in turn, though, and a yell of pain told that it was not without
effect.

"Keep back," cried Sir Edward, as his men advanced recklessly, and when
the wounded man had been drawn away and carried out, after a rough
bandage had been applied to his wound, Sir Edward turned to his son.

"You must be hurt, my boy," he whispered.

"I was, father, horribly."

"But I mean wounded."

"Only my doublet," said the lad merrily.  "What are we to do now?"

After a few moments' thought, as Nick Garth had been so able, Sir Edward
decided to let him try again, which he eagerly did, feigning so as to
draw a thrust from the enemy, and darting aside and close up to the
wall.  Then, as the man withdrew his pike, Nick, holding his own short,
thrust it through after it, and again there was a yell of pain, but
almost at the same moment Ram Jennings was just reached by a thrust
through another hole, and sprang back, roaring like a wild beast.

"Yah! don't howl like that," cried Nick angrily; "do as I do."

But poor Ram Jennings preferred to stand nursing his injured arm, and
watching his fellow ramming away with his pike, as if loading a gun,
till suddenly it was jerked out of his hand, and drawn through the wall.

"Look at that," he growled.  "Here, give's hold of another."

But Sir Edward ordered him back.

"It's of no use, my lad," he cried; "come away."

"All very well to say come away, captain," growled the man, as he stood
close up, "but if I stir, I shall get a hole through me."

Sir Edward saw the man's difficult position, and gave an order in a low
tone, when every man bearing a light ran back and round one of the
corners, leaving the cavern in darkness.

Nick took advantage thereof, and sprang away from his perilous position.
The rattle of a pike-staff against the stones told that a thrust had
been made at him in the darkness.

"Are you hit?" cried Mark anxiously.

"Ay, youngster, but on'y with the staff," growled Nick; and the order
for the lights to be brought back was given and obeyed.

"Another, Rugg," said Sir Edward laconically, and Dan, who had a bag
ready, primed with fuse, laid it on the stony floor, picked it up on the
point of a pike, and advanced to place it against the wall.

A couple of thrusts were made at it directly, but he lowered it, and the
enemy could not force their points down low enough to reach it.  But as
Dan placed it against the bottom of the wall the pikes were aimed now at
his breast.

"Back!" roared Sir Edward, as Mark rushed at the man to drag him away.

"All right, Master Mark," said Dan coolly; "my arms and my pike are as
long as theirs.  They can't reach me.  They've got all the thickness of
the wall to push through as well;" and he coolly placed the powder-bag
and arranged the fuse ready for being lighted.

"I did not think of that, Dan," said Mark.

"Ay, but I did," said the old fellow, chuckling.  "Now, Dummy, my boy,
son, bring a lighted torch."

Dummy trotted forward, and they heard a growl from beyond the wall, as
the miner thrust the point of his pike into the end of the torch, and
then reached out toward the fuse, but only succeeded in getting it
half-way before it was knocked off the point of his weapon.

"Ah, deal o' good that's done," growled Dan, trying to drive the point
of his pike into the torch again.  "There," he shouted, "run for it; I
can reach to pitch it up to the bag."

The men on the other side did not grasp the fact that if Dan did this
his companions would fare worse than they, but scuffled off at once,
their steps being plainly heard.

"Fools!" growled Dan, and stepping forward, he picked up the torch, went
close up to the wall, and touched the end of the fuse, which began to
sparkle at once.

"Plenty o' time, Sir Edward," he said coolly, "if you'll now order us
back."

The order was given, and as it was obeyed, Sir Edward and his son
retiring last, they saw Nick Garth step close up to old Dan and pat him
on the shoulder.

"You're a cool one, mate," he said.  "I never see one as cool as you."

Dan chuckled a little, and all went along the narrow passage and into
the chamber beyond, well out of reach of the blast, and waited.

It was a good two minutes before the explosion took place, and Mark had
made perfectly sure that the fuse had gone out, when there was a
sensation as if his breath was being sucked away, then a deafening roar,
followed by a crash.

Again they had to wait till the fumes had somewhat dispersed.  Then,
with Sir Edward and Mark leading, they returned, expecting to see the
wall demolished; but as far as they could see it was perfectly sound,
while another huge mass from the roof had come down, to lie piled up
before it, so that there was hardly room for a man to crawl over the
heap, so close was it to the roof.

"It's of no use, Mark," whispered Sir Edward, as they drew back a little
from the smoke, "we must devise some other plan.  It is useless to try
another bag there without first clearing away the mass of stones, and we
can only do that at the expense of many men wounded by pike-thrusts,
perhaps killed."

"Yes," said Mark, "and it doesn't seem fair to order them to do it."

"I cannot, my boy.  There, we have done our work for this time.  Let's
get out of this horrible smoke."

"Hoi, you!" came from beyond the wall; "if you fire any more of that
choke-dog stuff, I'll give orders to my men to kill the prisoners,
'specially the girl."

"You cowardly ruffian!" cried Mark, in a rage.

"Bah!  Puppy!" came back scornfully.

"Don't answer, boy," said Sir Edward softly.

"But father!--if--"

"It is only a boast.  They dare not do such a thing as that.  Come."

They retired, making for the mouth of the cavern, where the cool night
air blew with refreshing force.

"But we cannot give up, father," cried Mark.

"I am not going to give up, my boy," said Sir Edward quietly.  "When an
assault upon a stronghold fails, a general tries to starve his enemy
into submission.  We must do the same here.  Unfortunately they must
have stores, and they have a good supply of water from a spring within
there.  But still we must try.  The first thing is to protect ourselves
from a sudden attack, and this will be easy.  Now, my lads, every man
take in a block of stone, and carry it into the cavern as far as the end
of the first chamber.  Take these from the breastwork; we do not want it
now, for we shall encamp inside."

Mark nodded approval, and the men, glad that the night's fighting was at
an end, set to work with a will, after laying their arms aside; and in
less than an hour had walled up to a great thickness the narrow exit
from the cavern, wedging in the top stones with blows, and in spite of
the want of mortar producing a good solid piece of work, through which
no pikes could be thrust.

This done, Sir Edward reduced his force to one-third, this being plenty
to defend the wall should it be attacked from the inner side; and the
rest were sent back to the Tor Castle, for provisions and blankets.

"Now, Mark, lad," said Sir Edward, "the thing to consider is, how long
can the enemy hold out?"

"Not long, father," replied the lad; "they cannot have a very good
supply."

"That," said Sir Edward, "remains to be proved."



CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

PREPARATIONS FOR A SIEGE.

Siege was now commenced, Ergles being to all intents and purposes an
impregnable natural castle.  Provisions and other necessaries were
brought up, and the force was divided into three watches, who regularly
mounted guard in the chamber in front of the wall.  But the whole of the
next day passed without a sound being heard, the enemy not attempting to
break down their own side, for fear of getting into a trap, the utter
stillness being interpreted to mean a _ruse_ to get them to make an
opening through which an attack would be made.

