and told them that he left the temple every night, and for what
purpose.

Thus advised, the ephors surprised the little party the next night, and
thrust Agis into prison. He was tried and condemned to death by order of
Leonidas, and thus died when only twenty-two years of age, after having
vainly tried for three years to bring the Spartans back to their former
simplicity and virtue.

Leonidas, not content with killing Agis, gave the widow Agiatis in
marriage to his son, Cle-om'e-nes, who was a mere boy, several years
younger than she. Agiatis soon won great influence over the young
prince, and told him so much about her dead husband, that he tried to
follow the example of Agis in everything.

When Leonidas died, Cleomenes succeeded him, and, thanks to the
teachings of his wife, was both great and virtuous. He drove away the
ephors, who were rich and corrupt, and then distributed all the property
equally among the people, as Agis had planned.

When Aratus heard of the reforms made by Cleomenes, he began to fear
that Sparta would win back her former power, and again try to lord it
over the rest of Greece. To prevent such a misfortune, he decided to
attack the Spartan king while he was too young to excel in the art of
war.

He therefore advanced with a good army; but, to his surprise and dismay,
he was completely defeated by the young king. Several of the smaller
towns now showed a desire to leave the Achaean League and join Sparta, so
Aratus became more eager than ever to suppress her rising power.

In his eagerness he forgot all caution, and even asked help of Antigonus
Do'son, King of Macedon, the successor of Antigonus Gonatas. This ruler
owed his surname of Doson ("who will give") to a bad habit of promising
all kinds of gifts to his followers,--promises which were never kept.

Antigonus Doson was only too glad to send a Macedonian army into Greece,
and not only garrisoned the fortress on the Isthmus of Corinth, but also
sent troops on into the Peloponnesus.




CXIII. THE WAR OF THE TWO LEAGUES.


The Achaean and Macedonian armies now met the Spartans at Sel-la'sia, in
Laconia, where the latter were badly defeated, and Sparta fell into the
enemy's hands. Antigonus was so proud of his victory that he burst a
blood vessel upon hearing the news, and died shortly after.

Before he closed his eyes, however, he had the satisfaction of driving
Cleomenes away from Greece into Egypt. There the young king fell upon
his sword, after killing his children, rather than become a slave.
Tyrants were now allowed again in many of the Greek cities, in spite of
the remonstrances of Aratus, who learned only too late that the
Macedonians had come into the Peloponnesus merely for the purpose of
making themselves masters of the country.

Aratus' eyes were opened. He saw that all his efforts were vain, and
that, owing to his own imprudence, Greece would never again be free. In
his grief, his presence of mind quite forsook him. He did not know what
steps to take in order to undo all the harm he had done.

The AEtolians now became the champions of freedom, and marched against
the Achaeans, whom they defeated. In their distress, the Achaeans once
more begged the Macedonians to interfere, and send troops into Greece.

The contest which followed is known as the War of the Two Leagues, and
lasted for some time. In the beginning, the Macedonian king allowed
Aratus to take the lead, and followed all his directions; but, growing
weary of this subordinate part, he finally poisoned the Achaean leader,
and became head of the league himself.

When the Spartans and AEtolians, who had joined forces, found that the
Achaeans and Macedonians were likely to prove too strong for them, they
also began to look around for allies. As the fame of the rising city of
Rome had reached them, they finally sent thither for the help they
needed.

The Romans were then rapidly extending their territory, and hoped soon
to become masters of the world, so they were glad to help the Spartans
against the Macedonians, who were already their enemies.

They therefore speedily came to the Spartans' aid, set fire to the
Achaean and Macedonian ships, and defeated their armies so sorely, that
Philip was obliged to beg for peace and to give them his son as a
hostage.

The Spartans, having thus freed themselves from the yoke of the Achaean
League, now fell into far worse hands, for they were governed by a
tyrant named Na'bis,--a cruel and miserly man, who, in order to
increase his treasure, often had recourse to vile stratagems.

He had made a cunning instrument of torture, on purpose to obtain money
from any one he wished. This was a statue, the exact image of his wife,
clad in magnificent robes. Whenever he heard that any man was very rich,
Nabis used to send for him. After treating him with exaggerated
politeness, the tyrant would gently advise him to sacrifice his wealth
for the good of the state.

If his guest refused to do so, Nabis would invite him to visit his wife,
and lead the unsuspecting man close to the statue. This was made so as
to move by a system of cunningly arranged springs, and as soon as the
victim came within reach, the statue's arms closed tightly around him.

The terrified guest, caught in an irresistible embrace, then found
himself drawn closer and closer, and pressed against sharp points and
knives hidden under the rich garments.

It was only, when the tortured man had solemnly promised to give up all
he owned, that the tyrant Nabis would set him free; but if he resisted,
he was killed by slow torture, and allowed to bleed to death in the
statue's embrace.




CXIV. THE LAST OF THE GREEKS.


When Aratus died, the principal man in the Achaean army was
Phil-o-poe'men, a brave and virtuous young man. He was patriotic in
the extreme, and so plain and unassuming that no one would have
suspected his rank.

On one occasion, when he had reached the dignity of general, he was
invited to dine at a house where the hostess was a stranger to him. When
he came to the door, she took him for a servant, on account of his plain
clothes, and curtly bade him go and split wood.

Without saying a word, Philopoemen threw aside his cloak, seized an
ax, and set to work. The host, on coming up a few minutes later, was
horrified to see his honored guest cutting wood, and was profuse in his
apologies for a mistake which only made Philopoemen laugh.

When Philopoemen heard how cruel Nabis was, he wanted to free Sparta
from his tyranny. So he entered the town at the head of an armed force
of men, confiscated the treasures for the benefit of the public, and
drove Nabis away.

The Spartans were at first very grateful to the Achaeans for freeing
them, but they soon began to feel jealous of their power, and again rose
up in revolt against them. This time Philopoemen treated the Spartans
with the utmost severity, even razing the walls of the city, which were
never rebuilt.

Philopoemen was farsighted enough to see from the beginning that the
Roman alliance would prove bad for Greece. He soon discovered that the
Romans intended to subdue the country, and in order to do so most easily
were trying to make the people quarrel among themselves.

All his efforts were therefore directed toward keeping peace, and for a
time he was quite successful. But the Romans, seeing no other way to
bring about a quarrel, at last bribed the Messenians to revolt.

In the course of the war, Philopoemen was led into an artfully
arranged ambuscade, and was taken in chains to Messenia, where,
notwithstanding his gray hair, he was exposed to the jeers of the common
people.

After thus humiliating him, they led him to the place of torture; but
when he heard that his army had escaped from the ambush, he fervently
cried, "I die happy, since the Achaeans are safe."

This only hastened the end of the brave patriot, who has been called the
"Last of the Greeks," because he was the last to try to maintain his
country's independence.

The Achaeans soon after took the town of Messenia, stoned all
Philopoemen's murderers on his tomb, and carried his ashes to
Meg-a-lop'o-lis, his native city, where they were buried with great
pomp.




CXV. GREECE A ROMAN PROVINCE.


For centuries the Greeks had been in the habit of assembling at Corinth
every three years for the celebration of the Isthmian games, in honor of
Poseidon, god of the sea. Here, as at Olympia, there were races,
wrestling and boxing matches, and contests in verse and song; and as
usual the prizes were simple crowns of olive leaves, which were
considered far more precious than silver or gold.

In 196 B.C. not only were the Greeks present at this celebration, but
there were also many Romans who wished to witness the games. The Greeks
were then particularly happy because the War of the Two Leagues seemed
to be ended, and the country was at peace.

In the midst of the festival, Quin'tius Flam-i-ni'nus, the Roman consul,
mounted the orator's block, and proclaimed that the Roman army had just
won a great victory over the revolted King of Macedon, and that the
Greek states were now indeed free.

These tidings were received with such a tumult of joyful cries, it is
said, that a flock of birds that were flying overhead fell to the earth,
stunned by the shock of cheers which rent the air.

This joy, however, did not last very long, for the new-won freedom of
Greece existed in name only. As soon as the Romans had completed the
conquest of Macedon under its last ruler, Perseus, they prepared to
annex Greece also.

Their first move was to accuse the Achaeans of sending aid to Macedon.
Under this pretext, one thousand leading citizens were seized, and sent
to Rome to be tried.

Here they were kept in exile for many a year, longing to go home, and
fuming against their detention. When they were finally allowed to
return, they were so imbittered, that, as the Romans had foreseen, they
soon stirred up a revolt among the Achaeans.

AE-mil'i-us Pau'lus, the conqueror of Macedon, then marched into Greece,
and swept over the whole country. He took the city of Corinth, and
burned it to the ground, after carrying off many of its most precious
works of art to adorn his triumph.

Such was the ignorance of the Romans at that time, however, about all
matters of art, that the sailors who were to carry these treasures to
Rome were warned by the consul to be careful, as they would have to
replace any article they had damaged or lost.

The Romans then placed garrisons in the principal Greek towns, and the
country became a mere province of Rome, under the name of Achaia.

Thus ends the history of ancient Greece, which, though so small, was yet
the most famous country the world has ever known,--the country from
which later nations learned their best lessons in art, philosophy, and
literature.




INDEX.


                                                PAGE


Academy, gardens of                             142

Achaean League                                   268-270

Achaeans exiled to Rome                          281

Achilles, avenges Patroclus                     50
  betrays himself                               46
  death of                                      51
  in the Styx                                   45
  prophecy regarding                            44

Acropolis, captured                             88, 96
  Parthenon on                                  149
  statue of Athene on                           115
  temple to Theseus, near                       28, 143

Adrastus                                        37-40

AEgean Sea, derivation of name                   27
  Persian vessels forbidden to enter            147

AEgeus                                           27

AEgina, Draco at Island of                       88

AEneas, escape of                                53

AEtolian League                                  268, 273

Agamemnon, insults priest of Apollo             48
  King of Mycenae                                44

Age of Pericles                                 146

Agesilaus, at Coronea                           189
  courage of                                    185, 199

Agis, condemned to death                        275
  type of old Spartans                          271

Alcibiades, anecdotes of                        161, 163, 164
  hostility toward                              166
  killed by Persians                            171
  shield of                                     162

Alexander I                                     197-199

Alexander the Great, birthplace of              227
  crosses Libyan desert                         245
  cuts Gordian knot                             238
  death of                                      236, 253
  enters Jerusalem                              244
  generosity of                                 248
  horsemanship of                               229, 231
  marriage of                                   252
  omens concerning                              227
  prophecy of                                   256
  self-denial of                                251
  takes title of "Shah in Shah"                 249
  tomb of                                       255
  victory of                                    237, 246
  visit of, to Diogenes                         235

Alexandria, founded                             244
