water.

As she sat thus, striving to still the wailing of the hungry boy,
suddenly the shadow of a man fell upon her. With a cry she sprang to her
feet to find herself face to face with Zinti.

"Oh! I thought that they had taken you," she exclaimed.

"No, lady, I escaped, but I crossed the plain far to your left, for it
seemed better that we should not be seen travelling together from the
mountain. Now let us eat who have eaten little for so many days, lacking
water to wash down the food," and from the large skin wallet which he
bore Zinti drew out dried flesh and roasted corn.

Suzanne looked at the food with longing, but before she touched any
she took some corn, and having pounded it into a pulp with a stone, she
mixed it with water and fed the child, who devoured the stuff greedily
and presently fell asleep. Then they ate as much as they wanted, since
Zinti carried enough for three such meals, and never did Suzanne take
meat with a greater relish. Afterwards, though she yearned to sleep,
they pressed on again, for Zinti said it was not safe to stay, since
long before this Van Vooren would be seeking her far and wide, and if he
chanced to discover the secret of her flight he would travel further
in one hour on horseback than they could in four on foot. So they went
forward up the pass much refreshed, Zinti carrying the child.

All day long they walked thus, resting at intervals, till by sunset
they reached the crest of the pass, and saw the wide plains of Natal
stretched out like a map beneath them, and on them, not so very far
away and near to the banks of the river that wound at their feet, a
white-topped koppie, beneath which, said Zinti, was the Boer camp.

Suzanne sat down and looked, and there, yes, there the caps of the
waggons gleamed in the fading light; and oh! her heart leapt at the
sight of them, for in those waggons were white men and women such as she
had not seen for years, and with whom at length she would be safe. But
even as her breast heaved at the thought of it, an icy, unnatural wind
seemed to stir her hair, and of a sudden she felt, or seemed to feel,
the presence of Sihamba. For a moment, and one only, it was with her,
then it was gone, nor during all her life did it ever come back again.

"Oh! Sihamba is dead!" she cried.

Zinti looked at her in question.

"It may well be so," he said sadly, "but I pray that it is not so, for
she is the best of chieftainesses. At least we have our own lives to
save, so let us go on," and again they pressed forward through the
gathering gloom.

Soon it grew dark, and had her guide been any other man than Zinti
Suzanne must have stopped where she was till the moon rose at midnight.
But Zinti could find any path that his feet had trod even in the dark;
yes, although it ran through piled-up rocks on the mountain side, and
was cut with the course of streams which must be forded.

In wading through one of these rivulets, Suzanne struck her bare ankle
against a stone and lamed herself, so that from this time forward,
shivering and wet with water, for her hurt was so sharp and sudden that
she had fallen in the stream, she was forced to walk leaning on Zinti's
shoulder, and indeed over some rough places he was obliged to carry her.
Now again Zinti wished to abandon that heavy child, for strong though he
was the weight of the two of them proved almost more than he could bear,
but Suzanne would not listen to him.

"Nay," she said, "this child that was sent to me by Heaven has saved me
from shame and death, and shame and death be my portion if I will leave
it while I live. Go on alone if you will, Zinti, and I will stay here
with the child."

"Truly white people are strange," answered Zinti, "that they should wish
to burden themselves with the child of another when their own lives are
at stake, but be it as you will, lady," and he struggled forward as best
he could, carrying the one and supporting the other.

Thus for hour after hour, slowly they crept onward with only the stars
to light and guide them, till at length about midnight the moon rose and
they saw that they were near the foot of the mountain. Now they rested
awhile, but not long enough to grow stiff, then hastening down the slope
they reached the plain, and headed for the white-topped koppie which
shone in the moonlight some six miles away. On they crept, Suzanne now
limping painfully, for her ankle had begun to swell, and now crawling
upon her hands and knees, for Zinti had no longer the strength to carry
her and the child. Thus they covered three miles in perhaps as many
hours. At last, with something like a sob, Suzanne sank to the earth.

"Zinti, I can walk no more," she said. "Either I must rest or die."

He looked at her and saw that she spoke truth, for she was quite
outworn.

"Is it so?" he said, "then we must stay here till the morning, nor do I
think that you will take hurt, for Bull-Head will scarcely care to cross
that pass by night."

Suzanne shook her head and answered:

"He will have begun to climb it at the rising of the moon. Hear me,
Zinti. The Boer camp is close and you still have some strength left;
take the child and go to it, and having gained an entrance in this way
or in that tell them my plight and they will ride out and save me."

"That is a good thought," he said; "but, lady, I do not like to leave
you alone, since here there is no place for you to hide."

"You could not help me if you stayed, Zinti, therefore go, for the
sooner you are gone, the sooner I shall be rescued."

"I hear your command, lady," he answered, and having given her most of
the food that was left, he fastened the sleeping child upon his shoulder
and walked forward up the rise.

In something less than an hour Zinti came to the camp, which was formed
of unlaagered waggons and tents pitched at the foot of a koppie, along
one base of which ran the river. About fifty yards in front of the camp
stood a single buck-waggon, and near to it sill glowed the embers of a
cooking-fire.

"Now if I try to pass that waggon those who watch by it will shoot at
me," thought Zinti, though, indeed, he need have had no fear, for they
were but camp-Kaffirs who slept soundly.

Not knowing this, however, he stood at a distance and called aloud, till
at last a Hottentot crept out with a gun, and, throwing back the blanket
from his head, asked who he was and what he wanted.

"I want to see the Baas of the camp," he answered, "for my mistress, a
white woman, lies exhausted upon the veldt not far away and seeks his
help."

"If you want to see the Baas," yawned the man, "you must wait till
daylight when he wakes up."

"I cannot wait," answered Zinti, and he made as though to pass towards
the camp, whereupon the man raised his gun and covered him, saying:

"If you go on I will shoot you, for stray Kaffir dogs are not allowed to
prowl about the camp at night."

"What then must I do?" asked Zinti.

"You can go away, or if you will you may sit by the waggon here till it
is light, and then when the Boers, my masters, wake up you can tell your
story, of which I believe nothing."

So, having no choice, Zinti sat down by the waggon and waited, while the
man with the gun watched him, pretending to be asleep all the while.



Now Suzanne was left alone upon the great veldt, and fear took hold
of her, for she was broken in body and mind, and the place was very
desolate; also she dreaded lest lions should take her, for she could
hear them roaring in the distance, or Swart Piet, who was worse than any
lion. Still she was so weary that after washing her face and hands in a
spring close by, presently she fell asleep. When she awoke the east was
tinged with the first grey light of the coming dawn, and it seemed to
her as though some cold hand of fear had gripped her heart of a sudden
and aroused her from heavy sleep. A sound caused her to look up, and
there on the crest of the rise before her, some three hundred yards
away, she saw dark forms moving, and caught sight of spears that
glimmered in the moonlight.

"Now there is an end," thought Suzanne to herself, "for without doubt
yonder stands a Zulu impi; the same that attacked the Umpondwana, for
I can see the crane's feathers in their head-dresses," and she crouched
upon the ground in an extremity of dread.



CHAPTER XXXIII

RALPH FINDS THE DREAM MOUNTAIN

Now I must go back to that evening when we learned the great tidings
from the lips of the lad Gaasha, whose life Ralph had saved after the
attack by the Kaffirs upon the laager. There sat Gaasha on the ground
staring, and there, not far away, Ralph was lying in his swoon, while
Jan and I looked at each other like people who have suddenly beheld a
sign from heaven.

"What evil magic is there in my words," said Gaasha presently, "that
they should strike the Baas yonder dead like a spear?"

"He is not dead," I answered, "but for long he has sought that mountain
Umpondwana of which you speak. Tell us now, did you hear of any white
woman dwelling with the chieftainess Sihamba?"

"No, lady, I heard of none."

This answer of Gaasha's saddened me, for I made sure that if so strange
a thing had happened as that a white woman had come to live among his
tribe, the man who told him of the return of Sihamba would have told him
of this also. Therefore, so I argued, either Suzanne was dead or she
was in the power of Piet Van Vooren, or Sihamba had deserted her, though
this last I did not believe. As it turned out afterwards, had not Gaasha
been the stupidest of Kaffirs, we should have been saved those long
days of doubt and trouble, for though he had not heard that Sihamba was
accompanied by a white woman, he had heard that she brought with her
a white _bird_ to the mountain Umpondwana. Of course if he had told us
this we should have guessed that the white bird could be none other than
Suzanne, whose native name was Swallow.

Well, we set about reviving Ralph, which was done by throwing water
on to his face. When he had found his senses again I prayed him not to
suffer himself to be carried away with hope, since although Gaasha had
heard of Sihamba, he had heard nothing of Suzanne.

To this he answered that now when God had pointed out to him the
mountain of his vision and in so strange a manner, he had no fear but
that he would find his wife upon it, since God was merciful and did not
desire to mock or torment His servants.

I replied that I trusted it might be so, but the ways of the Almighty
were beyond our understanding, nor did it become us to pass judgment
upon them. Ralph scarcely heeded my words, but, springing to his feet,
said:

"Come, let us be going to the mountain Umpondwana."

"First we must consult with the commandant and get aid from him," said
Jan, "for it would not be safe that we should wander into these wild
places alone, where there are many Kaffirs who doubtless would murder
us."

In his eagerness Ralph would not listen to this, for he desired to start
at once. But I pointed out to him that we had no horses, all ours being
dead of the sickness; moreover, that the night was dark, and we could
not trek till the moon rose, so at length he consented. Then we went
into the laager, and Jan called the older men together in a quiet place.

"What is it, Heer Botmar?" asked the commandant when they were
assembled.

"It is this, cousin," said Jan. "I desire to ask you to go a three days'
trek out of your march to a mountain called Umpondwana, whither this
servant of mine, Gaasha, can guide you."

"For what reason?" asked the commandant astonished.

"Friend," said Jan, "you have all of you heard the story of how that
outcast devil Piet Van Vooren, stole away my only child, Suzanne, the
wife of Ralph Kenzie the Englishman here."

"That is an old tale," said the commandant, "and, doubtless, the poor
girl is dead long ago; why then do you speak of it now, and what has it
to do with your request that we should trek to the mountain Umpondwana?"

"Only this, cousin; we think that my daughter Suzanne is living there
among the Kaffirs, and we seek to rescue her. At least this is certain,
for only now we have learnt it from the lips of Gaasha that Sihamba, her
friend and servant whom we believe was with her, rules over this tribe
as chieftainess."

"That may be so," said the commandant, "but did Gaasha tell you that
your daughter was there also?"

"No," answered Jan.

"Then how do you know it?"

Now Jan hesitated and turned red as he replied:

"We know it because Ralph Kenzie here saw this very mountain in a vision
more than two years ago, and in that vision was told that there he would
find the wife who was taken from him on his marriage day."

Now, on hearing this most of the Boers broke out laughing, for,
though very religious, we are not a people who place faith in visions.
Thereupon I grew angry, and spoke to them more strongly, perhaps, than I
should have done, reducing them to silence, for they were all of them a
little afraid of my tongue. Also I told them the story of that dream of
Ralph's and of what had just passed with Gaasha, showing them that there
was more in it than they imagined. After I had done Ralph spoke also,
saying:

"Friends, doubtless this tale sounds foolish in your ears; but I
ask what has been my nickname among you? Has it not been 'Man of the
Mountain,' because I have always spoken and inquired for a certain
mountain which had ridges on it shaped like the fingers of a man's hand,
and have you not thought me mad for this reason? Now I have heard of
such a mountain and I have heard also that Sihamba, who was with my
wife, rules there as chieftainess. Is it strange, therefore, that I,
believing now as ever in that vision, should wish to visit this mountain
where, as I am sure, I shall find the wife that is lost to me?"

After this the Boers laughed no more but consulted apart till at last
the elder, Heer Celliers, spoke.

"Heeren Botmar and Kenzie," he said, "of all this story of a vision we
can say little. For aught we know it may be true, but if true then it
is the work of magic and we will have nothing to do with it. Should you
wish to go to seek this mountain Umpondwana you must go alone, for we
cannot alter our plans to trek there with you. But we counsel you not to
go, since no good can come of visions and magic."

When I heard this I answered him back, but Jan and Ralph went away, and
presently I found them talking together outside the laager.

"Let me go alone," Ralph was saying.

"Nay," Jan answered, "I will accompany you, for two are better than
one; also I shall not sleep till I find out the truth and know whether
Suzanne lives or is dead."

"Indeed! and what is to become of me?" I asked.

"You, vrouw, can stop with the neighbours here, and we will join you in
Natal."

"You will do no such thing, Jan Botmar," I answered, "for where you two
go there I can go. What! Am I not sick also with love for my daughter
and anxious to learn her fate?"

"As you will, wife," answered Jan; "perhaps it is well that we three
should not separate who have been together always," and he went to see
about the waggon.

As soon as the moon rose, which was about eleven o'clock, the oxen
were inspanned. Before we started, however, several of our friends
came praying us not to venture on so perilous a journey; indeed, they
threatened even to use force to prevent us, and I think would have done
so had not Jan told them outright that we were our own masters and free
to go where we wished. So they departed, grieving over our obstinacy,
and little guessing that their danger was far greater than our own,
since as it chanced just as they had trekked through the Van Reenen's
Pass a few days later a Zulu impi, returning from the Weenen massacres,
fell upon them unawares and killed more than half their number before
they were beaten off.

So we trekked with the moon, Gaasha guiding us, and did not outspan
till dawn. As I have said, we had no horses, but never until I made that
journey did it come home to me how slow are oxen, for never before then
was I in a hurry, nor, indeed, have I been since that time. It is the
Englishmen who are always in a hurry, and that is one of the reasons why
we Boers are so superior to them, and when we choose can master them in
everything, except shopkeeping, and especially in fighting. Well, at the
best the cattle could not drag the waggon over the roadless veldt at a
greater rate than two miles an hour, or cover more than twenty miles a
day in all. It was pitiful to see Ralph's impatience; again and again he
walked on and returned; indeed, had we allowed it, I think that he would
have pressed forward on foot, leaving us to follow in the waggon.

At daylight on the third day we inspanned as usual, and trekked through
the morning mists until the sun sucked them up. Then Gaasha, who was
sitting on the waggon-box beside Ralph, touched his shoulder, and
pointed before him. Ralph looked, and far away upon the plain saw what
seemed to be a white cloud, above which towered the flat cliffs of a
mountain of red rock.

"See, Baas," he said, "yonder is Umpondwana, my home, and now by
nightfall I shall know whether my parents are still alive, or, if they
are dead, whether they have left any cattle that I can claim by law,"
and he began to whistle cheerfully.

"And I," said Ralph aloud, "shall know whether my life is to be a heaven
or a hell," and all day long, neither eating nor drinking, he sat upon
the waggon-box and stared at the mountain, not lifting his eyes from it.



It was about one o'clock in the afternoon when we seemed to be quite
close to the green flanks of Umpondwana, that of a sudden we cut a wide
spoor trampled by thousands of naked feet. Jan and Gaasha got off the
waggon to examine it, but Ralph did not move.

"An impi has passed here," said Jan presently.

"Yes, and a Zulu impi as I think, Baas, but more than one whole day
ago," and Gaasha began to hunt about amongst some low bushes which grew
