barracks for his body guard and the treasuries.  The left wing was
occupied by the officers of the household, the innumerable servants and
the horses and chariots of the sovereign.

In spite of the absence of the king himself, brisk activity reigned in
the palace of Rameses, for a hundred gardeners watered the turf, the
flower-borders, the shrubs and trees; companies of guards passed hither
and thither; horses were being trained and broken; and the princess's
wing was as full as a beehive of servants and maids, officers and
priests.

Nefert was well known in this part of the palace.  The gate-keepers let
her litter pass unchallenged, with low bows; once in the garden, a lord
in waiting received her, and conducted her to the chamberlain, who, after
a short delay, introduced her into the sitting-room of the king's
favorite daughter.

Bent-Anat's apartment was on the first floor of the pavilion, next to the
king's residence.  Her dead mother had inhabited these pleasant rooms,
and when the princess was grown up it made the king happy to feel that
she was near him; so the beautiful house of the wife who had too early
departed, was given up to her, and at the same time, as she was his
eldest daughter, many privileges were conceded to her, which hitherto
none but queens had enjoyed.

The large room, in which Nefert found the princess, commanded the river.
A doorway, closed with light curtains, opened on to a long balcony with a
finely-worked balustrade of copper-gilt, to which clung a climbing rose
with pink flowers.

When Nefert entered the room, Bent-Anat was just having the rustling
curtain drawn aside by her waiting-women; for the sun was setting, and at
that hour she loved to sit on the balcony, as it grew cooler, and watch
with devout meditation the departure of Ra, who, as the grey-haired Turn,
vanished behind the western horizon of the Necropolis in the evening to
bestow the blessing of light on the under-world.

Nefert's apartment was far more elegantly appointed than the princess's;
her mother and Mena had surrounded her with a thousand pretty trifles.
Her carpets were made of sky-blue and silver brocade from Damascus, the
seats and couches were covered with stuff embroidered in feathers by the
Ethiopian women, which looked like the breasts of birds.  The images of
the Goddess Hathor, which stood on the house-altar, were of an imitation
of emerald, which was called Mafkat, and the other little figures, which
were placed near their patroness, were of lapis-lazuli, malachite, agate
and bronze, overlaid with gold.  On her toilet-table stood a collection
of salve-boxes, and cups of ebony and ivory finely carved, and everything
was arranged with the utmost taste, and exactly suited Nefert herself.

Bent-Anat's room also suited the owner.

It was high and airy, and its furniture consisted in costly but simple
necessaries; the lower part of the wall was lined with cool tiles of
white and violet earthen ware, on each of which was pictured a star, and
which, all together, formed a tasteful pattern.  Above these the walls
were covered with a beautiful dark green material brought from Sais, and
the same stuff was used to cover the long divans by the wall.  Chairs and
stools, made of cane, stood round a very large table in the middle of
this room, out of which several others opened; all handsome, comfortable,
and harmonious in aspect, but all betraying that their mistress took
small pleasure in trifling decorations.  But her chief delight was in
finely-grown plants, of which rare and magnificent specimens,
artistically arranged on stands, stood in the corners of many of the
rooms.  In others there were tall obelisks of ebony, which bore saucers
for incense, which all the Egyptians loved, and which was prescribed by
their physicians to purify and perfume their dwellings.  Her simple
bedroom would have suited a prince who loved floriculture, quite as well
as a princess.

Before all things Bent-Anat loved air and light.  The curtains of her
windows and doors were only closed when the position of the sun
absolutely required it; while in Nefert's rooms, from morning till
evening, a dim twilight was maintained.

The princess went affectionately towards the charioteer's wife, who bowed
low before her at the threshold; she took her chin with her right hand,
kissed her delicate narrow forehead, and said:

"Sweet creature!  At last you have come uninvited to see lonely me!
It is the first time since our men went away to the war.  If Rameses'
daughter commands there is no escape; and you come; but of your own free
will--"

Nefert raised her large eyes, moist with tears, with an imploring look,
and her glance was so pathetic that Bent-Anat interrupted herself, and
taking both her hands, exclaimed:

"Do you know who must have eyes exactly like yours?  I mean the Goddess
from whose tears, when they fall on the earth, flowers spring."

Nefert's eyes fell and she blushed deeply.

"I wish," she murmured, "that my eyes might close for ever, for I am very
unhappy."  And two large tears rolled down her cheeks.

"What has happened to you, my darling?"  asked the princess
sympathetically, and she drew her towards her, putting her arm round
her like a sick child.

Nefert glanced anxiously at the chamberlain, and the ladies in waiting
who had entered the room with her, and Bent-Anat understood the look; she
requested her attendants to withdraw, and when she was alone with her sad
little friend--"Speak now," she said.  "What saddens your heart?  how
comes this melancholy expression on your dear baby face?  Tell me, and I
will comfort you, and you shall be my bright thoughtless plaything once
more."

"Thy plaything!" answered Nefert, and a flash of displeasure sparkled in
her eyes.  "Thou art right to call me so, for I deserve no better name.
I have submitted all my life to be nothing but the plaything of others."

"But, Nefert, I do not know you again," cried Bent-Anat.  "Is this my
gentle amiable dreamer?"

"That is the word I wanted," said Nefert in a low tone.  "I slept, and
dreamed, and dreamed on--till Mena awoke me; and when he left me I went
to sleep again, and for two whole years I have lain dreaming; but to-day
I have been torn from my dreams so suddenly and roughly, that I shall
never find any rest again."

While she spoke, heavy tears fell slowly one after another over her
cheeks.

Bent-Anat felt what she saw and heard as deeply as if Nefert were her own
suffering child.  She lovingly drew the young wife down by her side on
the divan, and insisted on Nefert's letting her know all that troubled
her spirit.

Katuti's daughter had in the last few hours felt like one born blind, and
who suddenly receives his sight.  He looks at the brightness of the sun,
and the manifold forms of the creation around him, but the beams of the
day-star blind its eyes, and the new forms, which he has sought to guess
at in his mind, and which throng round him in their rude reality, shock
him and pain him.  To-day, for the first time, she had asked herself
wherefore her mother, and not she herself, was called upon to control the
house of which she nevertheless was called the mistress, and the answer
had rung in her ears: "Because Mena thinks you incapable of thought and
action."  He had often called her his little rose, and she felt now that
she was neither more nor less than a flower that blossoms and fades, and
only charms the eye by its color and beauty.

"My mother," she said to Bent-Anat, "no doubt loves me, but she has
managed badly for Mena, very badly; and I, miserable idiot, slept and
dreamed of Mena, and saw and heard nothing of what was happening to his
--to our--inheritance.  Now my mother is afraid of my husband, and those
whom we fear, says my uncle, we cannot love, and we are always ready to
believe evil of those we do not love.  So she lends an ear to those
people who blame Mena, and say of him that he has driven me out of his
heart, and has taken a strange woman to his tent.  But it is false and
a lie; and I cannot and will not countenance my own mother even, if she
embitters and mars what is left to me--what supports me--the breath and
blood of my life--my love, my fervent love for my husband."

Bent-Anat had listened to her without interrupting her; she sat by her
for a time in silence.  Then she said:

"Come out into the gallery; then I will tell you what I think, and
perhaps Toth may pour some helpful counsel into my mind.  I love you,
and I know you well, and though I am not wise, I have my eyes open and
a strong hand.  Take it, come with me on to the balcony."

A refreshing breeze met the two women as they stepped out into the air.
It was evening, and a reviving coolness had succeeded the heat of the
day.  The buildings and houses already cast long shadows, and numberless
boats, with the visitors returning from the Necropolis, crowded the
stream that rolled its swollen flood majestically northwards.

Close below lay the verdant garden, which sent odors from the rose-beds
up to the princess's balcony.  A famous artist had laid it out in the
time of Hatasu, and the picture which he had in his mind, when he sowed
the seeds and planted the young shoots, was now realized, many decades
after his death.  He had thought of planning a carpet, on which the
palace should seem to stand.  Tiny streams, in bends and curves, formed
the outline of the design, and the shapes they enclosed were filled with
plants of every size, form, and color; beautiful plats of fresh green
turf everywhere represented the groundwork of the pattern, and flower-
beds and clumps of shrubs stood out from them in harmonious mixtures of
colors, while the tall and rare trees, of which Hatasu's ships had
brought several from Arabia, gave dignity and impressiveness to the
whole.

Clear drops sparkled on leaf and flower and blade, for, only a short time
before, the garden by Bent-Anat's house had been freshly watered.  The
Nile beyond surrounded an island, where flourished the well-kept sacred
grove of Anion.

The Necropolis on the farther side of the river was also well seen from
Bent-Anat's balcony.  There stood in long perspective the rows of
sphinxes, which led from the landing-place of the festal barges to the
gigantic buildings of Amenophis III. with its colossi--the hugest in
Thebes--to the House of Seti, and to the temple of Hatasu.  There lay the
long workshops of the embalmers and closely-packed homes of the
inhabitants of the City of the Dead.  In the farthest west rose the
Libyan mountains with their innumerable graves, and the valley of the
kings' tombs took a wide curve behind, concealed by a spur of the hills.

The two women looked in silence towards the west.  The sun was near the
horizon--now it touched it, now it sank behind the hills; and as the
heavens flushed with hues like living gold, blazing rubies, and liquid
garnet and amethyst, the evening chant rang out from all the temples, and
the friends sank on their knees, hid their faces in the bower-rose
garlands that clung to the trellis, and prayed with full hearts.

When they rose night was spreading over the landscape, for the twilight
is short in Thebes.  Here and there a rosy cloud fluttered across the
darkening sky, and faded gradually as the evening star appeared.

"I am content," said Bent-Anat.  "And you?  have you recovered your peace
of mind?"

Nefert shook her head.  The princess drew her on to a seat, and sank down
beside her.  Then she began again "Your heart is sore, poor child; they
have spoilt the past for you, and you dread the future.  Let me be frank
with you, even if it gives you pain.  You are sick, and I must cure you.
Will you listen to me?"

