     Khebsennuf.  Instead of the cover, the head of the genius to which
     it was dedicated, was placed on each kanopus.  Amset (tinder the
     protection of Isis) has a human head, Hapi (protected by Nephthys)
     an ape's head, Tuamutef (protected by Neith) a jackal's head, and
     Khebsennuf (protected by Selk) a sparrow-hawk's head.  In one of the
     Christian Coptic Manuscripts, the four archangels are invoked in the
     place of these genii.]

lay this heart in it, and take out in its stead the heart of a human
being.  No one--no one will notice it.  Nor need you do it to-morrow, or
the day after tomorrow even.  Your son can buy a ram to kill every day
with my money till the right moment comes.  Your granddaughter will soon
grow strong on a good meat-diet.  Take courage!"

"I am not afraid of the danger," said the old man, "but how can I venture
to steal from a dead man his life in the other world?  And then--in shame
and misery have I lived, and for many a year--no man has numbered them
for me--have I obeyed the commandments, that I may be found righteous in
that world to come, and in the fields of Aalu, and in the Sun-bark find
compensation for all that I have suffered here.  You are good and
friendly.  Why, for the sake of a whim, should you sacrifice the future
bliss of a man, who in all his long life has never known happiness, and
who has never done you any harm?"

"What I want with the heart," replied the physician, "you cannot
understand, but in procuring it for me, you will be furthering a great
and useful purpose.  I have no whims, for I am no idler.  And as to what
concerns your salvation, have no anxiety.  I am a priest, and take your
deed and its consequences upon myself; upon myself, do you understand?
I tell you, as a priest, that what I demand of you is right, and if the
judge of the dead shall enquire, 'Why didst thou take the heart of a
human being out of the Kanopus?' then reply--reply to him thus, 'Because
Nebsecht, the priest, commanded me, and promised himself to answer for
the deed.'"

The old man gazed thoughtfully on the ground, and the physician continued
still more urgently:

"If you fulfil my wish, then--then I swear to you that, when you die, I
will take care that your mummy is provided with all the amulets, and I
myself will write you a book of the Entrance into Day, and have it wound
within your mummy-cloth, as is done with the great.

     [The Books of the Dead are often found amongst the cloths, (by the
     leg or under the arm), or else in the coffin trader, or near, the
     mummy.]

That will give you power over all demons, and you will be admitted to the
hall of the twofold justice, which punishes and rewards, and your award
will be bliss."

"But the theft of a heart will make the weight of my sins heavy, when my
own heart is weighed," sighed the old man.

Nebsecht considered for a moment, and then said: "I will give you a
written paper, in which I will certify that it was I who commanded the
theft.  You will sew it up in a little bag, carry it on your breast, and
have it laid with you in the grave.  Then when Techuti, the agent of the
soul, receives your justification before Osiris and the judges of the
dead, give him the writing.  He will read it aloud, and you will be
accounted just."

     [The vignettes of Chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead represent the
     Last Judgment of the Egyptians.  Under a canopy Osiris sits
     enthroned as Chief Judge, 42 assessors assist him.  In the hall
     stand the scales;  the dog headed ape, the animal sacred to Toth,
     guides the balance.  In one scale lies the heart of the dead man, in
     the other the image of the goddess of Truth, who introduces the soul
     into the hall of justice  Toth writs the record.  The soul affirms
     that it has not committed 42 deadly sins, and if it obtains credit,
     it is named "maa cheru," i.e. "the truth-speaker," and is therewith
     declared blessed.  It now receives its heart back, and grows into a
     new and divine life.]

"I am not learned in writing," muttered the paraschites with a slight
mistrust that made itself felt in his voice.

"But I swear to you by the nine great Gods, that I will write nothing on
the paper but what I have promised you.  I will confess that I, the
priest Nebsecht, commanded you to take the heart, and that your guilt is
mine."

"Let me have the writing then," murmured the old man.

The physician wiped the perspiration from his forehead, and gave the
paraschites his hand.  "To-morrow you shall have it," he said, "and I
will not leave your granddaughter till she is well again."

The soldier engaged in cutting up the ram, had heard nothing of this
conversation.  Now he ran a wooden spit through the legs, and held them
over the fire to roast them.  The jackals howled louder as the smell of
the melting fat filled the air, and the old man, as he looked on, forgot
the terrible task he had undertaken.  For a year past, no meat had been
tasted in his house.

The physician Nebsecht, himself eating nothing but a piece of bread,
looked on at the feasters.  They tore the meat from the bones, and the
soldier, especially, devoured the costly and unwonted meal like some
ravenous animal.  He could be heard chewing like a horse in the manger,
and a feeling of disgust filled the physician's soul.

"Sensual beings," he murmured to himself, "animals with consciousness!
And yet human beings.  Strange!  They languish bound in the fetters of
the world of sense, and yet how much more ardently they desire that which
transcends sense than we--how much more real it is to them than to us!"

"Will you have some meat?"  cried the soldier, who had remarked that
Nebsecht's lips moved, and tearing a piece of meat from the bone of the
joint he was devouring, he held it out to the physician.  Nebsecht shrank
back; the greedy look, the glistening teeth, the dark, rough features of
the man terrified him.  And he thought of the white and fragile form of
the sick girl lying within on the mat, and a question escaped his lips.

"Is the maiden, is Uarda, your own child?"  he said.

The soldier struck himself on the breast.  "So sure as the king Rameses
is the son of Seti," he answered.  The men had finished their meal, and
the flat cakes of bread which the wife of the paraschites gave them, and
on which they had wiped their hands from the fat, were consumed, when the
soldier, in whose slow brain the physician's question still lingered,
said, sighing deeply:

"Her mother was a stranger; she laid the white dove in the raven's nest."

"Of what country was your wife a native?"  asked the physician.

"That I do not know," replied the soldier.

"Did you never enquire about the family of your own wife?"

"Certainly I did: but how could she have answered me?  But it is a long
and strange story."

"Relate it to me," said Nebsecht, "the night is long, and I like
listening better than talking.  But first I will see after our patient."

When the physician had satisfied himself that Uarda was sleeping quietly
and breathing regularly, he seated himself again by the paraschites and
his son, and the soldier began:

"It all happened long ago.  King Seti still lived, but Rameses already
reigned in his stead, when I came home from the north.  They had sent me
to the workmen, who were building the fortifications in Zoan, the town of
Rameses.--[The Rameses of the Bible.  Exodus i.  ii.]--I was set over six
men, Amus,--[Semites]--of the Hebrew race, over whom Rameses kept such a
tight hand.

     [For an account of the traces of the Jews in Egypt, see Chabas,
     Melanges, and Ebers, AEgypten und die Bucher Moses]

Amongst the workmen there were sons of rich cattle-holders, for in
levying the people it was never: 'What have you?' but 'Of what race are
you?'  The fortifications and the canal which was to join the Nile and
the Red Sea had to be completed, and the king, to whom be long life,
health, and prosperity, took the youth of Egypt with him to the wars, and
left the work to the Amus, who are connected by race with his enemies in
the east.  One lives well in Goshen, for it is a fine country, with more
than enough of corn and grass and vegetables and fish and fowls, and I
always had of the best, for amongst my six people were two mother's
darlings, whose parents sent me many a piece of silver.  Every one loves
his children, but the Hebrews love them more tenderly than other people.
We had daily our appointed tale of bricks to deliver, and when the sun
burnt hot, I used to help the lads, and I did more in an hour than they
did in three, for I am strong and was still stronger then than I am now.

"Then came the time when I was relieved.  I was ordered to return to
Thebes, to the prisoners of war who were building the great temple of
Amon over yonder, and as I had brought home some money, and it would take
a good while to finish the great dwelling of the king of the Gods, I
thought of taking a wife; but no Egyptian.  Of daughters of paraschites
there were plenty; but I wanted to get away out of my father's accursed
caste, and the other girls here, as I knew, were afraid of our
uncleanness.  In the low country I had done better, and many an Amu and
Schasu woman had gladly come to my tent.  From the beginning I had set my
mind on an Asiatic.

"Many a time maidens taken prisoners in war were brought to be sold, but
either they did not please me, or they were too dear.  Meantime my money
melted away, for we enjoyed life in the time of rest which followed the
working hours.  There were dancers too in plenty, in the foreign quarter.

"Well, it was just at the time of the holy feast of Amon-Chem, that a new
transport of prisoners of war arrived, and amongst them many women, who
were sold publicly to the highest bidder.  The young and beautiful ones
were paid for high, but even the older ones were too dear for me.

"Quite at the last a blind woman was led forward, and a withered-looking
woman who was dumb, as the auctioneer, who generally praised up the
merits of the prisoners, informed the buyers.  The blind woman had strong
hands, and was bought by a tavern-keeper, for whom she turns the handmill
to this day; the dumb woman held a child in her arms, and no one could
tell whether she was young or old.  She looked as though she already lay
in her coffin, and the little one as though he would go under the grass
before her.  And her hair was red, burning red, the very color of Typhon.
Her white pale face looked neither bad nor good, only weary, weary to
death.  On her withered white arms blue veins ran like dark cords, her
hands hung feebly down, and in them hung the child.  If a wind were to
rise, I thought to myself, it would blow her away, and the little one
with her.

"The auctioneer asked for a bid.  All were silent, for the dumb shadow
was of no use for work; she was half-dead, and a burial costs money.

"So passed several minutes.  Then the auctioneer stepped up to her, and
gave her a blow with his whip, that she might rouse herself up, and
appear less miserable to the buyers.  She shivered like a person in a
fever, pressed the child closer to her, and looked round at every one as
though seeking for help--and me full in the face.  What happened now was
a real wonder, for her eyes were bigger than any that I ever saw, and a
demon dwelt in them that had power over me and ruled me to the end, and
that day it bewitched me for the first time.

"It was not hot and I had drunk nothing, and yet I acted against my own
will and better judgment when, as her eyes fell upon me, I bid all that I
possessed in order to buy her.  I might have had her cheaper!  My
companions laughed at me, the auctioneer shrugged his shoulders as he
took my money, but I took the child on my arm, helped the woman up,
carried her in a boat over the Nile, loaded a stone-cart with my
miserable property, and drove her like a block of lime home to the old
people.

"My mother shook her head, and my father looked as if he thought me mad;
but neither of them said a word.  They made up a bed for her, and on my
spare nights I built that ruined thing hard by--it was a tidy hut once.
Soon my mother grew fond of the child.  It was quite small, and we called
it Pennu--[Pennu is the name for the mouse in old Egyptian]--because it
was so pretty, like a little mouse.  I kept away from the foreign
quarter, and saved my wages, and bought a goat, which lived in front of
our door when I took the woman to her own hut.

"She was dumb, but not deaf, only she did not understand our language;
but the demon in her eyes spoke for her and understood what I said.  She
comprehended everything, and could say everything with her eyes; but best
of all she knew how to thank one.  No high-priest who at the great hill
festival praises the Gods in long hymns for their gifts can return thanks
