"Yes--in the form of a very frank 'no.'  I asked her reasons.  She begged
me to be content with the 'no;' then I pressed her harder, till she
interrupted me, and owned with proud decision that she preferred some
one else.  I wished to learn the name of the happy man--that she refused.
Then my blood began to boil, and my desire to win her increased; but I
had to leave her, rejected, and with a fresh, burning, poisoned wound in
my heart."

"You are jealous!"  said Katuti, "and do you know of whom?"

"No," replied Ani.  "But I hope to find out through you.  What I feel it
is impossible for me to express.  But one thing I know, and that is this,
that I entered the palace a vacillating man--that I left it firmly
resolved.  I now rush straight onwards, never again to turn back.  From
this time forward you will no longer have to drive me onward, but rather
to hold me back; and, as if the Gods had meant to show that they would
stand by me, I found the high-priest Ameni, and the chief pioneer Paaker
waiting for me in my house.  Ameni will act for me in Egypt, Paaker in
Syria.  My victorious troops from Ethiopia will enter Thebes to-morrow
morning, on their return home in triumph, as if the king were at their
head, and will then take part in the Feast of the Valley.  Later we will
send them into the north, and post them in the fortresses which protect
Egypt against enemies coming from the east Tanis, Daphne, Pelusium,
Migdol.  Rameses, as you know, requires that we should drill the serfs of
the temples, and send them to him as auxiliaries.  I will send him half
of the body-guard, the other half shall serve my own purposes.  The
garrison of Memphis, which is devoted to Rameses, shall be sent to Nubia,
and shall be relieved by troops that are faithful to me.  The people of
Thebes are led by the priests, and tomorrow Ameni will point out to them
who is their legitimate king, who will put an end to the war and release
them from taxes.  The children of Rameses will be excluded from the
solemnities, for Ameni, in spite of the chief-priest of Anion, still
pronounces Bent-Anat unclean.  Young Rameri has been doing wrong and
Ameni, who has some other great scheme in his mind, has forbidden him the
temple of Seti; that will work on the crowd!  You know how things are
going on in Syria: Rameses has suffered much at the hands of the Cheta
and their allies; whole legions are weary of eternally lying in the
field, and if things came to extremities would join us; but, perhaps,
especially if Paaker acquits himself well, we may be victorious without
fighting.  Above all things now we must act rapidly."

"I no longer recognize the timid, cautious lover of delay!"  exclaimed
Katuti.

"Because now prudent hesitation would be want of prudence," said Ani.

"And if the king should get timely information as to what is happening
here?"  said Katuti.

"I said so!"  exclaimed Ani; "we are exchanging parts."

"You are mistaken," said Katuti.  "I also am for pressing forwards; but
I would remind you of a necessary precaution.  No letters but yours must
reach the camp for the next few weeks."

"Once more you and the priests are of one mind," said Ani laughing;
'for Ameni gave me the same counsel.  Whatever letters are sent across
the frontier between Pelusium and the Red Sea will be detained.  Only my
letters--in which I complain of the piratical sons of the desert who fall
upon the messengers--will reach the king."

"That is wise," said the widow; "let the seaports of the Red Sea be
watched too, and the public writers.  When you are king, you can
distinguish those who are affected for or against you."

Ani shook his head and replied:

"That would put me in a difficult position; for it I were to punish those
who are now faithful to their king, and exalt the others, I should have
to govern with unfaithful servants, and turn away the faithful ones.  You
need not color, my kind friend, for we are kin, and my concerns are
yours."

Katuti took the hand he offered her and said:

"It is so.  And I ask no further reward than to see my father's house
once more in the enjoyment of its rights."

"Perhaps we shall achieve it," said Ani; "but in a short time if--if--
Reflect, Katuti; try to find out, ask your daughter to help you to the
utmost.  Who is it that she--you know whom I mean--Who is it that Bent-
Anat loves?"

The widow started, for Ani had spoken the last words with a vehemence
very foreign to his usual courtliness, but soon she smiled and repeated
to the Regent the names of the few young nobles who had not followed the
king, and remained in Thebes.  "Can it be Chamus?"  at last she said,
"he is at the camp, it is true, but nevertheless--"

At this instant Nemu, who had not lost a word of the conversation, came
in as if straight from the garden and said:

"Pardon me, my lady; but I have heard a strange thing."

"Speak," said Katuti.

The high and mighty princess Bent-Anat, the daughter of Rameses, is said
to have an open love-affair with a young priest of the House of Seti."

"You barefaced scoundrel!"  exclaimed Ani, and his eyes sparkled with
rage.  "Prove what you say, or you lose your tongue."

"I am willing to lose it as a slanderer and traitor according to the
law," said the little man abjectly, and yet with a malicious laugh; "but
this time I shall keep it, for I can vouch for what I say.  You both know
that Bent-Anat was pronounced unclean because she stayed for an hour and
more in the house of a paraschites.  She had an assignation there with
the priest.  At a second, in the temple of Hatasu, they were surprised by
Septah, the chief of the haruspices of the House of Seti."

"Who is the priest?"  asked Ani with apparent calmness.

"A low-born man," replied Nemu, "to whom a free education was given at
the House of Seti, and who is well known as a verse-maker and interpreter
of dreams.  His name is Pentaur, and it certainly must be admitted that
he is handsome and dignified.  He is line for line the image of the
pioneer Paaker's late father.  Didst thou ever see him, my lord?"

The Regent looked gloomily at the floor and nodded that he had.  But
Katuti cried out; "Fool that I am! the dwarf is right!  I saw how she
blushed when her brother told her how the boys had rebelled on his
account against Ameni. It is Pentaur and none other!"

"Good!"  said Ani, "we will see."

With these words he took leave of Katuti, who, as he disappeared in
the garden, muttered to herself: "He was wonderfully clear and decided
to-day; but jealousy is already blinding him and will soon make him feel
that he cannot get on without my sharp eyes."

Nemu had slipped out after the Regent.

He called to him from behind a fig-tree, and hastily whispered, while he
bowed with deep respect:

"My mother knows a great deal, most noble highness!  The sacred Ibis

     [Ibis religiosa.  It has disappeared from Egypt  There were two
     varieties of this bird, which was sacred to Toth, and mummies of
     both have been found in various places.  Elian states that an
     immortal Ibis was shown at Hermopolis.  Plutarch says, the ibis
     destroys poisonous reptiles, and that priests draw the water for
     their purifications where the Ibis has drunk, as it will never touch
     unwholesome water.]

wades through the fen when it goes in search of prey, and why shouldst
thou not stoop to pick up gold out of the dust?  I know how thou couldst
speak with the old woman without being seen."

"Speak," said Ani.

"Throw her into prison for a day, hear what she has to say, and then
release her--with gifts if she is of service to you--if not, with blows.
But thou wilt learn something important from her that she obstinately
refused to tell me even."

"We will see!"  replied the Regent.  He threw a ring of gold to the dwarf
and got into his chariot.

So large a crowd had collected in the vicinity of the palace, that Ani
apprehended mischief, and ordered his charioteer to check the pace of the
horses, and sent a few police-soldiers to the support of the out-runners;
but good news seemed to await him, for at the gate of the castle he heard
the unmistakable acclamations of the crowd, and in the palace court he
found a messenger from the temple of Seti, commissioned by Ameni to
communicate to him and to the people, the occurrence of a great miracle,
in that the heart of the ram of Anion, that had been torn by wolves, had
been found again within the breast of the dead prophet Rui.

Ani at once descended from his chariot, knelt down before all the people,
who followed his example, lifted his arms to heaven, and praised the Gods
in a loud voice.  When, after some minutes, he rose and entered the
palace, slaves came out and distributed bread to the crowd in Ameni's
name.

"The Regent has an open hand," said a joiner to his neighbor; "only look
how white the bread is.  I will put it in my pocket and take it to the
children."

"Give me a bit!"  cried a naked little scamp, snatching the cake of bread
from the joiner's hand and running away, slipping between the legs of the
people as lithe as a snake.

"You crocodile's brat!"  cried his victim.  "The insolence of boys gets
worse and worse every day."

"They are hungry," said the woman apologetically.  "Their fathers are
gone to the war, and the mothers have nothing for their children but
papyrus-pith and lotus-seeds."

"I hope they enjoy it," laughed the joiner.  "Let us push to the left;
there is a man with some more bread."

"The Regent must rejoice greatly over the miracle," said a shoemaker.
"It is costing him something."

"Nothing like it has happened for a long time," said a basket-maker.
"And he is particularly glad it should be precisely Rui's body, which the
sacred heart should have blessed.  You ask why?--Hatasu is Ani's
ancestress, blockhead!"

"And Rui was prophet of the temple of Hatasu," added the joiner.

"The priests over there are all hangers-on of the old royal house,
that I know," asserted a baker.

"That's no secret!"  cried the cobbler.  "The old times were better than
these too.  The war upsets everything, and quite respectable people go
barefoot because they cannot pay for shoe-leather.  Rameses is a great
warrior, and the son of Ra, but what can he do without the Gods; and they
don't seem to like to stay in Thebes any longer; else why should the
heart of the sacred ram seek a new dwelling in the Necropolis, and in the
breast of an adherent of the old--"

"Hold your tongue," warned the basket-maker.  "Here comes one of the
watch."

"I must go back to work," said the baker.  "I have my hands quite full
for the feast to-morrow."

"And I too," said the shoemaker with a sigh, "for who would follow the
king of the Gods through the Necropolis barefoot."

"You must earn a good deal," cried the basket-maker.  "We should do
better if we had better workmen," replied the shoemaker, "but all the
good hands are gone to the war.  One has to put up with stupid
youngsters.  And as for the women!  My wife must needs have a new gown
for the procession, and bought necklets for the children.  Of course we
must honor the dead, and they repay it often by standing by us when we
want it--but what I pay for sacrifices no one can tell.  More than half
of what I earn goes in them--"

"In the first grief of losing my poor wife," said the baker, "I promised
a small offering every new moon, and a greater one every year.  The
priests will not release us from our vows, and times get harder and
harder.  And my dead wife owes me a grudge, and is as thankless as she
was is her lifetime; for when she appears to me in a dream she does not
give me a good word, and often torments me."

"She is now a glorified all-seeing spirit," said the basket-maker's wife,
"and no doubt you were faithless to her.  The glorified souls know all
that happens, and that has happened on earth."

The baker cleared his throat, having no answer ready; but the shoemaker
exclaimed:

"By Anubis, the lord of the under-world, I hope I may die before my old
woman! for if she finds out down there all I have done in this world, and
if she may be changed into any shape she pleases, she will come to me
every night, and nip me like a crab, and sit on me like a mountain."

"And if you die first," said the woman, "she will follow you afterwards
to the under-world, and see through you there."

"That will be less dangerous," said the shoemaker laughing, "for then I
shall be glorified too, and shall know all about her past life.  That
will not all be white paper either, and if she throws a shoe at me I will
fling the last at her."

"Come home," said the basket-maker's wife, pulling her husband away.
"You are getting no good by hearing this talk."

The bystanders laughed, and the baker exclaimed:

"It is high time I should be in the Necropolis before it gets dark, and
see to the tables being laid for to-morrow's festival.  My trucks are
close to the narrow entrance to the valley.  Send your little ones to me,
and I will give them something nice.  Are you coming over with me?"

"My younger brother is gone over with the goods," replied the shoemaker.
"We have plenty to do still for the customers in Thebes, and here am I
standing gossiping.  Will the wonderful heart of the sacred ram be
exhibited to-morrow do you know?"
