begins the book on the eyes, which fills eight large pages.  We were
formerly compelled to draw from Greek and Roman authors what we knew
about the remedies used for diseases of the eye among the ancient
Egyptians.  The portion of the Papyrus Ebers just mentioned is now the
only Egyptian source from whence we can obtain instruction concerning
this important branch of ancient medicine.

All this scarcely seems to have a place in the preface of a historical
romance, and yet it is worthy of mention here; for there is something
almost "providential" in the fact that it was reserved for the author of
"An Egyptian Princess" to bestow the gift of this manuscript upon the
scientific world.  Among the characters in the novel the reader will meet
an oculist from Sais, who wrote a book upon the diseases of the visual
organs.  The fate of this valuable work exactly agrees with the course of
the narrative.  The papyrus scroll of the Sais oculist, which a short
time ago existed only in the imagination of the author and readers of "An
Egyptian Princess," is now an established fact.  When I succeeded in
bringing the manuscript home, I felt like the man who had dreamed of a
treasure, and when he went out to ride found it in his path.

A reply to Monsieur Jules Soury's criticism of "An Egyptian Princess" in
the Revue des deux Mondes, Vol. VII, January 1875, might appropriately be
introduced into this preface, but would scarcely be possible without
entering more deeply into the ever-disputed question, which will be
answered elsewhere, whether the historical romance is ever justifiable.
Yet I cannot refrain from informing Monsieur Soury here that "An Egyptian
Princess" detained me from no other work.  I wrote it in my sick-room,
before entering upon my academic career, and while composing it, found
not only comfort and pleasure, but an opportunity to give dead scientific
material a living interest for myself and others.

Monsieur Soury says romance is the mortal enemy of history; but this
sentence may have no more justice than the one with which I think myself
justified in replying: Landscape painting is the mortal enemy of botany.
The historical romance must be enjoyed like any other work of art.  No
one reads it to study history; but many, the author hopes, may be aroused
by his work to make investigations of their own, for which the notes
point out the way.  Already several persons of excellent mental powers
have been attracted to earnest Egyptological researches by "An Egyptian
Princess."  In the presence of such experiences, although Monsieur
Soury's clever statements appear to contain much that is true, I need not
apply his remark that "historical romances injure the cause of science"
to the present volume.

          Leipzig, April 19, 1875.

                                        GEORG EBERS.



PREFACE TO THE FIFTH GERMAN EDITION.

Again a new edition of "An Egyptian Princess" has been required, and
again I write a special preface because the printing has progressed so
rapidly as unfortunately to render it impossible for me to correct some
errors to which my attention was directed by the kindness of the well-
known botanist, Professor Paul Ascherson of Berlin, who has travelled
through Egypt and the Oases.

In Vol. I, page 7, I allow mimosas to grow among other plants in
Rhodopis' garden.  I have found them in all the descriptions of the Nile
valley, and afterwards often enjoyed the delicious perfume of the golden
yellow flowers in the gardens of Alexandria and Cairo.  I now learn that
this very mimosa (Acacia farnesiana) originates in tropical America, and
was undoubtedly unknown in ancient Egypt.  The bananas, which I mentioned
in Vol. I, p. 64, among other Egyptian plants, were first introduced into
the Nile valley from India by the Arabs.  The botanical errors occurring
in the last volume I was able to correct.  Helm's admirable work on
"Cultivated Plants and Domestic Animals" had taught me to notice such
things.  Theophrastus, a native of Asia Minor, gives the first
description of a citron, and this proves that he probably saw the so-
called paradise-apple, but not our citron, which I am therefore not
permitted to mention among the plants cultivated in ancient Lydia.  Palms
and birches are both found in Asia Minor; but I permitted them to grow
side by side, thereby committing an offense against the geographical
possibility of vegetable existence.  The birch, in this locality,
flourishes in the mountainous region, the palm, according to Griesbach
(Vegetation of the Earth, Vol. I, p. 319) only appears on the southern
coast of the peninsula.  The latter errors, as I previously mentioned,
will be corrected in the new edition.  I shall of course owe special
thanks to any one who may call my attention to similar mistakes.

     Leipzig, March 5, 1877

                                   GEORG EBERS



PREFACE TO THE NINTH GERMAN EDITION.

I have nothing to add to the ninth edition of "An Egyptian Princess"
except that it has been thoroughly revised.  My sincere thanks are due to
Dr. August Steitz of Frankfort on the Main, who has travelled through
Egypt and Asia Minor, for a series of admirable notes, which he kindly
placed at my disposal.  He will find that they have not remained unused.

     Leipzig, November 13, 1879.
                                        GEORG EBERS




AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS.

By Georg Ebers

Volume 1.



CHAPTER I.

The Nile had overflowed its bed.  The luxuriant corn-fields and blooming
gardens on its shores were lost beneath a boundless waste of waters; and
only the gigantic temples and palaces of its cities, (protected from the
force of the water by dikes), and the tops of the tall palm-trees and
acacias could be seen above its surface.  The branches of the sycamores
and plane-trees drooped and floated on the waves, but the boughs of the
tall silver poplars strained upward, as if anxious to avoid the watery
world beneath.  The full-moon had risen; her soft light fell on the
Libyan range of mountains vanishing on the western horizon, and in the
north the shimmer of the Mediterranean could faintly be discerned.  Blue
and white lotus-flowers floated on the clear water, bats of all kinds
darted softly through the still air, heavy with the scent of acacia-
blossom and jasmine; the wild pigeons and other birds were at roost in
the tops of the trees, while the pelicans, storks and cranes squatted in
groups on the shore under the shelter of the papyrus-reeds and Nile-
beans.  The pelicans and storks remained motionless, their long bills
hidden beneath their wings, but the cranes were startled by the mere beat
of an oar, stretching their necks, and peering anxiously into the
distance, if they heard but the song of the boatmen.  The air was
perfectly motionless, and the unbroken reflection of the moon, lying like
a silver shield on the surface of the water, proved that, wildly as the
Nile leaps over the cataracts, and rushes past the gigantic temples of
Upper Egypt, yet on approaching the sea by different arms, he can abandon
his impetuous course, and flow along in sober tranquillity.

On this moonlight night in the year 528 B. C. a bark was crossing the
almost currentless Canopic mouth of the Nile.  On the raised deck at the
stern of this boat an Egyptian was sitting to guide the long pole-rudder,
and the half-naked boatmen within were singing as they rowed.  In the
open cabin, which was something like a wooden summer-house, sat two men,
reclining on low cushions.  They were evidently not Egyptians; their
Greek descent could be perceived even by the moonlight.  The elder was an
unusually tall and powerful man of more than sixty; thick grey curls,
showing very little attempt at arrangement, hung down over his short,
firm throat; he wore a simple, homely cloak, and kept his eyes gloomily
fixed on the water.  His companion, on the contrary, a man perhaps twenty
years younger, of a slender and delicate build, was seldom still.
Sometimes he gazed into the heavens, sometimes made a remark to the
steersman, disposed his beautiful purple chlanis in fresh folds, or
busied himself in the arrangement of his scented brown curls, or his
carefully curled beard.

     [The chlanis was a light summer-mantle, worn especially by the more
     elegant Athenians, and generally made of expensive materials.  The
     simpler cloak, the himation, was worn by the Doric Greeks, and
     principally by the Spartans.]

The boat had left Naukratis, at that time the only Hellenic port in
Egypt, about half an hour before.

     [This town, which will form the scene of a part of our tale, lies in
     the northwest of the Nile Delta, in the Saitic Nomos or district, on
     the left bank of the Canopic mouth of the river.  According to
     Strabo and Eusebius it was founded by Milesians, and Bunsen reckons
     749 B. C.  It seems that in the earliest times Greek ships were only
     allowed to enter this mouth of the Nile in case of necessity.  The
     entire intercourse of the Egyptians with the hated strangers was, at
     that time, restricted to the little island of Pharos lying opposite
     to the town of Thonis.]

During their journey, the grey-haired, moody man had not spoken one word,
and the other had left him to his meditations.  But now, as the boat
neared the shore, the restless traveller, rising from his couch, called
to his companion: "We are just at our destination, Aristomachus!  That
pleasant house to the left yonder, in the garden of palms which you can
see rising above the waters, is the dwelling of my friend Rhodopis.  It
was built by her husband Charaxus, and all her friends, not excepting the
king himself, vie with one another in adding new beauties to it year by
year.  A useless effort!  Let them adorn that house with all the
treasures in the world, the woman who lives within will still remain its
best ornament!"

     [We are writing of the month of October, when the Nile begins to
     sink.  The inundations can now be accurately accounted for,
     especially since the important and laborious synoptical work of H.
     Barth and S. Baker. They are occasioned by the tropical rains, and
     the melting of the snows on the high mountain-ranges at the Equator.
     In the beginning of June a gradual rising of the Nile waters can be
     perceived; between the 15th and 20th June, this changes to a rapid
     increase; in the beginning of October the waters reach their highest
     elevation, a point, which, even after having begun their retreat,
     they once more attempt to attain; then, at first gradually, and
     afterwards with ever increasing rapidity, they continue to sink.  In
     January, February and March, the Nile is still drying up; and in May
     is at its lowest point, when the volume of its waters is only one-
     twentieth of that in October.]

The old man sat up, threw a passing glance at the building, smoothed the
thick grey beard which clothed his cheeks and chin, but left the lips
free,--[The Spartans were not in the habit of wearing a beard on the
upper lip.]--and asked abruptly: "Why so much enthusiasm, Phanes, for
this Rhodopis?  How long have the Athenians been wont to extol old
women?"  At this remark the other smiled, and answered in a self-
satisfied tone, "My knowledge of the world, and particularly of women,
is, I flatter myself, an extended one, and yet I repeat, that in all
Egypt I know of no nobler creature than this grey-haired woman.  When you
have seen her and her lovely grandchild, and heard your favorite melodies
sung by her well-practised choir of slave-girls, I think you will thank
me for having brought you hither."--"Yet," answered the Spartan gravely,
"I should not have accompanied you, if I had not hoped to meet Phryxus,
the Delphian, here."

"You will find him here; and besides, I cannot but hope that the songs
will cheer you, and dispel your gloomy thoughts."  Aristomachus shook his
head in denial, and answered: "To you, sanguine Athenians, the melodies
of your country may be cheering: but not so to me; as in many a sleepless
night of dreams, my longings will be doubled, not stilled by the songs of
Alkman."

     [Alkman (Attic, Alkmaeon) flourished in Sparta about 650 B. C.  His
     mother was a Lydian slave in Sardes, and he came into the possession
     of Agesides, who gave him his freedom.  His beautiful songs soon
     procured him the rights of a Lacedaemonian citizen.  He was
     appointed to the head-directorship in the entire department of music
     in Lacedaemon and succeeded in naturalizing the soft Lydian music.
     His language was the Doric-Laconian.  After a life devoted to song,
     the pleasures of the table and of love, he is said to have died of
     a fearful disease.  From the frequent chorusses of virgins
     (Parthenien) said to have been originally introduced by him, his
     frequent songs in praise of women, and the friendly relations in
     which he stood to the Spartan women (more especially to the fair
     Megalostrata), he gained the name of the woman's poet.]

"Do you think then," replied Phanes, "that I have no longing for my
beloved Athens, for the scenes of our youthful games, for the busy life
