which would be only too quickly spread throughout Alexandria, whose
inhabitants relished such speeches.

These remarks would be slow in reaching the plain people who were
attracted to the temple by the news of the victory, yet many doubtless
knew Caesarion, whom the architect was awaiting here.  It would be wiser
to meet the prince at the foot of the steps.  Both men, therefore, went
down to the square, though the crowds seeking the temple and thronging
the space before Didymus's house made it more and more difficult to pace
to and fro.

They were anxious to learn whether the rumour that Didymus's garden was
to be taken for the twin statues had already spread abroad, and their
first questions revealed that this was the case.  It was even stated that
the old sage's house was to be torn down, and within a few hours.  This
was vehemently contradicted; but a tall, scrawny man seemed to have
undertaken to defend the ruler's violence.

The friends knew him well.  It was the Syrian Philostratus, a clever
extempore speaker and agitator of the people, who placed his clever
tongue at the disposal of the highest bidder.

"The rascal is probably now in my uncle's employ," said Dion.  "The idea
of putting the piece of sculpture there originated with him, and it is
difficult to turn him from such plans.  There is some secret object to be
gained here.  That is why they have brought Philostratus.  I wonder if
the conspiracy is connected in any way with Barine, whose husband--
unfortunately for her--he was before he cast her off."

"Cast her off!" exclaimed Gorgias wrathfully.  "How that sounds!  True,
he did it, but to persuade him the poor woman sacrificed half the fortune
her father had earned by his brush.  You know as well as I that life with
that scoundrel would be unbearable."

"Very true," replied Dion quietly.  "But as all Alexandria melted into
admiration after her singing of the 'yalemos' at the Adonis festival, she
no longer needed her contemptible consort."

"How can you take pleasure, whenever it is possible, in casting such
slurs upon a woman, whom but yesterday you called blameless, charming,
peerless?"

"That the light she sheds may not dazzle your eyes.  I know how sensitive
they are."

"Then spare, instead of irritating them.  Besides, your suggestion gives
food for thought Barine is the granddaughter of the man whose garden they
want, and the advocate would probably be glad to injure both.  But I'll
spoil his game.  It is my business to choose the site for the statues."

"Yours?" replied Dion.  "Unless some on who is more powerful opposes you.
I would try to win my uncle, but there are others superior to him.  The
Queen has gone, it is true; but Iras, whose commands do not die away in
empty air, told me this morning that she had her own ideas about the
errection of the statue."

"Then you bring Philostratus here!" cried the architect.

"I?" asked the other in amazement.

"Ay, you," asserted Gorgias.  "Did not you say that Iras, with whom you
played when a boy is now becoming troublesome by watching your every
step?  And then--you visit Barine constantly and she so evidently prefers
you, that the fact might easily reach the ears of Iras."

"As Argus has a hundred, jealousy has a thousand eyes," interrupted Dion,
"yet I seek nothing from Barine, save two pleasant hours when the day is
drawing towards its close.  No matter; Iras, I suppose, heard that I was
favoured by this much-admired woman.  Iras herself has some little regard
for me, so she bought Philostratus.  She is willing to pay something for
the sake of injuring the woman who stands between us, or the old man who
has the good or evil fortune of being her rival's grandfather.  No, no;
that would be too base!  And believe me, if Iras desired to ruin Barine,
she need not make so long a circuit.  Besides, she is not really a wicked
woman.  Or is she?  All I know is that where any advantage is to be
gained for the Queen, she does not shrink even from doubtful means, and
also that the hours speed swiftly for any one in her society.  Yes, Iras,
Iras--I like to utter the name.  Yet I do not love her, and she--loves
only herself, and--a thing few can say--another still more.  What is the
world, what am I to her, compared with the Queen, the idol of her heart?
Since Cleopatra's departure, Iras seems like the forsaken Ariadne, or a
young roe which has strayed from its mother.  But stop; she may have a
hand in the game: the Queen trusted her as if she were her sister, her
daughter.  No one knows what she and Charmian are to her.  They are
called waiting-women, but are their sovereign's dearest friends.  When,
on the departure of the fleet, Cleopatra was compelled to leave Iras
here--she was ill with a fever--she gave her the charge of her children,
even those whose beards were beginning to grow, the 'King of kings'
Caesarion, whose tutor punishes him for every act of disobedience; and
the unruly lad Antyllus, who has forced his way the last few evenings
into our friend's house."

"Antony, his own father, introduced him to her."

"Very true, and Antyllus took Caesarion there.  This vexed Iras, like
everything which may disturb the Queen.  Barine is troublesome on account
of Cleopatra, whom she wishes to spare every, annoyance, and perhaps she
dislikes her a little for my sake.  Now she wants to inflict on the old
man, Barine's grandfather, whom she loves, some injury which the spoiled,
imprudent woman will scarcely accept quietly, and which will rouse her to
commit some folly that can be used against her.  Iras will hardly seek
her life, but she may have in mind exile or something of that kind.  She
knows people as well as I know her, my neighbour and playmate, whom many
a time I was obliged to lift down from some tree into which the child had
climbed as nimbly as a kitten."

"I myself suggested this conjecture, yet I cannot credit her with such
unworthy intrigues," cried Gorgias.

"Credit her?" repeated Dion, shrugging his shoulders.  "I only transport
myself in imagination to the court and to the soul of the woman who helps
make rain and sunshine there.  You have columns rounded and beams hewed
that they may afterwards support the roof to which in due time you wish
to direct attention.  She and all who have a voice in the management of
court affairs look first at the roof and then seek anything to raise and
support it, though it should be corpses, ruined lives, and broken hearts.
The point is that the roof shall stand until the architect, the Queen,
sees and approves it.  As to the rest--But there is the carriage--It
doubtless brings--You were--"

He paused, laid his hand on his friend's arm, and whispered hastily:
"Iras is undoubtedly at the bottom of this, and it is not Antyllus, but
yonder dreaming lad, for whom she is moving.  When she spoke of the
statues just now, she asked in the same breath where I had seen him on
the evening of the day before yesterday, and that was the very time he
called on Barine.  The plot was made by her, and Iras is doing all the
work.  The mouse is not caught while the trap is closed, and she is just
raising her little hand to open it."

"If only she does not use some man's hand," replied the architect
wrathfully, and then turned towards the carriage and the elderly man who
had just left it, and was now approaching the two friends.




CHAPTER II.

When Caesarion's companion reached Dion and Gorgias, the former modestly
made a movement to retire.  But Archibius was acquainted with both, and
begged him to remain.  There was an air of precision and clearness in the
voice and quiet movements of this big, broad-shouldered man, with his
robust frame and well-developed limbs.  Though only a few years beyond
forty, not merely his grey hair but the calm, impressive dignity of his
whole manner indicated a more advanced age.

"The young King yonder," he began in a deep, musical voice, motioning
towards the equipage, "wished to speak to you here in person, Gorgias,
but by my advice he refrained from mingling with the crowd.  I have
brought him hither in a closed carriage.  If the plan suits you, enter it
and talk with him while I keep watch here.  Strange things seem to be
occurring, and yonder--or am I mistaken?  Has the monster dragged along
there any connection with the twin statues of the Queen and her friend?
Was it you who selected that place for them?"

"No," replied the architect.  "The order was issued over my head and
against my will."

"I thought so," replied the other.  "This is the very matter of which
Caesarion wishes to speak.  If you can prevent the erection of the
statues on Didymus's land, so much the better.  I will do everything in
my power to aid you, but in the Queen's absence that is little."

"Then what can be said of my influence?"  asked the architect.  "Who, in
these days, knows whether the sky will be blue or grey to-morrow?  I can
guarantee one thing only: I will do my best to prevent this injury of an
estimable citizen, interference with the laws of our city, and violation
of good taste."

"Say so to the young King, but express yourself cautiously," replied
Archibius as the architect turned towards the carriage.

As soon as Dion and the older man were alone, the latter inquired the
cause of the increasing uproar, and as, like every well-disposed
Alexandrian, he esteemed Archibius, and knew that he was intimately
acquainted with the owner of the imperilled garden, and therefore with
his granddaughter Barine, he confided his anxiety to him without reserve.

"Iras is your niece, it is true," he said in his open-hearted manner,
"but I know that you understand her character.  It suits her now to fling
a golden apple into the path of a person whom she dislikes and believes
incautious, that she may pick it up and thus afford her an opportunity to
bring a charge of theft."

Noting the inquiring glance Archibius fixed upon him as he made this
comparison, he changed his tone and continued more earnestly: "Zeus is
great, but destiny is superior even to him.  Zeus can accomplish much,
but when Iras and your sister Charmian, who unfortunately is now with the
Queen, wish to effect anything, he, like the Regent Mardion, must give
way.  The more lovable Cleopatra is, the more surely every one prizes a
position near her person above aught else, especially such trifles as law
and justice."

"These are harsh words," responded Archibius, and seem the more bitter in
proportion to the germ of truth which they contain.  Our court shares the
fate of every other in the East, and those to whom Rome formerly set the
example of holding law and justice sacred--"

"Can now go there," interrupted Dion, "to learn how rudely both are
trampled under foot.  The sovereigns here and there may smile at one
another like the augurs.  They are like brothers--"

"But with the difference," Archibius broke in, "that the head of our
public affairs is the very embodiment of affability and grace; while in
Rome, on the contrary, harsh severity and bloody arrogance, or even
repulsive servility, guide the reins."

Here Archibius interrupted himself to point to the shouting throng
advancing towards them.  "You are right," Dion answered.  "Let us defer
this discussion till we can pursue it in the house of the charming
Barine.  But I rarely meet you there, though by blood you are so nearly
allied to her father.  I am her friend--at my age that might easily mean
her lover.  But in our case the comparison would not suit.  Yet perhaps
you will believe me, for you have the right to call yourself the friend
of the most bewitching of women."

A sorrowful smile flitted over the grave, set features of the older man,
who, raising his hand as if in protest, answered carelessly: "I grew up
