eyes and the senses which attracted a couple so widely separated by
years, but far more the mental characteristics of both.  Two winged
intellects had met.  The genius of one had recognized that of the other.
The highest type of manhood had met perfect womanhood.  They could not
fail to attract each other.  I expected it; for Cleopatra had long
watched breathlessly the flight of this eagle who soared so far above the
others, and she was strong enough to keep at his side.

"We succeeded in joining Cleopatra, and heard that, spite of the
hostility of our citizens, Caesar had occupied the palace of the
Ptolemies and was engaged in restoring order.

"We knew in what way Pothinus, Achillas, and Arsinoe would seek to
influence him.  Cleopatra had good reason to fear that her foes might
deliver Egypt unconditionally to Rome, if Caesar should leave the reins
of government in their hands and shut her out.  She had cause to dread
this, but she also had the courage to act in person in her own behalf.

"The point now was to bring her into the city, the palace-nay, into
direct communication with the dictator.  Children tell the tale of the
strong man who bore Cleopatra in a sack through the palace portals.  It
was not a sack which concealed her, but a Syrian carpet.  The strong man
was my brother Straton.  I went first, to secure a free passage.

"Julius Caesar and she saw and found each other.  Fate merely drew the
conclusion which must result from such premises.  Never have I seen
Cleopatra happier, more exalted in mind and heart, yet she was menaced on
all sides by serious perils.  It required all the military genius of
Caesar to conquer the fierce hostility which he encountered here.  It was
this, not the thrall of Cleopatra, I repeat, which first bound him to
Egypt.  What would have prevented him--as he did later--from taking the
object of his love to Rome, had it been possible at that time?  But this
was not the case.  The Alexandrians provided for that.

"He had recognized the flute-player's will, nay, had granted more to the
royal house than could have been given to the former.  Cleopatra and her
brother-husband, Dionysus, were to share the government, and he also
bestowed on Arsinoe and her youngest brother the island of Cyprus, which
had been wrested from their uncle Ptolemy by the republic.  Rome was, of
course, to remain the guardian of the brothers and sisters.

"This arrangement was unendurable to Pothinus and the former rulers of
the state.  Cleopatra as Queen, and Rome--that is Caesar, the dictator,
her friend, as guardian--meant their removal from power, their
destruction, and they resisted violently.

"The Egyptians and even the Alexandrians supported them.  The young King
hated nothing more than the yoke of the unloved sister, who was so
greatly his superior.  Caesar had come with a force by no means equal to
theirs, and it might be possible to draw the mighty general into a snare.
They fought with all the power at their command, with such passionate
eagerness, that the dictator had never been nearer succumbing to peril.
But Cleopatra certainly did not paralyze his strength and cautious
deliberation.  No!  He had never been greater; never proved the power of
his genius so magnificently.  And against what superior power, what
hatred he contended!  I myself saw the young King, when he heard that
Cleopatra had succeeded in entering the palace and meeting Caesar, rush
into the street, fairly crazed by rage, tear the diadem from his head,
hurl it on the pavement, and shriek to the passers-by that he was
betrayed, until Caesar's soldiers forced him back into the palace, and
dispersed the mob.

"Arsinoe had received more than she could venture to expect; but she was
again most deeply angered.  After Caesar's entry into the palace, she had
received him as Queen, and hoped everything from his favour.  Then her
hated sister had come and, as so often happened, she was forgotten for
Cleopatra's sake.

"This  was  too much,  and with  the  eunuch Ganymedes, her confidant,
and--as I have already said--an able warrior, she left the palace and
joined the dictator's foes.

"There were severe battles on land and sea; in the streets of the city,
for the drinkable water excavated by the foe; and against the
conflagration which destroyed part of the Bruchium and the library of the
museum.  Yet, half dead with thirst, barely escaped from drowning,
threatened on all sides by fierce hatred, he stood firm, and remained
victor also in the open field, after the young King had placed himself at
the head of the Egyptians and collected an army.

"You know that the boy was drowned in the flight.

"In battle and mortal peril, amid blood and the clank of arms, Caesar and
Cleopatra spent half a year ere they were permitted to pluck the fruit of
their common labour.  The dictator now made her Queen of Egypt, and gave
her, as co-regent, her youngest brother, a boy not half her own age.  To
Arsinoe he granted the life she had forfeited, but sent her to Italy.

"Peace followed the victory.  Now, it is true, grave duties must have
summoned the statesman back to Rome, but he tarried three full months
longer.

"Whoever knows the life of the ambitious Julius, and is aware what this
delay might have cost him, may well strike his brow with his hand, and
ask, 'Is it true and possible that he used this precious time to take a
trip with the woman he loved up the Nile, to the island of Isis, which is
so dear to the Queen, to the extreme southern frontier of the country?'
Yet it was so, and I myself went in the second ship, and not only saw
them together, but more than once shared their banquets and their
conversation.  It was giving and taking, forcing down and elevating, a
succession of discords, not unpleasant to hear, because experience taught
that they would finally terminate in the most beautiful harmony.  It was
a festal day for all the senses."

"I imagine the whole Nile journey," interrupted Barine, "to be like the
fairy voyage, when the purple silk sails of Cleopatra's galley bore
Antony along the Cydnus."

"No, no," replied Archibius, "she first learned from Antony the art of
filling this earthly existence with fleeting pleasures.  Caesar demanded
more.  Her intellect offered him the highest enjoyment."

Here he hesitated.

"True, the skill with which, to please Antony, she daily offered him for
years fresh charms for every sense, was not a matter of accident."

"And this," cried Barine, "this was undertaken by the woman who had
recognized the chief good in peace of mind!"

"Ay," replied Archibius thoughtfully, "yet this was the inevitable
result.  Pleasure had been the young girl's object in life.  Ere passion
awoke in her soul, peace of mind was the chief good she knew.  When the
hour arrived that this proved unattainable, the firmly rooted yearning
for happiness still remained the purpose of her existence.  My father
would have been wiser to take her to the Stoa and impress it upon her
that, if life must have a goal, it should be only to live in accordance
with the sensibly arranged course of the world, and in harmony with one's
own nature.  He should have taught her to derive happiness from virtue.
He should have stamped goodness upon the soul of the future Queen as the
fundamental law of her being.  He omitted to do this, because in his
secluded life he had succeeded in finding the happiness which the master
promises to his disciples.  From Athens to Cyrene, from Epicurus to
Aristippus, is but a short step, and Cleopatra took it when she forgot
that the master was far from recognizing the chief good in the enjoyment
of individual pleasure.  The happiness of Epicurus was not inferior to
that of Zeus, if he had only barley bread and water to appease his hunger
and thirst.

"Yet she still considered herself a follower of Epicurus, and later, when
Antony had gone to the Parthian war, and she was a long time alone, she
once more began to strive for freedom from pain and peace of mind, but
the state, her children, the marriage of Antony--who had long been her
lover--to Octavia, the yearning of her own heart, Anubis, magic, and the
Egyptian teachings of the life after death, above all, the burning
ambition, the unresting desire to be loved, where she herself loved, to
be first among the foremost--"

Here he was interrupted by the messenger, who informed him that the ship
was ready.




CHAPTER VII.

Archibius had buried himself so deeply in the past that it was several
minutes ere he could bring himself back to the present.  When he did so,
he hastily discussed with the two ladies the date of their departure.

It was hard for Berenike to leave her injured brother, and Barine longed
to see Dion once more before the journey.  Both were reluctant to quit
Alexandria ere decisive news had arrived from the army and the fleet.  So
they requested a few days' delay; but Archibius cut them short, requiring
them, with a resolution which transformed the amiable friend into a stern
master, to be ready for the journey the next day at sunset.  His Nile
boat would await them at the Agathodaemon harbour on Lake Mareotis, and
his travelling chariot would convey them thither, with as much luggage
and as many female slaves as they desired to take with them.  Then
softening his tone, he briefly reminded the ladies of the great
annoyances to which a longer stay would expose them, excused his rigour
on the plea of haste, pressed the hands of the mother and daughter, and
retired without heeding Barine, who called after him, yet could desire
nothing save to plead for a longer delay.  The carriage bore him swiftly
to the great harbour.

The waxing moon was mirrored like a silver column, now wavering and
tremulous, now rent by the waves tossing under a strong southeast wind,
and illumined the warm autumn night.  The sea outside was evidently
running high.  This was apparent by the motion of the vessels lying at
anchor in the angle which the shore in front of the superb Temple of
Poseidon formed with the Choma.  This was a tongue of land stretched like
a finger into the sea, on whose point stood a little palace which
Cleopatra, incited by a chance remark of Antony, had had built there to
surprise him.

