Chief of Glennaquoich was finely contrasted with the
contemplative, fanciful, and enthusiastic expression of his
happier friend. Beside this painting hung the arms which Waverley
had borne in the unfortunate civil war. The whole piece was beheld
with admiration and deeper feelings.

Men must, however, eat, in spite both of sentiment and vertu; and
the Baron, while he assumed the lower end of the table, insisted
that Lady Emily should do the honours of the head, that they
might, he said, set a meet example to the YOUNG FOLK. After a
pause of deliberation, employed in adjusting in his own brain the
precedence between the Presbyterian kirk and Episcopal church of
Scotland, he requested Mr. Morton, as the stranger, would crave a
blessing, observing that Mr. Rubrick, who was at HOME, would
return thanks for the distinguished mercies it had been his lot to
experience. The dinner was excellent. Saunderson attended in full
costume, with all the former domestics, who had been collected,
excepting one or two, that had not been heard of since the affair
of Culloden. The cellars were stocked with wine which was
pronounced to be superb, and it had been contrived that the Bear
of the Fountain, in the courtyard, should (for that night only)
play excellent brandy punch for the benefit of the lower orders.

When the dinner was over the Baron, about to propose a toast, cast
a somewhat sorrowful look upon the sideboard, which, however,
exhibited much of his plate, that had either been secreted or
purchased by neighbouring gentlemen from the soldiery, and by them
gladly restored to the original owner.

"In the late times," he said, "those must be thankful who have
saved life and land; yet when I am about to pronounce this toast,
I cannot but regret an old heirloom, Lady Emily, a POCULUM
POTATORIUM, Colonel Talbot--"

Here the Baron's elbow was gently touched by his major-domo, and,
turning round, he beheld in the hands of Alexander ab Alexandro
the celebrated cup of Saint Duthac, the Blessed Bear of
Bradwardine! I question if the recovery of his estate afforded him
more rapture. "By my honour," he said, "one might almost believe
in brownies and fairies, Lady Emily, when your ladyship is in
presence!"

"I am truly happy," said Colonel Talbot, "that, by the recovery of
this piece of family antiquity, it has fallen within my power to
give you some token of my deep interest in all that concerns my
young friend Edward. But that you may not suspect Lady Emily for a
sorceress, or me for a conjuror, which is no joke in Scotland, I
must tell you that Frank Stanley, your friend, who has been seized
with a tartan fever ever since he heard Edward's tales of old
Scottish manners, happened to describe to us at second-hand this
remarkable cup. My servant, Spontoon, who, like a true old
soldier, observes everything and says little, gave me afterwards
to understand that he thought he had seen the piece of plate Mr.
Stanley mentioned in the possession of a certain Mrs. Nosebag,
who, having been originally the helpmate of a pawnbroker, had
found opportunity during the late unpleasant scenes in Scotland to
trade a little in her old line, and so became the depositary of
the more valuable part of the spoil of half the army. You may
believe the cup was speedily recovered; and it will give me very
great pleasure if you allow me to suppose that its value is not
diminished by having been restored through my means."

A tear mingled with the wine which the Baron filled, as he
proposed a cup of gratitude to Colonel Talbot, and 'The Prosperity
of the united Houses of Waverley-Honour and Bradwardine!'

It only remains for me to say that, as no wish was ever uttered
with more affectionate sincerity, there are few which, allowing
for the necessary mutability of human events, have been upon the
whole more happily fulfilled.





CHAPTER LXXII

A POSTSCRIPT WHICH SHOULD HAVE BEEN A PREFACE


Our journey is now finished, gentle reader; and if your patience
has accompanied me through these sheets, the contract is, on your
part, strictly fulfilled. Yet, like the driver who has received
his full hire, I still linger near you, and make, with becoming
diffidence, a trifling additional claim upon your bounty and good
nature. You are as free, however, to shut the volume of the one
petitioner as to close your door in the face of the other.

This should have been a prefatory chapter, but for two reasons:
First, that most novel readers, as my own conscience reminds me,
are apt to be guilty of the sin of omission respecting that same
matter of prefaces; Secondly, that it is a general custom with
that class of students to begin with the last chapter of a work;
so that, after all, these remarks, being introduced last in order,
have still the best chance to be read in their proper place.

There is no European nation which, within the course of half a
century or little more, has undergone so complete a change as this
kingdom of Scotland. The effects of the insurrection of 1745,--the
destruction of the patriarchal power of the Highland chiefs,--the
abolition of the heritable jurisdictions of the Lowland nobility
and barons,--the total eradication of the Jacobite party, which,
averse to intermingle with the English, or adopt their customs,
long continued to pride themselves upon maintaining ancient
Scottish manners and customs,--commenced this innovation. The
gradual influx of wealth and extension of commerce have since
united to render the present people of Scotland a class of beings
as different from their grandfathers as the existing English are
from those of Queen Elizabeth's time.

The political and economical effects of these changes have been
traced by Lord Selkirk with great precision and accuracy. But the
change, though steadily and rapidly progressive, has nevertheless
been gradual; and, like those who drift down the stream of a deep
and smooth river, we are not aware of the progress we have made
until we fix our eye on the now distant point from which we have
been drifted. Such of the present generation as can recollect the
last twenty or twenty-five years of the eighteenth century will be
fully sensible of the truth of this statement; especially if their
acquaintance and connexions lay among those who in my younger time
were facetiously called 'folks of the old leaven,' who still
cherished a lingering, though hopeless, attachment to the house of
Stuart.

This race has now almost entirely vanished from the land, and with
it, doubtless, much absurd political prejudice; but also many
living examples of singular and disinterested attachment to the
principles of loyalty which they received from their fathers, and
of old Scottish faith, hospitality, worth, and honour.

It was my accidental lot, though not born a Highlander (which may
be an apology for much bad Gaelic), to reside during my childhood
and youth among persons of the above description; and now, for the
purpose of preserving some idea of the ancient manners of which I
have witnessed the almost total extinction, I have embodied in
imaginary scenes, and ascribed to fictitious characters, a part of
the incidents which I then received from those who were actors in
them. Indeed, the most romantic parts of this narrative are
precisely those which have a foundation in fact.

The exchange of mutual protection between a Highland gentleman and
an officer of rank in the king's service, together with the
spirited manner in which the latter asserted his right to return
the favour he had received, is literally true. The accident by a
musket shot, and the heroic reply imputed to Flora, relate to a
lady of rank not long deceased. And scarce a gentleman who was 'in
hiding' after the battle of Culloden but could tell a tale of
strange concealments and of wild and hair'sbreadth'scapes as
extraordinary as any which I have ascribed to my heroes. Of this,
the escape of Charles Edward himself, as the most prominent, is
the most striking example. The accounts of the battle of Preston
and skirmish at Clifton are taken from the narrative of
intelligent eye-witnesses, and corrected from the 'History of the
Rebellion' by the late venerable author of 'Douglas.' The Lowland
Scottish gentlemen and the subordinate characters are not given as
individual portraits, but are drawn from the general habits of the
period, of which I have witnessed some remnants in my younger
days, and partly gathered from tradition.

It has been my object to describe these persons, not by a
caricatured and exaggerated use of the national dialect, but by
their habits, manners, and feelings, so as in some distant degree
to emulate the admirable Irish portraits drawn by Miss Edgeworth,
so different from the 'Teagues' and 'dear joys' who so long, with
the most perfect family resemblance to each other, occupied the
drama and the novel.

I feel no confidence, however, in the manner in which I have
executed my purpose. Indeed, so little was I satisfied with my
production, that I laid it aside in an unfinished state, and only
found it again by mere accident among other waste papers in an old
cabinet, the drawers of which I was rummaging in order to
accommodate a friend with some fishing-tackle, after it had been
mislaid for several years.

Two works upon similar subjects, by female authors whose genius is
highly creditable to their country, have appeared in the interval;
I mean Mrs. Hamilton's 'Glenburnie' and the late account of
'Highland Superstitions.' But the first is confined to the rural
habits of Scotland, of which it has given a picture with striking
and impressive fidelity; and the traditional records of the
respectable and ingenious Mrs. Grant of Laggan are of a nature
distinct from the fictitious narrative which I have here
attempted.

I would willingly persuade myself that the preceding work will not
be found altogether uninteresting. To elder persons it will recall
scenes and characters familiar to their youth; and to the rising
generation the tale may present some idea of the manners of their
forefathers.

Yet I heartily wish that the task of tracing the evanescent
manners of his own country had employed the pen of the only man in
Scotland who could have done it justice--of him so eminently
distinguished in elegant literature, and whose sketches of Colonel
Caustic and Umphraville are perfectly blended with the finer
traits of national character. I should in that case have had more
pleasure as a reader than I shall ever feel in the pride of a
successful author, should these sheets confer upon me that envied
distinction. And, as I have inverted the usual arrangement,
placing these remarks at the end of the work to which they refer,
I will venture on a second violation of form, by closing the whole
with a Dedication--

THESE VOLUMES BEING RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED TO OUR SCOTTISH
ADDISON, HENRY MACKENZIE, BY AN UNKNOWN ADMIRER OF HIS GENIUS.





THE END





NOTES


NOTE I, p. 19

The clan of Mac-Farlane, occupying the fastnesses of the western
side of Loch Lomond, were great depredators on the Low Country,
and as their excursions were made usually by night, the moon was
proverbially called their lantern. Their celebrated pibroch of
Hoggil nam Bo, which is the name of their gathering tune,
intimates similar practices, the sense being:--

     We are bound to drive the bullocks,
     All by hollows, hirsts, and hillocks,
     Through the sleet, and through the rain.
     When the moon is beaming low
     On frozen lake and hills of snow,
     Bold and heartily we go;
     And all for little gain.

NOTE 2, p. 22

This noble ruin is dear to my recollection, from associations
which have been long and painfully broken. It holds a commanding
station on the banks of the river Teith, and has been one of the
largest castles in Scotland. Murdoch, Duke of Albany, the founder
of this stately pile, was beheaded on the Castle-hill of Stirling,
from which he might see the towers of Doune, the monument of his
fallen greatness.

In 1745-46, as stated in the text, a garrison on the part of the
Chevalier was put into the castle, then less ruinous than at
present. It was commanded by Mr. Stewart of Balloch, as governor
for Prince Charles; he was a man of property near Callander. This
castle became at that time the actual scene of a romantic escape
made by John Home, the author of Douglas, and some other
prisoners, who, having been taken at the battle of Falkirk, were
confined there by the insurgents. The poet, who had in his own
mind a large stock of that romantic and enthusiastic spirit of
adventure which he has described as animating the youthful hero of
his drama, devised and undertook the perilous enterprise of
escaping from his prison. He inspired his companions with his
sentiments, and when every attempt at open force was deemed
hopeless, they resolved to twist their bed-clothes into ropes and
thus to descend. Four persons, with Home himself, reached the
ground in safety. But the rope broke with the fifth, who was a
tall, lusty man. The sixth was Thomas Barrow, a brave young
Englishman, a particular friend of Home's. Determined to take the
risk, even in such unfavourable circumstances, Barrow committed
himself to the broken rope, slid down on it as far as it could
assist him, and then let himself drop. His friends beneath
succeeded in breaking his fall. Nevertheless, he dislocated his
ankle and had several of his ribs broken. His companions, however,
were able to bear him off in safety.

The Highlanders next morning sought for their prisoners with great
activity. An old gentleman told the author he remembered seeing
the commandant Stewart

    Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste,

riding furiously through the country in quest of the fugitives.

NOTE 3, p. 28

To go out, or to have been out, in Scotland was a conventional
phrase similar to that of the Irish respecting a man having been
up, both having reference to an individual who had been engaged in
insurrection. It was accounted ill-breeding in Scotland about
forty years since to use the phrase rebellion or rebel, which
might be interpreted by some of the parties present as a personal
insult. It was also esteemed more polite, even for stanch Whigs,
to denominate Charles Edward the Chevalier than to speak of him as
the Pretender; and this kind of accommodating courtesy was usually
observed in society where individuals of each party mixed on
friendly terms.

NOTE 4, p. 38

The Jacobite sentiments were general among the western counties
and in Wales. But although the great families of the Wynnes, the
Wyndhams, and others had come under an actual obligation to join
Prince Charles if he should land, they had done so under the
express stipulation that he should be assisted by an auxiliary
army of French, without which they foresaw the enterprise would be
desperate. Wishing well to his cause, therefore, and watching an
opportunity to join him, they did not, nevertheless, think
themselves bound in honour to do so, as he was only supported by a
body of wild mountaineers, speaking an uncouth dialect, and
wearing a singular dress. The race up to Derby struck them with
more dread than admiration. But it is difficult to say what the
effect might have been had either the battle of Preston or Falkirk
been fought and won during the advance into England.

NOTE 5, p. 43

Divisions early showed themselves in the Chevalier's little army,
not only amongst the independent chieftains, who were far too
proud to brook subjection to each other, but betwixt the Scotch
and Charles's governor O'Sullivan, an Irishman by birth, who, with
some of his countrymen bred in the Irish Brigade in the service of
the King of France, had an influence with the Adventurer much
resented by the Highlanders, who were sensible that their own
clans made the chief or rather the only strength of his
enterprise. There was a feud, also, between Lord George Murray and
John Murray of Broughton, the Prince's secretary, whose disunion
greatly embarrassed the affairs of the Adventurer. In general, a
thousand different pretensions divided their little army, and
finally contributed in no small degree to its overthrow.

NOTE 6, p. 78

This circumstance, which is historical, as well as the description
that precedes it, will remind the reader of the war of La Vendee,
in which the royalists, consisting chiefly of insurgent peasantry,
attached a prodigious and even superstitious interest to the
possession of a piece of brass ordnance, which they called Marie
Jeanne.

The Highlanders of an early period were afraid of cannon, with the
noise and effect of which they were totally unacquainted. It was
by means of three or four small pieces of artillery that the Earls
of Huntly and Errol, in James VI's time, gained a great victory at
Glenlivat, over a numerous Highland army, commanded by the Earl of
Argyle. At the battle of the Bridge of Dee, General Middleton
obtained by his artillery a similar success, the Highlanders not
being able to stand the discharge of Musket's Mother, which was
the name they bestowed on great guns. In an old ballad on the
battle of the Bridge of Dee these verses occur:--

       The Highlandmen are pretty men
         For handling sword and shield,
       But yet they are but simple men
         To stand a stricken field.

        The Highlandmen are pretty men
          For target and claymore,
        But yet they are but naked men
          To face the cannon's roar.

        For the cannons roar on a summer night
          Like thunder in the air;
        Was never man in Highland garb
          Would face the cannon fair

But the Highlanders of 1745 had got far beyond the simplicity of
their forefathers, and showed throughout the whole war how little
they dreaded artillery, although the common people still attached
some consequence to the possession of the field-piece which led to
