dwelling room, which look out upon the street.

She shaded her eyes with her hand, exclaiming, "Oh! the wearisome sun.
It looks at us the first thing in the morning through the window; as if
the day were not long enough.  The beds must be put in the front room; I
insist upon it."

The slave shook her head, and stammered an answer, "Phoebicius will not
have it so."

Sirona's eyes flashed angrily, and her voice, which was particularly
sweet, trembled slightly as she asked, "What is wrong with him again?"

"He says," replied the slave, "that the senator's son, Polykarp, goes
oftener past your window than altogether pleases him, and it seems to
him, that you occupy yourself more than is necessary with his little
brothers and sisters, and the other children up there."

"Is he still in there?"  asked Sirona with glowing cheeks, and she
pointed threateningly to the dwelling-room.

"The master is out," stuttered the old woman.  "He went out before
sunrise.  You are not to wait for breakfast, he will not return till
late."

The Gaulish lady made no answer, but her head fell, and the deepest
melancholy overspread her features.  The greyhound seemed to feel for the
troubles of his mistress, for he fawned upon her, as if to kiss her.  The
solitary woman pressed the little creature, which had come with her from
her home, closely to her bosom; for an unwonted sense of wretchedness
weighed upon her heart, and she felt as lonely, friendless, and
abandoned, as if she were driving alone--alone--over a wide and shoreless
sea.  She shuddered, as if she were cold--for she thought of her husband,
the man who here in the desert should have been all in all to her, but
whose presence filled her with aversion, whose indifference had ceased to
wound her, and whose tenderness she feared far more than his wild
irritability--she had never loved him.

She had grown up free from care among a number of brothers and sisters.
Her father had been the chief accountant of the decurions' college in his
native town, and he had lived opposite the circus, where, being of a
stern temper, he had never permitted his daughters to look on at the
games; but he could not prevent their seeing the crowd streaming into the
amphitheatre, or hearing their shouts of delight, and their eager cries
of approbation.

Sirona thus grew up in the presence of other people's pleasure, and in a
constantly revived and never satisfied longing to share it; she had,
indeed, no time for unnecessary occupations, for her mother died before
she was fully grown up, and she was compelled to take charge of the eight
younger children.  This she did in all fidelity, but in her hours of
leisure she loved to listen to the stories told her by the wives of
officials, who had seen, and could praise, the splendors of Rome the
golden.

She knew that she was fair, for she need only go outside the house to
hear it said; but though she longed to see the capital, it was not for
the sake of being admired, but because there was there so much that was
splendid to see and to admire.  So, when the Centurion Phoebicius, the
commandant of the garrison of her native town, was transferred to Rome,
and when he desired to take the seventeen-years-old girl with him to the
imperial city, as his wife--she was more than forty years younger than
he--she followed him full of hope and eager anticipation.

Not long after their marriage she started for Rome by sea from Massilia,
accompanied by an old relative; and he went by land at the head of his
cohorts.

She reached their destination long before her husband, and without
waiting for him, but constantly in the society of her old duenna, she
gave herself up with the freedom and eagerness of her fresh youth to the
delights of seeing and admiring.

It did not escape her, while she did so, that she attracted all eyes
wherever she went, and however much this flattered and pleased her at
first, it spoilt many of her pleasures, when the Romans, young and old,
began to follow and court her.  At last Phoebicius arrived, and when he
found his house crowded with his wife's admirers he behaved to Sirona as
though she had long since betrayed his honor.

Nevertheless he dragged her from pleasure to pleasure, and from one
spectacle to another, for it gratified him to show himself in public with
his beautiful young wife.  She certainly was not free from frivolity, but
she had learnt early from her strict father, as being the guide of her
younger sisters, to distinguish clearly right from wrong, and the pure
from the unclean; and she soon discovered that the joys of the capital,
which had seemed at first to be gay flowers with bright colors, and
redolent with intoxicating perfume, bloomed on the surface of a foul bog.

She at first had contemplated all that was beautiful, pleasant, and
characteristic with delight; but her husband took pleasure only in things
which revolted her as being common and abominable.  He watched her every
glance, and yet he pointed nothing out to her, but what was hurtful to
the feelings of a pure woman.  Pleasure became her torment, for the
sweetest wine is repulsive when it has been tasted by impure lips.
After every feast and spectacle he loaded her with outrageous reproaches,
and when at last, weary of such treatment, she refused to quit the house,
he obliged her nevertheless to accompany him as often as the Legate
Quintillus desired it.  The legate was his superior-officer, and he sent
her every day some present or flowers.

Up to this time she had borne with him, and had tried to excuse him, and
to think herself answerable for much of what she endured.  But at last--
about ten months after her marriage--something occurred between her and
Phoebicius--something which stood like a wall of brass between him and
her; and as this something had led to his banishment to the remote oasis,
and to his degradation to the rank of captain of a miserable maniple,
instead of his obtaining his hoped for promotion, he began to torment her
systematically while she tried to protect herself by icy coldness, so
that at last it came to this, that the husband, for whom she felt nothing
but contempt, had no more influence on her life, than some physical pain
which a sick man is doomed to endure all through his existence.

In his presence she was silent, defiant, and repellent, but as soon as he
quitted her, her innate, warm-hearted kindliness and child-like merriment
woke up to new life, and their fairest blossoms opened out in the
senator's house among the little troop who amply repaid her love with
theirs.

Phoebicius belonged to the worshippers of Mithras, and he often fasted
in his honor to the point of exhaustion, while on the other hand he
frequently drank with his boon companions, at the feasts of the god,
till he was in a state of insensibility.

Here even, in Mount Sinai, he had prepared a grotto for the feast of
Mithras, had gathered together a few companions in his faith, and when it
happened that he remained out all day and all night, and came home paler
even than usual, she well knew where he had been.  Just now she vividly
pictured to herself the person of this man with his eyes, that now were
dull with sleep and now glowed with rage, and she asked herself whether
it were indeed possible that of her own free will she had chosen to
become his wife.  Her bosom heaved with quicker breathing as she
remembered the ignominy he had subjected her to in Rome, and she clenched
her small hands.  At this instant the little dog sprang from her lap and
flew barking to the window-sill; she was easily startled, and she drew on
her morning-gown, which had slipped from her white shoulders; then she
fastened the straps of her sandals, and went to look down into the court-
yard.

A smile played upon her lips as she perceived young Hermas, who had
already been for some time leaning motionless against the wall of the
house opposite, and devouring with his gaze the figure of the beautiful
young woman.  She had a facile and volatile nature.  Like the eye which
retains no impression of the disabling darkness so soon as the rays of
light have fallen on it, no gloom of suffering touched her so deeply that
the lightest breath of a new pleasure could not blow her troubles to the
winds.  Many rivers are quite different in color at their source and at
their mouth, and so it was often with her tears; she began to weep for
sorrow, and then found it difficult to dry her eyes for sheer overflow of
mirth.  It would have been so easy for Phoebicius to make her lot a fair
one! for she had a most susceptible heart, and was grateful for the
smallest proofs of love, but between him and her every bond was broken.

The form and face of Hermas took her fancy; she thought he looked of
noble birth in spite of his poor clothing, and when she observed that his
checks were glowing, and that the hand in which he held the medicine
phial trembled, she understood that he was watching her, and that the
sight of her had stirred his youthful blood.  A woman--still more a woman
who is pleased to please--forgives any sin that is committed for her
beauty's sake, and Sirona's voice had a friendly ring in it as she bid
Hermas good-morning and asked him how his father was, and whether the
senator's medicine had been of service.  The youth's answers were short
and confused, but his looks betrayed that he would fain have said quite
other things than those which his indocile tongue allowed him to
reiterate timidly.

"Dame Dorothea was telling me last evening," she said kindly, "that
Petrus had every hope of your father's recovery, but that he is still
very weak.  Perhaps some good wine would be of service to him--not
to-day, but to-morrow or the day after.  Only come to me if you need it;
we have some old Falerman in the loft, and white Mareotis wine, which is
particularly good and wholesome."

Hermas thanked her, and as she still urged him to apply to her in all
confidence, he took courage and succeeded in stammering rather than
saying,--"You are as good as you are beautiful."

The words were hardly spoken when the topmost stone of an elaborately
constructed pile near the slaves' house fell down with a loud clatter.
Sirona started and drew back from the window, the grey-hound set up a
loud barking, and Hermas struck his forehead with his hand as if he were
roused from a dream.

In a few instants he had knocked at the senator's door; hardly had he
entered the house when Miriam's slight form passed across behind the pile
of stones, and vanished swiftly and silently into the slaves' quarters.
These were by this time deserted by their inhabitants, who were busy in
the field, the house, or the quarries; they consisted of a few ill-
lighted rooms with bare, unfinished walls.

The shepherdess went into the smallest, where, on a bed of palm-sticks,
lay the slave that she had wounded, and who turned over as with a hasty
hand she promptly laid a fresh, but ill-folded bandage, all askew on the
deep wound in his bend.  As soon as this task was fulfilled she left the
room again, placed herself behind the half open door which led into the
court-yard, and, pressing, her brow against the stone door-post, looked
first at the senator's house, and then at Sirona's window, while her
breath came faster and faster.

A new and violent emotion was stirring her young soul; not many minutes
since she had squatted peacefully on the ground by the side of the
wounded man, with her head resting on her hand, and thinking of her goats
on the mountain.  Then she had heard a slight sound in the court, which
any one else would not have noticed; but she not only perceived it, but
knew with perfect certainty with whom it originated.  She could never
fail to recognize Hermas' foot-step, and it had an irresistible effect
upon her.  She raised her head quickly from her hand, and her elbow from
the knee on which it was resting, sprang to her feet, and went out into
the yard.  She was hidden by the mill-stones, but she could see Hermas
lost in admiration.  She followed the direction of his eyes and saw the
same image which had fascinated his gaze--Sirona's lovely form, flooded
with sunlight.  She looked as if formed out of snow, and roses, and gold,
like the angel at the sepulchre in the new picture in the church.  Yes,
just like the angel, and the thought flew through her mind how brown and
black she was herself, and that he had called her a she-devil.  A sense
of deep pain came over her, she felt as though paralyzed in body and
soul; but soon she shook off the spell, and her heart began to beat
violently; she had to bite her lip hard with her white teeth to keep
herself from crying out with rage and anguish.

How she wished that she could swing herself up to the window on which
Hermas' gaze was fixed, and clutch Sirona's golden hair and tear her down
to the ground, and suck the very blood from her red lips like a vampire,
till she lay at her feet as pale as the corpse of a man dead of thirst in
the desert.  Then she saw the light mantle slip from Sirona's shoulders,
and observed Hermas start and press his hand to his heart.

Then another impulse seized her.  It was to call to her and warn her of
his presence; for even women who hate each other hold out the hand of
fellowship in the spirit, when the sanctity of woman's modesty is
threatened with danger.  She blushed for Sirona, and had actually opened
her lips to call, when the greyhound barked and the dialogue began.  Not
a word escaped her sharp ears, and when he told Sirona that she was as
good as she was beautiful she felt seized with giddiness; then the
