officials, in unscrupulous collusion, had managed to transport her to a
country-house belonging to the Mukaukas on the other side of the Nile,
and there Orion had been able to visit her undisturbed as often as fancy
prompted him.  The slave-girl, scarcely yet sixteen, ignorant and
unprotected, had not dared nor desired to resist her master's handsome
son, and when Orion had set out for Constantinople--heedless and weary
already of the girl who had nothing to give him but her beauty--Dame
Neforis found out her connection with her son and ordered the head
overseer to take care that the unhappy girl should not "ply her seductive
arts" any more.  The man had carried out her instructions by condemning
the fair Persian, according to an ancient custom, to have her ears cut
off.  After this cruel punishment the mutilated beauty sank into a state
of melancholy madness, and although the exorcists of the Church and other
thaumaturgists had vainly endeavored to expel the demon of madness, she
remained as before: a gentle, good-humored creature, quiet and diligent
at her work, under the women who had charge of her, and now in the common
work-shop.  It was only when she was idle that her craziness became
evident, and of this the other girls took advantage for their own
amusement.

They now led Mandane to the fire, and with farcical reverence requested
her to be seated on her throne--an empty color cask, for she suffered
under the strange permanent delusion that she was the wife of the
Mukaukas George.  They laughingly did her homage, craved some favor or
made enquiries as to her husband's health and the state of her affairs.
Hitherto a decent instinct of reserve had kept these poor ignorant
creatures from mentioning Orion's name in her presence, but now a woolly-
headed negress, a lean, spiteful hussy, went up to her, and said with a
horrible grimace:

"Oh, mistress, and where is your little son Orion?"  The crazy girl did
not seem startled by the question; she replied very gravely: "I have
married him to the emperor's daughter at Constantinople."

"Hey day!  A splendid match!"  exclaimed the black girl.  "Did you know
that the young lord was here again?  He has brought home his grand wife
to you no doubt, and we shall see purple and crowns in these parts!"

These words brought a deep flush into the poor creature's face.  She
anxiously pressed her hands on the bandage that covered her ears and
said: "Really Has he really come home?"

"Only quite lately," said another and more good-natured girl, to soothe
her.

"Do not believe her!"  cried the negress.  "And if you want to know the
latest news of him: Last night he was out boating on the Nile with the
tall Syrian.  My brother, the boatman, was among the rowers; and he went
on finely with the lady I can tell you, finely. . . ."

"My husband, the great Mukaukas?"  asked Mandane, trying to collect her
ideas.

"No.  Your son Orion, who married the emperor's daughter," laughed the
negress.

The crazy girl stood up, looked about with a restless glance, and then,
as though she had not fully understood what had been said to her,
repeated: "Orion?  Handsome Orion?"

"Aye, your sweet son, Orion!"  they all shouted, as loud as though she
were deaf.  Then the usually placable girl, holding her hand over her
ear, with the other hit her tormentor such a smack on her thick lips that
it resounded, while she shrieked out loud, in shrill tones:

"My son, did you say?  My son Orion?--As if you did not know!  Why, he
was my lover; yes, he himself said he was, and that was why they came and
bound me and cut my ears.--But you know it.  But I do not love him--I
could, I might wish, I. . . ."  She clenched her fists, and gnashed her
white teeth, and went on with panting breath:

"Where is he?--You will not tell me?  Wait a bit--only wait.  Oh, I am
sharp enough, I know you have him here.--Where is be?  Orion, Orion,
where are you?"

She sprang away, ran through the sheds and lifted the lids of all the
color-vats, stooping low to look down into each as if she expected to
find him there, while the others roared with laughter.

Most of her companions giggled at this witless behavior; but some, who
felt it somewhat uncanny and whom the unhappy girl's bitter cry had
struck painfully, drew apart and had already organized some new
amusement, when a neat little woman appeared on the scene, clapping her
plump hands and exclaiming:

"Enough of laughter--now, to bed, you swarm of bees.  The night is over
too soon in the morning, and the looms must be rattling again by sunrise.
One this way and one that, just like mice when the cat appears.  Will you
make haste, you night-birds?  Come, will you make haste?"

The girls had learnt to obey, and they hurried past the matron to their
sleeping-quarters.  Perpetua, a woman scarcely past fifty, whose face
wore a pleasant expression of mingled shrewdness and kindness, stood
pricking up her ears and listening; she heard from the water-shed a
peculiar low, long-drawn Wheeuh!--a signal with which she was familiar
as that by which the prefect Thomas had been wont to call together his
scattered household from the garden of his villa on Mount Lebanon.  It
was now Paula who gave the whistle to attract her nurse's attention.

Perpetua shook her head anxiously.  What could have brought her beloved
child to see her at so late an hour?  Something serious must have
occurred, and with characteristic presence of mind she called out, to
show that she had heard Paula's signal: "Now, make haste.  Will you be
quick?  Wheeuh! girls--wheeuh!  Hurry, hurry!"

She followed the last of the slave-girls into the sleeping-room, and when
she had assured herself that they were all there but the crazy Persian
she enquired where she was.  They had all seen her a few minutes ago in
the shed; so she bid them good-night and left them, letting it be
understood that she was about to seek the missing girl.




CHAPTER VII.

Paula went into her nurse's room, and Perpetua, after a short and vain
search for the crazy girl, abandoned her to her fate, not without some
small scruples of conscience.

A beautifully-polished copper lamp hung from the ceiling and the little
room exactly suited its mistress both were neat and clean, trim and
spruce, simple and yet nice.  Snowy transparent curtains enclosed the bed
as a protection against the mosquitoes, a crucifix of delicate
workmanship hung above the head of the couch, and the seats were covered
with good cloth of various colors, fag-ends from the looms.  Pretty straw
mats lay on the floor, and pots of plants, filling the little room with
fragrance, stood on the window-sill and in a corner of the room where a
clay statuette of the Good Shepherd looked down on a praying-desk.

The door had scarcely closed behind them when Perpetua exclaimed: "But
child, how you frightened me!  At so late an hour!"

"I felt I must come," said Paula.  I could contain myself no longer."

"What, tears?"  sighed the woman, and her own bright little eyes twinkled
through moisture.  "Poor soul, what has happened now?"

She went up to the young girl to stroke her hair, but Paula rushed into
her arms, clung passionately round her neck, and burst into loud and
bitter weeping.  The little matron let her weep for a while; then she
released herself, and wiped away her own tears and those of her tall
darling, which had fallen on her smooth grey hair.  She took Paula's chin
in a firm hand and turned her face towards her own, saying tenderly but
decidedly: "There, that is enough.  You might cry and welcome, for it
eases the heart, but that it is so late.  Is it the old story: home-
sickness, annoyances, and so forth, or is there anything new?"

"Alas, indeed!"  replied the girl.  She pressed her handkerchief in her
hands as she went on with excited vehemence: "I am in the last extremity,
I can bear it no longer, I cannot--I cannot!  I am no longer a child, and
when in the evening you dread the night and in the morning dread the day
which must be so wretched, so utterly unendurable. . . ."

"Then you listen to reason, my darling, and say to yourself that of two
evils it is wise to choose the lesser.  You must hear me say once more
what I have so often represented to you before now: If we renounce our
city of refuge here and venture out into the wide world again, what shall
we find that will be an improvement?"

"Perhaps nothing but a hovel by a well under a couple of palm-trees; that
would satisfy me, if I only had you and could be free--free from every
one else!"

"What is this; what does this mean?"  muttered the elder woman shaking
her head.  "You were quite content only the day before yesterday.
Something must have.  .  .  ."

"Yes, must have happened and has," interrupted the girl almost beside
herself.  "My uncle's son.--You were there when he arrived--and I
thought, even I firmly believed that he was worthy of such a reception.
--I--I--pity me, for I.  .  .  You do not know what influence that man
exercises over hearts.--And I--I believed his eyes, his words, his songs
and--yes, I must confess all--even his kisses on this hand!  But it was
all false, all--a lie, a cruel sport with a weak, simple heart, or even
worse--more insulting still!  In short, while he was doing all in his
power to entrap me--even the slaves in the barge observed it--he was in
the very act--I heard it from Dame Neforis, who is only too glad when she
can hurt me--in the very act of suing for the hand of that little doll--
you know her--little Katharina.  She is his betrothed; and yet the
shameless wretch dares to carry on his game with me; he has the face...."

Again Paula sobbed aloud; but the older woman did not know how to help in
the matter and could only mutter to herself:  "Bad, bad--what, this too!
--Merciful Heaven! .  .  ."  But she presently recovered herself and said
firmly: "This is indeed a new and terrible misfortune; but we have known
worse--much, much worse!  So hold up your head, and whatever liking you
may have in your heart for the traitor, tear it out and trample on it.
Your pride will help you; and if you have only just found out what my
lord Orion is, you may thank God that things had gone no further between
you!"  Then she repeated to Paula all that she knew of Orion's misconduct
to the frenzied Mandane, and as Paula gave strong utterance to her
indignation, she went on:

"Yes, child, he is a man to break hearts and ruin happiness, and perhaps
it was my duty to warn you against him; but as he is not a bad man in
other things--he saved the brother of Hathor the designer--you know her
--from drowning, at the risk of his own life--and as I hoped you might be
on friendly terms with him at least, on his return home, I refrained....
And besides, old fool that I am, I fancied your proud heart wore a
breastplate of mail, and after all it is only a foolish girl's heart like
any other, and now in its twenty-first year has given its love to a man
for the first time."

But Paula interrupted her:  "I love the traitor no more!  No, I hate him,
hate him beyond words!  And the rest of them!  I loathe them all!"

"Alas! that it should be so!" sighed the nurse.  "Your lot is no doubt a
hard one.  He--Orion--of course is out of the question; but I often ask
myself whether you might not mend matters with the others.  If you had
not made it too hard for them, child, they must have loved you; they
could not have helped it; but ever since you have been in the house you
have only felt miserable and wished that they would let you go your own
way, and they--well they have done so; and now you find it ill to bear
the lot you chose for yourself.  It is so indeed, child, you need not
contradict me.  This once we will put the matter plainly: Who can hope to
win love that gives none, but turns away morosely from his fellow-
creatures?  If each of us could make his neighbors after his own pattern
--then indeed!  But life requires us to take them just as we find them,
and you, sweetheart, have never let this sink into your mind!"

"Well, I am what I am !"

"No doubt, and among the good you are the best--but which of them all can
guess that?  Every one to some extent plays a part.  And you!  What
wonder if they never see in you anything but that you are unhappy?  God
knows it is ten thousand times a pity that you should be!  But who can
take pleasure in always seeing a gloomy face?"

"I have never uttered a single word of complaint of my troubles to any
one of them!"  cried Paula, drawing herself up proudly.

"That  is  just the difficulty,"  replied  Perpetua.  "They took you in,
and thought it gave them a claim on your person and also on your sorrows.
Perhaps they longed to comfort you; for, believe me, child, there is a
secret pleasure in doing so.  Any one who is able to show us sympathy
feels that it does him more good than it does us.  I know life!  Has it
never occurred to you that you are perhaps depriving your relations in
the great house of a pleasure, perhaps even doing them an injury by
locking up your heart from them?  Your grief is the best side of you, and
of that you do indeed allow them to catch a glimpse; but where the pain
