and that the merchant could perhaps intercede for him, if she were to
tell him all she knew.  She felt the fullest confidence in the old man,
whose kind and sympathetic face was still visible to her mind's eye, and
without paying any further heed to the physician she went quickly towards
the door of the sick-room.  A crucifix hung close by, and the nun had
fallen on her knees before it, praying for her infidel patient, and
beseeching the Good Shepherd to have mercy on the sheep that was not of
His fold.  Paula did not venture to disturb the worshipper, who was
kneeling just in the narrow passage; so some minutes elapsed before the
leech, observing her uneasiness, came out of the larger room, touched the
nun on the shoulder, and said in a low voice of genuine kindness:

"One moment, good Sister.  Your pious intercession will be heard--but
this damsel is in haste."  The nun rose at once and made way, sending a
wrathful glance after Paula as she hurried down the stairs.

At the door of the court-yard she looked out and about for the Arab, but
in vain.  Then she enquired of a slave who told her that the merchant's
horse had waited for him at the gate a long time, that he had just come
galloping out, and by this time must have reached the bridge of boats
which connected Memphis with the island of Rodah and, beyond the island,
with the fort of Babylon and the new town of Fostat.




CHAPTER XI.

Paula went up-stairs again, distressed and vexed with herself.  Was it
the heat that had enervated her and robbed her of the presence of mind
she usually had at her command?  She herself could not understand how it
was that she had not at once taken advantage of the opportunity to plead
to Haschim for her faithful retainer.  The merchant might have interested
himself for Hiram.

The slave at the gate had told her that he had not yet been taken; the
time to intercede, then, had not yet come.  But she was resolved to do
so, to draw the wrath of her relations down on herself, and, if need
should be, to relate all she had seen in the course of the night, to save
her devoted servant.  It was no less than her duty: still, before
humiliating Orion so deeply she would warn him.  The thought of charging
him with so shameful a deed pained her like the need for inflicting an
injury on herself.  She hated him, but she would rather have broken the
most precious work of art than have branded him--him whose image still
reigned in her heart, supremely glorious and attractive.

Instead of following Mary to breakfast, or offering herself as usual to
play draughts with her uncle, she went back to the sick-room.  To meet
Neforis or Orion at this moment would have been painful, indeed odious
to her.  It was long since she had felt so weary and oppressed.
A conversation with the physician might perhaps prove refreshing; after
the various agitations of the last few hours she longed for something, be
it what it might, that should revive her spirits and give a fresh turn to
her thoughts.

In the Masdakite's room the Sister coldly asked her what she wanted, and
who had given her leave to assist in tending the sufferers.  The leech,
who at that moment was moistening the bandage on the wounded man's head,
at this turned to the nun and informed her decidedly that he desired the
young girl's assistance in attending on both his patients.  Then he led
the way sitting-room, saying in subdued into the adjoining tones:

"For the present all is well.  Let us rest here a little while."

She sat down on a divan, and he on a seat opposite, and Philippus began:

"You were seeking handsome Orion just now, but you must.  .  .  ."

"What?"  she asked gravely.  "And I would have you to know that the son
of the house is no more to me than his mother is.  Your phrase 'Handsome
Orion' seems to imply something that I do not again wish to hear.  But I
must speak to him, and soon, in reference to an important matter."

"To what, then, do I owe the pleasure of seeing you here again?  To
confess the truth I did not hope for your return."

"And why not?"

"Excuse me from answering.  No  one likes to hear unpleasant things.  If
one of my profession thinks any one is not well.  .  .  ."

"If that is meant for me," replied the girl, "all I can tell you is that
the one thing on which I still can pride myself is my health.  Say what
you will--the very worst for aught I care.  I want something to-day to
rouse me from lethargy, even if it should make me angry."

"Very well then," replied the leech, "though I am plunging into deep
waters!--As to health, as it is commonly understood, a fish might envy
you; but the higher health--health of mind: that I fear you cannot boast
of."

"This is a serious beginning," said Paula.  "Your reproof would seem to
imply that I have done you or some one else a wrong."

"If only you had!"  exclaimed he.  "No, you have not sinned against us in
any way.--'I am as I am' is what you think of yourself; and what do you
care for others?"

"That must depend on whom you mean by 'others!'"

"Nothing less than all and each of those with whom you live--here, in
this house, in this town, in this world.  To you they are mere air--or
less; for the air is a tangible thing that can fill a ship's sails and
drive it against the stream, whose varying nature can bring comfort or
suffering to your body."

"My world is within!"  said Paula, laying her hand on her heart.

"Very true.  And all creation may find room there; for what cannot the
human heart, as it is called, contain!  The more we require it to take
and keep, the more ready it is to hold it.  It is unsafe to let the lock
rust; for, if once it has grown stiff, when we want to open it no pulling
and wrenching will avail.  And besides--but I do not want to grieve you.
--You have a habit of only looking backwards...."

"And what that is pleasurable lies before me?  Your blame is harsh and at
the same time unjust.--Indeed, and how can you tell which way I look?"

"Because I have watched you with the eye of a friend.  In truth, Paula,
you have forgotten how to look around and forward.  The life which lies
behind you and which you have lost is all your world.  I once showed you
on a fragmentary papyrus that belonged to my foster father, Horus Apollo,
a heathen demon represented as going forwards, while his head was turned
on his neck so that the face and eyes looked behind him."

"I remember it perfectly."

Well, you have long been just like him.  'All things move,' says
Heraclitus, so you are forced to float onwards with the great stream;
or, to vary the image, you must walk forwards on the high-road of life
towards the common goal; but your eye is fixed on what lies behind you,
feasting on the prospect of a handsome and wealthy home, kindness and
tenderness, noble and loving faces, and a happy, but alas!  long-lost
existence.  All the same, on you must go.--What must the result be?"

"I must stumble, you think, and fall?"

The physician's reproof had hit Paula all the harder because she could
not conceal from herself that there was much truth in it.  She had come
hither on purpose to find encouragement, and these accusations troubled
even her sense of high health.  Why should she submit to be taken to task
like a school-girl by this man, himself still young?  If this went on she
would let him hear....  But he was speaking again, and his reply calmed
her, and strengthened her conviction that he was a true and well-meaning
friend.

"Not that perhaps," he said, "because--well, because nature has blessed
you with perfect balance, and you go forward in full self-possession as
becomes the daughter of a hero.  We must not forget that it is of your
soul that I am speaking; and that maintains its innate dignity of feeling
among so much that is petty and mean."

"Then why need I fear to look back when it gives me so much comfort?"
she eagerly enquired, as she gazed in his face with fresh spirit.

"Because it may easily lead you to tread on other people's feet!  That
hurts them; then they are annoyed, and they get accustomed to think
grudgingly of you--you who are more lovable than they are."

"But quite unjustly; for I am not conscious of ever having intentionally
grieved or hurt any one in my whole life."

"I know that; but you have done so unintentionally a thousand times."

"Then it would be better I should quit them altogether."

"No, and a thousand times no!  The man who avoids his kind and lives in
solitude fancies he is doing some great thing and raising himself above
the level of the existence he despises.  But look a little closer: it is
self-interest and egoism which drive him into the cave and the cloister.
In any case he neglects his highest duty towards humanity--or let us say
merely towards the society he belongs to--in order to win what he
believes to be his own salvation.  Society is a great body, and every
individual should regard himself as a member of it, bound to serve and
succor it, and even, when necessary, to make sacrifices for it.  The
greatest are not too great.  But those who crave isolation,--you
yourself--nay, hear me out, for I may never again risk the danger of
incurring your wrath--desire to be a body apart.  What Paula has known
and possessed, she keeps locked in the treasure-house of her memory under
bolt and key; What Paula is, she feels she still must be--and for whom?
Again, for that same Paula.  She has suffered great sorrow and on that
her soul lives; but this is evil nourishment, unwholesome and bad for
her."

She was about to rise; but he bent forward, with a zealous conviction
that he must not allow himself to be interrupted, and lightly touched her
arm as though to prevent her quitting her seat, while he went on
unhesitatingly:

"You feed on your old sorrows!  Well and good.  Many a time have I seen
that trial can elevate the soul.  It can teach a brave heart to feel the
woes of others more deeply; it can rouse a desire to assuage the griefs
of others with beautiful self-devotion.  Those who have known pain and
affliction enjoy ease and pleasure with double satisfaction; sufferers
learn to be grateful for even the smaller joys of life.  But you?--
I have long striven for courage to tell you so--you derive no benefit
from suffering because you lock it up in your breast--as if a man were to
enclose some precious seed in a silver trinket to carry about with him.
It should be sown in the earth, to sprout and bear fruit!  However, I do
not blame you; I only wish to advise you as a true and devoted friend.
Learn to feel yourself a member of the body to which your destiny has
bound you for the present, whether you like it or not.  Try to contribute
to it all that your capacities allow you achieve.  You will find that you
can do something for it; the casket will open, and to your surprise and
delight you will perceive that the seed dropped into the soil will
germinate, that flowers will open and fruit will form of which you may
make bread, or extract from it a balm for yourself or for others!  Then
you will leave the dead to bury the dead, as the Bible has it, and
dedicate to the living those great powers and gracious gifts which an
illustrious father and a noble mother--nay, and a long succession of
distinguished ancestors, have bequeathed to a descendant worthy of them.
Then you will recover that which you have lost: the joy in existence
which we ought both to feel and to diffuse, because it brings with it an
obligation which it which is only granted to us once to fulfil.  Kind
fate has fitted you above a hundred thousand others for being loved; and
if you do not forget the gratitude you owe for that, hearts will be
turned to you, though now they shun the tree which has beset itself
intentionally with thorns, and which lets its branches droop like the
weeping-willows by the Nile.  Thus you will lead a new and beautiful
life, receiving and giving joy.  The isolated and charmless existence you
drag through here, to the satisfaction of none and least of all to your
own, you can transform to one of fruition and satisfaction--breathing and
moving healthily and beneficently in the light of day.  It lies in your
power.  When you came up here to give your care to these poor injured
creatures, you took the first step in the new path I desire to show you,
to true happiness.  I did not expect you, and I am thankful that you have
come; for I know that as you entered that door you may have started on
the road to renewed happiness, if you have the will to walk in it.--Thank
God!  That is said and over!"

The leech rose and wiped his forehead, looking uneasily at Paula who had
remained seated; her breath came fast, and she was more confused and
undecided than he had ever seen her.  She clasped her hand over her brow,
and gazed, speechless, into her lap as though she wished to smother some
pain.

The young physician beat his arms together, like a laborer in the winter
when his hands are frozen, and exclaimed with distressful emotion: "Yes,
I have spoken, and I cannot regret having done so; but what I foresaw has
come to pass:  The greatest happiness that ever sweetened my daily life
is gone out of it!  To love Plato is a noble rule, but greater than Plato
is the truth; and yet, those who preach it must be prepared to find that
truth scares away friends from the unpleasing vicinity of its ill-starred
Apostles!"

At this Paula rose, and following the impulse of her generous heart,
offered the leech her hand in all sincerity; he grasped it in both his,
pressing it so tightly that it almost hurt her, and his eyes glistened
with moisture as he exclaimed: "That is as I hoped; that is splendid,
that is noble!  Let me but be your brother, high-souled maiden!--Now,
come.  That poor, crazy, lovely girl will heal of her death-wound under
your hands if under any!"

"I will come!"  she replied heartily; and there was something healthy and
cheerful in her manner as they entered the sick-room; but her expression
suddenly changed, and she asked pensively:
