Vekeel than he begged for a private interview.  Obada did not hesitate to
turn the keeper of the prison, with his wife and infant, out of his room,
and there he listened while Horapollo informed him of the fate to which
he destined the condemned girl.  The old man's scheme certainly found
favor with the Negro; still, it seemed to him in many respects so daring
that, but for an equivalent service which Horapollo was in a position to
offer Obada, he would scarcely have succeeded in obtaining his consent.

All the Vekeel aimed at was to make it very certain that Orion had had a
hand in the flight of the nuns, and chance had placed a document in the
old man's hands which seemed to set this beyond a doubt.

He had effected his removal to the widow's dwelling in the cool hours of
early morning.  He had taken with him, in the first instance, only the
most valuable and important of his manuscripts, and as he was placing
these in a small desk--the very same which Rufinus had left for Paula's
use--Horapollo found in it the note which the youth had hastily written
when, after waiting in vain for Paula as she sat with little Mary, he had
at last been obliged to depart and take leave of Amru.  This wax-tablet,
on which the writing was much defaced and partly illegible, could not
fail to convince the judges of Orion's guilt, and the production of this
piece of evidence enabled the old man to extort Obada's consent to his
proposal as to the mode of Paula's death.  When they finally left the
warder's room, the Negro once more turned to the keeper of the prison and
told him with a snort, as he pointed to his pretty wife and the child at
her breast, that they should all three die if he allowed Orion to quit
his cell for so much as an instant.

He then swung himself on to his horse, while Horapollo rode off to the
Curia to desire the president of the council to call a meeting for that
evening; then he betook himself to his new quarters.

There he found his room carefully shaded, and as cool as was possible in
such heat.  The floor had been sprinkled with water, flowers stood
wherever there was room for them, and all his properties in scrolls and
other matters had found places in chests or on shelves.  There was not a
speck of dust to be seen, and a sweet pervading perfume greeted his
sensitive nostrils.

What a good exchange he had made!  He rubbed his withered hands with
satisfaction as he seated himself in his accustomed chair, and when Mary
came to call him to dinner, it was a pleasure to him to jest with her.

Pulcheria must lead him through the viridarium into the dining-room; he
enjoyed his meal, and his cross, wrinkled old face lighted up amazingly
as he glanced round at his feminine associates; only Eudoxia was absent,
confined to her room by some slight ailment.  He had something pleasant
to say to each; he frankly compared his former circumstances with his
present position, without disguising his heartfelt thankfulness; then,
with a merry glance at Pulcheria, he described how delightful it would be
when Philippus should come home to make the party complete--a true and
perfect star: for every Egyptian star must have five rays.  The ancients
had never painted one otherwise nor graven it in stone; nay, they had
used it as the symbol for the number five.

At this Mary exclaimed: "But then I hope--I hope we shall make a six-
rayed star; for by that time poor Paula may be with us again!"

"God grant it!"  sighed Dame Joanna.  Pulcheria, however, asked the old
man what was wrong with him, for his face had suddenly clouded.  His
cheerfulness had vanished, his tufted eyebrows were raised, and his
pinched lips seemed unwilling to part, when at length he reluctantly
said:

"Nothing--nothing is wrong...  At the same time; once for all--I loathe
that name."

"Paula?"  cried the child in astonishment.  "Oh! but if you knew. . ."

"I know more than enough," interrupted the old man.  "I love you all--
all; my old heart expands as I sit in your midst; I am comfortable here,
I feel kindly towards you, I am grateful to you; every little attention
you show me does me good; for it comes from your hearts: if I could repay
you soon and abundantly--I should grow young again with joy.  You may
believe me, as I can see indeed that you do.  And yet," and again his
brows went up, "and yet, when I hear that name, and when you try to win
me over to that woman, or if you should even go so far as to assail my
ears with her praises--then, much as it would grieve me, I would go back
again to the place where I came from."

"Why, Horapollo, what are you saying?"  cried Joanna, much distressed.

"I say," the old man went on, "I say that in her everything is
concentrated which I most hate and contemn in her class.  I say that she
bears in her bosom a cold and treacherous heart; that she blights my days
and my nights; in short, that I would rather be condemned to live under
the same roof with clammy reptiles and cold-blooded snakes than.  .  ."

"Than with her, with Paula?"  Mary broke in.  The eager little thing
sprang to her feet, her eyes flashed lightnings and her voice quivered
with rage, as she exclaimed: "And you not only say it but mean it?  Is it
possible?"

"Not only possible, but positive, sweetheart," replied the old man,
putting out his hand to take hers, but she shrank back, exclaiming
vehemently:

"I will not be your sweetheart, if you speak so of her!  A man as old as
you are ought to be just.  You do not know her at all, and what you say
about her heart.  .  ."

"Gently, gently, child," the widow put in; and Horapollo answered with
peculiar emphasis.

"That heart, my little whirlwind!--it would be well for us all if we
could forget it, forget it for good or for evil.  She has been tried
to-day, and that heart is sentenced to cease beating."

"Sentenced!  Merciful Heaven!"  shrieked Pulcheria, and as she started up
her mother cried out:

"For God's sake do not jest about such things, it is a sin.--Is it true?
--Is it possible?  Those wretches, those...  I see in your face it is
true; they have condemned Paula."

"As you say," replied Horapollo calmly.  "The girl is to be executed."

"And you only tell us now?"  wept Pulcheria, while Mary broke out:

"And yet you have been able to jest and laugh, and you--I hate you!  And
if you were not such a helpless, old, old man.  .  ."  But here Joanna
again silenced the child, and she asked between her sobs:

"Executed?--Will they cut off her head?  And is there no mercy for her
who was as far away from that luckless fight as we were--for her, a girl,
and the daughter of Thomas?"

To which the old man replied:

"Wait a while, only wait!  Heaven has perhaps chosen her for great ends.
She may be destined to save a whole country and nation from destruction
by her death.  It is even possible.  .  ."

"Speak out plainly; you make me shudder with your oracular hints," cried
the widow; but he only shrugged his shoulders and said coolly:

"What we foresee is not yet known.  Heaven alone can decide in such a
case.  It will be well for us all--for me, for her, for Pulcheria, and
even our absent Philip, if the divinity selects her as its instrument.
But who can see into darkness?  If it is any comfort to you, Joanna,
I can inform you that the soft-hearted Kadi and his Arab colleagues,
out of sheer hatred of the Vekeel, who is immeasurably their superior
in talent and strength of will, will do everything in their power..."
"To save her?"  exclaimed the widow.

"To-morrow they will hold council and decide whether to send a messenger
to Medina to implore pardon for her," Horapollo went on with a horrible
smile.  "The day after they will discuss who the messenger is to be, and
before he can reach Arabia fate will have overtaken the prisoner.  The
Vekeel Obada moves faster than they do, and the power lies in his hands
so long as Amru is absent from Egypt.  He, they say, perfectly dotes on
the Mukaukas' son, and for his sake--who knows?  Paula as his betrothed."

"His betrothed?"

"He called her by that name before the judges, and congratulated himself
on his promised bride."

"Paula and Orion!"  cried Pulcheria, jubilant in the midst of her tears,
and clapping her hands for joy.

"A pair indeed!"  said the old man.  "You may well rejoice, my girl!
Feeble hearts as you all are, respect the experience of the aged, and
bless Fate if it should lame the horse of the Kadi's messenger!--However,
you will not listen to anything oracular, so it will be better to talk of
something else."

"No, no," cried Joanna.  "What can we think of but her and her fate?
Oh, Horapollo, I do not know you in this mood.  What has that poor soul
done to you, persecuted as she is by the hardest fate--that noble
creature who is so dear to us all?  And do you forget that the judges who
have sentenced her will now proceed to enquire what Rufinus, and we all
of us.  .  ."

"What you had to do with that mad scheme of rescue?"  interrupted
Horapollo.  "I will make it my business to prevent that.  So long as this
old brain is able to think, and this mouth to speak, not a hair of your
heads shall be hurt."

"We are grateful to you," said Joanna.  "But, if you have such power,
set to work--you know how dear Paula is to us all, how highly your friend
Philip esteems her--use your power to save her."

"I have no power, and refuse to have any," retorted the old man harshly."

"But Horapollo, Horapollo!--Come here, children!--We were to find in you
a second father--so you promised.  Then prove that those were no empty
words, and be entreated by us."

The old man drew a deep breath; he rose to his feet with such vigor as he
could command, a bright, sharply-defined patch of color tinged each pale
cheek, and he exclaimed in husky tones:

"Not another word!  No attempt to move me, not a cry of lamentation!
Enough, and a thousand times too much, of that already.  You have heard
me, and I now say again--me or Paula, Paula or me.  Come what may in the
future, if you cannot so far control yourselves as never to mention her
in my presence, I--no, I do not swear, but when I have said a thing I
keep to it--I will go back to my old den and drag out life the richer
by a disappointment--or die, as my ruling goddess shall please."

With this he left the room, and little Mary raised her clenched right
fist and shook it after him, exclaiming: "Then let him go, hard-hearted,
unjust, old scarecrow!  Oh, if only I were a man!"  And she burst out
crying aloud.  Heedless of the widow's reproof, she went on quite beside
herself:  "Oh, there is no one more wicked than he is, Dame Joanna!  He
wants to see her die, he wishes her to be dead; I know it, he even wishes
it!  Did you hear him, Pul, he would be glad if the messenger's horse
went lame before he could save her?  And now she is my Orion's betrothed
--I always meant them for each other--and they want to kill him, too, but
they shall not, if there is still a God of justice in heaven!  Oh if I--
if I.  .  ."  Her voice failed her, choked with sobs.  When she had
