Pyramus attributed her sometimes depressed, sometimes irritable manner
to the disappointment of her wish.

What she had just learned and had had inflicted upon her filled her with
hatred of life.

Her two boys scarcely dared to approach their mother, who, unlike her
usual self, harshly rebuffed them.

At twilight Hannibal Melas appeared, full of joyous excitement.
Granvelle sent Barbara word that the doorkeeper Mangin would show her a
good seat. His Eminence desired to be remembered to her, and said that
only those who had been closely associated with his Majesty would be
admitted to this ceremony, and he knew that she ranked among the first
of these.

Barbara's features brightened and, as she saw how happy it made the
Maltese to be the bearer of so pleasant a message, she forced herself to
give a joyous expression to her gratitude. In the evening, and during
a sleepless night, she considered whether she should make use of
the invitation. What she had expected for herself and her child from
Charles's abdication had been mere chimeras of the brain, and what could
this spectacle offer her? She would only behold with her eyes what
she had often enough imagined with the utmost distinctness--the great
monarch divested of his grandeur and all his dignities.

But Granvelle's message that she was one cf those who stood nearest to
the abdicating sovereign constantly echoed in her ears, and her absence
from this ceremony would have seemed to her unnatural--nay, an offence
against something necessary.

Her husband was pleased with the great minister's kindness to his wife.
He had nothing to do in the palace, but he intended to look for the
children, who had gone there before noon with Frau Lamperi, that they
might get the best possible view of the approach of the princes and
dignitaries.

Barbara herself was to use a litter. The ex-'garde-robiere' had helped
her put on her gala attire, and Pyramus assured his wife that every
one would consider her the handsomest and most elegant lady in the
galleries. She knew that he was right, and listened with pleasure,
deeply as resentment and disappointment burdened her soul.

Then the knocker on the door rapped. The litter-bearers had probably
come. But no! The Flemish maid, who had opened the door, announced that
a messenger was waiting outside with a letter which he could deliver
only to the master or the mistress.

Pyramus went into the entry, and his long absence was already making
Barbara uneasy, when he returned with bowed head and, after many words
of preparation, informed her that her father was very ill and, finally,
that apoplexy had put a swift and easy end to his life.

Then a great and genuine grief seized upon her with all its power.
Everything that the simple-hearted, lovable man, who had guarded
her child hood so tenderly and her girlhood with such solicitude and
devotion, had been to her, returned to her memory in all its vividness.
In him she had lost the last person whose right to judge her conduct she
acknowledged, the only one whom she had good reason to be sure cared for
her welfare as much as, nay, perhaps more than, his own.

The litter, Granvelle's message, the Emperor's abdication ceremony,
everything that had just wounded, angered, and disturbed her, was
forgotten.

She gently refused the consolation of her husband, who in the captain
had lost a dear friend and sincerely mourned his death, and entreated
him to leave her alone; but when her sons returned and joyously
described the magnificent spectacle on which they had feasted their eyes
outside of the palace, she drew them toward her with special tenderness,
and tried to make them understand that they would never again see the
good grandfather who had loved them all so dearly.

But the older boy, Conrad, only gazed at her wonderingly, and asked why
she was weeping; and the younger one did not understand her at all,
and went on talking about the big soldier who wanted to lift him on his
piebald horse. To the child death is only slumber, and life being awake
to new games and pleasures.

Barbara said this to her husband when he wished to check the merry
laughter of the little ones, and then went to her chamber.

There she strove to think of the dead man, and she succeeded, but with
the memory of the sturdy old hero constantly blended the image of the
feeble man who to-day was voluntarily surrendering all the gifts of
fortune which she--oh, how willingly! would have received for the son
whom he desired to withdraw from the world.

The next morning Hannibal Melas came to ask what had kept her from the
ceremony. He learned it in the entry from Frau Lamperi, and Barbara's
tearful eyes showed him what deep sorrow this loss had caused her. Her
whole manner expressed quiet melancholy. This great, pure grief had come
just at the right time, flowing, like oil upon the storm-lashed waves,
over hatred, resentment, and all the passionate emotions by which she
had previously been driven to the verge of despair.

She did not repulse the witness of her lost happiness, and listened
attentively while Hannibal told her about the memorable ceremony which
he had attended.

True, his description of the lofty hall in the Brabant palace where it
took place, the chapel adjoining it, and the magnificent decorations of
flowers and banners that adorned it, told nothing new to Barbara. She
was familiar with both, and had seen them garlanded, adorned with flags
and coats of arms, and even witnessed the erection of the stage in the
hall and the stretching of the canopy above it.

The Emperor had appeared upon the platform at the stroke of three,
leaning upon his crutch and the shoulder of William of Orange. His son
Philip and the Queen of Hungary followed, and all took their seats
upon the gilded thrones awaiting them. The blithe, pleasant Archduke
Maximilian of Austria, the Duke of Savoy, who was expecting a great
winning card in the game of luck of his changeful life, the Knights
of the Golden Fleece, and the highest of the Netherland nobles, the
councillors, the governor, and the principal military officers also had
places upon the stage.

Barbara knew every name that Hannibal mentioned. It seemed as if she saw
the broken-down Emperor, his son Philip with his head haughtily thrown
back, his favourite, the omnipotent minister, Ruy Gomez, the Prince
of Eboli, who with his coal-black hair and beard would have resembled
Quijada if, instead of the soldierly frankness of the major-domo, an
uneasy, questioning expression had not lurked in his dark eyes, the
brilliant Bishop of Arras, who had again so kindly placed her under
obligation to him, and the Frieslander Viglius, who had dropped into her
soul the wormwood whose bitterness she still tasted, and whose motto,
"The life of mortals is a watch in the night," seemed to flash from his
green eyes. Not a single woman had been admitted to the distinguished
assembly of the States-General, the city magistrates, and illustrious
invited guests, who as spectators sat on benches and chairs opposite
to the stage, and this placed the kindness of Granvelle, whom the
Netherland dignitaries were said to detest, in a still brighter light.

The ceremony had been opened by the great speech of Philibert of
Brussels, which the young Maltese described as a masterpiece of the
finest rhetorical art. At the close of this address a solemn silence
pervaded the hall, for the Emperor Charles had risen to take leave of
his faithful subjects.

One might have heard a leaf fall, a spicier walk, as, supported by the
arm of William of Orange, he raised the notes of his address and began
to read.

At this information Barbara remembered how Maurice of Saxony had
supported the Emperor at the May festival at Prebrunn. William of
Orange, too, was still young. She had often seen him, and what deep
earnestness rested on his noble brow! how open and pure was the glance
of his clear eyes, yet how penetrating and inexorably keen it could also
be! She had noticed this at the assembly of the Knights of the Golden
Fleece, when he looked at King Philip with bitter hate or certainly with
dislike and scorn. Was this man chosen to avenge Charles's sins upon his
son and heir? Could the Prince of Orange be destined to deal with the
new king as Maurice of Saxony had treated his imperial father? Would the
resentment which, since the day before, had again filled her soul have
permitted her to prevent it had she possessed the power?

The Emperor's speech had treated of his broken health and the necessity
of living in a milder climate. Then Don Philip had been described by his
father as a successor whose wisdom equalled his experience. This called
a smile to Barbara's lips.

Philip was said to be an industrious, devout man, fond of
letter-writing, and full of intrigue, but only his father would venture
to compare him with himself, with Charles V.

He, the son, probably knew how vacant and lustreless his eyes were, for
he usually fixed them on the ground; and what fulness of life, what a
fiery soul had sparkled only a short time ago, when she saw him in the
distance, from those of the man whom she certainly was not disposed to
flatter!

Then the Emperor had reviewed his whole reign, mentioned how many wars
he had waged, how many victories he had won and, finally, had reminded
his son of the gratitude he owed a father who during his lifetime
bestowed all his possessions upon him and, as it were, descended into
the grave in order to make him earlier the heir of all his power and
wealth.

Now Barbara fancied that again--she knew not for what hundredth
time--the Frieslander's exclamation, "Debts! debts!" rang in her ears,
and at the same time she thought of the boy in Spain who had here been
disinherited, and must be hidden in a monastery that the other son
of the same father, the diminutive upstart Philip, puffed up with
arrogance, might sleep more quietly. For one son the unjust man whom she
loved was ready to die before his last hour came, in order to give him
all that he possessed; for the other he could find nothing save a monk's
cowl. Instead of the yearning for John, of which Wolf had spoken and
she, blind fool, believed, he thought of him with petty fears of the
claims by which he might injure his favoured brother. No warm impulse
of paternal tenderness stirred the breast of the man whose heart was
hardened, who understood how to divest himself of the warmest love as he
now cast aside the crown and the purple of royalty.

These torturing thoughts so powerfully affected Barbara that she only
half heard what Hannibal was saying about the Emperor's admonition to
his son to hold fast to justice, law, and the Catholic Church. But when
Granvelle's faithful follower, in an agitated tone, went on to relate
how Charles had besought the forgiveness of Providence for all the sins
and errors which he had committed, and added that he would remember all
who had rendered him happy by their love and obedience in every prayer
which he addressed to the Being to whom the remnant of his life should
be devoted, the ex-singer's breath came quicker, her small hands
clinched, and the question whether she had failed in love and obedience
before he basely cast her off forced itself upon her mind, and with it
the other, whether he would also include in his prayers her whom he had
ill-treated and mortally insulted.

These thoughts lent her features so gloomy an expression that it would
have offended the Emperor Charles's ardent admirer if he had noticed it.
But the scene which, with tears in his eyes, he now described absorbed
his attention so completely that he forgot everything around him and,
as it were, gazed into his own soul while picturing to himself and his
listener how the monarch, with a pallid, ashen countenance, had sunk
back upon his throne and wept like a child.

At this spectacle the whole assembly, even the sternest old general, had
been overwhelmed by deep emotion, and the spacious hall echoed with the
sobs and groans of graybeards, middle-aged men and youths, warriors and
statesmen.

Here the young man's voice failed and, weeping, with unfeigned emotion
he covered his agitated face with his handkerchief.

When he regained his composure he saw, with a shade of disappointment,
that Barbara's eyes had remained dry during the description of an event
in which he himself and so many stronger men had shed burning tears.

Yet, when Barbara was again alone she could not drive from her mind the
image of her broken-down, weeping lover. Doubtless she often felt moved
to think of him with deep pity; but she soon remembered the conversation
to which she had listened in the apartments of the Bishop of Arras, and
her belief in the genuineness of those tears vanished.




CHAPTER XV.

The winter came and passed. Instead of leaving the Netherlands, the
Emperor Charles remained nearly a year in Brussels. He lived in a modest
house in Lion Street and, although he had resigned the sovereignty,
nothing was done in the domain of politics to which he had not given his
assent.

Barbara, more domestic than ever before, was leading a dream life, in
which she dwelt more with her beloved dead and her child in Spain than
with her family at home. She thought of the boy's father sometimes with
bitter resentment, sometimes with quiet pity. Outward circumstances
rendered it easier for her to conceal these feelings, for Pyramus
attributed the melancholy mood which sometimes overpowered her to grief
for her father.

Her husband left the settlement of the business connected with her
inheritance solely to her. There were many letters to be written and, as
she had become unfamiliar with this art, Hannibal faithfully aided her.

Dr. Hiltner, of Ratisbon, to whom, in spite of his heretical belief, she
intrusted the legal business of the estate, acted wisely and promptly in
her behalf. Thus the sale of the house which she had purchased for
the dead man, and the disposal of her father's share in the Blomberg
business, brought her far more money than she had expected.

It seemed as though Fate desired to compensate her by outward prosperity
for the secret sorrow which, in spite of her husband's affectionate
solicitude and the thriving growth of her two boys, she could not shake
off.

In one respect she regarded the money which this winter brought her as a
genuine blessing, for it seemed to invite her to go to Ems and do all
in her power for the restoration of her voice. The hoarseness was now
barely perceptible in her speech, and Dr. Mathys, whom she visited in
April, encouraged her, and told her of really marvellous cures wrought
by the famous old springs.

When May came and the trees and shrubs in leafy Brussels adorned
themselves with new buds, she could not help thinking more frequently,
as usual in this month, of her wasted love and of the man for whom it
had bloomed and who had destroyed it. So she liked to pass through Lion
Street in her walks, for it led her by his house. She might easily meet
him again there, and she longed to see his face once more before the
departure for Spain, which would remove him from her sight forever.

And behold! One sunny noon he was borne toward her in a litter. She
stopped as though spellbound, bowing profoundly; her glance as he passed
met his, and he waved his emaciated hand--yes, she was not mistaken--he
waved it to her.

For an instant it seemed as if a crimson rose had bloomed in the midst
of winter snows. She had been as sure that he had not forgotten her as
that she herself had not ceased to think of him.

Now her confidence was, as it were, confirmed by letter and seal, and
this made her happy.

The man in the litter had been only the wreck of the Charles whom she
loved; even the fiery light in his eyes, though not extinguished, had
appeared subdued and veiled. Other women would probably have thought him
repulsively plain, but what did she care for his looks? Each of them was
still a part of the other, for her image lived in his soul, as his dwelt
in hers.

Barbara did not take as long a walk as usual; but when she was again
approaching the house occupied by the abdicated sovereign, Dr. Mathys
came toward her. The expression of his broad, dignified face suited the
bright May morning; nay, she imagined that his step was lighter and less
sedate than usual.

During the whole decade which they had known each other he had never
flattered her, but to-day, after the first greeting, he began his
conversation with the question:

"Do you know, Frau Barbara, that you were never more beautiful and
charming than just at this very time? Perhaps it is the mourning which
is so becoming to your pink-and-white complexion and the somewhat
subdued lustre of your golden hair. But why do I feed your vanity with
such speeches? Because I think that our gracious lord, who for many a
long day has not bestowed even the least side glance upon any of your
bewitching sex, noticed the same thing. And now you will presently be
obliged to admit that the old messenger of bad news in Ratisbon, whom
you requited so ill for his unpleasant errand, can also bring good
tidings; for the Emperor Charles--in spite of the abdication, he will
always be that until he, too, succumbs to the power which makes us all
equal--his Majesty sends you his greetings, and the message that
he desires to do what he can to restore to you the art in which you
attained such rare mastery. He places at your disposal--this time, at
least, he was not economical--a sum which will take you to the healing
springs four or five times, nay, oftener still."

Barbara had listened thus far, speechless with joyful surprise. If it
was Charles to whom she owed her recovery, the gift of song which it
restored would possess tenfold value for her, if that was conceivable.
She was already beginning to charge the leech to be the bearer of her
gratitude and joy, but he did not let her finish, and went on to mention
the condition which his Majesty attached to this gift.

Barbara must never mention it to any one, and must promise the physician
to refrain from all attempts to thank him either in person or by letter
in short, to avoid approaching him in any way.

The old physician had communicated this stipulation--which his royal
patient had strictly associated with the gift--to Barbara in the
emphatic manner peculiar to him, but she had listened, at first in
surprise, then with increasing indignation. The donation which, as a
token of remembrance and kind feeling, had just rendered her so happy,
now appeared like mere alms. Nay, the gift would make her inferior to
the poorest beggar, for who forbids the mendicant to utter his "May God
reward you"?

Charles kept her aloof as if she were plague-stricken. Perhaps it was
because he feared that if he saw her once he might desire a second and a
third meeting. But no matter. She would accept no aid at the cost of so
severe an offence to her pride, least of all when it came from the man
who had already wounded her soul often and painfully enough.

The startled physician perceived what was passing in her mind, and when,
not passionately as in her youth, but with cool composure, she requested
Dr. Mathys to tell his master that it would be as impossible for her to
accept a gift for which she could not express her thanks as to give alms
without wishing well to the recipient, the leech eagerly endeavoured to
persuade her to use the sum bestowed according to the donor's wish. But
Barbara firmly persisted in her refusal, and when she parted from the
old man he could not be angry with her, for, as in the garden of the
little Prebrunn castle, he could not help saying to himself that the
wrong was not wholly on the side of the independent young woman.

The result in this case was the usual one when the weaker party succeeds
in maintaining itself against the superior power of the stronger.
Barbara set out on her way home with her head proudly erect, but she
soon asked herself whether this victory was not too dearly purchased.
In a few months John was to meet his father, and then might there not be
cause to fear that the opposition which she, his mother, had offered to
the Emperor, in order to escape an offence to her own pride, would prove
an injury to the son? She stopped, hesitating; but after a brief period
of reflection, she continued her walk. What she had done might vex the
monarch, but it must rather enhance than lower her value in his eyes,
and everything depended upon that. Charles would open the path to high
honours and royal splendour to the son of a haughty mother rather than
to the child of a narrow-minded woman, who would receive a gift without
being suffered to express her thanks.

She had done right, and rejoiced that this time she had obeyed the voice
of her imperious soul. She no longer desired to meet again the man whom
she loved. Her wish to look into his eyes once more before his death or
hers was fulfilled, and his glance, which had certainly been the last
that he could give her, had expressed the kind feeling and forgiveness
for which she had secretly yearned. So what he had done was surely not
intended to wound her. She understood his desire to obtain peace of mind
and his fear of entering into communication with her again, and from
this time it once more became a necessity to her to include him in her
prayers.

She left her home with a lighter heart, better satisfied with herself
than she had been for years. The Emperor Charles could not help thinking
of her now as she desired. The love which she had never wholly withdrawn
was again his, and the feeling of belonging to him exalted her pride and
brightened her clouded soul.

Frau Lamperi accompanied her, and marvelled at her mistress's happy
mood. Besides, the Ems waters and the excellent advice of the physician
to whose care she intrusted herself exerted a beneficial influence upon
her ailment.

Her mourning garb prevented her from taking any part in the gay life of
the watering-place, but she found pleasure in watching it.

When she returned to Brussels, Pyramus thought she looked as young as in
her girlhood, and every wish that her husband fancied he could read in
her eyes was gratified with loving eagerness.

But the preparations for war against France allowed him only a short
time to remain in Brussels, and during his absence Barbara enjoyed
unlimited freedom.

The Emperor had sailed for Spain, Queen Mary had retired from the
regency, and Duke Emanuel Philibert of Savoy had taken it in her place.
King Philip remained in the Netherlands, and it was said in his praise
that he showed the boundless arrogance characteristic of him in a less
offensive way, and had acquired more affable manners.

Barbara often longed to seek an audience with him.

But what would it avail?

Philip was perhaps the very person who would be glad to have his
half-brother disappear in a monastery.

Yet the yearning to hear some news of her child would not be silenced.
Of the distant Emperor, who was said to be near his end, and spent his
days and sleepless nights in the monastery of San Yuste in prayer and
severe mortification, as the most pious of monks, she thought with
sympathizing affection.

The following year Barbara went to Ems again, this time no longer in
mourning robes, but scarcely less magnificently attired than many a
Rhenish noble's wife, who was also seeking health and amusement there.
The property she had inherited, and which the conscientious Pyramus
would not touch, and Frau Lamperi's skilful fingers had accomplished
this. Though the materials which she selected were not the most costly,
her aristocratic bearing made them appear valuable. She still possessed
the pearl necklace and other ornaments of more prosperous days, and on
festal occasions they did not remain in a chest.

She by no means lacked notice, partly on her own account, partly in
consequence of the conversations with which Granvelle, who visited the
springs for a short time, honoured her, while he kept entirely aloof
from all the other guests. This favour on the part of so famous and
powerful a statesman induced many of the most aristocratic ladies and
nobles to seek her, and many who had been attracted solely by curiosity
were charmed with the entertaining sprightliness of the beautiful woman,
and admitted her to their very exclusive circle.

This time the springs proved still more beneficial than when she first
used them, and the hope of soon being able to exercise her beloved art
again gained new and solid foundation.

This occupied a large share of her thoughts, but a still greater one
was filled with the yearning for her John, of whom, in spite of many
inquiries, she could hear nothing.

When, in her quiet home life, the monotony of her days oppressed her
more heavily, she often remembered Ems, and the pleasures and attention
which the next summer there would bring her. Now that the great,
passionate emotions which had been devoted to others were at rest,
she began to think more of her own person. It seemed desirable to show
herself to advantage, and though she longed for her recovery above all
for the sake of her art and the pleasure which its exercise afforded
her, she was already secretly thinking how she could use it to restore
and obtain satisfaction for her paralyzed self-esteem.

In consequence of the victory of St. Quentin, Brussels was filled
with festal joy; but Barbara took very little part in the numerous
festivities which followed one another, and again went to Ems.

When she returned, much benefited, her first visit was to the Dubois
house in the park. Unfortunately, it was futile; but when, a few weeks
before the battle of Gravelines, she repeated it for the second time,
she met the couple, now advancing in years, out of doors, and saw that
some good fortune had come to them.

Usually she had always been received here with a certain shade of
embarrassment, but to-day her coming seemed to please Herr Adrian. From
the great arm-chair, which he now never left, he held out his hand to
her, and Frau Traut's merry eyes looked a glad welcome.

After the first greetings, they eagerly expressed their joyful
amazement at the clear tones of her voice. Then Frau Dubois exchanged
a significant glance with her husband, and now Barbara learned that a
letter had arrived from San Yuste that very morning, which contained
little except pleasant news of his Majesty and John.

While speaking, Adrian drew from his doublet the precious missive,
showed it to the young wife as cautiously as a fragile ornament which
we are reluctant to let pass out of our hands, and said in an agitated
voice:

"The writer is no less a personage than Dona Magdalena de Ulloa. May
Heaven reward her for it!"

Barbara gazed beseechingly into his wrinkled face, and from the inmost
depths of her heart rose the cry: "Oh, let me see it, for I--you know
it--I am his mother!"

"So she is," said the old man in a tone of assent, nodded his long head,
whose hair was now snow-white, and glanced questioningly at his wife.
The answer was an assent.

Adrian clasped his chin--during the period of his service he had always
worn it smooth-shaven, but the white stubble of a full beard was
now growing on it--in his emaciated hand, and asked Barbara if she
understood Spanish.

Her knowledge of it was very slight; but Frau Traut, who, like her
husband, had mastered it during the long years of intercourse with the
Castilian court, now undertook to put the contents of the letter into
German.

This was not difficult, for she had already been obliged to read it
aloud three times to Adrian, who could no longer decipher written
characters.

The address was not omitted; it had pleased them both. It ran as
follows:

"To his Majesty's good and faithful servant, Adrian Dubois, from his
affectionate friend of former days, Dona Magdalena de Ulloa, wife of Don
Luis Mendez Quijada, Lady of Villagarcia."

Frau Trout read these noble names aloud to Barbara proudly, as if they
were her own; but before she went on Adrian interrupted--

"As to friendship, you may think, Frau Barbara, that Dona Magdalena is
showing me far too much honour in using those words; but I would still
give my right hand for that lovely creature with her kindly soul. When,
just after Don Luis married her, his Majesty took her young husband
away, she entreated me most earnestly to look after him, and I could
sometimes be of assistance. To be sure, we broke many a piece of bread
together in war and peace in the same service. Ah, Frau Barbara! I am
far better off here than I deserve to be; but sometimes my heart is
ready to break when I think of my Emperor, and that I must leave the
care of him to others."

"But it is hard enough for the major-domo and his Majesty to do without
you," said Frau Traut importantly. "Don Luis, the letter says, would
gladly have written with his own hand, but he had not a single leisure
moment; for, since Adrian had gone, he was obliged to be at hand to
serve his Majesty by day as well as by night. My husband's successor,
Bodart, whom he trained for the service, is skilful and makes every
effort, but he can not replace Adrian to his suffering master."

Then Frau Traut looked more closely at the letter, and began to
translate its contents.

"Of course," she began, "San Yuste is not like Brussels; but if they
think there that his Majesty lives like a monk and submits to the rules
of the monastery, they are misinformed."

Here she lowered the sheet; but Barbara's cheeks were glowing with
impatient interest, and she exclaimed with urgent warmth: "Oh, please,
read on! But where--it is probably in the letter--where is our child?"

"One thing after the other, as the letter communicates it," replied the
translator in a reproving tone; but her husband nodded soothingly to
Barbara, and said:

"Only this first: Our John is near his father, and there is something
especially good about him toward the end. Dona Magdalena is a true
Castilian--first the King, then her husband, then the others according
to their rank. It is different here and in your country. Patience and
you, Frau Barbara, have been bad friends ever since I knew you."

Barbara's sorrowful smile confirmed this statement, and when Frau Traut
at last went on, the tone of her voice betrayed how little she liked
interruptions just now.

"You were informed of his Majesty's safe landing at Quiposcoa. It was
pitiful to see how the people in his train who did not belong to the
number of those who were to accompany him to Jarandilla behaved at the
parting from their beloved master. The body-guards flung their halberds
on the pavement, and there were plenty of tears and lamentations. On
St. Blasius's day--[February 3, 1557]--his Majesty at last entered
San Yuste. Don Luis, as you know, had gone before to get the house in
readiness for his master. One could scarcely imagine a pleasanter spot,
for there is no greener valley than that of San Yuste in the whole range
of the Carpetano Mountains, nay, perhaps in all Spain. It is difficult
to describe how everything is growing and blossoming here now, in the
month of May. The little garden of the house is well kept and full of
beautiful orange trees. While blossoming, they exhale the most exquisite
perfume, and his Majesty enjoys the delicious fragrance which the wind
bears to him.

"In your noisy Brussels it is hard to imagine how quiet it can be here,
dear Senor Adrian. Nothing is to be heard save the carol of a bird, the
rippling of a clear stream flowing swiftly through the valley, and at
intervals the distinct notes of the little bells and cymbals upon the
clocks which his Majesty brought with him. Even their ticking is often
audible. At certain hours the ringing of the monastery bells blends
solemnly and softly with the silence. The Hieronymites in the monastery
are pious monks. His Majesty sometimes listens to their choir. Its music
is very fine since Sir Wolf Hartschwert, whom you also know, has taken
charge of it.

"From all this, you will perceive that the master, with whom your
faithful soul doubtless often dwells, is supplied--restricted by no
monastic discipline--with whatever suits his taste. He frequently
devotes himself for hours to religious exercises, and also retires
to the black-draped room with the coffin, which you know; but the old
industry and secular cares pursued him here. Mounted messengers come and
go continually, but they are not allowed to remain near the house.

"Even in Brussels he can scarcely have written and answered more letters
than he does here.

"If only the body would prosper as well as the mind. That is as active
and alert as ever. But the body--the body! O Senor Adrian! I fear that
the end is not far distant, although our royal sufferer looks better
than at his arrival.

"'The eating!' Dr. Mathys complains; but you know well enough how that
is.

"Three days have passed since I began this letter. You are aware of most
of what concerns your beloved master; now for my husband.

"He has never had service so arduous as here, for the grand prior, Don
Luis de Avila, is nothing to his Majesty except a dear old brother in
arms, with whom he is fond of talking about the past. Everything rests
on my poor husband. He said, a short time ago, that he would no longer
endure playing the host to everybody who comes to San Yuste, being agent
for everybody in Spain who desires anything from the Emperor Charles,
and at the same time constantly caring for the person of the sick
sovereign. This life, he thinks, may suit a person who has taken
leave of his property and the world, but he still clings to both, and
especially to me, the poor wife who has been parted from him so long. He
has served the Emperor twenty-five years, and during this time he lost
all his brothers in the war. The estates came to him, and how long they
have already been deprived of the master's eye!

"Don Luis told the Emperor Charles all this, yet he refused him leave
of absence to go to Villagarcia. Instead, I was obliged to move near
my husband, and am now living with Geronimo, in the wretched village of
Cuacos, which is easily reached from San Yuste. There I finally arrived
with the boy whom the Virgin, in her inexhaustible mercy, gave to me,
a poor, childless woman, to make me happy, although on his account I
wronged my lord and husband by a sinful suspicion.

"Here I must begin my letter for the third time.

"It was fortunate that Geronimo left Massi and Leganes, for he was
allowed to grow up there like a little savage. Before learning to obey,
he was permitted to command.--No one opposed him, so in Villagarcia the
first thing necessary was to accustom him to discipline, obedience, and
the manners of the nobles. The trouble was not great, and how richly the
boy rewarded it! He is now in his twelfth year, and how your good wife
would stare, Adrian, if she could see her nursling again! Do not suppose
that it is blind partiality when I say that few handsomer lads could
be found in all King Philip's dominions. His figure is slender and only
slightly above middle height; but how erect and noble is his bearing,
how symmetrically his pliant form is developing! His delicately cut
features and large blue eyes glow with the bold courage which fills his
soul, and which he displays in riding, hunting, and fencing. He still
has his wealth of fair, waving locks. Among a thousand other boys no one
will overlook him. Don Luis, too, admits that he was born to dignity
and honour. Every chivalrous and royal virtue is in his blood. Even his
mother could not sully it."

Here Frau Traut paused to look at Barbara, who had listened, panting for
breath.

She was sorry that she had not omitted the last sentence, but in the
zeal of translating it had unconsciously escaped her lips, and, as she
found no softening word, she went on:

"Geronimo has become a dear child to me. He thinks that I am his own
mother, and clings to me with filial affection. To lead such a son to
this august father was the greatest joy that Heaven has bestowed upon
me.

"Dressed as my page, he rode with me to Jarandilla to meet his Majesty.
He was to present to the imperial master, of whose near relationship
he had no idea, a little basket filled with beautiful oranges from our
garden in Villagarcia, which you know.

"The young horseman, who understands how to wheel his steed, swung
himself from the saddle close beside his Majesty, bent the knee with
noble grace, raised his little plumed hat, and, pressing his left hand
upon his heart, presented the little gift to his sovereign and master.
As the weather was mild, the latter sat in an open sedan chair, and when
he saw Geronimo he scanned him with the keen glance of the ruler, and
then looked inquiringly at my husband. Don Luis nodded the answer which
he desired to receive, and a bright smile flitted over his emaciated,
corpselike features. Then he accepted the oranges, stroked his son's
curls, addressed a few questions to him, which he answered modestly but
aptly, and then called to my husband, 'This boy must remain near me.'

"Oh, what pleasure all this gave me! Now Geronimo goes in and out of his
Majesty's apartments freely, and my reason for writing this letter is an
incident I happened to witness, and which will please you, Adrian, and
your good wife, as it filled my heart with fervent gratitude. So listen:
When the Emperor meets Geronimo in the presence of strangers, he seems
to take neither more nor less notice of him than of the other pages who
come to San Yuste. Only he often calls him, asks a question, or gives
him some trivial commission. Others would scarcely notice it, but I see
the brightening of his eyes as he does so.

"Recently I looked through the open door which leads from his Majesty's
work-room into the garden, and what did the Virgin permit me to
behold?--Geronimo, who was alone with the Emperor, picked up a sheet of
paper that had fluttered to the ground and handed it to him. Then
the Emperor Charles suddenly raised his poor hands oh, how they are
disfigured by the gout!--laid them on the boy's temples, drew his head
nearer, and kissed his brow and eyes! Charles V, the fugitive from the
world, the man crushed by sorrow and disappointment, did that! This
kiss--Don Luis believes it also--sealed the son's acceptance into his
father's heart."

Here Frau Traut let the sheet fall. Her voice had failed during the last
sentences; now she exclaimed amid her tears, "The Emperor's kiss!" and
her husband, no less deeply stirred by emotion, cried, "The Emperor
Charles--no one knows as well as I what that means--the Emperor Charles,
whose heart compels him to kiss some one."

Here Barbara rose with flushed cheeks, panting for breath.

She felt as if she must cry aloud to these good people: "What do you
know about my lover's kiss? I, I alone, not you, you poor, good man,
could tell you. Insignificant and wretched as I may be, no woman on
earth can boast of prouder memories, and now that he has also kissed his
