



CHAPTER XIII.

Shortly after sunset Appenzelder received the order to have the boy choir
sing before the Emperor.

During the noon hour, which the monarch had spent alone, thoughts so sad,
bordering upon melancholy, had visited him, although for several hours he
had been free from pain, that he relinquished his resentful intention of
showing his undutiful sister how little he cared for her surprise and how
slight was his desire to enjoy music.

In fact, he, too, regarded it as medicine, and hoped especially for
a favourable effect from the exquisite soprano voice in the motet "Tu
pulchra es."

He still had some things to look over with Granvelle, but the orchestra
and the boy choir must be ready by ten o'clock.

Would it not have been foolish to bear this intolerable, alarming mood
until the midnight meal?  It must be dispelled, for he himself perceived
how groundless it was.  The pain had passed away, the despatches
contained no bad news, and Dr. Mathys had permitted him to go out the
next day.  When Adrian already had his hand on the door knob, he called
after him, "And Appenzelder must see that the exquisite new voice--he
knows--is heard."

Soon after, when Granvelle had just left him, the steward, Malfalconnet,
entered, and, in spite of the late hour--the Nuremberg clock on the
writing table had struck nine some time before--asked an audience for Sir
Wolf Hartschwert, one of her Highness the regent's household, to whom she
committed the most noiseless and the most noisy affairs, namely, the
secret correspondence and the music.

"The German?" asked Charles, and as the baron, with a low bow, assented,
the Emperor continued: "Then it is scarcely an intrigue, at any rate a
successful one, unless he is unlike the usual stamp.  But no!  I noticed
the man.  There is something visionary about him, like most of the
Germans.  But I have never seen him intoxicated."

"Although he is of knightly lineage, and, as I heard, at home in the
neighbourhood of the Main, where good wine matures," remarked
Malfalconnet, with another bow.  "At this moment he looks more than
sober, rather as though some great fright had roused him from a carouse.
Poor knight!"

"Ay, poor knight!" the Emperor assented emphatically.  "To serve my
sister of Hungary in one position may be difficult for a man who is no
sportsman, and now in two!  God's death!  These torments on earth will
shorten his stay in purgatory."

The Emperor Charles had spoken of his sister in a very different tone the
day before, but now she remained away from him and kept with her a friend
whom he greatly needed, so he repaid her for it.

Therefore, with a shrug of the shoulders expressive of regret, he added,
"However badly off we may be ourselves, there is always some one with
whom we would not change places."

"Were I, the humblest of the humble, lucky enough to be in your Majesty's
skin," cried the baron gaily, "I wouldn't either.  But since I am only
poor Malfalconnet, I know of nobody--and I'm well acquainted with Sir
Wolf--who seems to me more enviable than your Majesty."

"Jest, or earnest?" asked the Emperor.

"Earnest, deep, well-founded earnest," replied the other with an upward
glance whose solemn devotion showed the sovereign that mischief was
concealed behind it.  "Let your Majesty judge for yourself.  He is a
knight of good family, and looks like a plain burgher.  His name is Wolf
Hartschwert, and he is as gentle as a lamb and as pliant as a young
willow.  He appears like the meek, whom our Lord calls blessed, and yet
he is one of the wisest of the wise, and, moreover, a master in his art.
Wherever he shows himself, delusion follows delusion, and every one
redounds to his advantage, for whoever took him for an insignificant man
must doff his hat when he utters his name.  If a shrewd fellow supposed
that this sheep would not know A from B, he'll soon give him nuts to
crack which are far too hard for many a learned master of arts.  Nobody
expects chivalric virtues and the accompanying expenditure from this
simple fellow; yet he practises them, and, when he once opens his hand,
people stare at him as they do at flying fish and the hen that lays a
golden egg.  Appreciative surprise gazes at him, beseeching forgiveness,
wherever he is known, as surely as happy faces welcome your Majesty's
entry into any Netherland city.  Fortune, lavish when she once departs
from her wonted niggardliness, guards this her favourite child from
disappointment and misconstruction."

"The blessing of those who are more than they seem," replied the Emperor.

"That is his also," sighed Malfalconnet.  "That man, your Majesty, and I
the poorest of the poor!  I was born a baron, and, as the greatest piece
of good fortune, obtained the favour of my illustrious master.  Now
everybody expects from me magnificence worthy of my ancient name, and a
style of living in keeping with the much-envied grace that renders me
happy.  But if your Majesty's divine goodness did not sometimes pay my
debts, which are now a part of me as the tail belongs to the comet--"

"Oho!" cried the Emperor here.  "If that is what is coming--"

"Do I look so stupid," interrupted the baron humbly, "as to repeat to-day
things which yesterday did not wholly fail to make an impression upon
your Majesty?"

"They would find deaf cars," Charles replied.  "You are certainly less
destitute of brains than of money, because you lack system.  One proceeds
in a contrary direction from the other.  Besides, your ancient name,
though worthy of all honour, does not inspire the most favourable
impression.  Malfalconnet!  Mal is evil, and falconnet--or is it
falconnelle?--is a cruel, greedy bird of prey.  So whoever encounters
no evil from you, whoever escapes you unplucked, also enjoys a pleasant
surprise.  As for not being plucked, I, at least, unfortunately have not
experienced this.  But we will not cloud by too long waiting the good
fortune of the gentleman outside who was born under such lucky stars.
What brings the Wolf in sheep's clothing to us?"

"One would almost suppose," replied the baron with a crafty smile, "that
he was coming to-day on a useless errand, and meant to apply to your
Majesty for the payment of his debts."

Here the Emperor interrupted him with an angry gesture; but Malfalconnet
went on soothingly: "However, there is nothing to be feared from lambs in
sheep's clothing.  Just think, your Majesty, how warm they must be in
their double dress!  No; he comes from the musicians, and apparently
brings an important message."

"Admit him, then," the Emperor commanded.  A few minutes later Wolf stood
before the sovereign, and, in Appenzelder's name, informed him in a tone
of sincere regret, yet with a certain degree of reserve, that the
performance of the choir boys that day would leave much to be desired,
for two of the best singers had not yet recovered.

"But the substitute, the admirable substitute?"  Charles impatiently
interrupted.

"That is just what troubles us," Wolf replied uneasily.  "The magnificent
new voice wishes to desert the maestro to-night."

"Desert?"  cried the Emperor angrily.  "A choir boy in the service of her
Majesty the Queen of Hungary!  So there is still something new under the
sun."

"Certainly," replied Wolf with a low bow, still striving, in obedience to
the regent's strict command, not to reveal the sex of the new member of
the choir.  "And this case is especially unusual.  This voice is not in
her Majesty's service.  It belongs to a volunteer, as it were, a native
of this city, whose wonderful instrument and rare ability we discovered.
But, begging your Majesty's pardon, the soul of such an artist is a
strange thing, inflammable and enthusiastic, but just as easily wounded
and disheartened."

"The soul of a boy!" cried Charles contemptuously.  "Appenzelder does not
look like a man who would permit such whims."

"Not in his choir, certainly," said the young nobleman.  "But this voice
--allow me to repeat it--is not at his disposal.  It was no easy matter
to obtain it at all, and, keenly as the maestro disapproves of the
caprices of this beautiful power, he can not force it--the power, I mean
--to the obedience which his boys----"

Here the Emperor laughed shrilly.  "The power, the voice!  The
songstress, you should say.  This whimsical volunteer with the voice of
an angel, who is so tenderly treated by rough Appenzelder, is a woman,
not a refractory choir boy.  How you are blushing!  You have proved a
very inapt pupil in the art of dissimulation and disguise in my royal
sister's service.  Really and truly, I am right!"

Here another bow from Wolf confirmed the Emperor's conjecture; but the
latter, highly pleased with his own penetration, laughed softly,
exclaimin, to the baron: "Where were our ears?  This masquerade is surely
the work of the Queen, who so dearly loves the chase.  And she forbade
you too, Malfalconnet, to give me your confidence?"  Again a silent bow
assented.

The Emperor bent his eyes on the ground a short time, and then said, half
in soliloquy: "It was not possible otherwise.  Whence could a boy learn
the ardent, yearning longing of which that 'Quia amore langueo' was so
full?  And the second, less powerful voice, which accompanied her, was
that a girl's too?  No?  Yet that also, I remember, had a suggestion of
feminine tenderness.  But only the marvellously beautiful melody of one
haunted me.  I can hear it still.  The irresistible magic of this 'Amore
langueo' mingled even in my conversation with Granvelle."

Then he passed his hand across his lofty brow, and in a different tone
asked Wolf, "So it is a girl, and a native of this city?"

"Yes, your Majesty," was the reply.

"And, in spite of the praise of the gracious mother of God, a Protestant,
like the other fools in this country?"

"No, my lord," replied the nobleman firmly; "a pious Catholic Christian."

"Of what rank?"

"She belongs, through both parents, to a family of knightly lineage,
entitled to bear a coat-of-arms and appear in the lists at tournaments.
Her father has drawn his sword more than once in battle against the
infidels--at the capture of Tunis, under your own eyes, your Majesty, and
in doing so he unfortunately ruined the prosperity of his good, ancient
house."

"What is his name?"

"Wolfgang Blomberg."

"A big, broad-shouldered German fighter, with a huge mustache and pointed
beard.  Shot in the leg and wounded in the shoulder.  Pious, reckless,
with the courage of a lion.  Afterward honoured with the title of
captain."

Full of honest amazement at such strength of memory, Wolf endeavoured to
express his admiration; but the imperial general interrupted him with
another question, "And the daughter?  Does her appearance harmonize with
her voice?"

"I think so," replied Wolf in an embarrassed tone.

"Wonderfully beautiful and very aristocratic," said the baron, completing
the sentence, and raising the tips of his slender fingers to his lips.

But this gesture seemed to displease his master, for he turned from him,
and, looking the young Ratisbon knight keenly in the face, asked
suspiciously, "She is full of caprices--I am probably right there also
--and consequently refuses to sing?"

"Pardon me, your Majesty," replied Wolf eagerly.  "If I understand her
feelings, she had hoped to earn your Majesty's approval, and when she
received no other summons, nay, when your Majesty for the second time
countermanded your wish to hear the boy choir, she feared that her art
had found no favour in your Majesty's trained ears, and, wounded and
