her will and harmed no one except herself, not even the wife who was so
sure of her husband.  How could she have presumed to dispute with her the
possession of Herr Lienhard's love?  Yet it seemed an insult that Frau
Katharina had no fear that she could menace her happiness.  Could the
former know that Kuni would have been content with so little--a tender
impulse of his heart, a kiss, a hasty embrace?  That would do the other
no injury.  In the circles whence she had been brought no one grudged
another such things.  How little, she thought, would have been taken from
the wealthy Katharina by the trifling gift which would have restored to
her happiness and peace.  The fact that Lienhard, though he never failed
to notice her, would not understand, and always maintained the same
pleasant, aristocratic reserve of manner, she sometimes attributed to
fear, sometimes to cruelty, sometimes to arrogance; she would not believe
that he saw in her only a person otherwise indifferent to him, whom he
wished to accustom to the mode of life which he and his friends believed
to be the right path, pleasing in the sight of God.  Love, feminine
vanity, the need of approval, her own pride--all opposed this view.

When the last snow of winter had melted, and the spring sunshine of April
was unfolding the green leafage and opening bright flowers in the
meadows, the hedges, the woods, and the gardens, she found the new home
which she had entered during the frosts of February, and whose solid
walls excluded every breath of air, more and more unendurable.  A gnawing
feeling of homesickness for the free out-of-door life, the wandering from
place to place, the careless, untrammelled people to whom she belonged,
took possession of her.  She felt as though everything which surrounded
her was too small, the house, the apartments, her own chamber, nay, her
very clothing.  Only the hope of the first token that Lienhard was not so
cold and unconquerable as he seemed, that she would at last constrain him
to pass the barrier which separated them, still detained her.

Then came the day when, to avoid answering his question whether she
needed anything, she had gone into the garden.  Before reaching the
children, who were playing among the crocuses and tulips, she had said
to herself that she must leave this house--it was foolish, nay mad, to
continue to cherish the hope which had brought her hither.  She would
suffer keenly in tearing it from her heart, but a wild delight seized her
at the thought that this imprisonment would soon be over, that she would
be free once more, entirely her own mistress, released from every
restraint and consideration.  How rapturous was the idea that she would
soon be roving through the fields and woods again with gay, reckless
companions!  Was there anything more pleasurable than to forget herself,
and devote her whole soul to the execution of some difficult and
dangerous feat, to attract a thousand eyes by her bewitching grace, and,
sustained by her enthusiasm, force a thousand hearts to throb anxiously
and give loud applause as she flew over the rope?

Never had the children seen her more extravagantly gay than after her
resolve to leave them.  Yet when, at a late hour, Kuni went to bed, the
old housekeeper heard her weeping so piteously in her chamber that she
rose to ask what had happened.  But the girl did not even open her door,
and declared that she had probably had the nightmare.

During the next few days she sometimes appeared more cheerful and docile,
sometimes more dull and troubled than her household companions had ever
seen her.  Frau Schurstab shook her head over her protegee's varying
moods.  But when the month of May began, and Lienhard told his aunt that
Loni, who had only remained in Nuremberg during Lent to spend the time
when all public performances were prohibited, had applied to the Council
for permission to give exhibitions with his company Easter week in the
Haller Meadows, the matron was troubled about her protegee's peace of
mind.  Her nephew had had the same thought, and advised her to move to
her country estate, that Kuni might see and hear nothing of the jugglers;
but she had noticed the clown with other members of the company, as they
passed through the streets on foot and mounted on horses and donkeys,
inviting the people, with blare of trumpets and beating of drums, to
witness the wonderful feats which Loni's famous band of artists would
perform.

Then Kuni packed her bundle.  But when she heard the next morning that,
before going to the country, Frau Schurstab would attend the christening
of her youngest grandson, and spend the whole day with the daughter who
was the little boy's mother, she untied it.

One sunny May morning she was left alone, as she had expected.  She could
not be invited to the ceremony with the other guests, and she would not
join the servants.  The housekeeper and most of the men and maids had
accompanied their mistress to help in the kitchen and to wait upon the
visitors.  Deep silence reigned throughout the great empty house, but
Kuni's heart had never throbbed so loudly.  If Lienhard came now, her
fate would be decided, and she knew that he must come.  Just before noon,
he really did rap with the knocker on the outer door.  He wanted the
christening gift, which Frau Schurstab had forgotten to take for the
infant.  The money was in the chest in the matron's room.  Kuni led the
way.  The house seemed to reel around her as she went up the stairs
behind him.  The next moment, she felt, must decide her destiny.

Now he laid his hand upon the doorknob, now he opened the door.  The
widow's chamber was before her.  Thick silk curtains shut out the bright
May sunshine from the quiet room.  How warm and pleasant it was!

She already saw herself in imagination kneeling by his side before the
chest to help him search.  While doing so, his fingers might touch hers,
perhaps her hair might brush against his.  But, instead of entering, he
turned to her with careless unconcern, saying:

"It is fortunate that I have found you alone.  Will you do me a favour,
girl?"

He had intended to ask her to help him prepare a surprise for his aunt.
The day after to-morrow was Frau Sophia Schurstab's birthday.  Early in
the morning she must find among her feathered favourites a pair of rare
India fowls, which he had received from Venice.

As Kuni did not instantly assent, because the wild tumult of her blood
paralyzed her tongue, he noticed her confusion, and in an encouraging
tone, gaily continued:

"What I have to ask is not too difficult."  As he spoke he passed his
hand kindly over her dark hair, just as he had done a few months before
in the Town Hall.

Then the blood mounted to her brain.  Clasping his right hand, beneath
whose touch she had just trembled, in both her own, she passionately
exclaimed:

"Ask whatever you desire.  If you wanted to trample my heart under your
feet, I would not stir."

A look of ardent love from her sparkling blue eyes accompanied the words;
but he had withdrawn his hand in astonishment, and raised a lofty barrier
between them by answering coldly and sternly, "Keep the heart and your
dainty self for the equerry Seifried who is an honest man."

The advice, and the lofty austerity with which it was given, pierced Kuni
like the thrust of a dagger.  Yet she succeeded controlling herself, and,
without a word reply, preceded the harsh man into the sleeping room and
silently, tearlessly, pointed the chest.  When he had taken out the
money, she bowed hastily and ran down the stairs.

Probably she heard him call her name more than three times; doubtless,
afterward she fancied that she remembered how his voice had sounded in
beseeching, tender, at last even imperious tones through the empty
corridors; but she did not turn, and hurried into her room.




CHAPTER V.

When, on the evening of the christening day, Lienhard accompanied his
aunt home, Kuni was nowhere to be found.  Frau Sophia discovered in her
chamber every article of clothing which she had obtained for her, even
the beaver cap, the prayer-book, and the rosary which she had given.
The young burgomaster, at her request, went to the manager of the rope-
dancers, Loni, the next morning, but the latter asserted that he knew
nothing about the girl.  The truth was that he had sent her to Wurzburg
with part of his company.

From that time she had remained with the ropedancers.  At first the
master had watched her carefully, that she might not run away again.  But
he soon perceived this to be unnecessary; for he had never found any
member of the company more zealous, or seen one make more progress in the
art.  Now the only point was to keep her out of the way of other rope-
dancers, English proprietors of circus companies, as well as the numerous
knights and gentlemen who tried to take her from him.  Her name had
become famous.  When the crier proclaimed that the "flying maiden" would
ascend the rope to the steeple, Loni was sure of a great crowd of
spectators.  Among her own profession she had obtained the nickname of
crazy Kuni.

Yet even at that time, and in the midst of the freest intercourse with
German, Spanish, and other officers in Flanders and Brabant, young
knights and light-hearted priests on the Rhine, the Main, the Danube, the
Weser, and the Elbe, whose purses the pretty, vivacious girl, with the
shining raven hair and bright blue eyes, the mistress of her art, seemed
to their owners worthy to empty, she had by no means forgotten Lienhard.
This wrought mischief to many a gay gentleman of aristocratic lineage in
the great imperial and commercial cities; for it afforded Kuni special
pleasure to try her power upon Lienhard's equals in rank.  When she went
on with the company, more than one patrician had good reason to remember
her with regret; for she, who shared the lion's portion of her earnings
with her companions or flung it to the poor, was insatiably avaricious
toward these admirers.

The weaker she found many of them, the higher, in her opinion, rose the
image of him who had made her feel his manly strength of resistance so
cruelly.  His stern, inexorable nature seemed to her worthy of hate, yet
for three whole years the longing for him scarcely left her heart at
peace an hour.

During this whole period she had not met him.  Not until after she had
come to Augsburg, where Loni's company was to give several performances
before the assembled Reichstag, did she see him again.  Once she even
succeeded in attracting his gaze, and this was done in a way which
afforded her great satisfaction.  His beautiful wife, clad in costly
velvet robes, was walking by his side with eyes decorously downcast; but
he had surely recognised her--there was no doubt of that.  Yet he omitted
to inform his wife, even by a look, whom he had met here.  Kuni watched
the proud couple a long time, and, with the keen insight of a loving
heart, told herself that he would have pointed her out to Frau Katharina,
if he did not remember her in some way--either in kindness or in anger.

This little discovery had sufficed to transfigure, as it were, the rest
of the day, and awaken a throng of new hopes and questions.

Even now she did not desire to win Frau Katharina's husband from her.
She freely acknowledged that the other's beauty was tenfold greater than
