check, either of justice or humanity, upon the revengeful feelings of
Edward. All who know him are well assured that it is no ordinary motive
that will induce him to depart from the indulgence of his evil temper.
But be it as it may, you, lady, if a lady you be, throw yourself as a
burden upon me, and I must discharge myself of my trust as I best may;
for this purpose you must be guided implicitly by my directions, which
will be given after the fashion of those of the spiritual world, being
intimations, rather than detailed instructions for your conduct, and
expressed rather by commands, than, by any reason or argument. In this
way it is possible that I may be of service to you; in any other case,
it is most likely that I may fail you at need, and melt from your side
like a phantom which dreads the approach of day."

"You cannot be so cruel!" answered the lady. "A gentleman, a knight,
and a nobleman--and I persuade myself I speak to all--hath duties which
he cannot abandon."

"He has, I grant it, and they are most sacred to me," answered the
Spectral Knight; "but I have also duties whose obligations are doubly
binding, and to which I must sacrifice those which would otherwise lead
me to devote myself to your rescue. The only question is whether you
feel inclined to accept my protection on the limited terms on which
alone I can extend it, or whether you deem it better that each go their
own way, and limit themselves to their own resources, and trust the
rest to Providence?" "Alas!" replied the lady, "beset and hard pressed
as I am, to ask me to form a resolution for myself, is like calling on
the wretch in the act of falling from a precipice, to form a calm
judgment by what twig he may best gain the chance of breaking his fall.
His answer must necessarily be, that he will cling to that which he can
easiest lay hold of, and trust the rest to Providence. I accept
therefore your offer of protection in the modified way you are pleased
to limit it, and I put my faith in Heaven and in you. To aid me
effectually, however, you must know my name and my circumstances."

"All these," answered the Knight of the Sepulchre, "have already been
told me by your late companion; for deem not, young lady, that either
beauty, rank, extended domains, unlimited wealth, or the highest
accomplishments, can weigh any thing in the consideration of him who
wears the trappings of the tomb, and whose affections and desires are
long buried in the charnel-house."

"May your faith," said the Lady Augusta de Berkely, "be as steady as
your words appear severe, and I submit to your guidance, without the
least doubt or fear that it will prove otherwise than as I venture to
hope."




CHAPTER THE FIFTEENTH.


Like the dog following its master, when engaged in training him to the
sport in which he desires he should excel, the Lady Augusta felt
herself occasionally treated with a severity, calculated to impress
upon her the most implicit obedience and attention to the Knight of the
Tomb, in whom she had speedily persuaded herself she saw a principal
man among the retainers of Douglas, if not James of Douglas himself.
Still, however, the ideas which the lady had formed of the redoubted
Douglas, were those of a knight highly accomplished in the duties of
chivalry, devoted in particular to the service of the fair sex, and
altogether unlike the personage with whom she found herself so
strangely united, or rather for the present enthralled to.
Nevertheless, when, as if to abridge farther communication, he turned
short into one of the mazes of the wood, and seemed to adopt a pace,
which, from the nature of the ground, the horse on which the Lady
Augusta was mounted had difficulty to keep up with, she followed him
with the alarm and speed of the young spaniel, which from fear rather
than fondness, endeavours to keep up with the track of its severe
master. The simile, it is true, is not a very polite one, nor entirely
becoming an age, when women were worshipped with a certain degree of
devotion; but such circumstances as the present were also rare, and the
Lady Augusta de Berkely could not but persuade herself that the
terrible champion, whose name had been so long the theme of her
anxiety, and the terror indeed of the whole country, might be able,
some way or other, to accomplish her deliverance. She, therefore,
exerted herself to the utmost, so as to keep pace with the phantom-like
apparition, and followed the knight, as the evening shadow keeps watch
upon the belated rustic.

As the lady obviously suffered under the degree of exertion necessary
to keep her palfrey from stumbling in these steep and broken paths, the
Knight of the Tomb slackened his pace, looked anxiously around him, and
muttered apparently to himself, though probably intended for his
companion's ear, "There is no occasion for so much haste."

He proceeded at a slower rate, until they seemed to be on the brink of
a ravine, being one of many irregularities on the surface of the
ground, effected by the sudden torrents peculiar to that country, and
which, winding among the trees and copse-wood, formed, as it were, a
net of places of concealment, opening into each other, so that there
was perhaps no place in the world so fit for the purpose of ambuscade.
The spot where the borderer Turnbull had made his escape at the hunting
match, was one specimen of this broken country, and perhaps connected
itself with the various thickets and passes through which the knight
and pilgrim occasionally seemed to take their way, though that ravine
was at a considerable distance from their present route.

Meanwhile the knight led the way, as if rather with the purpose of
bewildering the Lady Augusta amidst these interminable woods, than
following any exact or fixed path. Here they ascended, and anon
appeared to descend in the same direction, finding only boundless
wildernesses, and varied combinations of tangled woodland scenery. Such
part of the country as seemed arable, the knight appeared carefully to
avoid; yet he could not direct his course with so much certainty but
that he occasionally crossed the path of inhabitants and cultivators,
who showed a consciousness of so singular a presence, but never as the
lady observed evinced any symptoms of recognition. The inference was
obvious, that the spectre knight was known in the country, and that he
possessed adherents or accomplices there, who were at least so far his
friends, as to avoid giving any alarm, which might be the means of his
discovery. The well-imitated cry of the night-owl, too frequent a guest
in the wilderness that its call should be a subject of surprise, seemed
to be a signal generally understood among them; for it was heard in
different parts of the wood, and the Lady Augusta, experienced in such
journeys by her former travels under the guidance of the minstrel
Bertram, was led to observe, that on hearing such wild notes, her guide
changed the direction of his course, and betook himself to paths which
led through deeper wilds, and more impenetrable thickets. This happened
so often, that a new alarm came upon the unfortunate pilgrim, which
suggested other motives of terror. Was she not the confidant, and
almost the tool of some artful design, laid with a view to an extensive
operation, which was destined to terminate, as the efforts of Douglas
had before done, in the surprise of his hereditary castle, the massacre
of the English garrison--and finally in the dishonour and death of that
Sir John de Walton, upon whose fate she had long believed, or taught
herself to believe, that her own was dependent?

It no sooner flashed across the mind of the Lady Augusta that she was
engaged in some such conspiracy with a Scottish insurgent, than she
shuddered at the consequences of the dark transactions in which she had
now become involved, and which appeared to have a tendency so very
different from what she had at first apprehended.

The hours of the morning of this remarkable day, being that of Palm
Sunday, were thus drawn out in wandering from place to place; while the
Lady de Berkely occasionally interposed by petitions for liberty, which
she endeavoured to express in the most moving and pathetic manner, and
by offers of wealth and treasures, to which no answer whatever was
returned by her strange guide.

At length, as if worn out by his captive's importunity, the knight,
coming close up to the bridle-rein of the Lady Augusta, said in a
solemn tone--

"I am, as you may well believe, none of those knights who roam through
wood and wild, seeking adventures, by which I may obtain grace in the
eyes of a fair lady: Yet will I to a certain degree grant the request
which thou dost solicit so anxiously, and the arbitration of thy fate
shall depend upon the pleasure of him to whose will thou hast expressed
thyself ready to submit thine own. I will, on our arrival at the place
of our destination, which is now at hand, write to Sir John de Walton,
and send my letter, together with thy fair self, by a special
messenger. He will, no doubt, speedily attend our summons, and thou
shalt thyself be satisfied, that even he who has as yet appeared deaf
to entreaty, and insensible to earthly affections, has still some
sympathy for beauty and for virtue. I will put the choice of safety,
and thy future happiness, into thine own hands, and those of the man
whom thou hast chosen; and thou mayst select which thou wilt betwixt
those and misery."

While he thus spoke, one of those ravines or clefts in the earth seemed
to yawn before them, and entering it at the upper end, the spectre
knight, with an attention which he had not yet shown, guided the lady's
courser by the rein down the broken and steep path by which alone the
bottom of the tangled dingle was accessible.

When placed on firm ground after the dangers of a descent, in which her
palfrey seemed to be sustained by the personal strength and address of
the singular being who had hold of the bridle, the lady looked with
some astonishment at a place so well adapted for concealment as that
which she had now reached. It appeared evident that it was used for
this purpose, for more than one stifled answer was given to a very low
bugle-note emitted by the Knight of the Tomb; and when the same note
was repeated, about half a score of armed men, some wearing the dress
of soldiers, others those of shepherds and agriculturists, showed
themselves imperfectly, as if acknowledging the summons.




CHAPTER THE SIXTEENTH.


"Hail to you, my gallant friends!" said the Knight of the Tomb to his
companions, who seemed to welcome him with the eagerness of men engaged
in the same perilous undertaking. "The winter has passed over, the
festival of Palm Sunday is come, and as surely as the ice and snow of
this season shall not remain to chill the earth through the ensuing
summer, so surely we, in a few hours, keep our word to those southern
braggarts, who think their language of boasting and malice has as much
force over our Scottish bosoms, as the blast possesses over the autumn
fruits; but it is not so. While we choose to remain concealed, they may
as vainly seek to descry us, as a housewife would search for the needle
she has dropped among the withered foliage of yon gigantic oak. Yet a
few hours, and the lost needle shall become the exterminating sword of
the Genius of Scotland, avenging ten thousand injuries, and especially
the life of the gallant Lord Douglas, cruelly done to death as an exile
from his native country."

An exclamation between a yell and a groan burst from the assembled
retainers of Douglas, upon being reminded of the recent death of their
chieftain; while they seemed at the same time sensible of the necessity
of making little noise, lest they should give the alarm to some of the
numerous English parties which were then traversing different parts of
the forest. The acclamation, so cautiously uttered, had scarce died
away in silence, when the Knight of the Tomb, or, to call him by his
proper name, Sir James Douglas, again addressed his handful of faithful
followers.

"One effort, my friends, may yet be made to end our strife with the
Southron without bloodshed. Fate has within a few hours thrown into my
power the young heiress of Berkely, for whose sake it is said Sir John
de Walton keeps with such obstinacy the castle which is mine by
inheritance. Is there one among you who dare go, as the honourable
escort of Augusta de Berkely, bearing a letter, explaining the terms on
which I am willing to restore her to her lover, to freedom, and to her
English lordships?"

"If there is none other," said a tall man, dressed in the tattered
attire of a woodsman, and being, in fact, no other than the very
Michael Turnbull, who had already given so extraordinary a proof of his
undaunted manhood, "I will gladly be the person who will be the lady's
henchman on this expedition."

"Thou art never wanting," said the Douglas, "where a manly deed is to
be done; but remember, this lady must pledge to us her word and oath
that she will hold herself our faithful prisoner, rescue or no rescue;
that she will consider herself as pledged for the life, freedom, and
fair usage of Michael Turnbull; and that if Sir John de Walton refuse
my terms, she must hold herself obliged to return with Turnbull to our
presence, in order to be disposed of at our pleasure."

There was much in these conditions, which struck the Lady Augusta with
natural doubt and horror; nevertheless, strange as it may seem, the
declaration of the Douglas gave a species of decision to her situation,
which might have otherwise been unattainable; and from the high opinion
which she entertained of the Douglas's chivalry, she could not bring
herself to think, that any part which he might play in the approaching
drama would be other than that which a perfect good knight would, under
all circumstances, maintain towards his enemy. Even with respect to De
Walton, she felt herself relieved of a painful difficulty. The idea of
her being discovered by the knight himself, in a male disguise, had
preyed upon her spirits; and she felt as if guilty of a departure from
the laws of womanhood, in having extended her favour towards him beyond
maidenly limits; a step, too, which might tend to lessen her in the
eyes of the lover for whom she had hazarded so much.

    "The heart, she said, is lightly prized,
       That is but lightly won;
     And Long shall mourn the heartless man,
       That leaves his love too soon."

On the other hand, to be brought before him as a prisoner, was indeed a
circumstance equally perplexing as unpleasing, but it was one which was
beyond her control, and the Douglas, into whose hands she had fallen,
appeared to her to represent the deity in the play, whose entrance was
almost sufficient to bring its perplexities to a conclusion; she
therefore not unwillingly submitted to take what oaths and promises
were required by the party in whose hands she found herself, and
accordingly engaged to be a true prisoner, whatever might occur.
Meantime she strictly obeyed the directions of those who had her
motions at command, devoutly praying that circumstances, in themselves
so adverse, might nevertheless work together for the safety of her
lover and her own freedom.

A pause ensued, during which a slight repast was placed before the Lady
Augusta, who was well-nigh exhausted with the fatigues of her journey.

Douglas and his partisans, meanwhile, whispered together, as if
unwilling she should hear their conference; while, to purchase their
good-will, if possible, she studiously avoided every appearance of
listening.

After some conversation, Turnbull, who appeared to consider the lady as
peculiarly his charge, said to her in a harsh voice, "Do not fear,
lady; no wrong shall be done you; nevertheless, you must be content for
a space to be blindfolded."

She submitted to this in silent terror; and the trooper, wrapping part
of a mantle round her head, did not assist her to remount her palfrey,
but lent her his arm to support her in this blinded state.




CHAPTER THE SEVENTEENTH.


The ground which they traversed was, as Lady Augusta could feel, very
broken and uneven, and sometimes, as she thought, encumbered with
ruins, which were difficult to surmount. The strength of her comrade
assisted her forward on such occasions; but his help was so roughly
administered, that the lady once or twice, in fear or suffering, was
compelled to groan or sigh heavily, whatever was her desire to suppress
such evidence of the apprehension which she underwent, or the pain
which she endured. Presently, upon an occasion of this kind, she was
distinctly sensible that the rough woodsman was removed from her side,
and another of the party substituted in his stead, whose voice, more
gentle than that of his companions, she thought she had lately heard.

"Noble lady," were the words, "fear not the slightest injury at our
hands, and accept of my ministry instead of that of my henchman, who
has gone forward with our letter; do not think me presuming on my
situation if I bear you in my arms through ruins where you could not
easily move alone and blindfold."

At the same time the Lady Augusta Berkely felt herself raised from the
earth in the strong arms of a man, and borne onward with the utmost
gentleness, without the necessity of making those painful exertions
which had been formerly required. She was ashamed of her situation;
but, however delicate, it was no time to give vent to complaints, which
might have given offence to persons whom it was her interest to
conciliate. She, therefore, submitted to necessity, and heard the
following words whispered in her ear.

"Fear nothing; there is no evil intended you; nor shall Sir John de
Walton, if he loves you as you deserve at his hand, receive any harm on
our part. We call on him but to do justice to ourselves and to you; and
be assured you will best accomplish your own happiness by aiding our
views, which are equally in favour of your wishes and your freedom."

The Lady Augusta would have made some answer to this, but her breath,
betwixt fear and the speed with which she was transported, refused to
permit her to use intelligible accents. Meantime she began to be
sensible that she was enclosed within some building, and probably a
ruinous one--for although the mode of her transportation no longer
permitted her to ascertain the nature of her path in any respect
distinctly, yet the absence of the external air--which was, however,
sometimes excluded, and sometimes admitted in furious gusts--intimated
that she was conducted through buildings partly entire, and in other
places admitting the wind through wide rents and gaps. In one place it
seemed to the lady as if she passed through a considerable body of
people, all of whom observed silence, although there was sometimes
heard among them a murmur, to which every one present in some degree
contributed, although the general sound did not exceed a whisper. Her
situation made her attend to every circumstance, and she did not fail
to observe that these persons made way for him who bore her, until at
length she became sensible that he descended by the regular steps of a
stair, and that she was now alone excepting his company. Arrived, as it
appeared to the lady, on more level ground, they proceeded on their
singular road by a course which appeared neither direct nor easy, and
through an atmosphere which was close to a smothering degree, and felt
at the same time damp and disagreeable, as if from the vapours of a
new-made grave. Her guide again spoke.

"Bear up, Lady Augusta, for a little longer, and continue to endure
that atmosphere which must be one day common to us all. By the
necessity of my situation, I must resign my present office to your
original guide, and can only give you my assurance, that neither he,
nor any one else, shall offer you the least incivility or insult--and
on this you may rely, on the faith of a man of honour."

He placed her, as he said these words, upon the soft turf, and, to her
infinite refreshment, made her sensible that she was once more in the
open air, and free from the smothering atmosphere which had before
oppressed her like that of a charnel-house. At the same time, she
breathed in a whisper an anxious wish that she might be permitted to
disencumber herself from the folds of the mantle which excluded almost
the power of breathing, though intended only to prevent her seeing by
what road she travelled. She immediately found it unfolded, agreeably
to her request, and hastened, with uncovered eyes, to take note of the
scene around her.

It was overshadowed by thick oak trees, among which stood some remnants
of buildings, or what might have seemed such, being perhaps the same in
which she had been lately wandering. A clear fountain of living water
bubbled forth from under the twisted roots of one of those trees, and
offered the lady the opportunity of a draught of the pure element, and
in which she also bathed her face, which had received more than one
scratch in the course of her journey, in spite of the care, and almost
the tenderness, with which she had latterly been borne along. The cool
water speedily stopt the bleeding of those trifling injuries, and the
application served at the same time to recall the scattered senses of
the damsel herself. Her first idea was, whether an attempt to escape,
if such should appear possible, was not advisable. A moment's
reflection, however, satisfied her that such a scheme was not to be
thought of; and such second thoughts were confirmed by the approach of
the gigantic form of the huntsman Turnbull, the rough tones of whose
voice were heard before his figure was obvious to her eye.

"Were you impatient for my return, fair lady? Such as I," he continued
in an ironical tone of voice, "who are foremost in the chase of wild
stags and silvan cattle, are not in use to lag behind, when fair
ladies, like you, are the objects of pursuit; and if I am not so
constant in my attendance as you might expect, believe me, it is
because I was engaged in another matter, to which I must sacrifice for
a little even the duty of attending on you."

"I offer no resistance," said the lady; "forbear, however, in
discharging thy duty, to augment my uneasiness by thy conversation, for
thy master hath pledged me his word that he will not suffer me to be
alarmed or ill treated."

"Nay, fair one," replied the huntsman, "I ever thought it was fit to
make interest by soft words with fair ladies; but if you like it not, I
have no such pleasure in hunting for fine holyday terms, but that I can
with equal ease hold myself silent. Come, then, since we must wait upon
this lover of yours ere morning closes, and learn his last resolution
touching a matter which is become so strangely complicated, I will hold
no more intercourse with you as a female, but talk to you as a person
of sense, although an Englishwoman."

"You will," replied the lady, "best fulfil the intentions of those by
whose orders you act, by holding no society with me whatever, otherwise
than is necessary in the character of guide."

The man lowered his brows, yet seemed to assent to what the Lady of
Berkely proposed, and remained silent as they for some time pursued
their course, each pondering over their own share of meditation, which
probably turned upon matters essentially different. At length the loud
blast of a bugle was heard at no great distance from the unsocial
fellow-travellers.

"That is the person we seek," said Turnbull; "I know his blast from any
other who frequents this forest, and my orders are to bring you to
speech of him."

The blood darted rapidly through the lady's veins at the thought of
being thus unceremoniously presented to the knight, in whose favour she
had confessed a rash preference more agreeable to the manners of those
times, when exaggerated sentiments often inspired actions of
extravagant generosity, than in our days, when every thing is accounted
absurd which does not turn upon a motive connected with the immediate
selfish interests of the actor himself. When Turnbull, therefore,
winded his horn, as if in answer to the blast which they had heard, the
lady was disposed to fly at the first impulse of shame and of fear.
Turnbull perceived her intention, and caught hold of her with no very
gentle grasp, saying--"Nay, lady, it is to be understood that you play
your own part in the drama, which, unless you continue on the stage,
will conclude unsatisfactorily to us all, in a combat at outrance
between your lover and me, when it will appear which of us is most
worthy of your favour."

"I will be patient," said the lady, bethinking her that even this
strange man's presence, and the compulsion which he appeared to use
towards her, was a sort of excuse to her female scruples, for coming
into the presence of her lover, at least at her first appearance before
him, in a disguise which her feelings confessed was not extremely
decorous, or reconcilable to the dignity of her sex.

The moment after these thoughts had passed through her mind, the tramp
of a horse was heard approaching; and Sir John de Walton, pressing
through the trees, became aware of the presence of his lady, captive,
as it seemed, in the grasp of a Scottish outlaw, who was only known to
him by his former audacity at the hunting-match.

His surprise and joy only supplied the knight with those hasty
expressions--"Caitiff, let go thy hold! or die in thy profane attempt
to control the motions of one whom the very sun in heaven should be
proud to obey." At the same time, apprehensive that the huntsman might
hurry the lady from his sight by means of some entangled path--such as
upon a former occasion had served him for escape Sir John de Walton
dropt his cumbrous lance, of which the trees did not permit him the
perfect use, and springing from his horse, approached Turnbull with his
drawn sword.

The Scotchman, keeping his left hand still upon the lady's mantle,
uplifted with his right his battle-axe, or Jedwood staff, for the
purpose of parrying and returning the blow of his antagonist, but the
lady spoke.

"Sir John de Walton," she said, "for heaven's sake, forbear all
violence, till you hear upon what pacific object I am brought hither,
and by what peaceful means these wars may be put an end to. This man,
though an enemy of yours, has been to me a civil and respectful
guardian; and I entreat you to forbear him while he speaks the purpose
for which he has brought me hither."

"To speak of compulsion and the Lady de Berkely in the same breath,
would itself be cause enough for instant death," said the Governor of
Douglas Castle; "but you command, lady, and I spare his insignificant
life, although I have causes of complaint against him, the least of
which were good warrant, had he a thousand lives, for the forfeiture of
them all."

"John de Walton," replied Turnbull, "this lady well knows that no fear
of thee operates in my mind to render this a peaceful meeting; and were
I not withheld by other circumstances of great consideration to the
Douglas as well as thyself, I should have no more fear in facing the
utmost thou couldst do, than I have now in levelling that sapling to
the earth it grows upon."

So saying, Michael Turnbull raised his battle-axe, and struck from a
neighbouring oak-tree a branch, wellnigh as thick as a man's arm, which
(with all its twigs and leaves) rushed to the ground between De Walton
and the Scotchman, giving a singular instance of the keenness of his
weapon, and the strength and dexterity with which he used it.

"Let there be truce, then, between us, good fellow," said Sir John de
Walton, "since it is the lady's pleasure that such should be the case,
and let me know what thou hast to say to me respecting her?"

"On that subject," said Turnbull, "my words are few, but mark them, Sir
Englishman. The Lady Augusta Berkely, wandering in this country, has
become a prisoner of the noble Lord Douglas, the rightful inheritor of
the Castle and lordship, and he finds himself obliged to attach to the
liberty of this lady the following conditions, being in all respects
such as good and lawful warfare entitles a knight to exact. That is to
say, in all honour and safety the Lady Augusta shall be delivered to
Sir John de Walton, or those whom he shall name, for the purpose of
receiving her. On the other hand, the Castle of Douglas itself,
together with all out-posts or garrisons thereunto belonging, shall be
made over and surrendered by Sir John de Walton, in the same situation,
and containing the same provisions and artillery, as are now within
their walls; and the space of a month of truce shall be permitted to
Sir James Douglas and Sir John de Walton farther to regulate the terms
of surrender on both parts, having first plighted their knightly word
and oath, that in the exchange of the honourable lady for the foresaid
castle, lies the full import of the present agreement, and that every
other subject of dispute shall, at the pleasure of the noble knights
foresaid, be honourably compounded and agreed betwixt them; or at their
pleasure, settled knightly by single combat according to usage, and in
a fair field, before any honourable person, that may possess power
enough to preside."

It is not easy to conceive the astonishment of Sir John de Walton at
hearing the contents of this extraordinary cartel; he looked towards
the Lady of Berkely with that aspect of despair with which a criminal
may be supposed to see his guardian angel prepare for departure.
Through her mind also similar ideas flowed, as if they contained a
concession of what she had considered as the summit of her wishes, but
under conditions disgraceful to her lover, like the cherub's fiery
sword of yore, which was a barrier between our first parents and the
blessings of Paradise. Sir John de Walton, after a moment's hesitation,
broke silence in these words:--

"Noble lady, you may be surprised if a condition be imposed upon me,
having for its object your freedom; and if Sir John de Walton, already
standing under those obligations to you, which he is proud of
acknowledging, should yet hesitate on accepting, with the utmost
eagerness, what must ensure your restoration to freedom and
independence; but so it is, that the words now spoken have thrilled in
mine ear without reaching to my understanding, and I must pray the Lady
of Berkely for pardon if I take time to reconsider them for a short
space."

"And I," replied Turnbull, "have only power to allow you half an hour
for the consideration of an offer, in accepting which, methinks, you
should jump shoulder-height instead of asking any time for reflection.
What does this cartel exact, save what your duty as a knight implicitly
obliges you to? You have engaged yourself to become the agent of the
tyrant Edward, in holding Douglas Castle, as his commander, to the
prejudice of the Scottish nation, and of the Knight of Douglas Dale,
who never, as a community or as an individual, were guilty of the least
injury towards you; you are therefore prosecuting a false path,
unworthy of a good knight. On the other hand, the freedom and safety of
your lady is now proposed to be pledged to you, with a full assurance
of her liberty and honour, on consideration of your withdrawing from
the unjust line of conduct, in which you have suffered yourself to be
imprudently engaged. If you persevere in it, you place your own honour,
and the lady's happiness, in the hands of men whom you have done
everything in your power to render desperate, and whom, thus irritated,
it is most probable you may find such."

"It is not from thee at least," said the knight, "that I shall learn to
estimate the manner in which Douglas will explain the laws of war, or
De Walton receive them at his dictating."

"I am not, then," said Turnbull, "received as a friendly messenger?
Farewell, and think of this lady as being in any hands but those which
are safe, while you make up at leisure your mind upon the message I
have brought you. Come, madam, we must be gone."

So saying, he seized upon the lady's hand, and pulled her, as if to
force her to withdraw. The lady had stood motionless, and almost
senseless, while these speeches were exchanged between the warriors;
but when she felt the grasp of Michael Turnbull, she exclaimed, like
one almost beside herself with fear--"Help me, De Walton!"

The knight, stung to instant rage, assaulted the forester with the
utmost fury, and dealt him with his long sword, almost at unawares, two
or three heavy blows, by which he was so wounded that he sunk backwards
in the thicket, and. De Walton was about to despatch him, when he was
prevented by the anxious cry of the lady--"Alas! De Walton, what have
you done? This man was only an ambassador, and should have passed free
from injury, while he confined himself to the delivery of what he was
charged with; and if thou hast slain him, who knows how frightful may
prove the vengeance exacted!"

The voice of the lady seemed to recover the huntsman from the effects
of the blows he had received: he sprung on his feet, saying--"Never
mind me, nor think of my becoming the means of making mischief. The
knight, in his haste, spoke without giving me warning and defiance,
which gave him an advantage which, I think, he would otherwise have
scorned to have taken, in such a case, I will renew the combat on
fairer terms, or call another champion, as the knight pleases." With
these words he disappeared.

"Fear not, empress of De Walton's thoughts," answered the knight, "but
believe, that if we regain together the shelter of Douglas Castle, and
the safeguard of Saint George's Cross, thou may'st laugh at all. And if
you can but pardon, what I shall never be able to forgive myself, the
mole-like blindness which did not recognise the sun while under a
temporary eclipse, the task cannot be named too hard for mortal valour
to achieve which I shall not willingly undertake, to wipe out the
memory of my grievous fault."

"Mention it no more," said the lady; "it is not at such a time
as--this, when our lives are for the moment at stake, that quarrels
upon slighter topics are to be recurred to. I can tell you, if you do
not yet know, that the Scots are in arms in this vicinity, and that
even the earth has yawned to conceal them from the sight of your
garrison."

"Let it yawn, then," said Sir John de Walton, "and suffer every fiend
in the infernal abyss to escape from his prison-house and reinforce our
enemies--still, fairest, having received in thee a pearl of matchless
price, my spurs shall be hacked from my heels by the basest scullion,
if I turn my horse's head to the rear before the utmost force these
ruffians can assemble, either upon earth or from underneath it. In thy
name I defy them all to instant combat."

As Sir John de Walton pronounced these last words, in something of an
exalted tone, a tall cavalier, arrayed in black armour of the simplest
form, stepped forth from that part of the thicket where Turnbull had
disappeared. "I am," he said, "James of Douglas, and your challenge is
accepted. I, the challenged, name the arms our knightly weapons as we
now wear them, and our place of combat this field or dingle, called the
Bloody Sykes, the time being instant, and the combatants, like true
knights, foregoing each advantage on either side." [Footnote: The
ominous name of Bloodmire-sink or Syke, marks a narrow hollow to the
north-west of Douglas Castle, from which it is distant about the third
of a mile. Mr. Haddow states, that according to local tradition, the
name was given in consequence of Sir James Douglas having at this spot
intercepted and slain part of the garrison of the castle, while De
Walton was in command.]

"So be it, in God's name," said the English knight, who, though
surprised at being called upon to so sudden an encounter with so
formidable a warrior as young Douglas, was too proud to dream of
avoiding the combat. Making a sign to the lady to retire behind him,
that he might not lose the advantage which he had gained by setting her
at liberty from the forester, he drew his sword, and with a deliberate
and prepared attitude of offence, moved slowly to the encounter. It was
a dreadful one, for the courage and skill both of the native Lord of
Douglas Dale, and of De Walton, among the most renowned of the times,
and perhaps the world of chivalry could hardly have produced two
knights more famous. Their blows fell as if urged by some mighty
engine, where they were met and parried with equal strength and
dexterity; nor seemed it likely, in the course of ten minutes'
encounter, that an advantage would be gained by either combatant over
the other. An instant they stopped by mutually implied assent, as it
seemed, for the purpose of taking breath, during which Douglas said, "I
beg that this noble lady may understand, that her own freedom is no way
concerned in the present contest, which entirely regards the injustice
done by this Sir John de Walton, and by his nation of England, to the
memory of my father, and to my own natural rights."

"You are generous, Sir Knight," replied the lady; "but in what
circumstances do you place me, if you deprive me of my protector by
death or captivity, and leave me alone in a foreign land?"

"If such should be the event of the combat," replied Sir James, "the
Douglas himself, lady, will safely restore thee to thy native land; for
never did his sword do an injury for which he was not willing to make
amends with the same weapon; and if Sir John de Walton will make the
slightest admission that he renounces maintaining the present strife,
were it only by yielding up a feather from the plume of his helmet,
Douglas will renounce every purpose on his part which can touch the
lady's honour or safety, and the combat may be suspended until the
national quarrel again brings us together."

Sir John de Walton pondered a moment, and the lady, although she did
not speak, looked at him with eyes which plainly expressed how much she
wished that he would choose the less hazardous alternative. But the
knight's own scruples prevented his bringing the case to so favourable
an arbitrement.

"Never shall it be said of Sir John de Walton," he replied, "that he
compromised, in the slightest degree, his own honour, or that of his
country. This battle may end in my defeat, or rather death, and in that
case my earthly prospects are closed, and I resign to Douglas, with my
last breath, the charge of the Lady Augusta, trusting that he will
defend her with his life, and find the means of replacing her with
safety in the halls of her fathers. But while I survive, she may have a
better, but will not need another protector than he who is honoured by
being her own choice; nor will I yield up, were it a plume from my
helmet, implying that I have maintained an unjust quarrel, either in
the cause of England, or of the fairest of her daughters. Thus far
alone I will concede to Douglas--an instant truce, provided the lady
shall not be interrupted in her retreat to England, and the combat be
fought out upon another day. The castle and territory of Douglas is the
property of Edward of England, the governor in his name is the rightful
governor, and on this point I will fight while my eyelids are unclosed."

"Time flies," said Douglas, "without waiting for our resolves; nor is
there any part of his motions of such value as that which is passing
with every breath of vital air which we presently draw. Why should we
adjourn till to-morrow that which can be as well finished today? Will
our swords be sharper, or our arms stronger to wield them, than they
are at this moment? Douglas will do all which knight can do to succour
a lady in distress; but he will not grant to her knight the slightest
mark of deference, which Sir John de Walton vainly supposes himself
able to extort by force of arms."

With these words, the knights engaged once more in mortal combat, and
the lady felt uncertain whether she should attempt her escape through
the devious paths of the wood, or abide the issue of this obstinate
fight. It was rather her desire to see the fate of Sir John de Walton,
than any other consideration, which induced her to remain, as if
fascinated, upon the spot, where one of the fiercest quarrels ever
fought--was disputed by two of the bravest champions that ever drew
sword. At last the lady attempted to put a stop to the combat, by
appealing to the bells which began to ring for the service of the day,
which was Palm Sunday.

"For Heaven's sake," she said--"for your own sakes, and for that of
lady's love, and the duties of chivalry, hold your hands only for an
hour, and take chance, that where strength is so equal, means will be
found of converting the truce into a solid peace. Think this is Palm
Sunday, and will you defile with blood such a peculiar festival of
Christianity! Intermit your feud at least so far as to pass to the
nearest church, bearing with you branches, not in the ostentatious mode
of earthly conquerors, but as rendering due homage to the rules of the
blessed Church, and the institutions of our holy religion."

"I was on my road, fair lady, for that purpose, to the holy church of
Douglas," said the Englishman, "when I was so fortunate as to meet you
at this place; nor do I object to proceed thither even, now, holding
truce for an hour, and I fear not to find there friends to whom I can
commit you with assurance of safety, in case I am unfortunate in the
combat which is now broken off, to be resumed after the service of the
day."

"I also assent," said the Douglas, "to a truce for such short space;
nor do I fear that there may be good Christians enough at the church,
who will not see their master overpowered by odds. Let us go thither,
and each take the chance of what Heaven shall please to send us."

From these words Sir John de Walton little doubted that Douglas had
assured himself of a party among those who should there assemble; but
he doubted not of so many of the garrison being present as would bridle
every attempt at rising; and the risk, he thought, was worth incurring,
since ha should thereby secure an opportunity to place Lady Augusta de
Berkely in safety, at least so far as to make her liberty depend on the
event of a general conflict, instead of the precarious issue of a
combat between himself and Douglas.

Both these distinguished knights were inwardly of opinion, that the
proposal of the lady, though it relieved them from their present
conflict, by no means bound them to abstain from the consequences which
an accession of force might add to their general strength, and each
relied upon his superiority, in some degree provided for by their
previous proceedings. Sir John de Walton made almost certain of meeting
with several of his bands of soldiers, who were scouring the country
and traversing the woods by his direction; and Douglas, it may be
supposed, had not ventured himself in person, where a price was set
upon his head, without being attended by a sufficient number of
approved adherents, placed in more or less connexion with each other,
and stationed for mutual support. Each, therefore, entertained
well-grounded hopes, that by adopting the truce proposed, he would
ensure himself an advantage over his antagonist, although neither
exactly knew in what manner or to what extent this success was to be
obtained.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH.

     His talk was of another world--his bodiments
     Strange, doubtful, and mysterious; those who heard him
     Listen'd as to a man in feverish dreams,
     Who speaks of other objects than the present,
     And mutters like to him who sees a vision.
                                                OLD PLAY.


On the same Palm Sunday when De Walton and Douglas measured together
their mighty swords, the minstrel Bertram was busied with the ancient
Book of Prophecies, which we have already mentioned as the supposed
composition of Thomas the Rhymer, but not without many anxieties as to
the fate of his lady, and the events which were passing around him. As
a minstrel he was desirous of an auditor to enter into the discoveries
which he should make in that mystic volume, as well as to assist in
passing away the time; Sir John de Walton had furnished him, in Gilbert
Greenleaf the archer, with one who was well contented to play the
listener "from morn to dewy eve," provided a flask of Gascon wine, or a
stoup of good English ale, remained on the board. It may be remembered
that De Walton, when he dismissed the minstrel from the dungeon, was
sensible that he owed him some compensation for the causeless suspicion
which had dictated his imprisonment, more particularly as he was a
valued servant, and had shown himself the faithful confidant of the
Lady Augusta de Berkely, and the person who was moreover likely to know
all the motives and circumstances of her Scottish journey. To secure
his good wishes was, therefore, politic; and De Walton had intimated to
his faithful archer that he was to lay aside all suspicion of Bertram,
but at the same time keep him in sight, and, if possible, in good
humour with the governor of the castle, and his adherents. Greenleaf
accordingly had no doubt in his own mind, that the only way to please a
minstrel was to listen with patience and commendation to the lays which
he liked best to sing, or the tales which he most loved to tell; and in
order to ensure the execution of his master's commands, he judged it
necessary to demand of the butler such store of good liquor, as could
not fail to enhance the pleasure of his society.

Having thus fortified himself with the means of bearing a long
interview with the minstrel, Gilbert Greenleaf proposed to confer upon
him the bounty of an early breakfast, which, if it pleased him, they
might wash down with a cup of sack, and, having his master's commands
to show the minstrel any thing about the castle which he might wish to
see, refresh their overwearied spirits by attending a part of the
garrison of Douglas to the service of the day, which, as we have
already seen, was of peculiar sanctity. Against such a proposal the
minstrel, a good Christian by profession, and, by his connexion with
the joyous science, a good fellow, having no objections to offer, the
two comrades, who had formerly little good-will towards each other,
commenced their morning's repast on that fated Palm Sunday, with all
manner of cordiality and good fellowship.

"Do not believe, worthy minstrel," said the archer, "that my master in
any respect disparages your worth or rank in referring you for company
or conversation to so poor a man as myself. It is true I am no officer
of this garrison; yet for an old archer, who, for these thirty years,
has lived by bow and bowstring, I do not (Our Lady make me thankful!)
hold less share in the grace of Sir John de Walton, the Earl of
Pembroke, and other approved good soldiers, than many of those giddy
young men on whom commissions are conferred, and to whom confidences
are intrusted, not on account of what they have done, but what their
ancestors have done before them. I pray you to notice among them one
youth placed at our head in De Walton's absence, and who bears the
honoured name of Aymer de Valence, being the same with that of the Earl
of Pembroke, of whom I have spoken; this knight has also a brisk young
page, whom men call Fabian Harbothel."

"Is it to these gentlemen that your censure applies?" answered the
minstrel; "I should have judged differently, having never, in the
course of my experience, seen a young man more courteous and amiable
than the young knight you named."

"I nothing dispute that it may be so," said the archer, hastening to
amend the false step which he had made; "but in order that it should be
so, it will be necessary that he conform to the usages of his uncle,
taking the advice of experienced old soldiers in the emergencies which
may present themselves; and not believing, that the knowledge which it
takes many years of observation to acquire, can be at once conferred by
the slap of the flat of a sword, and the magic words, 'Rise up, Sir
Arthur'--or however the case may be."

"Doubt not, Sir Archer," replied Bertram, "that I am fully aware of the
advantage to be derived from conversing with men of experience like
you: it benefiteth men of every persuasion, and I myself am oft reduced
to lament my want of sufficient knowledge of armorial bearings, signs,
and cognizances, and would right fain have thy assistance, where I am a
stranger alike to the names of places, of persons, and description of
banners and emblems by which great families are distinguished from each
other, so absolutely necessary to the accomplishment of my present
task."

"Pennons and banners," answered the archer, "I have seen right many,
and can assign, as is a soldier's wont, the name of the leader to the
emblem under which he musters his followers; nevertheless, worthy
minstrel, I cannot presume to understand what you call prophecies, with
or under warranted authority of old painted books, expositions of
dreams, oracles, revelations, invocations of damned spirits, judicials,
astrologicals, and other gross and palpable offences, whereby men,
pretending to have the assistance of the devil, do impose upon the
common people, in spite of the warnings of the Privy Council; not
however, that I suspect you, worthy minstrel, of busying yourself with
these attempts to explain futurity, which are dangerous attempts, and
may be truly said to be penal, and part of treason."

"There is something in what you say," replied the minstrel; "yet it
applieth not to books and manuscripts such as I have been consulting;
part, of which things therein written having already come to pass,
authorize us surely to expect the completion of the rest; nor would I
have much difficulty in showing you from this volume, that enough has
been already proved true, to entitle us to look with certainty to the
accomplishment of that which remains."

"I should be glad to hear that," answered the archer, who entertained
little more than a soldier's belief respecting prophecies and auguries,
but yet cared not bluntly to contradict the minstrel upon such
subjects, as he had been instructed by Sir John de Walton to comply
with his humour. Accordingly the minstrel began to recite verses,
which, in our time, the ablest interpreter could not make sense out of.

    "When the cook crows, keep well his comb,
     For the fox and the fulmart they are false both.
     When the raven and the rook have rounded together,
     And the kid in his cliff shall accord to the same.
     Then shall they be bold, and soon to battle thereafter.
     Then the birds of the raven rugs and reives,
     And the leal men of Lothian, are louping on their horse;
     Then shall the poor people be spoiled full near,
     And the Abbeys be burnt truly that stand upon Tweed
     They shall burn and slay, and great reif make:
     There shall no poor man who say whose man he is:
     Then shall the land be lawless, for love there is none.
     Then falset shall have foot fully five years;
     Then truth surely shall be tint, and none shall lippen to other;
     The one cousing shall not trust the other,
     Not the son the father, nor the father the son:
     For to have his goods he would have him hanged."
     &c. &c. &c.

The archer listened to these mystic prognostications, which were not
the less wearisome that they were, in a considerable degree,
unintelligible; at the same time subduing his Hotspur-like disposition
to tire of the recitation, yet at brief intervals comforting himself
with an application to the wine flagon, and enduring as he might what
he neither understood nor took interest in. Meanwhile the minstrel
proceeded with his explanation of the dubious and imperfect
vaticinations of which we have given a sufficient specimen.

"Could you wish," said he to Greenleaf, "a more exact description of
the miseries which have passed over Scotland in these latter days? Have
not these the raven and rook, the fox and the fulmart, explained;
either because the nature of the birds or beasts bear an individual
resemblance to those of the knights who display them on their banners,
or otherwise are bodied forth by actual blazonry on their shields, and
come openly into the field to ravage and destroy? Is not the total
disunion of the land plainly indicated by these words, that connexions
of blood shall be broken asunder, that kinsmen shall not trust each
other, and that the father and son, instead, of putting faith in their
natural connexion, shall seek each other's life, in order to enjoy his
inheritance? The _leal men_ of Lothian are distinctly mentioned as
taking arms, and there is plainly allusion to the other events of these
late Scottish troubles. The death of this last William is obscurely
intimated under the type of a hound, which was that good lord's
occasional cognizance.

  'The hound that was harm'd then muzzled shall be,
  Who loved him worst shall weep for his wreck;
  Yet shall a whelp rise of the same race,
  That rudely shall roar, and rule the whole north,
  And quit the whole quarrel of old deeds done,
  Though he from his hold be kept back awhile.
  True Thomas told me this in a troublesome time,
  In a harvest morning at Eldoun hills.'"

"This hath a meaning, Sir Archer," continued the minstrel, "and which
flies as directly to its mark as one of your own arrows, although there
may be some want of wisdom in making the direct explication. Being,
however, upon assurance with you, I do not hesitate to tell you, that
in my opinion this lion's whelp that awaits its time, means this same
celebrated Scottish prince, Robert the Bruce, who, though repeatedly
