been rather hard with him, and had only allowed him to ride out and play
at bowls.

It is much to be believed that if the King could have been trusted, even
at this time, he might have been saved.  Even Oliver Cromwell expressly
said that he did believe that no man could enjoy his possessions in
peace, unless the King had his rights.  He was not unfriendly towards the
King; he had been present when he received his children, and had been
much affected by the pitiable nature of the scene; he saw the King often;
he frequently walked and talked with him in the long galleries and
pleasant gardens of the Palace at Hampton Court, whither he was now
removed; and in all this risked something of his influence with the army.
But, the King was in secret hopes of help from the Scottish people; and
the moment he was encouraged to join them he began to be cool to his new
friends, the army, and to tell the officers that they could not possibly
do without him.  At the very time, too, when he was promising to make
Cromwell and Ireton noblemen, if they would help him up to his old
height, he was writing to the Queen that he meant to hang them.  They
both afterwards declared that they had been privately informed that such
a letter would be found, on a certain evening, sewed up in a saddle which
would be taken to the Blue Boar in Holborn to be sent to Dover; and that
they went there, disguised as common soldiers, and sat drinking in the
inn-yard until a man came with the saddle, which they ripped up with
their knives, and therein found the letter.  I see little reason to doubt
the story.  It is certain that Oliver Cromwell told one of the King's
most faithful followers that the King could not be trusted, and that he
would not be answerable if anything amiss were to happen to him.  Still,
even after that, he kept a promise he had made to the King, by letting
him know that there was a plot with a certain portion of the army to
seize him.  I believe that, in fact, he sincerely wanted the King to
escape abroad, and so to be got rid of without more trouble or danger.
That Oliver himself had work enough with the army is pretty plain; for
some of the troops were so mutinous against him, and against those who
acted with him at this time, that he found it necessary to have one man
shot at the head of his regiment to overawe the rest.

The King, when he received Oliver's warning, made his escape from Hampton
Court; after some indecision and uncertainty, he went to Carisbrooke
Castle in the Isle of Wight.  At first, he was pretty free there; but,
even there, he carried on a pretended treaty with the Parliament, while
he was really treating with commissioners from Scotland to send an army
into England to take his part.  When he broke off this treaty with the
Parliament (having settled with Scotland) and was treated as a prisoner,
his treatment was not changed too soon, for he had plotted to escape that
very night to a ship sent by the Queen, which was lying off the island.

He was doomed to be disappointed in his hopes from Scotland.  The
agreement he had made with the Scottish Commissioners was not favourable
enough to the religion of that country to please the Scottish clergy; and
they preached against it.  The consequence was, that the army raised in
Scotland and sent over, was too small to do much; and that, although it
was helped by a rising of the Royalists in England and by good soldiers
from Ireland, it could make no head against the Parliamentary army under
such men as Cromwell and Fairfax.  The King's eldest son, the Prince of
Wales, came over from Holland with nineteen ships (a part of the English
fleet having gone over to him) to help his father; but nothing came of
his voyage, and he was fain to return.  The most remarkable event of this
second civil war was the cruel execution by the Parliamentary General, of
SIR CHARLES LUCAS and SIR GEORGE LISLE, two grand Royalist generals, who
had bravely defended Colchester under every disadvantage of famine and
distress for nearly three months.  When Sir Charles Lucas was shot, Sir
George Lisle kissed his body, and said to the soldiers who were to shoot
him, 'Come nearer, and make sure of me.'  'I warrant you, Sir George,'
said one of the soldiers, 'we shall hit you.'  'AY?' he returned with a
smile, 'but I have been nearer to you, my friends, many a time, and you
have missed me.'

The Parliament, after being fearfully bullied by the army--who demanded
to have seven members whom they disliked given up to them--had voted that
they would have nothing more to do with the King.  On the conclusion,
however, of this second civil war (which did not last more than six
months), they appointed commissioners to treat with him.  The King, then
so far released again as to be allowed to live in a private house at
Newport in the Isle of Wight, managed his own part of the negotiation
with a sense that was admired by all who saw him, and gave up, in the
end, all that was asked of him--even yielding (which he had steadily
refused, so far) to the temporary abolition of the bishops, and the
transfer of their church land to the Crown.  Still, with his old fatal
vice upon him, when his best friends joined the commissioners in
beseeching him to yield all those points as the only means of saving
himself from the army, he was plotting to escape from the island; he was
holding correspondence with his friends and the Catholics in Ireland,
though declaring that he was not; and he was writing, with his own hand,
that in what he yielded he meant nothing but to get time to escape.

Matters were at this pass when the army, resolved to defy the Parliament,
marched up to London.  The Parliament, not afraid of them now, and boldly
led by Hollis, voted that the King's concessions were sufficient ground
for settling the peace of the kingdom.  Upon that, COLONEL RICH and
COLONEL PRIDE went down to the House of Commons with a regiment of horse
soldiers and a regiment of foot; and Colonel Pride, standing in the lobby
with a list of the members who were obnoxious to the army in his hand,
had them pointed out to him as they came through, and took them all into
custody.  This proceeding was afterwards called by the people, for a
joke, PRIDE'S PURGE.  Cromwell was in the North, at the head of his men,
at the time, but when he came home, approved of what had been done.

What with imprisoning some members and causing others to stay away, the
army had now reduced the House of Commons to some fifty or so.  These
soon voted that it was treason in a king to make war against his
parliament and his people, and sent an ordinance up to the House of Lords
for the King's being tried as a traitor.  The House of Lords, then
sixteen in number, to a man rejected it.  Thereupon, the Commons made an
ordinance of their own, that they were the supreme government of the
country, and would bring the King to trial.

The King had been taken for security to a place called Hurst Castle: a
lonely house on a rock in the sea, connected with the coast of Hampshire
by a rough road two miles long at low water.  Thence, he was ordered to
be removed to Windsor; thence, after being but rudely used there, and
having none but soldiers to wait upon him at table, he was brought up to
St. James's Palace in London, and told that his trial was appointed for
next day.

On Saturday, the twentieth of January, one thousand six hundred and forty-
nine, this memorable trial began.  The House of Commons had settled that
one hundred and thirty-five persons should form the Court, and these were
taken from the House itself, from among the officers of the army, and
from among the lawyers and citizens.  JOHN BRADSHAW, serjeant-at-law, was
appointed president.  The place was Westminster Hall.  At the upper end,
in a red velvet chair, sat the president, with his hat (lined with plates
of iron for his protection) on his head.  The rest of the Court sat on
side benches, also wearing their hats.  The King's seat was covered with
velvet, like that of the president, and was opposite to it.  He was
brought from St. James's to Whitehall, and from Whitehall he came by
water to his trial.

When he came in, he looked round very steadily on the Court, and on the
great number of spectators, and then sat down: presently he got up and
looked round again.  On the indictment 'against Charles Stuart, for high
treason,' being read, he smiled several times, and he denied the
authority of the Court, saying that there could be no parliament without
a House of Lords, and that he saw no House of Lords there.  Also, that
the King ought to be there, and that he saw no King in the King's right
place.  Bradshaw replied, that the Court was satisfied with its
authority, and that its authority was God's authority and the kingdom's.
He then adjourned the Court to the following Monday.  On that day, the
trial was resumed, and went on all the week.  When the Saturday came, as
the King passed forward to his place in the Hall, some soldiers and
others cried for 'justice!' and execution on him.  That day, too,
Bradshaw, like an angry Sultan, wore a red robe, instead of the black
robe he had worn before.  The King was sentenced to death that day.  As
he went out, one solitary soldier said, 'God bless you, Sir!'  For this,
his officer struck him.  The King said he thought the punishment exceeded
the offence.  The silver head of his walking-stick had fallen off while
he leaned upon it, at one time of the trial.  The accident seemed to
disturb him, as if he thought it ominous of the falling of his own head;
and he admitted as much, now it was all over.

Being taken back to Whitehall, he sent to the House of Commons, saying
that as the time of his execution might be nigh, he wished he might be
allowed to see his darling children.  It was granted.  On the Monday he
was taken back to St. James's; and his two children then in England, the
PRINCESS ELIZABETH thirteen years old, and the DUKE OF GLOUCESTER nine
years old, were brought to take leave of him, from Sion House, near
Brentford.  It was a sad and touching scene, when he kissed and fondled
those poor children, and made a little present of two diamond seals to
the Princess, and gave them tender messages to their mother (who little
deserved them, for she had a lover of her own whom she married soon
afterwards), and told them that he died 'for the laws and liberties of
the land.'  I am bound to say that I don't think he did, but I dare say
he believed so.

There were ambassadors from Holland that day, to intercede for the
unhappy King, whom you and I both wish the Parliament had spared; but
they got no answer.  The Scottish Commissioners interceded too; so did
the Prince of Wales, by a letter in which he offered as the next heir to
the throne, to accept any conditions from the Parliament; so did the
Queen, by letter likewise.

Notwithstanding all, the warrant for the execution was this day signed.
There is a story that as Oliver Cromwell went to the table with the pen
in his hand to put his signature to it, he drew his pen across the face
of one of the commissioners, who was standing near, and marked it with
ink.  That commissioner had not signed his own name yet, and the story
adds that when he came to do it he marked Cromwell's face with ink in the
same way.

The King slept well, untroubled by the knowledge that it was his last
night on earth, and rose on the thirtieth of January, two hours before
day, and dressed himself carefully.  He put on two shirts lest he should
tremble with the cold, and had his hair very carefully combed.  The
warrant had been directed to three officers of the army, COLONEL HACKER,
COLONEL HUNKS, and COLONEL PHAYER.  At ten o'clock, the first of these
came to the door and said it was time to go to Whitehall.  The King, who
had always been a quick walker, walked at his usual speed through the
Park, and called out to the guard, with his accustomed voice of command,
'March on apace!'  When he came to Whitehall, he was taken to his own
bedroom, where a breakfast was set forth.  As he had taken the Sacrament,
he would eat nothing more; but, at about the time when the church bells
struck twelve at noon (for he had to wait, through the scaffold not being
ready), he took the advice of the good BISHOP JUXON who was with him, and
ate a little bread and drank a glass of claret.  Soon after he had taken
this refreshment, Colonel Hacker came to the chamber with the warrant in
his hand, and called for Charles Stuart.

And then, through the long gallery of Whitehall Palace, which he had
often seen light and gay and merry and crowded, in very different times,
the fallen King passed along, until he came to the centre window of the
Banqueting House, through which he emerged upon the scaffold, which was
hung with black.  He looked at the two executioners, who were dressed in
black and masked; he looked at the troops of soldiers on horseback and on
foot, and all looked up at him in silence; he looked at the vast array of
spectators, filling up the view beyond, and turning all their faces upon
him; he looked at his old Palace of St. James's; and he looked at the
block.  He seemed a little troubled to find that it was so low, and
asked, 'if there were no place higher?'  Then, to those upon the
scaffold, he said, 'that it was the Parliament who had begun the war, and
not he; but he hoped they might be guiltless too, as ill instruments had
gone between them.  In one respect,' he said, 'he suffered justly; and
that was because he had permitted an unjust sentence to be executed on
another.'  In this he referred to the Earl of Strafford.

He was not at all afraid to die; but he was anxious to die easily.  When
some one touched the axe while he was speaking, he broke off and called
out, 'Take heed of the axe! take heed of the axe!'  He also said to
Colonel Hacker, 'Take care that they do not put me to pain.'  He told the
executioner, 'I shall say but very short prayers, and then thrust out my
hands'--as the sign to strike.

He put his hair up, under a white satin cap which the bishop had carried,
and said, 'I have a good cause and a gracious God on my side.'  The
bishop told him that he had but one stage more to travel in this weary
world, and that, though it was a turbulent and troublesome stage, it was
a short one, and would carry him a great way--all the way from earth to
Heaven.  The King's last word, as he gave his cloak and the George--the
decoration from his breast--to the bishop, was, 'Remember!'  He then
kneeled down, laid his head on the block, spread out his hands, and was
instantly killed.  One universal groan broke from the crowd; and the
soldiers, who had sat on their horses and stood in their ranks immovable
as statues, were of a sudden all in motion, clearing the streets.

Thus, in the forty-ninth year of his age, falling at the same time of his
career as Strafford had fallen in his, perished Charles the First.  With
all my sorrow for him, I cannot agree with him that he died 'the martyr
of the people;' for the people had been martyrs to him, and to his ideas
of a King's rights, long before.  Indeed, I am afraid that he was but a
bad judge of martyrs; for he had called that infamous Duke of Buckingham
'the Martyr of his Sovereign.'




CHAPTER XXXIV--ENGLAND UNDER OLIVER CROMWELL


Before sunset on the memorable day on which King Charles the First was
executed, the House of Commons passed an act declaring it treason in any
one to proclaim the Prince of Wales--or anybody else--King of England.
Soon afterwards, it declared that the House of Lords was useless and
dangerous, and ought to be abolished; and directed that the late King's
statue should be taken down from the Royal Exchange in the City and other
public places.  Having laid hold of some famous Royalists who had escaped
from prison, and having beheaded the DUKE OF HAMILTON, LORD HOLLAND, and
LORD CAPEL, in Palace Yard (all of whom died very courageously), they
then appointed a Council of State to govern the country.  It consisted of
forty-one members, of whom five were peers.  Bradshaw was made president.
The House of Commons also re-admitted members who had opposed the King's
death, and made up its numbers to about a hundred and fifty.

But, it still had an army of more than forty thousand men to deal with,
and a very hard task it was to manage them.  Before the King's execution,
the army had appointed some of its officers to remonstrate between them
and the Parliament; and now the common soldiers began to take that office
upon themselves.  The regiments under orders for Ireland mutinied; one
troop of horse in the city of London seized their own flag, and refused
to obey orders.  For this, the ringleader was shot: which did not mend
the matter, for, both his comrades and the people made a public funeral
for him, and accompanied the body to the grave with sound of trumpets and
with a gloomy procession of persons carrying bundles of rosemary steeped
in blood.  Oliver was the only man to deal with such difficulties as
these, and he soon cut them short by bursting at midnight into the town
of Burford, near Salisbury, where the mutineers were sheltered, taking
four hundred of them prisoners, and shooting a number of them by sentence
of court-martial.  The soldiers soon found, as all men did, that Oliver
was not a man to be trifled with.  And there was an end of the mutiny.

The Scottish Parliament did not know Oliver yet; so, on hearing of the
King's execution, it proclaimed the Prince of Wales King Charles the
Second, on condition of his respecting the Solemn League and Covenant.
Charles was abroad at that time, and so was Montrose, from whose help he
had hopes enough to keep him holding on and off with commissioners from
Scotland, just as his father might have done.  These hopes were soon at
an end; for, Montrose, having raised a few hundred exiles in Germany, and
landed with them in Scotland, found that the people there, instead of
joining him, deserted the country at his approach.  He was soon taken
prisoner and carried to Edinburgh.  There he was received with every
possible insult, and carried to prison in a cart, his officers going two
and two before him.  He was sentenced by the Parliament to be hanged on a
gallows thirty feet high, to have his head set on a spike in Edinburgh,
and his limbs distributed in other places, according to the old barbarous
manner.  He said he had always acted under the Royal orders, and only
wished he had limbs enough to be distributed through Christendom, that it
might be the more widely known how loyal he had been.  He went to the
scaffold in a bright and brilliant dress, and made a bold end at thirty-
eight years of age.  The breath was scarcely out of his body when Charles
abandoned his memory, and denied that he had ever given him orders to
rise in his behalf.  O the family failing was strong in that Charles
then!

Oliver had been appointed by the Parliament to command the army in
Ireland, where he took a terrible vengeance for the sanguinary rebellion,
and made tremendous havoc, particularly in the siege of Drogheda, where
no quarter was given, and where he found at least a thousand of the
inhabitants shut up together in the great church: every one of whom was
killed by his soldiers, usually known as OLIVER'S IRONSIDES.  There were
numbers of friars and priests among them, and Oliver gruffly wrote home
in his despatch that these were 'knocked on the head' like the rest.

But, Charles having got over to Scotland where the men of the Solemn
League and Covenant led him a prodigiously dull life and made him very
weary with long sermons and grim Sundays, the Parliament called the
redoubtable Oliver home to knock the Scottish men on the head for setting
up that Prince.  Oliver left his son-in-law, Ireton, as general in
Ireland in his stead (he died there afterwards), and he imitated the
example of his father-in-law with such good will that he brought the
country to subjection, and laid it at the feet of the Parliament.  In the
end, they passed an act for the settlement of Ireland, generally
pardoning all the common people, but exempting from this grace such of
the wealthier sort as had been concerned in the rebellion, or in any
killing of Protestants, or who refused to lay down their arms.  Great
numbers of Irish were got out of the country to serve under Catholic
powers abroad, and a quantity of land was declared to have been forfeited
by past offences, and was given to people who had lent money to the
Parliament early in the war.  These were sweeping measures; but, if
Oliver Cromwell had had his own way fully, and had stayed in Ireland, he
would have done more yet.

However, as I have said, the Parliament wanted Oliver for Scotland; so,
home Oliver came, and was made Commander of all the Forces of the
Commonwealth of England, and in three days away he went with sixteen
thousand soldiers to fight the Scottish men.  Now, the Scottish men,
being then--as you will generally find them now--mighty cautious,
reflected that the troops they had were not used to war like the
Ironsides, and would be beaten in an open fight.  Therefore they said,
'If we live quiet in our trenches in Edinburgh here, and if all the
farmers come into the town and desert the country, the Ironsides will be
driven out by iron hunger and be forced to go away.'  This was, no doubt,
the wisest plan; but as the Scottish clergy _would_ interfere with what
they knew nothing about, and would perpetually preach long sermons
exhorting the soldiers to come out and fight, the soldiers got it in
their heads that they absolutely must come out and fight.  Accordingly,
in an evil hour for themselves, they came out of their safe position.
Oliver fell upon them instantly, and killed three thousand, and took ten
thousand prisoners.

To gratify the Scottish Parliament, and preserve their favour, Charles
had signed a declaration they laid before him, reproaching the memory of
his father and mother, and representing himself as a most religious
Prince, to whom the Solemn League and Covenant was as dear as life.  He
meant no sort of truth in this, and soon afterwards galloped away on
horseback to join some tiresome Highland friends, who were always
flourishing dirks and broadswords.  He was overtaken and induced to
return; but this attempt, which was called 'The Start,' did him just so
much service, that they did not preach quite such long sermons at him
afterwards as they had done before.

On the first of January, one thousand six hundred and fifty-one, the
Scottish people crowned him at Scone.  He immediately took the chief
command of an army of twenty thousand men, and marched to Stirling.  His
hopes were heightened, I dare say, by the redoubtable Oliver being ill of
an ague; but Oliver scrambled out of bed in no time, and went to work
with such energy that he got behind the Royalist army and cut it off from
all communication with Scotland.  There was nothing for it then, but to
go on to England; so it went on as far as Worcester, where the mayor and
some of the gentry proclaimed King Charles the Second straightway.  His
proclamation, however, was of little use to him, for very few Royalists
appeared; and, on the very same day, two people were publicly beheaded on
Tower Hill for espousing his cause.  Up came Oliver to Worcester too, at
double quick speed, and he and his Ironsides so laid about them in the
great battle which was fought there, that they completely beat the
Scottish men, and destroyed the Royalist army; though the Scottish men
fought so gallantly that it took five hours to do.

The escape of Charles after this battle of Worcester did him good service
long afterwards, for it induced many of the generous English people to
take a romantic interest in him, and to think much better of him than he
ever deserved.  He fled in the night, with not more than sixty followers,
to the house of a Catholic lady in Staffordshire.  There, for his greater
safety, the whole sixty left him.  He cropped his hair, stained his face
and hands brown as if they were sunburnt, put on the clothes of a
labouring countryman, and went out in the morning with his axe in his
hand, accompanied by four wood-cutters who were brothers, and another man
who was their brother-in-law.  These good fellows made a bed for him
under a tree, as the weather was very bad; and the wife of one of them
brought him food to eat; and the old mother of the four brothers came and
fell down on her knees before him in the wood, and thanked God that her
sons were engaged in saving his life.  At night, he came out of the
forest and went on to another house which was near the river Severn, with
the intention of passing into Wales; but the place swarmed with soldiers,
and the bridges were guarded, and all the boats were made fast.  So,
after lying in a hayloft covered over with hay, for some time, he came
out of his place, attended by COLONEL CARELESS, a Catholic gentleman who
had met him there, and with whom he lay hid, all next day, up in the
shady branches of a fine old oak.  It was lucky for the King that it was
September-time, and that the leaves had not begun to fall, since he and
the Colonel, perched up in this tree, could catch glimpses of the
soldiers riding about below, and could hear the crash in the wood as they
went about beating the boughs.

After this, he walked and walked until his feet were all blistered; and,
having been concealed all one day in a house which was searched by the
troopers while he was there, went with LORD WILMOT, another of his good
friends, to a place called Bentley, where one MISS LANE, a Protestant
lady, had obtained a pass to be allowed to ride through the guards to see
a relation of hers near Bristol.  Disguised as a servant, he rode in the
saddle before this young lady to the house of SIR JOHN WINTER, while Lord
Wilmot rode there boldly, like a plain country gentleman, with dogs at
his heels.  It happened that Sir John Winter's butler had been servant in
Richmond Palace, and knew Charles the moment he set eyes upon him; but,
the butler was faithful and kept the secret.  As no ship could be found
to carry him abroad, it was planned that he should go--still travelling
with Miss Lane as her servant--to another house, at Trent near Sherborne
in Dorsetshire; and then Miss Lane and her cousin, MR. LASCELLES, who had
gone on horseback beside her all the way, went home.  I hope Miss Lane
was going to marry that cousin, for I am sure she must have been a brave,
kind girl.  If I had been that cousin, I should certainly have loved Miss
Lane.

When Charles, lonely for the loss of Miss Lane, was safe at Trent, a ship
was hired at Lyme, the master of which engaged to take two gentlemen to
France.  In the evening of the same day, the King--now riding as servant
before another young lady--set off for a public-house at a place called
Charmouth, where the captain of the vessel was to take him on board.  But,
the captain's wife, being afraid of her husband getting into trouble,
locked him up and would not let him sail.  Then they went away to
Bridport; and, coming to the inn there, found the stable-yard full of
soldiers who were on the look-out for Charles, and who talked about him
while they drank.  He had such presence of mind, that he led the horses
of his party through the yard as any other servant might have done, and
said, 'Come out of the way, you soldiers; let us have room to pass here!'
As he went along, he met a half-tipsy ostler, who rubbed his eyes and
said to him, 'Why, I was formerly servant to Mr. Potter at Exeter, and
surely I have sometimes seen you there, young man?'  He certainly had,
for Charles had lodged there.  His ready answer was, 'Ah, I did live with
him once; but I have no time to talk now.  We'll have a pot of beer
together when I come back.'

From this dangerous place he returned to Trent, and lay there concealed
several days.  Then he escaped to Heale, near Salisbury; where, in the
house of a widow lady, he was hidden five days, until the master of a
collier lying off Shoreham in Sussex, undertook to convey a 'gentleman'
to France.  On the night of the fifteenth of October, accompanied by two
colonels and a merchant, the King rode to Brighton, then a little fishing
village, to give the captain of the ship a supper before going on board;
but, so many people knew him, that this captain knew him too, and not
only he, but the landlord and landlady also.  Before he went away, the
landlord came behind his chair, kissed his hand, and said he hoped to
live to be a lord and to see his wife a lady; at which Charles laughed.
They had had a good supper by this time, and plenty of smoking and
drinking, at which the King was a first-rate hand; so, the captain
assured him that he would stand by him, and he did.  It was agreed that
the captain should pretend to sail to Deal, and that Charles should
address the sailors and say he was a gentleman in debt who was running
away from his creditors, and that he hoped they would join him in
persuading the captain to put him ashore in France.  As the King acted
his part very well indeed, and gave the sailors twenty shillings to
drink, they begged the captain to do what such a worthy gentleman asked.
He pretended to yield to their entreaties, and the King got safe to
Normandy.

Ireland being now subdued, and Scotland kept quiet by plenty of forts and
soldiers put there by Oliver, the Parliament would have gone on quietly
enough, as far as fighting with any foreign enemy went, but for getting
into trouble with the Dutch, who in the spring of the year one thousand
six hundred and fifty-one sent a fleet into the Downs under their ADMIRAL
VAN TROMP, to call upon the bold English ADMIRAL BLAKE (who was there
with half as many ships as the Dutch) to strike his flag.  Blake fired a
raging broadside instead, and beat off Van Tromp; who, in the autumn,
came back again with seventy ships, and challenged the bold Blake--who
still was only half as strong--to fight him.  Blake fought him all day;
but, finding that the Dutch were too many for him, got quietly off at
night.  What does Van Tromp upon this, but goes cruising and boasting
about the Channel, between the North Foreland and the Isle of Wight, with
a great Dutch broom tied to his masthead, as a sign that he could and
would sweep the English of the sea!  Within three months, Blake lowered
his tone though, and his broom too; for, he and two other bold
commanders, DEAN and MONK, fought him three whole days, took twenty-three
of his ships, shivered his broom to pieces, and settled his business.

Things were no sooner quiet again, than the army began to complain to the
Parliament that they were not governing the nation properly, and to hint
that they thought they could do it better themselves.  Oliver, who had
now made up his mind to be the head of the state, or nothing at all,
supported them in this, and called a meeting of officers and his own
Parliamentary friends, at his lodgings in Whitehall, to consider the best
way of getting rid of the Parliament.  It had now lasted just as many
years as the King's unbridled power had lasted, before it came into
existence.  The end of the deliberation was, that Oliver went down to the
House in his usual plain black dress, with his usual grey worsted
stockings, but with an unusual party of soldiers behind him.  These last
he left in the lobby, and then went in and sat down.  Presently he got
up, made the Parliament a speech, told them that the Lord had done with
them, stamped his foot and said, 'You are no Parliament.  Bring them in!
Bring them in!'  At this signal the door flew open, and the soldiers
appeared.  'This is not honest,' said Sir Harry Vane, one of the members.
'Sir Harry Vane!' cried Cromwell; 'O, Sir Harry Vane!  The Lord deliver
