in an insurrection with which so large a proportion of the people
sympathized partly or fully, severity to the conquered would have been a
fatal policy. As a merely practical point, moreover, there was not jail
room in Stockbridge for the prisoners. They must be either forthwith
killed or set free. The upshot of it was that excepting Hubbard and two
or three more they were offered release that very afternoon, upon taking
the oath of allegiance to the state. The poor fellows eagerly accepted
the terms. A line of them being formed they passed one by one before
Justice Woodbridge, with uplifted hand took the oath, slunk away home,
free men, but very much crestfallen. As if to add a climax to the
exultation of the government party, news was received, during the
evening, of the rout of the rebels under Shays at Springfield, in their
attack on the militia defending the arsenal there, the last day of
January.

Now it must be understood that not alone in Captain Stoddard's
Stockbridge company had gentlemen filled up the places of the
disaffected farmers in the ranks, but such was equally the case with
the companies which had come in from the other towns, the consequence of
which was that the present muster represented the wealth, the culture,
and aristocracy of all Berkshire. There are far more people in Berkshire
now than then; far more aggregate wealth, and far more aggregate
culture, but with the decay of the aristocratic form of society which
prevailed in the day of which I write, passed away the elements of
such a gathering as this, which stands unique in the social history of
Stockbridge. The families of the county gentry here represented, though
generally living at a day or two's journey apart, were more intimate
with each other than with the farmer folk, directly surrounded by whom,
they lived. They met now like members of one family, the sense of unity
heightened by the present necessity of defending the interests of their
order, sword in hand, against the rabble. The gentlemen's families of
Stockbridge had opened wide their doors to these gallant and genial
defenders, whose presence in their households, far from being regarded
as a burden, required by the public necessity, was rather a social treat
of rare and welcome character; and, unless tradition deceives, more than
one happy match was the issue of the intimacies formed between the fair
daughters of Stockbridge and the knights who had come to their rescue.

Previous to the conflict at West Stockbridge and the news of the battle
at Springfield, the seriousness of the situation availed indeed to put
some check upon the spirits of the young people. But no sooner had it
become apparent that the suppression of the rebellion was not likely to
involve serious bloodshed than there was such a general ebullition of
fun and amusement as might be expected from the collection of such
a band of spirited youths. Not to speak of dances, teas, and indoor
entertainments, gay sleighing parties, out to the scene of "battle" of
West Stockbridge, as it was jokingly called, were of daily occurrence,
and every evening Mahkeenac's shining face was covered with bands
of merry skaters, and screaming, laughing sledge-loads of youths and
damsels went whizzing down Long Hill to the no small jeopardy of their
own lives and limbs, to say nothing of such luckless wayfarers as might
be in their path. To provide partners for so many gentlemen the cradle
was almost robbed, and many a farmer's daughter of Shayite proclivities
found herself, not unwillingly, conscripted to supply the dearth of
gentlemen's daughters, and provided with an opportunity for contrasting
the merits of silk-stockinged and worsted-stockinged adorers, an
experience possibly not redounding to their after contentment in the
station to which Providence had called them.

But even with these conscripts there was still such an excess of beaux
that every girl had half a dozen. As for Desire Edwards, she had the
whole army. If I have hitherto spoken of her in a manner as if she
were the only "young lady" in Stockbridge, that is no more than the
impression which she gave. Although there were several families in the
village which had a claim to equal gentility, their daughters somehow
felt that they failed to make good that claim in Desire's presence. They
owned, though they found less flattering terms in which to express it,
the same air of distinction and dainty aloofness about her, which the
farmers' daughters, too humble for jealousy, so admiringly admitted. The
young militia officers and gentlemen privates found her adorable, and
the three or four young men whom Squire Edwards took into his house,
as his share in quartering the troops, were the objects of the most
rancorous envy of the entire army. These favored youths had too much
appreciation of their fortune to be absent from their quarters save when
military duty required, and what with the obligation of entertaining and
being entertained by them, and keeping in play the numerous callers who
dropped in from other quarters in the evening, Desire had mighty
little time to herself. It was of course very exciting for her and very
agreeable to be the sole queen of so gallant and devoted a court. She
enjoyed it as any sprightly, beautiful girl fond of society and well
nigh starved for it might be expected to. Provided here so unexpectedly
in remote winter-bound Stockbridge, it was like a table spread in the
wilderness, whereof the Psalmist speaks.

And in this whirl of gayety, did she quite forget Perez, did she so soon
forget the secret flame she had cherished for the Shayite captain? Be
sure she had not forgotten, but she would have been willing to give
anything in the world if she could.

After the conventual seclusion and mental vacancy of the preceding
months, the sudden, almost instantaneous change in her surroundings,
had been like a burst of air and sunlight which dissipates the soporific
atmosphere of a sleeping-room. It had brought back her thoughts and
feelings all at once to their normal standards, making her recollection
of that infatuation seem like a fantastic, grotesque dream; unreal,
impossible, yet shamefully real. Every time she entered her chamber, and
her eye caught sight of the little hole in the curtain whence she had
spied upon Perez, shame and self-contempt overcame her like a flood. How
could she, how ever could she be left to do such a thing! What would the
obsequious, admiring gallants she had left in her parlor say if they but
knew what that little pin-hole in her curtain reminded her of? She could
not believe it possible herself that the girl whose fine-cut haughty
beauty confronted her gaze from the mirror could have so lost her
self-respect, could have actually--Oh! and tears of self-despite would
rush into her eyes as her remorseless memory set before her those
scenes. And had she been utterly beside herself that day in the store,
when she gave him that look and that hand-clasp? But for that the only
fruit of her folly would have been the loss of her own self-respect, but
now she was guilty toward him. This wretched business was dead
earnest to him, if not to her. With what a pang of self-contemptuous
self-reproach she recalled his white, anguished face as he rushed into
the store to bid her farewell when the soldiers were coming to take him.
If he at first, by his persecution of her, had left her with a right to
complain, she had given him such a right by that glance. She writhed as
she admitted to herself that by that she had given him a sort of claim
on her.

The village gossip about Perez' infatuation for her, although of her own
weakness none guessed, had naturally come to the ears of the visitors,
and some of the young men at Edwards' good naturedly chaffed her about
it, speaking of it as an amusing joke. She had to bear this without
wincing, and worse still, she had to play the hypocrite so far as to
reply in the same jesting tone, joining in turning the laugh on the
poor, shabby mob captain, when she knew in her heart it ought to be
turned against her.

There was nothing else she could do, of course. She could not confess to
these gay bantering young gentlemen the incredible weakness of which she
had been guilty. But if the self-contempt of the doer can avenge a wrong
done to another, Perez was amply avenged for this. And the worst of
it was that the thought that she had wronged him here also, and meanly
taken advantage of him, added to that horrid sense of his claim on her.
He began to occupy her mind to a morbid and most painful extent, really
much affecting her enjoyment. His sad and shabby figure, with its
mutely reproachful face, haunted her. All that might have been to his
disadvantage compared with the refined and cultivated circle about her,
was overcome by the pathos and dignity with which her sense of having
done him wrong invested him. Such was her unenviable state of mind, when
one evening, a week or ten days after the affair at West Stockbridge,
one of the young men at the house said to her gayly:

"May I hope, Miss Edwards, not to be wholly forgotten if I should fall
on the gory field to-morrow?"

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"What, didn't you know? General Patterson is fearful the Capuan delights
of Stockbridge will sap our martial vigor, and is going to lead us
against the foe in his lair at dawn to-morrow."

"Where is his lair this time?" asked Desire, carelessly.

"We've heard that two or three hundred of the rascals have collected out
here at Lee to stop a petty court, and we're going to capture them."

"By the way, too, Miss Edwards," broke in another, "your admirer,
Hamlin, is at the head of them, and I've no doubt his real design is
to make a dash on Stockbridge, and carry you off from the midst of
your faithful knights. He'll have a chance to repent of his presumption
to-morrow. Squire Woodbridge told me this afternoon that if he does not
have him triced up to the whipping-post in two hours after we bring him
in, it will be because he is no justice of the quorum. It's plain the
Squire has no liking for the fellow."

"I hope there'll be a little more fun this time than there was last
week. I'm sick of these battles without any fighting," doughtily
remarked a very young man.

"I'm afraid your blood-thirstiness won't be gratified this time,"
answered the first speaker. "The General means to surprise them and take
every man-jack of them prisoner before they're fairly waked up. We shall
be back to breakfast to receive your congratulations, Miss Edwards."

But Miss Edwards had left the room.




CHAPTER TWENTY-FIFTH

A GAME OF BLUFF


Had Perez Hamlin been her sweetheart, her brother, her dearest friend,
the announcement that he was to be captured and brought to Stockbridge
for punishment would not have come upon her with a greater effect of
consternation. After hearing that news it would have been impossible for
her to have retained her composure sufficiently to have avoided remark
had she remained in the parlor. But there were other reasons why she had
fled to the seclusion of her chamber. It was necessary that she should
think of some plan to evade the humiliation of being confronted by him,
of being reminded by his presence, by his looks, and maybe his words
even, of the weak folly of which she was so cruelly ashamed, and which
she was trying to forget about. Desperately, she resolved to make some
excuse to fly to Pittsfield, to be away from home when Perez was brought
in. But no, she could think of no excuse, not even the wildest pretense
for thus precipitately leaving a house full of guests, and taking a
journey by dangerous roads to make an uninvited visit. Perez must be
warned, he must escape, he must not be captured. Thus only could she
see any way to evade meeting him. But how could word be got to him?
They marched at dawn. There were but a few hours. There was his family.
Surely, if they were warned, they would find a way of communicating with
him. She had heard that he had a brother. Whatever she did she must do
quickly, before she was missed from the parlor and her mother came to
her door to ask if she were sick. There was no time to change her dress,
or even her shoes. Throwing a big shawl over her head, which quite
concealed her figure, she noiselessly made her way downstairs, and out
into the snowy street, passing, as she went, close under the lighted
windows of the parlor, whence came the sound of the voices and laughter
of guests who, no doubt, were already wondering at her absence.

Thanks to the amount of travel of late weeks, the snow in the street had
been trodden to a passable condition. But blinded by the darkness every
now and then, with a gasp and a flounder, she would step out of the
path into the deep snow on either side, and once hearing a sleigh coming
along, she had to plunge into a drift nearly as high as her waist, and
stand there till the vehicle had passed, with the snow freezing her
ankles, and also ruining, as she well knew, her lovely morocco shoes.
Suddenly a tall figure loomed up close before her, there was a rattle of
accoutrements, and a rough voice said sharply:

"Halt!"

She stopped, all in a tremble. She had quite forgotten that the streets
were now-a-days guarded by regular lines of sentries.

"Advance and give the countersign," said the soldier.

At first she gave herself quite up for lost. Then she remembered that by
the merest chance in the world she knew the countersign for that night.
The officer of the day had playfully asked her to name it, and in honor
of the patriotic citizens of the capital who had lent to the empty
treasury the money needed to equip and supply the force of militia
the governor had ordered out, she had given "The Merchants of Boston."
Scarcely believing that so simple a formula could remove this formidable
obstacle from her path, she repeated it in a tremulous voice. "Pass
on," said the sentry, and the way was clear. Now turning out of the
main street, she made her way slowly and pantingly, rather wading than
walking up the less trodden lane leading to the Hamlins' house, through
whose windows shines the flickering light of the fire on the hearth
within, the only species of evening illumination afforded in those days
save in the households of the rich.

She pulls the latchstring and enters. The miserable fittings of the
great kitchen denote extreme poverty, but the great fire of logs in the
chimney is such as the richest, in these days of wasted forests, cannot
afford, and the ruddy light illumines the room as all the candles in
Stockbridge scarcely could do. Before it sit Elnathan and his wife and
Reuben. The shawl which Desire wears is thickly flecked with the snow,
through which she has stumbled, and instinctively her first motion on
entering the room is to open and shake it, thereby revealing to the eyes
of the astonished family the toilet of a fashionable beauty. Her hair
is built up over a toupee with a charming effect of stateliness, the
dusting of powder upon the dark strands bringing out the rich bloom of
her brunette complexion. The shoulders gleam through the meshes of the
square of ancient yellow lace that covers them, while the curves of the
full young figure and the white roundness of the arms, left bare by the
elbow sleeves, are set off in charming contrast by the stiff folds of
the figured crimson brocade.

"Miss Edwards!" murmurs Mrs. Hamlin, as Elnathan and Reuben gape in
speechless bewilderment.

"Yes, it is I," replied Desire, coming forward a few steps, but still
keeping in the back of the room. "I came to tell you that the army is
going to march at dawn to-morrow to Lee, to take your son, and all who
are with him prisoners, and bring them back here to be punished." There
was a moment's silence, then Mrs. Hamlin said:

"How do you know it?"

"I was told so ten minutes since by the officers at my father's house,"
replied Desire.

"And why do you tell us?" asked Mrs. Hamlin again, regarding her keenly
from beneath her bushy grey eyebrows, and speaking with a certain slight
hardness of tone, as if half suspicious of a warning from such a source.

"I thought if I told you in time, you might get some word to him so he
could get away. The countersign is 'The Merchants of Boston.'"

Mrs. Hamlin's face suddenly changed its expression, and she answered
slowly, in a tone of intense, suppressed feeling:

"And so you left them gay gentlemen, and waded through the snow all
alone half a mile way out here, all in your pretty clothes, so that no
harm might come to my boy. God bless you, my child! God bless you with
his choicest blessings, my sweet young lady! My son does well to worship
the ground you walk on."

It was an odd sensation, but as the gray-haired woman was speaking, her
face aglow with tenderness, and her eyes wet with a mother's gratitude,
Desire could not help half wishing she had deserved the words, even
though that wish implied her being really in love with this woman's son.
It was not without emotion, and eyes to which a responsive wetness had
sprung that she exclaimed, with a gesture of deprecation:

"No, no, do not thank me. If you knew all, you would not thank me. I am
not so good as you think," and, throwing the door open she sprang out
into the snow.

When she reentered the parlor at home, the silver-dialed clock, high
upon the wall, accused her of only an hour's absence, and since nobody
but herself knew that her feet were quite wet through, there were no
explanations to make. But for the first time she wearied a little of her
courtiers. She found their compliments insipid and her repartees
were slow. Her thoughts were wandering to that poor home where all
undeservedly she had been received as an angel of light; and her
anxieties were with the messenger stumbling along the half broken road
to Lee to carry the warning. When, at last, Squire Edwards proposed
that all should fill their punch-glasses and drain to the success of
the morrow's expedition, she set down hers untasted, passing off her
omission with some excuse. That night toward morning, though it was yet
pitch dark, she was awakened by the noise of opening doors and men's
boots, and loud talk; and afterwards hearing a heavy, jarring sound,
she looked out the window and descried in the road, a long black column
moving rapidly along, noiseless save for now and then a hoarse word of
command. It was the expedition setting out for Lee. The impressiveness
of this silent, formidable departure gave her a new sense of the
responsibility she had taken on herself in frustrating the design of
so many grave and weighty men, and interfering with issues of life and
death. And then for the first time a dreadful thought occurred to her.
What if after all there should be a battle? She had only thought of
giving Perez warning, so he might fly with his men, but what if he
should take advantage of it to prepare an ambush and fight? She had not
thought of that. Jonathan was with the expedition. What if she should
prove to be the murderer of her brother? What had she done? Sick at
heart, she lay awake trembling till dawn. Then she got up and dressed,
and waited about miserably, till toward eight o'clock the news of the
result came. Then she laughed till she cried and ended by saying that
she would go to bed, for she thought she was going to be sick. And she
was right. Her mother wondered how she could have taken such a terrible
cold.

But leaving Dr. Partridge to cure her cold with calomel and laudanum,
after the manner of the day, let us inquire in a historical spirit what
it was in the news of the result at Lee which should cause a young woman
to laugh so immoderately.

It had been nearly midnight of the preceding evening, when Reuben
wearily and slowly making his way along the dark and difficult road,
reached Lee, and was directed at the rebel outposts to the house of Mrs.
Perry as the place which Perez occupied as a headquarters. Although
it was so late, the rebel commander, too full of anxious and brooding
thoughts to sleep, was still sitting before the smouldering fire in the
kitchen chimney when Reuben staggered in.

"Reub," he cried, starting up as he recognized his brother, "what's the
matter? Has anything happened at home?"

"Nothing bad. I've brought you news. Have you got some rum? I'm pretty
tired."

Perez found a demijohn, poured out a mug, and watched his brother with
anxious eyes as he gulped it down. Presently, a little color came back
to his white face, and he said:

"Now I feel better. It was a hard road. I felt like giving out once or
twice. But I'm all right now."

"What made you come, Reub? You're not strong yet. It might have killed
you."

"I had to, Perez. It was life or death for you. The army at Stockbridge
are going to surprise you at sunrise. I came to warn you. Desire Edwards
brought us word."

"What!" exclaimed Perez, his face aglow. "She brought you word? Do you
mean that?"

"Jess hole on, and I'll tell you how it was," said Reub, with a manner
almost as full of enthusiasm as his brother's. "It was nigh bedtime, and
we were setting afore the fire a talking 'bout you, and a hopin you'd
get over the line into York; when the door opened, an in come Desire
Edwards, all dressed up in a shiny gaown, an her hair fixed, an
everything like as to a weddin. I tell yew, Perez, my eyes stood out
some. An afore we could say nothing, we wuz so flustered, she up an
says as haow she hearn them ossifers tew her haouse tellin haow they wuz
gonter s'prise ye in the mornin, an so she come ter tell us, thinkin we
mout git word ter ye."
