obtain a good situation below the entrance of this creek it will be
much more eligible as the hunting country is more extensive and game
more abundant than above. The horse which the indians have given us to
kill was driven away yesterday by the natives with a gang of their
horses I presume in mistake; being without meat at noon we directed one
of the largest of our colts to be killed. we found the flesh of this
animal fat tender and by no means illy flavoured. we have three others
which we mean to reserve for the rocky mountains if we can subsist here
without them. my horse which was castrated the day before yesterday
wounded his thigh on the inner side with the rope by which he was
confined that evening and is now so much swolen with the wound the
castraiting and the collection of vermen that he cannot walk, in short
he is the most wretched specticle; I had his wounds clensed of the
vermen by washing them well with a strong decoction of the bark of the
roots & leaves of elder but think the chances are against his recovery.
at 3 P.M. we observed a large party of Indians on horseback in pursuit
of a deer which they ran into the river opposite to our camp; Capt. C.
Myself & three of our men shot and killed the deer in the water; the
indians pursued it on a raft and caught it. it is astonishing to see
these people ride down those steep hills which they do at full speed.
on our return to camp we found Drewyer the Two Feildses Gibson and
Sheilds just arrived with five deer which they had killed at a
considerable distance towards the mountains. they also brought with
them two red salmon trout which they had purchased from some indians
whom they had met with on their return to camp.--Two Indians who were
just arrived at our camp informed us that these salmon trout remained
in this river the greater part of the winter, that they were not good
at this season which we readily discovered, they were very meagre.
these indians also informed us that there were at this time a great
number of salmon at no great distance from hence in Lewis's river which
had just arrived and were very fat and fine, they said it would be some
yet before they would ascend this river as high as this place. a party
of the natives on the opposite shore informed those with us that a
party of the Shoshones had two nights past surrounded a lodge of their
nation on the South side of Lewis's river, that the inhabitants having
timely discovered the enimy effected their retreat in the course of the
night and escaped. Charbono's Child is very ill this evening; he is
cuting teeth, and for several days past has had a violent lax, which
having suddonly stoped he was attacked with a high fever and his neck
and throat are much swolen this evening. we gave him a doze of creem of
tartar and flour of sulpher and applyed a poltice of boiled onions to
his neck as warm as he could well bear it. Sergt. Pryor returned late
in the evening and informed us that he had been down the river eight
miles and that the clifts set in so abruptly to the river he could get
no further without returning several miles back and ascending the hills
and that he had thought it best to return and ride down tomorrow on the
high plain as he believed the mouth of the creek was a considerable
distance. Drewyer who has been at the place informs us that it is about
10 ms. and that there is no situation on the river for some distance
below this creek which can possibly answer our purposes.--we dryed our
baggage &c perfectly and put it up.-




[Clark, May 22, 1806]
Thursday 22nd May 1806
a fine day we exposed all our baggage to the Sun to air and dry, also
our roots which we have precured of the nativs. gave promission to
Windser & McNeal to go to the Indian Villages. Sergt. Ordway and
goodrich returned at 11 A.M. Soon after 2 Indian men Came down on a
raft and Continued with us about 3 hours and then returned to their
Village. Shannon & Colter went out to day to hunt towards the
mountains. Sergt. Pryor went out to hunt down the river, and examine
the mouth of Collins Creek, if a good Situation was below that Creek
for a Camp. this Creek which Cannot be passed owing to it's debth &
rapidity is a great beariore in our way to the best hunting Country. it
confines us to a narrow scope between this Creek and the river on which
we are Camped. If a Situation can be found imedeately below the Creek
it will answer us better than our present one as from thence we Can get
out to Some distance to hunt, and be convenient also to the fish Should
they pass up &c. The horse the Indian's left with us to kill has been
drove to their village with a gang of horses which I suppose belonged
to another man. as the greater part of our men have not had any Meat to
eate for 2 days, and the roots they Complain of, not being accustiomed
to live on them altogether we derected a large Coalt which was given to
us by a young man with an elegant mare on the ____ instant. this Coalt
was fat and was handsom looking meat. late in the evening we were
informed that the horse which Capt L. rode over the rocky mountains and
which was Cut day before yesterday had his hip out of place Since that
time, and Could not walk. Capt. Lewis examined him and thought he Could
not recover. at 3 P.M. we observed a number of Indians in chase of a
deer on their horses on the opposit hill Sides. Soon after the deer
took the water I Capt L. and 3 men run down on this Side, and killed
the deer in the water, the deer floated down and the Indians took it by
means of a raft which they had ready. on my return to Camp found
Drewyer Jos. & Reuben Fields, Shields and gibson just arrived from the
Chass with 5 Deer which they had killed on the high lands toward the
mountains. they also brought with them two Salmon trout which they had
purchased of Indians which they Saw on their return to Camp. at 5 p. M.
two young men highly decurated in their way Came to our camp and
informed us that the fat fish were in great numbers in Lewis's river.
that those Salmon trout which our hunters brought were pore and Such as
were Cought in the Winter in this river and were not the kind which
Comes up in the Spring of the year. great number of Indians Come to the
opposit bank and inform those on this Side that the Snake Indians had
come to a Lodge on Lewis's river at night. the inhabitents previously
discovering them abandened the house. Shabonoes Son a Small child is,
dangerously ill. his jaw and throat is much Swelled. we apply a poltice
of Onions. after giveing him Some creem of tarter &c. this day proved
to be fine fair which afforded us an oppertunety of drying our baggage
which had got a little wet.




[Lewis, May 23, 1806]
Friday May 23rd 1806.
Sergt. Pryor wounded a deer early this morning in a lick near camp; my
dog pursud it into the river; the two young Indian men who had remained
with us all night mounted their horses swam the river and drove the
deer into the water again; Sergt. Pryor killed it as it reached the
shore on this side, the indians returned as they had passed over. we
directed half this deer to be given to the indians, they immediately
made a fire and cooked their meat, 4 others joined them from the
village with the assistance of whom they consumed their portion of the
spoil in less than 2 hours and took their leave of our camp. The Creem
of tartar and sulpher operated several times on the child in the course
of the last night, he is considerably better this morning, tho the
swelling of the neck has abated but little; we still apply polices of
onions which we renew frequently in the course of the day and night. at
noon we were visited by 4 indians who informed us they cad come from
their village on Lewis's river at the distance of two days ride in
order to see us and obtain a little eyewater, Capt. C. washed their
eyes and they set out on their return to their village. our skill as
phisicans and the virture of our medecines have been spread it seems to
a great distance. I sincerely wish it was in our power to give releif
to these poor afficted wretches. at 1 P.M. Shannon, Colter, Labuish,
Cruzatte, Collins, and LaPage returned from hunting without having
killed anything except a few pheasants of the dark brown kind, which
they brought with them.These hunters informed us that they had hunted
the country deligently between the river and Creek for some distance
above and below our camp and that there was no game to be found. all
the horses which have been castrated except my poor unfortunate horse
appear as if they would do very well. I am convinced that those cut by
the indians will get well much soonest and they do not swell nor appear
to suffer as much as those cut in the common way.




[Clark, May 23, 1806]
Friday 23rd May 1806
a fair morning. Sergt. Pryor wounded a Deer at a lick near our Camp and
our dog prosued it into the river. two Indians which happened to be at
our Camp Mounted their horses and Swam across the river chased the deer
into the water again and pursued it across to the Side on which we
were, and as the Deer Came out of the Water Sgt. Pryor killed it. we
derected half of this deer to be given to those two indians. they
imediately made a fire and Cooked the meat. 4 others joined them from
the Village and they Soon consumed their portion. The Child is
Something better this morning than it was last night. we apply a fresh
poltice of the wild Onion which we repeeted twice in the Course of the
day. the Swelling does not appear to increas any Since yesterday. The 4
Indians who visited us to day informed us that they Came from their
village on Lewis's river two days ride from this place for the purpose
of Seeing of us and getting a little eye water I washed their eyes with
Some eyewater and they all left us at 2 P.M. and returned to the
Villages on the opposit Side of this river. at 1 oClock Shannon,
Colter, Labiech, Crusatt Lapage and Collins all returned from hunting
without haveing killed any thing except a fiew heath hens & black
Pheasants two of which they brought with them. Labiech also brought a
whisteling squerel which he had killed on it's hole in the high plains.
this squerel differs from those on the Missouri in their Colour, Size,
food and the length tal and from those found near the falls of Columbia

Our hunters brought us a large hooting owl which differ from those of
the atlantic States. The plumage of this owl is an uniform mixture of
dark yellowish brown and white, in which the dark brown prodominates.
it's Colour may be properly termed a dark Iron gray. the plumage is
very long and remarkably Silky and Soft. those have not the long
feathers on the head which give it the appearance of ears, or horns,
remarkable large eyes

the hunters informed us that they had hunted with great industry all
the Country between the river and for Some distance above and below
without the Smallest Chance of killing any game. they inform us that
the high lands are very cold with snow which has fallen for every day
or night for Several past. our horses which was Cut is like to doe well.




[Lewis, May 24, 1806]
Saturday May 24th 1806.
The child was very wrestless last night; it's jaw and the back of it's
neck are much more swolen than they were yesterday tho his fever has
abated considerably. we gave it a doze of creem of tartar and applyed a
fresh poltice of onions. we ordered some of the hunters out this
morning and directed them to pass Collins's creek if possible and hunt
towards the quawmash feilds. William Bratton still continues very
unwell; he eats heartily digests his food well, and his recovered his
flesh almost perfectly yet is so weak in the loins that he is scarcely
able to walk nor can he set upwright but with the greatest pain. we
have tryed every remidy which our engenuity could devise, or with which
our stock of medicines furnished us, without effect. John Sheilds
observed that he had seen men in a similar situation restored by
violent sweats. Bratton requested that he might be sweated in the
manner proposed by Sheilds to which we consented. Sheilds sunk a
circular hole of 3 feet diamiter and four feet deep in the earth. he
kindled a large fire in the hole and heated well, after which the fire
was taken out a seat placed in the center of the hole for the patient
with a board at bottom for his feet to rest on; some hoops of willow
poles were bent in an arch crossing each other over the hole, on these
several blankets were thrown forming a secure and thick orning of about
3 feet high. the patient being striped naked was seated under this
orning in the hole and the blankets well secured on every side. the
patient was furnished with a vessell of water which he sprinkles on the
bottom and sides of the hole and by that means creates as much steam or
vapor as he could possibly bear, in this situation he was kept about 20
minutes after which he was taken out and suddonly plunged in cold water
twise and was then immediately returned to the sweat hole where he was
continued three quarters of an hour longer then taken out covered up in
several blankets and suffered to cool gradually. during the time of his
being in the sweat hole, he drank copious draughts of a strong tea of
horse mint. Sheilds says that he had previously seen the tea of
Sinnecca snake root used in stead of the mint which was now employed
for the want of the other which is not be found in this country.--this
experiment was made yesterday; Bratton feels himself much better and is
walking about today and says he is nearly free from pain.--at 11 A.M. a
canoe arrived with 3 of the natives one of them the sick man of whom I
have before made mentions as having lost the power of his limbs. he is
a cheif of considerable note among them and they seem extreemly anxious
for his recovery. as he complains of no pain in any particular part we
conceive it cannot be the rheumatism, nor do we suppose that it can be
a parelitic attack or his limbs would have been more deminished. we
have supposed that it was some disorder which owed it's origine to a
diet of particular roots perhaps and such as we have never before
witnessed. while at the village of the broken arm we had recommended a
diet of fish or flesh for this man and the cold bath every morning. we
had also given him a few dozes of creem of tarter and flour of sulpher
to be repeated every 3rd day. this poor wretch thinks that he feels
himself of somewhat better but to me there appears to be no visible
alteration. we are at a loss what to do for this unfortunate man. we
gave him a few drops of Laudanum and a little portable soup. 4 of our
party pased the river and visited the lodge of the broken Arm for the
purpose of traiding some awls which they had made of the links of small
chain belonging to one of their steel traps, for some roots. they
returned in the evening having been very successfull, they had obtained
a good supply of roots and bread of cows.--this day has proved warmer
than any of the preceeding since we have arrived here.




[Clark, May 24, 1806]
Saturday 24th May 1806
a fine morning the Child was very restless last night its jaw and back
of its neck is much more Swelled than it was yesterday. I gave it a
dost of Creme of Tarter and a fresh Poltice of Onions. ordered Shields,
Gibson, Drewyer, Crusat, Collins, and Jo. & rubin Fields to turn out
hunting and if possible Cross Collins Creek and hunt towards the quar
mash fields. W. Brattin is yet very low he eats hartily but he is So
weak in the Small of his back that he Can't walk. we have made use of
every remidy to restore him without it's haveing the desired effect.
one of our party, John Shields observed that he had Seen men in Similar
Situations restored by Violent Swets. and bratten requested that he
might be Swetted in the way Sheilds purposed which we agreed to.
Shields dug a round hole 4 feet deep & 3 feet Diamuter in which he made
a large fire So as to beet the hole after which the fire was taken out
a Seet placed in the hole. the patent was then Set on the Seat with a
board under his feet and a can of water handed him to throw on the
bottom & Sides of the hole So as to create as greate a heat as he Could
bear. and the hole covered with blankets supported by hoops. after
about 20 minits the patient was taken out and put in Cold water a few
minits, & returned to the hole in which he was kept about 1 hour. then
taken out and Covered with Several blankets, which was taken off by
degrees untill he became Cool. this remedy took place yesterday and
bratten is walking about to day and is much better than he has been. at
11 A.M. a canoe came down with the Indian man who had applyed for
medical assistance while we lay at the broken arms village. this man I
had given a fiew doses of Flower of Sulpher & Creme of Tarter and
derected that he Should take the Cold bath every morning. he Conceited
himself a little better than he was at that time. he had lost the use
of all his limbs and his fingers are Contracted. We are at a loss to
deturmine what to do for this unfortunate man. I gave him a few drops
of Lodman and Some portable Supe as medisine. 4 of our men Crossed the
river and went to the broken arms Village and returned in the evening
with a Supply of bread and roots which they precured in exchange for
Awls which were made of pieces of a chane--we were visited to day by
the 2 young men who gave Capt. L. and my Self a horse each at the
village. those men Stayed about two hours and returned to their
village. this day proved to be very worm.




[Lewis, May 25, 1806]
Sunday May 25th 1806.
It rained the greater part of last night and continued untill 6 A.M.
our grass tent is impervious to the rain. the Child is more unwell than
yesterday. we gave it a doze of creem of tartar which did not operate,
we therefore gave it a clyster in the evening. we caused a sweat to be
prepared for the indian Cheif in the same manner in which Bratton had
been sweated, this we attempted but were unable to succeed, as he was
unable to set up or be supported in the place. we informed the indians
that we knew of no releif for him except sweating him in their sweat
houses and giving him a plenty of the tea of the horsemint which we
shewed them. and that this would probably nos succeed as he had been so
long in his present situation. I am confident that this would be an
excellent subject for electricity and much regret that I have it not in
my power to supply it.--Drewyer Labuish and Cruzatte set out this
morning to hunt towards the quawmash grounds if they can possibly pass
Collins's Creek. Joseph and Reuben Feilds passed the river in order to
hunt on the opposite side some miles above where the natives inform us
that there is an abundance of bear and some deer. Goodrich visited a
village about 8 ms. above on the opposite side of the river and
returned in the evening; he procured but few roots, he informed us that
there were but 8 persons at home; the others were either hunting,
diging roots or fishing on Lewis's river. he saw several salmon in
their lodges which they informed him came from that river these fish
were remarkably fat and fine. Gibson and shields returned this evening
having killed a Sandhill Crain only. they had wounded a female bear and
a deer but got neither of them. Gibson informed me that the bear had
two cubbs one of which was white and other as black as jett. four
indians remained with us this evening.-




[Clark, May 25, 1806]
Sunday 25th May 1806
rained moderately the greater part of last night and this morning
untill 6 A.M. The child is not So well to day as yesterday. I repeeted
the Creem of tarter and the onion poltice. I caused a Swet to be
prepared for the Indn. in the Same hole which bratten had been Sweeten
in two days past Drewyer Labiech and Peter crusatt Set out hunting
towards the quarmash grounds if they can cross the Creek which is
between this and that place, which has been the bearrer as yet to our
hunters. Jos. & R Fields crossed the river to hunt on the opposit side.
Goodrich went to the 2d village to purchase roots a fiew of which he
precured. he informed us that only 8 persons remained in the Village.
the men were either hunting on Lewis's river fishing, & the women out
digging roots. he saw Several fresh Salmon which the nativs informed
him Came from Lewis's river and were fat and fine. one of our men
purchased a Bear Skin of the nativs which was nearly of a Cream
Coloured white. this Skin which was the Skin of an animal of the middle
Size of bears together with the defferent Sizes colours &c. of those
which have been killed by our hunters give me a Stronger evidence of
the various Coloured bear of this country being one Species only, than
any I have heretofore had. the poil of these bear were infinately
longer finer & thicker than the black bear their tallons also longer &
more blunt as worn by digging roots. the white redish brown and bey
Coloured bear I saw together on the Missouri; the bey & Grizly have
been Seen and killed together here. for these were the Colours of those
which Collins killed on the 14th inst. in short it is not common to
find two bear here of this Species presisely of the same colour, and if
we were to attempt to distinguish them by their colours and to
denomonate each colour a distinct Species we Should Soon find at least
twenty. the most Strikeing difference between this Species of bear and
the Common black bear are that the former are large and have longer
tallens, hair, and tushes, prey more on other animals, do not lie so
long or so closely in winter quarters, and will not Climb a tree, tho
ever so hardly pursued. the varigated bear I believe to be the Same
here with those of the Missouri but these are not so ferocious as those
on the Missouri perhaps from the Circumstance of their being compeled
from the scercity of game in this quarter to live more on roots and of
course not so much in the habit of Seizing and debowering liveing
animals. the bear here is far from being as passive as the common black
bear, they have atacked and fought our hunters already but not so
feircely as those of the Missouri. There are also some of the Common
black bear in this neghbourhood tho no So Common as the other Species.

we attempted to swet the sick indian but could not Suckceed. he was not
able either to Set up or be Supported in the place prepared for him. I
therefore deturmined to inform the Nativs that nothing but Sefere
Swetts would restore this disabled man, and even that doubtfull in his
present Situation. in the evening Shields & gibson returned haveing
killed a Sandhill Crane only. they Saw a female bear, & 2 Cubs &
Several deer. they Shot the bear and a deer both of which made their
escape. Gibson told me that the Cubs were of different Colours one jut
black and the other of a whiteish Colour-. 4 indians Continue with us,
one return to their village to daey




[Lewis, May 26, 1806]
Monday May 26th 1806.
Had frequent showers in the course of the last night. Collins, Shannon
and Colter set out to hunt on the high lands some distance up on the N.
E. side of Collins's Creek. The Clyster given the Child last evening
operated very well. it is clear of fever this evening and is much
better, the swelling is considerably abated and appears as if it would
pass off without coming to a head. we still continue fresh poltices of
onions to the swolen part. we directed the indians in what manner to
treat the dieased Cheif, gave him a few dozes of flour of sulpher and
Creem of tartar & some portable soupe and directed them to take him
home. they seemed unwilling to comply with the latter part of the
injunction for they consumed the day and remained with us all night. at
1 P.M. Joseph and R. Feilds returned, accompanyed by Hohastillpilp
several other inferior Cheifs and some young men. These hunters
informed us they were unable to reach the grounds to which they had
been directed in consequence of the debth and rapidity of a large creek
which falls in about 10 Ms. above. they passed Commearp Creek at about
11/2 Ms. and a second creek reather larger at 3 Ms. further. at the
distance of 4 Ms. up this last creek on their return they called at a
village which our traders have never yet visited, here they obtained a
large quantity of bread and roots of Cows on very moderate terms. we
permitted Sergt. Pryor and four men to pass the river tomorrow morning
with a view to visit this village we also directed Charbono York and
LePage to set out early for the same place and procure us some roots.
our meat is again exhausted, we therefore directed R. Fields to hunt
the horse in the morning which the Indians have given us to kill. one
of our men saw a salmon in the river today. in the afternoon we
compleated our canoe and put her in the water; she appears to answer
very well and will carry about 12 persons.--the river still rising fast
and snows of the mountains visibly diminish




[Clark, May 26, 1806]
Monday 26th May 1806
Some Small Showers of rain last night, and continued Cloudy this
morning untill 7 A. M when it Cleared away and became fair and worm.
Collins Shannon & Colter set out to hunt on the high lands to the N E
of us towards Collins Creek. The Child Something better this morning
tho the Swelling yet continues. we Still apply the onion poltice. I
detected what Should be done for the disabled man, gave him a fiew
doses of Creem of tarter & flour Sulphur, and Some portable Supe and
directed that he Should be taken home & Swetted &c. at 1 P.M. Joseph &
R. Fields returned accompanied by Hoh hast ill pilt and an Second Chief
and 4 men Several young men also rode down on this Side. Jo & R Fields
informed us that they were at a village 4 Miles up the 2nd Creek from
this place on the opposit side above at which place on the opposit side
above at which place they precured roots on very reasonable terms. they
Could not proceed higher up to hunt as the creeks were too high for
them to Cross, &c. we gave permission to Serjt. Pryor and 4 men to
cross the river and trade with nativs of the village the Field's were
at yesterday for roots &c. we also directed Shabono & york to proceed
on to the Same Village and precure Some roots for our Selves if
possible. one of our men Saw a Salmon in the river to day. and two
others eat of Salmon at the near Village which was brought from Lewis's
river. our Canoe finished and put into the water. it will Carry 12 men.
the riseing very fast and Snow appear to melt on the Mountains.




[Lewis, May 27, 1806]
Tuesday May 27th 1806.
Early this morning we sent Reubin Fields in surch of the horse which
the indians had given us to kill. at 10 in the morning he returned with
the horse and we killed and butchered him; he was large and in good
order. Hohastillpilp told us that most of the horses we saw runing at
large in this neighbourhood belonged to himself and his people, and
whenever we were in want of meat he requested that we would kill any of
them we wished; this is a peice of liberallity which would do honour to
such as host of civilization; indeed I doubt whether there are not a
great number of our countrymen who would see us fast many days before
their compassion would excite them to a similar act of liberallity.
Sergt. Pryor and the party ordered to the indian Village set out early
this morning. in the evening he returned with Gibson and Sheilds. the
others remained at the village all night; they brought a good store of
roots and bread. we also sent Sergt. ordway and 2 men this morning over
to Lewis's river for salmon, which the indians inform us may be
procured in abundance at that place, and that it is but half a days
ride, nearly south.--Drewyer, Cruzatte, and Labuish returned at 4 P.M.
with five deer which they had killed at some distance up Collins's
Creek on this side; that stream still continues so high that they could
not pass it.--Charbono's son is much better today, tho the swelling on
the side of his neck I beleive will terminate in an ugly imposthume a
little below the ear. the indians were so anxious that the sick Cheif
should be sweated under our inspection that they requested we would
make a second attept today; accordingly the hole was somewhat enlarged
and his father a very good looking old man, went into the hole with him
and sustained him in a proper position during the operation; we could
not make him sweat as copiously as we wished. after the operation he
complained of considerable pain, we gave him 30 drops of laudanum which
soon composed him and he rested very well.--this is at least a strong
mark of parental affection. they all appear extreemly attentive to this
sick man nor do they appear to relax in their asceduity towards him
notwithstand he has been sick and helpless upwards of three years. the
Chopunnish appear to be very attentive and kind to their aged people
and treat their women with more rispect than the nations of the
Missouri.--There is a speceis of Burrowing squirrel common in these
plains which in their habits somewhat resemble those of the missouri
but are a distinct speceis. this little animal measures one fot five
and 1/2 inches from the nose to the extremity of the tail, of which the
tail occupys 21/4 inches only; in the girth it is 11 In. the body is
proportionably long, the neck and legs short; the ears are short,
obtusely pointed, and lie close to the head; the aperture of the ear is
larger proportionably than most animals which burrow. the eyes are of
moderate size, the puple black and iris of a dark sooty brown. the
teeth are like those of the squirrel as is it's whole contour. the
whiskers are full, long and black; it also has some long black hairs
above the eyes. it has five toes on each foot; the two inner toes of
the fore feet are remarkably short, and have short blont nails. the
remaining toes on those feet are long, black, slightly curved, and
sharply pointed. the outer and inner toes of the hind feet are not
short yet they are by no means as long as the three toes in the center
of the foot which are remarkably long but the nails are not as long as
those of the fore feet tho of the same form and colour. the hair of the
tail tho of the same form and colour. the hair of the tail tho thickly
inserted on every part rispects the two sides only. this gives it a
flat appearance and a long ovol form. the tips of the hair which form
the outer edges of the tail are white. the base of the hairs are either
black or a fox red. the under disk of the tail is an iron grey, the
upper a redish brown. the lower part of the jaws, under part of the
neck, legs and feet from the body down and belley are of a light brick
red. the nose as high as the eyes is of a darker brick red. the upper
part of the head neck and body are of a curious brownish grey colour
with a cast of the brick red. the longer hair of these parts being of a
redish white colour at their extremities, fall together in such manner
as to give it the appearance of being speckled at a little distance.
these animals form large ascociations as those of the Missouri,
occupying with their burroughs one or sometimes 200 acres of land. the
burrows are seperate and are each occupyed perhaps by ten or 12 of
those animals. there is a little mound in front of the hole formed of
the earth thrown out of the burrow and frequently there are three or
four distinct holes forming what I term one burrow with their mouths
arround the base of this little mound which seems to be occupyed as a
watch-tower in common by the inhabitants of those several holes. these
mounds are sometimes as much as 2 feet high and 4 feet in diameter, and
are irregularly distributed over the tract they occupy at the distance
of from ten to thirty or 40 yds. when you approach a burrow the
squirrels, one or more, usually set erect on these mounds and make a
kind of shrill whistleing nois, something like tweet, tweet, tweet, &c.
they do not live on grass as those of the missouri but on roots. one
which I examined had in his mouth two small bulbs of a speceis of
grass, which resemble very much what is sometimes called the grassnut.
the intestins of those little animals are remarkably large for it's
size. fur short and very fine.--the grass in their villages is not cut
down as in those of the plains of the missouri. I preserved the skins
of several of these animals with the heads feet and legs entire. The
Black woodpecker which I have frequently mentioned and which is found
in most parts of the roky Mountains as well as the Western and S. W.
mountains. I had never an opportunity of examining untill a few days
since when we killed and preserved several of them. this bird is about
the size of the lark woodpecker of the turtle dove, tho it's wings are
longer than either of those birds. the beak is black, one inch long,
reather wide at the base, somewhat curved, and sharply pointed; the
chaps are of equal length. arround the base of the beak including the
eye and a small part of the throat is of a fine crimson red. the neck
and as low as the croop in front is of an iron grey. the belly and
breast is a curious mixture of white and blood reed which has much the
appearance of having been artifically painted or stained of that
colour. the red reather predominates. the top of the head back, sides,
upper surface of the wings and tail are black, with a gossey tint of
green in a certain exposure to the light. the under side of the wings
and tail are of a sooty black. it has ten feathers in the tail, sharply
pointed, and those in the center reather longest, being 21/2 inches in
length. the tongue is barbed, pointed, and of an elastic cartelaginous
substance. the eye is moderately large, puple black and iris of a dark
yellowish brown. this bird in it's actions when flying resembles the
small redheaded woodpecke common to the Atlantic states; it's note also
somewhat resembles that bird. the pointed tail seems to assist it in
seting with more eas or retaining it its resting position against the
perpendicular side of a tree. the legs and feet are black and covered
with wide imbricated scales. it has four toes on each foot of which two
are in rear and two in front; the nails are much curved long and
remarkably keen or sharply pointed. it feeds on bugs worms and a
variety of insects.




[Clark, May 27, 1806]
Tuesday 27th May 1806
A cloudy morning Serjt. Pryor and party Set out at 7 A.M. Serjt. Ordway
and two men are ordered to cross this river and proceed on through the
plains to Lewis's and precure Some Salmon on that river, and return
tomorrow if possible he Set out at 8 A.M. we Sent Rub. Field in Serch
of the horse which the indians had given us to kill. at 10 A. M he
returned with the horse and he was killed and butchered; he was large
and in good order. hohastillpilp told us that most of the horses which
we Saw running in those plains in this neighbourhood at large belonged
to himself and his people, and whenever we were in want of meet, he
requested that would kill any of them we wished; this is a piece of
liberallity which would do honour to Such as host of civilization.
Serjt. Pryor, Gibson & Shields returned from the Village with a good
Stock of roots and bread. Shabono Lapage & Yourk whome we had Sent to
purchase roots for ourselves remained at the Village all night.
Drewyer, Labiech & Crusat return at 4 P.M. with 5 Deer which they had
killed at Some distance up Collin's Creek on this Side, that Stream
Still continue So high that they could not pass it.

Shabono's child is much better to day; tho the Swelling on the Side of
his neck I believe will termonate in an ugly imposthume a little below
the ear. The Indians were so anxious that the Sick Chief (who has lost
the use of his limbs) Should be Sweted under our inspection they
requested me to make a 2d attempt to day; accordingly the hole was
enlargened and his father a very good looking old man performed all the
drugery &c. we could not make him Swet as copously as we wished. being
compelled to keep him erect in the hole by means of Cords. after the
oppiration he complained of Considerable pain, I gave him 30 drops of
Laudnom which Soon composed him and he rested very well-. I observe the
Strongest marks of parental affection. they all appear extreemly
attentive to this Sick man, no do they appear to relax in their
ascituity towards him not withstanding he has been Sick and helpless
for near 5 years. The Chopunnish appeare to be very attentive & kind to
their aged people and treat their women with more respect than the
nativs on the Missouri.

There is a Species of whistleing Squirel common in these plains which
in their habit Somewhat resembles those of the Missouri but are a
distinct Species. this little animale measures 1 foot 5 inches & a half
from the nose to the extremity of the tail, of which the tail occupies
21/4 inches only; in the girth it is 11 inches the body is
perpotionably long, the neck and legs Short; the ears are Short,
obtusely pointed, and lye close to the head; the aperture of the ear is
larger proportionably than most animals which burrow. the eyes are of
Moderate Size, the puple black and iris of a dark dusky brown. the
teeth are like those of the Squirel as is it's whole contour. the
whiskers are full, long and black; it has also Some long black hars
above the eye-. it has five toes on each foot; the 2 iner toes of the
fore feet are remarkably Short, and have Short blunt nails. the
remaining toes on these feet are long Slightly Curved, black and
Sharply pointed. the outer and inner toes of the hind feet are not
Short yet they are by no means as long as the three toes in the Center
of the foot which are remarkably long but the nails are not as long as
those of the fore feet tho of the Same form and colour. the bars of the
tail tho thickly inserted on every part respects the two Sides only.
this givs it a flat appearance and a long oval form. the tips of the
hair which forms the outer edges of the tail are white. the bace of the
hair are either black or a fox red. the under disk of the tail is an
iron gray, the upper a redish brown. the lower part of the jaws, under
part of the neck, legs and feet from the body down and belly are of a
light brick red. the nose as high as the eyes is of a darker brick red.
the upper part of the head neck and body are of a curious brownish gray
colour with a cast of the brick red. the longer hairs of these parts
being of a redish white colour at their extremities fall together in
Such a Manner as to give it to the appearance of being Spekled at a
little distance. these animals form large ascoations as those of the
Missouri, occupying with their burroughs one or Sometimes 200 acres of
Land. the burrows are Seperate and are each occupyed perhaps by 10 or
12 of those Animals. there is a little Mound in front of the hole
formed of the earth thrown out of the burrow and frequently there are
three or four distinct holes forming what I call one burrow, around the
base of the mound, which Seams to be occupied as a watch tower in
common by the inhabitents of those Several holes. these Mounds are
Sometimes as much as 2 feet high, and 4 feet in diameter, and are
irregularly distributed over the tract they occupy at the distance of
from ten to 30 or forty yards. When you approach a burrow the Squirels
one, or more, usially Set erect on these Mounds and make a kind of
Shrill whistleing nois, Something like tweet, tweet, tweet &c. they do
not live on grass as those of the Missouri but on roots. one which I
examoned had in his mouth two Small bulbs of a Species of grass, which
resembles very much what is Sometimes Called the Grass Nut. the
intestins of these little animals are remarkably large for it's Size;
fur Short and very fine. the grass in their village is not Cut down as
in these of the plains of the Missouri. I preserved the Skins of
Several of these animals with the heads feet and legs entire-.-. The
Black Wood pecker which is found in most parts of the rocky Mountains
as will as the Western and S W. mountains, I had never an oppertunity
of examineing, untill a fiew days Since when we killed and preserved
Several of them. this bird is about the Size of the lark woodpecker or
the turtle dove, tho it's wings are longer than either of these birds.
the beak is black, one inch long reather wide at the base, Somewhat
cirved, and Sharply pointed; the chaps are of equal length. around the
bace of the beak including the eye and a Small part of the throat is of
a crimson red. the neck and as low as the croop in front is of an iron
gray. the belly and breast is of a curious mixture of white and blood
red which has much the appearance of haveing been artifically painted
or Stained of that colour, the red reather predominates. the top of the
head, back, Sides, upper Surface of the wings and tail are black, the
under Side of the wings and tail are black. it has ten feathers in the
tail, Sharply pointed, and those in the center reather longest, being
21/2 inches in length. the tongue is barbed, pointed, and of an elastic
cartalaginous Substance. the eye is moderately large, puple black and
iris of a dark yellowish brown. this bird in it's actions when flying
resemble the Small redish woodpecker common to the altantic States;
it's note also Somewhat resembles that bird. the pointed tail Seems to
assist it in sitting with more ease or retaining it, in it's resting
position against the perpendicular Side of a tree. the legs and feet
are black, and covered with imbricated scales. it has four toes on each
foot, of which two are in rear and two in front; the nails are much
curved long and remarkably Keen or Sharply pointed. it feeds on bugs,
worms and a variety of insects.-.




[Lewis, May 28, 1806]
Wednesday May 28th 1806.
We sent Goodrich to the village of the broken arm this morning he
returned in the evening with some roots bread and a parsel of
goats-hair for making our saddle pads. Reubin and Joseph Feilds set out
this morning to hunt high up on a creek which discharges itself into
this river about 8 miles above us. at Noon Charbono, York and Lapage
returned; they had obtained four bags of the dryed roots of Cows and
some bread. in the evening Collins Shannon and Colter returned with
eight deer. they had fortunately discovered a ford on Collins's Creek
where they were enabled to pass it with their horses and had hunted at
the quawmash ground where we first met with the Chopunnish last fall.
deer were very abundant they informed us, but there were not many bear.
The sick Cheif was much better this morning he can use his hands and
arms and seems much pleased with the prospect of recovering, he says he
feels much better than he has for a great number of months. I sincerely
wish these sweats may restore him; we have consented that he should
still remain with us and repeat these sweats. he set up a great
proportion of the day.--The Child is also better, he is free of fever,
the imposthume is not so large but seems to be advancing to maturity.-
since my arrival here I have killed several birds of the corvus genus
of a kind found only in the rocky mountains and their neighbourhood. I
first met with this bird above the three forks of the Missouri and saw
them on the hights of the rocky Mountains but never before had an
opportunity of examining them closely. the small corvus discribed at
Fort Clatsop is a different speceis, tho untill now I had taken it to
be the same, this is much larger and has a loud squawling note
something like the mewing of a cat. the beak of this bird is 11/2
inches long, is proportionably large, black and of the form which
characterizes this genus. the upper exceeds the under chap a little.
the head and neck are also proportionably large. the eye full and
reather prominent, the iris dark brown and puple black. it is about the
size and somewhat the form of the Jaybird tho reather rounder or more
full in the body. the tail is four and a half inches in length,
composed of 12 feathers nearly of the same length. the head neck and
body of this bird are of a dove colour. the wings are black except the
extremities of six large fathers ocupying the middle joint of the wing
which are white. the under disk of the wing is not of the shining or
grossy black which marks it's upper surface. the two feathers in the
center of the tail are black as are the two adjacent feathers for half
their width the ballance are of a pure white. the feet and legs are
black and imbricated with wide scales. the nails are black and
remarkably long and sharp, also much curved. it has four toes on each
foot of which one is in the rear and three in front. the toes are long
particularly that in the rear. this bird feeds on the seed of the pine
and also on insects. it resides in the rocky mountains at all seasons
of the year, and in many parts is the only bird to be found.--our
hunters brought us a large hooting Owl which differs considerably from
those of the Atlantic States which are also common here. the plumage of
this owl is an uniform mixture of dark yellowish brown and white, in
which the dark brown predominates. it's colour may be properly termed a
dark iron grey. the plumage is very long and remarkably silky and soft.
these have not the long feathers on the head which give it the
appearance of ears or horns. the leathers of the head are long narrow
and closely set, they rise upwright nearly to the extremity and then
are bent back sudonly as iff curled. a kind of ruff of these feathers
incircle the thoat. the head has a flat appearance being broadest
before and behind and is 1 foot 10 Is. in circumference. incircling the
eyes and extending from them like rays from the center a tissue of open
hairy long feathers are placed of a light grey colour, these conceal
the ears which are very large and are placed close to the eyes behind
and extending below them. these feathers meet over the beak which they
nearly conceal and form the face of the owl. they eyes are remarkably
large and prominant, the iris of a pale goald colour and iris circular
and of a deep sea green. the beak is short and wide at it's base. the
upper chap is much curved at the extremity and comes down over and in
front of the under chap. this bird is about the size of the largest
hooting Owl. the tail is composed of eleven feathers, of which those in
the center are reather the longest. it is booted to the extremity of
the toes, of which it has four on each foot, one in the rear one on the
outer side and two in front. the toes are short particularly that in
rear, but are all armed with long keen curved nails of a dark brown
colour. the beak is white and nostrils circular large and unconnected.
the habits and the note of this owl is much that of the common large
hooting owl.




[Clark, May 28, 1806]
Wednesday May 28th 1806
We sent Goodrich to the Village of the broken Arm for hair to Stuff
Saddle pads. Jo. & R. Fields Set out this morning to hunt towards the
mountains. at noon Shabono York and Lapage returned. they had obtained
4 bags of the dried roots of Cowse and Some bread. in the evening
Collins, Shannon & Cotter returned with 8 deer. they fortunately
discovered a ford on Collin's Creek where they were enable to pass it
with there horses and had hunted at the quawmash Grounds where we first
met with the Chopunnish last fall. deer were verry abundant they
informed us, but there was not many bear. The Sick Chief is much better
this morning he can use his hands and arms and Seems much pleased with
the prospects of recovering, he Says he feels much better than he has
done for a great Number of Months. I Sincerly wish that the Swetts may
restore him. I have Consented to repeet the Sweets.

The Country along the rocky mountains for Several hundred Miles in
length and about 50 in width is leavel extremely fertile and in many
parts Covered with a tall and opult. growth of the long leafed pine.
near the Watercourses the hills are lofty tho are covered with a good
Soil and not remarkably Stoney and possess more timber than the leavel
country. the bottom lands on the Water courses are reather narrow and
confined tho fertile and Seldom inundated. this Country would form an
extensive Settlement; the Climate appears quit as mild as that of a
Similar latitude on the Atlantic Coast; & it cannot be otherwise than
healthy; it possesses a fine dry pure air. the grass and maney plants
are now upwards of Knee high. I have no doubt that this tract of
Country if Cultivated would produce in great abundance every article
esentially necessary to the comfort and Subsistence of civillized man.
to it's present inhabitents nature Seems to have dealt with a liberal
hand, for she has distributed a great variety of esculent plants over
the face of the Country which furnish them a plentiful Store of
provisions; those are acquired but little toil; and when prepared after
the method of the nativs afford not only a nutricious but an agreeable
food. among other roots those Called by them the Quawmash and Cows are
esteemd. the most agreeable and valuable as they are also the most
abundant in those high plains.

The Cows is a knobbed root of an erregularly rounded form not unlike
the Gensang in form and Consistence; this root they Collect, rub off a
thin black rhind which Covers it and pounding it exposes it in cakes to
the Sun. these Cakes are about an inch and 1/4 thick and 6 by 18 in
wedth, when dry they either eat this bread alone without any further
preperation, or boil it and make a thick Musilage; the latter is most
common & much the most agreeable. the flower of this root is not very
unlike the gensang-. this root they Collect as early as the Snow
disappears in the Spring, and Continues to collect it untill the
Quawmash Supplies it's place which happins about the Middle of June.
the quawmash is also Collected for a fiew weeks after it first makes
it's appearance in the Spring, but when the scape appears it is no
longer fit for use untill the Seed are ripe which happens about the
time just mentioned. and then the Cows declines. The Cows is also
frequently dried in the Sun and pounded afterwards and used in
thickening Supe and Makeing Mush.

The Chopunnish held a Council in the morning of the 12th among
themselves in respect to the Subject on which we had Spoken to them the
day before, the result as we learnt was favourable, they placed
Confidence in the information they had recived and resolved to pursue
our advise. after this Council was over the principal Chief or the
broken arm, took the flour of the roots of Cows and thickened the Soup
in the Kitiles and baskets of all his people, this being ended he made
a harangue the purpote of which was makeing known the deliberations of
their councils and impressing the necessity of unanimity among them,
and a strict attention to the resolution which had been agreed on in
Councell; he concluded by enviting all such men as had resolved to
abide by the decree of the councill to come and eat, and requested Such
as would not be So bound to Show themselves by not partakeing of the
feast. I was told by one of our men who was present in the house, that
there was not a decenting voice on this great National question, but
all Swallowed their objections if any they had, very cheerfully with
their mush-. dureing the time of this loud animated harangue of the
Chief the women Cryed wrung their hands, tore their hair and appeared
to be in the utmost distress. after this cerimoney was over, the Chiefs
and considerate men came in a body to where we were Seated at a little
distance from our tent, and two young men at the instance of the nation
presented Capt L. and myself each a fine horse. and informed us that
they had listened with attentioned to what we had Said and were
resolved to pursue our Counsels &c.--That as we had not seen the Black
foot Indians and the Minetarries of Fort dePrarie they did not think it
safe to venter over to the plains of the Missouri, where they would
fondly go provided those nations would not kill them. that when we had
established a tradeing house on the Missouri as we had promised they
would Come over and trade for arms Amunition &c. and live about us.
that it would give them much pleasure to be at peace with those nations
altho they had Shed much of their blood-. They Said that they were pore
but their hearts were good. we might be assured of their sincerety.
Some of their brave men would go over with us to the Missouri and bring
them the news as we wished, and if we Could make a peace between them
and their enimies on the other Side of the mountains their nation would
go over to the Missouri in the latter end of the Summer. on the Subject
of one of their Chiefs accompanying us to the land of the White men
they Could not yet determine, but that they would let us know before we
left them. that the Snow was yet so deep in the Mountains that if we
attempted to pass, we would Certainly perish, and advised us to remain
untill after the next full Moon when the Snow would disappear on the
South hill sides and we would find grass for our horses.-. Shabonos
Child is better this day that he was yesterday. he is free from fever.
the imposthume is not So large but Seems to be advanceing to meturity-.




[Lewis, May 29, 1806]
Thursday May 29th 1806.
No movement of the party today worthy of notice. we have once more a
good stock of meat and roots. Bratton is recovering his strength very
fast; the Child and the Indian Cheif are also on the recovery. the
cheif has much more uce of his hands and arms. he washed his face
himself today which he has been unable to do previously for more than
twelvemonths. we would have repeated the sweat today had not been
cloudy and frequently raining. a speceis of Lizzard called by the
French engages prarie buffaloe are native of these plains as well as of
those of the Missouri. I have called them the horned Lizzard. they are
about the size and a good deel the figure of the common black lizzard.
but their bellies are broader, the tail shorter and their action much
slower; they crawl much like the toad. they are of brown colour with
yellowish and yellowishbrown spots. it is covered with minute scales
intermixed with little horny prosesses like blont prickles on the upper
surface of the body. the belley and throat is more like the frog and
are of a light yelowish brown colour. arround the edge of the belley is
regularly set with little horney projections which give to those edges
a serrate figure the eye is small and of a dark colour. above and
behind the eyes there are several projections of the bone which being
armed at their extremities with a firm black substance has the
appearance of horns sprouting out from the head. this part has induced
me to distinguish it by the apppellation of the horned Lizzard. I
cannot conceive how the engages ever assimilated this animal with the
buffaloe for there is not greater analogy than between the horse and
the frog. this animal is found in greatest numbers in the sandy open
parts of the plains, and appear in great abundance after a shower of
rain; they are sometimes found basking in the sunshine but conceal
themselves in little holes in the earth much the greater preportion of
their time. they are numerous about the falls of the Missouri and in
the plains through which we past lately above the Wallahwallahs.--The
Choke Cherry has been in blume since the 20th inst. it is a simple
branching ascending stem. the cortex smooth and of a dark brown with a
redish cast. the leaf is scattered petiolate oval accute at its apex
finely serrate smooth and of an ordinary green. from 11/2 to 3 inches
in length and 13/4 to 2 in width. the peduncles are common, cilindric,
and from 4 to 5 inches in length and are inserted promiscuously on the
twigs of the preceeding years growth. on the lower portion of the
common peduncle are frequently from 3 to 4 small leaves being the same
in form as those last discribed. other peduncles 1/4 of an inch in
length are thickly scattered and inserted on all sides of the common
peduncle at wright angles with it each elivating a single flower, which
has five obtuse short patent white petals with short claws inserted on
the upper edge of the calyx. the calyx is a perianth including both
stamens and germ, one leafed fine cleft entire simiglobular, infrior,
deciduous. the stamens are upwards of twenty and are seated on the
margin of the flower cup or what I have called the perianth. the
filaments are unequal in length subulate inflected and superior
membranous. the anthers are equal in number with the filaments, they
are very short oblong & flat, naked and situated at the extremity of
the filaments, is of a yelow colour as is also the pollen. one
pistillum. the germen is ovate, smooth, superior, sessile, very small;
the Style is very short, simple, erect, on the top of the germen,
deciduous. the stigma is simple, flat very short.-




[Clark, May 29, 1806]
Thursday 29th of May 1806
No movement of the party to day worthy of notice. we have once more a
good Stock of Meat and roots. Bratten is recovering his Strength very
fast. the Child, and the Indian Cheaf are also on the recovery. the
Chief has much more use of his hands and arms. he washed his face
himself today. Which he has not been able to do previously for more
than twelve months past. I would have repeeted the Sweat to day had it
not been Cloudy and frequently raining.-. Sence my arrival here I have
killed Several birds of the Corvus genus of a kind found only in the
rocky mountains and their neighbourhood. I first met with bird on
Jeffersons River. and Saw them on the hights of the rocky mountains.
but never before had an oppertunity of examineing them Closely. the
Small Corvus discribed at Fort Clatsop is a different Species, tho
untill now I had taken it to be the Same, this is much larger and has a
loud squaling note something like the newing of a Cat. the beak of this
bird is 11/2 inches long, is proportionably large, black and of the
form which characterize this genus. the upper exeeds the under Chap a
little. the head and neck are also propotionably large, the eyes full
and reather prominant, the iris dark brown and purple black. it is
about the Size and Some what the form of the jay bird, tho reather
rounder and more full in the body. the tail is four and a half inches
in length, composed of 12 feathers nearly of the Same length. the head,
neck and body of this bird is of a dove Colour. the wings are black
except the extremities of Six large feathers occupying the middle joint
of the wings which are White. the under disk of the wings are not of
the shineing or glossy black which mark it's upper Surface. the two
feathers in the Center of the tail are black as are the two adjacent
feathers for half their wedth, the ballance are of a pure White. the
feet and legs are black, and imbricated with wide Scales, the nails are
black and remarkably long and Sharp, also much Curved, it has four toes
on each foot of which one is in the rear and 3 in front. the toes are
long particular that in the rear. this bird feeds on the Seeds of the
pine and also on insects. it resides in the rocky Mountains at all
Seasons of the year, and in many parts is the only bird to be found. a
Species of Lizzard Called by the French engages, Prarie buffaloe are
nativs of these plains as well as those of the Missouri. I have Called
them the horned Lizzard. they are about the Size and a good deel the
figure of the Common black lizzard. but their bellies are broader, the
tail Shorter and their action much Slower; they Crawl much like the
toad. they are of a brown Colour with yellowish and yellowish brown
Spots. it is covered with minute scales intermixed with little horney
like blunt prickkles on the upper Surface of the body. the belly and
throat is more like the frog and are of a light yellowish brown Colour.
around the edge of the belly is regularly Set with little horney
prejections which give to those edges a Serrate figure, the eye is
Small and of a dark colour. above and behind the eyes there are Several
Projections of the bone which being armed at their extremities with a
firm black Substance has the appearance of horns Sprouting out from the
head. this part has induced me to distinguish it by the appellation of
the Horned Lizard. I cannot conceive how the engagees ever assimilated
this animal withe Buffalow for there is not grater anology than between
the Horse and the frog. this Animal is found in greatest numbers in the
Sandy open parts of the Plains, and appear in great abundance after a
rain; they are Sometimes found basking in the Sunshine but conceal
themselves in little holes under the tufts of grass or herbs much the
greater proportion of their time. they are noumerous about the Falls of
Missouri, and in the plains through which we passed lately above the
Falls of Columbia

The Choke Cherry has been in blume Since the 20th inst. it is a Simple
branching ascending Stem. the Cortex Smooth and of a dark brown with a
redish Cast. the leaf is scattered petiolate oval accute at it's apex
finely Serated Smooth and of an ordinary green, from 21/2 to 3 inches
in length and from 11/4 to 2 in width. the Peduncles cilindric and
Common from 4 to 5 inches in length and are inserted promiscuisly on
the twigs of the proceeding years growth. on the lower portion of the
Common peduncle are frequently from 3 to 4 Small leaves, being the same
in form as those last discribed. other peduncles 1/4 of an inch in
length are Scattered and thickly inserted on all sides of the Common
peduncle at right-angles with it, each elivateing a Single flower,
which has five obtuse Short patent white petals with Short claws
incerted on the upper edge of the calyx. the Calyx is a perianth
including both Stemes & germ, one leafed five cleft entire, Semi
globular. the Stamons are upwards of twenty and are Seated on the
Margin of the flower Cup or what I have Called the perianth. the
filaments are unequal in length Subulate inflected and Superior
membranous. the anthers are equal in number with the filaments, they
are very Short oblong and flat, naked and Situated at the extremity of
the filaments. is of a yellowish colour asis also the pollen. one
pistillum. the germin is ovate, Smooth, Superior, sessile, very Small;
the Style is very Short, Simple, erect, on the top of the germen
deciduous. the Stigma is Simple, flat very Short. This Shrub rises to
the hight of from 6 to 8 feet generally but Sometimes rich Situations
much higher. it is not confined to any particular Situation Capt. L-s
met with a singular plant in blume of which we preserved a Specimene.
it grows on the Steep fertile hill Sides near this place the radix is
fibrous, not much branched, annual, woody, white and nearly Smooth. the
Stem is Simple branching ascending 21/2 feet high. Celindric, villose
and of a pale red Colour. the branches are but fiew and those near it's
upper extremity. the extremities of the branches are flexable and are
bent down near their extremities with the weight of the flowers. the
leaf is sessile, scattered thinly, nearly lineor tho Somewhat widest in
the middle, two inches in length, absolutely entire, villose, obtusely
pointed and of an Ordinary green. above each leaf a Small Short branch
protrudes, Supporting a tissue of four or five Small leaves of the Same
appearance of those discribed. a leaf is placed under neath each branch
and each flower. the Calyx is one flowered Spatha. the corolla
Superior, consists of four pale perple petals which are tripartite, the
Centeral lobe largest and all terminate obtusely; they are inserted
with a long and narrow claw on the top of the germ, are long, Smooth
and deciduous. there are two distinct Sets of Stamens the first or
principal Consists of four, the filaments which are capillary, erect,
inserted on the top of the germ alternately with the petals, equal
short, membranus; the anthers are also four each being elivated with
it's fillaments; they are reather flat, erect sessile, cohering to the
base, membranous, longitudinally furrowed, twise as long as the
fillament naked, and of a pale purple colour, the Second Set of Stamens
are very minute, are also four and placed within and opposit to the
petals, those are Scercely precptable while the first are large &
Conspicious, the fillaments are capillary equal, very Short white and
Smooth. the anthers are four, oblong, beaked, erect Cohering at the
base, membanous, Shorter than the fillaments, White naked and appear
not to form pollen, there is one pistillum; the germ of which is also
one, celindric, villous, inferior, Sessile, as long as the first
Stamuns, and grooved. the Single Style and Stigma form a perfect mono
petallous corolla only with this difference that the Style which
elivates the Stigma or limb is not a tube but solid tho it's outer
appearance is that of a tube of a Monopetallous corolla swelling as it
ascends and gliding in such manner into the limb that it Cannot be Said
where the Style ends or the Stigma begins, jointly they are as long as
the Gorilla, while the limb is four cleft, Sauser Shaped, and the
margin of the lobes entire and rounded. this has the appearance of a
monopetallous flower growing from the Center of the four petalled
corollar which is rendered more conspicuous in consequence of the first
being white and the latter of a pale purple. I regret very much that
the Seed of this plant are not ripe as yet and it is probable will not
be so dureing our residence in this neighbourhood-. our Horses maney of
them have become So wild that we Cannot take them without the
assistance of the indians who are extreemly dextrous in throwing a Rope
and takeing them with a noose about the neck; as we frequently want the
use of our horses when we cannot get the use of the indians to take
them, we had a Strong pound formed to day in order to take them at
pleasure-




[Lewis, May 30, 1806]
Friday May 30th 1806.
Lapage and Charbono set out to the indian vilages early this morning
for the purpose of trading with them for roots; Sergt. Gass was sent
this morning to obtain some goats hair to stuff the padds of our
saddles. he ascended the river on this side and being unable to pass
the river opposite to the village he wished to visit, returned in the
evening unsuccessfull. Shannon and Collins were permitted to pass the
river in order to trade with the natives and lay in a store of roots
and bread for themselves with their proportion of the merchandize as
the others had done; in landing on the opposite shore the canoe was
driven broad side with the full forse of a very strong current against
some standing trees and instantly filled with water and sunk. Potts who
was with them is an indifferent swimer, it was with much difficulty he
made the land. they lost three blankets a blanket coat and their
pittance of merchandize. in our bear state of clootheing this was a
serious loss. I sent Sergt. Pryor and a party over with the indian
canoe in order to raise and secure ours but the debth of the water and
the strength of the current baffled every effort. I fear that we have
also lost our canoe. all our invalides are on the recovery. we gave the
sick Cheif a severe sweat today, shortly after which he could move one
of his legs and thyes and work his toes pretty well, the other leg he
can move a little; his fingers and arms seem to be almost entirely
restored. he seems highly delighted with his recovery. I begin to
entertain strong hope of his restoration by these sweats. in the
evening Joseph Feild returned in surch of his horses which had left
them last evening and returned to camp. Feilds informed us that himself
and his brother whom he had left at their camp 6 ms. distant on
Collin's creek, had killed 3 deer. The reptiles which I have observed
in this quarter are the Rattlesnake of the speceis discribed on the
Missouri, they are abundant in every part of the country and are the
only poisonous snake which we have yet met with since we left St.
Louis. the 2 speceis of snakes of an inosent kind already discribed.
the common black lizzard, the horned lizzard, a smal green tree frog,
the smal frog which is common to our country which sings in the spring
of the year, a large speceis of frog which resorts the water
considerably larger than our bull frog, it's shape seems to be a medium
between the delicate and lengthy form of our bull frog and that of our
land frog or toad as they are sometimes called in the U States. like
the latter their bodies are covered with little pustles or lumps,
elivated above the ordinary surface of the body; I never heard them
make any sound or nois. the mockerson snake or coperhead, a number of
vipers a variety of lizzards, the toad bullfrog &c common to the U
States are not to be found in this country. most of the insects common
to the U States are found here. the butterflies, common house and
blowing flies, the horse flies, except the goald coloured ear fly, tho
in stead of this fly we have a brown coloured fly about the same size
which attatches itself to that part of the horse and is equally as
troublesome. the silkworm is also found here. a great variety of
beatles common to the Atlantic states are found here likewise. except
from this order the large cow beatle and the black beatle usually alled
the tumble bug which are not found here. the hornet, the wasp and
yellow wasp or yellow jacket as they are frequently called are not met
with in this quarter. there is an insect which much resembles the
latter only a vast deel larger which are very numerous particularly in
the rocky mountains on the waters of the Columbia; these build in the
ground where they form a nest like the hornet with an outer covering to
the comb in which they deposit their eggs and raise their young. the
sheets of this comb are attatched to each other as those of the hornets
are. their wings are four of a dark brown colour. the head is black,
the body and abdomen are yellow incircled with transverse rings of
black, they are ferce and sting very severely, we found them
troublesome in frightening our horses as we passed those mountains. the
honey bee is not found here. the bumble bee is. one of the men brought
me today some onions from the high plain of a different speceis from
those near the borders of the river as they are also from the shive or
small onion noticed below the falls of the Columbia. these onions were
as large as a nutmeg, they generally grow double or two bulbs connected
by the same tissue of radicles; each bulb has two long liniar flat
solid leaves. the peduncle is solid celindric and crowned with an umbal
of from 20 to 30 flowers. this onion is exceedingly crisp and
delicately flavoured indeed I think more sweet and less strong than any
I ever taisted. it is not yet perfectly in blow, the parts of the
flower are not distinct.




[Clark, May 30, 1806]
Friday May 30th 1806.
Lapage and Shabono Set out early this morning to the Indian Village in
order to trade with them for roots; Serjt. Gass was Sent this morning
to obtain Some goats hair to Stuf the pads of our Saddles; he assended
the river on this Side and being unable to pass the river to the
village he wished to visit returned in the evening unsucksessfull.
Shannon and Collins were permited to pass the river in order to trade
with the nativs and lay in a Store of roots and bread for themselves
with their proportion of the merchendize as others had done; on landing
on the opposit Shore the Canoe was driven broad Side with the full
force of a very Strong Current against Some Standing trees and
instantly filled with water and Sunk. Potts who was with them is an
indifferent Swimer, it was with dificuelty he made the land. they lost
three blankets and a Blanket Cappo and their pittance of Merchindize.
in our bear State of Clothing this was a Serious loss. I Sent Serjt.
Pryor and a party over in the Indian Canoe in order to raise and Secure
ours but the debth of the water and the Strength of the Current baffled
every effort. I fear that we have also lost our Canoe.all our involedes
are on the recovery. we gave the Sick Chief a Severe Swet to day,
Shortly after which he could move one of his legs and thy's and work
his toes pritty well, the other leg he can move a little; his fingers
and arms Seem to be almost entirely restored. he Seems highly delighted
with his recovery. I begin to entertain Strong hope of his recovering
by these Sweats in the evening Joseph Fields returned in serch of his
horses which had left them last evening and returned to Camp. Field
informed us that himself and his brother whome he had left at their
Camp 6 ms. distant on Collins Creek had killed 3 Deer.--The reptiles
which I have observed in this quarter are the Rattle Snake of the
Species discribed on the Missouri, they are abundant in every part of
the Country and are the only poisonous Snake which we have met with
Since we left St. Louis. the Second Species of Snake of an inosent kind
already discribd. the Common black Lizzard, the horned Lizzard, a small
green tree-frog; the Same frog which is common to our Country which
Sings in the Spring of the year. a large Species of frog which resorts
the water considerably larger than our bull-frog, it's Shape Seems to
be a Medium between the delicate and lengthy form of our bullfrogs and
that of our land frog or toad as they are Sometimes called in the
United States. like the latter their bodies are covered with little
pustles or lumps, elevated above the ordinary Surface of the body; I
never heard them make any Sound or noise, the Mockerson Snake or Copper
head, a number of vipers, a variety of Lizzards, the toad bullfrog &c.
common to the U. States are not to be found in this Country. Most of
the insects common to the U States are found here. the butterfly,
common house and blowing flies, the horse flies, except the gold
coloured ear fly. tho in Stead of this fly we have a brown coloured fly
about the same Size which attatches itself to that part of the horse
and is equally as troublesom. the Silk worm is also found here. a great
variety of beatles common to the atlantic States are Seen here
likewise. except from this order the large Cow beatle and the black
beatle usially termed tumble bug which are not found here. the hornet,
the Wasp and yellow Wasp or yellow jacket as they are frequently Called
are not met with in this quarter. there is an insect which much
resembles the latter only a vast deel larger which are very noumerous
particular in the Rocky mountains on the waters of the Columbia, those
build in the ground where they form a nest like the hornet with an
outer covering to the Comb in which they deposit their eggs and raise
their young. the Sheets of this Comb are attatched to each other as
those of the hornets are. their wings are four of a dark brown
Colour--the head is black, the body and abdomin are yellow insercled with
transverce rings of black, they are firce and Sting very Severely; we
found them troublesom in frightening our horses as we passed through
mountains. the honey bee is not found here. the bumblebee is. one of
the men brought me to day Some Onions from the high plains of a
different Species from those near the borders of the river as they are
also from the Shive or Small Onion noticed below the Falls of Columbia.
these Onions were as large as an nutmeg, they generally grow double or
two bulbs connected by the same tissue of radicles; each bulb has two
long liner flat solid leaves. the pedencle is solid celindric and
cround with an umble of from 20 to 30 flowers. this Onion is
exceedingly crisp and delicately flavoured indeed. I think more Sweet
and less strong than any I ever tasted, it is not yet perfectly in
blume, the parts of the flower are not distinct




[Lewis, May 31, 1806]
Saturday May 31st 1806.
Goodrich and Willard visited the indian Villages this morning and
returned in the evening. Willard brought with him the dressed skin of a
bear which he had purchased for Capt. C. this skin was an uniform pale
redish brown colour, the indians informed us that it was not the
Hoh-host or white bear, that it was the Yack-kah. this distinction of
the indians induced us to make further enquiry relative to their
opinons of the several speceis of bear in this country. we produced the
several skins of the bear which we had killed at this place and one
very nearly white which I had purchased. The white, the deep and plale
red grizzle, the dark bron grizzle, and all those which had the
extremities of the hair of a white or frosty colour without regard to
the colour of the ground of the poil, they designated Hoh-host and
assured us that they were the same with the white bear, that they
ascosiated together, were very vicisious, never climbed the trees, and
had much longer nails than the others. the black skins, those which
were black with a number of intire white hairs intermixed, the black
with a white breast, the uniform bey, brown and light redish brown,
they designated the Yack-kah;-said that they climbed the trees, had
short nails and were not vicious, that they could pursue them and kill
them with safety, they also affirmed that they were much smaller than
the white bear. I am disposed to adopt the Indian distinction with
rispect to these bear and consider them two distinct speceis. the white
and the grizzly of this neighbourhood are the same of those found on
the upper portion of the Missouri where the other speceis are not, and
that the uniform redish brown black &c of this neighbourhood are a
speceis distinct from our black bear and from the black bear of the
Pacific coast which I believe to be the same with those of the Atlantic
coast, and that the common black bear do not exist here. I had
previously observed that the claws of some of the bear which we had
killed here had much shorter tallons than the variagated or white bear
usually have but supposed that they had woarn them out by scratching up
roots, and these were those which the indians called Yak-kah. on
enquiry I found also that a cub of an uniform redish brown colour, pup
to a female black bear intermixed with entire white hairs had climbed a
tree. I think this a distinct speceis from the common black bear,
because we never find the latter of any other colour than an uniform
black, and also that the poil of this bear is much finer thicker and
longer with a greater proportion of fur mixed with the hair, in other
ispects they are much the same.--This evening Joseph and R. Feilds
returned with the three deer which they had killed. The Indians brought
us another of our origional Stock of horses; there are only two absent
now of those horses, and these the indians inform us that our shoshone
guide rode back when he returned. we have sixty five horses at this
time, most of them in excellent order and fine strong active horses.-

The Indians pursued a mule deer to the river opposite to our camp this
evening; the deer swam over and one of our hunters killed it. there
being a large party of indians assembled on this occasion on the
opposite side, Hohast-ill-pilp desired them to raise our canoe which
was sunk on that side of the river yesterday; they made the attempt but
were unable to effect it.




[Clark, May 31, 1806]
Saturday May 31st 1806
Goodrich and Willard visited the indian Village this morning and
returned in the evening Willard brought with him the dressed Skin of a
bear which he had purchased for me. this Skin was of a uniform pale
redish brown colour, the indians inform us that it was not the Hoh-host
or white bear, that it was the Yack-kah this distinction of the indians
induced us to make further enquiry relitive to their oppinions of the
defferent Species of bear in this country. We produced the Several
Skins of the bear which our hunters had killed at this place and one
very nearly white which Capt Lewis had purchased. the White, the deep
and pale red grizzle, the dark brown grizzle, and all those that had
the extremities of the hair of a White or frosty Colour without reguard
to the Colour of the ground of the poil, they disignated Hoh-host and
assured us that they were the Same with the White bear, that they
associated together, were very vicisious, never climb the trees, and
had much longer nails than the others. The black skins, those which
were black with a number of entire white hairs intermixed, the black
with a White breast, the uniform bey, brown and light redish brown,
they disignated the Yack-kah-; Said that they Climb the trees had Short
nails and were not viscisious, that they could prosue them and kill
them in Safty, they also affirmed that they were much Smaller than the
white bear. I am disposed to adopt the Indians distinction with respect
to these bear and consider them two distinct Species. the White and the
Grizzly of this neighbourhood are the Same as those found on the upper
part of the Missouri where the other Species are not, and that the
uniform redish brown black &c. of this neighbourhood are a Species
distinct from both Species of our black bear and from the black bear of
the Pacific Coast which I believe to be the Same with those of the
Atlantic Coast, and that the Common black bear do not exist here. I had
previously observed that the claws of Some of the bear which we had
killed here had much Shorter tallons than the varigated or White bear
usially have but Supposed that they had worn them out by scratching out
roots, and these were those which the indians call Yahkah. on enquiry I
found also that a Cub of a uniform redish brown Colour pup to a female
black bear intermixed with entire white hairs, had climbed a tree. I
think this a distinct Species from the common black bear becaus we
never find the latter of any other Colour than a uniform black, and
also that the poil of this bear is much finer thicker and longer with a
greater proportion of fur mixed with the hair, in other respects they
are much the same

This evening, Joseph and Reuben Fields returned with the three deer
they had killed. The indians brought us another of our Original Stock
of Horses; there are only two Absent now of these horses, and these the
indians inform us that our Sho-Sho-ne guide rode back when he returned.
we have Sixty five horses at this time, most of them in excellent order
and fine Strong active horses

The Indians pursued a Mule deer to the river opposit to our Camp this
evening; the deer Swam over and one of our hunters killed it. there
being a large party of indians assembled on this Occasion on the
opposit Side with Tin-nach-e-moo-tolt they attempted to rais our Canoe
which was Sunk on that Side of the river yesterday; they made the
attempt but were unable to effect it-.




[Lewis, June 1, 1806]
Sunday June 1st 1806.
Yesterday evening Charbono an LaPage returned, having made a broken
voyage. they ascended the river on this side nearly opposite to a
village eight miles above us, here their led horse which had on him
their merchandize, feell into the river from the side of a steep clift
and swam over; they saw an indian on the opposite side whom they
prevailed on to drive their horse back again to them; in swiming the
river the horse lost a dressed Elkskin of LaPages and several small
articles, & their paint was destroyed by the water. here they remained
and dryed their articles the evening of the 30th Ult. the indians at
the village learning their errand and not having a canoe, made an
attempt esterday morning to pass the river to them on a raft with a
parsel of roots and bread in order to trade with them; the indian raft
struck a rock, upset and lost thir cargo; the river having fallen heir
to both merchandize and roots, our traders returned with empty bags.
This morning Drewyer accompanyed by Hohastillpilp set out in surch of
two tomahawks of ours which we have understood were in the possession
of certain indians residing at a distance in the plains on the South
side of the Kooskoske; the one is a tomahawk which Capt. C. left at our
camp on Musquetoe Creek and the other was stolen from us while we lay
at the forks of this and the Chopunnish rivers last fall. Colter and
Willard set out this morning on a hunting excurtion towards the quamash
grounds beyond Collins's Creek. we begin to feel some anxiety with
rispect to Sergt. Ordway and party who were sent to Lewis's river for
salmon; we have received no inteligence of them since they set out. we
desired Drewyer to make some enquiry after the Twisted hair; the old
man has not been as good as his word with rispect to encamping near us,
and we fear we shall be at a loss to procure guides to conduct us by
the different routs we wish to pursue from Traveller's rest to the
waters of the Missouri.--I met with a singular plant today in blume of
which I preserved a specemine; it grows on the steep sides of the
fertile hills near this place, the radix is fibrous, not much branched,
annual, woody, white and nearly smooth. the stem is simple branching
ascending, 21/2 feet high celindric, villose and of a pale red colour.
the branches are but few and those near it's upper extremity. the
extremities of the branches are flexable and are bent down near their
extremities with the weight of the flowers. the leaf is sissile,
scattered thinly, nearly linear tho somewhat widest in the middle, two
inches in length, absolutely entire, villose, obtusely pointed and of
an ordinary green. above each leaf a small short branch protrudes,
supporting a tissue of four or five smaller leaves of the same
appearance with those discribed. a leaf is placed underneath eah
branch, and each flower. the calyx is a one flowered spathe. the
corolla superior consists of four pale perple petals which are
tripartite, the central lobe largest and all terminate obtusely; they
are inserted with a long and narrow claw on the top of the germ, are
long, smooth, & deciduous. there are two distinct sets of stamens the
1st or principal consist of four, the filaments of which are capillary,
erect, inserted on the top of the germ alternately with the petals,
equal short, membranous; the anthers are also four each being elivated
with it's fillament, they are linear and reather flat, erect sessile,
cohering at the base, membranous, longitudinally furrowed, twise as
long as the fillament naked, and of a pale perple colour. the second
set of stamens are very minute are also four and placed within and
opposite to the petals, these are scarcely persceptable while the 1st
are large and conspicuous; the filaments are capillary equal, very
short, white and smooth. the anthers are four, oblong, beaked, erect,
cohering at the base, membranous, shorter than the fillaments, white
naked and appear not to form pollen. there is one pistillum; the germ
of which is also one, cilindric, villous, inferior, sessile, as long as
the 1st stamens, and marked with 8 longitudinal furrows. the single
style and stigma form a perfict monapetallous corolla only with this
difference, that the style which elivates the stigma or limb is not a
tube but solid tho it's outer appearance is that of the tube of a
monopetallous corolla swelling as it ascends and gliding in such manner
into the limb that it cannot be said where the style ends, or the
stigma begins; jointly they are as long as the corolla, white, the limb
is four cleft, sauser shaped, and the margins of the lobes entire and
rounded. this has the appearance of a monopetallous flower growing from
the center of a four petalled corollar, which is rendered more
conspicuous in consequence of the 1st being white and the latter of a
pale perple. I regret very much that the seed of this plant are not yet
ripe and it is proble will not be so during my residence in this
neighbourhood.




[Clark, June 1, 1806]
Sunday June 1st 1806.
Late last evening Shabono & Lapage returnd. haveing made a broken
voyage. they assended the river on this Side nearly opposit to the
Village Eight miles above us, here their led horse who had on him their
Stock of Merchindize fell into the river from the Side of a Steep Clift
and swam over, they Saw an indian on the opposit side whome they
provailed on to drive their horse back again to them; in swiming the
horse lost a dressed Elk skin of LaPages and Several small articles,
and their paint was distroyed by the water. here they remained and
dryed their articles the evening of the 30th ulto. the indians at the
village learned their errand and not haveing a canoe, made an attempt
Yesterday morning made an attempt to pass the river to them on a raft
with a parcel of roots and bread in order to trade with them; the
indian raft Struck a rock upset and lost their Cargo; the river haveing
Swallowed both Merchindize & roots, our traders returned with empty
bags. This morning Geo. Drewyer accompanied by Hohastillpilp Set out in
Serch of two tomahawks of ours which we have understood were in the
possession of certain indians resideing at a distance in the Plains on
the South Side of Flat Head river; one is a pipe tomahawk which Capt L.
left at our Camp on Musquetor Creek and the other was stolen from me
whilst we lay at the forks of this and Chopunnish rivers last fall.
Colter and Willard Set out this morning on a hunting excurtion towards
the quawmash grounds beyond Colins creek. we begin to feel Some anxiety
with respect to Sergt. Ordway and party who were Sent to Lewis's river
for salmon; we have receved no intillegence of them Sence they Set out.
we desired Drewyer to make Some enquiry after the Twisted hair; the old
man has not been as good as his word with respect to encamping near us,
and we fear we Shall be at a loss to procure guides to conduct us by
the different routs we wish to pursue from Travillers rest to the
waters of the Missouri




[Lewis, June 2, 1806]
Monday June 2cd 1806.
McNeal and york were sent on a trading voyage over the river this
morning. having exhausted all our merchandize we are obliged to have
recourse to every subterfuge in order to prepare in the most ample
manner in our power to meet that wretched portion of our journy, the
Rocky Mountain, where hungar and cold in their most rigorous forms
assail the waried traveller; not any of us have yet forgotten our
sufferings in those mountains in September last, and I think it
probable we never shall. Our traders McNeal and York were furnished
with the buttons which Capt. C. and myself cut off our coats, some eye
water and Basilicon which we made for that purpose and some Phials and
small tin boxes which I had brought out with Phosphorus. in the evening
they returned with about 3 bushels of roots and some bread having made
a successful) voyage, not much less pleasing to us than the return of a
good cargo to an East India Merchant.--Collins, Sheilds, R & J. Feilds
and Shannon set out on a hunting excurtion to the Quawmash grounds on
the lower side of Collins's Creek. our horses many of them have become
so wild that we cannot take them without the assistance of the Indians
who are extreemly dextrous in throwing a rope and taking them with a
noose about the neck; as we frequently want the use of our horses when
we cannot get the assistance of the indians to take them, we had a
strong pound formed today in order to take them at pleasure. Drewyer
arrived this evening with Neeshneparkkeeook and Hohastillpilp who had
accompanyed him to the lodges of the persons who had our tomahawks. he
obtained both the tomahawks principally by the influence of the former
of these Cheifs. the one which had been stolen we prized most as it was
the private property of the late Sergt. Floyd and Capt. C. was
desireous of returning it to his friends. the man who had this tomahawk
had purchased it from the Indian that had stolen it, and was himself at
the moment of their arrival just expiring. his relations were unwilling
to give up the tomehawk as they intended to bury it with the disceased
owner, but were at length induced to do so for the consideration of a
hadkerchief, two strands of beads, which Drewyer gave them and two
horses given by the cheifs to be killed agreeably to their custom at
the grave of the disceased. The bands of the Chopunnish who reside
above the junction of Lewis's river and the Kooskooske bury their dead
in the earth and place stones on the grave. they also stick little
splinters of wood in betwen the interstices of the irregular mass of
stone piled on the grave and afterwards cover the whole with a roof of
board or split timber. the custom of sacreficing horses to the
disceased appears to be common to all the nations of the plains of
Columbia. a wife of Neeshneeparkkeeook died some short time since,
himself and hir relations saceficed 28 horses to her. The Indians
inform us that there are a plenty of Moos to the S. E. of them on the
East branch of Lewis's river which they call Tommanamah R. about Noon
Sergt. Ordway Frazier and Wizer returned with 17 salmon and some roots
of cows; the distance was so great from which they had brought the fish
that most of them were nearly spoiled. these fish were as fat as any I
ever saw; sufficiently so to cook themselves without the addition of
grease; those which were sound were extreemly delicious; their flesh is
of a fine rose colour with a small admixture of yellow. these men set
out on the 27th ult. and in stead of finding the fishing shore at the
distance of half a days ride as we had been informed, they did not
reach the place at which they obtained their fish untill the evening of
the 29th having travelled by their estimate near 70 miles. the rout
they had taken however was not a direct one; the Indians conducted them
in the first instance to the East branch of Lewis's river about 20
miles above it's junction with the South branch, a distance of about 50
Ms. where they informed them they might obtain fish; but on their
arrival at that place finding that the salmon had not yet arrived or
were not taken, they were conducted down that river to a fishery a few
miles below the junction of the forks of Lewis's river about 20 Ms.
further, here with some difficulty and remaining one day they purchased
the salmon which they brought with them. the first 20 Ms. of their rout
was up Commeap Creek and through a plain open country, the hills of the
creek continued high and broken with some timber near it's borders. the
ballance of their rout was though a high broken mountanous country
generally well timbered with pine the soil fertile in this quarter they
met with an abundance of deer and some bighorned animals. the East fork
of Lewis's river they discribe as one continued rapid about 150 Yds.
wide it's banks are in most places solid and perpendicular rocks, which
rise to a great hight; it's hills are mountains high. on the tops of
some of those hills over which they passed, the snow had not entirely
disappeared, and the grass was just springing up. at the fishery on
Lewis's river below the forks there is a very considerable rapid nearly
as great from the information of Segt. Ordway as the great falls of the
Columbia the river 200 Yds. wide. their common house at this fishery is
built of split timber 150 feet long and 35 feet wide flat at top. The
general course from hence to the forks of Lewis's river is a little to
the West of south about 45 Ms.--The men at this season resort their
fisheries while the women are employed in collecting roots. both forks
of Lewis's river above their junction appear to enter a high
Mountainous country.--my sick horse being much reduced and apearing to
be in such an agoni of pain that there was no hope of his recovery I
ordered him shot this evening. the other horses which we casterated are
all nearly recovered, and I have no hesitation in declaring my beleif
that the indian method of gelding is preferable to that practiced by
ourselves.




[Clark, June 2, 1806]
Monday June 2nd 1806
McNeal and York were Sent on a tradeing voyage over the river this
morning. having exhosted all our Merchendize we were obliged to have
recourse to every Subterfuge in order to prepare in the most ample
manner in our power to meet that wretched portion of our journy, the
Rocky Mountains, where hungar and Cold in their most regorous form
assail the waried traveller; not any of us have yet forgotten our those
mountains in September last, I think it probable we never Shall. Our
traders McNeal and York are furnished with the buttons which Capt L-.
and my Self Cut off of our Coats, Some eye water and Basilicon which we
made for that purpose and Some phials of eye water and Some tin boxes
which Capt L. had brought from Philadelphia. in the evening they
returned with about 3 bushels of roots and Some bread haveing made a
Suckcessfull voyage, not much less pleasing to us than the return of a
good Cargo to an East India merchant.

Shields, Collins, Reuben & Joseph Field & Shannon Set out on a hunting
excurtion to the quaw mash the lower side of Collins Creek & towards
the Mountains.

Drewyer arived this evening with Neeshneparkkeeook and Hohashillpilp
who had accompanied him to the lodge of the person who had our
tomahawks. he obtained both the tomahawks principally by the influence
of the former of those Chiefs. the one which had been Stolen we prized
most as it was the private property of the late Serjt. Floyd and I was
desireous of returning it to his friends. The man who had this tomahawk
had purchased it from the man who had Stolen it, and was himself at the
moment of their arival just expireing. his relations were unwilling to
give up the tomahawk as they intended to bury it with the deceased
owner, but were at length to do so for the Consideration of a
handkerchief, two Strands of heeds, which drewyer gave them and two
horses given by the Chiefs to be Killed agreeable to their custom at
the grave of the deceased. The custom of Sacrificeing horses to the
disceased appears to be Common to all the nations of the plains of the
Columbia. a Wife of Neeshneeparkkeeook died Some Short time Sence,
himself and her relations sacrificed horses to her. The Indians inform
us that there is a plenty of Moos to the S. E. of them on the East
branch of Lewis's river which they Call Tommawamah River. About noon
Sergt. Ordway Frazier and Wiser returnd. with 17 Salmon and Some roots
of the Cows; the distance was So great from whence they brought the
fish, that most of them were nearly Spoiled. those fish were as fat as
any I ever saw; Sufficiently So to cook themselves without the addition
of Grease or butter; those which were Sound were extreemly delicious;
their flesh is of a fine rose colour with a Small admixture of yellow.
these men Set out on the 27th ulto. and in Sted of finding the fishing
Shore at the distance of half a days ride as we had been informed, they
did not reach the place at which they obtained their fish untill the
evening of the 29th haveing traveled near 70 miles. the rout they had
taken however was not a direct one; the Indians Conducted them in the
first instance to the East fork of Lewis's river about 10 miles above
it's junction with the South branch, a distance of about 50 miles where
they informed them they might obtain fish; but on their arival at that
place finding that the Salmon had not arived or were not taken, they
were Conducted down that river to a fishery a fiew miles below the
junction of the forks of Lewis's River about 20 miles further, here
they remained one day and with some dificuelty, they purchased the
Salmon which they brought with them. the first 20 ms. Of their rout was
up Commeap Creek and through a plain open Country, the hills of the
Creek Continued high and broken with Some timber near it's borders, the
ballance of their rout was through a high broken Mountanious Country.
generally well timbered with pine the soil fertile. in this quarter the
meet with abundance of deer and Some big-horned Animals. The East fork
of Lewis's river they discribe as one Continued rapid of about 150
yards wide, it's banks are in most places Solid and perpindicular
rocks, which rise to a great hight; it's hills are mountanious high. on
the top of Some of those hills over which they passed, the Snow had not
entirely disappeared, and the grass was just springing up. at the
fishery on Lewis's river below the forks there is a very Considerable
rapid, nearly as Great from the information of Sergt. Ordway as the
Great falls of the Columbia the river 200 yards wide. their common
house at this fishery is built of Split timber 150 feet long and 35
feet in width, flat at top. the general Course from here to the forks
of Lewis's river is a little to the west of South about 45 ms. The men
at this Season resort their fisheries while the womin are employed in
collecting roots-. both forks above the junction of Lewis's river
appear to enter a high Mountainious Country. our horses are all
recovering & I have no hesitation in declareing that I believe that the
Indian Method of guilding preferable to that practised by ourselves.




[Lewis, June 3, 1806]
Tuesday June 3rd 1806.
Our invalids are all on the recovery; Bratton is much stronger and can
walk about with considerable ease. the Indian Cheif appears to be
gradually recovering the uce of his limbs, and the child is nearly
well; the imposthume on his neck has in a great measure subsided and
left a hard lump underneath his left ear; we still continue the
application of the onion poltice. at 2 P.M. The Broken arm and 3 of his
wariars visited us and remained all night. Colter, Jo. Fields and
Willard returned this evening with five deer and one bear of the brown
speceis; the hair of this was black with a large white spot on the
breast containing a small circular black spot. today the Indians
dispatched an express over the mountains to travellers rest or the
neighbourhood of that Creek on Clark's river in order to learn from the
Oote-lash-shoots a band of the Flatheads who have wintered there, the
occurrences that have taken place on the East side of the mountains
during that season. this is the band which we first met with on that
river. the mountains being practicable for this express we thought it
probable that we could also pass, but the indians informed us that
several of the creeks would yet swim our horses, that there was no
grass and that the roads were extreemly deep and slipery; they inform
us that we may pass conveniently in twelve or fourteen days. we have
come to a resolution to remove from hence to the quawmash grounds
beyond Collins's creek on the 10th to hunt in that neighbourhood a few
days, if possible lay in a stock of meat and then attempt the mountains
about the middle of this month. I begin to lose all hope of any
dependance on the Salmon as this river will not fall sufficiently to
take them before we shall leave it, and as yet I see no appearance of
their runing near the shores as the indians informed us they would in
the course of a few days. I find that all the salmon which they procure
themselves they obtain on Lewis's river, and the distance thither is
too great for us to think of sending after them even had we merchandize
with which to purchase.




[Clark, June 3, 1806]
Tuesday June 3rd 1806
Our invalids are all on the recovery; bratten is much Stronger and can
walk about with Considerable ease. the Indian Chief appears to be
gradually recovering the use of his limbs, and the child is nearly
well; the inflomation on his neck Continus but the Swelling appears to
Subside. we Still Continue the application of the onion poltice. at 3
P.M. the broken arm and three wariors visited us and remained all
night. Colter, Jos. Fields and Willard returned this evening with five
deer and one bear of the brown Species; the hair of this was black with
a large white Spot on the breast containing a Small circular black
Spot. (this Species of bear is Smaller than our Common black bear) this
was a female bear and as our hunters informed us had cubs last year,
this they judged from the length and Size of her tits &c. this bear I
am Confident is not larger than the yerlin Cubs of our Country. To day
the Indians dispatched an express over the mountains to Travellers rest
or to the neighbourhood of that Creek on Clark's river in order to
learn from a band of Flat-Heads who inhabit that river and who have
probably Wintered on Clarks river near the enterance of travellers rest
Creek, the occurences which have taken place on the East Side of the
mountains dureing the last winter. this is the band which we first met
with on that river. the Mountains being practicable for this express we
thought it probable that we could also pass, but the Chiefs informs us
that Several of the Creek's would yet swim our horses, that there was
no grass and that the road was extreemly deep and slipery; they inform
us that we may pass Conveniently in twelve or fourteen days. we have
come to a resolution to remove from hence to the Quawmash Grounds
beyond Colins Creek on the 10th to hunt in that neighbourhood a fiew
days, if possible lay in a Stock of Meat, and then attempt the
Mountains about the Middle of this month. I begin to lose all hope of
any dependance on the Salmon as this river will not fall Sufficiently
to take them before we Shall leave it, and as yet I see no appearance
of their running near the Shore as the indians informed us they would
in the course of a fiew days. I find that all the Salmon which they
precure themselves they obtain on Lewis's river, and the distance
thither is too great for us to think of Sending after them, even had we
merchendize with which to purchase the salmon.-.




[Lewis, June 4, 1806]
Wednesday June 4th 1806.
about noon The 3 Cheifs left us and returned to their vilages. while
they were with us we repeated the promises we had formerly made them
and invited them to the Missouri with us, they declined going untill
the latter end of the summer and said it was there intention to spend
the ensuing winter on the East side of the Rocky mountains. they gave
us no positive answer to a request which we made, that two or three of
their young men should accompany me to the falls of the Missouri and
there wait my return from the upper part of Maria's river where it was
probable I should meet with some of the bands of the Minnetares from
Fort de Prarie; that in such case I should indeavor to bring about a
good understanding between those indians and themselves, which when
effected they would be informed of it though the young men thus sent
with me, and that on the contrary should I not be fortunate enough to
meet with these people nor to prevail on them to be at peace they would
equally be informed through those young men, and they might still
remain on their guard with rispect to them untill the whites had it in
their power to give them more effectual releif. The Broken Arm invited
us to his village and said he wished to speak to us before we set out,
and that he had some roots to give us for our journey over the
mountains; Capt. C. promised to visit him as he wished the day after
tomorrow.--Sheilds returned this evening from the quawmash grounds with
2 deer which he had killed.




[Clark, June 4, 1806]
Wednesday June 4th 1806
about noon the 3 chiefs left us and returned to their villages. While
they were with us we repeeted the promisces we had formerly made them
and envited them to the Missouri with us, they declined going untill
the latter end of the Summer, and Said it was their intintion to Spend
the insiewing winter on the East Side of the Rocky Mountains, they gave
us no positive answer to a request which we made, that two or three of
their young men Should accompany Capt L. to the falls of Missouri and
there wait his return from the upper part of Maria's river where it was
probable he Should meet with Some of the bands of the Blakfoot Indians
and Minitarres of Fort dePrarie, that in Such Case Capt L. would
indeavor to bring about a good understanding between those indians and
themselves, which when effected they would be informed of it through
the young men thus Sent with him. and that on the contrary Should he
not be fortunate enough to meet with those people, nor to provaile on
them to be at peace they would equally be informed through those young
men, and they might Still remain on their guard with respect to them,
untill the Whites had it more in their Power to give them more
effectual relief. I also urged the necessaty of Sending one or two of
their Considerate men to accompany me by way of the Shoshonees on the
head of Jeffersons river and about the three forks of the Missouri
which whome there is most probably Some of the Chiefs of those bands of
Shoshones with whome they are at war, and by which means a message Sent
to that nation & good understanding brought about between the Shoshones
and the Chopunnish Nations which appears to be the wish of both
Nations. The Broken Arm envited us to his Village and Said he wished to
Speak to us before we Set out, and that he had Some roots to give us
for our journey over the mountains; I promised to visit him as he
wished the day after tomorrow-. Shields returned this evining from the
Quawmash grounds with two Deer which he had killed




[Lewis, June 5, 1806]
Thursday June 5th 1806.
Colter and Bratton were permitted to visit the indian villages today
for the purpose of trading for roots and bread, they were fortunate and
made a good return. we gave the indian cheif another sweat today,
continuing it as long as he could possibly bear it; in the evening he
was very languid but appeared still to improve in the use of his limbs.
the child is recovering fast the inflamation has subsided intirely, we
discontinued the poltice, and applyed a plaster of basilicon; the part
is still considerably swolen and hard. in the evening R. Feilds Shannon
and Labuish return from the chaise and brought with them five deer and
a brown bear. among the grasses of this country I observe a large
speceis which grows in moist situations; it rises to the hight of eight
or ten feet, the culm is jointed, hollow, smooth, as large as a goos
quill and more firm than ordinary grasses; the leaf is linnear broad
and rough; it has much the appearance of the maden cain as it is called
in the state of Gergia, and retains it's virdure untill late in the
fall. this grass propegates principally by the root which is horizontal
and perennial. a second speceis grows in tussucks and rises to the
hight of six or eight feet; it seems to delight in the soil of the
river bottoms which possess a greater mixture of sand than the hills in
this neighbourhood. this is also a harsh course grass; it appears to be
the same which is called the Corn grass in the Southern states, and the
foxtail in Virginia. a third speceis resembles the cheet, tho the
horses feed on it very freely. a fourth and most prevalent speceis is a
grass which appears to be the same called the blue grass common to many
parts of the United States; it is common to the bottom as well as the
uplands, is now seeding and is from 9 inches to 2 feet high; it affords
an excellent pasture for horses and appears to bear the frosts and snow
better than any grass in our country; I therefore regret very much that
the seed will not be ripe before our probable departure. this is a fine
soft grass and would no doubt make excellent hay if cultivated. I do
not find the greenswoard here which we met with on the lower part of
the Columbia. there are also several speceis of the wild rye to be met
with in the praries. among the plants and shrubs common to our contry I
observe here the seven bark, wild rose, vining honeysickle, sweet
willow, red willow, longleafed pine, Cattail or cooper's flag,
lamsquarter, strawberry, raspberry, tonge grass, musterd, tanzy,
sinquefield, horsemint, coltsfoot, green plantin, cansar weed, elder,
shoemate and several of the pea blume flowering plants.-




[Clark, June 5, 1806]
Thursday June 5th 1806
Colter and Bratten were permitted to visit the Indian Village to day
for the purpose of tradeing for roots and bread, they were fortunate
and made a good return. we gave the Indian Cheif another Sweat to-day,
continuing it as long as he could bear it. in the evening he was very
languid but Still to improve in the use of his limbs. the Child is
revovereing fast. I applied a plaster of Sarve made of the Rozen of the
long leafed pine, Beas wax and Beare oil mixed, which has Subsided the
inflomation entirely, the part is Considerably Swelled and hard-. in
the evening Reuben Fields, G. Shannon, Labiech, & Collins returned from
the chaise and brought with them five deer and a brown Bear.

Among the Grasses of this Country I observe a large Species which grows
in moist Situations; it rises to the hight of Eight or ten feet, the
Culm is jointed, hollow, Smooth, as large as a goose quill, and more
firm than ordinary grass; the leaf is linner broad and rough; it has
much the appearance of the Meadin Cain as it is Called in the Southern
parts of the U States, and retains it's virdue untill late in the fall.
this grass propegates principally by the Root which is horozontal and
perennial.-. a Second Species grows in tussucks and rises to the hight
of Six or Eight feet; it Seams to delight in the Soil of the river
bottoms which possess agreater mixture of Sand than the hills in this
neighbourhood. this is also a harsh Course grass; it appears to be the
Same which is Called the Corn grass in the Southern States, and the
Foxtail in Virginia. a third Species resembles the cheet, tho the
horses feed on it very freely. a fouth and most prevalent Species is a
grass which appears to be the Same Called the blue Grass common to
maney parts of the United States; it is common to the bottoms as well
as the uplands, is now Seeding and is from 9 inches to 2 feet high; it
affords an excellent paterage for horses and appears to bear the frost
and Snow better than any grass in our Country; I therefore regrete very
much that the Seed will not be ripe before our probable departure. this
is a fine Soft grass and would no doubt make excellent hay if
cultivated. I do not find the Green Sword here which we met with on the
lower part of the Columbia. There are also Several Species of the wild
Rye to be met with in the praries. among the plants and Shrubs common
to our Country I observe here the Seven bark, Wild rose, vineing honey
suckle, Sweet willow, red willow, long leafed pine, Cattail or Coopers
Flag. Lambs quarter, Strawberries, Raspberries, Goose berries, tongue
grass, Mustard, tanzy, Sinquefield, horse mint, water penerial, elder,
Coalts foot, Green Plantin, canser weed, Shoemate, and Several of the
pea blume flowering plants.-. Frazier who had permission to visit the
Twisted Hairs Lodge at the distance of ten or twelve miles did not
return this evening-. The river falls in course of the day and rises
Some at night as will be Seen by the remarks in the Diary of the
weather. this most probably is the melding of the Snows dureing the day
&c.




[Lewis, June 6, 1806]
Friday June 6th 1806.
This morning Frazier returned having been in quest of some roots and
bread which had left at the lodg of the Twisted hair when on his way to
the fishery on Lewis's river. the Twisted hair came with him but I was
unable to converse with him for the want of an interpreter, Drewyer
being absent with Capt. C. This Cheif left me in the evening and
returned to his village. Capt C. Visited the Broken Arm today agreeably
to his promise; he took with him Drewyer and several others. they were
received in a friendly manner. The Broken Arm informed Capt. C. that
the nation would not pass the mountain untill the latter end of the
summer, and that with rispect to the young men whom we had requested
should accompany us to the falls of the Missouri, were not yet
scelected for that purpose nor could they be so untill there was a
meeting of the nation in counsil. that this would happen in the course
of ten or twelve days as the whole of the lodges were about to remove
to the head of the Commeap Creek in the plain near Lewis's river, that
when they had assembled themselves they would hold a council and
scelect the young men. that if we set out previously to that period the
men would follow us. we therefore do not calculate on any assistance
from them as guides, but depend more upon engageing some of the
Ootlashshoots in the neighborhood of Travellers rest C. for that
purpose. The broken arm gave Capt. C. a few dryed Quawmas roots as a
great present, but in our estimation those of cows are much better, I
am confident they are much more healthy. The men who were with Capt. C.
obtained a good store of roots and bread in exchange for a number of
little notions, using the Yanke phrase, with which their own enginuity
had principally furnished them. on examination we find that our whole
party have an ample store of bread and roots for our voyage, a
circumstance not unpleasing. They retuned at 5 P.M. shortly after which
we were visited by Hohastillpilp the two young Cheifs who gave us the
horses in behalf of the nation some time since and several others, who
remained all night. The Kooskooske is about 150 Yds. wide at this place
and discharges a vast body of water; notwithstanding it high state the
water remains nearly transparent, and it's temperature appeas to be
quite as cold as that of our best springs. we meet with a beautifull
little bird in this neighbourhood about the size and somewhat the shape
of the large spar-row. it is reather longer in proportion to it's bulk
than the sparrow. it measures 7 inches from the extremity of the beek
to that of the tail, the latter occupying 21/2 inches. the beak is
reather more than half an inch in length, and is formed much like the
Virginia nitingale; it is thick and large for a bird of it's size; wide
at the base, both chaps convex, and pointed, the uper exceeds the under
chap a little is somewhat curved and of a brown colour; the lower chap
of a greenish yellow. the eye full reather large and of a black colour
both puple and iris. the plumage is remarkably delicate; that of the
neck and head is of a fine orrange yellow and red, the latter
predominates on the top of the head and arround the base of the beak
from whence it graduly deminishes & towards the lower part of the neck,
the orrange yellow prevails most; the red has the appearance of being
laid over a ground of yellow. the breast, the sides, rump and some long
feathers which lie between the legs and extend underneath the tail are
of a fine orrange yellow. the tail, back and wings are black, ecept a
small stripe of yellow on the outer part of the middle joint of the
wing, 1/4 of an inch wide and an inch in length. the tail is composed
of twelve feathers of which those in the center are reather shortest,
and the plumage of all the feathers of the tail is longest on that side
of the quill next the center of the tail. the legs and feet are black,
nails long and sharp; it has four toes on each foot, of which three are
forward and one behind; that behind is as long as the two outer of the
three toes in front.




[Clark, June 6, 1806]
Friday June 6th 1806
I visited the Broken Arm to day agreeable to my promis of the 4th inst.
and took with me Drewyer & three other men I was receved in a friendly
manner. The broken Arm informed me that maney of the Small chiefs of
the different Bands of his nation had not heard our word from our own
mouths, Several of them were present and was glad to See me &c. I
repeeted in part what had been Said in Council before. The Broken arm
told me that the nation would not pass the mountains untill the latter
part of the Summer, and with respect to the young men who we had
requested to accompany us to the falls of Missouri, were not yet
Selected for that purpose nor could they be So untill they had a
Meeting of the Nation in Council. that this would happen in the Course
of ten or 12 days as the whole of the Lodges were about to Move to the
head of Commeap Creek in the Plain of Lewis's river, that when they
held a council they would Select two young men. that if we Set out
previously to that time the men would follow us. we therefore do not
Calculate any assistance from them as guides, but depend more upon
engageing Some of the Oatlash-shoots on Clarks river in the
neighbouringhood of Travellers rest C. for that purpose. The Broken Arm
gave me a fiew Quawmash roots as a great preasent, but in my estimation
those of Cows is much better. I am Confident they are much more
healthy. The Broken Arm informed me that they had latterly been
informed that a party of the Shoshones had arived at the Ye-E-al-po
Nation who reside to the South of the enterance of Kooskooske into
Lewis's river. and had informed that people that their nation (the
Shoshones) had received the talk which was given their relations on the
head of the East fork of Lewis's river last fall, and were resolved to
pursue our Councils, and had came foward for the purpose of makeing
peace with them, and allso with the Chopunnish &c. that they had Sent
Several men in Serch of those people with a view to bring them to
Lewis's river at which place the Broken Arm informed me he Should meet
them and Smoke the pipe of peace. which he Should afterwards Send by
with Some of his Chiefs in company with those Shoshones to their nation
and confirm a piece which never Should be broken on his part. he
produced two pipes one of which he said was as a present to me the
other he intended to Send to the Shoshones &c. and requested me to take
one, I receved the one made in the fascion of the Country, the other
which was of Stone curiously inlaid with Silver in the common form
which he got from the Shoshones. I deckorated the Stem of this pipe
with blue ribon and white wampom and informed the Chief this was the
emblem of peace with us.

The men who accompanied me obtained a good Store of roots and bread in
exchange for a number of little notions, useing the Yanke phrase, with
which their own enginuiety had principally furnished them. on
examonation we find our whole party have a Sufficient Store of bread
and roots for our Voyage. a Circumstance not unpleasing-.

I returned at 4 P. M followed by Hohastillpilp the 2 young Chiefs who
gave us the horses in behalf of the nation Some time Sence, the young
man who gave us the horse at Collins Creek to kill as we Came up, and
Several others. I met the twisted hair and two other indians with
Frazier on the opposit bank from our Camp this Morning & Sent him over
to our Camp. I met him this evening on his return home. he informed me
he could not accompany us across the mountains as his brother was Sick
&c.-.




[Clark, June 6, 1806]
The Chopunnish call the Crow Indians Up-shar-look-kar

Chopunnish name for Sin-sho-cal Dearbourne R ditto--do--Cal la mar-Sha
mosh Meddesons ditto--do--Co-ma win-nim Maria River ditto ditto-
Ta-ki-a-ki-a Mescle Shell R ditto--ditto Wah-wo-ko-ye-o-cose is th ____
ditto do--Rockejhone--Elk river

ditto do--Koos-koos-an-nim-a the little Missouri ditto--do-
Walch-Nim-mah--Knife R ditto--do Ni-hi-Sir-te--C. R




[Lewis, June 7, 1806]
Saturday June 7th 1806.
The two young Cheifs who visited last evening returned to their village
on Commeap C. with some others of the natives. Sergt. Gass, McNeal,
Whitehouse and Goodrich accompanyed them with a view to procure some
pack or lash ropes in exchange for parts of an old sain, fish giggs,
peices of old iron, old files and some bullets. they were also directed
to procure some bags for the purpose of containing our roots & bread.
in the evening they all returned except Whitehouse and Goodrich who
remained all night. they procured a few strings but no bags.
Hohastillpilp passed the river today and brought over a horse which he
gave Frazier one of our party who had previously made him a present of
a pair of Cannadian shoes or shoe-packs. Drewyer set out on a hunting
excurtion up Collins's Creek this evening. we wish to leave the deer in
the neighbourhood of the quawmash plains undisturbed untill the 10th
when we intend removing thither to lay in some meat for our voyage over
the Mountains. our party are much engaged in preparing their saddles
arranging their loads provisions &c for our departure. There is a
speceis of cherry which grows in this neighbourhood in sitations like
the Choke cherry or near the little rivulets and wartercouses. it
seldom grows in clumps or from the same cluster of roots as the choke
cherry dose. the stem is simple branching reather diffuse stem the
cortex is of a redish dark brown and reather smooth. the leaf is of the
ordinary dexture and colour of those of most cherries, it is petiolate;
a long oval 11/4 inhes in length and 1/2 an inch in width, obtuse,
margin so finely serrate that it is scarcely perseptable & smooth. the
peduncle is common 1 inch in length, branch proceeding from the
extremities as well as the sides of the branches, celindric gradually
tapering; the secondary peduncles are about 1/2 an inch in length
scattered tho proceeding more from the extremity of the common peduncle
and are each furnished with a small bracted. the parts of
fructification are much like those discribed of the choke cherry except
that the petals are reather longer as is the calix reather deeper. the
cherry appears to be half grown, the stone is begining to be hard and
is in shape somewhat like that of the plumb; it appears that when ripe
it would be as large as the Kentish cherry, which indeed the growth of
the bush somewhat resembles; it rises about 6 or 8 feet high




[Clark, June 7, 1806]
Saurday June 7th 1806.
The two young cheafs and other Indians who accompanied them Crossed the
river and returned to their Village this morning after brackfast;
Shabono Sergt Gass McNeal, Whitehouse & Goodrich accompanied them for
the purpose of purchaseing or exchangeing old peces of Sane, fish gig,
peces of iron, bullets, and old files and Such articles as they Could
raise for ropes and Strings for to lash their loads, and bags to Cary
their roots in Sergt. Gass, Shabono & McNeal returned at 2 P M haveing
precured a String each only. Whitehouse and Goodrich continued at the
Village all night. Hohastillpilp crossed the river to day and brought
over a horse and gave it to Frazier one of our party who had made him a
present previously of a Par of Canidian Shoes. one of our men informed
me one of the young Chiefs who had given us two horses already was in
Serch of one which he intended to give to me. George Drewyer Set out on
a hunting excurtion up Collins's Creek alone. our party are all much
engaged in prepareing Sadles and packing up their Stores of Provisions
&c.--The Flat Head river is about 150 yards wide at this place and
discharges a vast body of water; notwithstanding it's high State the
water remains nearly transparent, and it's temperature appears to be
quit as cold as that of our best Springs. we met with a butifull little
bird in this neighbourhood about the Size and Somewhat the Shape of the
large Sparrow. it measures 7 inches from the extremity of the beak to
that of the tail, the latter Occupying 21/2 inches. the beak is reather
more than half an inch in length, and is formed much like the Virginia
Nightingal; red bd. it is thick and large for a bird of it's size, wide
at the base, both Chaps convex, and pointed, the upper exceeds the
under chap a little is Somewhat cirved and of a brown Colour; the lower
chap of a Greenish yellow. the eye full reather large and of a black
colour both puple and iris. the plumage is remarkably delicate; that of
the neck and head is of a fine orrange yellow and red. the latter
predomonates on the top of the head and around the base of the beak
from whence it gradually diminishes towards the lower part of the Neck,
the orring yellow prevails most, the red has the Appearance of haveing
been laid over a Ground of yellow. the breast, the Sides, rump and some
long feathers which lie between the legs extend underneath the tail is
of a fine orrange yellow. the tail, back and wings are black, except a
Small Strip of yellow on the outer part of the Middle joint of the
wing, 1/4 of an inch wide and an inch in length. the tail is composed
of 12 feathers of which those in the Center are reather Shortest, and
the plumage of all the feathers of the tail is longest on that Side of
the quill next to the Center of the tail. the legs and feet are black,
nails long and Sharp; it has four toes on each foot, of which three are
forward and one behind; that behind is as long as the two outer of the
three toes in front




[Lewis, June 8, 1806]
Sunday June 8th 1806.
Drewyer returned this morning from the chase without having killed
anything. his hose left him last night, he pursued him but did not
overtake him untill he had nearly reached our camp. The sick Cheif is
fast on the recovery, he can bear his weight on his legs, and has
acquired a considerable portion of strength. the child is nearly well;
Bratton has so far recovered that we cannot well consider him an
invalid any longer, he has had a tedious illness which he boar with
much fortitude and firmness.--The Cutnose visited us today with ten or
twelve warriors; two of the latter were Y-e-let-pos a band of the
Chopunnish nation residing on the South side of Lewis's river whom we
have not previously seen. the band with which we have been most
conversent call themselves pel-late-pal-ler. one of the yeletpos
exchanged his horse for an indifferent one of ours and received a
tomahawk to boot; this tomahawk was one for which Capt. C. had given
another in exchange with the Clahclel-lah Chief at the rapids of the
Columbia. we also exchanged two other of our indifferent horses with
