not thought that there were deeds of arms to be done."

"But surely, my fair lord," said Alleyne, "you have done some great
feats of arms since we left the Lady Loring."

"I cannot call any to mind," answered Sir Nigel.

"There was the taking of the sea-rovers, and the holding of the keep
against the Jacks."

"Nay, nay," said the knight, "these were not feats of arms, but mere
wayside ventures and the chances of travel. By Saint Paul! if it were
not that these hills are over-steep for Pommers, I would ride to these
cavaliers of Navarre and see if there were not some among them who would
help me to take this patch from mine eye. It is a sad sight to see this
very fine pass, which my own Company here could hold against an army,
and yet to ride through it with as little profit as though it were the
lane from my kennels to the Avon."

All morning Sir Nigel rode in a very ill-humor, with his Company
tramping behind him. It was a toilsome march over broken ground and
through snow, which came often as high as the knee, yet ere the sun had
begun to sink they had reached the spot where the gorge opens out on to
the uplands of Navarre, and could see the towers of Pampeluna jutting
up against the southern sky-line. Here the Company were quartered in a
scattered mountain hamlet, and Alleyne spent the day looking down
upon the swarming army which poured with gleam of spears and flaunt of
standards through the narrow pass.

"Hola, mon gar.," said Aylward, seating himself upon a boulder by his
side. "This is indeed a fine sight upon which it is good to look, and a
man might go far ere he would see so many brave men and fine horses.
By my hilt! our little lord is wroth because we have come peacefully
through the passes, but I will warrant him that we have fighting
enow ere we turn our faces northward again. It is said that there are
four-score thousand men behind the King of Spain, with Du Guesclin and
all the best lances of France, who have sworn to shed their heart's
blood ere this Pedro come again to the throne."

"Yet our own army is a great one," said Alleyne.

"Nay, there are but seven-and-twenty thousand men. Chandos hath
persuaded the prince to leave many behind, and indeed I think that he is
right, for there is little food and less water in these parts for which
we are bound. A man without his meat or a horse without his fodder is
like a wet bow-string, fit for little. But voila, mon petit, here comes
Chandos and his company, and there is many a pensil and banderole among
yonder squadrons which show that the best blood of England is riding
under his banners."

Whilst Aylward had been speaking, a strong column of archers had defiled
through the pass beneath them. They were followed by a banner-bearer
who held high the scarlet wedge upon a silver field which proclaimed the
presence of the famous warrior. He rode himself within a spear's-length
of his standard, clad from neck to foot in steel, but draped in the long
linen gown or parement which was destined to be the cause of his death.
His plumed helmet was carried behind him by his body-squire, and his
head was covered by a small purple cap, from under which his snow-white
hair curled downwards to his shoulders. With his long beak-like nose and
his single gleaming eye, which shone brightly from under a thick tuft
of grizzled brow, he seemed to Alleyne to have something of the look
of some fierce old bird of prey. For a moment he smiled, as his eye lit
upon the banner of the five roses waving from the hamlet; but his course
lay for Pampeluna, and he rode on after the archers.

Close at his heels came sixteen squires, all chosen from the highest
families, and behind them rode twelve hundred English knights, with
gleam of steel and tossing of plumes, their harness jingling, their long
straight swords clanking against their stirrup-irons, and the beat of
their chargers' hoofs like the low deep roar of the sea upon the shore.
Behind them marched six hundred Cheshire and Lancashire archers, bearing
the badge of the Audleys, followed by the famous Lord Audley himself,
with the four valiant squires, Dutton of Dutton, Delves of Doddington,
Fowlehurst of Crewe, and Hawkestone of Wainehill, who had all won such
glory at Poictiers. Two hundred heavily-armed cavalry rode behind the
Audley standard, while close at their heels came the Duke of Lancaster
with a glittering train, heralds tabarded with the royal arms riding
three deep upon cream-colored chargers in front of him. On either side
of the young prince rode the two seneschals of Aquitaine, Sir Guiscard
d'Angle and Sir Stephen Cossington, the one bearing the banner of the
province and the other that of Saint George. Away behind him as far as
eye could reach rolled the far-stretching, unbroken river of steel--rank
after rank and column after column, with waving of plumes, glitter of
arms, tossing of guidons, and flash and flutter of countless armorial
devices. All day Alleyne looked down upon the changing scene, and all
day the old bowman stood by his elbow, pointing out the crests of famous
warriors and the arms of noble houses. Here were the gold mullets of the
Pakingtons, the sable and ermine of the Mackworths, the scarlet bars of
the Wakes, the gold and blue of the Grosvenors, the cinque-foils of
the Cliftons, the annulets of the Musgraves, the silver pinions of the
Beauchamps, the crosses of the Molineaux, the bloody chevron of the
Woodhouses, the red and silver of the Worsleys, the swords of the
Clarks, the boars'-heads of the Lucies, the crescents of the Boyntons,
and the wolf and dagger of the Lipscombs. So through the sunny winter
day the chivalry of England poured down through the dark pass of
Roncesvalles to the plains of Spain.

It was on a Monday that the Duke of Lancaster's division passed safely
through the Pyrenees. On the Tuesday there was a bitter frost, and the
ground rung like iron beneath the feet of the horses; yet ere evening
the prince himself, with the main battle of his army, had passed the
gorge and united with his vanguard at Pampeluna. With him rode the King
of Majorca, the hostage King of Navarre, and the fierce Don Pedro of
Spain, whose pale blue eyes gleamed with a sinister light as they rested
once more upon the distant peaks of the land which had disowned him.
Under the royal banners rode many a bold Gascon baron and many a
hot-blooded islander. Here were the high stewards of Aquitaine, of
Saintonge, of La Rochelle, of Quercy, of Limousin, of Agenois, of
Poitou, and of Bigorre, with the banners and musters of their provinces.
Here also were the valiant Earl of Angus, Sir Thomas Banaster with his
garter over his greave, Sir Nele Loring, second cousin to Sir Nigel,
and a long column of Welsh footmen who marched under the red banner
of Merlin. From dawn to sundown the long train wound through the pass,
their breath reeking up upon the frosty air like the steam from a
cauldron.

The weather was less keen upon the Wednesday, and the rear-guard
made good their passage, with the bombards and the wagon-train. Free
companions and Gascons made up this portion of the army to the number of
ten thousand men. The fierce Sir Hugh Calverley, with his yellow mane,
and the rugged Sir Robert Knolles, with their war-hardened and veteran
companies of English bowmen, headed the long column; while behind them
came the turbulent bands of the Bastard of Breteuil, Nandon de Bagerant,
one-eyed Camus, Black Ortingo, La Nuit and others whose very names seem
to smack of hard hands and ruthless deeds. With them also were the
pick of the Gascon chivalry--the old Duc d'Armagnac, his nephew Lord
d'Albret, brooding and scowling over his wrongs, the giant Oliver de
Clisson, the Captal de Buch, pink of knighthood, the sprightly Sir
Perducas d'Albret, the red-bearded Lord d'Esparre, and a long train of
needy and grasping border nobles, with long pedigrees and short purses,
who had come down from their hill-side strongholds, all hungering for
the spoils and the ransoms of Spain. By the Thursday morning the whole
army was encamped in the Vale of Pampeluna, and the prince had called
his council to meet him in the old palace of the ancient city of
Navarre.



CHAPTER XXXIV. HOW THE COMPANY MADE SPORT IN THE VALE OF PAMPELUNA.


Whilst the council was sitting in Pampeluna the White Company, having
encamped in a neighboring valley, close to the companies of La Nuit and
of Black Ortingo, were amusing themselves with sword-play, wrestling,
and shooting at the shields, which they had placed upon the hillside
to serve them as butts. The younger archers, with their coats of mail
thrown aside, their brown or flaxen hair tossing in the wind, and their
jerkins turned back to give free play to their brawny chests and arms,
stood in lines, each loosing his shaft in turn, while Johnston, Aylward,
Black Simon, and half-a-score of the elders lounged up and down with
critical eyes, and a word of rough praise or of curt censure for the
marksmen. Behind stood knots of Gascon and Brabant crossbowmen from
the companies of Ortingo and of La Nuit, leaning upon their unsightly
weapons and watching the practice of the Englishmen.

"A good shot, Hewett, a good shot!" said old Johnston to a young bowman,
who stood with his bow in his left hand, gazing with parted lips after
his flying shaft. "You see, she finds the ring, as I knew she would from
the moment that your string twanged."

"Loose it easy, steady, and yet sharp," said Aylward. "By my hilt! mon
gar., it is very well when you do but shoot at a shield, but when there
is a man behind the shield, and he rides at you with wave of sword and
glint of eyes from behind his vizor, you may find him a less easy mark."

"It is a mark that I have found before now," answered the young bowman.

"And shall again, camarade, I doubt not. But hola! Johnston, who is this
who holds his bow like a crow-keeper?"

"It is Silas Peterson, of Horsham. Do not wink with one eye and look
with the other, Silas, and do not hop and dance after you shoot, with
your tongue out, for that will not speed it upon its way. Stand straight
and firm, as God made you. Move not the bow arm, and steady with the
drawing hand!"

"I' faith," said Black Simon, "I am a spearman myself, and am more
fitted for hand-strokes than for such work as this. Yet I have spent my
days among bowmen, and I have seen many a brave shaft sped. I will not
say but that we have some good marksmen here, and that this Company
would be accounted a fine body of archers at any time or place. Yet I
do not see any men who bend so strong a bow or shoot as true a shaft as
those whom I have known."

"You say sooth," said Johnston, turning his seamed and grizzled face
upon the man-at-arms. "See yonder," he added, pointing to a bombard
which lay within the camp: "there is what hath done scath to good
bowmanship, with its filthy soot and foolish roaring mouth. I wonder
that a true knight, like our prince, should carry such a scurvy thing in
his train. Robin, thou red-headed lurden, how oft must I tell thee not
to shoot straight with a quarter-wind blowing across the mark?"

"By these ten finger-bones! there were some fine bowmen at the intaking
of Calais," said Aylward. "I well remember that, on occasion of an
outfall, a Genoan raised his arm over his mantlet, and shook it at us, a
hundred paces from our line. There were twenty who loosed shafts at him,
and when the man was afterwards slain it was found that he had taken
eighteen through his forearm."

"And I can call to mind," remarked Johnston, "that when the great
cog 'Christopher,' which the French had taken from us, was moored two
hundred paces from the shore, two archers, little Robin Withstaff and
Elias Baddlesmere, in four shots each cut every strand of her hempen
anchor-cord, so that she well-nigh came upon the rocks."

"Good shooting, i' faith rare shooting!" said Black Simon. "But I have
seen you, Johnston, and you, Samkin Aylward, and one or two others who
are still with us, shoot as well as the best. Was it not you, Johnston,
who took the fat ox at Finsbury butts against the pick of London town?"

A sunburnt and black-eyed Brabanter had stood near the old archers,
leaning upon a large crossbow and listening to their talk, which had
been carried on in that hybrid camp dialect which both nations could
understand. He was a squat, bull-necked man, clad in the iron helmet,
mail tunic, and woollen gambesson of his class. A jacket with hanging
sleeves, slashed with velvet at the neck and wrists, showed that he was
a man of some consideration, an under-officer, or file-leader of his
company.

"I cannot think," said he, "why you English should be so fond of your
six-foot stick. If it amuse you to bend it, well and good; but why
should I strain and pull, when my little moulinet will do all for me,
and better than I can do it for myself?"

"I have seen good shooting with the prod and with the latch," said
Aylward, "but, by my hilt! camarade, with all respect to you and to your
bow, I think that is but a woman's weapon, which a woman can point and
loose as easily as a man."

"I know not about that," answered the Brabanter, "but this I know,
that though I have served for fourteen years, I have never yet seen an
Englishman do aught with the long-bow which I could not do better with
my arbalest. By the three kings! I would even go further, and say that I
have done things with my arbalest which no Englishman could do with his
long-bow."

"Well said, mon gar.," cried Aylward. "A good cock has ever a brave
call. Now, I have shot little of late, but there is Johnston here who
will try a round with you for the honor of the Company."

"And I will lay a gallon of Jurancon wine upon the long-bow," said Black
Simon, "though I had rather, for my own drinking, that it were a quart
of Twynham ale."

"I take both your challenge and your wager," said the man of Brabant,
throwing off his jacket and glancing keenly about him with his black,
twinkling eyes. "I cannot see any fitting mark, for I care not to waste
a bolt upon these shields, which a drunken boor could not miss at a
village kermesse."

"This is a perilous man," whispered an English man-at-arms, plucking at
Aylward's sleeve. "He is the best marksman of all the crossbow companies
and it was he who brought down the Constable de Bourbon at Brignais. I
fear that your man will come by little honor with him."

"Yet I have seen Johnston shoot these twenty years, and I will not
flinch from it. How say you, old war-hound, will you not have a flight
shot or two with this springald?"

"Tut, tut, Aylward," said the old bowman. "My day is past, and it is
for the younger ones to hold what we have gained. I take it unkindly of
thee, Samkin, that thou shouldst call all eyes thus upon a broken bowman
who could once shoot a fair shaft. Let me feel that bow, Wilkins! It is
a Scotch bow, I see, for the upper nock is without and the lower within.
By the black rood! it is a good piece of yew, well nocked, well strung,
well waxed, and very joyful to the feel. I think even now that I might
hit any large and goodly mark with a bow like this. Turn thy quiver to
me, Aylward. I love an ash arrow pierced with cornel-wood for a roving
shaft."

"By my hilt! and so do I," cried Aylward. "These three gander-winged
shafts are such."

"So I see, comrade. It has been my wont to choose a saddle-backed
feather for a dead shaft, and a swine-backed for a smooth flier. I will
take the two of them. Ah! Samkin, lad, the eye grows dim and the hand
less firm as the years pass."

"Come then, are you not ready?" said the Brabanter, who had watched
with ill-concealed impatience the slow and methodic movements of his
antagonist.

"I will venture a rover with you, or try long-butts or hoyles," said old
Johnston. "To my mind the long-bow is a better weapon than the arbalest,
but it may be ill for me to prove it."

"So I think," quoth the other with a sneer. He drew his moulinet from
his girdle, and fixing it to the windlass, he drew back the powerful
double cord until it had clicked into the catch. Then from his quiver he
drew a short, thick quarrel, which he placed with the utmost care upon
the groove. Word had spread of what was going forward, and the rivals
were already surrounded, not only by the English archers of the Company,
but by hundreds of arbalestiers and men-at-arms from the bands of
Ortingo and La Nuit, to the latter of which the Brabanter belonged.

"There is a mark yonder on the hill," said he; "mayhap you can discern
it."

"I see something," answered Johnston, shading his eyes with his hand;
"but it is a very long shoot."

"A fair shoot--a fair shoot! Stand aside, Arnaud, lest you find a bolt
through your gizzard. Now, comrade, I take no flight shot, and I give
you the vantage of watching my shaft."

As he spoke he raised his arbalest to his shoulder and was about to pull
the trigger, when a large gray stork flapped heavily into view skimming
over the brow of the hill, and then soaring up into the air to pass the
valley. Its shrill and piercing cries drew all eyes upon it, and, as it
came nearer, a dark spot which circled above it resolved itself into a
peregrine falcon, which hovered over its head, poising itself from time
to time, and watching its chance of closing with its clumsy quarry.
Nearer and nearer came the two birds, all absorbed in their own contest,
the stork wheeling upwards, the hawk still fluttering above it, until
they were not a hundred paces from the camp. The Brabanter raised his
weapon to the sky, and there came the short, deep twang of his powerful
string. His bolt struck the stork just where its wing meets the body,
and the bird whirled aloft in a last convulsive flutter before falling
wounded and flapping to the earth. A roar of applause burst from the
crossbowmen; but at the instant that the bolt struck its mark old
Johnston, who had stood listlessly with arrow on string, bent his bow
and sped a shaft through the body of the falcon. Whipping the other from
his belt, he sent it skimming some few feet from the earth with so true
an aim that it struck and transfixed the stork for the second time ere
it could reach the ground. A deep-chested shout of delight burst from
the archers at the sight of this double feat, and Aylward, dancing with
joy, threw his arms round the old marksman and embraced him with such
vigor that their mail tunics clanged again.

"Ah! camarade," he cried, "you shall have a stoup with me for this! What
then, old dog, would not the hawk please thee, but thou must have the
stork as well. Oh, to my heart again!"

"It is a pretty piece of yew, and well strung," said Johnston with a
twinkle in his deep-set gray eyes. "Even an old broken bowman might find
the clout with a bow like this."

"You have done very well," remarked the Brabanter in a surly voice.
"But it seems to me that you have not yet shown yourself to be a better
marksman than I, for I have struck that at which I aimed, and, by the
three kings! no man can do more."

"It would ill beseem me to claim to be a better marksman," answered
Johnston, "for I have heard great things of your skill. I did but wish
to show that the long-bow could do that which an arbalest could not do,
for you could not with your moulinet have your string ready to speed
another shaft ere the bird drop to the earth."

"In that you have vantage," said the crossbowman. "By Saint James! it
is now my turn to show you where my weapon has the better of you. I pray
you to draw a flight shaft with all your strength down the valley, that
we may see the length of your shoot."

"That is a very strong prod of yours," said Johnston, shaking his
grizzled head as he glanced at the thick arch and powerful strings of
his rival's arbalest. "I have little doubt that you can overshoot me,
and yet I have seen bowmen who could send a cloth-yard arrow further
than you could speed a quarrel."

"So I have heard," remarked the Brabanter; "and yet it is a strange
thing that these wondrous bowmen are never where I chance to be. Pace
out the distances with a wand at every five score, and do you, Arnaud,
stand at the fifth wand to carry back my bolts to me."

A line was measured down the valley, and Johnston, drawing an arrow to
the very head, sent it whistling over the row of wands.

"Bravely drawn! A rare shoot!" shouted the bystanders.

"It is well up to the fourth mark."

"By my hilt! it is over it," cried Aylward. "I can see where they have
stooped to gather up the shaft."

"We shall hear anon," said Johnston quietly, and presently a young
archer came running to say that the arrow had fallen twenty paces beyond
the fourth wand.

"Four hundred paces and a score," cried Black Simon. "I' faith, it is a
very long flight. Yet wood and steel may do more than flesh and blood."

The Brabanter stepped forward with a smile of conscious triumph, and
loosed the cord of his weapon. A shout burst from his comrades as they
watched the swift and lofty flight of the heavy bolt.

"Over the fourth!" groaned Aylward. "By my hilt! I think that it is well
up to the fifth."

"It is over the fifth!" cried a Gascon loudly, and a comrade came
running with waving arms to say that the bolt had pitched eight paces
beyond the mark of the five hundred.

"Which weapon hath the vantage now?" cried the Brabanter, strutting
proudly about with shouldered arbalest, amid the applause of his
companions.

"You can overshoot me," said Johnston gently.

"Or any other man who ever bent a long-bow," cried his victorious
adversary.

"Nay, not so fast," said a huge archer, whose mighty shoulders and red
head towered high above the throng of his comrades. "I must have a word
with you ere you crow so loudly. Where is my little popper? By sainted
Dick of Hampole! it will be a strange thing if I cannot outshoot that
thing of thine, which to my eyes is more like a rat-trap than a bow.
Will you try another flight, or do you stand by your last?"

"Five hundred and eight paces will serve my turn," answered the
Brabanter, looking askance at this new opponent.

"Tut, John," whispered Aylward, "you never were a marksman. Why must you
thrust your spoon into this dish?"

"Easy and slow, Aylward. There are very many things which I cannot do,
but there are also one or two which I have the trick of. It is in my
mind that I can beat this shoot, if my bow will but hold together."

"Go on, old babe of the woods!" "Have at it, Hampshire!" cried the
archers laughing.

"By my soul! you may grin," cried John. "But I learned how to make the
long shoot from old Hob Miller of Milford." He took up a great black
bow, as he spoke, and sitting down upon the ground he placed his two
feet on either end of the stave. With an arrow fitted, he then pulled
the string towards him with both hands until the head of the shaft was
level with the wood. The great bow creaked and groaned and the cord
vibrated with the tension.

"Who is this fool's-head who stands in the way of my shoot?" said he,
craning up his neck from the ground.

"He stands on the further side of my mark," answered the Brabanter, "so
he has little to fear from you."

"Well, the saints assoil him!" cried John. "Though I think he is
over-near to be scathed." As he spoke he raised his two feet, with the
bow-stave upon their soles, and his cord twanged with a deep rich hum
which might be heard across the valley. The measurer in the distance
fell flat upon his face, and then jumping up again, he began to run in
the opposite direction.

"Well shot, old lad! It is indeed over his head," cried the bowmen.

"Mon Dieu!" exclaimed the Brabanter, "who ever saw such a shoot?"

"It is but a trick," quoth John. "Many a time have I won a gallon of ale
by covering a mile in three flights down Wilverley Chase."

"It fell a hundred and thirty paces beyond the fifth mark," shouted an
archer in the distance.

"Six hundred and thirty paces! Mon Dieu! but that is a shoot! And yet it
says nothing for your weapon, mon gros camarade, for it was by turning
yourself into a crossbow that you did it."

"By my hilt! there is truth in that," cried Aylward. "And now, friend,
I will myself show you a vantage of the long-bow. I pray you to speed
a bolt against yonder shield with all your force. It is an inch of elm
with bull's hide over it."

"I scarce shot as many shafts at Brignais," growled the man of Brabant;
"though I found a better mark there than a cantle of bull's hide. But
what is this, Englishman? The shield hangs not one hundred paces from
me, and a blind man could strike it." He screwed up his string to the
furthest pitch, and shot his quarrel at the dangling shield. Aylward,
who had drawn an arrow from his quiver, carefully greased the head of
it, and sped it at the same mark.

"Run, Wilkins," quoth he, "and fetch me the shield."

Long were the faces of the Englishmen and broad the laugh of the
crossbowmen as the heavy mantlet was carried towards them, for there in
the centre was the thick Brabant bolt driven deeply into the wood, while
there was neither sign nor trace of the cloth-yard shaft.

"By the three kings!" cried the Brabanter, "this time at least there is
no gainsaying which is the better weapon, or which the truer hand that
held it. You have missed the shield, Englishman."

"Tarry a bit! tarry a bit, mon gar.!" quoth Aylward, and turning round
the shield he showed a round clear hole in the wood at the back of it.
"My shaft has passed through it, camarade, and I trow the one which goes
through is more to be feared than that which bides on the way."

The Brabanter stamped his foot with mortification, and was about to make
some angry reply, when Alleyne Edricson came riding up to the crowds of
archers.

"Sir Nigel will be here anon," said he, "and it is his wish to speak
with the Company."

In an instant order and method took the place of general confusion.
Bows, steel caps, and jacks were caught up from the grass. A long cordon
cleared the camp of all strangers, while the main body fell into four
lines with under-officers and file-leaders in front and on either flank.
So they stood, silent and motionless, when their leader came riding
towards them, his face shining and his whole small figure swelling with
the news which he bore.

"Great honor has been done to us, men," cried he: "for, of all the army,
the prince has chosen us out that we should ride onwards into the lands
of Spain to spy upon our enemies. Yet, as there are many of us, and as
the service may not be to the liking of all, I pray that those will step
forward from the ranks who have the will to follow me."

There was a rustle among the bowmen, but when Sir Nigel looked up at
them no man stood forward from his fellows, but the four lines of men
stretched unbroken as before. Sir Nigel blinked at them in amazement,
and a look of the deepest sorrow shadowed his face.

"That I should live to see the day!" he cried. "What! not one----"

"My fair lord," whispered Alleyne, "they have all stepped forward."

"Ah, by Saint Paul! I see how it is with them. I could not think that
they would desert me. We start at dawn to-morrow, and ye are to have
the horses of Sir Robert Cheney's company. Be ready, I pray ye, at early
cock-crow."

A buzz of delight burst from the archers, as they broke their ranks and
ran hither and thither, whooping and cheering like boys who have news of
a holiday. Sir Nigel gazed after them with a smiling face, when a heavy
hand fell upon his shoulder.
