water and bound tightly round it eased the smart and stanched the blood.
Beyond this scratch I had no injuries, though from my own efforts I felt
as stiff and sore all over as though I had been well cudgelled, and the
slight wound got in Wells Cathedral had reopened and was bleeding. With
a little patience and cold water, however, I was able to dress it and to
tie myself up as well as any chirurgeon in the kingdom.

Having seen to my injuries I had now to attend to my appearance, for
in truth I might have stood for one of those gory giants with whom the
worthy Don Bellianis of Greece and other stout champions were wont to
contend. No woman or child but would have fled at the sight of me, for
I was as red as the parish butcher when Martinmas is nigh. A good wash,
however, in the brook soon removed those traces of war, and I was
able to get the marks off my breastplate and boots. In the case of my
clothes, however, it was so hopeless to clean them that I gave it up in
despair. My good old horse had been never so much as grazed by steel or
bullet, so that with a little watering and tending he was soon as fresh
as ever, and we turned our backs on the streamlet a better-favoured pair
than we had approached it.

It was now going on to mid-day, and I began to feel very hungry, for I
had tasted nothing since the evening before. Two or three houses stood
in a cluster upon the moor, but the blackened walls and scorched thatch
showed that it was hopeless to expect anything from them. Once or twice
I spied folk in the fields or on the roadway; but at sight of an armed
horseman they ran for their lives, diving into the brushwood like wild
animals. At one place, where a high oak tree marked the meeting of three
roads, two bodies dangling from one of the branches showed that the
fears of the villagers were based upon experience. These poor men had in
all likelihood been hanged because the amount of their little hoardings
had not come up to the expectations of their plunderers; or because,
having given all to one band of robbers, they had nothing with which
to appease the next. At last, when I was fairly weary of my fruitless
search for food, I espied a windmill standing upon a green hill at
the other side of some fields. Judging from its appearance that it had
escaped the general pillage, I took the pathway which branched away to
it from the high-road. (Note J, Appendix)

1. The incident is historically true, and may serve to show what sort of
men they were who had learned their soldiering under Cromwell.



Chapter XXXIII. Of my Perilous Adventure at the Mill

At the base of the mill there stood a shed which was evidently used to
stall the horses which brought the farmers' grain. Some grass was heaped
up inside it, so I loosened Covenant's girths and left him to have a
hearty meal. The mill itself appeared to be silent and empty. I climbed
the steep wood ladder, and pushing the door open, walked into a round
stone-flagged room, from which a second ladder led to the loft above. On
one side of this chamber was a long wooden box, and all round the walls
were ranged rows of sacks full of flour. In the fireplace stood a pile
of faggots ready for lighting, so with the aid of my tinder-box I soon
had a cheerful blaze. Taking a large handful of flour from the nearest
bag I moistened it with water from a pitcher, and having rolled it out
into a flat cake, proceeded to bake it, smiling the while to think of
what my mother would say to such rough cookery. Very sure I am that
Patrick Lamb himself, whose book, the 'Complete Court Cook,' was ever in
the dear soul's left hand while she stirred and basted with her right,
could not have turned out a dish which was more to my taste at the
moment, for I had not even patience to wait for the browning of it, but
snapped it up and devoured it half hot. I then rolled a second one, and
having placed it before the fire, and drawn my pipe from my pocket,
I set myself to smoke, waiting with all the philosophy which I could
muster until it should be ready.

I was lost in thought, brooding sadly over the blow which the news would
be to my father, when I was startled by a loud sneeze, which sounded as
though it were delivered in my very ear. I started to my feet and gazed
all round me, but there was nothing save the solid wall behind and the
empty chamber before. I had almost come to persuade myself that I had
been the creature of some delusion, when again a crashing sneeze, louder
and more prolonged than the last, broke upon the silence. Could some one
be hid in one of the bags? Drawing my sword I walked round pricking the
great flour sacks, but without being able to find cause for the sound. I
was still marvelling over the matter when a most extraordinary chorus of
gasps, snorts, and whistles broke out, with cries of 'Oh, holy mother!'
'Blessed Redeemer!' and other such exclamations. This time there could
be no doubt as to whence the uproar came. Rushing up to the great chest
upon which I had been seated, I threw back the heavy lid and gazed in.

It was more than half full of flour, in the midst of which was
floundering some creature, which was so coated and caked with the white
powder, that it would have been hard to say that it was human were
it not for the pitiable cries which it was uttering. Stooping down I
dragged the man from his hiding-place, when he dropped upon his knees
upon the floor and yelled for mercy, raising such a cloud of dust from
every wriggle of his body that I began to cough and to sneeze. As the
skin of powder began to scale off from him, I saw to my surprise that he
was no miller or peasant, but was a man-at-arms, with a huge sword girt
to his side, looking at present not unlike a frosted icicle, and a
great steel-faced breastplate. His steel cap had remained behind in the
flour-bin, and his bright red hair, the only touch of colour about him,
stood straight up in the air with terror, as he implored me to spare his
life. Thinking that there was something familiar about his voice, I drew
my hand across his face, which set him yelling as though I had slain
him. There was no mistaking the heavy cheeks and the little greedy
eyes. It was none other than Master Tetheridge, the noisy town-clerk of
Taunton.

But how much changed from the town-clerk whom we had seen strutting, in
all the pomp and bravery of his office, before the good Mayor on the day
of our coming to Somersetshire! Where now was the ruddy colour like a
pippin in September? Where was the assured manner and the manly port? As
he knelt his great jack-boots clicked together with apprehension, and he
poured forth in a piping voice, like that of a Lincoln's Inn mumper, a
string of pleadings, excuses, and entreaties, as though I were Feversham
in person, and was about to order him to instant execution.

'I am but a poor scrivener man, your serene Highness,' he bawled.
'Indeed, I am a most unhappy clerk, your Honour, who has been driven
into these courses by the tyranny of those above him. A more loyal man,
your Grace, never wore neat's leather, but when the mayor says "Yes,"
can the clerk say "No"? Spare me, your lordship; spare a most penitent
wretch, whose only prayer is that he may be allowed to serve King James
to the last drop of his blood!'

'Do you renounce the Duke of Monmouth?' I asked, in a stern voice.

'I do--from my heart!' said he fervently.

'Then prepare to die!' I roared, whipping out my sword, 'for I am one of
his officers.'

At the sight of the steel the wretched clerk gave a perfect bellow of
terror, and falling upon his face he wriggled and twisted, until looking
up he perceived that I was laughing. On that he crawled up on to his
knees once more, and from that to his feet, glancing at me askance, as
though by no means assured of my intentions.

'You must remember me, Master Tetheridge,' I said. 'I am Captain Clarke,
of Saxon's regiment of Wiltshire foot. I am surprised, indeed, that you
should have fallen away from that allegiance to which you did not only
swear yourself, but did administer the oath to so many others.'

'Not a whit, Captain, not a whit!' he answered, resuming his old
bantam-cock manner as soon as he saw that there was no danger. 'I am
upon oath as true and as leal a man as ever I was.'

'That I can fully believe,' I answered.

'I did but dissimulate,' he continued, brushing the flour from his
person. 'I did but practise that cunning of the serpent which should
in every warrior accompany the courage of the lion. You have read your
Homer, doubtless. Eh? I too have had a touch of the humanities. I am no
mere rough soldier, however stoutly I can hold mine own at sword-play.
Master Ulysses is my type, even as thine, I take it, is Master Ajax.'

'Methinks that Master Jack-in-the-box would fit you better,' said I.
'Wilt have a half of this cake? How came you in the flour-bin?'

'Why, marry, in this wise,' he answered, with his mouth full of dough.
'It was a wile or ruse, after the fashion of the greatest commanders,
who have always been famous for concealing their movements, and lurking
where they were least expected. For when the fight was lost, and I had
cut and hacked until my arm was weary and my edge blunted, I found that
I was left alone alive of all the Taunton men. Were we on the field you
could see where I had stood by the ring of slain which would be found
within the sweep of my sword-arm. Finding that all was lost and that our
rogues were fled, I mounted our worthy Mayor's charger, seeing that the
gallant gentleman had no further need for it, and rode slowly from the
field. I promise you that there was that in my eye and bearing which
prevented their horse from making too close a pursuit of me. One trooper
did indeed throw himself across my path, but mine old back-handed cut
was too much for him. Alas, I have much upon my conscience? I have made
both widows and orphans. Why will they brave me when--God of mercy, what
is that?'

''Tis but my horse in the stall below,' I answered.

'I thought it was the dragoons,' quoth the clerk, wiping away the drops
which had started out upon his brow. 'You and I would have gone forth
and smitten them.'

'Or climbed into the flour-bin,' said I.

'I have not yet made clear to you how I came there,' he continued.
'Having ridden, then, some leagues from the field, and noting this
windmill, it did occur to me that a stout man might single-handed make
it good against a troop of horse. We have no great love of flight, we
Tetheridges. It may be mere empty pride, and yet the feeling runs strong
in the family. We have a fighting strain in us ever since my kinsman
followed Ireton's army as a sutler. I pulled up, therefore, and had
dismounted to take my observations, when my brute of a charger gave
the bridle a twitch, jerked itself free, and was off in an instant over
hedges and ditches. I had, therefore, only my good sword left to trust
to. I climbed up the ladder, and was engaged in planning how the defence
could best be conducted, when I heard the clank of hoofs, and on the
top of it you did ascend from below. I retired at once into ambush, from
which I should assuredly have made a sudden outfall or sally, had the
flour not so choked my breathing that I felt as though I had a two-pound
loaf stuck in my gizzard. For myself, I am glad that it has so come
about, for in my blind wrath I might unwittingly have done you an
injury. Hearing the clank of your sword as you did come up the ladder,
I did opine that you were one of King James's minions, the captain,
perchance, of some troop in the fields below.'

'All very clear and explicit, Master Tetheridge,' said I, re-lighting
my pipe. 'No doubt your demeanour when I did draw you from your
hiding-place was also a mere cloak for your valour. But enough of that.
It is to the future that we have to look. What are your intentions?'

'To remain with you, Captain,' said he.

'Nay, that you shall not,' I answered; 'I have no great fancy for your
companionship. Your overflowing valour may bring me into ruffles which I
had otherwise avoided.'

'Nay, nay! I shall moderate my spirit,' he cried. 'In such troublous
times you will find yourself none the worse for the company of a tried
fighting man.'

'Tried and found wanting,' said I, weary of the man's braggart talk. 'I
tell you I will go alone.'

'Nay, you need not be so hot about it,' he exclaimed, shrinking away
from me. 'In any case, we had best stay here until nightfall, when we
may make our way to the coast.'

'That is the first mark of sense that you have shown,' said I. 'The
King's horse will find enough to do with the Zoyland cider and the
Bridgewater ale. If we can pass through, I have friends on the north
coast who would give us a lift in their lugger as far as Holland.
This help I will not refuse to give you, since you are my fellow in
misfortune. I would that Saxon had stayed with me! I fear he will be
taken!'

'If you mean Colonel Saxon,' said the clerk, 'I think that he also is
one who hath much guile as well as valour. A stern, fierce soldier
he was, as I know well, having fought back to back with him for forty
minutes by the clock, against a troop of Sarsfield's horse. Plain of
speech he was, and perhaps a trifle inconsiderate of the honour of a
cavalier, but in the field it would have been well for the army had they
had more such commanders.'

'You say truly,' I answered; 'but now that we have refreshed ourselves
it is time that we bethought us of taking some rest, since we may have
far to travel this night. I would that I could lay my hand upon a flagon
of ale.'

'I would gladly drink to our further acquaintanceship in the same,'
said my companion, 'but as to the matter of slumber that may be readily
arranged. If you ascend that ladder you will find in the loft a litter
of empty sacks, upon which you can repose. For myself, I will stay down
here for a while and cook myself another cake.'

'Do you remain on watch for two hours and then arouse me,' I replied.
'I shall then keep guard whilst you sleep.' He touched the hilt of his
sword as a sign that he would be true to his post, so not without some
misgivings I climbed up into the loft, and throwing myself upon the
rude couch was soon in a deep and dreamless slumber, lulled by the low,
mournful groaning and creaking of the sails.

I was awoken by steps beside me, and found that the little clerk had
come up the ladder and was bending over me. I asked him if the time had
come for me to rouse, on which he answered in a strange quavering voice
that I had yet an hour, and that he had come up to see if there was any
service which he could render me. I was too weary to take much note
of his slinking manner and pallid cheeks, so thanking him for his
attention, I turned over and was soon asleep once more.

My next waking was a rougher and a sterner one. There came a sudden
rush of heavy feet up the ladder, and a dozen red-coats swarmed into the
room. Springing on to my feet I put out my hand for the sword which I
had laid all ready by my side, but the trusty weapon had gone. It had
been stolen whilst I slumbered. Unarmed and taken at a vantage, I was
struck down and pinioned in a moment. One held a pistol to my head, and
swore that he would blow my brains out if I stirred, while the others
wound a coil of rope round my body and arms, until Samson himself could
scarce have got free. Feeling that my struggles were of no possible
avail, I lay silent and waited for whatever was to come. Neither now nor
at any time, dear children, have I laid great store upon my life, but
far less then than now, for each of you are tiny tendrils which bind me
to this world. Yet, when I think of the other dear ones who are waiting
for me on the further shore, I do not think that even now death would
seem an evil thing in my eyes. What a hopeless and empty thing would
life be without it!

Having lashed my arms, the soldiers dragged me down the ladder, as
though I had been a truss of hay, into the room beneath, which was
also crowded with troopers. In one corner was the wretched scrivener,
a picture of abject terror, with chattering teeth and trembling knees,
only prevented from falling upon the floor by the grasp of a stalwart
corporal. In front of him stood two officers, one a little hard brown
man with dark twinkling eyes and an alert manner, the other tall and
slender, with a long golden moustache, which drooped down half-way to
his shoulders. The former had my sword in his hand, and they were both
examining the blade curiously.

'It is a good bit of steel, Dick,' said one, putting the point against
the stone floor, and pressing down until he touched it with the handle.
'See, with what a snap it rebounds! No maker's name, but the date 1638
is stamped upon the pommel. Where did you get it, fellow?' he asked,
fixing his keen gaze upon my face.

'It was my father's before me,' I answered.

'Then I trust that he drew it in a better quarrel than his son hath
done,' said the taller officer, with a sneer.

'In as good, though not in a better,' I returned. 'That sword hath
always been drawn for the rights and liberties of Englishmen, and
against the tyranny of kings and the bigotry of priests.'

'What a tag for a playhouse, Dick,' cried the officer. 'How doth it
run? "The bigotry of kings and the tyranny of priests." Why, if well
delivered by Betterton close up to the footlights, with one hand upon
his heart and the other pointing to the sky, I warrant the pit would
rise at it.'

'Very like,' said the other, twirling his moustache. 'But we have no
time for fine speeches now. What are we to do with the little one?'

'Hang him,' the other answered carelessly.

'No, no, your most gracious honours,' howled Master Tetheridge, suddenly
writhing out of the corporal's grip and flinging himself upon the
floor at their feet. 'Did I not tell ye where ye could find one of the
stoutest soldiers of the rebel army? Did not I guide ye to him? Did not
I even creep up and remove his sword lest any of the King's subjects
be slain in the taking of him? Surely, surely, ye would not use me so
scurvily when I have done ye these services? Have I not made good my
words? Is he not as I described him, a giant in stature and of wondrous
strength? The whole army will bear me out in it, that he was worth any
two in single fight. I have given him over to ye. Surely ye will let me
go!'

'Very well delivered--plaguily so!' quoth the little officer, clapping
the palm of one hand softly against the back of the other. 'The emphasis
was just, and the enunciation clear. A little further back towards the
wings, corporal, if you please. Thank you! Now, Dick, it is your cue.'

'Nay, John, you are too absurd!' cried the other impatiently. 'The mask
and the buskins are well enough in their place, but you look upon the
play as a reality and upon the reality as but a play. What this reptile
hath said is true. We must keep faith with him if we wish that others of
the country folk should give up the fugitives. There is no help for it!'

'For myself I believe in Jeddart law,' his companion answered. 'I
would hang the man first and then discuss the question of our promise.
However, pink me if I will obtrude my opinion on any man!'

'Nay, it cannot be,' the taller said. 'Corporal, do you take him down.
Henderson will go with you. Take from him that plate and sword, which
his mother would wear with as good a grace. And hark ye, corporal, a few
touches of thy stirrup leathers across his fat shoulders might not be
amiss, as helping him to remember the King's dragoons.'

My treacherous companion was dragged off, struggling and yelping, and
presently a series of piercing howls, growing fainter and fainter as he
fled before his tormentors, announced that the hint had been taken. The
two officers rushed to the little window of the mill and roared with
laughter, while the troopers, peeping furtively over their shoulders,
could not restrain themselves from joining in their mirth, from which I
gathered that Master Tetheridge, as, spurred on by fear, he hurled his
fat body through hedges and into ditches, was a somewhat comical sight.

'And now for the other,' said the little officer, turning away from the
window and wiping the tears of laughter from his face. 'That beam over
yonder would serve our purpose. Where is Hangman Broderick, the Jack
Ketch of the Royals?'

'Here I am, sir,' responded a sullen, heavy-faced trooper, shuffling
forward; 'I have a rope here with a noose.'

'Throw it over the beam, then. What is amiss with your hand, you clumsy
rogue, that you should wear linen round it?'

'May it please you, sir,' the man answered, 'it was all through an
ungrateful, prick-eared Presbyterian knave whom I hung at Gommatch. I
had done all that could be done for him. Had he been at Tyburn he could
scarce have met with more attention. Yet when I did put my hand to his
neck to see that all was as it should be, he did fix me with his teeth,
and hath gnawed a great piece from my thumb.'

'I am sorry for you,' said the officer. 'You know, no doubt, that the
human bite under such circumstances is as deadly as that of the mad dog,
so that you may find yourself snapping and barking one of these fine
mornings. Nay, turn not pale! I have heard you preach patience and
courage to your victims. You are not afraid of death?'

'Not of any Christian death, your Honour. Yet, ten shillings a week is
scarce enough to pay a man for an end like that!'

'Nay, it is all a lottery,' remarked the Captain cheerily. 'I have heard
that in these cases a man is so drawn up that his heels do beat a tattoo
against the back of his head. But, mayhap, it is not as painful as it
would appear. Meanwhile, do you proceed to do your office.'

Three or four troopers caught me by the arms, but I shook them off as
best I might, and walked with, as I trust, a steady step and a cheerful
face under the beam, which was a great smoke-blackened rafter passing
from one side of the chamber to the other. The rope was thrown over
this, and the noose placed round my neck with trembling fingers by the
hangman, who took particular care to keep beyond the range of my teeth.
Half-a-dozen dragoons seized the further end of the coil, and stood
ready to swing me into eternity. Through all my adventurous life I have
never been so close upon the threshold of death as at that moment, and
yet I declare to you that, terrible as my position was, I could think
of nothing but the tattoo marks upon old Solomon Sprent's arm, and the
cunning fashion in which he had interwoven the red and the blue. Yet I
was keenly alive to all that was going on around me. The scene of the
bleak stone-floored room, the single narrow window, the two lounging
elegant officers, the pile of arms in the corner, and even the texture
of the coarse red serge and the patterns of the great brass buttons upon
the sleeve of the man who held me, are all stamped clearly upon my mind.

'We must do our work with order,' remarked the taller Captain, taking a
note-book from his pocket. 'Colonel Sarsfield may desire some details.
Let me see! This is the seventeenth, is it not?'

'Four at the farm and five at the cross-roads,' the other answered,
counting upon his fingers. 'Then there was the one whom we shot in the
hedge, and the wounded one who nearly saved himself by dying, and the
two in the grove under the hill. I can remember no more, save those who
were strung up in 'Bridgewater immediately after the action.'

'It is well to do it in an orderly fashion,' quoth the other, scribbling
in his book. 'It is very well for Kirke and his men, who are half Moors
themselves, to hang and to slaughter without discrimination or ceremony,
but we should set them a better example. What is your name, sirrah?'

'My name is Captain Micah Clarke,' I answered.

The two officers looked at each other, and the smaller one gave a long
whistle. 'It is the very man!' said he. 'This comes of asking questions!
Rat me, if I had not misgivings that it might prove to be so. They said
that he was large of limb.'

'Tell me, sirrah, have you ever known one Major Ogilvy of the Horse
Guards Blue?' asked the Captain.

'Seeing that I had the honour of taking him prisoner,' I replied, 'and
seeing also that he hath shared soldier's fare and quarters with me ever
since, I think I may fairly say that I do know him.'

'Cast loose the cord!' said the officer, and the hangman reluctantly
slipped the cord over my head once more. 'Young man, you are surely
reserved for something great, for you will never be nearer your grave
until you do actually step into it. This Major Ogilvy hath made great
interest both for you and for a wounded comrade of yours who lies at
Bridgewater. Your name hath been given to the commanders of horse, with
orders to bring you in unscathed should you be taken. Yet it is but fair
to tell you that though the Major's good word may save you from martial
law, it will stand you in small stead before a civil judge, before whom
ye must in the end take your trial.'

'I desire to share the same lot and fortune as has befallen my
companions-in-arms,' I answered.

'Nay, that is but a sullen way to take your deliverance,' cried the
smaller officer. 'The situation is as flat as sutler's beer. Otway would
have made a bettor thing of it. Can you not rise to the occasion? Where
is she?'

'She! Who?' I asked.

'She. The she. The woman. Your wife, sweetheart, betrothed, what you
will.'

'There is none such,' I answered.

'There now! What can be done in a case like that?' cried he
despairingly. 'She should have rushed in from the wings and thrown
herself upon your bosom. I have seen such a situation earn three rounds
from the pit. There is good material spoiling here for want of some one
to work it up.'

'We have something else to work up, Jack,' exclaimed his companion
impatiently. 'Sergeant Gredder, do you with two troopers conduct the
prisoner to Gommatch Church. It is time that we were once more upon our
way, for in a few hours the darkness will hinder the pursuit.'

At the word of command the troopers descended into the field where their
horses were picketed, and were speedily on the march once more, the tall
Captain leading them, and the stage-struck cornet bringing up the
rear. The sergeant to whose care I had been committed--a great
square-shouldered, dark-browed man--ordered my own horse to be brought
out, and helped me to mount it. He removed the pistols from the
holsters, however, and hung them with my sword at his own saddle-bow.

'Shall I tie his feet under the horse's belly?' asked one of the
dragoons.

'Nay, the lad hath an honest face,' the sergeant answered. 'If he
promises to be quiet we shall cast free his arms.'

'I have no desire to escape,' said I.

'Then untie the rope. A brave man in misfortune hath ever my goodwill,
strike me dumb else! Sergeant Gredder is my name, formerly of Mackay's
and now of the Royals--as hard-worked and badly-paid a man as any in
his Majesty's service. Right wheel, and down the pathway! Do ye ride
on either side, and I behind! Our carbines are primed, friend, so stand
true to your promise!'

'Nay, you can rely upon it,' I answered.

'Your little comrade did play you a scurvy trick,' said the sergeant,
'for seeing us ride down the road he did make across to us, and
bargained with the Captain that his life should be spared, on condition
that he should deliver into our hands what he described as one of the
stoutest soldiers in the rebel army. Truly you have thews and sinews
enough, though you are surely too young to have seen much service.'

'This hath been my first campaign,' I answered.

'And is like to be your last,' he remarked, with soldierly frankness. 'I
hear that the Privy Council intend to make such an example as will take
the heart out of the Whigs for twenty years to come. They have a lawyer
coming from London whose wig is more to be feared than our helmets. He
will slay more men in a day than a troop of horse in a ten-mile chase.
Faith! I would sooner they took this butcher-work into their own hands.
See those bodies on yonder tree. It is an evil season when such acorns
grow upon English oaks.'

'It is an evil season,' said I, 'when men who call themselves Christians
inflict such vengeance upon poor simple peasants, who have done no more
than their conscience urged them. That the leaders and officers should
suffer is but fair. They stood to win in case of success, and should pay
forfeit now that they have lost. But it goes to my heart to see those
poor godly country folk so treated.'

'Aye, there is truth in that,' said the sergeant. 'Now if it were some
of these snuffle-nosed preachers, the old lank-haired bell-wethers who
have led their flocks to the devil, it would be another thing. Why
can they not conform to the Church, and be plagued to them? It is good
enough for the King, so surely it is good enough for them; or are their
souls so delicate that they cannot satisfy themselves with that on which
every honest Englishman thrives? The main road to Heaven is too common
for them. They must needs have each a by-path of their own, and cry out
against all who will not follow it.'

'Why,' said I, 'there are pious men of all creeds. If a man lead a life
of virtue, what matter what he believes?

'Let a man keep his virtue in his heart,' quoth Sergeant Gredder. 'Let
him pack it deep in the knapsack of his soul. I suspect godliness
which shows upon the surface, the snuffling talk, the rolling eyes, the
groaning and the hawking. It is like the forged money, which can be told
by its being more bright and more showy than the real.'

'An apt comparison!' said I. 'But how comes it, sergeant, that you have
given attention to these matters? Unless they are much belied, the Royal
Dragoons find other things to think of.'

'I was one of Mackay's foot,' he answered shortly. 'I have heard of
him,' said I. 'A man, I believe, both of parts and of piety.'

'That, indeed, he is,' cried Sergeant Gredder warmly. 'He is a man stern
and soldierly to the outer eye, but with the heart of a saint within
him. I promise you there was little need of the strapado in his
regiment, for there was not a man who did not fear the look of sorrow in
his Colonel's eyes far more than he did the provost-marshal.'

During the whole of our long ride I found the worthy sergeant a true
follower of the excellent Colonel Mackay, for he proved to be a man of
more than ordinary intelligence, and of serious and thoughtful habit.
As to the two troopers, they rode on either side of me as silent as
statues; for the common dragoons of those days could but talk of wine
and women, and were helpless and speechless when aught else was to the
fore. When we at last rode into the little village of Gommatch, which
overlooks the plain of Sedgemoor, it was with regret on each side that I
bade my guardian adieu. As a parting favour I begged him to take charge
of Covenant for me, promising to pay a certain sum by the month for his
keep, and commissioning him to retain the horse for his own use should I
fail to claim him within the year. It was a load off my mind when I saw
my trusty companion led away, staring back at me with questioning eyes,
as though unable to understand the separation. Come what might, I knew
now that, he was in the keeping of a good man who would see that no harm
befell him.



Chapter XXXIV. Of the Coming of Solomon Sprent

The church of Gommatch was a small ivy-clad building with a square
Norman tower, standing in the centre of the hamlet of that name. Its
great oaken doors, studded with iron, and high narrow windows, fitted
it well for the use to which it was now turned. Two companies of
Dumbarton's Foot had been quartered in the village, with a portly Major
at their head, to whom I was handed over by Sergeant Gredder, with some
account of my capture, and of the reasons which had prevented my summary
execution.

Night was now drawing in, but a few dim lamps, hung here and there upon
the walls, cast an uncertain, flickering light over the scene. A hundred
or more prisoners were scattered about upon the stone floor, many of
them wounded, and some evidently dying. The hale had gathered in silent,
subdued groups round their stricken friends, and were doing what they
could to lessen their sufferings. Some had even removed the greater part
of their clothing in order to furnish head-rests and pallets for the
wounded. Here and there in the shadows dark kneeling figures might be
seen, and the measured sound of their prayers rang through the aisles,
with a groan now and again, or a choking gasp as some poor sufferer
