(into which some of his translators have fallen) cannot be allowable;
those only excepted without which it is impossible to treat the subjects
in any living language.

There are two peculiarities in Homer's diction, which are a sort of marks
or moles by which every common eye distinguishes him at first sight; those
who are not his greatest admirers look upon them as defects, and those who
are, seemed pleased with them as beauties. I speak of his compound
epithets, and of his repetitions. Many of the former cannot be done
literally into English without destroying the purity of our language. I
believe such should be retained as slide easily of themselves into an
English compound, without violence to the ear or to the received rules of
composition, as well as those which have received a sanction from the
authority of our best poets, and are become familiar through their use of
them; such as "the cloud-compelling Jove," &c. As for the rest, whenever
any can be as fully and significantly expressed in a single word as in a
compounded one, the course to be taken is obvious.

Some that cannot be so turned, as to preserve their full image by one or
two words, may have justice done them by circumlocution; as the epithet
einosiphyllos to a mountain, would appear little or ridiculous translated
literally "leaf-shaking," but affords a majestic idea in the periphrasis:
"the lofty mountain shakes his waving woods." Others that admit of
different significations, may receive an advantage from a judicious
variation, according to the occasions on which they are introduced. For
example, the epithet of Apollo, hekaebolos or "far-shooting," is capable
of two explications; one literal, in respect of the darts and bow, the
ensigns of that god; the other allegorical, with regard to the rays of the
sun; therefore, in such places where Apollo is represented as a god in
person, I would use the former interpretation; and where the effects of
the sun are described, I would make choice of the latter. Upon the whole,
it will be necessary to avoid that perpetual repetition of the same
epithets which we find in Homer, and which, though it might be
accommodated (as has been already shown) to the ear of those times, is by
no means so to ours: but one may wait for opportunities of placing them,
where they derive an additional beauty from the occasions on which they
are employed; and in doing this properly, a translator may at once show
his fancy and his judgment.

As for Homer's repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whole
narrations and speeches, of single sentences, and of one verse or
hemistitch. I hope it is not impossible to have such a regard to these, as
neither to lose so known a mark of the author on the one hand, nor to
offend the reader too much on the other. The repetition is not ungraceful
in those speeches, where the dignity of the speaker renders it a sort of
insolence to alter his words; as in the messages from gods to men, or from
higher powers to inferiors in concerns of state, or where the ceremonial
of religion seems to require it, in the solemn forms of prayers, oaths, or
the like. In other cases, I believe the best rule is, to be guided by the
nearness, or distance, at which the repetitions are placed in the
original: when they follow too close, one may vary the expression; but it
is a question, whether a professed translator be authorized to omit any:
if they be tedious, the author is to answer for it.

It only remains to speak of the versification. Homer (as has been said) is
perpetually applying the sound to the sense, and varying it on every new
subject. This is indeed one of the most exquisite beauties of poetry, and
attainable by very few: I only know of Homer eminent for it in the Greek,
and Virgil in the Latin. I am sensible it is what may sometimes happen by
chance, when a writer is warm, and fully possessed of his image: however,
it may reasonably be believed they designed this, in whose verse it so
manifestly appears in a superior degree to all others. Few readers have
the ear to be judges of it: but those who have, will see I have
endeavoured at this beauty.

Upon the whole, I must confess myself utterly incapable of doing justice
to Homer. I attempt him in no other hope but that which one may entertain
without much vanity, of giving a more tolerable copy of him than any
entire translation in verse has yet done. We have only those of Chapman,
Hobbes, and Ogilby. Chapman has taken the advantage of an immeasurable
length of verse, notwithstanding which, there is scarce any paraphrase
more loose and rambling than his. He has frequent interpolations of four
or six lines; and I remember one in the thirteenth book of the Odyssey,
ver. 312, where he has spun twenty verses out of two. He is often mistaken
in so bold a manner, that one might think he deviated on purpose, if he
did not in other places of his notes insist so much upon verbal trifles.
He appears to have had a strong affectation of extracting new meanings out
of his author; insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of
the mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to
strain the obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in
fustian; a fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as
in the tragedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man
may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface
and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in
poetry. His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than
fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which
is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for
particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits
the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt
not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimes omits whole similes and
sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of
his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness. His poetry, as
well as Ogilby's, is too mean for criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small part
of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the
sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much regard
to Chapman, whose words he sometimes copies, and has unhappily followed
him in passages where he wanders from the original. However, had he
translated the whole work, I would no more have attempted Homer after him
than Virgil: his version of whom (notwithstanding some human errors) is
the most noble and spirited translation I know in any language. But the
fate of great geniuses is like that of great ministers: though they are
confessedly the first in the commonwealth of letters, they must be envied
and calumniated only for being at the head of it.

That which, in my opinion, ought to be the endeavour of any one who
translates Homer, is above all things to keep alive that spirit and fire
which makes his chief character: in particular places, where the sense can
bear any doubt, to follow the strongest and most poetical, as most
agreeing with that character; to copy him in all the variations of his
style, and the different modulations of his numbers; to preserve, in the
more active or descriptive parts, a warmth and elevation; in the more
sedate or narrative, a plainness and solemnity; in the speeches, a fulness
and perspicuity; in the sentences, a shortness and gravity; not to neglect
even the little figures and turns on the words, nor sometimes the very
cast of the periods; neither to omit nor confound any rites or customs of
antiquity: perhaps too he ought to include the whole in a shorter compass
than has hitherto been done by any translator who has tolerably preserved
either the sense or poetry. What I would further recommend to him is, to
study his author rather from his own text, than from any commentaries, how
learned soever, or whatever figure they may make in the estimation of the
world; to consider him attentively in comparison with Virgil above all the
ancients, and with Milton above all the moderns. Next these, the
Archbishop of Cambray's Telemachus may give him the truest idea of the
spirit and turn of our author; and Bossu's admirable Treatise of the Epic
Poem the justest notion of his design and conduct. But after all, with
whatever judgment and study a man may proceed, or with whatever happiness
he may perform such a work, he must hope to please but a few; those only
who have at once a taste of poetry, and competent learning. For to satisfy
such a want either, is not in the nature of this undertaking; since a mere
modern wit can like nothing that is not modern, and a pedant nothing that
is not Greek.

What I have done is submitted to the public; from whose opinions I am
prepared to learn; though I fear no judges so little as our best poets,
who are most sensible of the weight of this task. As for the worst,
whatever they shall please to say, they may give me some concern as they
are unhappy men, but none as they are malignant writers. I was guided in
this translation by judgments very different from theirs, and by persons
for whom they can have no kindness, if an old observation be true, that
the strongest antipathy in the world is that of fools to men of wit. Mr.
Addison was the first whose advice determined me to undertake this task;
who was pleased to write to me upon that occasion in such terms as I
cannot repeat without vanity. I was obliged to Sir Richard Steele for a
very early recommendation of my undertaking to the public. Dr. Swift
promoted my interest with that warmth with which he always serves his
friend. The humanity and frankness of Sir Samuel Garth are what I never
knew wanting on any occasion. I must also acknowledge, with infinite
pleasure, the many friendly offices, as well as sincere criticisms, of Mr.
Congreve, who had led me the way in translating some parts of Homer. I
must add the names of Mr. Rowe, and Dr. Parnell, though I shall take a
further opportunity of doing justice to the last, whose good nature (to
give it a great panegyric), is no less extensive than his learning. The
favour of these gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them
so true an affection. But what can I say of the honour so many of the
great have done me; while the first names of the age appear as my
subscribers, and the most distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning
as my chief encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to
find, that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not displeased
I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his excellent
Essay), so complete a praise:

  "Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
  For all books else appear so mean, so poor,
  Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read,
  And Homer will be all the books you need."

That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it is
hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing to
his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord Bolingbroke,
not more distinguished in the great scenes of business, than in all the
useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not refused to be the
critic of these sheets, and the patron of their writer: and that the noble
author of the tragedy of "Heroic Love" has continued his partiality to me,
from my writing pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself
the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their
advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several
particulars of this translation.

I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my desire
of having it known that he was pleased to promote this affair. The
particular zeal of Mr. Harcourt (the son of the late Lord Chancellor) gave
me a proof how much I am honoured in a share of his friendship. I must
attribute to the same motive that of several others of my friends: to whom
all acknowledgments are rendered unnecessary by the privileges of a
familiar correspondence; and I am satisfied I can no way better oblige men
of their turn than by my silence.

In short, I have found more patrons than ever Homer wanted. He would have
thought himself happy to have met the same favour at Athens that has been
shown me by its learned rival, the University of Oxford. And I can hardly
envy him those pompous honours he received after death, when I reflect on
the enjoyment of so many agreeable obligations, and easy friendships,
which make the satisfaction of life. This distinction is the more to be
acknowledged, as it is shown to one whose pen has never gratified the
prejudices of particular parties, or the vanities of particular men.
Whatever the success may prove, I shall never repent of an undertaking in
which I have experienced the candour and friendship of so many persons of
merit; and in which I hope to pass some of those years of youth that are
generally lost in a circle of follies, after a manner neither wholly
unuseful to others, nor disagreeable to myself.






THE ILIAD.





BOOK I.


ARGUMENT.(40)

THE CONTENTION OF ACHILLES AND AGAMEMNON.

In the war of Troy, the Greeks having sacked some of the neighbouring
towns, and taken from thence two beautiful captives, Chryseis and Briseis,
allotted the first to Agamemnon, and the last to Achilles. Chryses, the
father of Chryseis, and priest of Apollo, comes to the Grecian camp to
ransom her; with which the action of the poem opens, in the tenth year of
the siege. The priest being refused, and insolently dismissed by
Agamemnon, entreats for vengeance from his god; who inflicts a pestilence
on the Greeks. Achilles calls a council, and encourages Chalcas to declare
the cause of it; who attributes it to the refusal of Chryseis. The king,
being obliged to send back his captive, enters into a furious contest with
Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however, as he had the absolute command
of the army, he seizes on Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent
withdraws himself and his forces from the rest of the Greeks; and
complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of
the wrong done to her son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter,
granting her suit, incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till
they are reconciled by the address of Vulcan.

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the
plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for
Jupiter's stay with the AEthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her
petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and
lastly to Olympus.

  Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
  Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
  That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
  The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
  Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
  Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.(41)
  Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
  Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!(42)

  Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour(43)
  Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
  Latona's son a dire contagion spread,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his reverent priest defied,(45)
  And for the king's offence the people died.

  For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
  His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
  Suppliant the venerable father stands;
  Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
  By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
  Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
  He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race(46)

  "Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
  May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
  Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
  But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
  And give Chryseis to these arms again;
  If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
  And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."

  The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
  Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
  Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:

  "Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
  Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
  Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
  Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
  Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
  And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
  Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
  And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
  In daily labours of the loom employ'd,
  Or doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
  Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
  Far from her native soil and weeping sire."

                 [Illustration: HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.]

                         HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.


  The trembling priest along the shore return'd,
  And in the anguish of a father mourn'd.
  Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
  Silent he wander'd by the sounding main;
  Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
  The god who darts around the world his rays.

  "O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's line,(47)
  Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,(48)
  Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
  And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shores.
  If e'er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,(49)
  Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
  God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
  Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy."

  Thus Chryses pray'd.--the favouring power attends,
  And from Olympus' lofty tops descends.
  Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;(50)
  Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
  Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
  And gloomy darkness roll'd about his head.
  The fleet in view, he twang'd his deadly bow,
  And hissing fly the feather'd fates below.
  On mules and dogs the infection first began;(51)
  And last, the vengeful arrows fix'd in man.
  For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
  The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
  But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
  Inspired by Juno, Thetis' godlike son
  Convened to council all the Grecian train;
  For much the goddess mourn'd her heroes slain.(52)
  The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
  Achilles thus the king of men address'd:

  "Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
  And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
  The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
  'Tis time to save the few remains of war.
  But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
  Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage;
  Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
  By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.(53)
  If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
  Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
  So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
  And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."

  He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
  Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
  That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
  The past, the present, and the future knew:
  Uprising slow, the venerable sage
  Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

  "Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
  Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
  First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
  Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
  For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
  And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
  Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
  Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
  For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
  'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
  To whom Pelides:--"From thy inmost soul
  Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
  E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
  To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
  And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
  Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
  No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
  Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
  Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
  The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."

  Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
  "Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
  But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
  Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
  Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
  But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
  Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
  To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.(54)
  Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
  The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."

  The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
  The monarch started from his shining throne;
  Black choler fill'd his breast that boil'd with ire,
  And from his eye-balls flash'd the living fire:
  "Augur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
  Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
  Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
  And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
  For this are Phoebus' oracles explored,
  To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
  For this with falsehood is my honour stain'd,
  Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
  Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
  And heavenly charms prefer to proffer'd gold?
  A maid, unmatch'd in manners as in face,
  Skill'd in each art, and crown'd with every grace;
  Not half so dear were Clytaemnestra's charms,
  When first her blooming beauties bless'd my arms.
  Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
  Our cares are only for the public weal:
  Let me be deem'd the hateful cause of all,
  And suffer, rather than my people fall.
  The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
  So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
  But since for common good I yield the fair,
  My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
  Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
  That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
  "Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
  Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
  Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
  The due reward of many a well-fought field?

  The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
  We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
  But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
  (That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
  Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
  The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
  Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
  Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."

  Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
  With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
  Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
  Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
  At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
  First let the just equivalent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and let it be
  A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
  Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
  This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
  The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;(55)
  Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
  The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
  And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
  But this when time requires.--It now remains
  We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
  And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
  With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
  Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
  And some deputed prince the charge attend:
  This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
  Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
  Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
  Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
  Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
  The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

                          [Illustration: MARS.]

                                  MARS.


  At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
  "O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
  Inglorious slave to interest, ever join'd
  With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
  What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
  Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
  What cause have I to war at thy decree?
  The distant Trojans never injured me;
  To Phthia's realms no hostile troops they led:
  Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
  Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
  And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
  Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
  Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
  Hither we sail'd, a voluntary throng,
  To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
  What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
  But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother's cause?
  Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
  Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
  And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,
  Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
  A prize as small, O tyrant! match'd with thine,
  As thy own actions if compared to mine.
  Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,
  Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
  Some trivial present to my ships I bear:
  Or barren praises pay the wounds of war.
  But know, proud monarch, I'm thy slave no more;
  My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia's shore:
  Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain,
  What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?"

  To this the king: "Fly, mighty warrior! fly;
  Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
  There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight,
  And Jove himself shall guard a monarch's right.
  Of all the kings (the god's distinguish'd care)
  To power superior none such hatred bear:
  Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,
  And wars and horrors are thy savage joy,
  If thou hast strength, 'twas Heaven that strength bestow'd;
  For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
  Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away;
  Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;
  I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
  Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
  Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:--but here(56)
  'Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
  Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
  My bark shall waft her to her native land;
  But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,
  Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair:
  Even in thy tent I'll seize the blooming prize,
  Thy loved Briseis with the radiant eyes.
  Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour
  Thou stood'st a rival of imperial power;
  And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known,
  That kings are subject to the gods alone."

  Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppress'd,
  His heart swell'd high, and labour'd in his breast;
  Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;
  Now fired by wrath, and now by reason cool'd:
  That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,
  Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;
  This whispers soft his vengeance to control,
  And calm the rising tempest of his soul.
  Just as in anguish of suspense he stay'd,
  While half unsheathed appear'd the glittering blade,(57)
  Minerva swift descended from above,
  Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove
  (For both the princes claim'd her equal care);
  Behind she stood, and by the golden hair
  Achilles seized; to him alone confess'd;
  A sable cloud conceal'd her from the rest.
  He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,
  Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes:

         [Illustration: MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.]

                 MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.


  "Descends Minerva, in her guardian care,
  A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear
  From Atreus' son?--Then let those eyes that view
  The daring crime, behold the vengeance too."

  "Forbear (the progeny of Jove replies)
  To calm thy fury I forsake the skies:
  Let great Achilles, to the gods resign'd,
  To reason yield the empire o'er his mind.
  By awful Juno this command is given;
  The king and you are both the care of heaven.
  The force of keen reproaches let him feel;
  But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
  For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)
  Thy injured honour has its fated hour,
  When the proud monarch shall thy arms implores
  And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
  Then let revenge no longer bear the sway;
  Command thy passions, and the gods obey."

  To her Pelides:--"With regardful ear,
  'Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.
  Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress:
  Those who revere the gods the gods will bless."
  He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
  Then in the sheath return'd the shining blade.
  The goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
  And joins the sacred senate of the skies.

  Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
  Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
  "O monster! mix'd of insolence and fear,
  Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
  When wert thou known in ambush'd fights to dare,
  Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
  'Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
  Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
  So much 'tis safer through the camp to go,
  And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
  Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
  Sent in Jove's anger on a slavish race;
  Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
  Are tamed to wrongs;--or this had been thy last.
  Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
  Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
  Which sever'd from the trunk (as I from thee)
  On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
  This sceptre, form'd by temper'd steel to prove
  An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
  From whom the power of laws and justice springs
  (Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
  By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
  Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
  When, flush'd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
  The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
  Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
  Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
  Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
  This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe."

  He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
  His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
  Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
  The raging king return'd his frowns again.

  To calm their passion with the words of age,
  Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
  Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
  Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:(58)
  Two generations now had pass'd away,
  Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
  And now the example of the third remain'd.
  All view'd with awe the venerable man;
  Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

  "What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
  To Troy's proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
  That adverse gods commit to stern debate
  The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
  Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
  Nor think your Nestor's years and wisdom vain.
  A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
  Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
  Lives there a chief to match Pirithous' fame,
  Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name;
  Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
  Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
  With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
  In early youth my hardy days I led;
  Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
  And smit with love of honourable deeds,
  Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
  Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters' gore,
  And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
  Yet these with soft persuasive arts I sway'd;
  When Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd.
  If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
  Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
  Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
  That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
  Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
  Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
  Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
  Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
  Him, awful majesty exalts above
  The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
  Let both unite with well-consenting mind,
  So shall authority with strength be join'd.
  Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles' rage;
  Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
  Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
  The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host."

  This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
  "Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But that imperious, that unconquer'd soul,
  No laws can limit, no respect control.
  Before his pride must his superiors fall;
  His word the law, and he the lord of all?
  Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
  What king can bear a rival in his sway?
  Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
  Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?"

  Here on the monarch's speech Achilles broke,
  And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
  "Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
  To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
  Should I submit to each unjust decree:--
  Command thy vassals, but command not me.
  Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doom'd
  My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
  And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
  His conquering sword in any woman's cause.
  The gods command me to forgive the past:
  But let this first invasion be the last:
  For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
  Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade."

  At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
  The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

  Achilles with Patroclus took his way
  Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
  Meantime Atrides launch'd with numerous oars
  A well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores:
  High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed,
  And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
  Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
  Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

  The host to expiate next the king prepares,
  With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
  Wash'd by the briny wave, the pious train(59)
  Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
  Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
  And bulls and goats to Phoebus' altars paid;
  The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
  And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

  The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
  Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
  To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
  Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
  "Haste to the fierce Achilles' tent (he cries),
  Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize:
  Submit he must; or if they will not part,
  Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart."

  The unwilling heralds act their lord's commands;
  Pensive they walk along the barren sands:
  Arrived, the hero in his tent they find,
  With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
  At awful distance long they silent stand,
  Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
  Decent confusion! This the godlike man
  Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

  "With leave and honour enter our abodes,
  Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!(60)
  I know your message; by constraint you came;
  Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
  Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring;
  Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
  But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
  Witness to gods above, and men below!
  But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
  (That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
  Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
  Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
  The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
  Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
  Unskill'd to judge the future by the past,
  In blood and slaughter shall repent at last."

   [Illustration: THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.]

           THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.


  Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
  She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
  Pass'd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
  And of look'd back, slow-moving o'er the strand.
  Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
  But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
  O'er the wild margin of the deep he hung,
  That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:(61)
  There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
  Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

  "O parent goddess! since in early bloom
  Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
  Sure to so short a race of glory born,
  Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
  Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;
  And ill he pays the promise of a god,
  If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,
  Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize."

  Far from the deep recesses of the main,
  Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign,
  The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;
  And like a mist she rose above the tide;
  Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,
  And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
  "Why grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He deeply sighing said: "To tell my woe
  Is but to mention what too well you know.
  From Thebe, sacred to Apollo's name(62)
  (Aetion's realm), our conquering army came,
  With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils,
  Whose just division crown'd the soldier's toils;
  But bright Chryseis, heavenly prize! was led,
  By vote selected, to the general's bed.
  The priest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain
  His beauteous daughter from the victor's chain;
  The fleet he reach'd, and, lowly bending down,
  Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown,
  Intreating all; but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings of Atreus' royal race:
  The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,
  The priest to reverence, and release the fair;
  Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,
  The sire insulted, and his gifts denied:
  The insulted sire (his god's peculiar care)
  To Phoebus pray'd, and Phoebus heard the prayer:
  A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts
  Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.
  A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose,
  And points the crime, and thence derives the woes:
  Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
  To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
  Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm'd;
  Incensed he threaten'd, and his threats perform'd:
  The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent,
  With offer'd gifts to make the god relent;
  But now he seized Briseis' heavenly charms,
  And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms,
  Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;(63)
  And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
  But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
  To high Olympus' shining court ascend,
  Urge all the ties to former service owed,
  And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
  Oft hast thou triumph'd in the glorious boast,
  That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
  When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
  The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
  When the bright partner of his awful reign,
  The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
  The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
  Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
  Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
  (Whom gods Briareus, men AEgeon name),
  Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
  Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
  With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
  And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
  The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
  They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.(64)
  This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
  Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
  Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
  To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
  To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
  The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
  Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
  O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
  And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
  The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

  [Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.]

          THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.


  "Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
  While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
  Why have I borne thee with a mother's throes,
  To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?(65)
  So short a space the light of heaven to view!
  So short a space! and fill'd with sorrow too!
  O might a parent's careful wish prevail,
  Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
  And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
  Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
  Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'll go
  To great Olympus crown'd with fleecy snow.
