facts, which none but he could have known--conviction gradually,
but firmly, seized the mind of his ancient enemy.

"I believe that thou art he," said the latter, with trembling
voice; "believe, though I cannot yet realise the fact, and I thank
God."

He extended his hand gravely, and Wilfred grasped it with equal
solemnity.

"Thou art, then, my uncle Wilfred I have so long been taught to
think dead, for whom I have prayed many a time, for whom countless
masses have been offered at St. Wilfred's shrine," said young
Edward.

"Thou hast not, then, been taught to hate me?"

"No, indeed," said the boy; "why should I?"

"He knows nought of the quarrel between us, save what it is fitting
that Edith's child should know," said Etienne. "It is well that
upon this holiest spot on earth, whence the Prince of Life uttered
the words which have floated through the ages--'Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do'--that Etienne de Malville and
Wilfred of Aescendune should become friends."

"It is, indeed."

"I have long been conscious that thou wast not alone to blame--that
thou hast to forgive as well as I; but thou, like myself, hast long
since, I am sure, earned the right to breathe the prayer, 'Forgive
us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.'"

Once more they grasped hands--Etienne still like one in a dream.

"Come now to my tent. There thou mayst tell me all the details of
thy story, and I will tell thee news, unless this boy, my son and
thy nephew, has anticipated me, of those thou didst leave behind
thirty years ago in England. Thy sister Edith is my beloved wife,
and in this boy Norman and Englishman meet together, the merits of
each combined, the faults obliterated, if a father may be trusted."

And the friends, who once were foes, entered the tent of Etienne.



CHAPTER XXVIII. AESCENDUNE ONCE MORE.


"Last scene of all,
Which ends this strange eventful history."

Once more we must ask our readers to accompany us to Aescendune--it
is for the last time--to witness the final scenes recorded in these
veracious Chronicles.

Thirty-four years have passed since the battle of Hastings; and our
tale has now advanced to the autumn of the last year of the
eleventh century.

The face of the country is little altered since we last beheld it,
so far as the works of God are concerned: the woods, His first
temples, and the everlasting hills stand, as when Elfric and his
brother hunted therein with Prince Edwy, or the sainted Bertric
suffered martyrdom in the recesses of the forest, at the hands of
the ruthless Danes {xxix}.

But the works of man are more transitory, and in them there is a
great change. The Norman castle rebuilt by Etienne stands where
erst stood the Anglo-Saxon hall; the new Priory of St. Wilfred's
resembles that of St. Denys in architecture, although it bears the
name of the old English saint, to whose honour the first sacred
pile, erected by Offa of Aescendune was dedicated; the houses which
dot the scene are of a more substantial character; stone is
superseding wood. Whatever were its darker features, the Norman
conquest brought with it a more advanced civilisation, especially
as expressed in architecture {xxx}.

Within her bower, as the retiring apartments of the lady of the
castle were termed, sat Edith of Aescendune, not the first who had
borne that name. She had now passed middle age, and her years would
soon number half a century, yet time had dealt very kindly with
her, and but few shades of grey appeared amidst her locks. The
traces of a gentle grief were upon her, but men said she mourned
for the absence of her lord and her eldest son, and her thoughts
seemed far away from the embroidery at which she worked with her
maidens--an altar frontal for the priory church.

She thought of the far East--of the sandy wastes of Syria. Or her
fancy painted the holy city, with her dear ones as worshippers in
its reconquered shrines.

For she had not found an unkind lord in Etienne. The scenes which
he had passed through, as related in the earlier pages of this
Chronicle, had produced fruit for good, which Lanfranc (under whose
spiritual guidance he placed himself) had zealously tended and
fostered.

He dared not think of his father, of whose guilt he could not but
be unwillingly convinced; nor was it true in his case:

"He who's convinced against his will
Is but an unbeliever still."

But there was one act of mercy of which he had been the object,
which above all influenced and changed his heart towards the
English. And that was the Christian charity he had received from
the aged Englishwoman, the nurse of Wilfred, whose son Eadwin he
had so cruelly slain in the Dismal Swamp.

Acting under the advice of Lanfranc, he had sought and obtained
Edith in marriage, and had thereby, like Henry Beauclerc, united
the claims of conquerors and conquered in his person. He had
obtained from the king a promise of free pardon to all the refugees
yet in the Dismal Swamp, where it will be remembered the poor
English had fled, who were unfit to accompany Wilfred to the Camp
of Refuge, and had thereupon invited them all to rebuild their old
homes and dwell in them.

At first they would not trust him, but through the mediation of
Father Kenelm and of poor old Hilda, he succeeded in gaining their
confidence, and he did not betray their trust.

So Norman and Englishman were happily united at Aescendune, and in
spite of some little difficulties, arising from the airs the
conquerors could not help giving themselves, became more like one
people daily; and in a few years, so many followed their lord's
example, and intermarried with the English, captivated by the
beauty of the Anglo-Saxon maidens, that distinction of race became
speedily abolished, and hence Aescendune was perhaps the happiest
village in the distracted island.

The priory was rebuilt, as well as the castle, and occupied by
Benedictine monks of both races; but unlike most other monasteries,
it had an English prior. Lanfranc had appointed Father Kenelm, at
Etienne's earnest request, in gratitude for events in which that
good father had borne his part in the Dismal Swamp. This
appointment, more than aught else, reconciled the English to Norman
rule.

At first Edith feared her new lord, whom she had been compelled to
marry, remembering the sadness of her mother's married life; but
his persistent kindness won her heart; and after the birth of young
Edward, whom we have introduced to our readers, all restraint was
removed, and they were as happy a pair as need be.

Their children were taught to converse in both tongues--Old English
and Norman French--and to treat all alike, the kinsfolk of father
or of mother.

Putting together the details given by Edward of Aescendune to the
Knight of the Holy Sepulchre, and these few outlines of intervening
events, our readers will have little difficulty in understanding
the history of the thirty years.

Within her bower (as we have said) was the lady of Aescendune.
Seated in an embrasure of the lofty tower in which her rooms were
situate, her attention became fixed upon a horseman, who was riding
swiftly towards the castle from the direction of Warwick.

"I wonder," thought she, "whether this be a messenger from--" and
then she checked the thought, as though it must end in disappointment.

For months she had not heard from the absent ones. She knew
Jerusalem was taken; but if any letters had been sent, they had
miscarried--no unlikely circumstance in those days.

The messenger reached the castle.

Soon steps were heard ascending the stairs with such precipitate
haste, that the lady felt sure that some important tidings had
arrived.

Young Hugh--an active, fresh-coloured boy, with his Father's
features, tempered by the softer expression of his mother,
perhaps--bounded into the room.

"Oh, mother! lady mother!--letters from father, about him and
Edward. The man below is old Tristam--you remember Tristam who went
to the wars. They have landed, landed, and are upon the road home.
Oh! happy day. Tristam was sent forward. Read,--only read."

She was as pale as death, and fainting from the sudden shock.
Excess of joy has its dangers.

Her two girls, Margaret and Hilda, had followed their brother, and
their gentle care soon restored her: but the shock had been great.

"Read, mother,--read," said Hugh.

The accomplishments of reading and writing--for they were
accomplishments then--were possessed both by husband and wife.

We will give but one paragraph in the letter:

We have landed safely at Southampton, my own Edith. God has
preserved us from many dangers, doubtless owing to thy many prayers
at St. Wilfred's altar. Thou hast, I hope, received safely the
letters I sent from Joppa last autumn, and knowest whom I am
bringing home with me. How wonderful it all is, and with what
strange feelings the exile must approach the home of his boyhood!
But he is very composed and quiet in his manner, and we grow in
mutual esteem daily. He declares that he will accept no part of his
ancient inheritance, but that he finds his highest joy in thinking
that, in his sister's children, the descendants of the ancient line
yet possess the land of their forefathers.

"What can he mean? Whom is he bringing with him? Send for Tristam.
Ah! I see there is the old prior at the gate--he is talking with
him;" and Hugh hurried down to fetch them up.

They entered the room: our old friend, Father Kenelm, as hale an
old man as one could well find at seventy-five years of
age--Wilfred's protector and friend, in the most critical moments
of his life--and Tristam--do our readers remember him?

"God bless you, my children, in joy as in sorrow," was his
salutation.

"How far are they off?"

"When will they be here?" and Tristam, who stood humbly at the
door, found himself the object of universal attraction, and did not
know which to answer first.

"Welcome, Tristam, welcome," said his lady; "thou art the morning
star, the harbinger of my sun. How far hence are they?"

"They will be here by sunset, my lady."

"I will go and meet them," cried Hugh, and ran down stairs to get
his horse ready.

"But whom is he bringing with him?"

"My child," said Father Kenelm, "has he not told thee?"

"Nay, he speaks so mysteriously--read."

Father Kenelm read. Then, looking up, he spoke with deep emotion.
Tristam had told him all.

"One long since dead to the world, and as many thought buried. I
alone knew of his existence, as a secret which I was absolutely
forbidden to disclose; and as many years had elapsed since I last
heard of him, I thought him dead--he who was once the hope of
Aescendune."

"End our suspense!"

"Thou hadst a brother once--a bright, laughing, fair-haired boy,
whom thou didst love whilst father and mother lived. I speak of
events long forgotten, save by me."

"Nay, I have never forgotten him. Hast thou not often commemorated
him amongst the faithful departed, at my request?"

"Only as one, whom the world might yet contain in the body, or
whose soul heaven might have received--I knew not which. Well, my
lady, this thy brother yet lives."

"Wilfred?"

"And is returning home with thy husband."

"Wilfred alive!--nay, thou jestest. He died at Oxenford and was
buried there, nearly thirty years agone."

"Geoffrey, then Bishop of Coutances, deceived the lad's enemies by
a fictitious death and burial, but forbade the rescued youth to
return home, or make his existence known, save to me."

At this moment, the gleams, the parting beams, of the setting sun
shone upon pennon and upon lance, issuing from the wood afar off.
The multitude, who had assembled below, saw the sight, and rushed
tumultuously forward to meet their kinsfolk.

Hugh forgot the story about his uncle, ran down stairs, and joined
the throng, who pressed over the bridge.

Amidst the pomp of banners, the crash of trumpets, and the loud
acclamations and cheers of the crowd, the Crusaders reached home,
and entered the castle yard.

Edith fell into the arms of her lord as he dismounted, then sought
her son. She knew not to which to turn.

A grave personage, who studied hard to maintain his composure, but
whose eyes were filled with tears, had also dismounted, and was
standing by.

"Edith," cried Etienne, "behold our brother."

And she fell upon his neck with a torrent of tears, as all the life
of her childhood rushed upon her--"hours that were to memory dear."

Only a few more lines are needed to dismiss the heroes and
personages of our tale to rest.

Wilfred spent a few happy days with his brother-in-law cheered by
the society of his sister and her children.

Between him and Etienne all clouds had departed; they had learned,
amidst the perils of the return journey, to appreciate each other,
and wondered they had ever been such foes.

Once only he visited the Dismal Swamp, the scene of such exciting
events in his earlier life. He found it an utter wilderness, not a
house had been left standing; Etienne had wished to abolish the
very remembrance of the scenes in which, as his conscience told
him, he had acted so ill a part, and when he had succeeded in
persuading the English to trust him, and return to Aescendune, he
had fired the little hamlet and reduced it to ashes.

The brook murmured in solitude and silence, the birds sang
undisturbed by the strife of men.

The scene of Edwin's death from the arrows of Etienne's followers
could hardly be identified; but under the very tree where Pierre
had fallen in stern retaliation, Wilfred knelt, and besought pardon
for himself and rest for the soul which he had sent so hurriedly
before the judgment seat.

"Oh how much we had to forgive each other, Etienne and I," he said
half aloud.

These words caused him to raise his head, and look instinctively
over the place where the light wind was bowing down the heads of
the tall reeds and sedges, which grew where the fire, that
destroyed Count Hugo and his band, had swept over their
predecessors.

These remembrances saddened him, he returned to the castle--the
prey of conflicting emotions.

But much did Wilfred marvel at the peace and concord that reigned
in this happy village, in such contrast to the discord which
elsewhere marked the relations between Englishman and Norman, the
conquered and the conquerors; and one day he ventured to remark
upon the happy change to his old rival and brother-in-law.

"Come with me," said Etienne, "and I will explain it all."

He led Wilfred to the Priory Church, and they entered the hallowed
pale, with its round Norman arches and lofty roof, where the very
tread seemed an intrusion upon the silence, which spake of the
eternal repose that shall be, after the storms of this troublesome
