
"Man or woman?" asked Wogan, remembering that visitor who had drawn back
into the alley one early morning of last autumn. The man might very
likely have been Whittington.

"I did not trouble to inquire," said the Cardinal. "But, Mr. Wogan, why
do you ask me these questions?"

"I have not come yet to the end of them," answered Wogan. "There is one
more."

"Ask it!" said his Eminence, crossing his legs.

"Will your Eminence oblige me with a history of the affection of Maria
Vittoria, Mlle. de Caprara, for the King?"

The Cardinal uncrossed his legs and bounced in his chair.

"Here is a question indeed!" he stuttered.

"And a history of the King's response to it," continued Wogan,
implacably, "with a particular account of why the King lingers in Spain
after the Cadiz expedition has put out to sea."

Origo was now quite still. His face was pale, and he had lost in an
instant that air of affectation which so contrasted with his broad
features.

"This is very dangerous talk," said he, solemnly.

"Not so dangerous as silence."

"Some foolish slanderer has been busy at your ears."

"Not at my ears," returned Wogan.

The Cardinal took his meaning. "Is it so, indeed?" said he,
thoughtfully, once or twice. Then he reached out his hand towards an
escritoire. "But here's the King's letter come this morning."

"It is not enough," said Wogan, "for the King lingers in Spain, and the
portrait of Maria Vittoria glows on the walls of the Caprara Palace,
whither I was bidden to escort her Highness this morning."

The Cardinal walked thoughtfully to and fro about the room, but made up
his mind in the end.

"I will tell you the truth of the matter, Mr. Wogan. The King saw Mlle.
de Caprara for the first time while you were searching Europe for a wife
for him. He saw her here one morning at Mass in the Church of the
Crucifixion, and came away most silent. Of their acquaintance I need not
speak. The King just for one month became an ardent youth. He appealed
to the Pope for his consent to marry Mlle. de Caprara, and the Pope
consented. The King was just sending off a message to bid you cease your
search when you came back with the news that her Highness the Princess
Clementina had accepted the King's hand and would shortly set out for
Bologna. Sir, the King was in despair, though he showed to you a
smiling, grateful face. Mlle. de Caprara went to Rome; the King stayed
here awaiting his betrothed. There came the news of her imprisonment.
The King, after all, is a man. If his heart leaped a little at the news,
who shall blame him? Do you remember how you came privately one night
to the King's cabinet and found me there in the King's company?"

"But," stammered Wogan, "I do remember that evening. I remember that the
King was pale, discouraged--"

"And why?" said Origo. "Because her Highness's journey had been
interrupted, because the marriage now seemed impossible? No, but because
Mr. Charles Wogan was back in Bologna, because Mr. Charles Wogan had
sought for a private interview, because the King had no more doubt than
I as to what Mr. Charles Wogan intended to propose, and because the King
knew that what Mr. Wogan set his hand to was as good as done. You
remember I threw such hindrances as I could in your way, and made much
of the risks you must run, and the impossibility of your task. Now you
know why."

Never was a man more confused than Wogan at this story of the
Cardinal's. "It makes me out a mere meddlesome fool," he cried, and sat
stunned.

"It is an unprofitable question at this time of day," said the Cardinal,
with a smile. "Matters have gone so far that they can no longer be
remedied. This marriage must take place."

"True," said Wogan.

"The King, indeed, is firmly inclined to it."

"Yet he lingers in Spain."

"That I cannot explain to you, but he has been most loyal. That you must
take my word for, so must your Princess."

"Yet this winter when I was at Schlestadt preparing the expedition to
Innspruck," Wogan said with a certain timidity, for he no longer felt
that it was within his right to make reproaches, "the King was in Rome
visiting Mlle. de Caprara."

The Cardinal flushed with some anger at Wogan's persistence.

"Come, sir," said he, "what has soured you with suspicions? Upon my
word, here is a man sitting with me who bears your name, but few of
those good qualities the name is linked with in my memories. Your King
saw Mlle. de Caprara once in Rome, once only. Major Gaydon had come at
your request to Rome to fetch a letter in the King's hand, bidding her
Highness entrust herself to you. Up to that moment the issue of your
exploit was in the balance. But your request was to the King a very
certain sign that you would indeed succeed. So the night before he wrote
the letter he went to the Caprara Palace and took his farewell of the
woman he loved. So much may be pardoned to any man, even by you, who, it
seems, stand pinnacled above these earthly affections."

The blood rushed into Wogan's face at the sneer, but he bowed his head
to it, being much humbled by Origo's disclosures.

"This story I have told you," continued the Cardinal, "I will make bold
to tell to-morrow to her Highness."

"But you must also explain why the King lingers in Spain," Wogan
objected. "I am very certain of it. The Princess has her pride; she
will not marry a reluctant man."

"Well, that I cannot do," cried the Cardinal, now fairly exasperated.
"Pride! She has her pride! Is it to ruin a cause, this pride of hers? Is
it to wreck a policy?"

"No," cried Wogan, starting up. "I have a fortnight. I beg your Eminence
not to speak one word to her Highness until this fortnight is gone,
until the eve of the marriage in Bologna. Give me till then. I have a
hope there will be no need for us to speak at all."

The Cardinal shrugged his shoulders.

"You must do more than hope. Will you pledge your word to it?"

Here it seemed to Wogan was an occasion when a man must dare.

"Yes," he said, and so went out of the house. He had spoken under a
sudden inspiration; the Cardinal's words had shown him a way which with
careful treading might lead to his desired result. He went first to his
lodging, and ordered his servant Marnier to saddle his black horse. Then
he hurried again to O'Toole's lodging, and found his friend back from
the bookseller's indeed, but breathing very hard of a book which he slid
behind his back.

"I am to go on a journey," said Wogan, "and there's a delicate sort of
work I would trust to you."

O'Toole looked distantly at Wogan.

"_Opus_," said he, in a far-away voice.

"I want you to keep an eye on the little house in the garden--"

O'Toole nodded. "_Hortus, hortus, hortum_," said he, "_horti--hortus_,"
and he fingered the book at his back, "no, _horti, horto, horto_. Do you
know, my friend, that the difference between the second and fourth
declensions was solely invented by the grammarians for their own profit.
It is of no manner of use, and the most plaguy business that ever I
heard of."

"O'Toole," cried Wogan, with a bang of his fist, "you are no more
listening to me than this table."

At once O'Toole's face brightened, and with a shout of pride he reeled
out, "_Mensa, mensa, mensam, mensae, mensae, mensa_." Wogan sprang up in
a rage.

"Don't _mensa, mensam_ me when I am talking most seriously to you! What
is it you are after? What's that book you are hiding? Let me look at
it!" O'Toole blushed on every visible inch of him and handed the book to
Wogan.

"It's a Latin grammar, my friend," said he, meekly.

"And what in the world do you want to be addling your brains with a
Latin grammar for, when there's other need for your eyes?"

"Aren't we to be enrolled at the Capitol in June as Roman Senators with
all the ancient honours, _cum titubis_--it is so--_cum titubis_, which
are psalters or pshawms?"

"Well, what then?"

"You don't understand, Charles, the difficulty of my position. You have
Latin at your finger-ends. Sure, I have often admired you for your
extraordinary comprehension of Latin, but never more than I do now. It
will be no trouble in the world for you to trip off a neat little
speech, thanking the Senators kindly for the great honour they are doing
themselves in electing us into their noble body. But it will not be easy
for me," said O'Toole, with a sigh. "How can I get enough Latin through
my skull by June not to disgrace myself?" He looked so utterly miserable
and distressed that Wogan never felt less inclined to laugh. "I sit up
at nights with a lamp, but the most unaccountable thing happens. I may
come in here as lively as any cricket, but the moment I take this book
in my hands I am overpowered with sleep--"

"Oh, listen to me," cried Wogan. "I have only a fortnight--"

"And I have only till June," sighed O'Toole. "But there! I am listening.
I have no doubt, my friend, your business is more important than mine,"
he said with the simplicity of which not one of his friends could resist
the appeal. Wogan could not now.

"My business," he said, "is only more important because you have no need
of your Latin grammar at all. There's a special deputy, a learned
professor, appointed on these occasions to make a speech for us, and all
we have to do is to sit still and nod our heads wisely when he looks
towards us."

"Is that all?" cried O'Toole, jumping up. "Swear it!"

"I do," said Wogan; and "Here's to the devil with the Latin grammar!"
exclaimed O'Toole. He flung open his window and hurled the book out
across the street with the full force of his prodigious arm. There
followed a crash and then the tinkle of falling glass. O'Toole beamed
contentedly and shut the window.

"Now what will I do for you in return for this?" he asked.

"Keep a watch on the little house and the garden. I will tell you why
when I return. Observe who goes in to visit the Princess, but hinder no
one. Only remember who they are and let me know." And Wogan got back to
his lodging and mounted his black horse. He could trust O'Toole to play
watchdog in his absence. If the mysterious visitor who had bestowed upon
Clementina with so liberal a hand so much innuendo and such an artful
combination of truth and falsity, were to come again to the little house
to confirm the slanders, Wogan in the end would not fail to discover the
visitor's identity.

He dismissed the matter from his mind and rode out from Bologna. Four
days afterwards he presented himself at the door of the Caprara Palace.




CHAPTER XXIV


Maria Vittoria received the name of her visitor with a profound
astonishment. Then she stamped her foot and said violently, "Send him
away! I hate him." But curiosity got the better of her hate. She felt a
strong desire to see the meddlesome man who had thrust himself between
her and her lover; and before her woman had got so far as the door, she
said, "Let him up to me!" She was again surprised when Wogan was
admitted, for she expected a stout and burly soldier, stupid and
confident, of the type which blunders into success through sheer
ignorance of the probabilities of defeat. Mr. Wogan, for his part, saw
the glowing original of the picture at Bologna, but armed at all points
with hostility.

"Your business," said she, curtly. Wogan no less curtly replied that he
had a wish to escort Mlle. de Caprara to Bologna. He spoke as though he
was suggesting a walk on the Campagna.

"And why should I travel to Bologna?" she asked. Wogan explained. The
explanation required delicacy, but he put it in as few words as might
be. There were slanderers at work. Her Highness the Princess Clementina
was in great distress; a word from Mlle. de Caprara would make all
clear.

"Why should I trouble because the Princess Clementina has a crumpled
rose-leaf in her bed? I will not go," said Mlle. de Caprara.

"Yet her Highness may justly ask why the King lingers in Spain." Wogan
saw a look, a smile of triumph, brighten for an instant on the angry
face.

"It is no doubt a humiliation to the Princess Clementina," said Maria
Vittoria, with a great deal of satisfaction. "But she must learn to bear
humiliation like other women."

"But she will reject the marriage," urged Wogan.

"The fool!" cried Maria Vittoria, and she laughed almost gaily. "I will
not budge an inch to persuade her to it. Let her fancy what she will and
weep over it! I hate her; therefore she is out of my thought."

Wogan was not blind to the inspiriting effect of his argument upon Maria
Vittoria. He had, however, foreseen it, and he continued
imperturbably,--

"No doubt you think me something of a fool, too, to advance so unlikely
a plea. But if her Highness rejects the marriage, who suffers? Her
Highness's name is already widely praised for her endurance, her
constancy. If, after all, at the last moment she scornfully rejects that
for which she has so stoutly ventured, whose name, whose cause, will
suffer most? It will be one more misfortune, one more disaster, to add
to the crushing weight under which the King labours. There will be
ignominy; who will be dwarfed by it? There will be laughter; whom will
it souse? There will be scandal; who will be splashed by it? The
Princess or the King?"

Maria Vittoria stood with her brows drawn together in a frown. "I will
not go," she said after a pause. "Never was there so presumptuous a
request. No, I will not."

Wogan made his bow and retired. But he was at the Caprara Palace again
in the morning, and again he was admitted. He noticed without regret
that Maria Vittoria bore the traces of a restless night.

"What should I say if I went with you?" she asked.

"You would say why the King lingers in Spain."

Maria Vittoria gave a startled look at Wogan.

"Do you know why?"

"You told me yesterday."

"Not in words."

"There are other ways of speech."

That one smile of triumph had assured Wogan that the King's delay was
her doing and a condition of their parting.

"How will my story, though I told it, help?" asked Mlle. de Caprara.
Wogan had no doubts upon that score. The story of the Chevalier and
Maria Vittoria had a strong parallel in Clementina's own history.
Circumstance and duty held them apart, as it held apart Clementina and
Wogan himself. In hearing Maria Vittoria's story, Clementina would hear
her own; she must be moved to sympathy with it; she would regard with
her own generous eyes those who played unhappy parts in its
development; she could have no word of censure, no opportunity for
scorn.

"Tell the story," said Wogan. "I will warrant the result."

"No, I will not go," said she; and again Wogan left the house. And again
he came the next morning.

"Why should I go?" said Maria Vittoria, rebelliously. "Say what you have
said to me to her! Speak to her of the ignominy which will befall the
King! Tell her how his cause will totter! Why talk of this to me? If she
loves the King, your words will persuade her. For on my life they have
nearly persuaded me."

"If she loves the King!" said Wogan, quietly, and Maria Vittoria stared
at him. There was something she had not conjectured before.

"Oh, she does not love him!" she said in wonderment. Her wonderment
swiftly changed to contempt. "The fool! Let her go on her knees and pray
for a modest heart. There's my message to her. Who is she that she
should not love him?" But it nevertheless altered a trifle pleasurably
Maria Vittoria's view of the position. It was pain to her to contemplate
the Chevalier's marriage, a deep, gnawing, rancorous pain, but the pain
was less, once she could believe he was to marry a woman who did not
