    (141, 142).

Sec.129. _Quod coeperam_: in 128 at _veniamus nunc ad boni maique notionem_.
_Constituendi_: n. on 114. _Bonorum summa_: cf. _D.F._ V. 21 and Madv. _Est
igitur_: so in _De Div._ II. 8, _igitur_ comes fourth word in the clause;
this is not uncommon in Cic., as in Lucretius. _Omitto_: MSS. _et omitto_,
but cf. Madv. _Em._ 201 _certe contra Ciceronis usum est 'et omitto' pro
simplici 'omitto,' in initio huius modi orationis ubi universae sententiae
exempla subiciuntur per figuram omissionis_. _Relicta_: cf. 130 _abiectos_.
Cic. generally classes Herillus (or Erillus as Madv. on _D.F._ II. 35
spells the name), Pyrrho and Aristo together as authors of exploded
systems, cf. _D.F._ II. 43, _De Off._ I. 6, _T.D._ V. 85. _Ut Herillum_.
MSS. have either _Erillum_ or _et illum_, one would expect _ut Herilli_.
_Cognitione et scientia_: double translation of [Greek: episteme]. For the
_finis_ of Herillus see Madv. on _D.F._ II. 43. _Megaricorum_:
_Xenophanes_. Cic considers the Eleatic and Megarian schools to be so
closely related as to have, like the schools of Democritus and Epicurus, a
continuous history. The Megarian system was indeed an ethical development
of Eleatic doctrine. Zeller, _Socrates_ 211. _Unum et simile_: for this see
Zell. _Socr._ 222 sq, with footnotes, R. and P. 174 sq. _Simile_ ought
perhaps to be _sui simile_ as in _Tim._ c. 7, already quoted on I. 30, see
my note there and cf. I. 35. _Menedemo_: see Zeller _Socr._ 238, R. and P.
182. The _Erctrian_ school was closely connected with the Megarian. _Fuit_:
= _natus est_, as often. _Herilli_: so Madv. for _ulli_ of MSS.

Sec.130. _Aristonem_: this is Aristo of Chios, not Aristo of Ceos, who was a
Peripatetic; for the difference see R. and P. 332, and for the doctrines of
Aristo the Chian _ib._ 358, Zeller 58 sq. _In mediis_: cf. I. 36, 37.
_Momenta_ = _aestimationes_, [Greek: axiai] in 36, where _momenti_ is used
in a different way. _Pyrrho autem_: one would expect Pyrrhoni as Dav.
conj., but in 124 there is just the same change from _Pyrrhoni_ to
_Xenocrates_. [Greek: Apatheia]: Diog. IX. 108 affirms this as well as
[Greek: praiotes] to be a name for the sceptic [Greek: telos], but the name
scarcely occurs if at all in Sext. who generally uses [Greek: ataraxia],
but occasionally [Greek: metriopatheia]; cf. Zeller 496, R. and P. 338.
[Greek: Apatheia] was also a Stoic term. _Diu multumque_: n. on I. 4.

Sec.131. _Nec tamen consentiens_: cf. R. and P. 352 where the differences
between the two schools are clearly drawn out, also Zeller 447, 448.
_Callipho_: as the genitive is _Calliphontis_, Cic. ought according to rule
to write _Calliphon_ in the nom; for this see Madv. on _D.F._ II. 19, who
also gives the chief authorities concerning this philosopher. _Hieronymus_:
mentioned _D.F._ II. 19, 35, 41, V. 14, in which last place Cic. says of
him _quem iam cur Peripateticum appellem nescio_. _Diodorus_: see Madv. on
_D.F._ II. 19. _Honeste vivere_, etc.: in _D.F._ IV. 14 the _finis_ of
Polemo is stated to be _secundum naturam vivere_, and three Stoic
interpretations of it are given, the last of which resembles the present
passage--_omnibus aut maximis rebus iis quae secundum naturam sint fruentem
vivere_. This interpretation Antiochus adopted, and from him it is
attributed to the _vetus Academia_ in I. 22, where the words _aut omnia aut
maxima_, seem to correspond to words used by Polemo; cf. Clemens Alex. qu.
by Madv. on _D.F._ IV. 15. See n. below on Carneades. _Antiochus probat_:
the germs of many Stoic and Antiochean doctrines were to be found in
Polemo; see I. 34, n. _Eiusque amici_: Bentl. _aemuli_, but Halm refers to
_D.F._ II. 44. The later Peripatetics were to a great degree Stoicised.
_Nunc_: Halm _huc_ after Jo. Scala. _Carneades_: this _finis_ is given in
_D.F._ II. 35 (_frui principiis naturalibus_), II. 42 (_Carneadeum illud
quod is non tam ut probaret protulit, quam ut Stoicis quibuscum bellum
gerebat opponeret_), V. 20 (_fruendi rebus iis, quas primas secundum
naturam esse diximus, Carneades non ille quidem auctor sed defensor
disserendi causa fuit_), _T.D._ V. 84 (_naturae primus aut omnibus aut
maximis frui, ut Carneades contra Stoicos disserebat_). The _finis_
therefore, thus stated, is not different from that of Polemo, but it is
clear that Carneades intended it to be different, as he did not include
_virtus_ in it (see _D.F._ II. 38, 42, V. 22) while Polemo did (I. 22). See
more on 139. _Zeno_: cf. _D.F._ IV. 15 _Inventor et princeps_: same
expression in _T.D._ I. 48, _De Or._ I. 91, _De Inv._ II. 6; _inv._ =
[Greek: oikistes].

Sec.132. _Quemlibet_: cf. 125, 126. _Prope singularem_: cf. _T.D._ I. 22
_Aristoteles longe omnibus--Platonem semper excipio--praestans_; also
_D.F._ V. 7, _De Leg._ I. 15. _Per ipsum Antiochum_: a similar line of
argument is taken in Sext. _P.H._ I. 88, II. 32, etc. _Terminis ...
possessione_: there is a similar play on the legal words _finis terminus
possessio_ in _De Leg._ I. 55, 56, a noteworthy passage. _Omnis ratio_
etc.: this is the constant language of the later Greek philosophy; cf. Aug.
_De Civ. Dei_ XIX. 1 _neque enim existimat_ (Varro) _ullam philosophiae
sectam esse dicendam, quae non eo distat a ceteris, quod diversos habeat
fines bonorum et malorum_, etc. _Si Polemoneus_: i.e. _sapiens fuerit_.
_Peccat_: a Stoic term turned on the Stoics, see I. 37. _Academicos et_:
MSS. om. _et_ as in I. 16, and _que_ in 52 of this book. _Dicenda_: for the
omission of the verb with the gerundive (which occurs chiefly in emphatic
clauses) cf. I. 7, and Madv. on _D.F._ I. 43, who how ever unduly limits
the usage. _Hic igitur ... prudentior_: MSS. generally have _assentiens_,
but one good one (Halm's E) has _assentientes_. I venture to read
_adsentietur_, thinking that the last two letters were first dropt, as in
26 (_tenetur_) and that then _adsentiet_, under the attraction of the _s_
following, passed into _adsentiens_, as in 147 _intellegat se_ passed into
_intelligentes_. _N_, I may remark, is frequently inserted in MSS. (as in
I. 7 _appellant_, 16 _disputant_, 24 _efficerentur_), and all the changes
involved in my conj. are of frequent occurrence. I also read _sin, inquam_
(_sc. adsentietur_) for _si numquam_ of MSS. The question _uter est
prudentior_ is intended to press home the dilemma in which Cicero has
placed the supposed _sapiens_. All the other emendations I have seen are
too unsatisfactory to be enumerated.

Sec.133. _Non posse ... esse_: this seems to me sound; Bait. however reads
_non esse illa probanda sap._ after Lamb., who also conj. _non posse illa
probata esse_. _Paria_: _D.F._ III. 48, _Paradoxa_ 20 sq., Zeller 250.
_Praecide_: [Greek: syntomos] or [Greek: synelon eipe], cf. _Cat. Mai._ 57,
_Ad Att._ VIII. 4, X. 16. _Inquit_: n. on 79. _Quid quod quae_: so Guietus
with the approval of Madv. (_Em._ 203) reads for MSS. _quid quae_ or _quid
quaeque_, Halm and Bait., follow Moser in writing _Quid? si quae_ removing
the stop at _paria_, and make _in utramque partem_ follow _dicantur_, on
Orelli's suggestion. When several relative pronouns come together the MSS.
often omit one. _Dicebas_: in 27. _Incognito_: 133.

Sec.134. _Etiam_: = "yes," Madv. _Gram._ 454. _Non beatissimam_: I. 22, n.
_Deus ille_: i.e. more than man (of Aristotle's [Greek: e theos e
therion]), if he can do without other advantages. For the omission of _est_
after the emphatic _ille_ cf. 59, n. _Theophrasto_, etc.: n. on I. 33, 35.
_Dicente_: before this Halm after Lamb., followed by Bait., inserts
_contra_, the need for which I fail to see. _Et hic_: i.e. Antiochus. _Ne
sibi constet_: Cic. argues in _T.D._ V. that there cannot be degrees in
happiness. _Tum hoc ... tum illud_: cf. 121. _Iacere_: 79. _In his
discrepant_: I. 42 _in his constitit_.

Sec.135. _Moveri_: [Greek: kineisthai], 29. _Laetitia efferri_: I. 38.
_Probabilia_: the removal of passion and delight is easier than that of
fear and pain. _Sapiensne ... deleta sit_: see Madv. _D.F._ p. 806, ed. 2,
who is severe upon the reading of Orelli (still kept by Klotz), _non
timeat? nec si patria deleatur? non doleat? nec, si deleta sit?_ which
involves the use of _nec_ for _ne ... quidem_. I have followed the reading
of Madv. in his _Em._, not the one he gives (after Davies) in _D.F._ _ne
patria deleatur_, which Halm takes, as does Baiter. Mine is rather nearer
the MSS. _Decreta_: some MSS. _durata_; Halm conj. _dictata_.
_Mediocritates_: [Greek: mesopetes], as in Aristotle; cf. _T.D._ III. 11,
22, 74. _Permotione_: [Greek: kinesei]. _Naturalem ... modum_: so _T.D._
III. 74. _Crantoris_: sc. _librum_, for the omission of which see n. on I.
13; add Quint. IX. 4, 18, where Spalding wished to read _in Herodoti_,
supplying _libro_. _Aureolus ... libellus_: it is not often that two
diminutives come together in Cic., and the usage is rather colloquial; cf.
_T.D._ III. 2, _N.D._ III. 43, also for _aureolus_ 119 _flumen aureum_.
_Panaetius_: he had addressed to Tubero a work _de dolore_; see _D.F._ IV.
23. _Cotem_: _T.D._ IV. 43, 48, Seneca _De Ira_ III. 3, where the saying is
attributed to Aristotle (_iram calcar esse virtutis_). _Dicebant_: for the
repetition of this word cf. 146, I. 33.

Sec.136. _Sunt enim Socratica_: the Socratic origin of the Stoic paradoxes is
affirmed in _Parad._ 4, _T.D._ III. 10. _Mirabilia_: Cic. generally
translates [Greek: paradoxa] by _admirabilia_ as in _D.F._ IV. 74, or
_admiranda_, under which title he seems to have published a work different
from the _Paradoxa_, which we possess: see Bait., and Halm's ed. of the
Phil. works (1861), p. 994. _Quasi_: = almost, [Greek: hos epos eipein].
_Voltis_: cf. the Antiochean opinion in I. 18, 22. _Solos reges_: for all
this see Zeller 253 sq. _Solos divites_: [Greek: hoti monos ho sophos
plousios], _Parad._ VI. _Liberum_: _Parad._ V. [Greek: hoti monos ho sophos
eleutheros kai pas aphron doulos]. _Furiosus_: _Parad._ IV. [Greek: hoti
pas aphron mainetai].

Sec.137. _Tam sunt defendenda_: cf. 8, 120. _Bono modo_: a colloquial and
Plautine expression; see Forc. _Ad senatum starent_: "were in waiting on
the senate;" cf. such phrases as _stare ad cyathum_, etc. _Carneade_: the
vocative is _Carneades_ in _De Div._ I. 23. _Huic Stoico_: i.e. _Diogeni_;
cf. _D.F._ II. 24. Halm brackets _Stoico_, and after him Bait. _Sequi
volebat_: "professed to follow;" cf. _D.F._ V. 13 _Strato physicum se
voluit_ "gave himself out to be a physical philosopher:" also Madv. on
_D.F._ II. 102. _Ille noster_: Dav. _vester_, as in 143 _noster Antiochus_.
But in both places Cic. speaks as a friend of Antiochus; cf. 113.
_Balbutiens_: "giving an uncertain sound;" cf. _De Div._ I. 5, _T.D._ V.
75.

Sec.138. _Mihi veremini_: cf. Caes. _Bell. Gall_. V. 9 _veritus navibus_. Halm
and Bait. follow Christ's conj. _verenti_, removing the stop at _voltis_.
_Opinationem_: the [Greek: oiesin] of Sext., e.g. _P.H._ III. 280. _Quod
minime voltis_: cf. I. 18. _De finibus_: not "concerning," but "from among"
the different _fines_; otherwise _fine_ would have been written. Cf. I. 4
_si qui de nostris._ _Circumcidit et amputat_: these two verbs often come
together, as in _D.F._ I. 44; cf. also _D.F._ III. 31. _Si vacemus omni
molestia_: which Epicurus held to be the highest pleasure. _Cum honestate_:
Callipho in 131. _Prima naturae commoda_: Cic. here as in _D.F._ IV. 59, V.
58 confuses the Stoic [Greek: prota kata physin] with [Greek: ta tou
somatos agatha kai ta ektos] of the Peripatetics, for which see I. 19. More
on the subject in Madvig's fourth Excursus to the _D.F._ _Relinquit_:
Orelli _relinqui_ against the MSS.

Sec.139. _Polemonis ... finibus_: all these were composite _fines_. _Adhuc_: I
need scarcely point out that this goes with _habeo_ and not with
_probabilius_; _adhuc_ for _etiam_ with the comparative does not occur till
the silver writers. _Labor eo_: cf. Horace's _nunc in Aristippi furtim
praecepta relabor_, also _D.F._ V. 6 _rapior illuc: revocat autem
Antiochus_. _Reprehendit manu_: _M.D.F._ II. 3. _Pecudum_: I. 6, _Parad._
14 _voluptatem esse summum bonum, quae mihi vox pecudum videtur esse non
hominum_; similar expressions occur with a reference to Epicurus in _De
Off._ I. 105, _Lael._ 20, 32. _T.D._ V. 73, _D.F._ II. 18; cf. also
Aristoph. _Plut._ 922 [Greek: probatiou bion legeis] and [Greek: boskematon
bios] in Aristotle. The meaning of _pecus_ is well shown in _T.D._ I. 69.
_Iungit deo_: Zeller 176 sq. _Animum solum_: the same criticism is applied
to Zeno's _finis_ in _D.F._ IV. 17, 25. _Ut ... sequar_: for the repeated
_ut_ see _D.F._ V. 10, Madv. _Gram._ 480, obs. 2. Bait. brackets the second
_ut_ with Lamb. _Carneades ... defensitabat_: this is quite a different
view from that in 131; yet another of Carneades is given in _T.D._ V. 83.
_Istum finem_: MSS. _ipsum_; the two words are often confused, as in I. 2.
_Ipsa veritas_: MSS. _severitas_, a frequent error; cf. _In Verr. Act._ I.
3, III. 162, _De Leg._ I. 4, also Madv. on _D.F._ IV. 55. _Obversetur_:
Halm takes the conj. of Lamb., _adversetur_. The MSS. reading gives
excellent sense; cf. _T.D._ II. 52 _obversentur honestae species viro_.
Bait. follows Halm. _Tu ... copulabis_: this is the feigned expostulation
of _veritas_ (cf. 34 _convicio veritatis_), for which style see 125.

Sec.140. _Voluptas cum honestate_: this whole expression is in apposition to
_par_, so that _cum_ must not be taken closely with _depugnet_; cf. Hor.
_Sat._ I. 7, 19 _Rupili et Persi par pugnat uti non compositum melius_ (sc.
_par_) _cum Bitho Bacchius_. _Si sequare, ruunt_: for constr. cf. I. 7.
_Communitas_: for Stoic philanthropy see Zeller 297. _Nulla potest nisi
erit_: Madv. _D.F._ III. 70 "_in hac coniunctione--hoc fieri non potest
nisi--fere semper coniunctivus subicitur praesentis--futuri et perfecti
indicativus ponitur_." _Gratuita_: "disinterested." _Ne intellegi quidem_:
n. on I. 7, cf. also _T.D._ V. 73, 119. _Gloriosum in vulgus_: cf. _D.F._
II. 44 _populus cum illis facit_ (i.e. _Epicureis_). _Normam ... regulam_:
n. on _Ac. Post._ fragm. 8. _Praescriptionem_: I. 23, n.

Sec.141. _Adquiescis_: MSS. are confused here, Halm reads _adsciscis_,
comparing 138. Add _D.F._ I. 23 (_sciscat et probet_), III. 17
(_adsciscendas esse_), III. 70 (_adscisci et probari_) Bait. follows Halm.
_Ratum ... fixum_: cf. 27 and n. on _Ac. Post._ fragm. 17. _Falso_: like
_incognito_ in 133. _Nullo discrimine_: for this see the explanation of
_nihil interesse_ in 40, n. _Iudicia_: [Greek: kriteria] as usual.

    Sec.Sec.142--146. Summary. To pass to Dialectic, note how Protagoras, the
    Cyrenaics, Epicurus, and Plato disagree (142). Does Antiochus follow
    any of these? Why, he never even follows the _vetus Academia_, and
    never stirs a step from Chrysippus. Dialecticians themselves cannot
    agree about the very elements of their art (143). Why then, Lucullus,
    do you rouse the mob against me like a seditious tribune by telling
    them I do away with the arts altogether? When you have got the crowd
    together, I will point out to them that according to Zeno all of them
    are slaves, exiles, and lunatics, and that you yourself, not being
    _sapiens_, know nothing whatever (144). This last point Zeno used to
    illustrate by action Yet his whole school cannot point to any actual
    _sapiens_ (145). Now as there is no knowledge there can be no art. How
    would Zeuxis and Polycletus like this conclusion? They would prefer
    mine, to which our ancestors bear testimony.

Sec.142. _Venio iam_: Dialectic had been already dealt with in 91--98 here it
is merely considered with a view to the choice of the supposed _sapiens_,
as was Ethical Science in 129--141 and Physics in 116--128. With the
enumeration of conflicting schools here given compare the one Sextus gives
in _A.M._ VII. 48 sq. _Protagorae_: R. and P. 132 sq. _Qui putet_: so MSS.,
Halm and Bait. _putat_ after Lamb. Trans. "inasmuch as he thinks".
_Permotiones intimas_: cf. 20 _tactus interior_, also 76. _Epicuri_: nn. on
19, 79, 80. _Iudicium_: [Greek: kriterion] as usual. _Rerum notitiis_:
[Greek: prolepsesi], Zeller 403 sq. _Constituit_: note the constr. with
_in_, like _ponere in_. _Cogitationis_: cf. I. 30. Several MSS. have
_cognitionis_, the two words are frequently confused. See Wesenberg _Fm._
to _T.D._ III. p. 17, who says, _multo tamen saepius "cogitatio" pro
"cognitio" substituitur quam contra_, also _M.D.F_ III. 21.

Sec.143. _Ne maiorum quidem suorum_: sc. _aliquid probat_. For _maiorum_ cf.
80. Here Plato is almost excluded from the so-called _vetus Academia_, cf.
I. 33. _Libri_: titles of some are preserved in Diog. Laert. IV. 11--14.
_Nihil politius_: cf. 119, n. _Pedem nusquam_: for the ellipse cf. 58, 116,
_Pro Deiot._ 42 and _pedem latum_ in Plaut. _Abutimur_: this verb in the
rhetorical writers means to use words in metaphorical or unnatural senses,
see Quint. X. 1, 12. This is probably the meaning here; "do we use the name
Academic in a non natural fashion?" _Si dies est lucet_: a better trans of
[Greek: ei phos estin, hemera estin] than was given in 96, where see n.
_Aliter Philoni_: not Philo of Larissa, but a noted dialectician, pupil of
Diodorus the Megarian, mentioned also in 75. The dispute between Diodorus
and Philo is mentioned in Sext. _A.M._ VIII. 115--117 with the same purpose
as here, see also Zeller 39. _Antipater_: the Stoic of Tarsus, who
succeeded Diogenes Babylonius in the headship of the school. _Archidemus_:
several times mentioned with Antipater in Diog., as VII. 68, 84.
_Opiniosissimi_: so the MSS. I cannot think that the word is wrong, though
all edd. condemn it. Halm is certainly mistaken in saying that a laudatory
epithet such as _ingeniosissimi_ is necessary. I believe that the word
_opiniosissimi_ (an adj. not elsewhere used by Cic.) was manufactured on
the spur of the moment, in order to ridicule these two philosophers, who
are playfully described as men full of _opinio_ or [Greek: doxa]--just the
imputation which, as Stoics, they would most repel. Hermann's
_spinosissimi_ is ingenious, and if an em. were needed, would not be so
utterly improbable as Halm thinks.

Sec.144. _In contionem vocas_: a retort, having reference to 14, cf. also 63,
72. For these _contiones_ see Lange, _Romische Alterthumer_ II. 663, ed 2.
They were called by and held under the presidency of magistrates, all of
whom had the right to summon them, the right of the tribune being under
fewer restrictions than the right of the others. _Occludi tabernas_ in
order of course that the artisans might all be at the meeting, for this see
Liv. III. 27, IV. 31, IX. 7, and compare the cry "to your tents, O Israel"
in the Bible. _Artificia_: n. on 30. _Tolli_: n. on 26. _Ut opifices
concitentur_: cf. _Pro Flacc._ 18 _opifices et tabernarios quid neqoti est
concitare?_ _Expromam_: Cic. was probably thinking of the use to which he
himself had put these Stoic paradoxes in _Pro Murena_ 61, a use of which he
half confesses himself ashamed in _D.F._ IV. 74. _Exsules_ etc.: 136.

Sec.145. _Scire negatis_: cf. Sext. _A.M._ VII. 153, who says that even
[Greek: katalepsis] when it arises in the mind of a [Greek: phaulos] is
mere [Greek: doxa] and not [Greek: episteme]; also _P.H._ II. 83, where it
is said that the [Greek: phaulos] is capable of [Greek: to alethes] but not
of [Greek: aletheia], which the [Greek: sophos] alone has. _Visum ...
adsensus_: the Stoics as we saw (II. 38, etc.) analysed sensations into two
parts; with the Academic and other schools each sensation was an ultimate
unanalysable unit, a [Greek: psilon pathos]. For this symbolic action of
Zeno cf. _D.F._ II. 18, _Orat._ 113, Sextus _A.M._ II. 7, Quint. II. 20, 7,
Zeller 84. _Contraxerat_: so Halm who qu. Plin. _Nat. Hist._ XI. 26, 94
_digitum contrahens aut remittens_; Orelli _construxerat_; MSS. mostly
_contexerat_. _Quod ante non fuerat_: [Greek: katalambanein] however is
frequent in Plato in the sense "to seize firmly with the mind."
_Adverterat_: the best MSS. give merely _adverat_, but on the margin
_admoverat_ which Halm takes, and after him Bait.; one good MS. has
_adverterat_. _Ne ipsi quidem_: even Socrates, Antisthenes and Diogenes
were not [Greek: sophoi] according to the Stoics, but merely were [Greek:
en prokopei]; see Diog. VII. 91, Zeller 257, and cf. Plut. _Sto. Rep._ 1056
(qu. by P. Valentia p. 295, ed Orelli) [Greek: esti de outos] (i.e. [Greek:
ho sophos]) [Greek: oudamou ges oude gegone]. _Nec tu_: sc. _scis_; Goer.
has a strange note here.

Sec.146. _Illa_: cf. _illa invidiosa_ above (144). _Dicebas_: in 22. _Refero_:
"retort," as in Ovid. _Metam._ I. 758 _pudet haec opprobria nobis Et dici
potuisse et non potuisse referri_; cf. also _par pari referre dicto_. _Ne
nobis quidem_: "_nor_ would they be angry;" cf. n. on. I. 5. _Arbitrari_:
the original meaning of this was "to be a bystander," or "to be an
eye-witness," see Corssen I. 238. _Ea non ut_: MSS. have _ut ea non aut_.
Halm reads _ut ea non_ merely, but I prefer the reading I have given
because of Cicero's fondness for making the _ut_ follow closely on the
negative: for this see Madv. _Gram._ 465 _b_, obs.

Sec.147. _Obscuritate_: cf. I. 44, n. on I. 15. _Plus uno_: 115. _Iacere_: cf.
79. _Plagas_: cf. n. on 112.

Sec.148. _Ad patris revolvor sententiam_: for this see Introd. 50, and for the
expression 18. _Opinaturum_: see 59, 67, 78, 112. _Intellegat se_: MSS.
_intellegentes_, cf. n. on 132. _Qua re_: so Manut. for _per_ of MSS.
[Greek: Epochen] _illam omnium rerum_: an odd expression; cf. _actio rerum_
in 62. _Non probans_: so Madv. _Em._ 204 for MSS. _comprobans_. Dav. conj.
_improbans_ and is followed by Bait. I am not sure that the MSS. reading is
wrong. The difficulty is essentially the same as that involved in 104,
which should be closely compared. A contrast is drawn between a theoretical
dogma and a practical belief. The dogma is that _assent_ (meaning absolute
assent) is not to be given to phenomena. This dogma Catulus might well
describe himself as formally approving (_comprobans_). The _practice_ is to
give assent (meaning modified assent). There is the same contrast in 104
between _placere_ and _tenere_. I may note that the word _alteri_ (cf.
