but without making another attack. Indeed, the defences had long before
become so formidable, that attack was well-nigh hopeless. At the end of
that time he destroyed all his works and fell back upon Chioggia, and
determined to wait there until Venice was starved into surrender.

The suffering in the city was intense. It was cut off from all access
to the mainland behind, but occasionally a ship, laden with provisions
from Egypt or Syria, managed to evade the Genoese galleys. These
precarious supplies, however, availed but little for the wants of the
starving city, eked out though they were by the exertions of the
sailors, who occasionally sailed across the lagoon, landed on the
mainland, and cut off the supplies sent from Padua and elsewhere to the
Genoese camp.

The price of provisions was so enormous, that the bulk of the people
were famishing, and even in the houses of the wealthy the pressure was
great. The nobility, however, did their utmost for their starving
countrymen, and the words of Pietro Mocenigo, speaking in the name of
the doge to the popular assembly, were literally carried into effect.

"Let all," he said, "who are pressed by hunger, go to the dwellings of
the patricians. There you will find friends and brothers, who will
divide with you their last crust."

So desperate, indeed, did the position become, that a motion was made
by some members of the council for emigrating from the lagoons, and
founding a new home in Candia or Negropont; but this proposal was at
once negatived, and the Venetians declared that, sooner than abandon
their city, they would bury themselves under her ruins.

So October and November passed. Carlo Zeno had not yet arrived, but by
some letters which had been captured with a convoy of provisions, it
was learned that he had been achieving the most triumphant success, had
swept the seas from Genoa to Constantinople, had captured a Genoese
galleon valued at three hundred thousand ducats, and was at Candia.

This intelligence revived the hopes of Venice, and on the 16th of
November Luigi Moroceni was despatched to order him, in the name of the
government, peremptorily to hasten to the rescue of Venice. Almost at
the same time, Giovanni Barberigo, with his light craft, surprised and
captured three of the enemy's vessels, killing many of the sailors, and
taking a hundred and fifty prisoners. The success was not in itself
important, but it raised the hopes of the Venetians, as being the first
time they had taken the offensive. Pisani himself had endeavoured to
reconnoitre the position of the enemy, but had each time been sharply
repulsed, losing ten boats and thirty men upon one occasion, when the
doge's nephew, Antonio Gradenigo, was also killed by the enemy; but in
spite of this, he advised government to make a great effort to recover
Chioggia.

He admitted that the chances of failure were great. Still, he
maintained that success was possible, and it was better that the
Venetians should die fighting than by hunger.

As the result of his expeditions, he had found that Doria had at least
thirty thousand men, fifty great ships, and from seven to eight hundred
light craft. Moreover his troops were in high spirits, well fed, and
well cared for, and should therefore be, man to man, more than a match
for the starving soldiers of Venice. Nevertheless, there was a
possibility of success, as Zeno would doubtless arrive by the time the
siege had fairly commenced.

After much debate, the council determined that the undertaking should
be attempted. To stir the people to the utmost exertion, the senate, on
the 1st of December, published a decree that the thirty plebeians, who
should most liberally meet the urgent necessities of the state by the
proffer of their persons or estates, should, after peace was made, be
raised to the rank of nobility, and summoned to the great council; that
thirty-five thousand ducats of gold should be distributed annually
among those who were not elected, and their heirs, forever; that any
foreign merchant, who should display peculiar zeal for the cause of the
republic, should be admitted to the full privileges of citizenship; and
that, on the other hand, such Venetians as might endeavour to elude a
participation in the common burdens, and hardships, should be held by
so doing to have forfeited all their civil rights.

Seventy-five candidates came forward. Some offered money, some personal
service or the service of their sons and relatives; some presented
galleys and offered to pay their crews. Immense efforts were made, and
by the 21st of December sixty ships, four hundred boats of all sizes,
and thirty-four war galleys were equipped. The doge, although just
seventy-three years old, signified his wish to assume the supreme
command of the expedition, Pisani acting as his lieutenant and admiral.

During the long weeks the siege continued, Francis saw little of the
Polanis, his duties keeping him constantly near Pisani, with whom he
took such meals as the time would afford, sleeping in his house, in
readiness for instant service. Maria had returned to her father's
house, for her husband was in command of the outpost nearest to the
enemy, and was therefore constantly away from home. Maria's spirits
were higher than ever. She made light of the hardships in the way of
food, bantered Francis when he came on his business engagements, and
affected to treat him with extreme respect, as the trusted lieutenant
of Pisani. Giulia, too, kept up her spirits, and no one would have
thought, listening to the lively talk of the two girls with their
father and Francis, that Venice was besieged by an overwhelming force,
and reduced to the direst straits by hunger.

The greater part of Polani's ships were now in the service of the
state. Those which remained, were constantly engaged in running across
to the Dalmatian coast, and bringing in cargoes of provisions through
the cordon of the Genoese galleys.

The light gondola which, after being repaired, had been lying for two
years under cover in Messer Polani's yard, had again been made useful.
Giuseppi had returned to his old work, and he and another powerful
oarsman made the light boat fly through the water, as Francis carried
the orders of the admiral to the various posts. He had also been in it
upon several of the reconnoitring expeditions, in the canals leading to
Chioggia, and although hotly chased he had, on each occasion, left his
pursuers behind. The evening before the expedition was to start Pisani
said to him:

"I think you have brought me more news, with that fast little craft of
yours, than I have been able to obtain even at the cost of some hard
fighting, and a good many lives. I wish that you would make an
excursion for me tonight, and find out, if you can, whether the enemy
have moved their position since the last time I reconnoitred them. I
particularly wish to learn if they have strong forces near the outlets
of the channels of Chioggia, and Brondolo, and the Canal of Lombardy.
You know my plans, and with such a host of recruits as I shall have
with me, it is all important that there should be no failure at first.
Veterans can stand defeat, but a reverse is fatal to young troops.
Heaven knows, they will have enough to bear, with wet, cold, exposure,
and hunger, and success will be necessary to keep up their spirits. Do
not push your adventure too far. Run no risk if you can help it. I
would not, for much, that harm befell you."

Francis at once accepted the commission, and left the admiral in order
to make his preparations.

"Giuseppi," he said, as he took his place in the boat, "I want you to
find for me, for service tonight, a gondolier who is a native of
Chioggia, and who knows every foot of the country round, and every
winding of the canals. He must be intelligent and brave, for the risk
will be no slight one."

"I think I know such a man, Messer Francisco; but if he happens to be
away, there will be no difficulty in finding another, for there are
many fishermen here who escaped before the Genoese captured Chioggia."

"When will you see him?"

"As soon as you have landed me at Messer Polani's."

"Go and fetch him, Giuseppi; and if you can find one or two old
fishermen of Chioggia, bring them also with you. I want to gain as much
information as possible regarding the country."

"Is it true that the fleet starts tomorrow, Francisco?" Maria asked as
he entered. "Everyone says so."

"It is quite true. There will be no further change. The orders have
been all issued, and you may rely upon it that we are going to sea."

"And when will you return?"

"That's another matter altogether," Francis laughed. "It may be a week,
it may be three months."

"But I thought we were going to fight the Genoese galleys. It does not
seem to me that a week is wanted to do that. A day to go to Chioggia, a
day to fight, and a day to return. What can you want more than that
for?"

"I do not think that we are going to fight the Genoese galleys,"
Francis answered. "Certainly we shall not do so if we can help it. They
are vastly stronger than we are; but I do not know that we need fear
them for all that."

"What do you mean, Francisco? You do not mean to fight--they are vastly
stronger than you are--and yet you do not fear them. You are not given
to speak in riddles; but you have puzzled me this time."

"Well, I will explain myself a little," Francis said; "but you must
remember that it is a secret, and not to be whispered to anyone."

"That is right," Maria said. "I love a secret, especially a state
secret.

"Giulia, come and sit quite close, so that he can whisper it into our
ears, and even the walls shall not hear it.

"Now, sir, explain yourself!"

"I will explain it without telling you," Francis said. "Have you not
gone to see African lions, who were very much stronger and fiercer than
yourself, and yet you did not fear them?"

"Because they have been in cages," Maria said. "But what has that to do
with it?"

"It explains the whole matter," Francis said. "We do not mean to fight
the Genoese fleet, if we can help it; but we are going to try to put
them in a cage, and then we shall not be afraid of them."

"Do not trifle with us, sir," Maria said sternly. "How can you put
Genoese galleys in a cage?"

"We cannot put them in a cage, but we can cage them up," Francis said.
"Pisani's intention is, if possible, to close all the entrances to the
canals round Chioggia. Thus, not only will the Genoese galleys be
unable to sally out to attack us, but the whole of the Genoese army
will be cooped up, and we shall then do to them what they have been
doing to us, namely, starve them out!"

"Capital, capital!" Maria said, clapping her hands. "Your Pisani is a
grand man, Francisco. And if he can do this for us, there is nothing
which we would not do to show our gratitude. But you won't find it
easy; besides, in the game of starving out, are we likely to win? The
contest will not be even, for they start on it full men and strong,
while our people are half starved already."

"I do not regard success as certain," Francis replied; "and Pisani
himself acknowledges the chances are very great against us. Still, it
is possible; and as nothing else seems possible, we are going to
attempt it."

Polani looked grave, when he heard of the mission which Francis was
going to undertake. Giulia's bright colour fled at once, and Maria said
angrily:

"You have no right to be always running into danger, Francisco. You are
not a Venetian, and there is no reason why you should be always running
risks greater than those which most Venetians are likely to encounter.
You ought to think of us who care for you, if you don't choose to think
of yourself."

"I did not volunteer for the service," Francis said. "I was asked by
the admiral to undertake it, and even had I wished it, I could hardly
have refused. The admiral selected me, not from any merit on my part,
but because he knows that my boat is one of the fastest on the lagoons,
and that I can easily run away from any of the Genoese rowboats. He
particularly ordered me to run no unnecessary risks."

"That is all very well," Maria said; "but you know very well that you
will run risks, and put yourself in the way of danger, if there is a
chance of doing so.

"You should tell him not to go, father!"

"I cannot do that, Maria; for the service he has undertaken is a very
important one to Venice. Everything depends upon the success of
Pisani's attempt, and undertaken, as it is, against great odds, it is
of the utmost importance that there should be no mistake as to the
position of the enemy. Whether Francis was wise or not, in accepting
Pisani's offer that he should act as his aide-de-camp, may be doubted;
but now that he has undertaken it, he must carry out his orders,
especially as it is now too late to make other arrangements, did he
draw back.

"If you will come into my room, Francisco, I will give you a chart of
the passages around Chioggia. You can study that, and you will then the
better understand the information you may receive, from the men you are
expecting."

Half an hour later Giuseppi arrived with the gondolier he had spoken
of, and two old fishermen, and from their explanations, and a study of
the map, Francis gained an exact idea of the localities. From his
previous expeditions he had learned where the Genoese were generally
posted, and something of the strength of the forces at the various
points.

In truth, they kept but a careless watch. Feeling convinced that the
Venetians possessed no forces capable of attacking him, and that their
surrender must now be a matter of a few days only, Doria took no
precautions. His troops were all quartered in the houses of Chioggia,
his galleys moored alongside its quays, and the utmost he did was to
post small bodies of men, with rowboats, at the entrances to the
passages from the sea, and up the lagoons, to give warning of any
sudden attempt on the part of Barberigo, with his light flotilla, to
make a dash at the galleys, and endeavour to burn them.

Having obtained all the information he could from the old fishermen,
Francis dismissed them.

"It is evident," he said to Giuseppi, "that we can hardly hope to
succeed in passing the boats at the entrance to the canal seaward, or
by going up the lagoon. The only plan that I can see is for us to land
on the island of Pelestrina, which is held by us, to carry the boat
across it, and to embark in the Malamocco channel. In this way, we
should be within their cordon of boats, and can row fearlessly either
out to the entrances, or to Chioggia itself. We are not likely to be
detected, and if we are, we must make a race of it to Pelestrina."

The gondolier agreed that the scheme was practicable, and Francis
ordered Giuseppi and him to remove the burdens, and every bit of wood
that could be dispensed with from the gondola, so as to facilitate its
transport.



Chapter 19: The Siege Of Chioggia.


Late in the afternoon, Francis embarked in his gondola, and in an hour
and a half landed at Pelestrina. He was well known, to those posted
there, as the bearer of Pisani's orders, and as soon as it became dark,
Rufino Giustiniani, who was in command, ordered a dozen men to carry
the light gondola across the island to the Malamocco channel. While
this was being done, Francis went to Rufino's tent, and informed him of
what was going on in Venice, and that the whole fleet would set sail on
the morrow.

"We heard rumours, from the men who brought our rations, that it was to
be so," Rufino said; "but we have heard the same story a dozen times.
So, now, it is really true! But what can the admiral be thinking of!
Sure he can't intend to attack Doria with this newly-manned fleet and
rabble army. He could not hope for victory against such odds!"

"The admiral's intentions are kept a profound secret," Francis said,
"and are only known to the doge and the Council of Ten."

"And to yourself," Rufino said laughing.

"The admiral is good enough to honour me with his fullest confidence,"
Francis said; "and in this matter, it is so important that the nature
of the design should be kept wholly secret, that I cannot tell it even
to you!"

"You are quite right, Francisco; nor do I wish to know it, though I
would wager that Maria, and her pretty sister, have some inkling of
what is going on."

Francis laughed.

"The signoras are good enough to treat me as a brother," he said, "and
I will not affirm that they have not obtained some slight information."

"I will warrant they have!" Rufino said. "When my wife has made up her
mind to get to the bottom of a matter, she will tease and coax till she
succeeds.

"Ah, here is Matteo! he has been out posting the sentries for the
night."

The two friends had not indulged in a talk for some weeks, though they
had occasionally met when Francis paid one of his flying visits to the
island.

"I have just seen your boat being carried along," Matteo said, as he
entered the tent. "I could not think what it was till I got close; but
of course, when I saw Giuseppi, I knew all about it. What are you going
to do--scout among the Genoese?"

"I am going to find out as much as I can," Francis said.

"It's a capital idea your bringing the boat across the island," Matteo
said. "You are always full of good ideas, Francis. I can't make it out.
They never seem to occur to me, and at the present time, especially,
the only ideas that come into my mind are as to the comfortable meals I
will eat, when this business is over. I never thought I cared much for
eating before, but since I have had nothing but bread--and not enough
of that--and an occasional fish, I have discovered that I am really
fond of good living. My bones ache perpetually with lying on the bare
ground, and if I escape from this, without being a cripple for life
from rheumatism, I shall consider myself lucky, indeed. You are a
fortunate fellow, Francisco; spending your time in the admiral's
comfortable palace, or flying about in a smooth-rowing gondola!"

"That is one side of the question certainly," Francis said, laughing;
"but there is a good deal of hard work, too, in the way of writing."

"I should not like that," Matteo said. "Still, I think you have the
best of it. If the Genoese would come sometimes, and try and drive us
off the island, there would be some excitement. But, except when the
admiral wishes a reconnaissance, or Barberigo's galleys come down and
stir them up, there is really nothing doing here."

"That ought to suit you exactly, Matteo, for never but once did I hear
you say you wanted to do anything."

"When was that?" Rufino asked, laughing.

"Matteo conceived a violent desire to climb Mount Etna," Francis said,
"and it needed all my arguments to prevent his leaving the ship at
Girgenti, while she was loading, and starting to make the ascent."

"He would have repented before he had gone a quarter of the way up,"
Rufino said.

"I might have repented," Matteo replied stoutly, "but I would have done
it, if I had begun. You don't know me yet, Rufino. I have a large store
of energy, only at present I have had no opportunity of showing what I
am made of.

"And now, how do you intend to proceed, Francisco? Have you any plan?"

"None at all," Francis replied. "I simply want to assure myself that
the galleys are all in their usual places, and that the Genoese are
making no special preparations against our coming."

"I have seen no unusual stir," Rufino said. "Their ships, as far as one
can see their masts, seem all in their usual position. I fancy that,
since Barberigo carried off two of them, they have put booms across the
channels to prevent sudden attacks. I saw a lot of rowboats busy about
something, but I could not make out exactly what they were doing; but
still, I fancy they were constructing a boom. Their galleys keep a
sharp lookout at night, and you certainly would not have succeeded in
passing them, had you not hit upon this plan of carrying your boat
over.

"Your greatest danger will be at first. When once you have fairly
entered the inner canals, you are not likely to be suspected of being
an enemy. They will take you for Chioggian fishermen late. We often
make out their returning boats near the town. No doubt Doria is fond of
fresh fish. Otherwise you would be detected, for the Genoese boats are,
of course, quite different to ours, and even in the dark they would
make out that you belonged to the lagoons.

"Ah, here is supper! It is not often that I should have anything to
offer you, but one of my men managed to catch three or four fish today,
and sold them to me at about their weight in silver. However, I have
some good wine from my own cellars, and a man who has good wine, fish,
and bread can do royally, whatever this grumbling brother of mine may
say."

Half an hour later, a soldier brought the news that the gondola was in
the water, and Francis bade adieu to his friends, and started at once.

"Row slowly and quietly," he said, as he took his seat. "Do not let
your oars make the slightest splash in the water, until we are well
across to the opposite shore. They may have a guard boat lying in the
channel."

The light craft made her way noiselessly across the water. Once or
twice they heard the sound of oars, as some Genoese galley passed up or
down, but none came near enough to perceive them, and they crossed the
main channel, and entered one of the numerous passages practicable only
for boats of very light draught, without being once hailed. A broad
shallow tract of water was now crossed, passable only by craft drawing
but a few inches of water; then again they were in a deeper channel,
and the lights of Chioggia rose but a short distance ahead.

They paused and listened, now, for they were nearing the ship channel,
and here the enemy would, if anywhere, be on the alert. Coming across
the water they could hear the sound of voices, and the dull noise made
