
[427-4] From 1425 Jiddah on the east shore of the Red Sea rapidly
displaced Aden as an emporium of the spice trade where the cargoes were
transshipped from Indian to Egyptian vessels. Jiddah is the port of entry
for Mecca, distant about forty-five miles, and Mecca became a great spice
market. See Heyd, _Histoire du Commerce du Levant au Moyen-Age_, II. 445
_et seqq._, and Biggar, _Voyages of the Cabots and Corte-Reals_, pp.
31-36. Biggar quotes interesting passages on the Mecca trade from _The
Travels of Ludovico di Varthema_, Hakluyt Society (London, 1863).

[428-1] _I.e._, a place far enough east from Arabia to be thought of as
west from Europe. After making all due allowances one may be excused for
feeling some misgiving whether John Cabot actually ever was in Mecca.
While some of the spices and eastern commodities were brought overland by
caravan from Ormuz or Bassora, the greater part came by water to Jiddah.
At Jiddah he could hardly have failed to get fairly accurate information
as to where the spices came from. That one who had seen that great
commerce should have remained so much in the dark as to conclude that
spices came from northeastern Asia is strange enough.

[428-2] In imitation of Columbus.

[429-1] English social joys in the fifteenth century did not appeal to
the more refined Italians. An interesting parallel to this comment of
Raimondo de Soncino is to be found in Vespasiano's life of Poggio. "Pope
Martin sent him with letters to England. He strongly condemned their
life, consuming the time in eating and drinking. He was used to say in
pleasantry that oftentimes being invited by those prelates or English
gentlemen to dinner or to supper and staying four hours at the table he
must needs rise from the table many times to wash his eyes with cold
water so as not to fall asleep." Vespasiano da Bisticci, _Vite di Uomini
Illustri del Secolo XV._ (Florence, 1859), p. 420.

[429-2] The original is in the archives at Simancas partly in cipher. It
was discovered and deciphered by Bergenroth and published in the
_Calendar of State Papers, Spanish Series_, I., pp. 176-177. The Spanish
text was published by Harrisse, _Jean et Sebastien Cabot_, pp. 329-330,
and in Weare, _Cabot's Discovery_, pp. 160-161. Bergenroth's translation
is given here, carefully revised. The contents of this letter were
briefly summarized in a despatch to the Catholic sovereigns by Dr.
Puebla, their senior ambassador, which was transmitted at or about the
same time with that of Ayala. The Puebla despatch, which contains nothing
not in the Ayala despatch, can be seen in Weare, p. 159.

[430-1] In this Ayala would seem to have been misinformed. _Cf._ pp. 423,
425.

[430-2] The "and" is not in the original, but is supplied by all the
editors. It is not absolutely certain that it belongs there. If it does,
the passage implies that Cabot had recently been in Seville and Lisbon to
enlist interest in his second voyage.

[430-3] This information is not elsewhere confirmed. On Brazil and the
Seven Cities, see p. 426, note 2, and p. 425, note 1.

[430-4] One Friar Buil went with Columbus on his second voyage.

[430-5] The treaty of Tordesillas, June 7, 1494; see p. 323, note 3.




INDEX


Aburema, 394 n.

Acul, Bay of, 188 n., 197, 198 n.

Adam of Bremen, and reliability of Vinland tradition, 13;
  _Descriptio Insularum Aquilonis_, extract, 67-68.

Aden, decline of spice trade, 427 n.

Admiral, office of, 78 n., 79.

Affonso, Rodrigo, and Columbus, 324.

Agesinba, identified by Columbus with Cape of Good Hope, 397 n.

Aguado, Juan, 377, 379.

Aguja, Point of, 344, 345.

Alcacovas, Treaty of, 254 n.

Alexander VI., pope, letter concerning projected voyage of newly
appointed Bishop of Gardar, 73-74.

Almirante Bay, 393 n.

Alonso, Roderigo, _see_ Affonso, Rodrigo.

"Alto de Juan Danue," 133 n.

Alto Velo, mountain, 365.

Alto y Bajo, Cabo, 188.

America and Vinland voyages, 7-13;
  and Asia, 126, 131, 134, 135, 136, 145, 157, 174, 268;
  mainland discovered by John Cabot, 423;
  mainland discovered by Columbus, 333.

Amianus, _see_ Arrianus.

Amiga, La, island, 198, 199, 208.

Angel, Cabo del, 220.

Antilia, legendary island, 101 n., 425 n.

Arana, Diego de, 183 n.;
  sent ashore, 200;
  remains in Espanola, 209-210;
  mentioned, 321.

Arana, Pedro de, despatched to Espanola, 321.

Arena, Las Islas de, 130.

Arenal, Punta del, 334.

Arnarstapi, Gudrid in, 18.

Arnlaug, settles in Greenland, 47.

Arnold, Bishop of Greenland, 69 n.

Arrianus, history of India, 329 n.

Asia, Columbus believes Cuba to be part of, 396 n.;
  and John Cabot's landfall, 425.

Aslak of Langadal, 16.

Asuncion, Isla de la, 356.

Aud the Wealthy, 14;
  in Iceland, 15.

Avalldamon, reported to be a king of the Skrellings, 41.

Ayala, Pedro de, despatch to Ferdinand and Isabella, 429-430.

Ayay, _see_ Guadeloupe.

Azores, reports of land to westward, 93;
  mentioned, 236, 237, 329;
  Columbus at, 243-249;
  and Demarcation Line, 323, 326, 416.

Azua, Columbus in, 391 n.

Azules, Punta de los, 166 n.


Babeque, Columbus sails towards, 143, 147;
  reports of gold, 181, 184, 214-215;
  sighted, 150-151;
  Martin Alonso Pinzon seeks, 152, 214-215;
  Columbus seeks, 167, 179;
  described by Indians, 174.

Babueca, island, 346.

Bafan, 136.

Ballena, Gulf of, 334, 339, 345, 349, 355.

Baneque, _see_ Babeque.

Banes, Puerto de, 132 n.

Baracoa, Puerto de, 131 n.-133 n.;
  Columbus enters, 158 n.-159;
  inland explorations, 161-162;
  Columbus sets up cross, 162;
  Columbus sails from, 166.

Bardsen, Ivar, account of Greenland, 11, 71 n.

Bassora, spice caravans, 428 n.

Bastidas, Rodrigo de, voyage, 416 n.

Bastimentos, harbor of, Columbus in, 398-399.

Becerro, Cabo del, 213.

Behechio, an Indian ruler, 345.

Belem, river, 401 n.;
  settlement near, 403 n.

Belprado, Cape, 220.

Belpuerto, 394 n., 399 n., 405.

Beothuk Indians, 41 n.

Biarney, 32.

Biarni, Grimolf's son, 30;
  accompanies expedition to Vinland, 31-32, 35;
  fate, 39, 42-43.

Biarni Herjulfson, and discovery of America, 8-9, 12;
  voyage, 48-50.

Blacksark, discovered, 17, 46.

Boavista, Columbus at, 324-325.

Bobadilla, Francisco de, 375;
  governor, 376;
  and Columbus, 376-383, 417 n.;
  proclaims immunities, 376;
  takes Columbus prisoner, 380;
  distributes gold, 380;
  appropriates Columbus's house, 383.

Bohio, 126, 146, 147;
  inhabitants, 153, 156, 167;
  sighted, 167;
  size, 174;
  reports of gold, 202;
  Columbus in, 295.

Boma, Rio, 166 n.

Boto, Cape, 340, 353, 354.

Brand of Alptafirth, sons of, 45.

Brand, Bishop, the Elder, and chronology of Vinland voyages, 6-7, 43 n.

Brattahlid, Eric in, 23, 27, 46, 48, 50;
  Biarni and Thorfinn Karlsefni in, 30-31;
  Leif arrives, 54;
  Gudrid comes to, 59.

Brazil, discovery, 326 n.

Brazil, mythical island, 426 n., 430.

Brazil, port of, Espanola, 407.

Breidabolstad, 16.

Breidafirth, Eric goes to, 17, 45, 46.

Bristol, and expedition of John Cabot, 423, 425, 428, 430;
  and search for the Seven Cities, 430.

Brokey, Eric takes possession, 16.

Buen Tiempo, Cabo del, 220.

Buil, Friar, 430.

Burenquen, 294-295.
  _See also_ Porto Rico.


Cabanas, Puerto de las, 353.

Cabanas, Punta de, 132 n.

Cabo Rico, 356.

Cabo Santo, 211, 212.

Cabot, John, sources of information, 421-422;
  letter of Lorenzo Pasqualigo, 423-424;
  voyage of 1497, 423-424;
  landfall, 423 n., 426;
  reception, 424, 428;
  new voyage proposed, 428;
  and title admiral, 428;
  map, 426, 430.

Cabot, Sebastian, and father's voyages, 421.

Cabra, 213 n., 296 n.

Cabral, route of, 326 n.

Cabron, Cabo, 221 n.

Cadiz, and proposed inspection of ships from Indies, 277;
  Columbus's departure, 283.

Caithness, conquered by Thorstein the Red and Earl Sigurd the Mighty, 14.

Cambodia, supposed connection of Costa Rica and Panama with, 397 n.

Campana, Cabo de, Columbus approaches, 156-158.

Canaries, Columbus at, 92-94, 283-284, 320-323;
  French ship at, 320;
  pearls, 364.

Caonabo, King, and fate of first settlement in Espanola, 300, 303, 304,
307;
  mentioned, 312.

Cape Breton Island, and Karlsefni's voyages, 40 n.;
  and landfall of John Cabot, 423 n.

Cape Verde Islands, 103;
  and Hesperides, 322;
  and Demarcation Line, 323, 326, 416;
  Columbus at, 324-326.

Carabelas grandes, Boca de, 134 n.

Caracol, Bay of, Columbus anchors in, 299 n.

Caracol, El, island, 340, 353.

Carambaru, 393, 394 n.

Cariay, 393;
  Indians of, 409.

Carib, island of, 223, 225, 226, 229, 230.
  _See also_ Porto Rico.

Caribata, Cabo de, 188.

Caribata, Monte, described, 188;
  mentioned, 196, 199.

Caribs, 203;
  houses, 286, 289;
  reported cannibalism, 286, 288-290;
  industry, 289;
  appearance, 289, 293;
  treatment of captives, 290-291;
  several captured, 292, 293;
  fight with Spaniards, 293;
  and natives of Porto Rico, 294;
  mentioned, 322, 330, 348, 359.

Caritaba, province of, reports of gold, 202.

Carvajal, Alonso Sanchez de, despatched to Espanola, 321.

Cascaes, Columbus at, 251.

Cassiterides, Columbus identifies with Azores, 329.

Castaneda, Juan de, attempt to seize Columbus, 245-248.

Cateva, 394 n.

Cathay, Columbus's desire to reach, 134;
  supposed proximity to Cuba, 405;
  emperor's embassy to Rome, 414.

Catholicism, in Greenland, 70-74;
  Columbus urges its establishment in Espanola, 274-275, 361.

Catiba, Columbus in, 394 n.

Catigara, location, 396-397.

Caxinas, Point, named, 391 n.;
  mentioned, 392 n.

Caymanos Chicos, islands, sighted, 405 n.

Cayre, 293. _See also_ Dominica.

Central America, exploration of coast, 387.

Cerabora, _see_ Carambaru.

Ceyre, 290. _See also_ Dominica.

Chanca, Dr., letter to Cabildo of Seville, 280-313.

China, Columbus's belief that he had reached, 397 n.

Christianity, introduced into Greenland, 23-26;
  in Greenland, 29, 56, 57, 71-74;
  in Iceland, 46;
  and New World, 352.

Chuzona chica, Rio, 219 n.

Ciamba, province of, 393.

Cibao, 197;
  reports of gold, 202;
  mentioned, 206;
  explored, 312-313;
  mines, 338.

Ciguare, described by natives, 394-395.

Cinquin, Cabo de, 168;
  Columbus approaches, 171, 174.

Cipango, 101 n.;
  Columbus desires to find, 113;
  Cuba mistaken for, 126, 127, 128, 130;
  mentioned, 197, 202, 212.

Clato, Prior of, entertains Columbus, 254.

Cobrava, 394 n.

Coche, 357.

Cochin-China, Costa Rica and Panama believed to be southern extension of,
397 n.

Colon, _see_ Columbus.

Colonization, plan of Columbus for Espanola, 273-277.

Columbo, Juan Antonio, despatched to Espanola, 321.

Columbus, Bartholomew, in Espanola, 321;
  mentioned, 345;
  projected exploring expedition, 360;
  meets admiral, 366;
  in Paragua, 375;
  taken prisoner, 380;
  map, 397 n.

Columbus, Christopher, contract, 77-80;
  patent, 81-84;
  first voyage, 89-258;
  departure, 90;
  at Canaries, 92-94;
  signs of land, 96-100;
  landfall, 108-109;
  takes possession, 110;
  desire to reach Cipango, 113;
  at Santa Maria de la Concepcion, 115;
  at Fernandina, 120;
  believes Cuba to be Cipango, 126;
  discovers Cuba, 130;
  along coast, 144-168;
  Martin Alonso Pinzon deserts, 152;
  at Espanola, 169-228;
  reappearance of Pinzon, 214;
  and disaffection of Pinzons, 216-219;
  homeward voyage, 228-258;
  storm, 241;
  at Azores, 244-249;
  puts in at Portugal, 251-256;
  reception by King of Portugal, 251-256;
  arrival, 257;
  letter to Santangel, 263-272;
  and Cuba, 263;
  and Espanola, 264;
  duration of first voyage, 272;
  plan for colonization and commerce of Espanola, 273-277;
  second voyage, 278-313;
  sources of information, 281-282;
  at Canaries, 283-284;
  at Dominica, 284-285;
  at Guadeloupe, 286-291;
  at Porto Rico, 294-295;
  at Espanola, 295-313;
  finds settlement destroyed, 300;
  visits Cacique, 304;
  building of city, 308;
  sickness, 309, 312;
  third voyage, 314-366;
  sources of information, 317-318;
  preparations, 319;
  reception in Madeira, 320;
  at Canaries, 320;
  at Cape Verde Islands, 324-326;
  sends ships ahead to Espanola, 320-323;
  instructions concerning treatment of Indians, 322;
  proposed route, 322, 326, 327;
  and Demarcation Line, 326, 382;
  signs of land, 329-330;
  Trinidad sighted, 331;
  mainland of South America discovered, 333;
  at Trinidad, 335-339;
  along coast, 331-351, 353-358, 362;
  and a New World, 352, 355, 356;
  in Boca del Drago, 354;
  near Margarita, 356-357, 362;
  anxiety about Espanola, 359-360;
  reasons for hastening to Espanola, 359-362;
  and Earthly Paradise, 364-365;
  arrival in Espanola, 365, 366;
  misfortunes, 371;
  aid of Isabella, 371-372;
  in disfavor, 372, 375, 378-379;
  revolt in Espanola, 374;
  and Bobadilla, 376-383;
  letter on fourth voyage, significance, 387;
  fourth voyage, 389-418;
  outward voyage, 389;
  arrival at Espanola, 389;
  forbidden to land, 390;
  storm, 390-392;
  at Queen's Garden, 391;
  along coast of Central America, 391-403, 405;
  search for strait, 391 n.;
  illness, 392-393, 399;
  geographical conceptions, 396-398;
  and Earthly Paradise, 398;
  illness, 399;
  tempest, 399-400;
  sends out exploring party, 401;
  trouble with Indians, 402-403;
  establishes settlement, 402;
  reaches Cuba, 406;
  in Jamaica, 406;
  one ship puts into a port of Espanola, 407;
  urges colonization of Veragua, 411-413;
  deplores condition of Spanish settlements, 415;
  complains of ill-treatment, 416-418.

Columbus, Diego, brother of Columbus, in Espanola, 321;
  taken prisoner, 380.

Columbus, Diego, son of Columbus, page to Prince John, 379;
   mentioned, 393.

Columbus, Ferdinand, 241 n., 321;
  page in Queen's household, 379;
  account of fourth voyage, 318, 388, 392 n.

Commerce, plan of Columbus for Espanola, 273-277;
  value of Spanish colonies predicted, 415.

Concepcion, La, island, 356.

Concepcion, Puerto de la, Columbus in, 172-179.

Conchas, Cabo de, 356.

Coroay, 206.

Cosa, Juan de la, master of _Santa Maria_, 200;
  mentioned, 204.

Costa Rica, supposed connection with Cambodia, 397 n.

Crooked Island, 123.

Cuba, mistaken for Cipango, 126-130;
  described by Indians, 130-136;
  discovered, 136;
  mistaken for mainland of Asia, 134, 263, 323, 405, 406;
  explorations, 136-148;
  Columbus returns, 153;
  Columbus leaves, 167;
  mentioned, 176, 263-264, 267, 364, 391 n.;
  Columbus lands on fourth voyage, 405.

Cuba, Cabo de, 146, 147.

Cubagua, reports of pearls, 357.

Cubiga, 394 n.


Dama, Alvaro, 253.

Darien, Gulf of, 405 n.

Davis, John, voyage to Greenland, 74 n.

Delfin, El, 340, 353.

Demarcation Line, and Columbus, 326;
  Papal, 416;
  agreement between Spain and Portugal, 416.

Diaz, Bartolome, 252, 397 n.

Dimunarvag, 16.

Doegurdar River, country between, and Skraumuhlaups River, occupied by
Aud, 15.

Dominica, discovered, 285;
  described 285;
  mentioned, 290, 321;
  report of gold, 293;
  Columbus heads for, 330.

Drago, Boca del, named, 340;
  Columbus's ships in peril in, 354-355.
