
When the Spaniards approached the city, they found it almost
entirely deserted, the inhabitants having fled across the lake to
Mexico. Their ruler had accompanied them, and Cortez appointed
another brother in his place. This prince lived but a few months,
and was succeeded by another member of the royal house--the prince
who had, during Cacama's lifetime, obtained a large portion of his
dominion; and who proved a valiant and faithful ally of the
Spaniards, in their struggle with his countrymen.

The Tezcucans gradually returned after Cortez had nominated a new
sovereign, and Cortez at once set a large number of them to dig a
canal from the town itself to the lake, so that the men putting
together the ships could labor under his very eye.

Several of the cities round sent in to make their submission; and a
week after his arrival Cortez marched, with a body of Spaniards and
allies, against Iztapalapan, a town of fifty thousand inhabitants,
lying near the narrow tongue of land dividing the great lake from
that of Xochicalco.

The natives came out to meet them, and fought bravely, but were
driven into the city. The greater part of those who could not
escape were slaughtered. While engaged in the work of plunder, the
Spaniards were alarmed by a rush of water; the natives having
broken the bank of the great lake. The troops with the greatest
difficulty escaped with their lives, many of the allies being
drowned.

The fate of Iztapalapan excited consternation among the other
cities, and many sent in to make their submission, among them
Otompan and Chalco. Not only had the Mexican Empire fallen to
pieces, by the detachment of its distant provinces; but even near
home long smoldering rivalries broke into flame. The Aztecs were
but a small portion, even of the people of the Valley of Mexico;
and the greater portion of these were glad to take advantage of the
distress of the capital to break up the union that had so long
existed. Cortez, by promises and presents, assisted the work.

After some weeks' stay at Tezcuco, the news came that the ships
were all completed, and ready to be carried down; and two hundred
foot and fifteen horse, under the command of Sandoval, were sent to
escort them. But scarcely had he reached the frontier of Tlascala
than he saw a vast procession advancing. The ships had already been
put together, and tried on a lake among the hills; and were now
being brought down in pieces by an immense number of porters, with
a great military escort. Sandoval sent the larger portion of the
Indian escort home, but kept twenty thousand of the best warriors.
After four days of painful labor, the host of porters and fighting
men reached Tezcuco. It was, indeed, an immense undertaking that
had been accomplished; for the whole of the wood and iron work, of
thirteen ships, had to be carried for upwards of sixty miles, over
a difficult and mountainous country.

A few days later, Cortez took half of his Spanish force and the
whole of his allies, and started on an expedition to reconnoiter
the capital, and to punish some of the towns which had returned
insolent answers in reply to his summons.

The town of Xaltocan, standing on an island, was first attacked.
The dike leading to it was found to be cut through; and the
Spaniards, for a time, suffered greatly. They found a ford,
however; reached the town, and put all who resisted to the sword.

Three other towns, which had been deserted by their inhabitants,
were occupied and sacked. They then marched against Tlacopan and,
after a battle outside the town, occupied the suburbs. Another hot
fight was necessary before the town was fully taken.

Here the Spaniards halted for some days, fighting almost daily with
the Aztecs. In one encounter, Cortez allowed himself to be decoyed
on to the great causeway, upon which he had before suffered such
disaster. When he was halfway across the Aztecs turned,
reinforcements arrived from the city, swarms of canoes attacked the
Spaniards in flank; and it was only after desperate fighting, and
some loss, that they regained the mainland.

Having accomplished their object, the force returned to Tezcuco,
greatly harassed on the march by the enemy. Other expeditions were
undertaken. During these events the work of putting together the
vessels was continued and, to the great satisfaction of the
Spaniards, news reached them from the coast of the arrival of three
ships, with reinforcements: two hundred men, seventy or eighty
horses, arms, and ammunition.

When these reached Tezcuco, Cortez felt confident that he should
now be able to overcome all opposition. On the fifth of April he
again started on an expedition. Passing through some deep gorges,
he attempted to carry a mountain fortress; but was repulsed, with
loss, from the volleys of stones and rocks rolled down upon the
assailants.

After several other battles they neared Xochimilco, one of the
richest of the Aztec towns. Like Mexico, it stood in the water, but
at a small distance from the edge of the lake. This was only
captured after desperate fighting, Cortez himself having a narrow
escape of his life. The next morning at dawn, great numbers of
Aztecs landed from canoes, and fell upon the Spaniards; and it was
only after a long and desperate struggle that the latter gained the
day.

They now continued their march to Tlacopan, the enemy following
closely, and striking whenever they saw an opportunity; and the
troops were glad, indeed, when they again reached Tezcuco. By this
time the canal was finished and the ships were put together; and
after discovering and punishing another conspiracy against his
life, Cortez gave orders for the fleet to advance. Solemn mass was
held, and then the vessels, in the sight of an enormous concourse
of people, dropped down the canal, one after the other, and reached
the lake.

Cortez mustered his men, and found that he had eighty-seven horse;
eight hundred and eighteen foot, of which one hundred and eighteen
were musketeers or crossbow men; three large iron field pieces, and
fifteen light brass guns. Three hundred of the men were told off to
man the ships.

The Indian confederates arrived punctually: fifty thousand
Tlascalans, and a vast number of levies from the other tribes.

The army was divided into three corps. One was to take up its post,
under Alvarado, at Tlacopan. Another, under Olid, was to aid in
capturing the causeway; while Sandoval had command of the third,
whose movements were to be determined by circumstances. Cortez
himself took charge of the fleet.

A quarrel arose between a Spanish soldier and a Tlascalan chief,
who was a relation of Xicotencatl; who at once left the army, and
started for Tlascala. He had always been bitterly hostile to the
Spaniards; and Cortez saw that, unless the movement was stopped, it
might become very serious. He sent a party of natives after him,
with instructions to prevail upon him, if possible, to return. He
refused to do so. Cortez dispatched a body of cavalry in pursuit,
arrested him in Tlascala, brought him down to Tezcuco, and there
hung him in the sight of his own countrymen.

The divisions of Alvarado and Olid met with no resistance in
establishing themselves at Tlacopan. They cut the reservoir that
supplied the city with fresh water, the great lake being salt. The
next day the two divisions marched on to the causeway to make
themselves masters, if possible, of the first bridge.

The natives pursued their former tactics, desperately defending
barricades thrown across the causeway, and attacking the invaders
with a crowd of missiles from canoes. After a long and obstinate
fight, the Spaniards and their allies were obliged to fall back,
with considerable loss; and Olid drew off with his division to his
station commanding the other causeway.

Iztapalapan having been again occupied by the enemy, Sandoval's
division attacked them by land; while Cortez, with his fleet, lay
off the shore. After capturing the town, Cortez turned his
attention to the canoes of the natives, which darkened the surface
of the lake. At this moment a fresh breeze sprang up; and the
ships, spreading their canvas, dashed amongst the canoes,
overturning and destroying great numbers; while the cannon tore
others to pieces, with discharges of bullets; and comparatively few
succeeded in regaining the city.

It was now getting nearly dark, and the fleet coasted along the
great southern causeway to the fort of Xoloc, where another branch
of the causeway joined the main dike.

The fort was feebly garrisoned. Cortez landed his soldiers and
carried it by storm. Here he established his headquarters, landing
some of the cannon from the ships to strengthen the position.

He was now within half a league of the city, and two out of the
three great approaches were already in his hands. Night and day the
natives attacked the garrison; but the ships, and the guns in
positions, repulsed their assaults.

After some days' delay, a simultaneous attack was made by the
Spaniards. Two of the ships, one on each side of the causeway,
advanced abreast of the army, sweeping the dike with their fire.
The enemy were driven back; and Cortez, passing gap after gap,
reached the island on which the city stood. Behind them, as they
advanced, the native allies filled up the breaches, and made them
practicable for artillery and cavalry; and as soon as the work was
completed, the Spaniards who had already passed were reinforced by
large numbers of their allies.



Chapter 21: A Victim For The Gods.


The street which the Spaniards entered, after leaving the causeway,
intersected the city from north to south. It was broad and
perfectly straight and, from the roofs of the houses which lined
it, a storm of missiles was poured on the Spaniards, as they
advanced. Cortez set the allies to work to level the houses, as
fast as the Spaniards won their way along the street. This they
did, until they reached the first canal. The bridge here had been
broken down, and after the Indians had crossed, the temporary
planks were pulled after them, and they joined their countrymen
behind a solid rampart of stone, erected on the other side of the
canal.

It was not until after two hours' hard fighting, and the use of
artillery, that this obstacle was cleared away; and the Spaniards,
wading across the canal, pressed forward without further resistance,
until they reached the great square, on one side of which stood the
palace they had so long occupied. The Aztecs--disheartened at the
manner in which all the defenses on which they relied had been
captured by the Spaniards, and by their presence in the heart of
the city--for some time desisted from their efforts; but they were
roused to fury, as a body of Spaniards rushed up the winding terraces
to the summit of the great temple, and hurled the priests from its summit.

Then, with a yell of fury, they threw themselves upon their
enemies. Their headlong rush swept the Spaniards back into the
square, when they were attacked by bodies of natives, pouring down
every street. For once the Spaniards lost their presence of mind,
fell into disorder, and were swept before the torrent, down the
street which they had just traversed.

In vain Cortez attempted to stem the stream. The panic spread to
the allies, and the whole mass were flying before the natives; when
a body of cavalry came up and plunged into the crowd. The natives
were shaken by the appearance of the enemies they feared so much;
and Cortez, taking advantage of the confusion, rallied his
followers, and again drove the Aztecs back into the square.

Night was now at hand and, dragging off the cannon which had been
abandoned in their flight, the force marched off in good order,
though hotly pressed by the natives, and retired to Xoloc. Alvarado
and Sandoval also succeeded in crossing their respective causeways,
but neither of them could penetrate into the city.

The attack had failed, but it had strengthened the position of the
Spaniards; for seeing the speedy manner in which they had overcome
all the defenses erected by the Mexicans, many of the cities which
had hitherto stood aloof now sent in their submission, and supplied
levies to assist them in their work; while Ixtlilxochitl, who had
now become Lord of Tezcuco, and was a strong adherent of the
Spaniards, brought up a force of fifty thousand Tezcucans, who were
divided among the three armies.

Another simultaneous attack was now made, the advance along the
causeway being, as before, covered by the ships; but the enemy
fought stoutly, and some hours elapsed before the Spaniards again
entered the city. The advance was now more easy than on the
previous occasion, owing to the destruction of the buildings
bordering the streets. The natives, however, still fought with the
greatest obstinacy; but the great square was at last reached.

Thinking to discourage the natives, by the destruction of some of
the principal edifices, Cortez ordered the palace which had served
as the former barracks to be set on fire, as also the house of
birds adjoining Montezuma's palace, and those were soon a mass of
flames. The Aztecs, however, were infuriated rather than
intimidated; and the fight raged with greater fury than ever.
Having accomplished his object, Cortez again gave the order to fall
back and, covered by the cavalry, retired down the street; so
desperately assailed, by the natives, that but few men reached the
fort unwounded.

Day after day the same tactics were repeated, the Mexicans every
night repairing the breaches cleared out every day by the Spanish
allies. Cortez found it impossible to guard the causeway and
prevent this, the soldiers being already overcome by the fatigue of
their daily encounters. Alvarado's division, however, held at night
the ground they won in the daytime; but the troops suffered
dreadfully from the incessant toil, and from the rain, which poured
down in torrents. The soldiers of Cortez fared little better, for
the buildings in the fort of Xoloc afforded shelter but to few; and
the rest had to sleep on the causeway in its rear, exposed to all
the tempestuous weather.

Frequently, too, they were called up to battle; for the Aztec
emperor, contrary to the usual practice of his countrymen,
frequently attacked by night; often making simultaneous attacks on
the three divisions on the causeways, while at the same moment
troops from the neighboring towns attacked their camps in the rear.
He did not content himself with open attacks, but resorted to
stratagem. On one occasion he had a large number of canoes in
ambuscade, among some tall reeds bordering the lake. Several large
boats then rowed near the Spanish vessels. Believing that they were
filled with provisions intended for the city, two of the smaller
vessels pursued them. The Aztec boats made for the reeds, the
Spaniards followed, and presently struck upon submerged timbers the
Indians had driven in. They were instantly attacked by the whole
fleet of canoes, most of the men were wounded, and several,
including the two captains, slain, and one of the Spanish craft
captured.

It was now three months since the siege had begun, and the attitude
of the Mexicans was as bold and defiant as ever. Several attempts
which Cortez had made to open negotiations with the young emperor
had been received with scorn. It was certain that, sooner or later,
famine would do its work; for the approaches to the city were all
in the hands of the Spaniards, and as the towns of the lake were
either friendly or overawed by the great army of their allies, even
the canoes, which at first made their way in at night with
provisions, had ceased to steal across in the darkness. The great
native levies were of little use to the Spaniards in the absolute
fighting, but they did good service by overawing the towns, making
expeditions against the tribes that had not yet consented to throw
in their lot with the invaders, and by sweeping in provisions from
a wide extent of country.

But to wait until famine did its work little suited the spirit of
the Spaniards. The process would assuredly be a long one, for men
who fought so stoutly would resist starvation with equal tenacity;
besides, the duration of the siege was already beginning to excite
discontent among the allies, whose wars were generally of very
short duration. The Spaniards, too, were suffering from severe
illness brought on by fatigue, exposure, and hardship.

It was now determined to make a grand effort to obtain possession
of the great market of Tlatelolco, which lay on the northwestern
part of the city. Its possession would enable the force of Cortez
to join hands with those of Alvarado and Sandoval; and the spacious
market itself, with its halls and porticoes, would furnish
accommodation for the army; and enable them to attack the city at
close quarters, instead of having to fight their way, every day,
along the causeway.

Sandoval was to join Alvarado, sending seventy picked troops to
support Cortez. Advancing along the causeway, and supported not
only by the ships, but by a countless host of canoes filled with
the allies of the lake cities, who penetrated the canals, and
caused confusion in the rear of the Aztecs, the division of Cortez
cleared the suburbs of their opponents, and then advanced towards
the square of Tlatelolco by three great streets.

Alderete commanded the force that advanced by the main central
avenue. This was a raised causeway, with canals running on either
side of the road. Tapia and a brother of Alvarado commanded one of
the other columns, while Cortez led the third. A small body of
cavalry, with three guns, remained in reserve in the great street
leading to the causeway; and here the column were to rally, in case
of disaster.

The three columns advanced simultaneously. The Spanish pressed the
Aztecs back before them. Their allies filled up the canals as they
took them, one by one. The Tlascalans stormed the houses, and
attacked the enemy on their roofs; while the canoes engaged those
of the Aztecs, and so prevented them from interfering with the men
occupied in filling up the breaches. The parallel streets were near
enough to each other for the Spaniards to hear the shouts of their
companions in the other columns, and to know that all were gaining
ground steadily.

The enemy in the streets fought with less obstinacy than usual; and
Cortez, with his usual keen-sightedness, at once apprehended that
the feebleness of the resistance indicated some device, and that
the Aztecs were allowing them to advance, only to lead them into a
trap.

He had received a message from Alderete saying that he was getting
on fast, and that he was but a short distance from the great
square. Fearing that this officer, eager to be the first to gain
the marketplace, was not taking proper precautions to secure his
retreat; Cortez, with a small body of troops, retraced his steps,
and turned up the street by which Alderete's column had advanced.
He had gone but a short distance, when he saw that his stringent
orders had been neglected; for he came upon an opening some thirty
feet wide, full of water at least twelve feet deep. A slight
attempt, only, had been made to stop the gap; and stones and
timber, lying by the side, showed that it had been abandoned as
soon as commenced.

The general saw, too, that the road had been narrowed as it
approached this point, and that the work had evidently been
recently done. Much alarmed at the consequence of this neglect, he
at once set his men to fill up the breach; but they had scarcely
begun the operation when a terrific yell arose, drowning the
mingled clamor of the distant conflict.

Alderete had, as Cortez supposed, pressed on the retreating Aztecs
with too great eagerness. He had carried the barricades which
defended the breach, and had given orders that the chasm should be
filled up. But in their eagerness to be first in the square, the
Spaniards had pressed on, none caring to stop to see that the
allies carried out the order. So, taking position after position,
they pressed on until they were close to the square.

Suddenly the horn of Guatimozin, the emperor, sent forth a piercing
note from the summit of a temple. As if by magic, the retreating
Aztecs turned and fell on their pursuers; while swarms of warriors
from the adjoining streets, lanes, and corners attacked the
advancing column.

Taken completely by surprise, bewildered by the suddenness and fury
of the onslaught, appalled by the terrific war yells, smitten down
by the rain of missiles from the Aztecs, the Spaniards fell into
confusion, and were swept down the street like foam on the crest of
a wave. In vain their leaders attempted to rally them. Their voices
were drowned in the din, and their followers, panic stricken, now
thought only of preserving their lives.

On they came, until they reached the edge of the cut. Here some
plunged in, others were pushed in by the pressure from behind.
Those who could swim were pulled down by their struggling comrades.
Some got across and tried to climb the slippery side of the dike,
but fell back and were seized by the Aztecs; whose canoes now
dashed up, and added to the confusion by hurling a storm of
missiles into the crowd.

Cortez, with his little party, kept his station on the other side
of the breach. They were already surrounded by Aztecs, who had
landed on the causeway behind them; but held their ground
desperately, and endeavored, as far as possible, to assist their
comrades to climb out of the water. Cortez was speedily recognized,
and storms of missiles were poured upon him, but these glanced
harmlessly from his helmet and armor. Six of the Aztecs threw
themselves upon him together, and made a desperate effort to drag
him into their boat. In the struggle he received a severe wound in
the leg, and fell.

Olid, one of his followers, sprang to his rescue, severed the arm
of one of the natives, and ran another through the body; and being
joined by a comrade named Lerma, and by a Tlascalan chief, stood
over the body of Cortez and drove off his foes, dispatching three
more of his assailants; but Olid fell, mortally wounded, by the
side of his leader.

Quinones, the captain of the guard, with several of his men now
fought his way up, lifted Cortez from the water, and laid him on
the road. One of his pages brought up his horse, but fell, wounded
in the throat by a javelin. Guzman, the chamberlain, then seized
the bridle, and held it while Cortez was helped into the saddle;
but was himself seized by the Aztecs, and carried off in a canoe.

Cortez, wounded as he was, would still have fought on; but
Quinones, taking his horse by the bridle, turned it to the rear,
exclaiming that his leader's life was "too important to the army to
be thrown away there!"

The mass of fugitives poured along the causeway. The road was soft,
and was so cut up that it was knee deep in mud; and in some places
the water of the canals beside it met across it. Those on the
flanks were often forced, by the pressure, down the slippery sides;
and were instantly captured and carried off by the canoes of the
enemy. Cortez's standard bearer was among those who fell in the
canal, but he succeeded in recovering his footing, and saved the
standard.

At last the fugitives reached the spot where the cannon and cavalry
had been placed in reserve. Here Cortez rallied them, and charged
the Aztecs with the little body of horse, while the artillery
opened a hot fire upon them. He then sent orders to the other two
columns to fall back and, when these had rejoined him, the division
retired, Cortez covering the movement with the cavalry.

As soon as they were freed from the city, Tapia was sent round on
horseback to acquaint the other commanders of the failure. They had
advanced at the same time as Cortez, and had on their side nearly
gained the square; when they, too, were startled by the blast of
Guatimozin's horn, and by the terrible yell that followed it. Then
they heard the sound of battle, which had before been clearly
audible, roll away in the distance; and knew that the division of
Cortez had been driven back.

In a short time the attack upon themselves increased in fury, as
the troops who had been engaged with Cortez returned and joined in
the attack upon them. Two or three bloody heads were thrown among
them, with shouts of "Malinzin!"

Although Sandoval and Alvarado did not credit the death of their
commander, they felt that it was useless to persevere, and indeed
were unable to withstand the furious assaults of the Aztecs. With
great difficulty they drew off their troops to the entrenchment on
the causeway, and here the guns of the ships, sweeping the road,
drove back their assailants. The greatest anxiety prevailed as to
the fate of Cortez, until Tapia arrived, bleeding from several
wounds, which he had received from parties of men whom Guatimozin
had stationed to interrupt the communication between the two camps.

Sandoval at once rode round. He, too, was attacked on the road; but
his armor, and that of his horse protected him from the missiles
showered upon them. On arriving at the camp, he found the troops
much dispirited. Numbers had been killed and wounded, and no less
than sixty-two Spaniards, with a multitude of allies, had fallen
into the hands of the enemy. Indeed, the column around Alderete had
been almost entirely destroyed, and two guns and seven horses had
been lost.

Cortez explained to his follower the cause of the disaster, and
told Sandoval that, as he should be unable to take the field for a
few days, he must take his place, and watch over the safety of the
camps.

Roger Hawkshaw had borne his full share in the desperate conflicts
that had taken place. In the previous combats he had fought only to
preserve his own life, but now he was eager for the fray. His
friend Cuitcatl and his promised bride were prisoners in Mexico,
and he fought now to deliver them. It was nearly a year from the
time when he had first retreated along the fatal causeway; and in
that time his frame had broadened out, and his strength increased;
and so terrible were the blows he dealt that Cortez, himself, had
several times spoken to him in terms of approval of his valor, and
had appointed him to be one of his own bodyguard. He had stood
beside him at the edge of the breach, and had done good service
there.

"You fight like a paladin," Cortez said, as Roger cut down three
natives who had rushed upon him; "but see, Sancho, put up your
sword for a minute, and take up that pike. If you hand the end to
those poor fellows in the water, your strength will be sufficient
to haul them up."

Roger at once set to, at the work of saving life, and dragged more
than a score of men who would otherwise have been drowned. He heard
the cry which was raised, when Cortez was attacked; and throwing
down his pike and drawing his sword, turned to rush to his
assistance; but at this moment two Mexicans threw themselves upon
him, his foot slipped in the mud, and in another moment he and his
two assailants were rolling down the deep bank into the water.

With a mighty effort, he freed himself from their grasp and,
gaining the bank, tried to climb up; but a canoe dashed up
alongside, a dozen Mexicans threw themselves upon him, and with a
triumphant shout drew him into the boat, which at once paddled off
from the scene of conflict.

Roger, as he lay at the bottom of the canoe, felt that all hope was
over. He knew that the Aztecs never spared a captive taken in war,
and that all who fell into their hands were destined for the altars
of their gods. He regretted deeply that he had not fallen in
battle; but determined that, at any rate, he would not die tamely;
and resolved that, rather than be slaughtered in cold blood on the
altar, when the time came, he would offer so desperate a resistance
that they would be forced to kill him.

Passing along several canals, the canoe stopped at some stairs.
Roger was taken out, and led through a shouting crowd to a great
temple, where he was thrust into a prison room, already occupied by
several Spaniards. Their numbers increased, until they amounted to
twenty.

