   [Footnote 712: Herodot. ix. 25: [Greek: O de nekros een thees axios
   megatheos eineka ka kalleos].]

Thus would some one say, and, standing by, would wound him. But
swift-footed Achilles, after he had despoiled him, standing amongst the
Greeks, spoke winged words:

"O friends, leaders and princes of the Greeks, since the gods have
granted us to subdue this hero, he who did as many mischiefs, as did not
all the others together; come! let us make trial round the city with our
arms, that we may learn concerning the Trojans, what mind they have;
whether they are about to desert the citadel, he being slain, or intend
to remain, Hector being no more. But why does my mind within me
deliberate these things? Patroclus lies at the ships, an unwept,
unburied corse; and him I shall never forget, as long as I am amongst
the living, and my dear knees move for me; and though they forget the
dead in Hades, yet will I remember my beloved comrade even there. But
come now, ye youths of the Greeks, singing a paean,[713] let us return to
the hollow ships, and let us bring him; we bear back great glory: we
have slain noble Hector, whom the Trojans, throughout the city,
worshipped as a god."

He spoke, and was meditating unseemly deeds against noble Hector. He
perforated the tendons of both his feet behind, from the heel to the
instep, and fastened in them leather thongs, and bound him from the
chariot; but left his head to be trailed along. Then ascending his
chariot, and taking up the splendid armour, he lashed (the horses) to go
on, and they, not unwilling, flew. But the dust arose from him while
trailed along, and his azure locks around approached [the ground],[714]
and his entire head, once graceful, lay in the dust; for Jupiter had
then granted to his enemies, to dishonour him in his own father-land.
Thus indeed his whole head was denied with dust; but his mother plucked
out her hair, and cast away her shining veil, and wept very loudly,
having beheld her son. And his dear father groaned piteously, and all
the people around were occupied in wailing and lamentation through the
city; and it was very like to this, as if all Ilium, from its summit,
were smouldering in fire. With difficulty indeed did the people detain
the old man, indignant with grief anxious to rush out from the Dardanian
gates: for rolling in the mud, he was supplicating all, addressing each
man by name:

   [Footnote 713: "This hymn consisted in a repetition, cf. v. 393,
   4, which Quintus Smyrnaeus has imitated in id. 117, and Abronius
   Silo translated ap. _Senec. Suas_. c. 2. The most ancient hymn of
   this kind on record is that in the first book of Samuel, xviii.
   7."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 714: Supply [Greek: oudei] or [Greek: konie].]

"Desist, my friends, and permit me alone, grieved as I am, going out of
the city, to approach the ships of the Greeks. I will supplicate this
reckless, violent man, if perchance he may respect my time of life, and
have compassion on my old age; for such is his father Peleus to him, he
who begat and nurtured him a destruction to the Trojans; but
particularly to me above all has he caused sorrows. For so many blooming
youths has he slain to me, for all of whom I do not lament so much,
although grieved, as for this one, Hector, keen grief for whom will bear
me down even into Hades.[715] Would that he had died in my hands; for
thus we should have been satisfied, weeping and lamenting, both his
unhappy mother who bore him, and I myself." Thus he spoke, weeping, but
the citizens also groaned. But among the Trojan dames, Hecuba began her
continued lamentation:

   [Footnote 715: "Then shall ye bring down my grey hairs with
   sorrow to the grave." --Genes, xlii. 38.]

"O my son, why do wretched I live, having suffered grievous things, thou
being dead? Thou who by night and day wast my boast throughout the town,
and an advantage to the Trojan men and women throughout the city, who
received thee as a god. For assuredly thou wast a very great glory to
them when alive now, on the contrary, death and fate possess thee."

Thus she spoke, weeping; but the wife of Hector had not yet learned
anything: no certain messenger going, informed her that her husband had
remained without the gates; but she was weaving a web in a retired part
of her lofty house; double, splendid, and was spreading on it various
painted works.[716] And she had ordered her fair-haired attendants
through the palace, to place a large tripod on the fire, that there
might be a warm bath for Hector, returning from the battle. Foolish! nor
knew she that, far away from baths, azure-eyed Minerva had subdued him
by the hands of Achilles. But she heard the shriek and wailing from the
tower, and her limbs were shaken, and the shuttle fell from her to the
ground; and immediately she addressed her fair-haired attendants:

   [Footnote 716: [Greek: Poikilmata] is similarly used in vi. 294.]

"Come hither, let two follow me, that I may see what deeds have been
done. I heard the voice of my venerable mother-in-law, and to myself the
heart within my breast leaps up to my mouth, and the limbs under me are
benumbed. Surely some evil is now near the sons of Priam. O that the
word may be [far] from my ear! I dread lest brave Achilles, having
already cut off noble Hector alone from the city, may drive him towards
the plain, and even now have made him desist from the fatal valour which
possessed him; for he never remained among the throng of warriors, but
leaped out far before, yielding in his valour to none."

Thus having spoken, she rushed through the palace like unto one
deranged, greatly palpitating in heart; and her attendants went along
with her. But when she reached the tower and the crowd of men, she stood
looking round over the wall, and beheld him dragged before the city; but
the fleet steeds drew him ruthlessly towards the ships of the Greeks.
Then gloomy night veiled her over her eyes, and she fell backwards, and
breathed out her soul in a swoon. But from her head fell the beautiful
head-gear, the garland, the net, and the twisted fillet, and the veil
which golden Venus had given to her on that day when crest-tossing
Hector led her from the palace of Eetion, after he had presented many
marriage-gifts. Around her in great numbers stood her sisters-in-law and
sisters, who supported her amongst them, seized with stupor unto
death.[717] But when she again revived, and her soul was collected in
her breast, sobbing at intervals, she spoke among the Trojan dames:

   [Footnote 717: See Kennedy: [Greek: oste] is to be understood before
   [Greek: apolesthai].]

"Hector, O wretched me! then we were both born to a like fate, thou
indeed in Troy, in the mansion of Priam, but I in Thebe, beneath woody
Placus, in the palace of Eetion; who, himself ill-fated, reared me,
ill-fated, being yet a little child;--would that he had not begotten me!
Now, however, thou goest to the mansions of Hades beneath the recesses
of the earth, but leavest me, in hateful grief, a widow in the dwelling;
and thy boy, yet such an infant, to whom thou and I unfortunate gave
birth; nor wilt thou be an advantage to him, O Hector, for thou art
dead; nor he to thee. For even if he shall escape the mournful war of
the Greeks, still will labour and hardship ever be to him hereafter;
for others will deprive him of his fields by changing the landmarks. But
the bereaving day renders a boy destitute of his contemporaries; he is
ever dejected, and his cheeks are bedewed with tears. The boy in want
shall go to the companions of his father, pulling one by the cloak,
another by the tunic; and some of these pitying, shall present him with
a very small cup; and he shall moisten his lips, but not wet his palate.
Him also some one, enjoying both [parents],[718] shall push away from
the banquet, striking him with his hands, and reviling him with
reproaches: 'A murrain on thee! even thy father feasts not with us.'
Then shall the boy Astyanax return weeping to his widowed mother,--he
who formerly, indeed, upon the knees of his own father, ate marrow
alone, and the rich fat of sheep; but when sleep came upon him, and he
ceased childishly crying, used to sleep on couches in the arms of a
nurse, in a soft bed, full as to his heart with delicacies. But now,
indeed, Astyanax,[719] whom the Trojans call by surname (because thou
alone didst defend their gates and lofty walls for them), shall suffer
many things, missing his dear father. But now shall the crawling worms
devour thee, naked, at the curved ships, far away from thy parents,
after the dogs shall have satiated themselves: but thy robes, fine and
graceful, woven by the hands of women, lie in thy palaces. Truly all
these will I consume with burning fire, being of no use to thee, for
thou wilt not lie on them; but let them be a glory [to thee] before the
Trojans and the Trojan dames."

Thus she spoke, weeping, and the females also mourned.

   [Footnote 718: [Greek: Amphithales pais o amphoterothen thallon,
   egoun o ampho oi goneis peritisi].]

   [Footnote 719: Playing on the signification of the name,--"king
   of the city." This piece of twaddle has not been omitted by Plato
   in his ridiculous Cratylus.]




                        BOOK THE TWENTY-THIRD.


                               ARGUMENT.

Achilles, admonished in a dream by the ghost of his friend, celebrates
the funeral of Patroclus.


Thus they indeed were mourning through the city; but the Greeks, as soon
as they reached the ships and the Hellespont, were separated each to his
own ship. But Achilles did not permit the Myrmidons to be dispersed, but
he spoke amongst his warlike companions [thus]:

"Ye swift-horsed Myrmidons, comrades dear to me, let us not yet loose
the solid-hoofed steeds from under our chariots, but with the very
horses and chariots, going near, let us bewail Patroclus; for this is
the honour of the dead. But when we have indulged[720] sad lamentation,
unyoking our steeds, we will all sup here."

Thus he spoke; but they mourned in a body; and Achilles led the way.
Thrice they drove their fair-maned steeds around the body,[721]
grieving; and among them Thetis kindled a longing for lamentation.
Moistened were the sands, and moistened were the arms of the men with
tears; for so brave a master of the flight they longed. But among them
the son of Peleus led the abundant lamentation, laying his
man-slaughtering hands upon the breast of his companion:

   [Footnote 720: Excellently paraphrased by Gaza: [Greek: Epeidan
   de tou olethriou threnou apolausomen]. Ernesti well observes that
   [Greek: tetarpomestha] implies "delight mingled with satiety."]

   [Footnote 721: This was a frequent rite at funerals. Cf. Apollon.
   Rh. i. 1059; Virg. AEn. xi. 188, sqq.; Heliodor. Ethiop. iii. p.
   136: [Greek: Epeide to mnema tou Neoptolemou periestoichesato e
   pompe, kai triton oi epeboi ten ippon perielasan, eloluxan men ai
   gunaikes, lalaxan de oi andres]. Among the Romans this rite was
   called _decursio_. Cf. Liv. xxv. 17: Tacit. Ann. ii. 7; Sueton.
   Claud. Sec. i. According to Plutarch, Alexander the Great performed
   the same honours at the tomb of Achilles, that Achilles had
   bestowed upon the manes of his friend Patroclus. See also Bernart
   on Stat. Theb. vi. 217.]

"Hail! O Patroclus, even in the dwellings of Hades; for now shall I
accomplish all those things which formerly I promised, that having
dragged Hector hither, I would give him to the dogs to be devoured raw;
and that before thy pile I would cut the necks of twelve illustrious
sons of the Trojans, enraged on account of thee slain."

He spoke, and meditated unworthy deeds against noble Hector, having
stretched him prone in the dust before the bier of Menoetiades; but they
each stripped off his brazen, glittering armour, and unyoked their
high-sounding steeds. They sat also in crowds at the ship of
swift-footed AEacides; but he afforded to them an agreeable funeral
feast.[722] Many white bulls[723] were stretched around by the axe,
having their throats cut, and many sheep and bleating goats. Many
white-tusked swine also, abounding in fat, were extended for roasting in
the flame of Vulcan; and on every side around the dead body flowed
abundant blood. But the chiefs of the Greeks led the king, the
swift-footed son of Peleus, to noble Agamemnon, hardly persuading him
enraged at heart on account of his companion. But when advancing they
reached the tent of Agamemnon, he straightway ordered the clear-voiced
heralds to place a large tripod on the fire, if he could persuade the
son of Peleus to wash away the bloody gore. But he sternly refused, and
besides swore an oath:[724]

   [Footnote 722: [Greek: Taphos' to ginomenon perideipnon epi te
   ton katoichomenon time].--Hesych.]

   [Footnote 723: On these funeral sacrifices, see Comm. on AEn. xi.
   l. c.; and Lomeier de Lustrationibus, Sec. xxxi.]

   [Footnote 724: Buttm. Lexil. p. 436, after insisting strongly on
   the _personification_ of [Greek: Orkos], observes on this
   passage: "I see no reason why we should not suppose that in the
   poet's mind Jupiter was put in opposition to [Greek: orkon],
   exactly in the same sense as [Greek: orkos] is actually found in
   opposition to [Greek: Zeus] in Pindar, Pyth. iv. 297. [Greek:
   Karteros orkos ammi martys esto Zeus o genethlios amphoterois].
   Further, the expressions [Greek: megas orkos, karteros orkos]
   suit much better the idea of the witness or pledge of the oath,
   than they do the oath itself."]

"No, by Jove, who is both the supreme and the best of gods, it is not
lawful that ablutions should come near my head, before I place Patroclus
on the pile, and have thrown up a mound, and shorn my hair; for not to
such a degree will sorrow a second time invade my heart, whilst I am
among the living. But nevertheless let us now yield to the loathsome
banquet. But on the morrow, O king of men, Agamemnon, give orders to
bring wood, and dispose it so as is proper that a dead body enjoying it,
should descend beneath the obscure darkness; so that the indefatigable
fire may consume him very quickly from our eyes, and the people may
return to their occupations."

Thus he spoke; but they indeed readily listened to him, and obeyed. Then
they, each sedulously preparing supper, feasted; nor did their mind lack
aught of an equal feast. But when they had dismissed the desire of food
and drink, some departed in order to lie down, each to his tent. But the
son of Peleus, on the contrary, amid his many Myrmidons, lay near the
shore of the far-sounding sea, heavily moaning, in a clear spot, where
the waves plashed against the shore; when sweet[725] sleep, diffused
around, took possession of him, relaxing the cares of his mind; for he
was very much fatigued as to his fair knees, chasing Hector at
wind-swept Ilium. But to him came the spirit of wretched Patroclus, like
unto him in all things, as to bulk, and beautiful eyes, and his voice;
and like garments also were around his body; and he stood over his head,
and addressed him:

"Sleepest thou, O Achilles, and art thou forgetful of me? Thou didst not
indeed neglect me when alive, but [now that I am] dead. Bury me, that I
may as soon as possible pass the gates of Hades. The spirits, the images
of the deceased,[726] drive me far away, nor by any means permit me to
be mingled with them beyond the river; but thus I do wander round the
ample-gated dwelling of Hades. But give me thy hand,[727] I beseech
thee, for I shall not again return from Hades after thou hast made me a
partaker of the fire. For by no means shall we, being alive, sitting
apart from our dear companions, deliberate counsels; but the hateful
fate which befel me when born, has snatched me away. And to thyself
also, O godlike Achilles, thy fate is to perish beneath the wall of the
noble Trojans. But another thing I bid, and will command, O Achilles, if
thou wilt obey, not to lay my bones apart from thine; but as we were
nurtured together in thy palaces, when Menoetius led me from Opus, a
little boy, to thy home, on account of a melancholy homicide, on that
day when, imprudent, I slew the son of Amphidamas, not wishing it,
enraged about the dice:[728] then Peleus received me in his abode,
carefully reared me, and named me thy attendant. So may the same tomb
contain our bones, the golden vase which thy venerable mother gave
thee."

   [Footnote 725: On the epithet [Greek: nedymos], cf. Buttm. p.
   414, sqq.]

   [Footnote 726: Buttm. Lexil. p. 372, in a very interesting
   discussion, regards [Greek: kamontes] as an euphemism, "by which
   the dead, whom we consider as still acting and feeling, and
   consequently as the objects of our kind offices, of which they
   are conscious, are represented as still living in another state,
   but deprived of their earthly powers."]

   [Footnote 727: Virg. AEn. vi. 370: "Da dextram misero."]

   [Footnote 728: See the Quaint remarks of Jeremy Taylor, Holy
   Living, p. 224, ed. Bohn.]

But him swift-footed Achilles, answering, addressed:

"Why, O venerable friend, hast thou come to me, and commandest each of
these things to me? Yet will I readily accomplish all these things for
thee, and obey as thou commandest. But stand nearer to me, that
embracing each other even for a little while, we may indulge in sad
lamentation."

Thus then having spoken, he stretched out with his friendly arms, nor
caught him;[729] for the spirit went gibbering[730] beneath the earth,
like smoke. Then Achilles sprang up astonished, and clapped together his
hands, and spoke this doleful speech:

"Alas! there is indeed then, even in the dwellings of Hades, a certain
spirit and image, but there is no body[731] in it at all; for all night
the spirit of miserable Patroclus stood by me, groaning and lamenting,
and enjoined to me each particular, and was wonderfully like unto
himself."

   [Footnote 729: Cf. Georg. iv. 499; AEn. ii. 790, iv. 276; Lucan,
   iii. 34.]

   [Footnote 730: See Odyss. xxiv. sub init, where the same word is
   applied to the shades of the suitors of Penelope.]

   [Footnote 731: By [Greek: phrenes] we may understand the power of
   using reason and judgment, with Duport, Gnom. p. 128, and Jeremy
   Taylor, Holy Dying, p. 524, ed. Bohn. But ver. 100 seems to
   require the interpretation which I have followed; Clarke
   rendering it "praecordia."]

Thus he spoke; and excited among them all a longing for lamentation; and
rosy-fingered Morn appeared to them while weeping around the miserable
corpse. But king Agamemnon incited everywhere from the tents both mules
and men to bring wood; and for this a brave man was roused, Meriones,
the servant of valour-loving Idomeneus. And they went, holding in their
hands wood-lopping axes and well-twisted ropes; and before them went the
mules. They passed over many ascents,[732] descents, and straight ways
and crossways. But when they reached the forests of many-rilled Ida,
hastening, they cut down the towering oaks with the keen-edged brass.
These greatly resounding, fell; and the Greeks then splitting them, tied
[them] upon the mules, but they pained the ground with their hoofs,
eager to reach the plain through the close thickets. But all the
wood-cutters carried trunks of trees, for so Meriones, the servant of
valour-loving Idomeneus, ordered; and afterwards threw them in order
upon the shore, where Achilles designed a mighty tomb for Patroclus, and
for himself.

But when they had thrown on all sides immense quantities of wood,
remaining there in a body, they sat down; but Achilles immediately
ordered the warlike Myrmidons to gird on the brass, and to yoke each his
horses to his chariot; but they arose, and were arrayed in their armour.
And both the combatants and the charioteers ascended their chariots; the
cavalry indeed first, but a cloud of infantry followed after in myriads;
and in the midst his companions bore Patroclus. They covered all the
dead body over with hair, which, cutting off,[733] they threw upon it;
but noble Achilles held his head behind, grieving, for he was sending a
blameless companion to Hades.

   [Footnote 732: A most remarkable and beautiful example of the
   appropriation of sound to sense. Pope has admirably imitated the
   original by the following translation:--

       "O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks, they go."

   Cowper less successfully:--

                 "They measured hill and dale,
       Right onward now, and now circuitous."

   Cf. Milton, P.L. ii. 948:--

           "So eagerly the fiend
   O'er bog, or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
   With head, hands, wings, or feet pursues his way,
   And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."]

   [Footnote 733: So in Senec. Hippol. 1176, "Placemus umbras,
   capitis exuvias cape, laceraeque frontis accipe abscissam comam."
   The custom is learnedly illustrated by Bernart on Stat. Theb. vi.
   195, Lomeier de Lustrat. Sec. xxv.]

But they, when they reached the place where Achilles pointed out to
them, laid him down; and immediately heaped on abundant wood for him.
Then again swift-footed Achilles remembered another thing. Standing
apart from the pile, he cut off his yellow hair, which he had nurtured,
blooming, for the river Sperchius;[734] and, moaning, he spake, looking
upon the dark sea:

   [Footnote 734: On this custom, cf. Schol. Hesiod. Theog. 348:
   [Greek: Apolloni kai potamois oi neoi apetemon tas komas, dia to
   auxeseos kai anatrophes aitious einai]. See Lindenbrog on
   Censorin. de Die Nat. i. p. 6, and Blomf. on AEsch. Choeph. s.
   init., with my own note. Statius, Achill. i. 628, "Quaerisne meos,
   Sperchie, natatus, Promissasque comas?" Cf. Pausan. i. 43, 4;
   Philostrat. Her. xi.]

"In vain, O Sperchius, did my father Peleus vow to thee, that I,
returning to my dear native land, should there cut off my hair for thee,
and offer a sacred hecatomb; and besides, that I would in the same place
sacrifice fifty male sheep at the fountains, where are a grove and
fragrant altar to thee. Thus the old man spake, but thou hast not
fulfilled his will. And now, since I return not to my dear fatherland, I
will give my hair to the hero Patroclus, to be borne [with him]." Thus
saying, he placed his hair in the hands of his dear companion; and
excited amongst them all a longing for weeping. And the light of the sun
had certainly set upon them, mourning, had not Achilles, standing
beside, straightway addressed Agamemnon:

"O son of Atreus (for to thy words the people of the Greeks most
especially hearken), it is possible to satiate oneself even with
weeping;[735] but now do thou dismiss them from the pile, and order them
to prepare supper. We, to whom the corpse is chiefly a care, will labour
concerning these things; but let the chiefs remain with us."

But when the king of men, Agamemnon, heard this, he immediately
dispersed the people among the equal ships; but the mourners remained
there, and heaped up the wood. They formed a pile[736] a hundred feet
this way and that, and laid the body upon the summit of the pile,
grieving at heart.

   [Footnote 735: See Buttm. Lexil. p. 25. "Achilles speaks of the
   expediency of terminating the lamentations of the army at large,
   and leaving what remains to be performed in honour of the
   deceased to his more particular friends."--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 736: In illustration of the following rites, cf. Virg.
   AEn. iii. 62; v. 96; vi. 215; x. 517; xi. 80, 197, sqq.; and the
   notes of Stephens on Saxo Grammat. p. 92.]

Many fat sheep, and stamping-footed, bent-horned oxen, they skinned and
dressed before the pile; from all of which magnanimous Achilles, taking
the fat, covered over the dead body [with it] from head to feet, and
heaped around the skinned carcases. Leaning towards the bier, he
likewise placed vessels of honey and oil,[737] and, sighing deeply,
hastily threw upon the pyre four high-necked steeds. There were nine
dogs, companions at the table of the [departed] king, and, slaying two
of them, he cast them upon the pile; also twelve gallant sons[738] of
the magnanimous Trojans, slaying them with the brass; and he designed
evil deeds in his mind. Next he applied to it the iron strength of fire,
that it might feed upon it: then he groaned aloud, and addressed his
beloved companion by name:[739]

   [Footnote 737: Cf. Alcaeus apud Brunck, Ann. i. p. 490: [Greek:
   Kai taphon ypsosanto, galakti de poimenes aigon Erranan xanto
   mixamenoi meliti]. Compare the similar libations to the dead in
   Eur. Orest. 114; Heliodor. Eth. vi.; Apul. Met. 3; Stat. Theb.
   vi. 209; Virg. AEn. iii. 66.]

   [Footnote 738: This cruel custom was in vogue amongst the
   followers of Odin. See Olaus Magnus, iii. 3, and Mallet, Northern
   Antiquities, p. 213, sq., ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 739: On this [Greek: prosphonesis], or last address to
   the deceased, see my note on Eurip. Alcest. 625, t. i. p. 231,
   ed. Bohn; and Suppl. 773, 804; Virg. AEn. iii. 68, v. 79; Propert.
   i. 17; Auson. Parent. 159, 10.]

"Hail! O Patroclus, even in the dwellings of Hades: for I now fulfil all
things which I formerly promised thee; twelve brave sons of the
magnanimous Trojans, all these, along with thee, shall the fire consume;
but I will not suffer Hector, the son of Priam, to be devoured by fire,
but by the dogs."

Thus he spoke, threatening; but about him the dogs were not busied; for
Venus, the daughter of Jove, drove off the dogs both days and nights,
and anointed him with a rosy unguent, ambrosial, that he might not
lacerate him dragging him along. Over him also Phoebus Apollo drew a dark
cloud from heaven to the plain, and overshadowed the whole space, as
much as the dead body occupied, lest the influence of the sun should
previously dry the body all around, with the nerves and limbs.

Yet the pile of dead Patroclus burnt not. Then again noble Achilles
meditated other things. Standing apart from the pile, he prayed to two
winds, Boreas and Zephyrus, and promised fair sacrifices; and, pouring
out many libations with a golden goblet, he supplicated them to come,
that they might burn the body with fire as soon as possible, and the
wood might hasten to be burned. But swift Iris, hearing his prayers,
went as a messenger to the winds. They, indeed, together at home with
fierce-breathing Zephyrus, were celebrating a feast, when Iris,
hastening, stood upon the stone threshold. But when they beheld her with
their eyes, they rose up, and invited her to him, each of them. But she,
on the contrary, refused to sit down, and spoke [this] speech:

"No seat [for me]; for I return again to the flowings of the ocean, to
the land of the AEthiopians, where they sacrifice hecatombs to the
immortals, that now I, too, may have a share in their offerings. But
Achilles now supplicates Boreas, and sonorous Zephyrus, to come, that ye
may kindle the pile to be consumed, on which lies Patroclus, whom all
the Greeks bewail."

She, indeed, thus having spoken, departed; but they hastened to go with
a great tumult, driving on the clouds before them. Immediately they
reached the sea, blowing, and the billow was raised up beneath their
sonorous blast: but they reached the very fertile Troad, and fell upon
the pile, and mightily resounded the fiercely-burning fire. All night,
indeed, did they together toss about the blaze of the pyre, shrilly
blowing; and all night swift Achilles, holding a double cup, poured wine
upon the ground, drawing it from a golden goblet, and moistened the
earth, invoking the manes of wretched Patroclus. And as a father mourns,
consuming the bones of his son, a bridegroom who, dying, has afflicted
his unhappy parents, so mourned Achilles, burning the bones of his
companion, pacing pensively beside the pile, groaning continually. But
when Lucifer arrived, proclaiming light over the earth, after whom
saffron-vested Morn is diffused over the sea, then the pyre grew
languid, and the flame decayed; and the Winds departed again, to return
home through the Thracian sea; but it (the sea) groaned indeed, raging
with swelling billow.

But Pelides, going apart[740] from the pile, reclined fatigued, and upon
him fell sweet sleep. The others, however, were assembling in crowds
round the son of Atreus, the noise and tumult of whom, approaching,
awoke him; and, being raised up, he sat, and addressed them:

   [Footnote 740: On [Greek: liazomai], cf. Buttm. Lex. p. 404.]

"O son of Atreus, and ye other chiefs of the Greeks, first, indeed,
extinguish the whole pile, as much as the fire has seized, with dark
wine; and then let us collect the bones of Patroclus, the son of
Menoetius, well discriminating them (for they are readily distinguished;
for he lay in the centre of the pyre, but the others, both horses and
men, were burned promiscuously at the extremity), and let us place them
in a golden vessel, and with a double [layer of] fat, till I myself be
hidden in Hades. And I wish that a tomb should be made, not very large,
but of such[741] a size as is becoming; but do ye, O Achaeans, hereafter,
make it both broad and lofty, you who may be left behind me at the
many-benched barks."

Thus he spoke; and they obeyed the swift-footed son of Peleus. First of
all, indeed, they totally extinguished the pyre with dark wine, as much
as the fire had invaded, and the deep ashes fell in; and, weeping, they
collected the white bones of their mild companion into a golden vessel,
and a double [layer of] fat; then, laying them in the tent, they covered
them with soft[742] linen. Next they marked out the area for the tomb,
and laid the foundations around the pile; and immediately upraised a
mound of earth; and, heaping up the tomb, returned. But Achilles
detained the people there, and made the wide assembly sit down; but from
the ships he brought forth prizes, goblets, tripods, horses, mules, and
sturdy heads of oxen, and slender-waisted women, and hoary[743] iron.
First he staked as prizes for swift-footed steeds, a woman to be borne
away, faultless, skilled in works, as well as a handled tripod of
two-and-twenty measures, for the first; but for the second he staked a
mare six years old, unbroken, pregnant with a young mule; for the third
he staked a fireless tripod, beautiful, containing four measures, yet
quite untarnished;[744] for the fourth he staked two talents of gold;
and for the fifth he staked a double vessel, untouched by the fire.
Erect he stood, and spoke this speech to the Greeks:

   [Footnote 741: Ernesti considers that [Greek: toion] is here
   added to indicate _magnitude_, and Heyne accordingly renders it:
   "magnitudine fere hac," the speaker being supposed to use a
   gesture while thus speaking.]

   [Footnote 742: See Buttm. Lexil. pp. 236--9.]

   [Footnote 743: "Ernesti conceives that the colour is here
   maintained to express, not merely the _shining aspect_, but the
   newness of the metal; as [Greek: lenkon] in 268. This is
   ingenious; but why not receive it as expressive of colour, and
   borrowed from that to which the metal itself supplies a
   well-known epithet, viz., the hair of age?"--Kennedy.]

   [Footnote 744: [Greek: Autos] here designates "_that which is
   original, unchanged_, in opposition to common changes, [Greek:
   lenkon eth' autos], still in _that_ its original state,
   completely unblackened with fire; and [Greek: o]. 413; of the
   body of Hector, [Greek: all' ete keinos keitai. Autos], in _that_
   state in which he was before, still free from
   corruption."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 173.]

"O son of Atreus, and ye other well-greaved Greeks, these prizes lie in
the circus, awaiting the charioteers. If now, indeed, in honour of
another, we Grecians were contending, then truly would I, receiving,
bear the first [prizes] to my tent. For ye know how much my steeds
surpass in excellence; for they are both immortal, and Neptune gave them
to my father Peleus, who, again, delivered them to me. But nevertheless
I and my solid-hoofed steeds will remain apart [from the contest];
because they have lost the excellent might of such a charioteer, who
very often poured the moist oil over their manes, having washed them
with limpid water. They, indeed, standing, lament him, but their manes
hang down upon the ground, and they stand, grieved at heart. However, do
ye others through the army prepare, whoever of the Greeks confides in
his steeds and well-fastened chariots."

Thus spoke the son of Peleus; but the swift charioteers arose. But, far
the first, arose Eumelus, king of men, the dear son of Admetus, who
surpassed in equestrian skill. After him arose the son of Tydeus,
valiant Diomede, and led under the yoke the horses of Tros, which he
formerly took from AEneas; but Apollo preserved himself[745] alive; next
to whom arose the most noble son of yellow-haired Atreus, Menelaus, and
led beneath the yoke fleet steeds, Agamemnon's mare AEthe, and his own
stallion, Podargus. Her Echepolus, the son of Anchises, had presented
as a gift to Agamemnon, that he need not follow him to wind-swept Ilium,
but staying there might be delighted; for Jove had given him great
wealth, and he dwelt in wise Sicyon. Her, persevering in the race, he
led under the yoke. But Antilochus, the fourth, harnessed his
beautiful-maned steeds (the illustrious son of the magnanimous king
Nestor, the son of Neleus), and swift-footed Pelian-born steeds drew his
chariot for him; but his father, standing near, spoke for his good,
advising him, though himself prudent:

   [Footnote 745: AEneas.]

"O Antilochus, assuredly indeed both Jove and Neptune have loved thee,
although being young, and have taught thee all kinds of equestrian
exercise; wherefore there is no great need to instruct thee. For thou
knowest how to turn the goals with safety; but thy horses are very slow
to run, wherefore I think that disasters may happen. Their horses,
indeed, are more fleet, but they themselves know not how to manoeuvre
better than thou thyself. But come now, beloved one, contrive every
manner of contrivance in thy mind, lest the prizes by any chance escape
thee. By skill is the wood-cutter much better than by strength; and,
again, by skill the pilot directs upon the dark sea the swift ship,
tossed about by the winds; and by skill charioteer excels charioteer.
One man who is confident in his steeds and chariot, turns imprudently
hither and thither over much [ground], and his steeds wander through the
course, nor does he rein them in. But he, on the contrary, who is
acquainted with stratagem [though] driving inferior steeds, always
looking at the goal, turns it close, nor does it escape him in what
manner he may first turn [the course][746] with his leathern reins; but
he holds on steadily, and watches the one who is before him. But I will
show thee the goal, easily distinguished, nor shall it escape thy
notice. A piece of dry wood, as much as a cubit, stands over the ground,
either of oak or of larch, which is not rotted by rain; and two white
stones are placed on either side, in the narrow part of the way;[747]
but the racecourse around is level: either it is the monument[748] of
some man long since dead, or perhaps it has been a goal in the time of
former men, and now swift-footed noble Achilles has appointed it the
goal. Approaching this very closely, drive thy chariot and horses near;
but incline thyself gently towards the left of them (the steeds), in the
well-joined chariot-seat; and, cheering on the right-hand horse, apply
the whip, and give him the rein with thy hands. Let thy left-hand horse,
however, be moved close to the goal, so that the nave of the well-made
wheel may appear to touch, the top [of the post]; but avoid to touch
upon the stone, lest thou both wound thy horses, and break thy chariot
in pieces, and be a joy to the others, and a disgrace to thyself. But,
