Moore sighed--a sigh so deep it was nearly a groan. He covered his eyes
with his hand.

"May I be spared to make some atonement."

Such was his prayer.

"And for what?"

"We will not touch on it now, Cary; unmanned as I am, I have not the
power to cope with such a topic. Was Mrs. Pryor with you during your
illness?"

"Yes"--Caroline smiled brightly--"you know she is mamma?"

"I have heard--Hortense told me; but that tale too I will receive from
yourself. Does she add to your happiness?"

"What! mamma? She is _dear_ to me; _how_ dear I cannot say. I was
altogether weary, and she held me up."

"I deserve to hear that in a moment when I can scarce lift my hand to my
head. I deserve it."

"It is no reproach against you."

"It is a coal of fire heaped on my head; and so is every word you
address to me, and every look that lights your sweet face. Come still
nearer, Lina; and give me your hand--if my thin fingers do not scare
you."

She took those thin fingers between her two little hands; she bent her
head _et les effleura de ses levres_. (I put that in French because the
word _effleurer_ is an exquisite word.) Moore was much moved. A large
tear or two coursed down his hollow cheek.

"I'll keep these things in my heart, Cary; that kiss I will put by, and
you shall hear of it again one day."

"Come out!" cried Martin, opening the door--"come away; you have had
twenty minutes instead of a quarter of an hour."

"She will not stir yet, you hempseed."

"I dare not stay longer, Robert."

"Can you promise to return?"

"No, she can't," responded Martin. "The thing mustn't become customary.
I can't be troubled. It's very well for once; I'll not have it
repeated."

"_You_'ll not have it repeated."

"Hush! don't vex him; we could not have met to-day but for him. But I
will come again, if it is your wish that I should come."

"It _is_ my wish--my _one_ wish--almost the only wish I can feel."

"Come this minute. My mother has coughed, got up, set her feet on the
floor. Let her only catch you on the stairs, Miss Caroline. You're not
to bid him good-bye"--stepping between her and Moore--"you are to
march."

"My shawl, Martin."

"I have it. I'll put it on for you when you are in the hall."

He made them part. He would suffer no farewell but what could be
expressed in looks. He half carried Caroline down the stairs. In the
hall he wrapped her shawl round her, and, but that his mother's tread
then creaked in the gallery, and but that a sentiment of diffidence--the
proper, natural, therefore the noble impulse of his boy's heart--held
him back, he would have claimed his reward; he would have said, "Now,
Miss Caroline, for all this give me one kiss." But ere the words had
passed his lips she was across the snowy road, rather skimming than
wading the drifts.

"She is my debtor, and I _will_ be paid."

He flattered himself that it was opportunity, not audacity, which had
failed him. He misjudged the quality of his own nature, and held it for
something lower than it was.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

CASE OF DOMESTIC PERSECUTION--REMARKABLE INSTANCE OF PIOUS PERSEVERANCE
IN THE DISCHARGE OF RELIGIOUS DUTIES.


Martin, having known the taste of excitement, wanted a second draught;
having felt the dignity of power, he loathed to relinquish it. Miss
Helstone--that girl he had always called ugly, and whose face was now
perpetually before his eyes, by day and by night, in dark and in
sunshine--had once come within his sphere. It fretted him to think the
visit might never be repeated.

Though a schoolboy he was no ordinary schoolboy; he was destined to grow
up an original. At a few years' later date he took great pains to pare
and polish himself down to the pattern of the rest of the world, but he
never succeeded; an unique stamp marked him always. He now sat idle at
his desk in the grammar school, casting about in his mind for the means
of adding another chapter to his commenced romance. He did not yet know
how many commenced life-romances are doomed never to get beyond the
first, or at most the second chapter. His Saturday half-holiday he spent
in the wood with his book of fairy legends, and that other unwritten
book of his imagination.

Martin harboured an irreligious reluctance to see the approach of
Sunday. His father and mother, while disclaiming community with the
Establishment, failed not duly, once on the sacred day, to fill their
large pew in Briarfield Church with the whole of their blooming family.
Theoretically, Mr. Yorke placed all sects and churches on a level. Mrs.
Yorke awarded the palm to Moravians and Quakers, on account of that
crown of humility by these worthies worn. Neither of them were ever
known, however, to set foot in a conventicle.

Martin, I say, disliked Sunday, because the morning service was long,
and the sermon usually little to his taste. This Saturday afternoon,
however, his woodland musings disclosed to him a new-found charm in the
coming day.

It proved a day of deep snow--so deep that Mrs. Yorke during breakfast
announced her conviction that the children, both boys and girls, would
be better at home; and her decision that, instead of going to church,
they should sit silent for two hours in the back parlour, while Rose and
Martin alternately read a succession of sermons--John Wesley's
"Sermons." John Wesley, being a reformer and an agitator, had a place
both in her own and her husband's favour.

"Rose will do as she pleases," said Martin, not looking up from the book
which, according to his custom then and in after-life, he was studying
over his bread and milk.

"Rose will do as she is told, and Martin too," observed the mother.

"I am going to church."

So her son replied, with the ineffable quietude of a true Yorke, who
knows his will and means to have it, and who, if pushed to the wall,
will let himself be crushed to death, provided no way of escape can be
found, but will never capitulate.

"It is not fit weather," said the father.

No answer. The youth read studiously; he slowly broke his bread and
sipped his milk.

"Martin hates to go to church, but he hates still more to obey," said
Mrs. Yorke.

"I suppose I am influenced by pure perverseness?"

"Yes, you are."

"Mother, _I am not_."

"By what, then, are you influenced?"

"By a complication of motives, the intricacies of which I should as soon
think of explaining to you as I should of turning myself inside out to
exhibit the internal machinery of my frame."

"Hear Martin! hear him!" cried Mr. Yorke. "I must see and have this lad
of mine brought up to the bar. Nature meant him to live by his tongue.
Hesther, your third son must certainly be a lawyer; he has the
stock-in-trade--brass, self-conceit, and words--words--words."

"Some bread, Rose, if you please," requested Martin, with intense
gravity, serenity, phlegm. The boy had naturally a low, plaintive voice,
which in his "dour moods" rose scarcely above a lady's whisper. The more
inflexibly stubborn the humour, the softer, the sadder the tone. He
rang the bell, and gently asked for his walking-shoes.

"But, Martin," urged his sire, "there is drift all the way; a man could
hardly wade through it. However, lad," he continued, seeing that the boy
rose as the church bell began to toll, "this is a case wherein I would
by no means balk the obdurate chap of his will. Go to church by all
means. There is a pitiless wind, and a sharp, frozen sleet, besides the
depth under foot. Go out into it, since thou prefers it to a warm
fireside."

Martin quietly assumed his cloak, comforter, and cap, and deliberately
went out.

"My father has more sense than my mother," he pronounced. "How women
miss it! They drive the nail into the flesh, thinking they are hammering
away at insensate stone."

He reached church early.

"Now, if the weather frightens her (and it is a real December tempest),
or if that Mrs. Pryor objects to her going out, and I should miss her
after all, it will vex me; but, tempest or tornado, hail or ice, she
_ought_ to come, and if she has a mind worthy of her eyes and features
she _will_ come. She will be here for the chance of seeing me, as I am
here for the chance of seeing her. She will want to get a word
respecting her confounded sweetheart, as I want to get another flavour
of what I think the essence of life--a taste of existence, with the
spirit preserved in it, and not evaporated. Adventure is to stagnation
what champagne is to flat porter."

He looked round. The church was cold, silent, empty, but for one old
woman. As the chimes subsided and the single bell tolled slowly, another
and another elderly parishioner came dropping in, and took a humble
station in the free sittings. It is always the frailest, the oldest, and
the poorest that brave the worst weather, to prove and maintain their
constancy to dear old mother church. This wild morning not one affluent
family attended, not one carriage party appeared--all the lined and
cushioned pews were empty; only on the bare oaken seats sat ranged the
gray-haired elders and feeble paupers.

"I'll scorn her if she doesn't come," muttered Martin, shortly and
savagely, to himself. The rector's shovel-hat had passed the porch. Mr.
Helstone and his clerk were in the vestry.

The bells ceased--the reading-desk was filled--the doors were
closed--the service commenced. Void stood the rectory pew--she was not
there. Martin scorned her.

"Worthless thing! vapid thing! commonplace humbug! Like all other
girls--weakly, selfish, shallow!"

Such was Martin's liturgy.

"She is not like our picture. Her eyes are not large and expressive; her
nose is not straight, delicate, Hellenic; her mouth has not that charm I
thought it had, which I imagined could beguile me of sullenness in my
worst moods. What is she? A thread-paper, a doll, a toy, a _girl_, in
short."

So absorbed was the young cynic he forgot to rise from his knees at the
proper place, and was still in an exemplary attitude of devotion when,
the litany over, the first hymn was given out. To be so caught did not
contribute to soothe him. He started up red (for he was as sensitive to
ridicule as any girl). To make the matter worse, the church door had
reopened, and the aisles were filling: patter, patter, patter, a hundred
little feet trotted in. It was the Sunday scholars. According to
Briarfield winter custom, these children had till now been kept where
there was a warm stove, and only led into church just before the
communion and sermon.

The little ones were settled first, and at last, when the boys and the
younger girls were all arranged--when the organ was swelling high, and
the choir and congregation were rising to uplift a spiritual song--a
tall class of young women came quietly in, closing the procession. Their
teacher, having seen them seated, passed into the rectory pew. The
French-gray cloak and small beaver bonnet were known to Martin; it was
the very costume his eyes had ached to catch. Miss Helstone had not
suffered the storm to prove an impediment. After all, she was come to
church. Martin probably whispered his satisfaction to his hymn book; at
any rate, he therewith hid his face two minutes.

Satisfied or not, he had time to get very angry with her again before
the sermon was over. She had never once looked his way; at least he had
not been so lucky as to encounter a glance.

"If," he said--"if she takes no notice of me, if she shows I am not in
her thoughts, I shall have a worse, a meaner opinion of her than ever.
Most despicable would it be to come for the sake of those sheep-faced
Sunday scholars, and not for my sake or that long skeleton Moore's."

The sermon found an end; the benediction was pronounced; the
congregation dispersed. She had not been near him.

Now, indeed, as Martin set his face homeward, he felt that the sleet was
sharp and the east wind cold.

His nearest way lay through some fields. It was a dangerous, because an
untrodden way. He did not care; he would take it. Near the second stile
rose a clump of trees. Was that an umbrella waiting there? Yes, an
umbrella, held with evident difficulty against the blast; behind it
fluttered a French-gray cloak. Martin grinned as he toiled up the steep,
encumbered field, difficult to the foot as a slope in the upper realms
of Etna. There was an inimitable look in his face when, having gained
the stile, he seated himself coolly thereupon, and thus opened a
conference which, for his own part, he was willing to prolong
indefinitely.

"I think you had better strike a bargain. Exchange me for Mrs. Pryor."

"I was not sure whether you would come this way, Martin, but I thought I
would run the chance. There is no such thing as getting a quiet word
spoken in the church or churchyard."

"Will you agree?--make over Mrs. Pryor to my mother, and put me in her
skirts?"

"As if I could understand you! What puts Mrs. Pryor into your head?"

"You call her 'mamma,' don't you?"

"She _is_ my mamma."

"Not possible--or so inefficient, so careless a mamma; I should make a
five times better one. You _may_ laugh. I have no objection to see you
laugh. Your teeth--I hate ugly teeth; but yours are as pretty as a pearl
necklace, and a necklace of which the pearls are very fair, even, and
well matched too."

"Martin, what now? I thought the Yorkes never paid compliments?"

"They have not done till this generation; but I feel as if it were my
vocation to turn out a new variety of the Yorke species. I am rather
tired of my own ancestors. We have traditions going back for four
ages--tales of Hiram, which was the son of Hiram, which was the son of
Samuel, which was the son of John, which was the son of Zerubbabel
Yorke. All, from Zerubbabel down to the last Hiram, were such as you see
my father. Before that there was a Godfrey. We have his picture; it
hangs in Moore's bedroom; it is like me. Of his character we know
nothing; but I am sure it was different to his descendants. He has long,
curling dark hair; he is carefully and cavalierly dressed. Having said
that he is like me, I need not add that he is handsome."

"You are not handsome, Martin."

"No; but wait awhile--just let me take my time. I mean to begin from
this day to cultivate, to polish, and we shall see."

"You are a very strange, a very unaccountable boy, Martin. But don't
imagine you ever will be handsome; you cannot."

"I mean to try. But we were talking about Mrs. Pryor. She must be the
most unnatural mamma in existence, coolly to let her daughter come out
in this weather. Mine was in such a rage because I would go to church;
she was fit to fling the kitchen brush after me."

"Mamma was very much concerned about me; but I am afraid I was
obstinate. I _would_ go."

"To see me?"

"Exactly; I thought of nothing else. I greatly feared the snow would
hinder you from coming. You don't know how pleased I was to see you all
by yourself in the pew."

"_I_ came to fulfil my duty, and set the parish a good example. And so
you were obstinate, were you? I should like to see you obstinate, I
should. Wouldn't I have you in good discipline if I owned you? Let me
take the umbrella."

"I can't stay two minutes; our dinner will be ready."

"And so will ours; and we have always a hot dinner on Sundays. Roast
goose to-day, with apple-pie and rice-pudding. I always contrive to know
the bill of fare. Well, I like these things uncommonly; but I'll make
the sacrifice, if you will."

"We have a cold dinner. My uncle will allow no unnecessary cooking on
the Sabbath. But I must return; the house would be in commotion if I
failed to appear."

"So will Briarmains, bless you! I think I hear my father sending out the
overlooker and five of the dyers, to look in six directions for the body
of his prodigal son in the snow; and my mother repenting her of her
many misdeeds towards me, now I am gone."

"Martin, how is Mr. Moore?"

"_That_ is what you came for, just to say that word."

"Come, tell me quickly."

"Hang him! he is no worse; but as ill-used as ever--mewed up, kept in
solitary confinement. They mean to make either an idiot or a maniac of
him, and take out a commission of lunacy. Horsfall starves him; you saw
how thin he was."

"You were very good the other day, Martin."

"What day? I am always good--a model."

"When will you be so good again?"

"I see what you are after; but you'll not wheedle me--I am no
cat's-paw."

"But it must be done. It is quite a right thing, and a necessary thing."

"How you encroach! Remember, I managed the matter of my own free will
before."

"And you will again."

"I won't. The business gave me far too much trouble. I like my ease."

"Mr. Moore wishes to see me, Martin, and I wish to see him."

"I dare say" (coolly).

"It is too bad of your mother to exclude his friends."

"Tell her so."

"His own relations."

"Come and blow her up."

"You know that would advance nothing. Well, I shall stick to my point.
See him I will. If you won't help me, I'll manage without help."

"Do; there is nothing like self-reliance, self-dependence."

"I have no time to reason with you now; but I consider you provoking.
Good-morning."

Away she went, the umbrella shut, for she could not carry it against the
wind.

"She is not vapid; she is not shallow," said Martin. "I shall like to
watch, and mark how she will work her way without help. If the storm
were not of snow, but of fire--such as came refreshingly down on the
cities of the plain--she would go through it to procure five minutes'
speech of that Moore. Now, I consider I have had a pleasant morning.
The disappointments got time on; the fears and fits of anger only made
that short discourse pleasanter, when it came at last. She expected to
coax me at once. She'll not manage that in one effort. She shall come
again, again, and yet again. It would please me to put her in a
passion--to make her cry. I want to discover how far she will go--what
she will do and dare--to get her will. It seems strange and new to find
one human being thinking so much about another as she thinks about
Moore. But it is time to go home; my appetite tells me the hour. Won't I
walk into that goose? and we'll try whether Matthew or I shall get the
largest cut of the apple-pie to-day."




CHAPTER XXXV.

WHEREIN MATTERS MAKE SOME PROGRESS, BUT NOT MUCH.


Martin had planned well. He had laid out a dexterously concerted scheme
for his private amusement. But older and wiser schemers than he are
often doomed to see their finest-spun projects swept to annihilation by
the sudden broom of Fate, that fell housewife whose red arm none can
control. In the present instance this broom was manufactured out of the
tough fibres of Moore's own stubborn purpose, bound tight with his will.
He was now resuming his strength, and making strange head against Mrs.
Horsfall. Each morning he amazed that matron with a fresh astonishment.
First he discharged her from her valet duties; he would dress himself.
Then he refused the coffee she brought him; he would breakfast with the
family. Lastly, he forbade her his chamber. On the same day, amidst the
outcries of all the women in the place, he put his head out of doors.
The morning after, he followed Mr. Yorke to his counting-house, and
requested an envoy to fetch a chaise from the Red House Inn. He was
resolved, he said, to return home to the Hollow that very afternoon. Mr.
Yorke, instead of opposing, aided and abetted him. The chaise was sent
for, though Mrs. Yorke declared the step would be his death. It came.
Moore, little disposed to speak, made his purse do duty for his tongue.
He expressed his gratitude to the servants and to Mrs. Horsfall by the
chink of his coin. The latter personage approved and understood this
language perfectly; it made amends for all previous contumacy. She and
her patient parted the best friends in the world.

The kitchen visited and soothed, Moore betook himself to the parlour. He
had Mrs. Yorke to appease; not quite so easy a task as the pacification
of her housemaids. There she sat plunged in sullen dudgeon, the
gloomiest speculations on the depths of man's ingratitude absorbing her
thoughts. He drew near and bent over her; she was obliged to look up,
if it were only to bid him "avaunt." There was beauty still in his pale,
wasted features; there was earnestness and a sort of sweetness--for he
was smiling--in his hollow eyes.

"Good-bye!" he said, and as he spoke the smile glittered and melted. He
had no iron mastery of his sensations now; a trifling emotion made
itself apparent in his present weak state.

"And what are you going to leave us for?" she asked. "We will keep you,
and do anything in the world for you, if you will only stay till you are
stronger."

"Good-bye!" he again said; and added, "You have been a mother to me;
give your wilful son one embrace."

Like a foreigner, as he was, he offered her first one cheek, then the
other. She kissed him.

"What a trouble--what a burden I have been to you!" he muttered.

"You are the worst trouble now, headstrong youth!" was the answer. "I
wonder who is to nurse you at Hollow's Cottage? Your sister Hortense
knows no more about such matters than a child."

"Thank God! for I have had nursing enough to last me my life."

Here the little girls came in--Jessie crying, Rose quiet but grave.
Moore took them out into the hall to soothe, pet, and kiss them. He knew
it was not in their mother's nature to bear to see any living thing
caressed but herself. She would have felt annoyed had he fondled a
kitten in her presence.

The boys were standing about the chaise as Moore entered it; but for
them he had no farewell. To Mr. Yorke he only said, "You have a good
riddance of me. That was an unlucky shot for you, Yorke; it turned
Briarmains into an hospital. Come and see me at the cottage soon."

He drew up the glass; the chaise rolled away. In half an hour he
alighted at his own garden wicket. Having paid the driver and dismissed
the vehicle, he leaned on that wicket an instant, at once to rest and to
muse.

"Six months ago I passed out at this gate," said he, "a proud, angry,
disappointed man. I come back sadder and wiser; weakly enough, but not
worried. A cold, gray, yet quiet world lies round--a world where, if I
hope little, I fear nothing. All slavish terrors of embarrassment have
left me. Let the worst come, I can work, as Joe Scott does, for an
honourable living; in such doom I yet see some hardship but no
degradation. Formerly, pecuniary ruin was equivalent in my eyes to
personal dishonour. It is not so now; I know the difference. Ruin _is_
an evil, but one for which I am prepared; the day of whose coming I
know, for I have calculated. I can yet put it off six months--not an
hour longer. If things by that time alter, which is not probable; if
fetters, which now seem indissoluble, should be loosened from our trade
(of all things the most unlikely to happen), I might conquer in this
long struggle yet--I might--good God! what might I not do? But the
thought is a brief madness; let me see things with sane eyes. Ruin will
come, lay her axe to my fortune's roots, and hew them down. I shall
snatch a sapling, I shall cross the sea, and plant it in American woods.
Louis will go with me. Will none but Louis go? I cannot tell--I have no
right to ask."

He entered the house.

It was afternoon, twilight yet out of doors--starless and moonless
twilight; for though keenly freezing with a dry, black frost, heaven
wore a mask of clouds congealed and fast locked. The mill-dam too was
frozen. The Hollow was very still. Indoors it was already dark. Sarah
had lit a good fire in the parlour; she was preparing tea in the
kitchen.

"Hortense," said Moore, as his sister bustled up to help him off with
his cloak, "I am pleased to come home."

Hortense did not feel the peculiar novelty of this expression coming
from her brother, who had never before called the cottage his home, and
to whom its narrow limits had always heretofore seemed rather
restrictive than protective. Still, whatever contributed to his
happiness pleased her, and she expressed herself to that effect.

He sat down, but soon rose again. He went to the window; he came back to
the fire.

"Hortense!"

"Mon frere?"

"This little parlour looks very clean and pleasant--unusually bright,
somehow."

"It is true, brother; I have had the whole house thoroughly and
scrupulously cleaned in your absence."

"Sister, I think on this first day of your return home you ought to have
a friend or so to tea, if it were only to see how fresh and spruce you
have made the little place."

"True, brother. If it were not late I might send for Miss Mann."

"So you might; but it really is too late to disturb that good lady, and
the evening is much too cold for her to come out."

"How thoughtful in you, dear Gerard! We must put it off till another
day."

"I want some one to-day, dear sister--some quiet guest, who would tire
neither of us."

"Miss Ainley?"

"An excellent person, they say; but she lives too far off. Tell Harry
Scott to step up to the rectory with a request from you that Caroline
Helstone should come and spend the evening with you."

"Would it not be better to-morrow, dear brother?"

"I should like her to see the place as it is just now; its brilliant
cleanliness and perfect neatness are so much to your credit."

"It might benefit her in the way of example."

"It might and must; she ought to come."

He went into the kitchen.

"Sarah, delay tea half an hour." He then commissioned her to dispatch
Harry Scott to the rectory, giving her a twisted note hastily scribbled
in pencil by himself, and addressed "Miss Helstone."

Scarcely had Sarah time to get impatient under the fear of damage to her
toast already prepared when the messenger returned, and with him the
invited guest.

She entered through the kitchen, quietly tripped up Sarah's stairs to
take off her bonnet and furs, and came down as quietly, with her
beautiful curls nicely smoothed, her graceful merino dress and delicate
collar all trim and spotless, her gay little work-bag in her hand. She
lingered to exchange a few kindly words with Sarah, and to look at the
new tortoise-shell kitten basking on the kitchen hearth, and to speak to
the canary-bird, which a sudden blaze from the fire had startled on its
perch; and then she betook herself to the parlour.

The gentle salutation, the friendly welcome, were interchanged in such
tranquil sort as befitted cousins meeting; a sense of pleasure, subtle
and quiet as a perfume, diffused itself through the room; the
newly-kindled lamp burnt up bright; the tray and the singing urn were
brought in.

"I am pleased to come home," repeated Mr. Moore.

They assembled round the table. Hortense chiefly talked. She
congratulated Caroline on the evident improvement in her health. Her
colour and her plump cheeks were returning, she remarked. It was true.
There was an obvious change in Miss Helstone. All about her seemed
elastic; depression, fear, forlornness, were withdrawn. No longer
crushed, and saddened, and slow, and drooping, she looked like one who
had tasted the cordial of heart's ease, and been lifted on the wing of
hope.

After tea Hortense went upstairs. She had not rummaged her drawers for a
month past, and the impulse to perform that operation was now become
resistless. During her absence the talk passed into Caroline's hands.
She took it up with ease; she fell into her best tone of conversation. A
pleasing facility and elegance of language gave fresh charm to familiar
topics; a new music in the always soft voice gently surprised and
pleasingly captivated the listener; unwonted shades and lights of
expression elevated the young countenance with character, and kindled it
with animation.

"Caroline, you look as if you had heard good tidings," said Moore, after
earnestly gazing at her for some minutes.

"Do I?"

"I sent for you this evening that I might be cheered; but you cheer me
more than I had calculated."

"I am glad of that. And I _really_ cheer you?"

"You look brightly, move buoyantly, speak musically."

"It is pleasant to be here again."

"Truly it is pleasant; I feel it so. And to see health on your cheek and
hope in your eye is pleasant, Cary; but what is this hope, and what is
the source of this sunshine I perceive about you?"

"For one thing, I am happy in mamma. I love her so much, and she loves
me. Long and tenderly she nursed me. Now, when her care has made me
well, I can occupy myself for and with her all the day. I say it is my
turn to attend to her; and I _do_ attend to her. I am her waiting-woman
as well as her child. I like--you would laugh if you knew what pleasure
I have in making dresses and sewing for her. She looks so nice now,
Robert; I will not let her be old-fashioned. And then, she is charming
to talk to--full of wisdom, ripe in judgment, rich in information,
exhaustless in stores her observant faculties have quietly amassed.
Every day that I live with her I like her better, I esteem her more
highly, I love her more tenderly."

"_That_ for one thing, then, Cary. You talk in such a way about 'mamma'
it is enough to make one jealous of the old lady."

"She is not old, Robert."

"Of the young lady, then."

"She does not pretend to be young."

"Well, of the matron. But you said 'mamma's' affection was _one_ thing
that made you happy; now for the other thing."

"I am glad you are better."

"What besides?"

"I am glad we are friends."

"You and I?"

"Yes. I once thought we never should be."

"Cary, some day I mean to tell you a thing about myself that is not to
my credit, and consequently will not please you."

"Ah, don't! I cannot bear to think ill of you."

"And I cannot bear that you should think better of me than I deserve."

"Well, but I half know your 'thing;' indeed, I believe I know all about
it."

"You do not."

"I believe I do."

"Whom does it concern besides me?"

She coloured; she hesitated; she was silent.

"Speak, Cary! Whom does it concern?"

She tried to utter a name, and could not.

"Tell me; there is none present but ourselves. Be frank."

"But if I guess wrong?"

"I will forgive. Whisper, Cary."

He bent his ear to her lips. Still she would not, or could not, speak
clearly to the point. Seeing that Moore waited and was resolved to hear
something, she at last said, "Miss Keeldar spent a day at the rectory
about a week since. The evening came on very wintry, and we persuaded
her to stay all night."

"And you and she curled your hair together?"

"How do you know that?"

"And then you chattered, and she told you----"

"It was not at curling-hair time, so you are not as wise as you think;
and, besides, she didn't tell me."

"You slept together afterwards?"

"We occupied the same room and bed. We did not sleep much; we talked the
whole night through."

"I'll be sworn you did! And then it all came out--_tant pis_. I would
rather you had heard it from myself."

"You are quite wrong. She did not tell me what you suspect--she is not
the person to proclaim such things; but yet I inferred something from
parts of her discourse. I gathered more from rumour, and I made out the
rest by instinct."

"But if she did not tell you that I wanted to marry her for the sake of
her money, and that she refused me indignantly and scornfully (you need
neither start nor blush; nor yet need you prick your trembling fingers
with your needle. That is the plain truth, whether you like it or
not)--if such was not the subject of her august confidences, on what
point did they turn? You say you talked the whole night through; what
about?"

"About things we never thoroughly discussed before, intimate friends as
we have been; but you hardly expect I should tell you?"

"Yes, yes, Cary; you will tell me. You said we were friends, and friends
should always confide in each other."

"But you are sure you won't repeat it?"

"Quite sure."

"Not to Louis?"

"Not even to Louis. What does Louis care for young ladies' secrets?"

"Robert, Shirley is a curious, magnanimous being."

"I dare say. I can imagine there are both odd points and grand points
about her."

"I have found her chary in showing her feelings; but when they rush out,
river-like, and pass full and powerful before you--almost without leave
from her--you gaze, wonder; you admire, and--I think--love her."

"You saw this spectacle?"

"Yes; at dead of night, when all the house was silent, and starlight and
the cold reflection from the snow glimmered in our chamber, then I saw
Shirley's heart."

"Her heart's core? Do you think she showed you that?"

"Her heart's core."

"And how was it?"

"Like a shrine, for it was holy; like snow, for it was pure; like
flame, for it was warm; like death, for it was strong."

"Can she love? tell me that."

"What think you?"

"She has loved none that have loved her yet."

"Who are those that have loved her?"

He named a list of gentlemen, closing with Sir Philip Nunnely.

"She has loved none of these."

"Yet some of them were worthy of a woman's affection."

"Of some women's, but not of Shirley's."

"Is she better than others of her sex?"

"She is peculiar, and more dangerous to take as a wife--rashly."

"I can imagine that."

"She spoke of you----"

"Oh, she did! I thought you denied it."

"She did not speak in the way you fancy; but I asked her, and I would
make her tell me what she thought of you, or rather how she felt towards
you. I wanted to know; I had long wanted to know."

"So had I; but let us hear. She thinks meanly, she feels contemptuously,
doubtless?"

"She thinks of you almost as highly as a woman can think of a man. You
know she can be eloquent. I yet feel in fancy the glow of the language
in which her opinion was conveyed."

"But how does she feel?"

"Till you shocked her (she said you had shocked her, but she would not
tell me how) she felt as a sister feels towards a brother of whom she is
at once fond and proud."

"I'll shock her no more, Cary, for the shock rebounded on myself till I
staggered again. But that comparison about sister and brother is all
nonsense. She is too rich and proud to entertain fraternal sentiments
for me."

"You don't know her, Robert; and, somehow, I fancy now (I had other
ideas formerly) that you cannot know her. You and she are not so
constructed as to be able thoroughly to understand each other."

"It may be so. I esteem her, I admire her; and yet my impressions
concerning her are harsh--perhaps uncharitable. I believe, for instance,
that she is incapable of love----"

"Shirley incapable of love!"

"That she will never marry. I imagine her jealous of compromising her
pride, of relinquishing her power, of sharing her property."

"Shirley has hurt your _amour propre_."

"She did hurt it; though I had not an emotion of tenderness, nor a spark
of passion for her."

"Then, Robert, it was very wicked in you to want to marry her."

"And very mean, my little pastor, my pretty priestess. I never wanted to
kiss Miss Keeldar in my life, though she has fine lips, scarlet and
round as ripe cherries; or, if I did wish it, it was the mere desire of
the eye."

"I doubt, now, whether you are speaking the truth. The grapes or the
cherries are sour--'hung too high.'"

"She has a pretty figure, a pretty face, beautiful hair. I acknowledge
