Locris, he stayed with Amphiphanes and Ganyetor the sons of Phegeus,
thus unconsciously fulfilling the oracle; for all that region was called
the sacred place of Nemean Zeus. He continued to stay a somewhat long
time at Oenoe, until the young men, suspecting Hesiod of seducing their
sister, killed him and cast his body into the sea which separates Achaea
and Locris. On the third day, however, his body was brought to land by
dolphins while some local feast of Ariadne was being held. Thereupon,
all the people hurried to the shore, and recognized the body, lamented
over it and buried it, and then began to look for the assassins. But
these, fearing the anger of their countrymen, launched a fishing boat,
and put out to sea for Crete: they had finished half their voyage when
Zeus sank them with a thunderbolt, as Alcidamas states in his "Museum".
Eratosthenes, however, says in his "Hesiod" that Ctimenus and Antiphus,
sons of Ganyetor, killed him for the reason already stated, and were
sacrificed by Eurycles the seer to the gods of hospitality. He adds that
the girl, sister of the above-named, hanged herself after she had been
seduced, and that she was seduced by some stranger, Demodes by name, who
was travelling with Hesiod, and who was also killed by the brothers.
At a later time the men of Orchomenus removed his body as they were
directed by an oracle, and buried him in their own country where they
placed this inscription on his tomb:

'Ascra with its many cornfields was his native land; but in death the
land of the horse-driving Minyans holds the bones of Hesiod, whose
renown is greatest among men of all who are judged by the test of wit.'

So much for Hesiod. But Homer, after losing the victory, went from place
to place reciting his poems, and first of all the "Thebais" in seven
thousand verses which begins: 'Goddess, sing of parched Argos whence
kings...', and then the "Epigoni" in seven thousand verses beginning:
'And now, Muses, let us begin to sing of men of later days'; for some
say that these poems also are by Homer. Now Xanthus and Gorgus, son of
Midas the king, heard his epics and invited him to compose a epitaph
for the tomb of their father on which was a bronze figure of a maiden
bewailing the death of Midas. He wrote the following lines:--

'I am a maiden of bronze and sit upon the tomb of Midas. While water
flows, and tall trees put forth leaves, and rivers swell, and the sea
breaks on the shore; while the sun rises and shines and the bright moon
also, ever remaining on this mournful tomb I tell the passer-by that
Midas here lies buried.'

For these verses they gave him a silver bowl which he dedicated to
Apollo at Delphi with this inscription: 'Lord Phoebus, I, Homer, have
given you a noble gift for the wisdom I have of you: do you ever grant
me renown.'

After this he composed the "Odyssey" in twelve thousand verses, having
previously written the "Iliad" in fifteen thousand five hundred
verses [3705]. From Delphi, as we are told, he went to Athens and was
entertained by Medon, king of the Athenians. And being one day in the
council hall when it was cold and a fire was burning there, he drew off
the following lines:

'Children are a man's crown, and towers of a city, horses are the
ornament of a plain, and ships of the sea; and good it is to see
a people seated in assembly. But with a blazing fire a house looks
worthier upon a wintry day when the Son of Cronos sends down snow.'

From Athens he went on to Corinth, where he sang snatches of his poems
and was received with distinction. Next he went to Argos and there
recited these verses from the "Iliad":

'The sons of the Achaeans who held Argos and walled Tiryns, and Hermione
and Asine which lie along a deep bay, and Troezen, and Eiones, and
vine-clad Epidaurus, and the island of Aegina, and Mases,--these
followed strong-voiced Diomedes, son of Tydeus, who had the spirit
of his father the son of Oeneus, and Sthenelus, dear son of famous
Capaneus. And with these two there went a third leader, Eurypylus,
a godlike man, son of the lord Mecisteus, sprung of Talaus; but
strong-voiced Diomedes was their chief leader. These men had eighty
dark ships wherein were ranged men skilled in war, Argives with linen
jerkins, very goads of war.' [3706]

This praise of their race by the most famous of all poets so exceedingly
delighted the leading Argives, that they rewarded him with costly gifts
and set up a brazen statue to him, decreeing that sacrifice should be
offered to Homer daily, monthly, and yearly; and that another sacrifice
should be sent to Chios every five years. This is the inscription they
cut upon his statue:

'This is divine Homer who by his sweet-voiced art honoured all proud
Hellas, but especially the Argives who threw down the god-built walls of
Troy to avenge rich-haired Helen. For this cause the people of a great
city set his statue here and serve him with the honours of the deathless
gods.'

After he had stayed for some time in Argos, he crossed over to Delos,
to the great assembly, and there, standing on the altar of horns, he
recited the "Hymn to Apollo" [3707] which begins: 'I will remember and
not forget Apollo the far-shooter.' When the hymn was ended, the Ionians
made him a citizen of each one of their states, and the Delians wrote
the poem on a whitened tablet and dedicated it in the temple of Artemis.
The poet sailed to Ios, after the assembly was broken up, to join
Creophylus, and stayed there some time, being now an old man. And, it is
said, as he was sitting by the sea he asked some boys who were returning
from fishing:

'Sirs, hunters of deep-sea prey, have we caught anything?'

To this replied:

'All that we caught, we left behind, and carry away all that we did not
catch.'

Homer did not understand this reply and asked what they meant. They then
explained that they had caught nothing in fishing, but had been catching
their lice, and those of the lice which they caught, they left behind;
but carried away in their clothes those which they did not catch.
Hereupon Homer remembered the oracle and, perceiving that the end of his
life had come composed his own epitaph. And while he was retiring from
that place, he slipped in a clayey place and fell upon his side, and
died, it is said, the third day after. He was buried in Ios, and this is
his epitaph:

'Here the earth covers the sacred head of divine Homer, the glorifier of
hero-men.'


*****




ENDNOTES:

[Footnote 1101: sc. in Boeotia, Locris and Thessaly: elsewhere the
movement was forced and unfruitful.]

[Footnote 1102: The extant collection of three poems, "Works and Days",
"Theogony", and "Shield of Heracles", which alone have come down to us
complete, dates at least from the 4th century A.D.: the title of the
Paris Papyrus (Bibl. Nat. Suppl. Gr. 1099) names only these three
works.]

[Footnote 1103: "Der Dialekt des Hesiodes", p. 464: examples are AENEMI
(W. and D. 683) and AROMENAI (ib. 22).]

[Footnote 1104: T.W. Allen suggests that the conjured Delian and Pythian
hymns to Apollo ("Homeric Hymns" III) may have suggested this version of
the story, the Pythian hymn showing strong continental influence.]

[Footnote 1105: She is said to have given birth to the lyrist
Stesichorus.]

[Footnote 1106: See Kinkel "Epic. Graec. Frag." i. 158 ff.]

[Footnote 1107: See "Great Works", frag. 2.]

[Footnote 1108: "Hesiodi Fragmenta", pp. 119 f.]

[Footnote 1109: Possibly the division of this poem into two books is a
division belonging solely to this 'developed poem', which may have
included in its second part a summary of the Tale of Troy.]

[Footnote 1110: Goettling's explanation.]

[Footnote 1111: x. 1. 52.]

[Footnote 1112: Odysseus appears to have been mentioned once only--and
that casually--in the "Returns".]

[Footnote 1113: M.M. Croiset note that the "Aethiopis" and the "Sack"
were originally merely parts of one work containing lays (the Amazoneia,
Aethiopis, Persis, etc.), just as the "Iliad" contained various lays
such as the Diomedeia.]

[Footnote 1114: No date is assigned to him, but it seems likely that he
was either contemporary or slightly earlier than Lesches.]

[Footnote 1115: Cp. Allen and Sikes, "Homeric Hymns" p. xv. In the text
I have followed the arrangement of these scholars, numbering the Hymns
to Dionysus and to Demeter, I and II respectively: to place "Demeter"
after "Hermes", and the Hymn to Dionysus at the end of the collection
seems to be merely perverse.]

[Footnote 1116: "Greek Melic Poets", p. 165.]

[Footnote 1117: This monument was returned to Greece in the 1980's.--
DBK.]

[Footnote 1118: Cp. Marckscheffel, "Hesiodi fragmenta", p. 35. The
papyrus fragment recovered by Petrie ("Petrie Papyri", ed. Mahaffy, p.
70, No. xxv.) agrees essentially with the extant document, but differs
in numerous minor textual points.]

[Footnote 1201: See Schubert, "Berl. Klassikertexte" v. 1.22 ff.; the
other papyri may be found in the publications whose name they bear.]

[Footnote 1202: Unless otherwise noted, all MSS. are of the 15th
century.]

[Footnote 1203: To this list I would also add the following: "Hesiod and
Theognis", translated by Dorothea Wender (Penguin Classics, London,
1973).--DBK.]

[Footnote 1301: That is, the poor man's fare, like 'bread and cheese'.]

[Footnote 1302: The All-endowed.]

[Footnote 1303: The jar or casket contained the gifts of the gods
mentioned in l.82.]

[Footnote 1304: Eustathius refers to Hesiod as stating that men sprung
'from oaks and stones and ashtrees'. Proclus believed that the Nymphs
called Meliae ("Theogony", 187) are intended. Goettling would render: 'A
race terrible because of their (ashen) spears.']

[Footnote 1305: Preserved only by Proclus, from whom some inferior MSS.
have copied the verse. The four following lines occur only in Geneva
Papyri No. 94. For the restoration of ll. 169b-c see "Class. Quart."
vii. 219-220. (NOTE: Mr. Evelyn-White means that the version quoted by
Proclus stops at this point, then picks up at l. 170.--DBK).]

[Footnote 1306: i.e. the race will so degenerate that at the last even a
new-born child will show the marks of old age.]

[Footnote 1307: Aidos, as a quality, is that feeling of reverence or
shame which restrains men from wrong: Nemesis is the feeling of
righteous indignation aroused especially by the sight of the wicked in
undeserved prosperity (cf. "Psalms", lxxii. 1-19).]

[Footnote 1308: The alternative version is: 'and, working, you will be
much better loved both by gods and men; for they greatly dislike the
idle.']

[Footnote 1309: i.e. neighbours come at once and without making
preparations, but kinsmen by marriage (who live at a distance) have to
prepare, and so are long in coming.]

[Footnote 1310: Early in May.]

[Footnote 1311: In November.]

[Footnote 1312: In October.]

[Footnote 1313: For pounding corn.]

[Footnote 1314: A mallet for breaking clods after ploughing.]

[Footnote 1315: The loaf is a flattish cake with two intersecting lines
scored on its upper surface which divide it into four equal parts.]

[Footnote 1316: The meaning is obscure. A scholiast renders 'giving
eight mouthfulls'; but the elder Philostratus uses the word in contrast
to 'leavened'.]

[Footnote 1317: About the middle of November.]

[Footnote 1318: Spring is so described because the buds have not yet
cast their iron-grey husks.]

[Footnote 1319: In December.]

[Footnote 1320: In March.]

[Footnote 1321: The latter part of January and earlier part of
February.]

[Footnote 1322: i.e. the octopus or cuttle.]

[Footnote 1323: i.e. the darker-skinned people of Africa, the Egyptians
or Aethiopians.]

[Footnote 1324: i.e. an old man walking with a staff (the 'third leg'--
as in the riddle of the Sphinx).]

[Footnote 1325: February to March.]

[Footnote 1326: i.e. the snail. The season is the middle of May.]

[Footnote 1327: In June.]

[Footnote 1328: July.]

[Footnote 1329: i.e. a robber.]

[Footnote 1330: September.]

[Footnote 1331: The end of October.]

[Footnote 1332: That is, the succession of stars which make up the full
year.]

[Footnote 1333: The end of October or beginning of November.]

[Footnote 1334: July-August.]

[Footnote 1335: i.e. untimely, premature. Juvenal similarly speaks of
'cruda senectus' (caused by gluttony).]

[Footnote 1336: The thought is parallel to that of 'O, what a goodly
outside falsehood hath.']

[Footnote 1337: The 'common feast' is one to which all present
subscribe. Theognis (line 495) says that one of the chief pleasures of a
banquet is the general conversation. Hence the present passage means
that such a feast naturally costs little, while the many present will
make pleasurable conversation.]

[Footnote 1338: i.e. 'do not cut your finger-nails'.]

[Footnote 1339: i.e. things which it would be sacrilege to disturb, such
as tombs.]

[Footnote 1340: H.G. Evelyn-White prefers to switch ll. 768 and 769,
reading l. 769 first then l. 768.--DBK]

[Footnote 1341: The month is divided into three periods, the waxing, the
mid-month, and the waning, which answer to the phases of the moon.]

[Footnote 1342: i.e. the ant.]

[Footnote 1343: Such seems to be the meaning here, though the epithet is
otherwise rendered 'well-rounded'. Corn was threshed by means of a
sleigh with two runners having three or four rollers between them, like
the modern Egyptian "nurag".]

[Footnote 1401: This halt verse is added by the Scholiast on Aratus,
172.]

[Footnote 1402: The "Catasterismi" ("Placings among the Stars") is a
collection of legends relating to the various constellations.]

[Footnote 1403: The Straits of Messina.]

[Footnote 1501: Or perhaps 'a Scythian'.]

[Footnote 1601: The epithet probably indicates coquettishness.]

[Footnote 1602: A proverbial saying meaning, 'why enlarge on irrelevant
topics?']

[Footnote 1603: 'She of the noble voice': Calliope is queen of Epic
poetry.]

[Footnote 1604: Earth, in the cosmology of Hesiod, is a disk surrounded
by the river Oceanus and floating upon a waste of waters. It is called
the foundation of all (the qualification 'the deathless ones...' etc. is
an interpolation), because not only trees, men, and animals, but even
the hills and seas (ll. 129, 131) are supported by it.]

[Footnote 1605: Aether is the bright, untainted upper atmosphere, as
distinguished from Aer, the lower atmosphere of the earth.]

[Footnote 1606: Brontes is the Thunderer; Steropes, the Lightener; and
Arges, the Vivid One.]

