lady Eleanor,' replied she, 'I have to-day witnessed what I cannot
but judge a supernatural visitation, and to what end can it call
me but to give myself to the altar? That peasant who guided me to
Baddow through the Park of Danbury, the same who appeared before
me at different times and in different forms during that eventful
journey--that youth, whose features are imprinted on my memory, is
the very individual forester who this day rescued us in the
forest. I cannot be mistaken; and, connecting these marvellous
appearances with the spectre which I saw while at Gay Bowers, I
cannot resist the conviction that Heaven has permitted my guardian
angel to assume mortal shape for my relief and protection.'

The fair cousins, after exchanging looks which implied a fear that
her mind was wandering, answered her in soothing terms, and
finally prevailed upon her to accompany them to the banqueting-
hall. Here the first person they encountered was the Baron
Fitzosborne of Diggswell, now divested of his armour, at the sight
of whom the Lady Emma changed colour, and exclaiming, 'It is the
same!' sunk senseless into the arms of Matilda.

'She is bewildered by the terrors of the day,' said Eleanor;' and
we have done ill in obliging her to descend.'

'And I,'said Fitzosborne, 'have done madly in presenting before
her one whose presence must recall moments the most alarming in
her life.'

While the ladies supported Emma from the hall, Lord Boteler and
Saint Clere requested an explanation from Fitzosborne of the words
he had used.

'Trust me, gentle lords,' said the Baron of Diggswell, 'ye shall
have what ye demand when I learn that Lady Emma Darcy has not
suffered from my imprudence.'

At this moment Lady Matilda, returning, said that her fair friend,
on her recovery, had calmly and deliberately insisted that she had
seen Fitzosborne before, in the most dangerous crisis of her life.

'I dread,' said she, 'her disordered mind connects all that her
eye beholds with the terrible passages that she has witnessed.'

'Nay,' said Fitzosborne, 'if noble Saint Clere can pardon the
unauthorized interest which, with the purest and most honourable
intentions, I have taken in his sister's fate, it is easy for me
to explain this mysterious impression.'

He proceeded to say that, happening to be in the hostelry called
the Griffin, near Baddow, while upon a journey in that country, he
had met with the old nurse of the Lady Emma Darcy, who, being just
expelled from Gay Bowers, was in the height of her grief and
indignation, and made loud and public proclamation of Lady Emma's
wrongs. From the description she gave of the beauty of her foster-
child, as well as from the spirit of chivalry, Fitzosborne became
interested in her fate. This interest was deeply enhanced when, by
a bribe to old Gaunt the Reve, he procured a view of the Lady Emma
as she walked near the castle of Gay Bowers. The aged churl
refused to give him access to the castle; yet dropped some hints
as if he thought the lady in danger, and wished she were well out
of it. His master, he said, had heard she had a brother in life,
and since that deprived him of all chance of gaining her domains
by purchase, he--in short, Gaunt wished they were safely
separated. 'If any injury,' quoth he, 'should happen to the damsel
here, it were ill for us all. I tried by an innocent stratagem to
frighten her from the castle, by introducing a figure through a
trap-door, and warning her, as if by a voice from the dead, to
retreat from thence; but the giglet is wilful, and is running upon
her fate.'

Finding Gaunt, although covetous and communicative, too faithful a
servant to his wicked master to take any active steps against his
commands, Fitzosborne applied himself to old Ursely, whom he found
more tractable. Through her he learned the dreadful plot Gaston
had laid to rid himself of his kinswoman, and resolved to effect
her deliverance. But aware of the delicacy of Emma's situation, he
charged Ursely to conceal from her the interest he took in her
distress, resolving to watch over her in disguise until he saw her
in a place of safety. Hence the appearance he made before her in
various dresses during her journey, in the course of which he was
never far distant; and he had always four stout yeomen within
hearing of his bugle, had assistance been necessary. When she was
placed in safety at the lodge, it was Fitzosborne's intention to
have prevailed upon his sisters to visit and take her under their
protection; but he found them absent from Diggswell, having gone
to attend an aged relation who lay dangerously ill in a distant
county. They did not return until the day before the May-games;
and the other events followed too rapidly to permit Fitzosborne to
lay any plan for introducing them to Lady Emma Darcy. On the day
of the chase he resolved to preserve his romantic disguise, and
attend the Lady Emma as a forester, partly to have the pleasure of
being near her and partly to judge whether, according to an idle
report in the country, she favoured his friend and comrade
Fitzallen of Marden. This last motive, it may easily be believed,
he did not declare to the company. After the skirmish with the
ruffians, he waited till the Baron and the hunters arrived, and
then, still doubting the farther designs of Gaston, hastened to
his castle to arm the band which had escorted them to Queenhoo-
Hall.

Fitzosborne's story being finished, he received the thanks of all
the company, particularly of Saint Clere, who felt deeply the
respectful delicacy with which he had conducted himself towards
his sister. The lady was carefully informed of her obligations to
him; and it is left to the well-judging reader whether even the
raillery of Lady Eleanor made her regret that Heaven had only
employed natural means for her security, and that the guardian
angel was converted into a handsome, gallant, and enamoured
knight.

The joy of the company in the hall extended itself to the buttery,
where Gregory the jester narrated such feats of arms done by
himself in the fray of the morning as might have shamed Bevis and
Guy of Warwick. He was, according to his narrative, singled out
for destruction by the gigantic Baron himself, while he abandoned
to meaner hands the destruction of Saint Clere and Fitzosborne.

'But certes,' said he, 'the foul paynim met his match; for, ever
as he foined at me with his brand, I parried his blows with my
bauble, and, closing with him upon the third veny, threw him to
the ground, and made him cry recreant to an unarmed man.'

'Tush, man,' said Drawslot, 'thou forgettest thy best auxiliaries,
the good greyhounds, Help and Holdfast! I warrant thee, that when
the hump-backed Baron caught thee by the cowl, which he hath
almost torn off, thou hadst been in a fair plight had they not
remembered an old friend, and come in to the rescue. Why, man, I
found them fastened on him myself; and there was odd staving and
stickling to make them "ware haunch!" Their mouths were full of
the flex, for I pulled a piece of the garment from their jaws. I
warrant thee, that when they brought him to ground thou fledst
like a frighted pricket.'

'And as for Gregory's gigantic paynim,' said Fabian, 'why, he lies
yonder in the guard-room, the very size, shape, and colour of a
spider in a yew-hedge.'

'It is false!' said Gregory. 'Colbrand the Dane was a dwarf to
him.'

'It is as true,' returned Fabian, 'as that the Tasker is to be
married on Tuesday to pretty Margery. Gregory, thy sheet hath
brought them between a pair of blankets.'

'I care no more for such a gillflirt,' said the jester,' than I do
for thy leasings. Marry, thou hop-o'-my-thumb, happy wouldst thou
be could thy head reach the captive Baron's girdle.'

'By the mass,' said Peter Lanaret, 'I will have one peep at this
burly gallant'; and, leaving the buttery, he went to the guard-
room where Gaston Saint Clere was confined. A man-at-arms, who
kept sentinel on the strong studded door of the apartment, said he
believed he slept; for that, after raging, stamping, and uttering
the most horrid imprecations, he had been of late perfectly still.
The falconer gently drew back a sliding board of a foot square
towards the top of the door, which covered a hole of the same
size, strongly latticed, through which the warder, without opening
the door, could look in upon his prisoner. From this aperture he
beheld the wretched Gaston suspended by the neck by his own girdle
to an iron ring in the side of his prison. He had clambered to it
by means of the table on which his food had been placed; and, in
the agonies of shame and disappointed malice, had adopted this
mode of ridding himself of a wretched life. He was found yet warm,
but totally lifeless. A proper account of the manner of his death
was drawn up and certified. He was buried that evening in the
chapel of the castle, out of respect to his high birth; and the
chaplain of Fitzallen of Marden, who said the service upon the
occasion, preached the next Sunday an excellent sermon upon the
text, 'Radix malorum est cupiditas,' which we have here
transcribed.

Here the manuscript, from which we have painfully transcribed, and
frequently, as it were, translated, this tale for the reader's
edification, is so indistinct and defaced, that, excepting certain
howbeits, nathlesses, lo ye's! etc., we can pick out little that
is intelligible, saving that avarice is defined 'a likourishness
of heart after earthly things.' A little farther there seems to
have been a gay account of Margery's wedding with Ralph the
Tasker, the running at the quintain, and other rural games
practised on the occasion. There are also fragments of a mock
sermon preached by Gregory upon that occasion, as for example:--

'My dear cursed caitiffs, there was once a king, and he wedded a
young old queen, and she had a child; and this child was sent to
Solomon the Sage, praying he would give it the same blessing which
he got from the witch of Endor when she bit him by the heel.
Hereof speaks the worthy Doctor Radigundus Potator; why should not
mass be said for all the roasted shoe souls served up in the
king's dish on Saturday; for true it is, that Saint Peter asked
Father Adam, as they journeyed to Camelot, an high, great, and
doubtful question, "Adam, Adam, why eated'st thou the apple
without paring?"

[Footnote: This tirade of gibberish is literally taken or selected
from a mock discourse pronounced by a professed jester, which
occurs in an ancient manuscript in the Advocates' Library, the
same from which the late ingenious Mr. Weber published the curious
comic romance of the Hunting of the Hare. It was introduced in
compliance with Mr Strutt's plan of rendering his tale an
illustration of ancient manners A similar burlesque sermon is
pronounced by the fool in Sir David Lindesay's satire of the Three
Estates. The nonsense and vulgar burlesque of that composition
illustrate the ground of Sir Andrew Aguecheek's eulogy on the
exploits of the jester in Twelfth Night, who, reserving his
sharper jests for Sir Toby, had doubtless enough of the jargon of
his calling to captivate the imbecility of his brother knight, who
is made to exclaim--'In sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling
last night, when thou spokest of Pigrogremitus, and of the vapours
passing the equinoctials of Quenbus; 't was very good, i' faith!'
It is entertaining to find commentators seeking to discover some
meaning in the professional jargon of such a passage as this.]

With much goodly gibberish to the same effect; which display of
Gregory's ready wit not only threw the whole company into
convulsions of laughter, but made such an impression on Rose, the
Potter's daughter, that it was thought it would be the Jester's
own fault if Jack was long without his Jill. Much pithy matter,
concerning the bringing the bride to bed, the loosing the
bridegroom's points, the scramble which ensued for them, and the
casting of the stocking, is also omitted from its obscurity.

The following song which has been since borrowed by the worshipful
author of the famous History of Fryar Bacon, has been with
difficulty deciphered. It seems to have been sung on occasion of
carrying home the bride

    Bridal Song

    To the tune of--'I have been a Fiddler,' etc,

    And did you not hear of a mirth befell
      The morrow after a wedding day,
    And carrying a bride at home to dwell?
      And away to Tewin, away, away!

    The quintain was set, and the garlands were made,
      'T is pity old customs should ever decay;
    And woe be to him that was horsed on a jade,
      For he carried no credit away, away.

    We met a consort of fiddle-de-dees;
      We set them a cockhorse, and made them play
    The winning of Bullen and Upsey-frees,
      And away to Tewin, away, away!

    There was ne'er a lad in all the parish
      That would go to the plough that day;
    But on his fore-horse his wench he carries.
      And away to Tewin, away, away!

    The butler was quick, and the ale he did tap,
      The maidens did make the chamber full gay;
    The servants did give me a fuddling cup,
      And I did carry't away, away.

    The smith of the town his liquor so took,
      That he was persuaded that the ground look'd blue;
    And I dare boldly be sworn on a book,
      Such smiths as he there's but a few.

    A posset was made, and the women did sip,
      And simpering said, they could eat no more;
    Full many a maiden was laid on the lip,--
      I'll say no more, but give o'er (give o'er).

But what our fair readers will chiefly regret is the loss of three
declarations of love; the first by Saint Clere to Matilda; which,
with the lady's answer, occupies fifteen closely written pages of
manuscript. That of Fitzosborne to Emma is not much shorter; but
the amours of Fitzallen and Eleanor, being of a less romantic
cast, are closed in three pages only. The three noble couples were
married in Queenhoo-Hall upon the same day, being the twentieth
Sunday after Easter. There is a prolix account of the marriage-
feast, of which we can pick out the names of a few dishes, such as
peterel, crane, sturgeon, swan, etc. etc., with a profusion of
wild-fowl and venison. We also see that a suitable song was
produced by Peretto on the occasion; and that the bishop who
blessed the bridal beds which received the happy couples was no
niggard of his holy water, bestowing half a gallon upon each of
the couches. We regret we cannot give these curiosities to the
reader in detail, but we hope to expose the manuscript to abler
antiquaries so soon as it shall be framed and glazed by the
ingenious artist who rendered that service to Mr. Ireland's
Shakspeare MSS. And so (being unable to lay aside the style to
which our pen is habituated), gentle reader, we bid thee heartily
farewell.





NO. III

ANECDOTE OF SCHOOL DAYS

UPON WHICH MR. THOMAS SCOTT PROPOSED TO FOUND A TALE OF FICTION

It is well known in the South that there is little or no boxing at
the Scottish schools. About forty or fifty years ago, however, a
far more dangerous mode of fighting, in parties or factions, was
permitted in the streets of Edinburgh, to the great disgrace of
the police and danger of the parties concerned. These parties were
generally formed from the quarters of the town in which the
combatants resided, those of a particular square or district
fighting against those of an adjoining one. Hence it happened that
the children of the higher classes were often pitted against those
of the lower, each taking their side according to the residence of
their friends. So far as I recollect, however, it was unmingled
either with feelings of democracy or aristocracy, or indeed with
malice or ill-will of any kind towards the opposite party. In
fact, it was only a rough mode of play. Such contests were,
however, maintained with great vigour with stones and sticks and
fisticuffs, when one party dared to charge and the other stood
their ground. Of course mischief sometimes happened; boys are said
to have been killed at these bickers, as they were called, and
serious accidents certainly took place, as many contemporaries can
bear witness.

The author's father residing in George Square, in the southern
side of Edinburgh, the boys belonging to that family, with others
in the square, were arranged into a sort of company, to which a
lady of distinction presented a handsome set of colours. Now this
company or regiment, as a matter of course, was engaged in weekly
warfare with the boys inhabiting the Crosscauseway, Bristo Street,
the Potterrow--in short, the neighbouring suburbs. These last were
chiefly of the lower rank, but hardy loons, who threw stones to a
hair's-breadth and were very rugged antagonists at close quarters.
The skirmish sometimes lasted for a whole evening, until one party
or the other was victorious, when, if ours were successful, we
drove the enemy to their quarters, and were usually chased back by
the reinforcement of bigger lads who came to their assistance. If,
on the contrary, we were pursued, as was often the case, into the
precincts of our square, we were in our turn supported by our
elder brothers, domestic servants, and similar auxiliaries.

It followed, from our frequent opposition to each other, that,
though not knowing the names of our enemies, we were yet well
acquainted with their appearance, and had nicknames for the most
remarkable of them. One very active and spirited boy might be
considered as the principal leader in the cohort of the suburbs.
He was, I suppose, thirteen or fourteen years old, finely made,
tall, blue-eyed, with long fair hair, the very picture of a
youthful Goth. This lad was always first in the charge and last in
the retreat--the Achilles, at once, and Ajax of the
Crosscauseway. He was too formidable to us not to have a cognomen,
and, like that of a knight of old, it was taken from the most
remarkable part of his dress, being a pair of old green livery
breeches, which was the principal part of his clothing; for, like
Pentapolin, according to Don Quixote's account, Green-Breeks, as
we called him, always entered the battle with bare arms, legs, and
feet.

It fell, that once upon a time, when the combat was at the
thickest, this plebeian champion headed a sudden charge, so rapid
and furious that all fled before him. He was several paces before
his comrades, and had actually laid his hands on the patrician
standard, when one of our party, whom some misjudging friend had
entrusted with a couleau de chasse, or hanger, inspired with a
zeal for the honour of the corps worthy of Major Sturgeon himself,
struck poor Green-Breeks over the head with strength sufficient to
cut him down. When this was seen, the casualty was so far beyond
what had ever taken place before, that both parties fled different
ways, leaving poor Green-Breeks, with his bright hair plentifully
dabbled in blood, to the care of the watchman, who (honest man)
took care not to know who had done the mischief. The bloody hanger
was flung into one of the Meadow ditches, and solemn secrecy was
sworn on all hands; but the remorse and terror of the actor were
beyond all bounds, and his apprehensions of the most dreadful
character. The wounded hero was for a few days in the Infirmary,
the case being only a trifling one. But, though inquiry was
strongly pressed on him, no argument could make him indicate the
person from whom he had received the wound, though he must have
been perfectly well known to him. When he recovered and was
dismissed, the author and his brothers opened a communication with
him, through the medium of a popular ginger-bread baker, of whom
both parties were customers, in order to tender a subsidy in name
of smart-money. The sum would excite ridicule were I to name it;
but sure I am that the pockets of the noted Green-Breeks never
held as much money of his own. He declined the remittance, saying
that he would not sell his blood; but at the same time reprobated
the idea of being an informer, which he said was clam, i.e. base
or mean. With much urgency he accepted a pound of snuff for the
use of some old woman--aunt, grandmother, or the like--with whom
he lived. We did not become friends, for the bickers were more
agreeable to both parties than any more pacific amusement; but we
conducted them ever after under mutual assurances of the highest
consideration for each other.

Such was the hero whom Mr. Thomas Scott proposed to carry to
Canada, and involve in adventures with the natives and colonists
of that country. Perhaps the youthful generosity of the lad will
not seem so great in the eyes of others as to those whom it was
the means of screening from severe rebuke and punishment. But it
seemed to those concerned to argue a nobleness of sentiment far
beyond the pitch of most minds; and however obscurely the lad who
showed such a frame of noble spirit may have lived or died, I
cannot help being of opinion that, if fortune had placed him in
circumstances calling for gallantry or generosity, the man would
have fulfilled the promise of the boy. Long afterwards, when the
story was told to my father, he censured us severely for not
telling the truth at the time, that he might have attempted to be
of use to the young man in entering on life. But our alarms for
the consequences of the drawn sword, and the wound inflicted with
such a weapon, were far too predominant at the time for such a
pitch of generosity.

Perhaps I ought not to have inserted this schoolboy tale; but,
besides the strong impression made by the incident at the time,
the whole accompaniments of the story are matters to me of solemn
and sad recollection. Of all the little band who were concerned in
those juvenile sports or brawls, I can scarce recollect a single
survivor. Some left the ranks of mimic war to die in the active
service of their country. Many sought distant lands to return no
more. Others, dispersed in different paths of life,'my dim eyes
now seek for in vain.' Of five brothers, all healthy and promising
in a degree far beyond one whose infancy was visited by personal
infirmity, and whose health after this period seemed long very
precarious, I am, nevertheless, the only survivor. The best loved,
and the best deserving to be loved, who had destined this incident
to be the foundation of literary composition, died 'before his
day' in a distant and foreign land; and trifles assume an
importance not their own when connected with those who have been
loved and lost.





NOTES


NOTE I

LONG the oracle of the country gentlemen of the high Tory party.
The ancient News-Letter was written in manuscript and copied by
clerks, who addressed the copies to the subscribers. The
politician by whom they were compiled picked up his intelligence
at coffee-houses, and often pleaded for an additional gratuity in
consideration of the extra expense attached to frequenting such
places of fashionable resort.

NOTE 2

There is a family legend to this purpose, belonging to the
knightly family of Bradshaigh, the proprietors of Haigh Hall, in
Lancashire, where, I have been told, the event is recorded on a
