proposal to go to Edinburgh, or at least to Dumfries, where there is
remarkably good society, until the resentment of these outlaws should
blow over. He answered with great composure that he had no mind to have
his landlord's house and his own property at Woodbourne destroyed;
that, with our good leave, he had usually been esteemed competent to
taking measures for the safety or protection of his family; that, if he
remained quiet at home, he conceived the welcome the villains had
received was not of a nature to invite a second visit, but should he
show any signs of alarm, it would be the sure way to incur the very
risk which we were afraid of. Heartened by his arguments, and by the
extreme indifference with which he treated the supposed danger, we
began to grow a little bolder, and to walk about as usual. Only the
gentlemen were sometimes invited to take their guns when they attended
us, and I observed that my father for several nights paid particular
attention to having the house properly secured, and required his
domestics to keep their arms in readiness in case of necessity.

'But three days ago chanced an occurrence of a nature which alarmed me
more by far than the attack of the smugglers.

'I told you there was a small lake at some distance from Woodbourne,
where the gentlemen sometimes go to shoot wild-fowl. I happened at
breakfast to say I should like to see this place in its present frozen
state, occupied by skaters and curlers, as they call those who play a
particular sort of game upon the ice. There is snow on the ground, but
frozen so hard that I thought Lucy and I might venture to that
distance, as the footpath leading there was well beaten by the repair
of those who frequented it for pastime. Hazlewood instantly offered to
attend us, and we stipulated that he should take his fowling-piece. He
laughed a good deal at the idea of going a-shooting in the snow; but,
to relieve our tremors, desired that a groom, who acts as gamekeeper
occasionally, should follow us with his gun. As for Colonel Mannering,
he does not like crowds or sights of any kind where human figures make
up the show, unless indeed it were a military review, so he declined
the party.

'We set out unusually early, on a fine, frosty, exhilarating morning,
and we felt our minds, as well as our nerves, braced by the elasticity
of the pure air. Our walk to the lake was delightful, or at least the
difficulties were only such as diverted us,--a slippery descent, for
instance, or a frozen ditch to cross, which made Hazlewood's assistance
absolutely necessary. I don't think Lucy liked her walk the less for
these occasional embarrassments.

'The scene upon the lake was beautiful. One side of it is bordered by a
steep crag, from which hung a thousand enormous icicles all glittering
in the sun; on the other side was a little wood, now exhibiting that
fantastic appearance which the pine trees present when their branches
are loaded with snow. On the frozen bosom of the lake itself were a
multitude of moving figures, some flitting along with the velocity of
swallows, some sweeping in the most graceful circles, and others deeply
interested in a less active pastime, crowding round the spot where the
inhabitants of two rival parishes contended for the prize at
curling,--an honour of no small importance, if we were to judge from
the anxiety expressed both by the players and bystanders. We walked
round the little lake, supported by Hazlewood, who lent us each an arm.
He spoke, poor fellow, with great kindness to old and young, and seemed
deservedly popular among the assembled crowd. At length we thought of
retiring.

'Why do I mention these trivial occurrences? Not, Heaven knows, from
the interest I can now attach to them; but because, like a drowning man
who catches at a brittle twig, I seize every apology for delaying the
subsequent and dreadful part of my narrative. But it must be
communicated: I must have the sympathy of at least one friend under
this heart-rending calamity.

'We were returning home by a footpath which led through a plantation of
firs. Lucy had quitted Hazlewood's arm; it is only the plea of absolute
necessity which reconciles her to accept his assistance. I still leaned
upon his other arm. Lucy followed us close, and the servant was two or
three paces behind us. Such was our position, when at once, and as if
he had started out of the earth, Brown stood before us at a short turn
of the road! He was very plainly, I might say coarsely, dressed, and
his whole appearance had in it something wild and agitated. I screamed
between surprise and terror. Hazlewood mistook the nature of my alarm,
and, when Brown advanced towards me as if to speak, commanded him
haughtily to stand back, and not to alarm the lady. Brown replied, with
equal asperity, he had no occasion to take lessons from him how to
behave to that or any other lady. I rather believe that Hazlewood,
impressed with the idea that he belonged to the band of smugglers, and
had some bad purpose in view, heard and understood him imperfectly. He
snatched the gun from the servant, who had come up on a line with us,
and, pointing the muzzle at Brown, commanded him to stand off at his
peril. My screams, for my terror prevented my finding articulate
language, only hastened the catastrophe. Brown, thus menaced, sprung
upon Hazlewood, grappled with him, and had nearly succeeded in
wrenching the fowling-piece from his grasp, when the gun went off in
the struggle, and the contents were lodged in Hazlewood's shoulder, who
instantly fell. I saw no more, for the whole scene reeled before my
eyes, and I fainted away; but, by Lucy's report, the unhappy
perpetrator of this action gazed a moment on the scene before him,
until her screams began to alarm the people upon the lake, several of
whom now came in sight. He then bounded over a hedge which divided the
footpath from the plantation, and has not since been heard of. The
servant made no attempt to stop or secure him, and the report he made
of the matter to those who came up to us induced them rather to
exercise their humanity in recalling me to life, than show their
courage by pursuing a desperado, described by the groom as a man of
tremendous personal strength, and completely armed.

'Hazlewood was conveyed home, that is, to Woodbourne, in safety; I
trust his wound will prove in no respect dangerous, though he suffers
much. But to Brown the consequences must be most disastrous. He is
already the object of my father's resentment, and he has now incurred
danger from the law of the country, as well as from the clamorous
vengeance of the father of Hazlewood, who threatens to move heaven and
earth against the author of his son's wound. How will he be able to
shroud himself from the vindictive activity of the pursuit? how to
defend himself, if taken, against the severity of laws which, I am
told, may even affect his life? and how can I find means to warn him of
his danger? Then poor Lucy's ill-concealed grief, occasioned by her
lover's wound, is another source of distress to me, and everything
round me appears to bear witness against that indiscretion which has
occasioned this calamity.

'For two days I was very ill indeed. The news that Hazlewood was
recovering, and that the person who had shot him was nowhere to be
traced, only that for certain he was one of the leaders of the gang of
smugglers, gave me some comfort. The suspicion and pursuit being
directed towards those people must naturally facilitate Brown's escape,
and I trust has ere this ensured it. But patrols of horse and foot
traverse the country in all directions, and I am tortured by a thousand
confused and unauthenticated rumours of arrests and discoveries.

'Meanwhile my greatest source of comfort is the generous candour of
Hazlewood, who persists in declaring that, with whatever intentions the
person by whom he was wounded approached our party, he is convinced the
gun went off in the struggle by accident, and that the injury he
received was undesigned. The groom, on the other hand, maintains that
the piece was wrenched out of Hazlewood's hands and deliberately
pointed at his body, and Lucy inclines to the same opinion; I do not
suspect them of wilful exaggeration, yet such is the fallacy of human
testimony, for the unhappy shot was most unquestionably discharged
unintentionally. Perhaps it would be the best way to confide the whole
secret to Hazlewood; but he is very young, and I feel the utmost
repugnance to communicate to him my folly. I once thought of disclosing
the mystery to Lucy, and began by asking what she recollected of the
person and features of the man whom we had so unfortunately met; but
she ran out into such a horrid description of a hedgeruffian, that I
was deprived of all courage and disposition to own my attachment to one
of such appearance as she attributed to him. I must say Miss Bertram is
strangely biassed by her prepossessions, for there are few handsomer
men than poor Brown. I had not seen him for a long time, and even in
his strange and sudden apparition on this unhappy occasion, and under
every disadvantage, his form seems to me, on reflection, improved in
grace and his features in expressive dignity. Shall we ever meet again?
Who can answer that question? Write to me kindly, my dearest Matilda;
but when did you otherwise? Yet, again, write to me soon, and write to
me kindly. I am not in a situation to profit by advice or reproof, nor
have I my usual spirits to parry them by raillery. I feel the terrors
of a child who has in heedless sport put in motion some powerful piece
of machinery; and, while he beholds wheels revolving, chains clashing,
cylinders rolling around him, is equally astonished at the tremendous
powers which his weak agency has called into action, and terrified for
the consequences which he is compelled to await, without the
possibility of averting them.

'I must not omit to say that my father is very kind and affectionate.
The alarm which I have received forms a sufficient apology for my
nervous complaints. My hopes are, that Brown has made his escape into
the sister kingdom of England, or perhaps to Ireland or the Isle of
Man. In either case he may await the issue of Hazlewood's wound with
safety and with patience, for the communication of these countries with
Scotland, for the purpose of justice, is not (thank Heaven) of an
intimate nature. The consequences of his being apprehended would be
terrible at this moment. I endeavour to strengthen my mind by arguing
against the possibility of such a calamity. Alas! how soon have sorrows
and fears, real as well as severe, followed the uniform and tranquil
state of existence at which so lately I was disposed to repine! But I
will not oppress you any longer with my complaints. Adieu, my dearest
Matilda! 'JULIA MANNERING.'




NOTES

NOTE 1, p. 25

The groaning malt mentioned in the text was the ale brewed for the
purpose of being drunk after the lady or goodwife's safe delivery. The
ken-no has a more ancient source, and perhaps the custom may be derived
from the secret rites of the Bona Dea. A large and rich cheese was made
by the women of the family, with great affectation of secrecy, for the
refreshment of the gossips who were to attend at the 'canny' minute.
This was the ken-no, so called because its existence was secret (that
is, presumed to be so) from all the males of the family, but especially
from the husband and master. He was accordingly expected to conduct
himself as if he knew of no such preparation, to act as if desirous to
press the female guests to refreshments, and to seem surprised at their
obstinate refusal. But the instant his back was turned the ken-no was
produced; and after all had eaten their fill, with a proper
accompaniment of the groaning malt, the remainder was divided among the
gossips, each carrying a large portion home with the same affectation
of great secrecy.

NOTE 2, p. 198

It is fitting to explain to the reader the locality described in
chapter xxii. There is, or rather I should say there WAS, a little inn
called Mumps's Hall, that is, being interpreted, Beggar's Hotel, near
to Gilsland, which had not then attained its present fame as a Spa. It
was a hedge alehouse, where the Border farmers of either country often
stopped to refresh themselves and their nags, in their way to and from
the fairs and trysts in Cumberland, and especially those who came from
or went to Scotland, through a barren and lonely district, without
either road or pathway, emphatically called the Waste of Bewcastle. At
the period when the adventures described in the novel are supposed to
have taken place, there were many instances of attacks by freebooters
on those who travelled through this wild district, and Mumps's Ha' had
a bad reputation for harbouring the banditti who committed such
depredations.

An old and sturdy yeoman belonging to the Scottish side, by surname an
Armstrong or Elliot, but well known by his soubriquet of Fighting
Charlie of Liddesdale, and still remembered for the courage he
displayed in the frequent frays which took place on the Border fifty or
sixty years since, had the following adventure in the Waste, which
suggested the idea of the scene in the text:--

Charlie had been at Stagshawbank Fair, had sold his sheep or cattle, or
whatever he had brought to market, and was on his return to Liddesdale.
There were then no country banks where cash could be deposited and
bills received instead, which greatly encouraged robbery in that wild
country, as the objects of plunder were usually fraught with gold. The
robbers had spies in the fair, by means of whom they generally knew
whose purse was best stocked, and who took a lonely and desolate road
homeward,--those, in short, who were best worth robbing and likely to
be most easily robbed.

All this Charlie knew full well; but he had a pair of excellent pistols
and a dauntless heart. He stopped at Mumps's Ha', notwithstanding the
evil character of the place. His horse was accommodated where it might
have the necessary rest and feed of corn; and Charlie himself, a
dashing fellow, grew gracious with the landlady, a buxom quean, who
used all the influence in her power to induce him to stop all night.
The landlord was from home, she said, and it was ill passing the Waste,
as twilight must needs descend on him before he gained the Scottish
side, which was reckoned the safest. But Fighting Charlie, though he
suffered himself to be detained later than was prudent, did not account
Mumps's Ha' a safe place to quarter in during the night. He tore
himself away, therefore, from Meg's good fare and kind words, and
mounted his nag, having first examined his pistols, and tried by the
ramrod whether the charge remained in them.

He proceeded a mile or two at a round trot, when, as the Waste
stretched black before him, apprehensions began to awaken in his mind,
partly arising out of Meg's unusual kindness, which he could not help
thinking had rather a suspicious appearance. He therefore resolved to
reload his pistols, lest the powder had become damp; but what was his
surprise, when he drew the charge, to find neither powder nor ball,
while each barrel had been carefully filled with TOW, up to the space
which the loading had occupied! and, the priming of the weapons being
left untouched, nothing but actually drawing and examining the charge
could have discovered the inefficiency of his arms till the fatal
minute arrived when their services were required. Charlie bestowed a
hearty Liddesdale curse on his landlady, and reloaded his pistols with
care and accuracy, having now no doubt that he was to be waylaid and
assaulted. He was not far engaged in the Waste, which was then, and is
now, traversed only by such routes as are described in the text, when
two or three fellows, disguised and variously armed, started from a
moss-hag, while by a glance behind him (for, marching, as the Spaniard
says, with his beard on his shoulder, he reconnoitred in every
direction) Charlie instantly saw retreat was impossible, as other two
stout men appeared behind him at some distance. The Borderer lost not a
moment in taking his resolution, and boldly trotted against his enemies
in front, who called loudly on him to stand and deliver; Charlie
spurred on, and presented his pistol. 'D--n your pistol,' said the
foremost robber, whom Charlie to his dying day protested he believed to
have been the landlord of Mumps's Ha', 'd--n your pistol! I care not a
curse for it.' 'Ay, lad,' said the deep voice of Fighting Charlie, 'but
the TOW'S out now.' He had no occasion to utter another word; the
rogues, surprised at finding a man of redoubted courage well armed,
instead of being defenceless, took to the moss in every direction, and
he passed on his way without farther molestation.

The author has heard this story told by persons who received it from
Fighting Charlie himself; he has also heard that Mumps's Ha' was
afterwards the scene of some other atrocious villainy, for which the
people of the house suffered. But these are all tales of at least half
a century old, and the Waste has been for many years as safe as any
place in the kingdom.

NOTE 3, p. 213

The author may here remark that the character of Dandie Dinmont was
drawn from no individual. A dozen, at least, of stout Liddesdale yeomen
with whom he has been acquainted, and whose hospitality he has shared
in his rambles through that wild country, at a time when it was totally
inaccessible save in the manner described in the text, might lay claim
to be the prototype of the rough, but faithful, hospitable, and
generous farmer. But one circumstance occasioned the name to be fixed
upon a most respectable individual of this class, now no more. Mr.
James Davidson of Hindlee, a tenant of Lord Douglas, besides the points
of blunt honesty, personal strength, and hardihood designed to be
expressed in the character of Dandie Dinmont, had the humour of naming
a celebrated race of terriers which he possessed by the generic names
of Mustard and Pepper (according as their colour was yellow or
greyish-black), without any other individual distinction except as
according to the nomenclature in the text. Mr. Davidson resided at
Hindlee, a wild farm on the very edge of the Teviotdale mountains, and
bordering close on Liddesdale, where the rivers and brooks divide as
they take their course to the Eastern and Western seas. His passion for
the chase in all its forms, but especially for fox-hunting, as followed
in the fashion described in chapter xxv, in conducting which he was
skilful beyond most men in the South Highlands, was the distinguishing
point in his character.

When the tale on which these comments are written became rather
popular, the name of Dandie Dinmont was generally given to him, which
Mr. Davidson received with great good-humour, only saying, while he
distinguished the author by the name applied to him in the country,
where his own is so common--'that the Sheriff had not written about him
mair than about other folk, but only about his dogs.' An English lady
of high rank and fashion, being desirous to possess a brace of the
celebrated Mustard and Pepper terriers, expressed her wishes in a
letter which was literally addressed to Dandie Dinmont, under which
very general direction it reached Mr. Davidson, who was justly proud of
the application, and failed not to comply with a request which did him
and his favourite attendants so much honour.

I trust I shall not be considered as offending the memory of a kind and
worthy man, if I mention a little trait of character which occurred in
Mr. Davidson's last illness. I use the words of the excellent clergyman
who attended him, who gave the account to a reverend gentleman of the
same persuasion:--

'I read to Mr. Davidson the very suitable and interesting truths you
addressed to him. He listened to them with great seriousness, and has
uniformly displayed a deep concern about his soul's salvation. He died
