deadliest foe to my breast--to pardon the assassin who strikes his
steel into my heart, and I will obey you; but to pardon Scotland for
the injury she has done to you--for the disgrace with which her
self-debasement stains this cheek I never, never can!  I abhor these
sons of Lucifer.  Think not, noblest of masters, dearest of friends,"
cried he, throwing himself at Wallace's feet, "that I will ever shine
in the light of those envious stars which have displayed the sun!  No
tibi soli shall henceforth be the impress on my shield; to thee alone
will I ever turn; and till your beams restore your country and revive
me, the springing laurels of Edwin Ruthven shall whither where they
grew!"

Wallace folded him to his heart; a tear stood in his eyes, while he
said in a low voice:

"If thou art mine, thou art Scotland's.  Me, she rejects.  Mysterious
Heaven wills that I should quit my post; but for thee, Edwin, as a
relic of the fond love I yet bear this wretched country, abide by her,
bear with her, cherish her, defend her for my sake; and if Bruce lives,
he will be to thee a second Wallace, a friend, a brother!"

Edwin listened, wept, and sobbed, but his heart was fixed; unable to
speak, he broke from his friend's arms, and hurried into an interior
apartment to subdue his emotions by pouring them forth to God.

Ruthven joined in determined opinion with Bothwell, that if ever a
civil war could be sanctified, this was the time; and in spite of all
that Wallace could urge against the madness of contending for his
supremacy over a nation which would not yield him obedience, still they
remained firm in their resolution.  Bruce they hardly dared hope could
recover; and to relinquish the guiding hand of their best approved
leader at this crisis, was a sacrifice, they said, no earthly power
should compel them to make.

"So far from it," cried Lord Bothwell, dropping on his knees, and
grasping the cross hilt of his sword in both hands, "I swear by the
blood of the crucified Lord of this ungrateful world, that should Bruce
die, I will obey no other king of Scotland than William Wallace!"

Wallace turned ashy pale as he listened to this vow.  At that moment
Scrymgeour entered, followed by the Lanark veterans, and all kneeling
down, repeated the oath of Bothwell; then starting up, called on the
outraged chief, by the unburied corpse of his murdered Ker, to lead
them forth and avenge them of his enemies.

When the agitation of his soul would allow him to speak to this
faithful group, Wallace stretched his hands over them, and with such
tears as a father would shed who looks on the children he is to behold
no more, he said, in a subdued and faltering voice, "God will avenge
our murdered friend; my sword is sheathed forever.  May that holy
Being, who is the true and best King of the virtuous, always be present
with you!  I feel your love, and I appreciate it.  But Bothwell,
Ruthven, Lockhart, Scrymgeour, my faithful Lanark followers, leave me
awhile to compose my scattered thoughts.  Let me pass this night alone,
and to-morrow you shall know the resolution of your grateful Wallace!"

The shades of evening were closing in, and the men of Lanark, first
obtaining his permission to keep guard before the wood which skirted
the tent, respectfully kissing his hand, withdrew.  Ruthven called
Edwin from the recess, whither he had retired to unburden his grief:
but as soon as he heard that it was the resolution of his friends to
preserve the authority of Wallace or to perish in the contest, the
gloom passed from his fair brow, a smile of triumph parted his lips,
and he exclaimed:

"All will be well again.  We shall force this deluded nation to
recognize her safety and her honor!"

While the determined chiefs held discourse so congenial with the wishes
of the youthful knight, Wallace sat almost silent.  He seemed revolving
some momentous idea: he frequently turned his eyes on the speakers with
a fixed regard, which appeared rather full of a grave sorrow than
demonstrative of any sympathy on the subjects of their discussion.  On
Edwin he at times looked with penetrating tenderness; and when the bell
from the neighboring convent sounded the hour of rest, he stretched out
his hand to him with a smile, which he wished should speak of comfort
as well as of affection; but the soul spoke more eloquently than he had
intended: his smile was mournful, and the attempt to render it
otherwise, like a transient light over a dark sepulcher, only the more
distinctly showed the gloom and melancholy within.

"And am I, too, to leave you?" said Edwin.

"Yes, my brother," replied Wallace; "I have much to do with my own
thoughts this night.  We separate now to meet more gladly hereafter.  I
must have solitude to arrange my plans.  To-morrow you shall know them.
Meanwhile farewell!"

As he spoke he pressed the affectionate youth to his breast, and,
warmly grasping the hands of his three other friends, bade them an
earnest adieu.

Bothwell lingered a moment at the tent-door, and looking back, "Let
your first plan be, that to-morrow you lead us to Lord Soulis'
quarters, to teach the traitor what it is to be a Scot and a man!"

"My plans shall be deserving of my brave colleagues," replied Wallace;
"and whether they be executed on this or the other side of the Forth,
you shall find, my long-tried Bothwell, that Scotland's peace and the
honor of her best sons are the dearest considerations of your friend."

When the door closed, and Wallace was left alone, he stood for awhile
in the midst of the tent, listening to the departing steps of his
friends.  When the last sound died on his ear, "I shall hear them no
more!" cried he; and throwing himself into a seat, he remained for an
hour in a trance of grievous thoughts.  Melancholy remembrances and
prospects dire for Scotland pressed upon his surcharged heart.  "It is
to God alone I must confide my country!" cried he; "His mercy will pity
its madness, and forgive its deep transgressions.  My duty is to remove
the object of ruin far from the power of any longer exciting jealousy
or awakening zeal."  With these words, he took a pen in his hand to
write to Bruce.

He briefly narrated the events which compelled him, if he would avoid
the grief of having occasioned a civil war, to quit his country
forever.  The general hostility of the nobles, the unresisting
acquiescence of the people in measures which menaced his life and
sacrificed the freedom for which he had so long fought, convinced him,
he said, that his warlike commission was now closed.  He was summoned
by Heaven to exchange the field for the cloister; and to the monastery
at Chartres he was now hastening, to dedicate the remainder of his days
to the peace of a future world.  He then exhorted Bruce to confide in
the Lords Ruthven and Bothwell, as his soul would commune with his
spirit, for he would find them true unto death.  He counseled him, as
the leading measure to circumvent the treason of Scotland's enemies, to
go immediately to Kilchurn Castle, where he knew resources would be;
for Loch-awe, who retired thither on the last approach of De Warenne,
meaning to call out his vassals for that emergency, needed it not then;
for the battle of Dalkeith was fought and gained before they could
leave their heights, and the victor did not want them afterward.  To
use those brave and simple-hearted men for his establishment on the
throne of his kingdom, Wallace advised Bruce.  And so, amidst the
natural fortresses of the Highlands, he might recover his health,
collect his friends, and openly proclaim himself.  "Then," added he,
"when Scotland is your oqn, let its bulwarks be its mountains and its
people's arms.  Dismantle and raze to the ground the castles of those
base chiefs who have only embattled them to betray and enslave their
country."  Though intent on these political suggestions, he ceased not
to remember his own brave engines of war; and he earnestly conjured his
prince that he would wear the valiant Kirkpatrick as a buckler on his
heart; that he would place Scrymgeour with his Lanark veterans, and the
faithful Grimsby next him as his body-guard; and that he would love and
cherish the brave and tender Edwin for his sake.  "When my prince and
friend receives this," added he, "Wallace shall have bidden an eternal
farewell to Scotland; but his heart will be amidst its hills.  My king,
and the friends most dear to me will still be there!  The earthly part
of my beloved wife rests within its bosom!  But I go to rejoin her
soul; to meet it in the vigils of days consecrated wholly to the
blessed Being in whose presence she rejoices forever.  This is no sad
destiny, my dear Bruce.  Our Almighty Captain recalls me from dividing
with you the glory of maintaining the liberty of Scotland, but he
brings me closer to himself: I leave the plains of Gilgal to tread with
his angel the courts of my God.  Mourn not, then, my absence; for my
prayers will be with you till we are again united in the only place
where you can fully know me as I am--thine and Scotland's never-dying
friend!  Start not at the bold epithet.  My body may sink into the
grave, but the affections of my immortal spirit are eternal as its
essence, and, in earth or in heaven, I am ever yours.

"Should the endearing Helen--my heart's sister--be near your couch when
you read this, tell her that Wallace, in idea, presses her virgin cheek
with a brother's farewell; and from his inmost soul he blesses her."

Messages of respectful adieus he sent to Isabella, Lady Ruthven, and
the sage of Ercildown; and then kneeling down in that posture, he wrote
his last invocations for the prosperity and happiness of Bruce.

This letter finished, with a more tranquil mind he addressed Lord
Ruthven; detailing to him his reasons for leaving such faithful friends
so clandestinely; and after mentioning his purpose of proceeding to
France, he ended with those expressions of gratitude which the worthy
chief so well deserved; and exhorting him to transfer his public zeal
for him to the maguanimous and royal Bruce, closed the letter with
begging him, for the sake of his friend, his king, and his country, to
return immediately with all his followers to Huntingtower, and there to
rally round their prince.  His letter to Scrymgeour spoke nearly the
same language.  But when he began to write to Bothwell, to bid him that
farewell which his heart foreboded would be forever in this world--to
part from this, his steady companion in arms, his dauntless champion!
he lost some of his composure; and his handwriting testified the
emotion of his mind.  How, then, was he shaken when he addressed the
young and devoted Edwin, the brother of his soul?  He dropped the pen
from his hand.  At that moment he felt all he was going to relinquish,
and he exclaimed, "Oh, Scotland! my ungrateful country; what is it you
do?  Is it thus that you repay your most faithful servants?  Is it not
enough that the wife of my bosom, the companion of my youth, should be
torn from me by your enemies; but your hand must wrest from my bereaved
heart its every other solace?  You snatch from me my friends; you would
deprive me of my life.  To preserve you from that crime, I imbitter the
cup of death; I go far from the tombs of my fathers--from the grave of
my Marion, where I have fondly hoped to rest!"  His head sunk on his
arm; his heart gave way under the pressure of accumulated regrets, and
floods of tears poured from his eyes.  Deep and frequent were his
sighs--but none answered him.  Friendship was far distant; and where
was that gentle being who would have soothed his sorrow on her bosom?
She it was he lamented.  "Dreary, dreary solitude!" cried he, looking
around him with an aghast perception of all that he had lost! "how have
I been mocked for these three long years!  What is renown? what the
loud acclaim of admiring throngs? what the loud acclaim of admiring
throngs? what the bended knees of worshiping gratefulness but breath
and vapor!  It seems to shelter the mountain's top; the blast comes; it
rolls from its sides; and the lonely hill is left to all the storm!  So
stand I, my Marion, when bereft of thee.  In weal or woe, thy smiles,
thy warm embrace, were mine; my head reclined on that faithful breast,
and still I found my home, my heaven.  But now, desolate and alone,
ruin is around me.  Destruction waits on all who would steal one pang
from the racked heart of William Wallace!--even pity is no more for me.
Take me, then, O Power of Mercy!" cried he, stretching forth his
hands, "take me to Thyself!"

At these words, a peal of thunder burst on his ear, and seemed to roll
over his tent, till, passing off toward the west, it died away in long
and solemn reverberation.  Wallace rose from his knee, on which he had
sunk at this awful response to his Heaven-directed adjuration.  "Thou
callest me, my Father!" cried he, with a holy confidence dilating his
soul.  "I go from the world to Thee!  I come, and before Thy altars
know no human weakness."

In a paroxysm of sacred enthusiasm he rushed from the tent, and,
reckless whither he went, struck into the depths of Roslyn woods.  With
the steps of the wind he pierced their remotest thickets.  He reached
their boundary--it was traversed by a rapid stream, but that did not
stop his course; he sprung over it, and, ascending its moonlight bank,
was startled by the sound of his name.  Grimsby, attended by a youth,
stood before him.  The veteran expressed amazement at meeting his
master alone at this hour, unhelmeted and unarmed, and in so dangerous
a direction.  "The road," said he, "between this and Stirling is beset
with your enemies."  Instead of noticing this information, Wallace
inquired what news he brought from Huntingtower.  "The worst," said he.
"By this time the royal Bruce is no more!"  Wallace gasped
convulsively, and fell against a tree.  Grimsby paused.  In a few
minutes the heart-struck chief was able to speak.  "Listen not to my
groans for unhappy Scotland!" cried he; "show me all that is in this
last vial of wrath."

Grimsby informed him that Bruce being so far recovered as to have left
his sick chamber for the family apartment, while he was sitting with
the ladies, a letter was brought to Lady Helen.  She opened it, read a
few lines, and fell senseless into the arms of her sister.  Bruce
snatched the packet, but not a word did he speak till he had perused it
to the end.  It was from the Countess Strathearn, written in the
triumph of revenge, cruelly exulting in what she termed the
demonstration of Wallace's guilt; congratulating herself on having been
the primary means of discovering it, and boasting that his once adored
Scotland now held him in such detestation as to have doomed him to die.
It was this denunciation which had struck to the soul of Helen; and
while the anxious Lady Ruthven removed her inanimate form into another
room, Bruce read the barbarous triumphs of this disappointed woman.
"No power on earth can save him now," continued she; "your doting heart
must yield him, Helen, to another rest than your bridal chamber.  His
iron breast has met with others as adamantine as his own.  A hypcrite!
he feels not pity; he knows no beat of human sympathies; and like a
rock, he falls, unpitied, undeplored--undeplored by all but you, lost,
self-deluded girl!  My noble lord, the princely De Warenne, informs me
that William Wallace would be burned as a double traitor in England,
and a price is now set upon his head in Scotland! hence, there is
safety for him no more.  Those his base-born heart has outraged shall
be avenged; and his cries for mercy, who will answer?  No voice on
earth!  None dare support the man whom friends and enemies abandon to
destruction!"

"Yes," cried Bruce, starting from his seat, "I will support him, thou
damned traitress!  Bruce will declare himself!  Bruce will throw
himself before his friend, and in his breast receive every arrow meant
for that godlike heart!  Yes," cried he, glancing on the terrified
looks of Isabella, who believed that his delirium was returned.  "I
would snatch him in these arms, from their murderous flames, did all
the fiends of hell guard their infernal fire!"  Not a word more did he
utter, but darting from the apartment, was soon seen before the
barbican-gate, armed from head to foot.  Grimsby stood there, to whom
he called to bring him a horse, "for that the Light of Scotland was in
danger."  Grimsby, who understood by that term, his beloved master was
in peril, instantly obeyed; and Bruce, as instantly mourning, struck
his rowels into the horse, and was out of sight ere Grimsby could reach
his stirrup to follow.

But that faithful soldier speeded after him like the win, and came in
view of Bruce just as he was leaping a chasm in the mountain path.  The
horse struck his heel against a loose stone, and it giving way, he fell
headlong into the deep ravine.  At the moment of his disappearance,
Grimsby rushed toward the spot, and saw the animal struggling in the
agonies of death at the bottom.  Bruce lay insensible, amongst some
bushes which grew nearer the top.  With difficulty the honest
Englishman got him dragged to the surface of the hill; and finding all
attempts to recover him ineffectual, he laid him on his own beast, and
so carried him slowly back to the castle.  The assiduities of the sage
of Ercildown restored him to life, but not to recollection.  "The fever
returned on him, with a delirium, so hopeless of recovery," continued
Grimsby, "that the Lady Helen, who again seems like an inspired angel
amongst us, has sent me with this youth to implore you to come to
Huntingtower, and there embattle yourself against your own and your
prince's enemies."

"Send me," cried Walter Hay, grasping Wallace's hand, "send me back to
Lady Helen, and let me tell her that our benefactor, the best guardian
of our country, will not abandon us!  Should you depart, Scotland's
genius will go with you! again she must sink, again she will be in
ruins.  De Valence will regain possession of my dear lady, and you will
not be near to save her."

"Grimsby, Walter, my friends!" cried Wallace, in an agitated voice, "I
do not abandon Scotland; she drives me from her.  Would she have
allowed me, I would have borne her in my arms until my latest gasp; but
it must not be so.  I resign her into the Almighty hands, to which I
commit myself; they will also preserve the Lady Helen from violence.  I
cannot forego my trust, for the Bruce also!  If he live, he will
protect her for my sake; and should he died, Bothwell and Ruthven will
cherish her for their own."

"But you will return with us to Huntingtower," cried Grimsby.
"Disguised in these peasant's garments, which we have brought for the
purpose, you may pass through the legions of the regent with perfect
security."

"Let me implore you, if not for your own sake, for ours!  Pity our
desolation, and save yourself for them who can know no safety when you
are gone!"

Walter clung to his arm while uttering this supplication.  Wallace
looked tenderly upon him.

"I would save myself; and I will, please God," said he; "but by no
means unworthy of myself.  I go, but not under any disguise.  Openly
have I defended Scotland, and openly will I pass through her lands.
The chalice of Heaven consecrated me the champion of my country, and no
Scot dare lift a hostile hand against this anointed head."

The soul of Wallace swelled high, but devoutly, while uttering this.

"Whither you go," cried Grimsby, "let me follow you, in joy or in
sorrow!"

"And me, too, my benefactor!" rejoined Walter, "and when you look on
us, think not that Scotland is altogether ungrateful!"

"My faithful friend," returned he, "whither I go, I must go alone.  And
as a proof of your love, grant me your obedience this once.  Rest
amongst these thickets till morning.  At sunrise, repair to our camp;
there you will know my destination.  But till Bruce proclaims himself
at the head of the country's armies, for my sake never reveal to mortal
man, that he who lies debilitated by sickness at Huntingtower, is other
than Sir Thomas de Longueville."

"Rest we cannot," replied Grimsby; "but still we will obey our master.
You command me to adhere to Bruce; to serve him till the hour of his
death!  I will--but should he die, then I may seek you, and be again
your faithful servant?"

"You will find me before the cross of Christ," returned Wallace, "with
saints my fellow-soldiers, and God my only King!  Till then, Grimsby,
farewell.  Walter, carry my fidelity to your mistress.  She will share
my thoughts, with the Blessed Virgin of Heaven, for in all my prayers
shall her name be remembered."

Grimsby and Walter, struck by the holy solemnity of his manner, fell on
their knees before him.  Wallace raised his hands:

"Bless, O Father of Light!" cried he, "bless this unhappy land, when
Wallace is no more; let his memory be lost in the virtues and
prosperity of Robert Bruce!"

Grimsby sunk on the earth, and gave way to a burst of manly sorrow.
Walter hid his weeping face in the folds of his master's mantle, which
had fallen from his shoulders to the ground.  Lost in grief, no thought
seemed to exist in the young man's heart but the resolution to live
only for his persecuted benefactor; and to express this vow with all
the energy of determined devotedness, he looked up to seek the face of
Wallace--but Wallace had disappeared; and all that remained, to the
breaking hearts of his faithful servants, was the tartan plaid which
they had clasped in their arms.




Chapter LXXIX.

Lumloch.


Wallace, having turned abruptly away from his lamenting servants,
struck into the deep defiles of the Pentland Hills.  They pointed to
different tracks.  Aware that the determined affection of some of his
friends might urge them to dare the perils attendant on his fellowship,
he hesitated a moment which path to take.  Certainly not toward
Huntingtower, to bring immediate destruction on its royal inhabitant.
Nor to any chieftain of the Highlands, to give rise to a spirit of
civil warfare.  Neither would he pursue the eastern track; for in that
direction, as pointing to France, his friends would most likely seek
him.  He therefore turned his steps toward the ports of Ayr.  The road
was circuitous; but it would soon enough take him from the land of his
fathers--from the country he must never see again!

As morning dispelled the shades of night, it discovered still more
dreary glooms.  A heavy mist hung over the hills, and rolled before him
along the valley.  Still he pursued his way, although, the day
advanced, the vapors collected into thicker blackness, and, floating
down the heights, at last burst into a deluge of rain.  All around was
darkened by the descending water; and the accumulating floods, dashing
from the projecting craigs above, swelled the burn in his path to a
roaring river.  Wallace stood in the torrent, with its wild waves
breaking against his sides.  The rain fell on his uncovered head, and
the chilling blast sighed in his streaming hair.  Looking around him,
he paused amidst this tumult of nature.  "Must there be strife, even
amongst the elements, to show that this is no longer a land for me?
Spirits of these hills," cried he, "pour not thus your rage on a
banished man!  A man without a friend, without a home."  He started and
smiled at his own adjuration.  "The spirits of Heaven launch not this
tempest on a defenseless head; 'tis chance!--but affliction shapes all
things to its own likeness.  Thou, oh, my Father! would not suffer any
demon of the air to bend thy broken reed!  Therefore rain on, ye
torrents; ye are welcome to William Wallace.  He can well breast the
mountain's storm, who has stemmed the ingratitude of his country."

Hills, rivers, and vales were measured by his solitary steps, till
entering on the heights of Clydesdale, the broad river of his native
glen spread its endeared waters before him.  Not a wave passed along
that had not kissed the feet of some scene consecrated to his memory.
Over the western hills lay the lands of his forefathers.  There he had
first drawn his breath; there he imbibed from the lips of his revered
grandfather, now no more, those lessons of virtue by which he had
lived, and for which he was now ready to die.  Far to the left
stretched the wide domains of Lammington: there his youthful heart
first knew the pulse of love: there all nature smiled upon him, for
Marion was near, and hope hailed him, from every sunlit mountain's
brow.  Onward in the depths of the cliffs, lay Ellerslie, the home of
his heart, where he had tasted the joys of Paradise; but all there,
like that once blessed place, now lay in one wide ruin.

"Shall I visit thee again?" said he, as he hurried along the beetling
craigs; "Ellerslie!  Ellerslie," cried he; "'tis no hero, no triumphant
warrior, that approaches!  Receive--shelter thy deserted, widowed
master!  I come, my Marion, to mourn thee in thine own domains!"

He flew forward; he ascended the cliffs; he rushed down the
hazel-crowned pathway--but it was no longer smooth; thistles, and
thickly-interwoven underwood, obstructed his steps.  Breaking through
them all, he turned the angle of the rock--the last screen between him
and the view of his once beloved home.  On this spot he used to stand
on moonlight evenings, watching the graceful form of his Marion, as she
passed to and fro within her chamber.  His eyes now turned
instinctively to the point, but it gazed on vacancy.  His home had
disappeared: one solitary tower alone remained, standing like "a
hermit, the last of his race," to mourn over the desolation of all by
which it had once been surrounded.  Not a human being now moved on the
spot which, three years before, was thronged with his grateful vassals.
Not a voice was now heard, where then sounded the harp of
Halbert--where breathed the soul-entrancing song of his beloved Marion!

"Death!" cried he, striking his breast, "how many ways hast thou to
bereave poor mortality!  All, all gone!  My Marion sleeps in Bothwell:
the faithful Halbert at her feet.  And my peasantry of Lanark, how many
of you have found untimely graves in the bosom of your vainly rescued
country!"

A few steps forward, and he stood on a mound of moldering fragments,
heaped over the pavement of what had been the hall.

"My wife's blood marks the stones beneath!" cried he.

He flung himself on the ruins, and a groan burst from his heart.  It
echoed mournfully from the opposite rock.  He started and gazed around.

"Solitude!" cried he, with a faint smile; "naught is here, but Wallace
and his sorrow.  Marion! I call, and even thou dost not answer me;
thou, who didst ever fly at the sound of my voice!  Look on me, love!"
exclaimed he, stretching his arms toward the sky; "look on me, and for
once, till ever, cheer thy lonely, heart-stricken Wallace!"

Tears choked his further utterance; and once more laying his head upon
the stones, he wept in silence, till exhausted natured found repose in
sleep.

The sun was gilding the gray summits of the ruined tower under whose
shadow he lay, when Wallace slowly opened his eyes; looking around him,
he smote his breast, and with a heavy groan sunk back upon the stones.
In the silence which succeeded this burst of memory, he thought he
heard a rustling near him, and a half-suppressed sigh.  He listened
breathless.  The sigh was repeated.  He gently raised himself on his
hand, and with an expectation he dared hardly whisper to himself,
turned toward the spot whence the sound proceeded.  The branches of a
rose-tree that had been planted by his Marion, shook and scattered the
leaves of its ungathered flowers upon the brambles which grew beneath.
Wallace rose in agitation.  The skirts of a human figure appeared,
retreating behind the ruins.  He advanced toward it, and beheld Edwin
Ruthven.  The moment their eyes met, Edwin precipitated himself at his
feet, and clinging to him, exclaimed:

"Pardon me this pursuit!  But we meet to part no more."

Wallace raised him, and strained him to his breast in silence.  Edwin,
in hardly articulate accents, continued:

"Some kind power checked your hand when writing to your Edwin.  You
could not command him not to follow you! you left the letter
unfinished, and thus I come to bless you for not condemning me to die
of a broken heart!"

"I did not write farewell to thee," cried Wallace, looking mournfully
on him, "but I meant it, for I must part from all I love in Scotland.
It is my doom.  The country needs me not, and I have need of Heaven.  I
go into its outcourts at Chartres.  Follow me there, dear boy, when
thou hast accomplished thy noble career on earth, and then our gray
hairs shall mingle together over the altar of the God of Peace; but now
receive the farewell of thy friend.  Return to Bruce, and be to him the
dearest representative of William Wallace."

"Never!" cried Edwin; "thou alone art my prince, my friend, my brother,
my all in this world!  My parents, dear as they are, would have buried
my youth in a cloister, but your name called me to honor, and to you,
in life or in death, I dedicate my being."

"Then," returned Wallace, "that honor summons you to the side of the
dying Bruce.  He is now in the midst of his foes."

"And where art thou?" interrupted Edwin; "who drove thee hence but
enemies? who line these roads, but wretches sent to betray their
benefactor?  No, my friend, thy fate shall be my fate--thy woe my woe!
We live, or we die together: the field, the cloister, or the tomb--all
shall be welcomed by Edwin Ruthven, if they separate him not from
thee!"  Seeing that Wallace was going to speak, and fearful that it was
to repeat his commands to be left alone, he suddenly exclaimed with
vehemence: "Father of men and angels! grant me thy favor only as I am
true to the vow I have sworn, never more to leave the side of Sir
William Wallace!"

To urge the dangers in which such a resolution would expose this too
faithful friend, Wallace knew would be in vain: he read an invincible
determination in the eye and gesture of Edwin; and, therefore, yielding
to the demands of friendship, he threw himself upon his neck.

"For thy sake, Edwin, I will endure yet awhile mankind at large!  Thy
bloom of honor shall not be cropped by my hand.  We will go together to
France; and while I seek a probationary quiet in some of its remote
cities, thou mayest bear the standard of Scotland, in the land of our
ally, against the proud enemies of Bruce."

"Make of me what you will," returned Edwin, "only do not divide me from
yourself!"

Wallace explained to his friend his design of crossing the hills to
Ayrshire, in some port of which he did not doubt finding some vessel
bound for France.  Edwin overturned this plan by telling him that in
the moment the abthanes repledged their secret faith to England, they
sent orders into Ayrshire to watch the movements of Wallace's
relations, and to prevent their either hearing of or marching to the
assistance of their wronged kinsman.  And besides this, no sooner was
it discovered by the insurgent lords at Roslyn that he had disappeared
from the camp, than, supposing he meant to appeal to Philip, they
dispatched expresses all along the western and eastern coasts, from the
Friths of Forth and Clyde to those of Solway and Berwick-upon-Tweed, to
intercept him.  On hearing this, and that all avenues from the southern
parts of his country were closed upon him, Wallace determined to try
the north.  Some bay in the Western Highlands might open its yet not
ungrateful arms to set its benefactor free!  "If not by a ship,"
continued Edwin, "a fisher's boat will launch us from a country no
longer worthy of you!"

Their course was then taken along the Cartlane Craigs, at a distance
from villages and mountain cots, which, leaning from their verdant
heights, seemed to invite the traveler to refreshment and repose.
Though the sword of Wallace had won them this quiet, though his wisdom,
like the hand of Creation, had spread the lately barren hills with
beauteous harvest, yet had an ear of corn been asked in his name, it
would have been denied.  A price was set upon his head, and the lives
of all who should succor him would be forfeited!  He who had given
bread and homes to thousands was left to perish--had no where to
shelter his head.  Edwin looked anxiously on him as at times they sped
silently along: "Ah!" thought he, "this heroic endurance of evil is the
true cross of our celestial Captain!  Let who will carry his insignia
to the Holy Land, here is the man who bears the real substance, that
walks undismayed in the path of his sacrificed Lord!"

The black plumage of a common Highland bonnet, which Edwin had
purchased at one of the cottages to which he had gone alone to buy a
few oaten cakes, hung over the face of his friend.  That face no longer
blazed with the fire of generous valor--it was pale and sad; but
whenever he turned his eyes on Edwin, the shades which seemed to
envelop it disappeared, a bright smile spoke the peaceful consciousness
within, a look of grateful affection expressed his comfort at having
found, in defiance of every danger, he was not yet wholly forsaken.
Edwin's youthful, happy spirit rejoiced in every glad beam which shone
on the face of him he loved.  It awoke felicity in his breast.  To be
occasionally near Wallace to share his confidence with others, had
always filled him with joy, but now to be the only one on whom his
noble heart leaned for consolation, was bliss unutterable.  He trod on
air, and even chid his beating heart for a delight which seemed to
exult when his friend suffered:  "But not so," ejaculated he
internally; "to be with thee is the delight!  In life or in death thy
presence is the sunshine of my soul!"

When they arrived within sight of the high towers of Bothwell Castle,
Wallace stopped.  "We must not go thither," said Edwin, replying to the
sentiment which spoke from the eyes of his friend; "the servants of my
cousin Andrew may not be as faithful as their lord!"

"I will not try them," returned Wallace, with a resigned smile; "my
presence in Bothwell Chapel shall not pluck danger on the head of my
dauntless Murray.  She wakes in heaven for me whose body sleeps there;
and knowing where to find the jewel, my friend, shall I linger over the
vacated casket?"

While he yet spoke, a chieftain on horseback suddenly emerged from the
trees which led to the castle, and drew to their side.  Edwin was
wrapped in his plaid, and, cautiously concealing his face that no
chance of his recognition might betray his companion, he walked briskly
on, without once looking at the stranger.  But Wallace, being without
any shade over the noble contour of a form which for majesty and grace
was unequaled in Scotland, could not be mistaken.  He, too, moved
swiftly forward.  The horseman spurred after him.  Perceiving himself
pursued, and therefore known, and aware that he must be overtaken, he
suddenly stopped.  Edwin drew his sword, and would have given it into
the hand of his friend; but Wallace, putting it back, rapidly answered:
"Leave my defense to this unweaponed arm.  I would not use steel
against my countrymen, but none shall take me while I have a sinew to
resist."

The chieftain now checked his horse in front of Wallace, and
respectfully raising his visor, discovered Sir John Monteith.  At sight
of him Edwin dropped the point of his yet unlifted sword; and Wallace,
stepping back, "Monteith," said he, "I am sorry for this rencounter.
If you would be safe from the destiny which pursues me, you must retire
immediately, and forget that we have met."

"Never," cried Monteith; "I know the ingratitude of an envious country
drives the bravest of her champions from our borders, but I also know
what belongs to myself!  To serve you at all hazards!  And by conjuring
you to become my guest, in my castle on the Frith of Clyde, I would
demonstrate my grateful sense of the dangers you once incurred for me,
and I therefore thank fortune for this rencounter."

In vain Wallace expressed his determination not to bring peril on any
of his countrymen, by sojourning under any roof till he were far away
from Scotland.  In vain he urged to Monteith the outlawry which would
await him should the infuriated abthanes discover that he had given
shelter to the man whom they had chosen to suppose a traitor, and
denounce as one.  Monteith, after equally unsuccessful persuasion on
his side, at last said, that he knew a vessel was lying at Newark, near
his castle, in which Wallace might immediately embark: and he implored
him, by past friendship, to allow him to be his guide to its anchorage.
To enforce this supplication, he threw himself off his horse, and,
with protestations of a fidelity that trampled on all comfort he should
ever know in his now degraded country.  "Once I saw Scotland's steady
champion, the brave Douglas, rifled from her shores!  Do not then doom
me to a second grief, bitterer than the first; do not you yourself
drive me from the side of her last hero!  Ah! let me behold you,
companion of my school-days, friend, leader, benefactor! till the sea
wrests you forever from my eyes!"  Exhausted and affected, Wallace gave
his hand to Monteith; the tear of gratitude stood in his eye.  He
looked affectionately from Monteith to Edwin, from Edwin to Monteith:
"Wallace shall yet live in the memory of the trusty of this land! you,
my friend, prove it.  I go richly forth, for the hearts of good men are
my companions."

As they journeyed along the devious windings of the Clyde, and saw at a
distance the aspiring turrets of Rutherglen, Edwin pointed to them, and
said, "From that church a few months ago did you dictate a conqueror's
terms to England."

"And now that very England makes me a fugitive," returned Wallace.

"Oh! not England!" interrupted Edwin; "you bow not to her.  It is
blind, mad Scotland, who thus thrusts her benefactor from her."

"Ah! then, my Edwin," rejoined he, "read in me this history of
thousands.  So various is the fate of a people's idol; to-day he is
worshiped as a god, to-morrow cast into the fire!"

Monteith turned pale at this conversation; and quickening his steps,
hurried in silence past the opening of the valley which presented the
view of Rutherglen.

Night overtook the travelers near the little village of Lumloch, about
two hours' journey from Glasgow.  Here a storm coming on, Monteith
advised his friends to take shelter and rest.  "As you object to
implicate others," said he, "you may sleep secure in an old barn which
at present has no ostensible owner.  I remarked it while passing this
way from Newark.  But I rather wish you would forget this too chary
regard for others, and lodge with me in the neighboring cottage."

Wallace was insensible to the pelting of the elements; his unsubdued
spirit wanted rest for neither mind nor body; but the broken voice and
lingering step of the young Edwin, who had severely sprained his foot
in the dark, penetrated his heart; and notwithstanding that the
resolute boy, suddenly rallying himself, declared that he was neither
weary nor in pain, Wallace seeing he was both, yielded a sad consent to
be conducted from the storm.  "But not," said he, "to the house.  We
will go into the barn, and there, on the dry earth, my Edwin, we may
gratefully repose."

Monteith did not oppose him further, and pushing open the door, Wallace
and Edwin entered.  Their conductor soon after followed with a light
from the cottage; and pulling down some heaped straw, strewed it on the
ground for a bed.  "Here I shall sleep like a prince!" cried Edwin,
throwing himself along the scattered truss.

"But not," returned Monteith, "till I have disengaged you from your wet
garments, and preserved your arms and brigandine from the rust of this
night."

Edwin, sunk in weariness, said little in opposition; and having
suffered Monteith to take away his sword and to unbrace his plated
vest, dropped at once on the straw in a profound sleep.

Wallace, that he might not disturb him by debate, yielded to the
request of Monteith; and having resigned his armor also, waved him a
good-night.  Monteith nodded the same, and closed the door upon his
victims.

Well known to the generals of King Edward as one who estimated his
honor as a mere counter of traffic, Sir John Monteith was considered by
them all as a hireling fit for any purpose.  Though De Warenne had been
persuaded to use unworthy means to intimidate his great opponent, he
would have shrunk from being a coadjutor of treachery.  His removal
from the lord-wardenship of Scotland, in consequence of the wounds he
had received at Dalkeith, opened a path to the elevation of Aymer de
Valence.  And when he was named viceroy in the stead of De Warenne, he
told Edward that if he would authorize him to offer an earldom, with
adequate estates, to Sir John Monteith, the old friend of Wallace, he
was sure so rapacious a chieftain would traverse sea and land to put
that formidable Scot in the hands of England.  To incline Edward to the
proffer of so large a bribe, De Valence instanced Monteith's having
volunteered, while he commanded with Sir Eustace Maxwell on the
borders, to betray the forces under him to the English general.  The
treachery was accepted; and for its execution he received a casket of
uncounted gold.  Some other proofs of his devotion to England were
mentioned by De Valence.

"You mean his devotion to money," replied the king, "and if that will
make him ours at this crisis, give him overflowing coffers, but no
earldom!  Though I must have the head of Wallace, I would not have one
of my peers show a title written in his blood.  Ill deeds must
sometimes be done; but we do not emblazon their perpetrators!"

De Valence having received his credentials, sent Haliburton (a Scottish
prisoner, who bought his liberty too dear by such an embassage) to
impart to Sir John Monteith the King of England's approval.  Monteith
was then castellan of Newark, where he had immured himself for many
months, under a pretense of the reopening of old wounds; but the fact
was his treasons were connected with so many accomplices that he feared
some disgraceful disclosure, and therefore kept out of the way of
exciting public attention.  Avarice was his master passion; and the
sudden idea that there might be treasure in the iron box, which,
unwitting of such a thought at the time, he had consigned to Wallace,
first bound him a sordid slave.  His murmurs for having allowed the box
to leave his possession, gave the alarm which caused the disasters at
Ellerslie, and his own immediate arrest.  He was then sent a prisoner
to Cressingham at Stirling; but in his way thither he made his escape,
though only to fall into the hands of Soulis.  That inhuman chief
threatened to return him to his dungeons; and to avoid such a
misfortune, Monteith engaged in the conspiracy to bring Lady Helen from
the priory to the arms of this monster.  On her escape, Soulis would
have wreaked his vengeance on his vile emissary; but Monteith, aware of
his design, fled, and fled even into the danger he would have avoided.
He fell in with a party of roaming Southrons, who conveyed him to Ayr.
Once having immolated his honor, he kept no terms with conscience.
Arnulf soon understood what manner of man was in his custody; and by
sharing with him the pleasures of his table, soon drew from him every
information respecting the strength and resources of his country.  His
after history was a series of secret treacheries to Scotland; and in
return for them, an accumulation of wealth from England, the
comtemplation of which seemed to be his sole enjoyment.

This new offer from De Valence was therefore greedily embraced.  He
happened to be at Rutherglen when Haliburton brought the proposal; and
in the cloisters of its church** was its fell agreement signed.  He
transmitted an oath to De Valence that he would die or win his hire.
And immediately dispatching spies to the camp at Roslyn, as soon as he
was informed of Wallace's disappearance, he judged, from the knowledge
of that chief's retentive affections, that whithersoever he intended
finally to go, he would first visit Ellerslie, and the tomb of his
wife.  According to this opinion, he planted his emissaries in
favorable situations on the road, and then proceeded himself to
intercept his victim at the most probable places.

Not finding him at Bothwell, he was issuing forth to take the way to
Ellerslie, when the object of his search presented himself at the
opening of the wood.  The evil plan too well succeeded.

Triumphant in his deceit, this master of hypocrisy left the barn, in
which he had seen Wallace and his young friend lie down on that ground
from which he had determined they should never more rise.  Aware that
the unconquerable soul of Wallace would never allow himself to be taken
alive, he had stipulated with De Valence that the delivery of his head
should entitle him to a full reward.  From Rutherglen to Lumloch no
place had presented itself in which he thought he could so judiciously
plant an ambuscade to surprise the unsuspecting Wallace.  And in this
village he had stationed so large a force of ruthless savages (brought
for the occasion by Haliburton from the Irish island of Rathlin), that
their employer had hardly a doubt of this night being the last of his
too-trusting friend's existence.  These Rathliners neither knew of
Wallace nor his exploits; but the lower order of Scots, however they
might fear to succor his distress, loved his person, and felt so bound
to him by his actions, that Monteith durst not apply to any one of them
to second his villainy.

**The events of Wallace having dictated terms of peace with England,
and Monteith pledging himself to that country's emissary to betray
Wallace, having taken place in this church, are traditionary facts.

The hour of midnight passed, and yet he could not summon courage to
lead his men to their nefarious attack.  Twice they urged him, before
he arose from his affected sleep--for sleep he could not; guilt had
"murdered sleep!" and he lay awake, restless, and longing for the dawn;
and yet, ere that dawn, the deed must be accomplished!  A cock crew
from the neighboring farm.

"That is the sign of morning, and we have yet done nothing," exclaimed
a surly ruffian, who leaned on his battle-ax in an ssopposite corner of
the apartment.

"No, it is the signal of our enemy's captivity!" cried Monteith.
"Follow me, but gently.  If ye speak a word or a single target rattle,
before ye all fall upon him, we are lost.  It is a being of
supernatural might, not a mere man, whom ye go to encounter.  He that
first disables him shall have a double reward."

"Depend upon us," returned the sturdiest ruffian; and stealing
cautiously out of the cottage, the party advanced with noiseless steps
toward the barn.  Monteith paused at the door, making a sign to his men
to halt while he listened.  He put his ear to a crevice--not a murmur
was within.  He gently raised the latch, and setting the door wide
open, with his finger on his lip, beckoned his followers.  Without
venturing to draw a breath, they approached the threshold.  The
meridian moon shone full into the hovel, and shed a broad light upon
their victims.  The innocent face of Edwin rested on the bosom of his
friend, and the arm of Wallace lay on the spread straw with which he
had covered the tender body of his companion.  So fair a picture of
mortal friendship was never before beheld.  But the hearts were blind
which looked on it, and Monteith gave the signal.  He retreated out of
the door, while his men threw themselves forward to bind Wallace where
he lay; but the first man, in his eagerness, striking his head against
a joist in the roof, uttered a fierce oath.  The noise roused Wallace,
whose wakeful senses had rather slumbered than slept, and opening his
eyes, he sprung on his feet.

A moment told him enemies were around.  Seeing him rise, they rushed on
him with imprecations.  His eyes blazed like two terrible meteors; and,
with a sudden motion of his arm, he seemed to hold the men at a
distance, while his god-like figure stood, a tower in collected might.
Awe-struck, they paused, but it was only for an instant.  The sight of
Edwin, now starting from his sleep, his aghast countenance, while he
felt for his weapons, his cry when he recollected they were gone,
inspired the assassins with fresh courage.  Battle-axes, swords, and
rattling chains, now flashed before the eyes of Wallace.  The pointed
steel in many places entered his body, while with part of a broken
bench, which chanced to lie near him, he defended himself and Edwin
from this merciless host.  Edwin, seeing naught but the death of his
friend before his sight, regardless of himself, made a spring from his
side, and snatched a dagger from the belt of one of the murderers.  The
ruffian instantly caught the intrepid boy by the throat, and in that
horrible clutch would certainly have deprived him of life had not the
lion grasp of Wallace seized the man in his arms, and with a pressure
that made his mouth and nostrils burst with blood, compelled him to
forego his hold.  Edwin released, Wallace dropped his assailant, who,
staggering a few paces, fell senseless to the ground, and instantly
expired.

The conflict now became doubly desperate--Edwin's dagger twice defended
the breast of his friend.  Two of his assassins he stabbed to the heart.

"Murder that urchin!" cried Monteith, who, seeing from without the
carnage of his men, feared that Wallace might yet make his escape.

"Hah!" cried Wallace, at the sound of Monteith's voice giving such an
order--"then we are betrayed--but not by Heaven!  Strike, one of you,
that angel youth," cried he, "and you will incur damnation!"

He spoke to the winds.  They poured toward Edwin; Wallace, with a
giant's strength, dispersed them as they advanced; the beam of wood
fell on the heads, the breasts of his assailants.  Himself bleeding at
every pore, he felt not a smart while yet he defended Edwin.  But a
shout was heard from the door, a faint cry was heard at his side.  He
looked around.  Edwin lay extended on the ground, with an arrow
quivering in his breast, his closing eyes still looking upward to his
friend.  The beam fell from the hands of Wallace.  He threw himself on
his knees beside him.  The dying boy pressed his hand to his heart, and
dropped his head upon his bosom--Wallace moved not, spoke not.  His
hand was bathed in the blood of his friend, but not a pulse beat
beneath it; no breath warmed the paralyzed chill of his face as it hung
over the motionless lips of Edwin.

The men were more terrified at this unresisting stillness than at the
invincible prowess of his arm, and stood gazing on him in mute wonder.
But Monteith, in whom the fell appetite of avarice had destroyed every
perception of humanity, sent in other ruffians with new orders to bind
Wallace.  They approached him with terror; two of the strongest
stealing behind him, and taking advantage of his face being bent upon
that of his murdered Edwin, each in the same moment seized his hands.
As they griped them fast, the others advanced eagerly to fasten the
bands, he looked calmly up, but it was a dreadful calm; it spoke of
despair, of the full completion of all woe.  "Bring chains," cried one
of the men, "he will burst these thongs."

"You may bind me with a hair," said he; "I contend no more."  The bonds
were fastened on his wrists; and then, turning toward the lifeless body
of Edwin, he raised it gently in his arms.  The rosy red of youth yet
tinged his cold cheek; his parted lips still beamed with the same--but
the breath that had so sweetly informed them, was flown.  "Oh! my best
brother that ever I had," cried Wallace in a sudden transport, and
kissing his pale forehead; "my sincerest friend in my greatest need!
In thee was truth, manhood, and nobleness; in thee was all man's
fidelity with woman's tenderness.  My friend, my brother, oh! would to
God I had died for thee!"




Chapter LXXX.

Huntingtower.


Lord Ruthven was yet musing, in fearful anxiety, on Wallace's solemn
adieu, and the confirmation which the recitals of Grimsby and Hay had
brought of his determined exile, when he was struck with a new
consternation by the flight of his son.  A billet, which Edwin had left
with Scrymgeour, who guessed not its contents, told his father that he
was gone to seek their friend, and to unite himself forever to his
fortunes.

Bothwell not less eager to preserve Wallace to the world, with an
intent to persuade him to at least abandon his monastic project, set
off direct for France, hoping to arrive before his friend, and engage
the French monarch to assist in preventing so grievous a sacrifice.
Ruthven, meanwhile, fearful that the unarmed Wallace and the
self-regardless Edwin might fall into the hands of the venal wretches
now widely dispersed to seize the chief and his adherents, sent out the
veterans, in divers disguises, to pursue the roads it was probable he
might take, and finding him, guard him safely to the coast.  Till
Ruthven should receive accounts of their success, he forbore to forward
the letter which Wallace had left for Bruce, or to increase the
solicitude of the already anxious inhabitants of Huntingtower with any
intimation of what had happened.  But on the fourth day, Scrymgeour and
his party returned with the horrible narrative of Lumloch.

After the murder of his youthful friend, Wallace had been loaded with
irons, and conveyed, so unresistingly that he seemed in a stupor, on
board a vessel, to be carried without loss of time to the Tower of
London.  Sir John Monteith, though he never ventured into his sight,
attended as the accuser, who, to put a visor on cruelty, was to swear
away his victim's life.  The horror and grief of Ruthven at these
tidings were unutterable; and Scrymgeour, to turn the tide of the
bereaved father's thoughts to the inspiring recollection of the early
glory of his son, proceeded to narrate, that he found the beauteous
remains in the hovel, but bedecked with flowers by the village girls.
They were weeping over it, and lamenting the pitiless heart which could
slay such youth and loveliness.  To bury him in so obscure a spot,
Scrymgeour would not allow, and he had sent Stephen Ireland with the
sacred corpse to Dumbarton, with orders to see him entombed in the
chapel of that fortress.

"It is done," continued the worthy knight, "and those towers he so
bravely scaled with stand forever the monument of Edwin Ruthven."

"Scrymgeour," said the stricken father, "the shafts fall thick upon us,
but we must fulfill our duty."

Cautious of inflicting too heavy a blow on the fortitude of his wife
and of Helen, he commanded Grimsby and Hay to withhold from everybody
at Huntingtower the tidings of its young lord's fate; but he believed
it his duty not to delay the letter of Wallace to Bruce, and the
dreadful information to him of Monteith's treachery.  Ruthven ended his
short epistle to his wife by saying he should soon follow his
messenger; but that at present he could not bring himself to entirely
abandon the Lowlands to even a temporary empire of the seditious chiefs.

Ruthven ended his short epistle to his wife by saying he should soon
follow his messenger; but that at present he could not bring himself to
entirely abandon the Lowlands to even a temporary empire of the
seditious chiefs.

On Grimsby's arrival at Huntingtower he was conducted immediately to
Bruce.  Some cheering symptoms having appeared that morning, he had
just exchanged his bed for a couch when Grimsby entered the room.  The
countenance of the honest Southron was the harbinger of his news.  Lady
Helen started from her seat, and Bruce, stretching out his arms,
eagerly caught the packets the soldier presented.  Isabella inquired if
all were well with Sir William Wallace; but ere he could make an
answer, Lady Ruthven ran breathless into the room, holding out the open
letter brought by Hay to her.  Bruce had just read the first line of
his, which announced the captivity of Wallace; and, with a groan that
pierced through the souls of every one present, he made an attempt to
spring from the couch; but in the act he reeled, and fell back in a
fearful but mute mental agony.  The apprehensive heart of Helen guessed
some direful explanation; she looked with speechless inquiry upon her
aunt and Grimsby.  Isabella and Ercildown hastened to Bruce; and Lady
Ruthven being too much appalled in her own feelings to think for a
moment on the aghast Helen, hurriedly read to her from Lord Ruthven's
letter the brief but decisive account of Wallace's dangerous
situation--his seizure and conveyance to the Tower of England.  Helen
listened without a word; her heart seemed locked within her; her brain
was on fire; and gazing fixedly on the floor while she listened, all
else that was transacted around her passed unnoticed.

