"Hush thee here, my simple-minded savage! I have often told you, most
ignorant Hereward, that the skulls of those who come from your cold and
muddy Boentia of the North, are fitter to bear out twenty blows with a
sledge-hammer, than turn off one witty or ingenious idea. But follow
me, Hereward, and although I am aware that showing the fine meshes of
Grecian policy to the coarse eye of an unpractised barbarian like thee,
is much like casting pearls before swine, a thing forbidden in the
Blessed Gospel, yet, as thou hast so good a heart, and so trusty, as is
scarce to be met with among my Varangians themselves, I care not if,
while thou art in attendance on my person, I endeavour to indoctrinate
thee in some of that policy by which I myself--the Follower--the chief
of the Varangians, and therefore erected by their axes into the most
valiant of the valiant, am content to guide myself, although every way
qualified to bear me through the cross currents of the court by main
pull of oar and press of sail--a condescension in me, to do that by
policy, which no man in this imperial court, the chosen sphere of
superior wits, could so well accomplish by open force as myself. What
think'st thou, good savage?"

"I know," answered the Varangian, who walked about a step and a half
behind his leader, like an orderly of the present day behind his
officer's shoulder, "I should be sorry to trouble my head with what I
could do by my hands at once."

"Did I not say so?" replied the Follower, who had now for some minutes
led the way from the Golden Gate, and was seen gliding along the
outside of the moonlight walls, as if seeking an entrance elsewhere.
"Lo, such is the stuff of what you call your head is made! Your hands
and arms are perfect Ahitophels, compared to it. Hearken to me, thou
most ignorant of all animals,--but, for that very reason, thou stoutest
of confidants, and bravest of soldiers,--I will tell thee the very
riddle of this night-work, and yet, even then I doubt if thou canst
understand me."

"It is my present duty to try to comprehend your Valour," said the
Varangian--"I would say your policy, since you condescend to expound it
to me. As for your valour," he added, "I should be unlucky if I did not
think I understand its length and breadth already."

The Greek General coloured a little, but replied, with unaltered voice,
"True, good Hereward. We have seen each other in battle."

Hereward here could not suppress a short cough, which to those
grammarians of the day who were skilful in applying the use of accents,
would have implied no peculiar eulogium on his officer's military
bravery. Indeed, during their whole intercourse, the conversation of
the General, in spite of his tone of affected importance and
superiority, displayed an obvious respect for his companion, as one
who, in many points of action, might, if brought to the test, prove a
more effective soldier than himself. On the other hand, when the
powerful Northern warrior replied, although it was with all observance
of discipline and duty, yet the discussion might sometimes resemble
that between an ignorant macaroni officer, before the Duke of York's
reformation of the British army, and a steady sergeant of the regiment
in which they both served. There was a consciousness of superiority,
disguised by external respect, and half admitted by the leader.

"You will grant me, my simple friend," continued the chief, in the same
tone as before, "in order to lead thee by a short passage into the
deepest principle of policy which pervades this same court of
Constantinople, that the favour of the Emperor"--(here the officer
raised his casque, and the soldier made a semblance of doing so
also)--"who (be the place where he puts his foot sacred!) is the
vivifying principle of the sphere in which we live, as the sun itself
is that of humanity"----

"I have heard something like this said by our tribunes," said the
Varangian.

"It is their duty so to instruct you," answered the leader; "and I
trust that the priests also, in their sphere, forget not to teach my
Varangians their constant service to their Emperor."

"They do not omit it," replied the soldier, "though we of the exiles
know our duty."

"God forbid I should doubt it," said the commander of the battle-axes.
"All I mean is to make thee understand, my dear Hereward, that as there
are, though perhaps such do not exist in thy dark and gloomy climate, a
race of insects which are born in the first rays of the morning, and
expire with those of sunset, (thence called by us ephemeras, as
enduring one day only,) such is the case of a favourite at court, while
enjoying the smiles of the most sacred Emperor. And happy is he whose
favour, rising as the person of the sovereign emerges from the level
space which extends around the throne, displays itself in the first
imperial blaze of glory, and who, keeping his post during the meridian
splendour of the crown, has only the fate to disappear and die with the
last beam of imperial brightness."

"Your Valour," said the islander, "speaks higher language than my
Northern wits are able to comprehend. Only, methinks, rather than part
with life at the sunset, I would, since insect I must needs be, become
a moth for two or three dark hours."

"Such is the sordid desire of the vulgar, Hereward," answered the
Follower, with assumed superiority, "who are contented to enjoy life,
lacking distinction; whereas we, on the other hand, we of choicer
quality, who form the nearest and innermost circle around the Imperial
Alexius, in which he himself forms the central point, are watchful, to
woman's jealousy, of the distribution of his favours, and omit no
opportunity, whether by leaguing with or against each other, to
recommend ourselves individually to the peliar light of his
countenance."

"I think I comprehend what you mean," said the guardsman; "although as
for living such a life of intrigue--but that matters not."

"It does indeed matter not, my good Hereward," said his officer, "and
thou art lucky in having no appetite for the life I have described. Yet
have I seen barbarians rise high in the empire, and if they have not
altogether the flexibility, the malleability, as it is called--that
happy ductility which can give way to circumstances, I have yet known
those of barbaric tribes, especially if bred up at court from their
youth, who joined to a limited portion of this flexile quality enough
of a certain tough durability of temper, which, if it does not excel in
availing itself of opportunity, has no contemptible talent at creating
it. But letting comparisons pass, it follows, from this emulation of
glory, that is, of royal favour, amongst the servants of the imperial
and most sacred court, that each is desirous of distinguishing himself
by showing to the Emperor, not only that he fully understands the
duties of his own employments, but that he is capable, in case of
necessity, of discharging those of others."

"I understand," said the Saxon; "and thence it happens that the under
ministers, soldiers, and assistants of the great crown-officers, are
perpetually engaged, not in aiding each other, but in acting as spies
on their neighbours' actions?"

"Even so," answered the commander; "it is but few days since I had a
disagreeable instance of it. Every one, however dull in the intellect,
hath understood thus much, that the great Protospathaire, [Footnote:
Literally, the First Swordsman.] which title thou knowest signifies the
General-in-chief of the forces of the empire, hath me at hatred,
because I am the leader of those redoubtable Varangians, who enjoy and
well deserve, privileges exempting them from the absolute command which
he possesses over all other corps of the army--an authority which
becomes Nicanor, notwithstanding the victorious sound of his name,
nearly as well as a war-saddle would become a bullock."

"How!" said the Varangian, "does the Protospathaire pretend to any
authority over the noble exiles?--By the red dragon, under which we
will live and die, we will obey no man alive but Alexius Comnenus
himself, and our own officers!"

"Rightly and bravely resolved," said the leader; "but, my good
Hereward, let not your just indignation hurry you so far as to name the
most sacred Emperor, without raising your hand to your casque, and
adding the epithets of his lofty rank."

"I will raise my hand often enough and high enough," said the Norseman,
"when the Emperor's service requires it."

"I dare be sworn thou wilt," said Achilles Tatius, the commander of the
Varangian Imperial Body Guard, who thought the time was unfavourable
for distinguishing himself by insisting on that exact observance of
etiquette, which was one of his great pretensions to the name of a
soldier. "Yet were it not for the constant vigilance of your leader, my
child, the noble Varangians would be trode down, in the common mass of
the army, with the heathen cohorts of Huns, Scythians, or those
turban'd infidels the renegade Turks; and even for this is your
commander here in peril, because he vindicates his axe-men as worthy of
being prized above the paltry shafts of the Eastern tribes and the
javelins of the Moors, which are only fit to be playthings for
children."

"You are exposed to no danger," said the soldier, closing up to
Achilles in a confidential manner, "from which these axes can protect
you."

"Do I not know it?" said Achilles. "But it is to your arms alone that
the Follower of his most sacred Majesty now intrusts his safety."

"In aught that a soldier may do," answered Hereward; "make your own
computation, and then reckon this single arm worth two against any man
the Emperor has, not being of our own corps."

"Listen, my brave friend," continued Achilles. "This Nicanor was daring
enough to throw a reproach on our noble corps, accusing them--gods and
goddesses!--of plundering in the field, and, yet more sacrilegious, of
drinking the precious wine which was prepared for his most sacred
Majesty's own blessed consumption. I, the sacred person of the Emperor
being present, proceeded, as thou may'st well believe"--

"To give him the lie in his audacious throat!" burst in the
Varangian--"named a place of meeting somewhere in the vicinity, and
called the attendance of your poor follower, Hereward of Hampton, who
is your bond-slave for life long, for such an honour! I wish only you
had told me to get my work-day arms; but, however, I have my
battle-axe, and"--Here his companion seized a moment to break in, for
he was somewhat abashed at the lively tone of the young soldier.

"Hush thee, my son," said Achilles Tatius; "speak low, my excellent
Hereward. Thou mistakest this thing. With thee by my side, I would not,
indeed, hesitate to meet five such as Nicanor; but such is not the law
of this most hallowed empire, nor the sentiments of the three times
illustrious Prince who now rules it. Thou art debauched, my soldier,
with the swaggering stories of the Franks, of whom we hear more and
more every day."

"I would not willingly borrow any thing from those whom you call
Franks, and we Normans," answered the Varangian, in a disappointed,
dogged tone.

"Why, listen, then," said the officer as they proceeded on their walk,
"listen to the reason of the thing, and consider whether such a custom
can obtain, as that which they term the duello, in any country of
civilization and common sense, to say nothing of one which is blessed
with the domination of the most rare Alexius Comnenus. Two great lords,
or high officers, quarrel in the court, and before the reverend person
of the Emperor. They dispute about a point of fact. Now, instead of
each maintaining his own opinion by argument or evidence, suppose they
had adopted the custom of these barbarous Franks,--'Why, thou liest in
thy throat,' says the one; 'and thou liest in thy very lungs,' says
another; and they measure forth the lists of battle in the next meadow.
Each swears to the truth of his quarrel, though probably neither well
knows precisely how the fact stands. One, perhaps the hardier, truer,
and better man of the two, the Follower of the Emperor, and father of
the Varangians, (for death, my faithful follower, spares no man,) lies
dead on the ground, and the other comes back to predominate in the
court, where, had the matter been enquired into by the rules of common
sense and reason, the victor, as he is termed, would have been sent to
the gallows. And yet this is the law of arms, as your fancy pleases to
call it, friend Hereward!"

"May it please your Valour," answered the barbarian, "there is a show
of sense in what you say; but you will sooner convince me that this
blessed moonlight is the blackness of a wolf's mouth, than that I ought
to hear myself called liar, without cramming the epithet down the
speaker's throat with the spike of my battle-axe. The lie is to a man
the same as a blow, and a blow degrades him into a slave and a beast of
burden, if endured without retaliation."

"Ay, there it is!" said Achilles; "could I but get you to lay aside
that inborn barbarism, which leads you, otherwise the most disciplined
soldiers who serve the sacred Emperor, into such deadly quarrels and
feuds"--

"Sir Captain," said the Varangian, in a sullen tone, "take my advice,
and take the Varangians as you have them; for, believe my word, that if
you could teach them to endure reproaches, bear the lie, or tolerate
stripes, you would hardly find them, when their discipline is
completed, worth the single day's salt which they cost to his holiness,
if that be his title. I must tell you, moreover, valorous sir, that the
Varangians will little thank their leader, who heard them called
marauders, drunkards, and what not, and repelled not the charge on the
spot."

"Now, if I knew not the humours of my barbarians," thought Tatius, in
his own mind, "I should bring on myself a quarrel with these untamed
islanders, who the Emperor thinks can be so easily kept in discipline.
But I will settle this sport presently." Accordingly, he addressed the
Saxon in a soothing tone.

"My faithful soldier," he proceeded aloud, "we Romans, according to the
custom of our ancestors, set as much glory on actually telling the
truth, as you do in resenting the imputation of falsehood; and I could
not with honour return a charge of falsehood upon Nicanor, since what
he said was substantially true."

"What! that we Varangians were plunderers, drunkards, and the like?"
said Hereward, more impatient than before.

"No, surely, not in that broad sense," said Achilles; "but there was
too much foundation for the legend."

"When and where?" asked the Anglo-Saxon.

"You remember," replied his leader, "the long march near Laodicea,
where the Varangians beat off a cloud of Turks, and retook a train of
the imperial baggage? You know what was done that day--how you quenched
your thirst, I mean?"

"I have some reason to remember it," said Hereward of Hampton; "for we
were half choked with dust, fatigue, and, which was worst of all,
constantly fighting with our faces to the rear, when we found some
firkins of wine in certain carriages which were broken down--down our
throats it went, as if it had been the best ale in Southampton."

"Ah, unhappy!" said the Follower; "saw you not that the firkins were
stamped with the thrice excellent Grand Butler's own inviolable seal,
and set apart for the private use of his Imperial Majesty's most sacred
lips?"

"By good Saint George of merry England, worth a dozen of your Saint
George of Cappadocia, I neither thought nor cared about the matter,"
answered Hereward. "And I know your Valour drank a mighty draught
yourself out of my head-piece; not this silver bauble, but my
steel-cap, which is twice as ample. By the same token, that whereas
before you were giving orders to fall back, you were a changed man when
you had cleared your throat of the dust, and cried, 'Bide the other
brunt, my brave and stout boys of Britain!'"

"Ay," said Achilles, "I know I am but too apt to be venturous in
action. But you mistake, good Hereward; the wine I tasted in the
extremity of martial fatigue, was not that set apart for his sacred
Majesty's own peculiar mouth, but a secondary sort, preserved for the
Grand Butler himself, of which, as one of the great officers of the
household, I might right lawfully partake--the chance was nevertheless
sinfully unhappy."

"On my life," replied Hereward, "I cannot see the infelicity of
drinking when we are dying of thirst."

"But cheer up, my noble comrade," said Achilles, after he had hurried
over his own exculpation, and without noticing the Varangian's light
estimation of the crime, "his Imperial Majesty, in his ineffable
graciousness, imputes these ill-advised draughts as a crime to no one
who partook of them. He rebuked the Protospathaire for fishing up this
accusation, and said, when he had recalled the bustle and confusion of
that toilsome day, 'I thought myself well off amid that seven times
heated furnace, when we obtained a draught of the barley-wine drank by
my poor Varangians; and I drank their health, as well I might, since,
had it not been for their services, I had drunk my last; and well fare
their hearts, though they quaffed my wine in return!' And with that he
turned off, as one who said, 'I have too much of this, being a finding
of matter and ripping up of stories against Achilles Tatius and his
gallant Varangians.'"

"Now, may God bless his honest heart for it!" said Hereward, with more
downright heartiness than formal respect. "I'll drink to his health in
what I put next to my lips that quenches thirst, whether it may be ale,
wine, or ditch-water."

"Why, well said, but speak not above thy breath! and remember to put
thy hand to thy forehead, when naming, or even thinking of the
Emperor!--Well, thou knowest, Hereward, that having thus obtained the
advantage, I knew that the moment of a repulsed attack is always that
of a successful charge; and so I brought against the Protospathaire,
Nicanor, the robberies which have been committed at the Golden Gate,
and other entrances of the city, where a merchant was but of late
kidnapped and murdered, having on him certain jewels, the property of
the Patriarch."

"Ay! indeed?" said the Varangian; "and what said Alex--I mean the most
sacred Emperor, when he heard such things said of the city
warders?--though he had himself given, as we say in our land, the fox
the geese to keep."

"It may be he did," replied Achilles; "but he is a sovereign of deep
policy, and was resolved not to proceed against these treacherous
warders, or their general, the Protospathaire, without decisive proof.
His Sacred Majesty, therefore, charged me to obtain specific
circumstantial proof by thy means."

"And that I would have managed in two minutes, had you not called me
off the chase of yon cut-throat vagabond. But his grace knows the word
of a Varangian, and I can assure him that either lucre of my silver
gaberdine, which they nickname a cuirass, or the hatred of my corps,
would be sufficient to incite any of these knaves to cut the throat of
a Varangian, who appeared to be asleep.--So we go, I suppose, captain,
to bear evidence before the Emperor to this night's work?"

"No, my active soldier, hadst thou taken the runaway villain, my first
act must have been to set him free again; and my present charge to you
is, to forget that such an adventure has ever taken place."

"Ha!" said the Varangian; "this is a change of policy indeed!"

"Why, yes, brave Hereward; ere I left the palace this night, the
Patriarch made overtures of reconciliation betwixt me and the
Protospathaire, which, as our agreement is of much consequence to the
state, I could not very well reject, either as a good soldier or a good
Christian. All offences to my honour are to be in the fullest degree
repaid, for which the Patriarch interposes his warrant. The Emperor,
who will rather wink hard than see disagreements, loves better the
matter should be slurred over thus."

"And the reproaches upon the Varangians." said Hereward----

"Shall be fully retracted and atoned for," answered Achilles; "and a
weighty donative in gold dealt among the corps of the Anglo-Danish
axemen. Thou, my Hereward, mayst be distributor; and thus, if
well-managed, mayst plate thy battle-axe with gold."

"I love my axe better as it is," said the Varangian. "My father bore it
against the robber Normans at Hastings. Steel instead of gold for my
money."

"Thou mayst make thy choice, Hereward," answered his officer; "only, if
thou art poor, say the fault was thine own."

But here, in the course of their circuit round Constantinople, the
officer and his soldier came to a very small wicket or sallyport,
opening on the interior of a large and massive advanced work, which
terminated an entrance to the city itself. Here the officer halted, and
made his obedience, as a devotee who is about to enter a chapel of
peculiar sanctity.




CHAPTER THE THIRD.

     Here, youth, thy foot unbrace,
       Here, youth, thy brow unbraid;
     Each tribute that may grace
       The threshold here be paid.
     Walk with the stealthy pace
       Which Nature teaches deer,
     When, echoing in the chase,
       The hunter's horn they hear.
                          THE COURT.


Before entering, Achilles Tatius made various gesticulations, which
were imitated roughly and awkwardly by the unpractised Varangian, whose
service with his corps had been almost entirely in the field, his
routine of duty not having, till very lately, called him to serve as
one of the garrison of Constantinople. He was not, therefore,
acquainted with the minute observances which the Greeks, who were the
most formal and ceremonious soldiers and courtiers in the world,
rendered not merely to the Greek Emperor in person, but throughout the
sphere which peculiarly partook of his influence.

Achilles, having gesticulated after his own fashion, at length touched
the door with a rap, distinct at once and modest. This was thrice
repeated, when the captain whispered to his attendant, "The
interior!--for thy life, do as thou seest me do." At the same moment he
started back, and, stooping his head on his breast, with his hands over
his eyes, as if to save them from being dazzled by an expected burst of
light, awaited the answer to his summons. The Anglo-Dane, desirous to
obey his leader, imitating him as near as he could, stood side by side
in the posture of Oriental humiliation. The little portal opened
inwards, when no burst of light was seen, but four of the Varangians
were made visible in the entrance, holding each his battle-axe, as if
about to strike down the intruders who had disturbed the silence of
their watch.

"Acoulouthos," said the leader, by way of password.

"Tatius and Acoulouthos," murmured the warders, as a countersign.

Each sentinel sunk his weapon.

Achilles then reared his stately crest, with a conscious dignity at
making this display of court influence in the eyes of his soldiers.
Hereward observed an undisturbed gravity, to the surprise of his
officer, who marvelled in his own mind how he could be such a barbarian
as to regard with apathy a scene, which had in his eyes the most
impressive and peculiar awe. This indifference he imputed to the stupid
insensibility of his companion.

They passed on between the sentinels, who wheeled backward in file, on
each side of the portal, and gave the strangers entrance to a long
narrow plank, stretched across the city-moat, which was here drawn
within the enclosure of an external rampart, projecting beyond the
principal wall of the city.

"This," he whispered to Hereward, "is called the Bridge of Peril, and
it is said that it has been occasionally smeared with oil, or strewed
with dried peas, and that the bodies of men, known to have been in
company with the Emperor's most sacred person, have been taken out of
the Golden Horn, [Footnote: The harbour of Constantinople.] into which
the moat empties itself."

"I would not have thought," said the islander, raising his voice to its
usual rough tone, "that Alexius Comnenus"--

"Hush, rash and regardless of your life!" said Achilles Tatius; "to
awaken the daughter of the imperial arch, [Footnote: The daughter of
the arch was a courtly expression for the echo, as we find explained by
the courtly commander himself.] is to incur deep penalty at all times;
but when a rash delinquent has disturbed her with reflections on his
most sacred Highness the Emperor, death is a punishment far too light
for the effrontery which has interrupted her blessed slumber!--Ill hath
been my fate, to have positive commands laid on me, enjoining me to
bring into the sacred precincts a creature who hath no more of the salt
of civilization in him than to keep his mortal frame from corruption,
since of all mental culture he is totally incapable. Consider thyself,
Hereward, and bethink thee what thou art. By nature a poor
barbarian--thy best boast that thou hast slain certain Mussulmans in
thy sacred master's quarrel; and here art thou admitted into the
inviolable enclosure of the Blaquernal, and in the hearing not only of
the royal daughter of the imperial arch, which means," said the
eloquent leader, "the echo of the sublime vaults; but--Heaven be our
guide,--for what I know, within the natural hearing of the Sacred Ear
itself!"

"Well, my captain," replied the Varangian, "I cannot presume to speak
my mind after the fashion of this place; but I can easily suppose I am
but ill qualified to converse in the presence of the court, nor do I
mean therefore to say a word till I am spoken to, unless when I shall
see no better company than ourselves. To be plain, I find difficulty in
modelling my voice to a smoother tone than nature has given it. So,
henceforth, my brave captain, I will be mute, unless when you give me a
sign to speak."

"You will act wisely," said the captain. "Here be certain persons of
high rank, nay, some that have been born in the purple itself, that
will, Hereward, (alas, for thee!) prepare to sound with the line of
their courtly understanding the depths of thy barbarous and shallow
conceit. Do not, therefore, then, join their graceful smiles with thy
inhuman bursts of cachinnation, with which thou art wont to thunder
forth when opening in chorus with thy messmates."

"I tell thee I will be silent," said the Varangian, moved somewhat
beyond his mood. "If you trust my word, so; if you think I am a jackdaw
that must be speaking, whether in or out of place and purpose, I am
contented to go back again, and therein we can end the matter."

Achilles, conscious perhaps that it was his best policy not to drive
his subaltern to extremity, lowered his tone somewhat in reply to the
uncourtly note of the soldier, as if allowing something for the rude
manners of one whom he considered as not easily matched among the
Varangians themselves, for strength and valour; qualities which, in
despite of Hereward's discourtesy, Achilles suspected in his heart were
fully more valuable than all those nameless graces which a more courtly
and accomplished soldier might possess.

The expert navigator of the intricacies of the imperial residence,
carried the Varangian through two or three small complicated courts,
forming a part of the extensive Palace of the Blaquernal, [Footnote:
This palace derived its name from the neighbouring Blachernian Gate and
Bridge.] and entered the building itself by a side door--watched in
like manner by a sentinel of the Varangian Guard, whom they passed on
being recognized. In the next apartment was stationed the Court of
Guard, where were certain soldiers of the same corps amusing themselves
at games somewhat resembling the modern draughts and dice, while they
seasoned their pastime with frequent applications to deep flagons of
ale, which were furnished to them while passing away their hours of
duty. Some glances passed between Hereward and his comrades, and he
would have joined them, or at least spoke to them; for, since the
adventure of the Mitylenian, Hereward had rather thought himself
annoyed than distinguished by his moonlight ramble in the company of
his commander, excepting always the short and interesting period during
which he conceived they were on the way to fight a duel. Still, however
negligent in the strict observance of the ceremonies of the sacred
palace, the Varangians had, in their own way, rigid notions of
calculating their military duty; in consequence of which Hereward,
without speaking to his companions, followed his leader through the
guard-room, and one or two antechambers adjacent, the splendid and
luxurious furniture of which convinced him that he could be nowhere
else save in the sacred residence of his master the Emperor.

At length, having traversed passages and apartments with which the
captain seemed familiar, and which he threaded with a stealthy, silent,
and apparently reverential pace, as if, in his own inflated phrase,
afraid to awaken the sounding echoes of those lofty and monumental
halls, another species of inhabitants began to be visible. In different
entrances, and in different apartments, the northern soldier beheld
those unfortunate slaves, chiefly of African descent, raised
occasionally under the Emperors of Greece to great power and honours,
who, in that respect, imitated one of the most barbarous points of
Oriental despotism. These slaves were differently occupied; some
standing, as if on guard, at gates or in passages, with their drawn
sabres in their hands; some were sitting in the Oriental fashion, on
carpets, reposing themselves, or playing at various games, all of a
character profoundly silent. Not a word passed between the guide of
Hereward, and the withered and deformed beings whom they thus
encountered. The exchange of a glance with the principal soldier seemed
all that was necessary to ensure both an uninterrupted passage.

After making their way through several apartments, empty or thus
occupied, they, at length entered one of black marble, or some other
dark-coloured stone, much loftier and longer than the rest. Side
passages opened into it, so far as the islander could discern,
descending from several portals in the wall; but as the oils and gums
with which the lamps in these passages were fed diffused a dim vapour
around, it was difficult to ascertain, from the imperfect light, either
the shape of the hall, or the style of its architecture. At the upper
and lower ends of the chamber, there was a stronger and clearer light.
It was when they were in the middle of this huge and long apartment,
that Achilles said to the soldier, in the sort of cautionary whisper
which he appeared to have substituted in place of his natural voice
since he had crossed the Bridge of Peril--

"Remain here till I return, and stir from this hall on no account."

"To hear is to obey," answered the Varangian, an expression of
obedience, which, like many other phrases and fashions, the empire,
which still affected the name of Roman, had borrowed from the
barbarians of the East. Achilles Tatius then hastened up the steps
which led to one of the side-doors of the hall, which being slightly
pressed, its noiseless hinge gave way and admitted him.

Left alone to amuse himself as he best could, within the limits
permitted to him, the Varangian visited in succession both ends of the
hall, where the objects were more visible than elsewhere. The lower end
had in its centre a small low-browed door of iron. Over it was
displayed the Greek crucifix in bronze, and around and on every side,
the representation of shackles, fetter bolts, and the like, were also
executed in bronze, and disposed as appropriate ornaments over the
entrance. The door of the dark archway was half open, and Hereward
naturally looked in, the orders of his chief not prohibiting his
satisfying his curiosity thus far. A dense red light, more like a
distant spark than a lamp, affixed to the wall of what seemed a very
narrow and winding stair, resembling in shape and size a draw-well, the
verge of which opened on the threshold of the iron door, showed a
descent which seemed to conduct to the infernal regions. The Varangian,
however obtuse he might be considered by the quick-witted Greeks, had
no difficulty in comprehending that a staircase having such a gloomy
appearance, and the access to which was by a portal decorated in such a
melancholy style of architecture, could only lead to the dungeons of
the imperial palace, the size and complicated number of which were
neither the least remarkable, nor the least awe-imposing portion of the
sacred edifice. Listening profoundly, he even thought he caught such
accents as befit those graves of living men, the faint echoing of
groans and sighs, sounding as it were from the deep abyss beneath. But
in this respect his fancy probably filled up the sketch which his
conjectures bodied out.

"I have done nothing," he thought, "to merit being immured in one of
these subterranean dens. Surely though my captain, Achilles Tatius, is,
under favour, little better than an ass, he cannot be so false of word
as to train me to prison under false pretexts? I trow he shall first
see for the last time how the English axe plays, if such is to be the
sport of the evening. But let us see the upper end of this enormous
vault; it may bear a better omen."

Thus thinking, and not quite ruling the tramp of his armed footstep
according to the ceremonies of the place, the large-limbed Saxon strode
to the upper end of the black marble hall. The ornament of the portal
here was a small altar, like those in the temples of the heathen
deities, which projected above the centre of the arch. On this altar
smoked incense of some sort, the fumes of which rose curling in a thin
cloud to the roof, and thence extending through the hall, enveloped in
its column of smoke a singular emblem, of which the Varangian could
make nothing. It was the representation of two human arms and hands,
seeming to issue from the wall, having the palms extended and open, as
about to confer some boon on those who approached the altar. These arms
were formed of bronze, and being placed farther back than the altar
with its incense, were seen through the curling smoke by lamps so
disposed as to illuminate the whole archway. "The meaning of this,"
thought the simple barbarian, "I should well know how to explain, were
these fists clenched, and were the hall dedicated to the _pancration_,
which we call boxing; but as even these helpless Greeks use not their
hands without their fingers being closed, by St. George I can make out
nothing of their meaning."

At this instant Achilles entered the black marble hall at the same door
by which he had left it, and came up to his neophyte, as the Varangian
might be termed.

"Come with me now, Hereward, for here approaches the thick of the
onset. Now, display the utmost courage that thou canst summon up, for
believe me thy credit and name also depend on it."

"Fear nothing for either," said Hereward, "if the heart or hand of one
man can bear him through the adventure by the help of a toy like this."

"Keep thy voice low and submissive, I have told thee a score of times,"
said the leader, "and lower thine axe, which, as I bethink me, thou
hadst better leave in the outer apartment."

"With your leave, noble captain," replied Hereward, "I am unwilling to
lay aside my bread-winner. I am one of those awkward clowns who cannot
behave seemly unless I have something to occupy my hands, and my
faithful battle-axe comes most natural to me."

"Keep it then; but remember thou dash it not about according to thy
custom, nor bellow, nor shout, nor cry as in a battle-field; think of
the sacred character of the place, which exaggerates riot into
blasphemy, and remember the persons whom thou mayst chance to see, an
offence to some of whom, it may be, ranks in the same sense with
blasphemy against Heaven itself."

This lecture carried the tutor and the pupil so far as to the
side-door, and thence inducted them into a species of anteroom, from
which Achilles led his Varangian forward, until a pair of
folding-doors, opening into what proved to be a principal apartment of
the palace, exhibited to the rough-hewn native of the north a sight
equally new and surprising.

It was an apartment of the palace of the Blaquernal, dedicated to the
special service of the beloved daughter of the Emperor Alexius, the
Princess Anna Comnena, known to our times by her literary talents,
which record the history of her father's reign. She was seated, the
queen and sovereign of a literary circle, such as an imperial Princess,
porphyrogenita, or born in the sacred purple chamber itself, could
assemble in those days, and a glance around will enable us to form an
idea of her guests or companions.

The literary Princess herself had the bright eyes, straight features,
and comely and pleasing manners, which all would have allowed to the
Emperor's daughter, even if she could not have been, with severe truth,
said to have possessed them. She was placed upon a small bench, or
sofa, the fair sex here not being permitted to recline, as was the
fashion of the Roman ladies. A table before her was loaded with books,
plants, herbs, and drawings. She sat on a slight elevation, and those
who enjoyed the intimacy of the Princess, or to whom she wished to
speak in particular, were allowed, during such sublime colloquy, to
rest their knees on the little dais, or elevated place where her chair
found its station, in a posture half standing, half kneeling. Three
other seats, of different heights, were placed on the dais, and under
the same canopy of state which overshadowed that of the Princess Anna.

The first, which strictly resembled her own chair in size and
convenience, was one designed for her husband, Nicephorus Briennius. He
was said to entertain or affect the greatest respect for his wife's
erudition, though the courtiers were of opinion he would have liked to
absent himself from her evening parties more frequently than was
particularly agreeable to the Princess Anna and her imperial parents.
This was partly explained by the private tattle of the court, which
averred, that the Princess Anna Comnena had been more beautiful when
she was less learned; and that, though still a fine woman, she had
somewhat lost the charms of her person as she became enriched in her
mind.

To atone for the lowly fashion of the seat of Nicephorus Briennius, it
was placed as near to his princess as it could possibly be edged by the
ushers, so that she might not lose one look of her handsome spouse, nor
he the least particle of wisdom which might drop from the lips of his
erudite consort.

Two other seats of honour, or rather thrones,--for they had footstools
placed for the support of the feet, rests for the arms, and embroidered
pillows for the comfort of the back, not to mention the glories of the
outspreading canopy, were destined for the imperial couple, who
frequently attended their daughter's studies, which she prosecuted in
public in the way we have intimated. On such occasions, the Empress
Irene enjoyed the triumph peculiar to the mother of an accomplished
daughter, while Alexius, as it might happen, sometimes listened with
complacence to the rehearsal of his own exploits in the inflated
language of the Princess, and sometimes mildly nodded over her
dialogues upon the mysteries of philosophy, with the Patriarch Zosimus,
and other sages.

All these four distinguished seats for the persons of the Imperial
family, were occupied at the moment which we have described, excepting
that which ought to have been filled by Nicephorus Briennius, the
husband of the fair Anna Comnena. To his negligence and absence was
perhaps owing the angry spot on the brow of his fair bride. Beside her
on the platform were two white-robed nymphs of her household; female
slaves, in a word, who reposed themselves on their knees on cushions,
when their assistance was not wanted as a species of living book-desks,
to support and extend the parchment rolls, in which the Princess
recorded her own wisdom, or from which she quoted that of others. One
of these young maidens, called Astarte, was so distinguished as a
calligrapher, or beautiful writer of various alphabets and languages,
that she narrowly escaped being sent as a present to the Caliph, (who
could neither read nor write,) at a time when it was necessary to bribe
him into peace. Violante, usually called the Muse, the other attendant
of the Princess, a mistress of the vocal and instrumental art of music,
was actually sent in a compliment to soothe the temper of Robert
Guiscard, the Archduke of Apulia, who being aged and stone-deaf, and
the girl under ten years old at the time, returned the valued present
to the imperial donor, and, with the selfishness which was one of that
wily Norman's characteristics, desired to have some one sent him who
could contribute to his pleasure, instead of a twangling squalling
infant.

Beneath these elevated seats there sat, or reposed on the floor of the
hall, such favourites as were admitted. The Patriarch Zosimus, and one
or two old men, were permitted the use of certain lowly stools, which
were the only seats prepared for the learned members of the Princess's
evening parties, as they would have been called in our days. As for the
younger magnates, the honour of being permitted to join the imperial
conversation was expected to render them far superior to the paltry
accommodation of a joint-stool. Five or six courtiers, of different
dress and ages, might compose the party, who either stood, or relieved
their posture by kneeling, along the verge of an adorned fountain,
which shed a mist of such very small rain as to dispel almost
insensibly, cooling the fragrant breeze which breathed from the flowers
and shrubs, that were so disposed as to send a waste of sweets around.
One goodly old man, named Michael Agelastes, big, burly, and dressed
like an ancient Cynic philosopher, was distinguished by assuming, in a
great measure, the ragged garb and mad bearing of that sect, and by his
inflexible practice of the strictest ceremonies exigible by the
Imperial family. He was known by an affectation of cynical principle
and language, and of republican philosophy, strangely contradicted by
his practical deference to the great. It was wonderful how long this
man, now sixty years old and upwards, disdained to avail himself of the
accustomed privilege of leaning, or supporting his limbs, and with what
regularity he maintained either the standing posture or that of
absolute kneeling; but the first was so much his usual attitude, that
he acquired among his court friends the name of Elephas, or the
Elephant, because the ancients had an idea that the half-reasoning
animal, as it is called, has joints incapable of kneeling down.

"Yet I have seen them kneel when I was in the country of the
Gymnosophists," said a person present on the evening of Hereward's
introduction.

"To take up their master on their shoulders? so will ours," said the
Patriarch Zosimus, with the slight sneer which was the nearest advance
to a sarcasm that the etiquette of the Greek court permitted; for on
all ordinary occasions, it would not have offended the Presence more
surely, literally, to have drawn a poniard, than to exchange a repartee
in the imperial circle. Even the sarcasm, such as it was, would have
been thought censurable by that ceremonious court in any but the
Patriarch, to whose high rank some license was allowed.

Just as he had thus far offended decorum, Achilles Tatius, and his
soldier Hereward, entered the apartment. The former bore him with even
more than his usual degree of courtliness, as if to set his own
good-breeding off by a comparison with the inexpert bearing of his
follower; while, nevertheless, he had a secret pride in exhibiting, as
one under his own immediate and distinct command, a man whom he was
accustomed to consider as one of the finest soldiers of the army of
Alexius, whether appearance or reality were to be considered.

Some astonishment followed the abrupt entrance of the new comers.
Achilles indeed glided into the presence with the easy and quiet
extremity of respect which intimated his habitude in these regions. But
Hereward started on his entrance, and perceiving himself in company of
the court, hastily strove to remedy his disorder. His commander,
throwing round a scarce visible shrug of apology, made then a
confidential and monitory sign to Hereward to mind his conduct. What he
meant was, that he should doff his helmet and fall prostrate on the
ground. But the Anglo-Saxon, unaccustomed to interpret obscure
inferences, naturally thought of his military duties, and advanced in
front of the Emperor, as when he rendered his military homage. He made
reverence with his knee, half touched his cap, and then recovering and
shouldering his axe, stood in advance of the imperial chair, as if on
duty as a sentinel.

A gentle smile of surprise went round the circle as they gazed on the
manly appearance, and somewhat unceremonious but martial deportment of
the northern soldier. The various spectators around consulted the
Emperor's face, not knowing whether they were to take the intrusive
manner of the Varangian's entrance as matter of ill-breeding, and
manifest their horror, or whether they ought rather to consider the
bearing of the life-guardsman as indicating blunt and manly zeal, and
therefore to be received with applause.

It was some little time ere the Emperor recovered himself sufficiently
to strike a key-note, as was usual upon such occasions. Alexius
Comnenus had been wrapt for a moment into some species of slumber, or
at least absence of mind. Out of this he had been startled by the
sudden appearance of the Varangian; for though he was accustomed to
commit the outer guards of the palace to this trusty corps, yet the
deformed blacks whom we have mentioned, and who sometimes rose to be
ministers of state and commanders of armies, were, on all ordinary
occasions, intrusted with the guard of the interior of the palace.
Alexius, therefore, awakened from his slumber, and the military phrase
of his daughter still ringing in his ears as she was reading a
description of the great historical work, in which she had detailed the
conflicts of his reign, felt somewhat unprepared for the entrance and
military deportment of one of the Saxon guard, with whom he was
accustomed to associate, in general, scenes of blows, danger, and death.

After a troubled glance around, his look rested on Achilles Tatius.
"Why here," he said, "trusty Follower? why this soldier here at this
time of night?" Here, of course, was the moment for modelling the
visages _regis ad exemplum;_ but, ere the Patriarch could frame his
countenance into devout apprehension of danger, Achilles Tatius had
spoken a word or two, which reminded Alexius' memory that the soldier
had been brought there by his own special orders. "Oh, ay! true, good
fellow," said he, smoothing his troubled brow; "we had forgot that
passage among the cares of state." He then spoke to the Varangian with
a countenance more frank, and a heartier accent than he used to his
courtiers; for, to a despotic monarch, a faithful life-guardsman is a
person of confidence, while an officer of high rank is always in some
degree a subject of distrust. "Ha!" said he, "our worthy Anglo-Dane,
how fares he?"--This unceremonious salutation surprised all but him to
whom it was addressed. Hereward answered, accompanying his words with a
military obeisance which partook of heartiness rather than reverence,
with a loud unsubdued voice, which startled the presence still more
that the language was Saxon, which these foreigners occasionally used,
"_Waes hael Kaisar mirrig und machtigh!_"--that is, Be of good health,
stout and mighty Emperor. The Emperor, with a smile of intelligence, to
show he could speak to his guards in their own foreign language,
replied, by the well-known counter-signal--"_Drink hael!_'"

Immediately a page brought a silver goblet of wine. The Emperor put his
lips to it, though he scarce tasted the liquor, then commanded it to be
handed to Hereward, and bade the soldier drink. The Saxon did not wait
till he was desired a second time, but took off the contents without
hesitation. A gentle smile, decorous as the presence required, passed
over the assembly, at a feat which, though by no means wonderful in a
hyperborean, seemed prodigious in the estimation of the moderate
Greeks. Alexius himself laughed more loudly than his courtiers thought
might be becoming on their part, and mustering what few words of
Varangian he possessed, which he eked out with Greek, demanded of his
life-guardsman--"Well, my bold Briton, or Edward, as men call thee,
dost thou know the flavour of that wine?"

"Yes," answered the Varangian, without change of countenance, "I tasted
it once before at Laodicea"--

Here his officer, Achilles Tatius, became sensible that his soldier
approached delicate ground, and in vain endeavoured to gain his
attention, in order that he might furtively convey to him a hint to be
silent, or at least take heed what he said in such a presence. But the
soldier, who, with proper military observance, continued to have his
eye and attention fixed on the Emperor, as the prince whom he was bound
to answer or to serve, saw none of the hints, which Achilles at length
suffered to become so broad, that Zosimus and the Protospathaire
exchanged expressive glances, as calling on each other to notice the
by-play of the leader of the Varangians. In the meanwhile, the dialogue
between the Emperor and his soldier continued:--"How," said Alexius,
"did this draught relish compared with the former?"

"There is fairer company here, my liege, than that of the Arabian
archers," answered Hereward, with a look and bow of instinctive
good-breeding; "Nevertheless, there lacks the flavour which the heat of
the sun, the dust of the combat, with the fatigue of wielding such a
weapon as this" (advancing his axe) "for eight hours together, give to
a cup of rare wine."

"Another deficiency there might be," said Agelastes the Elephant,
"provided I am pardoned hinting at it," he added, with a look to the
throne,--"it might be the smaller size of the cup compared with that at
Laodicea." "By Taranis, you say true," answered the life-guardsman; "at
Laodicea I used my helmet."

"Let us see the cups compared together, good friend," said Agelastes,
continuing his raillery, "that we may be sure thou hast not swallowed
the present goblet; for I thought, from the manner of the draught,
there was a chance of its going down with its contents."

"There are some things which I do not easily swallow," answered the
Varangian, in a calm and indifferent tone; "but they must come from a
younger and more active man than you."

The company again smiled to each other, as if to hint that the
philosopher, though also parcel wit by profession, had the worst of the
encounter. The Emperor at the same time interfered--"Nor did I send for
thee hither, good fellow, to be baited by idle taunts."

Here Agelastes shrunk back in the circle, as a hound that has been
rebuked by the huntsman for babbling--and the Princess Anna Comnena,
who had indicated by her fair features a certain degree of impatience,
at length spoke--"Will it then please you, my imperial and much-beloved
father, to inform those blessed with admission to the Muses' temple,
for what it is that you have ordered this soldier to be this night
admitted to a place so far above his rank in life? Permit me to say, we
ought not to waste, in frivolous and silly jests, the time which is
sacred to the welfare of the empire, as every moment of your leisure
must be."

"Our daughter speaks wisely," said the Empress Irene, who, like most
mothers who do not possess much talent themselves, and are not very
capable of estimating it in others, was, nevertheless, a great admirer
of her favourite daughter's accomplishments, and ready to draw them out
on all occasions. "Permit me to remark, that in this divine and
selected palace of the Muses, dedicated to the studies of our
well-beloved and highly-gifted daughter, whose pen will preserve your
reputation, our most imperial husband, till the desolation of the
universe, and which enlivens and delights this society, the very flower
of the wits of our sublime court;--permit me to say, that we have,
merely by admitting a single life-guardsman, given our conversation the
character of that which distinguishes a barrack."

Now the Emperor Alexius Comnenus had the same feeling with many an
honest man in ordinary life when his wife begins a long oration,
especially as the Empress Irene did not always retain the observance
consistent with his awful rule and right supremacy, although especially
