me from Sir Harry Vane!'  Then he pointed out members one by one, and
said this man was a drunkard, and that man a dissipated fellow, and that
man a liar, and so on.  Then he caused the Speaker to be walked out of
his chair, told the guard to clear the House, called the mace upon the
table--which is a sign that the House is sitting--'a fool's bauble,' and
said, 'here, carry it away!'  Being obeyed in all these orders, he
quietly locked the door, put the key in his pocket, walked back to
Whitehall again, and told his friends, who were still assembled there,
what he had done.

They formed a new Council of State after this extraordinary proceeding,
and got a new Parliament together in their own way: which Oliver himself
opened in a sort of sermon, and which he said was the beginning of a
perfect heaven upon earth.  In this Parliament there sat a well-known
leather-seller, who had taken the singular name of Praise God Barebones,
and from whom it was called, for a joke, Barebones's Parliament, though
its general name was the Little Parliament.  As it soon appeared that it
was not going to put Oliver in the first place, it turned out to be not
at all like the beginning of heaven upon earth, and Oliver said it really
was not to be borne with.  So he cleared off that Parliament in much the
same way as he had disposed of the other; and then the council of
officers decided that he must be made the supreme authority of the
kingdom, under the title of the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth.

So, on the sixteenth of December, one thousand six hundred and
fifty-three, a great procession was formed at Oliver's door, and he came
out in a black velvet suit and a big pair of boots, and got into his
coach and went down to Westminster, attended by the judges, and the lord
mayor, and the aldermen, and all the other great and wonderful personages
of the country.  There, in the Court of Chancery, he publicly accepted
the office of Lord Protector.  Then he was sworn, and the City sword was
handed to him, and the seal was handed to him, and all the other things
were handed to him which are usually handed to Kings and Queens on state
occasions.  When Oliver had handed them all back, he was quite made and
completely finished off as Lord Protector; and several of the Ironsides
preached about it at great length, all the evening.



SECOND PART


Oliver Cromwell--whom the people long called OLD NOLL--in accepting the
office of Protector, had bound himself by a certain paper which was
handed to him, called 'the Instrument,' to summon a Parliament,
consisting of between four and five hundred members, in the election of
which neither the Royalists nor the Catholics were to have any share.  He
had also pledged himself that this Parliament should not be dissolved
without its own consent until it had sat five months.

When this Parliament met, Oliver made a speech to them of three hours
long, very wisely advising them what to do for the credit and happiness
of the country.  To keep down the more violent members, he required them
to sign a recognition of what they were forbidden by 'the Instrument' to
do; which was, chiefly, to take the power from one single person at the
head of the state or to command the army.  Then he dismissed them to go
to work.  With his usual vigour and resolution he went to work himself
with some frantic preachers--who were rather overdoing their sermons in
calling him a villain and a tyrant--by shutting up their chapels, and
sending a few of them off to prison.

There was not at that time, in England or anywhere else, a man so able to
govern the country as Oliver Cromwell.  Although he ruled with a strong
hand, and levied a very heavy tax on the Royalists (but not until they
had plotted against his life), he ruled wisely, and as the times
required.  He caused England to be so respected abroad, that I wish some
lords and gentlemen who have governed it under kings and queens in later
days would have taken a leaf out of Oliver Cromwell's book.  He sent bold
Admiral Blake to the Mediterranean Sea, to make the Duke of Tuscany pay
sixty thousand pounds for injuries he had done to British subjects, and
spoliation he had committed on English merchants.  He further despatched
him and his fleet to Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, to have every English
ship and every English man delivered up to him that had been taken by
pirates in those parts.  All this was gloriously done; and it began to be
thoroughly well known, all over the world, that England was governed by a
man in earnest, who would not allow the English name to be insulted or
slighted anywhere.

These were not all his foreign triumphs.  He sent a fleet to sea against
the Dutch; and the two powers, each with one hundred ships upon its side,
met in the English Channel off the North Foreland, where the fight lasted
all day long.  Dean was killed in this fight; but Monk, who commanded in
the same ship with him, threw his cloak over his body, that the sailors
might not know of his death, and be disheartened.  Nor were they.  The
English broadsides so exceedingly astonished the Dutch that they sheered
off at last, though the redoubtable Van Tromp fired upon them with his
own guns for deserting their flag.  Soon afterwards, the two fleets
engaged again, off the coast of Holland.  There, the valiant Van Tromp
was shot through the heart, and the Dutch gave in, and peace was made.

Further than this, Oliver resolved not to bear the domineering and
bigoted conduct of Spain, which country not only claimed a right to all
the gold and silver that could be found in South America, and treated the
ships of all other countries who visited those regions, as pirates, but
put English subjects into the horrible Spanish prisons of the
Inquisition.  So, Oliver told the Spanish ambassador that English ships
must be free to go wherever they would, and that English merchants must
not be thrown into those same dungeons, no, not for the pleasure of all
the priests in Spain.  To this, the Spanish ambassador replied that the
gold and silver country, and the Holy Inquisition, were his King's two
eyes, neither of which he could submit to have put out.  Very well, said
Oliver, then he was afraid he (Oliver) must damage those two eyes
directly.

So, another fleet was despatched under two commanders, PENN and VENABLES,
for Hispaniola; where, however, the Spaniards got the better of the
fight.  Consequently, the fleet came home again, after taking Jamaica on
the way.  Oliver, indignant with the two commanders who had not done what
bold Admiral Blake would have done, clapped them both into prison,
declared war against Spain, and made a treaty with France, in virtue of
which it was to shelter the King and his brother the Duke of York no
longer.  Then, he sent a fleet abroad under bold Admiral Blake, which
brought the King of Portugal to his senses--just to keep its hand in--and
then engaged a Spanish fleet, sunk four great ships, and took two more,
laden with silver to the value of two millions of pounds: which dazzling
prize was brought from Portsmouth to London in waggons, with the populace
of all the towns and villages through which the waggons passed, shouting
with all their might.  After this victory, bold Admiral Blake sailed away
to the port of Santa Cruz to cut off the Spanish treasure-ships coming
from Mexico.  There, he found them, ten in number, with seven others to
take care of them, and a big castle, and seven batteries, all roaring and
blazing away at him with great guns.  Blake cared no more for great guns
than for pop-guns--no more for their hot iron balls than for snow-balls.
He dashed into the harbour, captured and burnt every one of the ships,
and came sailing out again triumphantly, with the victorious English flag
flying at his masthead.  This was the last triumph of this great
commander, who had sailed and fought until he was quite worn out.  He
died, as his successful ship was coming into Plymouth Harbour amidst the
joyful acclamations of the people, and was buried in state in Westminster
Abbey.  Not to lie there, long.

Over and above all this, Oliver found that the VAUDOIS, or Protestant
people of the valleys of Lucerne, were insolently treated by the Catholic
powers, and were even put to death for their religion, in an audacious
and bloody manner.  Instantly, he informed those powers that this was a
thing which Protestant England would not allow; and he speedily carried
his point, through the might of his great name, and established their
right to worship God in peace after their own harmless manner.

Lastly, his English army won such admiration in fighting with the French
against the Spaniards, that, after they had assaulted the town of Dunkirk
together, the French King in person gave it up to the English, that it
might be a token to them of their might and valour.

There were plots enough against Oliver among the frantic religionists
(who called themselves Fifth Monarchy Men), and among the disappointed
Republicans.  He had a difficult game to play, for the Royalists were
always ready to side with either party against him.  The 'King over the
water,' too, as Charles was called, had no scruples about plotting with
any one against his life; although there is reason to suppose that he
would willingly have married one of his daughters, if Oliver would have
had such a son-in-law.  There was a certain COLONEL SAXBY of the army,
once a great supporter of Oliver's but now turned against him, who was a
grievous trouble to him through all this part of his career; and who came
and went between the discontented in England and Spain, and Charles who
put himself in alliance with Spain on being thrown off by France.  This
man died in prison at last; but not until there had been very serious
plots between the Royalists and Republicans, and an actual rising of them
in England, when they burst into the city of Salisbury, on a Sunday
night, seized the judges who were going to hold the assizes there next
day, and would have hanged them but for the merciful objections of the
more temperate of their number.  Oliver was so vigorous and shrewd that
he soon put this revolt down, as he did most other conspiracies; and it
was well for one of its chief managers--that same Lord Wilmot who had
assisted in Charles's flight, and was now EARL OF ROCHESTER--that he made
his escape.  Oliver seemed to have eyes and ears everywhere, and secured
such sources of information as his enemies little dreamed of.  There was
a chosen body of six persons, called the Sealed Knot, who were in the
closest and most secret confidence of Charles.  One of the foremost of
these very men, a SIR RICHARD WILLIS, reported to Oliver everything that
passed among them, and had two hundred a year for it.

MILES SYNDARCOMB, also of the old army, was another conspirator against
the Protector.  He and a man named CECIL, bribed one of his Life Guards
to let them have good notice when he was going out--intending to shoot
him from a window.  But, owing either to his caution or his good fortune,
they could never get an aim at him.  Disappointed in this design, they
got into the chapel in Whitehall, with a basketful of combustibles, which
were to explode by means of a slow match in six hours; then, in the noise
and confusion of the fire, they hoped to kill Oliver.  But, the Life
Guardsman himself disclosed this plot; and they were seized, and Miles
died (or killed himself in prison) a little while before he was ordered
for execution.  A few such plotters Oliver caused to be beheaded, a few
more to be hanged, and many more, including those who rose in arms
against him, to be sent as slaves to the West Indies.  If he were rigid,
he was impartial too, in asserting the laws of England.  When a
Portuguese nobleman, the brother of the Portuguese ambassador, killed a
London citizen in mistake for another man with whom he had had a quarrel,
Oliver caused him to be tried before a jury of Englishmen and foreigners,
and had him executed in spite of the entreaties of all the ambassadors in
London.

One of Oliver's own friends, the DUKE OF OLDENBURGH, in sending him a
present of six fine coach-horses, was very near doing more to please the
Royalists than all the plotters put together.  One day, Oliver went with
his coach, drawn by these six horses, into Hyde Park, to dine with his
secretary and some of his other gentlemen under the trees there.  After
dinner, being merry, he took it into his head to put his friends inside
and to drive them home: a postillion riding one of the foremost horses,
as the custom was.  On account of Oliver's being too free with the whip,
the six fine horses went off at a gallop, the postillion got thrown, and
Oliver fell upon the coach-pole and narrowly escaped being shot by his
own pistol, which got entangled with his clothes in the harness, and went
off.  He was dragged some distance by the foot, until his foot came out
of the shoe, and then he came safely to the ground under the broad body
of the coach, and was very little the worse.  The gentlemen inside were
only bruised, and the discontented people of all parties were much
disappointed.

The rest of the history of the Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell is a
history of his Parliaments.  His first one not pleasing him at all, he
waited until the five months were out, and then dissolved it.  The next
was better suited to his views; and from that he desired to get--if he
could with safety to himself--the title of King.  He had had this in his
mind some time: whether because he thought that the English people, being
more used to the title, were more likely to obey it; or whether because
he really wished to be a king himself, and to leave the succession to
that title in his family, is far from clear.  He was already as high, in
England and in all the world, as he would ever be, and I doubt if he
cared for the mere name.  However, a paper, called the 'Humble Petition
and Advice,' was presented to him by the House of Commons, praying him to
take a high title and to appoint his successor.  That he would have taken
the title of King there is no doubt, but for the strong opposition of the
army.  This induced him to forbear, and to assent only to the other
points of the petition.  Upon which occasion there was another grand show
in Westminster Hall, when the Speaker of the House of Commons formally
invested him with a purple robe lined with ermine, and presented him with
a splendidly bound Bible, and put a golden sceptre in his hand.  The next
time the Parliament met, he called a House of Lords of sixty members, as
the petition gave him power to do; but as that Parliament did not please
him either, and would not proceed to the business of the country, he
jumped into a coach one morning, took six Guards with him, and sent them
to the right-about.  I wish this had been a warning to Parliaments to
avoid long speeches, and do more work.

It was the month of August, one thousand six hundred and fifty-eight,
when Oliver Cromwell's favourite daughter, ELIZABETH CLAYPOLE (who had
lately lost her youngest son), lay very ill, and his mind was greatly
troubled, because he loved her dearly.  Another of his daughters was
married to LORD FALCONBERG, another to the grandson of the Earl of
Warwick, and he had made his son RICHARD one of the Members of the Upper
House.  He was very kind and loving to them all, being a good father and
a good husband; but he loved this daughter the best of the family, and
went down to Hampton Court to see her, and could hardly be induced to
stir from her sick room until she died.  Although his religion had been
of a gloomy kind, his disposition had been always cheerful.  He had been
fond of music in his home, and had kept open table once a week for all
officers of the army not below the rank of captain, and had always
preserved in his house a quiet, sensible dignity.  He encouraged men of
genius and learning, and loved to have them about him.  MILTON was one of
his great friends.  He was good humoured too, with the nobility, whose
dresses and manners were very different from his; and to show them what
good information he had, he would sometimes jokingly tell them when they
were his guests, where they had last drunk the health of the 'King over
the water,' and would recommend them to be more private (if they could)
another time.  But he had lived in busy times, had borne the weight of
heavy State affairs, and had often gone in fear of his life.  He was ill
of the gout and ague; and when the death of his beloved child came upon
him in addition, he sank, never to raise his head again.  He told his
physicians on the twenty-fourth of August that the Lord had assured him
that he was not to die in that illness, and that he would certainly get
better.  This was only his sick fancy, for on the third of September,
which was the anniversary of the great battle of Worcester, and the day
of the year which he called his fortunate day, he died, in the sixtieth
year of his age.  He had been delirious, and had lain insensible some
hours, but he had been overheard to murmur a very good prayer the day
before.  The whole country lamented his death.  If you want to know the
real worth of Oliver Cromwell, and his real services to his country, you
can hardly do better than compare England under him, with England under
CHARLES THE SECOND.

He had appointed his son Richard to succeed him, and after there had
been, at Somerset House in the Strand, a lying in state more splendid
than sensible--as all such vanities after death are, I think--Richard
became Lord Protector.  He was an amiable country gentleman, but had none
of his father's great genius, and was quite unfit for such a post in such
a storm of parties.  Richard's Protectorate, which only lasted a year and
a half, is a history of quarrels between the officers of the army and the
Parliament, and between the officers among themselves; and of a growing
discontent among the people, who had far too many long sermons and far
too few amusements, and wanted a change.  At last, General Monk got the
army well into his own hands, and then in pursuance of a secret plan he
seems to have entertained from the time of Oliver's death, declared for
the King's cause.  He did not do this openly; but, in his place in the
House of Commons, as one of the members for Devonshire, strongly
advocated the proposals of one SIR JOHN GREENVILLE, who came to the House
with a letter from Charles, dated from Breda, and with whom he had
previously been in secret communication.  There had been plots and
counterplots, and a recall of the last members of the Long Parliament,
and an end of the Long Parliament, and risings of the Royalists that were
made too soon; and most men being tired out, and there being no one to
head the country now great Oliver was dead, it was readily agreed to
welcome Charles Stuart.  Some of the wiser and better members said--what
was most true--that in the letter from Breda, he gave no real promise to
govern well, and that it would be best to make him pledge himself
beforehand as to what he should be bound to do for the benefit of the
kingdom.  Monk said, however, it would be all right when he came, and he
could not come too soon.

So, everybody found out all in a moment that the country _must_ be
prosperous and happy, having another Stuart to condescend to reign over
it; and there was a prodigious firing off of guns, lighting of bonfires,
ringing of bells, and throwing up of caps.  The people drank the King's
health by thousands in the open streets, and everybody rejoiced.  Down
came the Arms of the Commonwealth, up went the Royal Arms instead, and
out came the public money.  Fifty thousand pounds for the King, ten
thousand pounds for his brother the Duke of York, five thousand pounds
for his brother the Duke of Gloucester.  Prayers for these gracious
Stuarts were put up in all the churches; commissioners were sent to
Holland (which suddenly found out that Charles was a great man, and that
it loved him) to invite the King home; Monk and the Kentish grandees went
to Dover, to kneel down before him as he landed.  He kissed and embraced
Monk, made him ride in the coach with himself and his brothers, came on
to London amid wonderful shoutings, and passed through the army at
Blackheath on the twenty-ninth of May (his birthday), in the year one
thousand six hundred and sixty.  Greeted by splendid dinners under tents,
by flags and tapestry streaming from all the houses, by delighted crowds
in all the streets, by troops of noblemen and gentlemen in rich dresses,
by City companies, train-bands, drummers, trumpeters, the great Lord
Mayor, and the majestic Aldermen, the King went on to Whitehall.  On
entering it, he commemorated his Restoration with the joke that it really
would seem to have been his own fault that he had not come long ago,
since everybody told him that he had always wished for him with all his
heart.




CHAPTER XXXV--ENGLAND UNDER CHARLES THE SECOND, CALLED THE MERRY MONARCH


There never were such profligate times in England as under Charles the
Second.  Whenever you see his portrait, with his swarthy, ill-looking
face and great nose, you may fancy him in his Court at Whitehall,
surrounded by some of the very worst vagabonds in the kingdom (though
they were lords and ladies), drinking, gambling, indulging in vicious
conversation, and committing every kind of profligate excess.  It has
been a fashion to call Charles the Second 'The Merry Monarch.'  Let me
try to give you a general idea of some of the merry things that were
done, in the merry days when this merry gentleman sat upon his merry
throne, in merry England.

The first merry proceeding was--of course--to declare that he was one of
the greatest, the wisest, and the noblest kings that ever shone, like the
blessed sun itself, on this benighted earth.  The next merry and pleasant
piece of business was, for the Parliament, in the humblest manner, to
give him one million two hundred thousand pounds a year, and to settle
upon him for life that old disputed tonnage and poundage which had been
so bravely fought for.  Then, General Monk being made EARL OF ALBEMARLE,
and a few other Royalists similarly rewarded, the law went to work to see
what was to be done to those persons (they were called Regicides) who had
been concerned in making a martyr of the late King.  Ten of these were
merrily executed; that is to say, six of the judges, one of the council,
Colonel Hacker and another officer who had commanded the Guards, and HUGH
PETERS, a preacher who had preached against the martyr with all his
heart.  These executions were so extremely merry, that every horrible
circumstance which Cromwell had abandoned was revived with appalling
cruelty.  The hearts of the sufferers were torn out of their living
bodies; their bowels were burned before their faces; the executioner cut
jokes to the next victim, as he rubbed his filthy hands together, that
were reeking with the blood of the last; and the heads of the dead were
drawn on sledges with the living to the place of suffering.  Still, even
so merry a monarch could not force one of these dying men to say that he
was sorry for what he had done.  Nay, the most memorable thing said among
them was, that if the thing were to do again they would do it.

Sir Harry Vane, who had furnished the evidence against Strafford, and was
one of the most staunch of the Republicans, was also tried, found guilty,
and ordered for execution.  When he came upon the scaffold on Tower Hill,
after conducting his own defence with great power, his notes of what he
had meant to say to the people were torn away from him, and the drums and
trumpets were ordered to sound lustily and drown his voice; for, the
people had been so much impressed by what the Regicides had calmly said
with their last breath, that it was the custom now, to have the drums and
trumpets always under the scaffold, ready to strike up.  Vane said no
more than this: 'It is a bad cause which cannot bear the words of a dying
man:' and bravely died.

These merry scenes were succeeded by another, perhaps even merrier.  On
the anniversary of the late King's death, the bodies of Oliver Cromwell,
Ireton, and Bradshaw, were torn out of their graves in Westminster Abbey,
dragged to Tyburn, hanged there on a gallows all day long, and then
beheaded.  Imagine the head of Oliver Cromwell set upon a pole to be
stared at by a brutal crowd, not one of whom would have dared to look the
living Oliver in the face for half a moment!  Think, after you have read
this reign, what England was under Oliver Cromwell who was torn out of
his grave, and what it was under this merry monarch who sold it, like a
merry Judas, over and over again.

Of course, the remains of Oliver's wife and daughter were not to be
spared either, though they had been most excellent women.  The base
clergy of that time gave up their bodies, which had been buried in the
Abbey, and--to the eternal disgrace of England--they were thrown into a
pit, together with the mouldering bones of Pym and of the brave and bold
old Admiral Blake.

The clergy acted this disgraceful part because they hoped to get the
nonconformists, or dissenters, thoroughly put down in this reign, and to
have but one prayer-book and one service for all kinds of people, no
matter what their private opinions were.  This was pretty well, I think,
for a Protestant Church, which had displaced the Romish Church because
people had a right to their own opinions in religious matters.  However,
they carried it with a high hand, and a prayer-book was agreed upon, in
which the extremest opinions of Archbishop Laud were not forgotten.  An
Act was passed, too, preventing any dissenter from holding any office
under any corporation.  So, the regular clergy in their triumph were soon
as merry as the King.  The army being by this time disbanded, and the
King crowned, everything was to go on easily for evermore.

I must say a word here about the King's family.  He had not been long
upon the throne when his brother the Duke of Gloucester, and his sister
the PRINCESS OF ORANGE, died within a few months of each other, of small-
pox.  His remaining sister, the PRINCESS HENRIETTA, married the DUKE OF
ORLEANS, the brother of LOUIS THE FOURTEENTH, King of France.  His
brother JAMES, DUKE OF YORK, was made High Admiral, and by-and-by became
a Catholic.  He was a gloomy, sullen, bilious sort of man, with a
remarkable partiality for the ugliest women in the country.  He married,
under very discreditable circumstances, ANNE HYDE, the daughter of LORD
CLARENDON, then the King's principal Minister--not at all a delicate
minister either, but doing much of the dirty work of a very dirty palace.
It became important now that the King himself should be married; and
divers foreign Monarchs, not very particular about the character of their
son-in-law, proposed their daughters to him.  The KING OF PORTUGAL
offered his daughter, CATHERINE OF BRAGANZA, and fifty thousand pounds:
in addition to which, the French King, who was favourable to that match,
offered a loan of another fifty thousand.  The King of Spain, on the
other hand, offered any one out of a dozen of Princesses, and other hopes
of gain.  But the ready money carried the day, and Catherine came over in
state to her merry marriage.

The whole Court was a great flaunting crowd of debauched men and
shameless women; and Catherine's merry husband insulted and outraged her
in every possible way, until she consented to receive those worthless
creatures as her very good friends, and to degrade herself by their
companionship.  A MRS. PALMER, whom the King made LADY CASTLEMAINE, and
afterwards DUCHESS OF CLEVELAND, was one of the most powerful of the bad
women about the Court, and had great influence with the King nearly all
through his reign.  Another merry lady named MOLL DAVIES, a dancer at the
theatre, was afterwards her rival.  So was NELL GWYN, first an orange
girl and then an actress, who really had good in her, and of whom one of
the worst things I know is, that actually she does seem to have been fond
of the King.  The first DUKE OF ST. ALBANS was this orange girl's child.
In like manner the son of a merry waiting-lady, whom the King created
DUCHESS OF PORTSMOUTH, became the DUKE OF RICHMOND.  Upon the whole it is
not so bad a thing to be a commoner.

The Merry Monarch was so exceedingly merry among these merry ladies, and
some equally merry (and equally infamous) lords and gentlemen, that he
soon got through his hundred thousand pounds, and then, by way of raising
a little pocket-money, made a merry bargain.  He sold Dunkirk to the
French King for five millions of livres.  When I think of the dignity to
which Oliver Cromwell raised England in the eyes of foreign powers, and
when I think of the manner in which he gained for England this very
Dunkirk, I am much inclined to consider that if the Merry Monarch had
been made to follow his father for this action, he would have received
his just deserts.

Though he was like his father in none of that father's greater qualities,
he was like him in being worthy of no trust.  When he sent that letter to
the Parliament, from Breda, he did expressly promise that all sincere
religious opinions should be respected.  Yet he was no sooner firm in his
power than he consented to one of the worst Acts of Parliament ever
passed.  Under this law, every minister who should not give his solemn
assent to the Prayer-Book by a certain day, was declared to be a minister
no longer, and to be deprived of his church.  The consequence of this was
that some two thousand honest men were taken from their congregations,
and reduced to dire poverty and distress.  It was followed by another
outrageous law, called the Conventicle Act, by which any person above the
age of sixteen who was present at any religious service not according to
the Prayer-Book, was to be imprisoned three months for the first offence,
six for the second, and to be transported for the third.  This Act alone
filled the prisons, which were then most dreadful dungeons, to
overflowing.

The Covenanters in Scotland had already fared no better.  A base
Parliament, usually known as the Drunken Parliament, in consequence of
its principal members being seldom sober, had been got together to make
laws against the Covenanters, and to force all men to be of one mind in
religious matters.  The MARQUIS OF ARGYLE, relying on the King's honour,
had given himself up to him; but, he was wealthy, and his enemies wanted
his wealth.  He was tried for treason, on the evidence of some private
letters in which he had expressed opinions--as well he might--more
favourable to the government of the late Lord Protector than of the
present merry and religious King.  He was executed, as were two men of
mark among the Covenanters; and SHARP, a traitor who had once been the
friend of the Presbyterians and betrayed them, was made Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, to teach the Scotch how to like bishops.

Things being in this merry state at home, the Merry Monarch undertook a
war with the Dutch; principally because they interfered with an African
company, established with the two objects of buying gold-dust and slaves,
of which the Duke of York was a leading member.  After some preliminary
hostilities, the said Duke sailed to the coast of Holland with a fleet of
ninety-eight vessels of war, and four fire-ships.  This engaged with the
Dutch fleet, of no fewer than one hundred and thirteen ships.  In the
great battle between the two forces, the Dutch lost eighteen ships, four
admirals, and seven thousand men.  But, the English on shore were in no
