
"Did she say that, Reub? Did she say those words? Did she say that about
me? Are you sure?" interrupted Perez, in a hushed tone of incredulous
ecstasy, as he nervously gripped his brother's shoulder.

"Them wuz her words, nigh es I kin reckullec," replied Reub, "an that
'bout yew she said for sartin. She said we wuz ter sen' word ter ye,
so's ye mout git away, an then she guv me the countersign for ter say
tew the sentries, so's I could git by ter fetch ye word."

"To think of her doing all that for me, Reub. I can't believe it. It's
too much. Because you see, Reub, if she'd take all that trouble for me,
it shows--it shows--I think it must be she"--he hesitated, and finally
gulped out--"cares for me, Reub," and his eyes filled with tears.

"Ye may say so, for sartin, Perez," replied his brother with sympathetic
enthusiasm. "A gal wouldn' dew what she did for no feller, unless she
sat store by him, naow. It's a sign fer sure."

"Reub," said Perez, in a voice uneven with suppressed emotion, "now I
know she cares for me that much, I don't mind a snap of the finger what
happens to me. If they came to hang me this minute, I should laugh in
their faces," and he sprang up and paced to and fro, with fixed eyes
and a set smile, and then, still wearing the same look came back and sat
down by his brother, and said: "I sort of hoped she cared for me before,
but it seemed most too much to believe. You don't know how I feel, Reub.
You can't think, nohow."

"Yes I can," said Reuben, quietly; "I guess ye feel suthin ez I uster
baout Jemimy, sorter light inside an so pleased like ye don't keer a
copper ef ye live or die. Yes, I know mor'n ye think I dew baout the
feelin's a feller hez long o' women, on'y ye see it didn't come ter
nothin with Jemimy, fer wen my fust crop failed, an I was tuk for debt,
Peleg got her arter all."

"I didn't think 'bout Jemimy, Reub," said Perez, softly. In the
affluence of his own happiness, he was overwhelmed with compassion for
his brother. He was stricken by the patient look upon his pale face.
"Never mind, Reub," he said. "Don't be downhearted. You and me 'll stand
by each other, an mebbe it'll be made up to ye some time," and he laid
his arm tenderly on the other's shoulder.

"I on'y spoke on't 'cause o' what ye said 'bout my not under-standin,"
said Reuben, excusing himself for having made a demand on the other's
compassion. "She never guv me no sech reasin ter think she set store by
me ez ye've hed ter night 'long o' Desire Edwards. I wuzn't a comparin
on us, nohow."

There was a space of silence finally disturbed by a noise of boots in
an adjoining room and presently Abner Rathbun stumped out. Abner had
escaped at the West Stockbridge rout and having made his way to Perez,
at Lee, had been forgiven his desertion by the latter and made his chief
lieutenant and adviser.

"Hello, Reub," he exclaimed. "Whar'd ye drop from? Heard so much talkin,
callated suthin must a happened, an turned out ter see what it wuz.
Fetched any news, hev ye Reub? Spit it aout. Guess it muss be pooty
good, or the cap'n would'n be lookin so darned pleased."

"The news I fetched is that the army in Stockbridge is going to attack
you to-morrow at dawn."

Abner's jaw fell. He looked from Reuben to Perez, whose face as he
gazed absently at the coals on the hearth still wore the smile which
had attracted his attention. This seemed to decide him, for as he turned
again to Reub, he said, shrewdly:

"Yew can't fool me with no gum-game o' that sort. I guess Perez wouldn't
be grinnin that ar way ef he callated we wuz gonter be all chawed up
afore mornin."

"Reuben tells the truth. They are going to attack us in the morning,"
said Perez, looking up. Abner stared at him a moment, and then demanded
half-sullen, half-puzzled:

"Wal, Cap'n, wat dew ye see tew larf at in that? Derned ef I see nothin
funny."

"Your glum mug would be enough to laugh at if there was nothing else
Abner," said Perez, getting up and gayly slapping the giant on the
shoulder.

"I s'pose ye must hev got some plan in yer head fer gittin the best on
em," suggested Abner, at last, evidently racking his brains to suggest a
hypothesis to explain his commander's untimely levity.

"No, Abner," replied Perez, "I have not thought of any plan yet. What do
you think about the business?"

"I'm afeard thar ain't no dependin on the men fer a scrimmage. I callate
they'll scatter ez soon's the news gits raound that the white feathers
be comin, 'thout even waitin fer em tew git in sight," was Abner's
gloomy response.

"I shouldn't be at all surprised if they did. I don't believe there's a
dozen in the lot we could depend on," said Perez cheerfully.

"Wat's the matter with ye, Cap'n," burst out Abner, in desperation. "I
can't make aout wat's come over ye. Ye talk 's though ye didn' keer a
Bungtaown copper wether we fit or run, or stayed an got hung, but jess
set thar a grinnin tew yerself ez if ye'd loss yer wits."

Perez laughed again, but checking himself, replied: "I s'pose I do seem
a little queer, Abner, but you mustn't mind that. I hope I haven't lost
my wits quite. Let's see, now," he went on in a businesslike tone, with
the air of one abruptly enforcing a new direction upon his thoughts.
"We could get up the men and retreat to the mountains by morning, but
two-thirds would desert before we'd marched two miles, and slink away
home, and the worst of it is the poor chaps would be arrested and abused
when they got home."

"That's sartin so, Cap'n," said Abner, his anxiety for Perez' sanity
evidently diminishing.

"It's a shame to retreat, too, with such a position to defend. Why,
Abner, just look at it. The snow is three to four feet deep in the
fields and woods, and the enemy can only come in on the road. That road
is just like a causeway through a swamp or a bridge. They can't go off
it without snowshoes. With half a company that I could depend on, I'd
defend it against a regiment. If I wanted breastworks all I've got to
do is to dig paths in the snow. I could hold Lee till the snow melts
or till they took it by zig-zags and parallels through the drifts. But
there's no use talking about any such thing, for there's no fight left
in the men, not a bit. If they had ever so little grit left, we might
hold out long enough at least to get some sort of fair terms, but, Lord
they haven't. They'll just run like sheep."

"Ef we on'y hed a cannon naow, ef 'twan't but a three-pounder!" said
Abner, pathetically. "We could jess sot it in the middle of the road,
and all creation couldn't get intew Lee. Yew an I could stop em alone
then. Gosh naow wat wouldn't I give fer a cannon the size o' Mis Perry's
yarn-beam thar. Ef the white feathers seen a gun the size o' that
p'inted at em an a feller behind it with a hot coal, I callate they'd be
durn glad tew 'gree tew a fa'r settlement. But Lordomassy, gosh knows we
hain't got no cannon, and we can't make one."

"I don't know about that, Abner," replied Perez, deliberately. His
glance had followed Abner's to the loom standing in the back of the
kitchen, and as he answered his lieutenant he was fixedly regarding the
very yarn-beam to which the other had alluded, a round, smooth, dark
colored wooden roller, five or six feet long and eight or ten inches
through.

But perhaps it will be better to let Dr. Partridge tell the rest of the
story as he related it nearly three weeks later for the amusement of
Desire during her convalescence from the cold and fever through which he
had brought her.

"It was pitch dark when we left Stockbridge," said the doctor, "and
allowing a good hour for the march owing to the state of the road, the
General calculated we should reach Lee about dawn and catch the rascals
taking their beauty sleep. It was excessively cold and our fingers began
to grow numb very soon, and if anybody touched the iron part of his gun
without the mittens he would leave a piece of skin behind. But you see
we had just heard of General Lincoln's thirty-mile night march from
Hadley to Petersham in even worse weather, and for the credit of
Berkshire, we had to keep on if we froze to death. We met nobody until
we were within half a mile of Lee. Then we overhauled one of the rebel
sentries, and captured him, though not till he had let off his gun. Then
we heard the drum beating in the town. There was nothing to do but to
hurry on as fast as we could. And so we did for about ten minutes more
when somebody said, 'There they are.' Sure enough, about twenty rods
off, where the road enters the village was a black mass of men occupying
its entire breadth with a man on horseback in front whom I took for
Hamlin. We kept on a little longer and then the General ordered us to
halt, and Squire Woodbridge rode forward within easy speaking distance
of the rebels and began to read the riot act. But he had no sooner
begun than Hamlin made a gesture, and a drum struck up lustily among the
rebels, drowning the Squire's voice. Nevertheless he made an end of
the reading so that we might proceed legally and thereupon the General
ordered the men to fix bayonets and gave the order to march. Then it
seemed that the rebels were about to retire, for their line fell back a
little and already our men had given a cheer when a sharp-eyed fellow in
the front rank sang out:

"'They've got a cannon!' And when we looked, sure enough the slight
falling back of the rebels we had noted, had only been to uncover a
piece of artillery which was planted squarely in the middle of the road,
pointing directly at us. A man with a smoking brazier of coals stood by
the breech, and another, whom by his size I took to be Abner Rathbun,
with a pair of tongs held a bright coal which he had taken from it. It
being yet rather dark, though close on sunrise, we could plainly see the
redness of the coal the fellow held in the tongs above the touchhole
of the gun, and ticklish near, it seemed, I can say. I know not to this
day, and others say the same, whether any one gave the order to halt or
not, but it is certain we stopped square, nor were those behind at all
disposed to push forward such as were in front, for there is this about
cannon balls that is different from musket balls. The front rank serves
the rear rank as a shield from the bullets, but the cannon ball plows
the whole length of the file and kills those behind as readily as those
before. And, moreover, we had as soon expected to see the devil in horns
and tail leading the rebels, as this cannon, for no one supposed there
was a piece of artillery in all Berkshire. You must know the place we
were in, was, moreover, as bad as could be; for we could only march
by the road, by reason of the deep snow on either hand, which was like
walls shutting us in, and leaving room for no more than eight men to
go abreast. If the cannon were loaded with a ball, it must needs cut
a swathe like a scythe from the first man to the last, and if it were
loaded with small balls, all of us who were near the front must needs go
down at once. The General asked counsel of us who were riding with him
at the front what had best be done, whereupon Squire Sedgwick advised
that half a dozen of us with horses should put spurs to them and dash
suddenly upon the cannon and take it. 'Ten to one,' he said, 'the rascal
with the tongs will not dare touch off the gun, and if he does, why,
'tis but one shot.' But this seemed to us all a foolhardy thing; for,
though there were but one shot, who could tell whom it might hit? It
might be one of us as well as another. Your uncle Jahleel, as it seemed,
lest any should deem Squire Sedgwick braver than he, declared that he
was ready, but the others of us, by no means fell in with the notion and
General Patterson said flatly that he was responsible for all our lives
and would permit no such madness. And then, as no one had any other plan
to propose, we were in a quandary, and I noted that each one had his
eyes, as it were, fastened immovably upon the cannon and the glowing
coal which the fellow held in the tongs. For, in order to keep it clear
of ash, he kept waving it to and fro, and once or twice when he brought
it perilously close to the touchhole, I give you my word I began
to think in a moment of all the things I had done in my life. And I
remember, too, that if one of us was speaking when the fellow made as if
he would touch off the gun, there was an interruption of a moment in his
speech, ere he went on again. It must be that not only civilians like
myself, but men of war also do find a certain discomposing effect in
the stare of a cannon. Meanwhile the wind drew through the narrow path
wherein we stood, with vehemence, and, whereas we had barely kept our
blood in motion by our laboring through the snow, now that we stood
still, we seemed freezing. Our horses shivered and set their ears back
with the cold, but it was notable how quietly the men stood packed in
the road behind us, though they must have been well nigh frost-bitten.
No doubt they were absorbed in watching the fellow swinging the coal as
we were. But if we did not advance, we must retreat, that was plain.
We could not stay where we were. It was, I fancy, because no one could
bring himself to propose such an ignoble issue to our enterprise, that
we were for a little space all dumb.

"Then it was when the General could no longer have put off giving the
order to right about march, that Hamlin tied a white rag to his sword
and rode toward us holding it aloft. When he had come about half way, he
cried out:

"'Will your commander and Dr. Partridge, if he be among you, ride out to
meet me? I would have a parley.'

"Why he pitched on me I know not, save that, wanting a witness, he chose
me as being a little more friendly to him than most of the Stockbridge
gentlemen. When we had ridden forward, he saluted us with great
cordiality and good humor, as if forsooth, instead of being within an
ace of murdering us all, he had but been trying us with a jest.

"'I see,' said he to the general, 'that your fellows like not the look
of my artillery, and I blame them not, for it will be a nasty business
in that narrow lane if we have to let drive, as assuredly we shall do
if you come another foot further. But it may be we can settle our
difference without bloodshed. My men have fled together to me to be
protected from arrest and prosecution, for what they have heretofore
done, not because they intend further to attack the government. I will
agree that they shall disperse and go quietly to their homes, provided
you give me your word that they shall not be arrested or injured by your
men, and will promise to use your utmost influence to secure them from
any arrest hereafter, and that at any rate they shall have trial before
a jury of their neighbors.'

"The General is a shrewd bargainer, I make no doubt, for though I knew
he was delighted out of measure to find any honorable escape from the
predicament in which we were, he pulled a long face, and after some
thought, said that he would grant the conditions, provided the rebels
also surrendered their arms, and took the oath of allegiance to the
state. At this Hamlin laughed a little.

"'I see, sir, we are but wasting time,' he said, with a mighty
indifferent air. 'You have got the boot on the wrong foot. It is we who
are granting you terms, not you us. You may thank your stars I don't
require your men to surrender their arms. Look you, sir, my men will not
give up their guns, or take any oath but go as free as yours, with your
promise of protection hereafter. If you agree to those terms, you may
come into Lee, and we will disperse. If not let us lose no more time
waiting, but have at it.'

"It was something to make one's blood run cold, to hear the fellow talk
so quietly about murdering us. The General hemmed and hawed a little,
and made a show of talking aside with me, and presently said that to
avoid shedding the blood of the misguided men on the other side, he
would consent to the terms, but he added, the artillery must at any rate
be surrendered.

"'It is private property,' said Hamlin.

"'It is forfeited to its owner by its use against the government,'
replied the General sturdily.

"'I will not stickle for the gun,' said Hamlin, 'but will leave you to
settle that with the owner,' and, as he spoke, he looked as if he were
inwardly amused over something.

"Thereupon we separated. The announcement of the terms was received by
our men with a cheer, for they had made up their minds that there was
nothing before them but a march back to Stockbridge in the face of the
wind and to meet the ridicule of the populace. As we now approached the
cannon at quick-step Abner Rathbun came around and stood in front of it,
so we did not see it till we were close upon it. He was grinning from
ear to ear. The road just behind was packed with rebels all likewise on
the broad grin, as if at some prodigious jest. As we came up Hamlin said
to the General:

"'Sir, I now deliver over to you the artillery, that is if you can
settle it with Mrs. Perry. Abner stand aside.'

"Rathbun did so and what we saw was a yarn-beam mounted on a pair of
oxcart wheels with the tongue of the cart resting on the ground behind."




CHAPTER TWENTY-SIXTH

THE RESTORATION


As was remarked in the last chapter, it was some three weeks after
the famous encounter at Lee that Dr. Partridge entertained Desire one
afternoon with the account of the affair which I have transcribed for
the information of my readers. The interval between the night before the
Lee expedition, when she had taken her sickness, and the sunny afternoon
of expiring February, when she sat listening to the doctor's story, had
for her been only a blank of sickness, but in the community around, it
had been a time of anxiety, of embitterment, and of critical change. The
gay and brilliant court, of which she had for a brief period been the
center, had long ago vanished. Hamlin's band at Lee had been the last
considerable force of rebels embodied in Southern Berkshire, and a few
days after its dispersal the companies from other towns left Stockbridge
to return home, leaving the protection of the village to the home
company. Close on this followed the arrival at Pittsfield of General
Lincoln with a body of troops called into Berkshire by the invitation
of General Patterson, to the disgust of some gentlemen who thought the
county quite capable of attending to its own affairs. These forces
had completed the pacification of Northern Berkshire, where, among the
mountain fastnesses rebel bands had till then maintained themselves, so
that now the entire county was subdued and the insurrection, so far
as concerned any overt manifestation, was at an end. In Stockbridge
Tax-collector Williams once more went his rounds. Deputy Sheriff
Seymour's red flag floated again from the gable ends of the houses
whence the mob had torn it last September, foreclosure sales were made,
processes were served, debtors taken to jail, and the almost forgotten
sound of the lash was once more heard on the green of Saturday
afternoons as the constable executed Squire Woodbridge's sentences at
the reerected whipping-post and stocks. Sedgwick's return to Boston to
his seat in the Legislature early in February, had left Woodbridge to
resume unimpeded his ancient autocracy in the village, and with as many
grudges as that gentleman had to pay off, it may well be supposed
the constable had no sinecure. The victims of justice were almost
exclusively those who had been concerned in the late rebellion. For
although the various amnesties, as well as the express stipulations
under which a large number had surrendered, protected most of the
insurgents from penalties for their political crimes, still misdemeanors
and petty offenses against property and persons during the late
disturbances were chargeable against most of them, and tried before a
magistrate whom, like Woodbridge, they had mobbed. A charge was as good
as a proof.

Nor if they appealed to a jury, was their chance much better, for the
Legislature coming together again in February, had excluded former
rebels from the jury box for three years, binding them to keep the peace
for the same time, and depriving them of the elective franchise in all
forms for a year, while on the other hand complete indemnity was granted
to the friends of government for all offences against property or
persons, which they might have committed in suppressing the rebellion.
Without here controverting the necessity of these measures, it is easy
to realize the state of hopeless discouragement to which they reduced
the class exposed to their effect. Originally driven into the rebellion
by the pressure of a poverty which made them the virtual serfs of the
gentlemen, they now found themselves not only forced to resume their
former position in that respect, but were in addition, deprived of the
ordinary civil rights and guarantees of citizens. In desperation many
fled over the border into New York and Connecticut, and joined bands of
similar refugees which were camped there. Others, weaker spirited,
or bound by ties they could not or would not break, remained at home,
seeking to propitiate their masters by a contrite and circumspect
demeanor, or sullenly enduring whatever was put upon them. A large
number prepared to emigrate to homes in the West as soon as spring
opened the roads.

Of the chief abettors of Perez, the fortunes may be briefly told. Jabez
