Henbane Dwining."

"I will follow you," said Catharine. "You cannot do more to me than you
are permitted."

He led the way into the tower, and mounted staircase after staircase and
ladder after ladder.

Catharine's resolution failed her. "I will follow no farther," she said.
"Whither would you lead me? If to my death, I can die here."

"Only to the battlements of the castle, fool," said Ramorny, throwing
wide a barred door which opened upon the vaulted roof of the castle,
where men were bending mangonels, as they called them (military engines,
that is, for throwing arrows or stones), getting ready crossbows, and
piling stones together. But the defenders did not exceed twenty in
number, and Catharine thought she could observe doubt and irresolution
amongst them.

"Catharine," said Ramorny, "I must not quit this station, which is
necessary for my defence; but I can speak with you here as well as
elsewhere."

"Say on," answered Catharine, "I am prepared to hear you."

"You have thrust yourself, Catharine, into a bloody secret. Have you the
firmness to keep it?"

"I do not understand you, Sir John," answered the maiden.

"Look you. I have slain--murdered, if you will--my late master, the Duke
of Rothsay. The spark of life which your kindness would have fed
was easily smothered. His last words called on his father. You are
faint--bear up--you have more to hear. You know the crime, but you know
not the provocation. See! this gauntlet is empty; I lost my right hand
in his cause, and when I was no longer fit to serve him, I was cast off
like a worn out hound, my loss ridiculed, and a cloister recommended,
instead of the halls and palaces in which I had my natural sphere! Think
on this--pity and assist me."

"In what manner can you require my assistance?" said the trembling
maiden; "I can neither repair your loss nor cancel your crime."

"Thou canst be silent, Catharine, on what thou hast seen and heard in
yonder thicket. It is but a brief oblivion I ask of you, whose word
will, I know, be listened to, whether you say such things were or were
not. That of your mountebank companion, the foreigner, none will hold
to be of a pin point's value. If you grant me this, I will take your
promise for my security, and throw the gate open to those who now
approach it. If you will not promise silence, I defend this castle till
every one perishes, and I fling you headlong from these battlements.
Ay, look at them--it is not a leap to be rashly braved. Seven courses of
stairs brought you up hither with fatigue and shortened breath; but you
shall go from the top to the bottom in briefer time than you can breathe
a sigh! Speak the word, fair maid; for you speak to one unwilling to
harm you, but determined in his purpose."

Catharine stood terrified, and without power of answering a man who
seemed so desperate; but she was saved the necessity of reply by the
approach of Dwining. He spoke with the same humble conges which at all
times distinguished his manner, and with his usual suppressed ironical
sneer, which gave that manner the lie.

"I do you wrong, noble sir, to intrude on your valiancie when engaged
with a fair damsel. But I come to ask a trifling question."

"Speak, tormentor!" said Ramorny; "ill news are sport to thee even when
they affect thyself, so that they concern others also."

"Hem!--he, he!--I only desired to know if your knighthood proposed the
chivalrous task of defending the castle with your single hand--I crave
pardon, I meant your single arm? The question is worth asking, for I
am good for little to aid the defence, unless you could prevail on the
besiegers to take physic--he, he, he!--and Bonthron is as drunk as ale
and strong waters can make him; and you, he, and I make up the whole
garrison who are disposed for resistance."

"How! Will the other dogs not fight?" said Ramorny.

"Never saw men who showed less stomach to the work," answered
Dwining--"never. But here come a brace of them. Venit extrema dies. He,
he, he!"

Eviot and his companion Buncle now approached, with sullen resolution
in their faces, like men who had made their minds up to resist that
authority which they had so long obeyed.

"How now!" said Ramorny, stepping forward to meet them. "Wherefore from
your posts? Why have you left the barbican, Eviot? And you other fellow,
did I not charge you to look to the mangonels?"

"We have something to tell you, Sir John Ramorny," answered Eviot. "We
will not fight in this quarrel."

"How--my own squires control me?" exclaimed Ramorny.

"We were your squires and pages, my lord, while you were master of the
Duke of Rothsay's household. It is bruited about the Duke no longer
lives; we desire to know the truth."

"What traitor dares spread such falsehoods?" said Ramorny.

"All who have gone out to skirt the forest, my lord, and I myself among
others, bring back the same news. The minstrel woman who left the castle
yesterday has spread the report everywhere that the Duke of Rothsay
is murdered, or at death's door. The Douglas comes on us with a strong
force--"

"And you, cowards, take advantage of an idle report to forsake your
master?" said Ramorny, indignantly.

"My lord," said Eviot, "let Buncle and myself see the Duke of Rothsay,
and receive his personal orders for defence of this castle, and if we do
not fight to the death in that quarrel, I will consent to be hanged on
its highest turret. But if he be gone by natural disease, we will yield
up the castle to the Earl of Douglas, who is, they say, the King's
lieutenant. Or if--which Heaven forefend!--the noble Prince has had
foul play, we will not involve ourselves in the guilt of using arms in
defence of the murderers, be they who they will."

"Eviot," said Ramorny, raising his mutilated arm, "had not that glove
been empty, thou hadst not lived to utter two words of this insolence."

"It is as it is," answered Evict, "and we do but our duty. I have
followed you long, my lord, but here I draw bridle."

"Farewell, then, and a curse light on all of you!" exclaimed the
incensed baron. "Let my horse be brought forth!"

"Our valiancie is about to run away," said the mediciner, who had crept
close to Catharine's side before she was aware. "Catharine, thou art a
superstitious fool, like most women; nevertheless thou hast some mind,
and I speak to thee as one of more understanding than the buffaloes
which are herding about us. These haughty barons who overstride the
world, what are they in the day of adversity? Chaff before the wind. Let
their sledge hammer hands or their column resembling legs have injury,
and bah! the men at arms are gone. Heart and courage is nothing to
them, lith and limb everything: give them animal strength, what are they
better than furious bulls; take that away, and your hero of chivalry
lies grovelling like the brute when he is hamstrung. Not so the sage;
while a grain of sense remains in a crushed or mutilated frame, his mind
shall be strong as ever. Catharine, this morning I was practising your
death; but methinks I now rejoice that you may survive to tell how the
poor mediciner, the pill gilder, the mortar pounder, the poison vender,
met his fate, in company with the gallant Knight of Ramorny, Baron in
possession and Earl of Lindores in expectation--God save his lordship!"

"Old man," said Catharine, "if thou be indeed so near the day of thy
deserved doom, other thoughts were far wholesomer than the vainglorious
ravings of a vain philosophy. Ask to see a holy man--"

"Yes," said Dwining, scornfully, "refer myself to a greasy monk, who
does not--he! he! he!--understand the barbarous Latin he repeats by
rote. Such would be a fitting counsellor to one who has studied both
in Spain and Arabia! No, Catharine, I will choose a confessor that is
pleasant to look upon, and you shall be honoured with the office. Now,
look yonder at his valiancie, his eyebrow drops with moisture, his lip
trembles with agony; for his valiancie--he! he! he!--is pleading for his
life with his late domestics, and has not eloquence enough to persuade
them to let him slip. See how the fibres of his face work as he implores
the ungrateful brutes, whom he has heaped with obligations, to permit
him to get such a start for his life as the hare has from the greyhounds
when men course her fairly. Look also at the sullen, downcast, dogged
faces with which, fluctuating between fear and shame, the domestic
traitors deny their lord this poor chance for his life. These things
thought themselves the superior of a man like me! and you, foolish
wench, think so meanly of your Deity as to suppose wretches like them
are the work of Omnipotence!"

"No! man of evil--no!" said Catharine, warmly; "the God I worship
created these men with the attributes to know and adore Him, to guard
and defend their fellow creatures, to practise holiness and virtue.
Their own vices, and the temptations of the Evil One, have made them
such as they now are. Oh, take the lesson home to thine own heart of
adamant! Heaven made thee wiser than thy fellows, gave thee eyes to look
into the secrets of nature, a sagacious heart, and a skilful hand; but
thy pride has poisoned all these fair gifts, and made an ungodly atheist
of one who might have been a Christian sage!"

"Atheist, say'st thou?" answered Dwining. "Perhaps I have doubts on that
matter--but they will be soon solved. Yonder comes one who will send
me, as he has done thousands, to the place where all mysteries shall be
cleared."

Catharine followed the mediciner's eye up one of the forest glades, and
beheld it occupied by a body of horsemen advancing at full gallop. In
the midst was a pennon displayed, which, though its bearings were not
visible to Catharine, was, by a murmur around, acknowledged as that of
the Black Douglas. They halted within arrow shot of the castle, and a
herald with two trumpets advanced up to the main portal, where, after a
loud flourish, he demanded admittance for the high and dreaded Archibald
Earl of Douglas, Lord Lieutenant of the King, and acting for the time
with the plenary authority of his Majesty; commanding, at the same time,
that the inmates of the castle should lay down their arms, all under
penalty of high treason.

"You hear?" said Eviot to Ramorny, who stood sullen and undecided. "Will
you give orders to render the castle, or must I?"

"No, villain!" interrupted the knight, "to the last I will command you.
Open the gates, drop the bridge, and render the castle to the Douglas."

"Now, that's what may be called a gallant exertion of free will," said
Dwining. "Just as if the pieces of brass that were screaming a minute
since should pretend to call those notes their own which are breathed
through them by a frowsy trumpeter."

"Wretched man!" said Catharine, "either be silent or turn thy thoughts
to the eternity on the brink of which thou art standing."

"And what is that to thee?" answered Dwining. "Thou canst not, wench,
help hearing what I say to thee, and thou wilt tell it again, for thy
sex cannot help that either. Perth and all Scotland shall know what a
man they have lost in Henbane Dwining!"

The clash of armour now announced that the newcomers had dismounted and
entered the castle, and were in the act of disarming the small garrison.
Earl Douglas himself appeared on the battlements, with a few of his
followers, and signed to them to take Ramorny and Dwining into custody.
Others dragged from some nook the stupefied Bonthron.

"It was to these three that the custody of the Prince was solely
committed daring his alleged illness?" said the Douglas, prosecuting an
inquiry which he had commenced in the hall of the castle.

"No other saw him, my lord," said Eviot, "though I offered my services."

"Conduct us to the Duke's apartment, and bring the prisoners with
us. Also should there be a female in the castle, if she hath not been
murdered or spirited away--the companion of the glee maiden who brought
the first alarm."

"She is here, my lord," said Eviot, bringing Catharine forward.

Her beauty and her agitation made some impression even upon the
impassible Earl.

"Fear nothing, maiden," he said; "thou hast deserved both praise and
reward. Tell to me, as thou wouldst confess to Heaven, the things thou
hast witnessed in this castle."

Few words served Catharine to unfold the dreadful story.

"It agrees," said the Douglas, "with the tale of the glee maiden, from
point to point. Now show us the Prince's apartment."

They passed to the room which the unhappy Duke of Rothsay had been
supposed to inhabit; but the key was not to be found, and the Earl could
only obtain entrance by forcing the door. On entering, the wasted and
squalid remains of the unhappy Prince were discovered, flung on the bed
as if in haste. The intention of the murderers had apparently been to
arrange the dead body so as to resemble a timely parted corpse, but they
had been disconcerted by the alarm occasioned by the escape of Louise.
Douglas looked on the body of the misguided youth, whose wild passions
and caprices had brought him to this fatal and premature catastrophe.

"I had wrongs to be redressed," he said; "but to see such a sight as
this banishes all remembrance of injury!"

"He! he! It should have been arranged," said Dwining, "more to your
omnipotence's pleasure; but you came suddenly on us, and hasty masters
make slovenly service."

Douglas seemed not to hear what his prisoner said, so closely did he
examine the wan and wasted features, and stiffened limbs, of the dead
body before him. Catharine, overcome by sickness and fainting, at length
obtained permission to retire from the dreadful scene, and, through
confusion of every description, found her way to her former apartment,
where she was locked in the arms of Louise, who had returned in the
interval.

The investigations of Douglas proceeded. The dying hand of the Prince
was found to be clenched upon a lock of hair, resembling, in colour and
texture, the coal black bristles of Bonthron. Thus, though famine had
begun the work, it would seem that Rothsay's death had been finally
accomplished by violence. The private stair to the dungeon, the keys of
which were found at the subaltern assassin's belt, the situation of the
vault, its communication with the external air by the fissure in the
walls, and the wretched lair of straw, with the fetters which remained
there, fully confirmed the story of Catharine and of the glee woman.

"We will not hesitate an instant," said the Douglas to his near kinsman,
the Lord Balveny, as soon as they returned from the dungeon. "Away with
the murderers! hang them over the battlements."

"But, my lord, some trial may be fitting," answered Balveny.

"To what purpose?" answered, Douglas. "I have taken them red hand; my
authority will stretch to instant execution. Yet stay--have we not some
Jedwood men in our troop?"

"Plenty of Turnbulls, Rutherfords, Ainslies, and so forth," said
Balveny.

"Call me an inquest of these together; they are all good men and true,
saving a little shifting for their living. Do you see to the execution
of these felons, while I hold a court in the great hall, and we'll try
whether the jury or the provost marshal do their work first; we will
have Jedwood justice--hang in haste and try at leisure."

"Yet stay, my lord," said Ramorny, "you may rue your haste--will you
grant me a word out of earshot?"

"Not for worlds!" said Douglas; "speak out what thou hast to say before
all that are here present."

"Know all; then," said Ramorny, aloud, "that this noble Earl had letters
from the Duke of Albany and myself, sent him by the hand of yon cowardly
deserter, Buncle--let him deny it if he dare--counselling the removal
of the Duke for a space from court, and his seclusion in this Castle of
Falkland."

"But not a word," replied Douglas, sternly smiling, "of his being flung
into a dungeon--famished--strangled. Away with the wretches, Balveny,
they pollute God's air too long!"

The prisoners were dragged off to the battlements. But while the means
of execution were in the act of being prepared, the apothecary expressed
so ardent a desire to see Catharine once more, and, as he said, for
the good of his soul, that the maiden, in hopes his obduracy might have
undergone some change even at the last hour, consented again to go
to the battlements, and face a scene which her heart recoiled from.
A single glance showed her Bonthron, sunk in total and drunken
insensibility; Ramorny, stripped of his armour, endeavouring in vain to
conceal fear, while he spoke with a priest, whose good offices he had
solicited; and Dwining, the same humble, obsequious looking, crouching
individual she had always known him. He held in his hand a little silver
pen, with which he had been writing on a scrap of parchment.

"Catharine," he said--"he, he, he!--I wish to speak to thee on the
nature of my religious faith."

"If such be thy intention, why lose time with me? Speak with this good
father."

"The good father," said Dwining, "is--he, he!--already a worshipper of
the deity whom I have served. I therefore prefer to give the altar of
mine idol a new worshipper in thee, Catharine. This scrap of parchment
will tell thee how to make your way into my chapel, where I have
worshipped so often in safety. I leave the images which it contains to
thee as a legacy, simply because I hate and contemn thee something less
than any of the absurd wretches whom I have hitherto been obliged to
call fellow creatures. And now away--or remain and see if the end of the
quacksalver belies his life."

"Our Lady forbid!" said Catharine.

"Nay," said the mediciner, "I have but a single word to say, and yonder
nobleman's valiancie may hear it if he will."

Lord Balveny approached, with some curiosity; for the undaunted
resolution of a man who never wielded sword or bore armour and was in
person a poor dwindled dwarf, had to him an air of something resembling
sorcery."

"You see this trifling implement," said the criminal, showing the
silver pen. "By means of this I can escape the power even of the Black
Douglas."

"Give him no ink nor paper," said Balveny, hastily, "he will draw a
spell."

"Not so, please your wisdom and valiancie--he, he, he!" said Dwining
with his usual chuckle, as he unscrewed the top of the pen, within which
was a piece of sponge or some such substance, no bigger than a pea.

"Now, mark this--" said the prisoner, and drew it between his lips.
The effect was instantaneous. He lay a dead corpse before them, the
contemptuous sneer still on his countenance.

Catharine shrieked and fled, seeking, by a hasty descent, an escape from
a sight so appalling. Lord Balveny was for a moment stupified, and then
exclaimed, "This may be glamour! hang him over the battlements, quick
or dead. If his foul spirit hath only withdrawn for a space, it shall
return to a body with a dislocated neck."

His commands were obeyed. Ramorny and Bonthron were then ordered for
execution. The last was hanged before he seemed quite to comprehend what
was designed to be done with him. Ramorny, pale as death, yet with
the same spirit of pride which had occasioned his ruin, pleaded his
knighthood, and demanded the privilege of dying by decapitation by the
sword, and not by the noose.

"The Douglas never alters his doom," said Balveny. "But thou shalt have
all thy rights. Send the cook hither with a cleaver."

The menial whom he called appeared at his summons.

"What shakest thou for, fellow?" said Balveny; "here, strike me this
man's gilt spurs from his heels with thy cleaver. And now, John Ramorny,
thou art no longer a knight, but a knave. To the halter with him,
provost marshal! hang him betwixt his companions, and higher than them
if it may be."

In a quarter of an hour afterwards, Balveny descended to tell the
Douglas that the criminals were executed.

"Then there is no further use in the trial," said the Earl. "How say
you, good men of inquest, were these men guilty of high treason--ay or
no?"

"Guilty," exclaimed the obsequious inquest, with edifying unanimity, "we
need no farther evidence."

"Sound trumpets, and to horse then, with our own train only; and let
each man keep silence on what has chanced here, until the proceedings
shall be laid before the King, which cannot conveniently be till the
battle of Palm Sunday shall be fought and ended. Select our attendants,
and tell each man who either goes with us or remains behind that he who
prates dies."

In a few minutes the Douglas was on horseback, with the followers
selected to attend his person. Expresses were sent to his daughter, the
widowed Duchess of Rothsay, directing her to take her course to Perth,
by the shores of Lochleven, without approaching Falkland, and committing
to her charge Catharine Glover and the glee woman, as persons whose
safety he tendered.

As they rode through the forest, they looked back, and beheld the three
bodies hanging, like specks darkening the walls of the old castle.

"The hand is punished," said Douglas, "but who shall arraign the head by
whose direction the act was done?"

"You mean the Duke of Albany?" said Balveny.

"I do, kinsman; and were I to listen to the dictates of my heart, I
would charge him with the deed, which I am certain he has authorised.
But there is no proof of it beyond strong suspicion, and Albany has
attached to himself the numerous friends of the house of Stuart, to
whom, indeed, the imbecility of the King and the ill regulated habits
of Rothsay left no other choice of a leader. Were I, therefore, to break
the bond which I have so lately formed with Albany, the consequence
must be civil war, an event ruinous to poor Scotland while threatened
by invasion from the activity of the Percy, backed by the treachery
of March. No, Balveny, the punishment of Albany must rest with Heaven,
which, in its own good time, will execute judgment on him and on his
house."



CHAPTER XXXIII.

     The hour is nigh: now hearts beat high;
     Each sword is sharpen'd well;
     And who dares die, who stoops to fly,
     Tomorrow's light shall tell.

     Sir Edwald.


We are now to recall to our reader's recollection, that Simon Glover and
his fair daughter had been hurried from their residence without having
time to announce to Henry Smith either their departure or the alarming
cause of it. When, therefore, the lover appeared in Curfew Street, on
the morning of their flight, instead of the hearty welcome of the honest
burgher, and the April reception, half joy half censure, which he had
been promised on the part of his lovely daughter, he received only the
astounding intelligence, that her father and she had set off early, on
the summons of a stranger, who had kept himself carefully muffled from
observation. To this, Dorothy, whose talents for forestalling evil, and
communicating her views of it, are known to the reader, chose to add,
that she had no doubt her master and young mistress were bound for the
Highlands, to avoid a visit which had been made since their departure by
two or three apparitors, who, in the name of a Commission appointed by
the King, had searched the house, put seals upon such places as were
supposed to contain papers, and left citations for father and daughter
to appear before the Court of Commission, on a day certain, under pain
of outlawry. All these alarming particulars Dorothy took care to state
in the gloomiest colours, and the only consolation which she afforded
the alarmed lover was, that her master had charged her to tell him to
reside quietly at Perth, and that he should soon hear news of them. This
checked the smith's first resolve, which was to follow them instantly to
the Highlands, and partake the fate which they might encounter.

But when he recollected his repeated feuds with divers of the Clan
Quhele, and particularly his personal quarrel with Conachar, who was now
raised to be a high chief, he could not but think, on reflection, that
his intrusion on their place of retirement was more likely to disturb
the safety which they might otherwise enjoy there than be of any service
to them. He was well acquainted with Simon's habitual intimacy with
the chief of the Clan Quhele, and justly augured that the glover would
obtain protection, which his own arrival might be likely to disturb,
while his personal prowess could little avail him in a quarrel with
a whole tribe of vindictive mountaineers. At the same time his heart
throbbed with indignation, when he thought of Catharine being within the
absolute power of young Conachar, whose rivalry he could not doubt, and
who had now so many means of urging his suit. What if the young chief
should make the safety of the father depend on the favour of the
daughter? He distrusted not Catharine's affections, but then her mode
of thinking was so disinterested, and her attachment to her father so
tender, that, if the love she bore her suitor was weighed against his
security, or perhaps his life, it was matter of deep and awful doubt
whether it might not be found light in the balance. Tormented by
thoughts on which we need not dwell, he resolved nevertheless to
remain at home, stifle his anxiety as he might, and await the promised
intelligence from the old man. It came, but it did not relieve his
concern.

Sir Patrick Charteris had not forgotten his promise to communicate to
the smith the plans of the fugitives. But, amid the bustle occasioned by
the movement of troops, he could not himself convey the intelligence.
He therefore entrusted to his agent, Kitt Henshaw, the task of making it
known. But this worthy person, as the reader knows, was in the interest
of Ramorny, whose business it was to conceal from every one, but
especially from a lover so active and daring as Henry, the real place of
Catharine's residence. Henshaw therefore announced to the anxious smith
that his friend the glover was secure in the Highlands; and though he
affected to be more reserved on the subject of Catharine, he said little
to contradict the belief that she as well as Simon shared the protection
of the Clan Quhele. But he reiterated, in the name of Sir Patrick,
assurances that father and daughter were both well, and that Henry would
best consult his own interest and their safety by remaining quiet and
waiting the course of events.

With an agonized heart, therefore, Henry Gow determined to remain quiet
till he had more certain intelligence, and employed himself in finishing
a shirt of mail, which he intended should be the best tempered and the
most finely polished that his skilful hands had ever executed. This
exercise of his craft pleased him better than any other occupation which
he could have adopted, and served as an apology for secluding himself
in his workshop, and shunning society, where the idle reports which were
daily circulated served only to perplex and disturb him. He resolved to
trust in the warm regard of Simon, the faith of his daughter, and the
friendship of the provost, who, having so highly commended his valour
in the combat with Bonthron, would never, he thought, desert him at this
extremity of his fortunes. Time, however, passed on day by day; and
it was not till Palm Sunday was near approaching, that Sir Patrick
Charteris, having entered the city to make some arrangements for the
ensuing combat, bethought himself of making a visit to the Smith of the
Wynd.

He entered his workshop with an air of sympathy unusual to him, and
which made Henry instantly augur that he brought bad news. The smith
caught the alarm, and the uplifted hammer was arrested in its descent
upon the heated iron, while the agitated arm that wielded it, strong
before as that of a giant, became so powerless, that it was with
difficulty Henry was able to place the weapon on the ground, instead of
dropping it from his hand.

"My poor Henry," said Sir Patrick, "I bring you but cold news; they are
uncertain, however, and, if true, they are such as a brave man like you
should not take too deeply to heart."

"In God's name, my lord," said Henry, "I trust you bring no evil news of
Simon Glover or his daughter?"

"Touching themselves," said Sir Patrick, "no: they are safe and well.
But as to thee, Henry, my tidings are more cold. Kitt Henshaw has, I
think, apprised thee that I had endeavoured to provide Catharine Glover
with a safe protection in the house of an honourable lady, the Duchess
of Rothsay. But she hath declined the charge, and Catharine hath been
sent to her father in the Highlands. What is worst is to come. Thou
mayest have heard that Gilchrist MacIan is dead, and that his son
Eachin, who was known in Perth as the apprentice of old Simon, by the
name of Conachar, is now the chief of Clan Quhele; and I heard from one
of my domestics that there is a strong rumour among the MacIans that the
young chief seeks the hand of Catharine in marriage. My domestic learned
this--as a secret, however--while in the Breadalbane country, on some
arrangements touching the ensuing combat. The thing is uncertain but,
Henry, it wears a face of likelihood."

"Did your lordship's servant see Simon Glover and his daughter?" said
Henry, struggling for breath, and coughing, to conceal from the provost
the excess of his agitation.

"He did not," said Sir Patrick; "the Highlanders seemed jealous, and
refused to permit him to speak to the old man, and he feared to alarm
them by asking to see Catharine. Besides, he talks no Gaelic, nor had
his informer much English, so there may be some mistake in the matter.
Nevertheless, there is such a report, and I thought it best to tell it
you. But you may be well assured that the wedding cannot go on till the
affair of Palm Sunday be over; and I advise you to take no step till we
learn the circumstances of the matter, for certainty is most desirable,
even when it is painful. Go you to the council house," he added, after a
pause, "to speak about the preparations for the lists in the North Inch?
You will be welcome there."

"No, my good lord."

"Well, Smith, I judge by your brief answer that you are discomposed with
this matter; but, after all, women are weathercocks, that is the truth
on't. Solomon and others have proved it before you."

And so Sir Patrick Charteris retired, fully convinced he had discharged
the office of a comforter in the most satisfactory manner.

With very different impressions did the unfortunate lover regard the
tidings and listen to the consoling commentary.

"The provost," he said bitterly to himself, "is an excellent man; marry,
he holds his knighthood so high, that, if he speaks nonsense, a poor man
must hold it sense, as he must praise dead ale if it be handed to him
in his lordship's silver flagon. How would all this sound in another
situation? Suppose I were rolling down the steep descent of the
Corrichie Dhu, and before I came to the edge of the rock, comes my Lord
Provost, and cries: 'Henry, there is a deep precipice, and I grieve to
say you are in the fair way of rolling over it. But be not downcast,
for Heaven may send a stone or a bush to stop your progress. However, I
thought it would be comfort to you to know the worst, which you will
be presently aware of. I do not know how many hundred feet deep the
precipice descends, but you may form a judgment when you are at the
bottom, for certainty is certainty. And hark ye! when come you to take
a game at bowls?' And this gossip is to serve instead of any friendly
attempt to save the poor wight's neck! When I think of this, I could go
mad, seize my hammer, and break and destroy all around me. But I will
be calm; and if this Highland kite, who calls himself a falcon, should
stoop at my turtle dove, he shall know whether a burgess of Perth can
draw a bow or not."

It was now the Thursday before the fated Palm Sunday, and the champions
on either side were expected to arrive the next day, that they might
have the interval of Saturday to rest, refresh themselves, and prepare
for the combat. Two or three of each of the contending parties were
detached to receive directions about the encampment of their little
band, and such other instructions as might be necessary to the proper
ordering of the field. Henry was not, therefore, surprised at seeing a
tall and powerful Highlander peering anxiously about the wynd in which
he lived, in the manner in which the natives of a wild country examine
the curiosities of one that is more civilized. The smith's heart rose
against the man on account of his country, to which our Perth burgher
bore a natural prejudice, and more especially as he observed the
individual wear the plaid peculiar to the Clan Quhele. The sprig of oak
leaves, worked in silk, intimated also that the individual was one
of those personal guards of young Eachin, upon whose exertions in the
future battle so much reliance was placed by those of their clan.

Having observed so much, Henry withdrew into his smithy, for the sight
of the man raised his passion; and, knowing that the Highlander came
plighted to a solemn combat, and could not be the subject of any
inferior quarrel, he was resolved at least to avoid friendly intercourse
with him. In a few minutes, however, the door of the smithy flew open,
and flattering in his tartans, which greatly magnified his actual size,
the Gael entered with the haughty step of a man conscious of a personal
dignity superior to anything which he is likely to meet with. He stood
looking around him, and seemed to expect to be received with courtesy
and regarded with wonder. But Henry had no sort of inclination to
indulge his vanity and kept hammering away at a breastplate which was
lying upon his anvil as if he were not aware of his visitor's presence.

"You are the Gow Chrom?" (the bandy legged smith), said the Highlander.

"Those that wish to be crook backed call me so," answered Henry.

"No offence meant," said the Highlander; "but her own self comes to buy
an armour."

"Her own self's bare shanks may trot hence with her," answered Henry; "I
have none to sell."

"If it was not within two days of Palm Sunday, herself would make you
