'Come, Master Ridd, you might be lashed from New-gate to Tyburn and back
again, once a week, for a twelvemonth, if some people heard you. Keep
your tongue more close, young man; or here you lodge no longer; albeit
I love your company, which smells to me of the hayfield. Ah, I have not
seen a hayfield for nine-and-twenty years, John Ridd. The cursed moths
keep me at home, every day of the summer.'

'Spread your furs on the haycocks,' I answered very boldly: 'the indoor
moth cannot abide the presence of the outdoor ones.'

'Is it so?' he answered: 'I never thought of that before. And yet I
have known such strange things happen in the way of fur, that I can
well believe it. If you only knew, John, the way in which they lay their
eggs, and how they work tail-foremost--'

'Tell me nothing of the kind,' I replied, with equal confidence: 'they
cannot work tail-foremost; and they have no tails to work with.' For I
knew a little about grubs, and the ignorance concerning them, which
we have no right to put up with. However, not to go into that (for the
argument lasted a fortnight; and then was only come so far as to begin
again), Master Ramsack soon convinced me of the things I knew already;
the excellence of Lorna's birth, as well as her lofty place at Court,
and beauty, and wealth, and elegance. But all these only made me sigh,
and wish that I were born to them.

From Master Ramsack I discovered that the nobleman to whose charge Lady
Lorna had been committed, by the Court of Chancery, was Earl Brandir
of Lochawe, her poor mother's uncle. For the Countess of Dugal was
daughter, and only child, of the last Lord Lorne, whose sister had
married Sir Ensor Doone; while he himself had married the sister of
Earl Brandir. This nobleman had a country house near the village of
Kensington; and here his niece dwelled with him, when she was not in
attendance on Her Majesty the Queen, who had taken a liking to her.
Now since the King had begun to attend the celebration of mass, in the
chapel at Whitehall--and not at Westminster Abbey, as our gossips had
averred--he had given order that the doors should be thrown open, so
that all who could make interest to get into the antechamber, might see
this form of worship. Master Ramsack told me that Lorna was there almost
every Sunday; their Majesties being most anxious to have the presence
of all the nobility of the Catholic persuasion, so as to make a goodly
show. And the worthy furrier, having influence with the door-keepers,
kindly obtained admittance for me, one Sunday, into the antechamber.

Here I took care to be in waiting, before the Royal procession entered;
but being unknown, and of no high rank, I was not allowed to stand
forward among the better people, but ordered back into a corner very
dark and dismal; the verger remarking, with a grin, that I could see
over all other heads, and must not set my own so high. Being frightened
to find myself among so many people of great rank and gorgeous apparel,
I blushed at the notice drawn upon me by this uncourteous fellow; and
silently fell back into the corner by the hangings.

You may suppose that my heart beat high, when the King and Queen
appeared, and entered, followed by the Duke of Norfolk, bearing the
sword of state, and by several other noblemen, and people of repute.
Then the doors of the chapel were thrown wide open; and though I
could only see a little, being in the corner so, I thought that it was
beautiful. Bowers of rich silk were there, and plenty of metal shining,
and polished wood with lovely carving; flowers too of the noblest kind,
and candles made by somebody who had learned how to clarify tallow. This
last thing amazed me more than all, for our dips never will come clear,
melt the mutton-fat how you will. And methought that this hanging of
flowers about was a pretty thing; for if a man can worship God best of
all beneath a tree, as the natural instinct is, surely when by fault of
climate the tree would be too apt to drip, the very best make-believe is
to have enough and to spare of flowers; which to the dwellers in London
seem to have grown on the tree denied them.

Be that as it may, when the King and Queen crossed the threshold, a
mighty flourish of trumpets arose, and a waving of banners. The Knights
of the Garter (whoever they be) were to attend that day in state;
and some went in, and some stayed out, and it made me think of the
difference betwixt the ewes and the wethers. For the ewes will go
wherever you lead them; but the wethers will not, having strong
opinions, and meaning to abide by them. And one man I noticed was of the
wethers, to wit the Duke of Norfolk; who stopped outside with the sword
of state, like a beadle with a rapping-rod. This has taken more to tell
than the time it happened in. For after all the men were gone, some
to this side, some to that, according to their feelings, a number of
ladies, beautifully dressed, being of the Queen's retinue, began to
enter, and were stared at three times as much as the men had been. And
indeed they were worth looking at (which men never are to my ideas,
when they trick themselves with gewgaws), but none was so well worth
eye-service as my own beloved Lorna. She entered modestly and shyly,
with her eyes upon the ground, knowing the rudeness of the gallants, and
the large sum she was priced at. Her dress was of the purest white, very
sweet and simple, without a line of ornament, for she herself adorned
it. The way she walked, and touched her skirt (rather than seemed to
hold it up) with a white hand beaming one red rose, this and her stately
supple neck, and the flowing of her hair would show, at a distance of a
hundred yards, that she could be none but Lorna Doone. Lorna Doone of
my early love; in the days when she blushed for her name before me
by reason of dishonesty; but now the Lady Lorna Dugal as far beyond
reproach as above my poor affection. All my heart, and all my mind,
gathered themselves upon her. Would she see me, or would she pass? Was
there instinct in our love?

By some strange chance she saw me. Or was it through our destiny? While
with eyes kept sedulously on the marble floor, to shun the weight of
admiration thrust too boldly on them, while with shy quick steps she
passed, some one (perhaps with purpose) trod on the skirt of her clear
white dress,--with the quickness taught her by many a scene of danger,
she looked up, and her eyes met mine.

As I gazed upon her, steadfastly, yearningly, yet with some reproach,
and more of pride than humility, she made me one of the courtly bows
which I do so much detest; yet even that was sweet and graceful, when my
Lorna did it. But the colour of her pure clear cheeks was nearly as
deep as that of my own, when she went on for the religious work. And the
shining of her eyes was owing to an unpaid debt of tears.

Upon the whole I was satisfied. Lorna had seen me, and had not
(according to the phrase of the high world then) even tried to 'cut' me.
Whether this low phrase is born of their own stupid meanness, or whether
it comes of necessity exercised on a man without money, I know not, and
I care not. But one thing I know right well; any man who 'cuts' a man
(except for vice or meanness) should be quartered without quarter.

All these proud thoughts rose within me as the lovely form of Lorna went
inside, and was no more seen. And then I felt how coarse I was; how apt
to think strong thoughts, and so on; without brains to bear me out: even
as a hen's egg, laid without enough of lime, and looking only a poor
jelly.

Nevertheless, I waited on; as my usual manner is. For to be beaten,
while running away, is ten times worse than to face it out, and take
it, and have done with it. So at least I have always found, because of
reproach of conscience: and all the things those clever people carried
on inside, at large, made me long for our Parson Bowden that he might
know how to act.

While I stored up, in my memory, enough to keep our parson going through
six pipes on a Saturday night--to have it as right as could be next
day--a lean man with a yellow beard, too thin for a good Catholic (which
religion always fattens), came up to me, working sideways, in the manner
of a female crab.

'This is not to my liking,' I said: 'if aught thou hast, speak plainly;
while they make that horrible noise inside.'

Nothing had this man to say; but with many sighs, because I was not of
the proper faith, he took my reprobate hand to save me: and with several
religious tears, looked up at me, and winked with one eye. Although the
skin of my palms was thick, I felt a little suggestion there, as of a
gentle leaf in spring, fearing to seem too forward. I paid the man, and
he went happy; for the standard of heretical silver is purer than that
of the Catholics.

Then I lifted up my little billet; and in that dark corner read it, with
a strong rainbow of colours coming from the angled light. And in mine
eyes there was enough to make rainbow of strongest sun, as my anger
clouded off.

Not that it began so well; but that in my heart I knew (ere three lines
were through me) that I was with all heart loved--and beyond that, who
may need? The darling of my life went on, as if I were of her own rank,
or even better than she was; and she dotted her 'i's,' and crossed
her 't's,' as if I were at least a schoolmaster. All of it was done in
pencil; but as plain as plain could be. In my coffin it shall lie, with
my ring and something else. Therefore will I not expose it to every man
who buys this book, and haply thinks that he has bought me to the bottom
of my heart. Enough for men of gentle birth (who never are inquisitive)
that my love told me, in her letter, just to come and see her.

I ran away, and could not stop. To behold even her, at the moment, would
have dashed my fancy's joy. Yet my brain was so amiss, that I must do
something. Therefore to the river Thames, with all speed, I hurried;
and keeping all my best clothes on (indued for sake of Lorna), into the
quiet stream I leaped, and swam as far as London Bridge, and ate nobler
dinner afterwards.



CHAPTER LXVII

LORNA STILL IS LORNA

Although a man may be as simple as the flowers of the field; knowing
when, but scarcely why, he closes to the bitter wind; and feeling why,
but scarcely when, he opens to the genial sun; yet without his questing
much into the capsule of himself--to do which is a misery--he may have a
general notion how he happens to be getting on.

I felt myself to be getting on better than at any time since the last
wheat-harvest, as I took the lane to Kensington upon the Monday evening.
For although no time was given in my Lorna's letter, I was not inclined
to wait more than decency required. And though I went and watched
the house, decency would not allow me to knock on the Sunday evening,
especially when I found at the corner that his lordship was at home.

The lanes and fields between Charing Cross and the village of
Kensington, are, or were at that time, more than reasonably infested
with footpads and with highwaymen. However, my stature and holly club
kept these fellows from doing more than casting sheep's eyes at me.
For it was still broad daylight, and the view of the distant villages,
Chelsea, Battersea, Tyburn, and others, as well as a few large houses,
among the hams and towards the river, made it seem less lonely.
Therefore I sang a song in the broadest Exmoor dialect, which caused no
little amazement in the minds of all who met me.

When I came to Earl Brandir's house, my natural modesty forbade me to
appear at the door for guests; therefore I went to the entrance for
servants and retainers. Here, to my great surprise, who should come
and let me in but little Gwenny Carfax, whose very existence had almost
escaped my recollection. Her mistress, no doubt, had seen me coming, and
sent her to save trouble. But when I offered to kiss Gwenny, in my joy
and comfort to see a farm-house face again, she looked ashamed, and
turned away, and would hardly speak to me.

I followed her to a little room, furnished very daintily; and there she
ordered me to wait, in a most ungracious manner. 'Well,' thought I, 'if
the mistress and the maid are alike in temper, better it had been for
me to abide at Master Ramsack's.' But almost ere my thought was done, I
heard the light quick step which I knew as well as 'Watch,' my dog, knew
mine; and my breast began to tremble, like the trembling of an arch ere
the keystone is put in.

Almost ere I hoped--for fear and hope were so entangled that they
hindered one another--the velvet hangings of the doorway parted, with
a little doubt, and then a good face put on it. Lorna, in her perfect
beauty, stood before the crimson folds, and her dress was all pure
white, and her cheeks were rosy pink, and her lips were scarlet.

Like a maiden, with skill and sense checking violent impulse, she stayed
there for one moment only, just to be admired; and then like a woman,
she came to me, seeing how alarmed I was. The hand she offered me I
took, and raised it to my lips with fear, as a thing too good for me.
'Is that all?' she whispered; and then her eyes gleamed up at me; and in
another instant, she was weeping on my breast.

'Darling Lorna, Lady Lorna,' I cried, in astonishment, yet unable but to
keep her closer to me, and closer; 'surely, though I love you so, this
is not as it should be.'

'Yes, it is, John. Yes, it is. Nothing else should ever be. Oh, why have
you behaved so?'

'I am behaving.' I replied, 'to the very best of my ability. There is no
other man in the world could hold you so, without kissing you.'

'Then why don't you do it, John?' asked Lorna, looking up at me, with a
flash of her old fun.

Now this matter, proverbially, is not for discussion, and repetition.
Enough that we said nothing more than, 'Oh, John, how glad I am!' and
'Lorna, Lorna Lorna!' for about five minutes. Then my darling drew
back proudly, with blushing cheeks, and tear-bright eyes, she began to
cross-examine me.

'Master John Ridd, you shall tell the truth, the whole truth, and
nothing but the truth. I have been in Chancery, sir; and can detect a
story. Now why have you never, for more than a twelvemonth, taken the
smallest notice of your old friend, Mistress Lorna Doone?' Although she
spoke in this lightsome manner, as if it made no difference, I saw that
her quick heart was moving, and the flash of her eyes controlled.

'Simply for this cause, I answered, 'that my old friend and true love,
took not the smallest heed of me. Nor knew I where to find her.'

'What!' cried Lorna; and nothing more; being overcome with wondering;
and much inclined to fall away, but for my assistance. I told her, over
and over again, that not a single syllable of any message from her,
or tidings of her welfare, had reached me, or any one of us, since the
letter she left behind; except by soldier's gossip.

'Oh, you poor dear John!' said Lorna, sighing at thought of my misery:
'how wonderfully good of you, thinking of me as you must have done, not
to marry that little plain thing (or perhaps I should say that lovely
creature, for I have never seen her), Mistress Ruth--I forget her name;
but something like a towel.'

'Ruth Huckaback is a worthy maid,' I answered with some dignity; 'and
she alone of all our world, except indeed poor Annie, has kept her
confidence in you, and told me not to dread your rank, but trust your
heart, Lady Lorna.'

'Then Ruth is my best friend,' she answered, 'and is worthy of you, dear
John. And now remember one thing, dear; if God should part us, as may be
by nothing short of death, try to marry that little Ruth, when you cease
to remember me. And now for the head-traitor. I have often suspected it:
but she looks me in the face, and wishes--fearful things, which I cannot
repeat.'

With these words, she moved an implement such as I had not seen before,
and which made a ringing noise at a serious distance. And before I had
ceased wondering--for if such things go on, we might ring the church
bells, while sitting in our back-kitchen--little Gwenny Carfax came,
with a grave and sullen face.

'Gwenny,' began my Lorna, in a tone of high rank and dignity, 'go and
fetch the letters which I gave you at various times for despatch to
Mistress Ridd.'

'How can I fetch them, when they are gone? It be no use for him to tell
no lies--'

'Now, Gwenny, can you look at me?' I asked, very sternly; for the matter
was no joke to me, after a year's unhappiness.

'I don't want to look at 'ee. What should I look at a young man for,
although he did offer to kiss me?'

I saw the spite and impudence of this last remark, and so did Lorna,
although she could not quite refrain from smiling.

'Now, Gwenny, not to speak of that,' said Lorna, very demurely, 'if you
thought it honest to keep the letters, was it honest to keep the money?'

At this the Cornish maiden broke into a rage of honesty: 'A putt the
money by for 'ee. 'Ee shall have every farden of it.' And so she flung
out of the room.

'And, Gwenny,' said Lorna very softly, following under the
door-hangings; 'if it is not honest to keep the money, it is not honest
to keep the letters, which would have been worth more than any gold to
those who were so kind to you. Your father shall know the whole, Gwenny,
unless you tell the truth.'

'Now, a will tell all the truth,' this strange maiden answered, talking
to herself at least as much as to her mistress, while she went out of
sight and hearing. And then I was so glad at having my own Lorna once
again, cleared of all contempt for us, and true to me through all of it,
that I would have forgiven Gwenny for treason, or even forgery.

'I trusted her so much,' said Lorna, in her old ill-fortuned way; 'and
look how she has deceived me! That is why I love you, John (setting
other things aside), because you never told me falsehood; and you never
could, you know.'

'Well, I am not so sure of that. I think I could tell any lie, to have
you, darling, all my own.'

'Yes. And perhaps it might be right. To other people besides us two. But
you could not do it to me, John. You never could do it to me, you know.'

Before I quite perceived my way to the bottom of the
distinction--although beyond doubt a valid one--Gwenny came back with a
leathern bag, and tossed it upon the table. Not a word did she vouchsafe
to us; but stood there, looking injured.

'Go, and get your letters, John,' said Lorna very gravely; 'or at least
your mother's letters, made of messages to you. As for Gwenny, she shall
go before Lord Justice Jeffreys.' I knew that Lorna meant it not; but
thought that the girl deserved a frightening; as indeed she did. But we
both mistook the courage of this child of Cornwall. She stepped upon a
little round thing, in the nature of a stool, such as I never had seen
before, and thus delivered her sentiments.

'And you may take me, if you please, before the great Lord Jeffreys. I
have done no more than duty, though I did it crookedly, and told a heap
of lies, for your sake. And pretty gratitude I gets.'

'Much gratitude you have shown,' replied Lorna, 'to Master Ridd, for all
his kindness and his goodness to you. Who was it that went down, at the
peril of his life, and brought your father to you, when you had lost him
for months and months? Who was it? Answer me, Gwenny?'

'Girt Jan Ridd,' said the handmaid, very sulkily.

'What made you treat me so, little Gwenny?' I asked, for Lorna would not
ask lest the reply should vex me.

'Because 'ee be'est below her so. Her shanna' have a poor farmering
chap, not even if her were a Carnishman. All her land, and all her
birth--and who be you, I'd like to know?'

'Gwenny, you may go,' said Lorna, reddening with quiet anger; 'and
remember that you come not near me for the next three days. It is the
only way to punish her,' she continued to me, when the maid was gone, in
a storm of sobbing and weeping. 'Now, for the next three days, she will
scarcely touch a morsel of food, and scarcely do a thing but cry. Make
up your mind to one thing, John; if you mean to take me, for better for
worse, you will have to take Gwenny with me.

'I would take you with fifty Gwennies,' said I, 'although every one
of them hated me, which I do not believe this little maid does, in the
bottom of her heart.'

'No one can possibly hate you, John,' she answered very softly; and I
was better pleased with this, than if she had called me the most noble
and glorious man in the kingdom.

After this, we spoke of ourselves and the way people would regard us,
supposing that when Lorna came to be her own free mistress (as she must
do in the course of time) she were to throw her rank aside, and refuse
her title, and caring not a fig for folk who cared less than a fig-stalk
for her, should shape her mind to its native bent, and to my perfect
happiness. It was not my place to say much, lest I should appear to use
an improper and selfish influence. And of course to all men of common
sense, and to everybody of middle age (who must know best what is good
for youth), the thoughts which my Lorna entertained would be enough to
prove her madness.

Not that we could not keep her well, comfortably, and with nice clothes,
and plenty of flowers, and fruit, and landscape, and the knowledge of
our neighbours' affairs, and their kind interest in our own. Still this
would not be as if she were the owner of a county, and a haughty title;
and able to lead the first men of the age, by her mind, and face, and
money.

Therefore was I quite resolved not to have a word to say, while this
young queen of wealth and beauty, and of noblemen's desire, made her
mind up how to act for her purest happiness. But to do her justice, this
was not the first thing she was thinking of: the test of her judgment
was only this, 'How will my love be happiest?'

'Now, John,' she cried; for she was so quick that she always had my
thoughts beforehand; 'why will you be backward, as if you cared not
for me? Do you dream that I am doubting? My mind has been made up, good
John, that you must be my husband, for--well, I will not say how long,
lest you should laugh at my folly. But I believe it was ever since you
came, with your stockings off, and the loaches. Right early for me to
make up my mind; but you know that you made up yours, John; and, of
course, I knew it; and that had a great effect on me. Now, after all
this age of loving, shall a trifle sever us?'

I told her that it was no trifle, but a most important thing, to abandon
wealth, and honour, and the brilliance of high life, and be despised
by every one for such abundant folly. Moreover, that I should appear a
knave for taking advantage of her youth, and boundless generosity, and
ruining (as men would say) a noble maid by my selfishness. And I told
her outright, having worked myself up by my own conversation, that she
was bound to consult her guardian, and that without his knowledge, I
would come no more to see her. Her flash of pride at these last words
made her look like an empress; and I was about to explain myself better,
but she put forth her hand and stopped me.

'I think that condition should rather have proceeded from me. You are
mistaken, Master Ridd, in supposing that I would think of receiving
you in secret. It was a different thing in Glen Doone, where all except
yourself were thieves, and when I was but a simple child, and oppressed
with constant fear. You are quite right in threatening to visit me thus
no more; but I think you might have waited for an invitation, sir.'

'And you are quite right, Lady Lorna, in pointing out my presumption. It
is a fault that must ever be found in any speech of mine to you.'

This I said so humbly, and not with any bitterness--for I knew that I
had gone too far--and made her so polite a bow, that she forgave me in a
moment, and we begged each other's pardon.

'Now, will you allow me just to explain my own view of this matter,
John?' said she, once more my darling. 'It may be a very foolish view,
but I shall never change it. Please not to interrupt me, dear, until you
have heard me to the end. In the first place, it is quite certain that
neither you nor I can be happy without the other. Then what stands
between us? Worldly position, and nothing else. I have no more education
than you have, John Ridd; nay, and not so much. My birth and ancestry
are not one whit more pure than yours, although they may be better
known. Your descent from ancient freeholders, for five-and-twenty
generations of good, honest men, although you bear no coat of arms, is
better than the lineage of nine proud English noblemen out of every ten
I meet with. In manners, though your mighty strength, and hatred of any
meanness, sometimes break out in violence--of which I must try to cure
you, dear--in manners, if kindness, and gentleness, and modesty are
the true things wanted, you are immeasurably above any of our
Court-gallants; who indeed have very little. As for difference of
religion, we allow for one another, neither having been brought up in a
bitterly pious manner.'

Here, though the tears were in my eyes, at the loving things love said
of me, I could not help a little laugh at the notion of any bitter piety
being found among the Doones, or even in mother, for that matter. Lorna
smiled, in her slyest manner, and went on again:--

'Now, you see, I have proved my point; there is nothing between us but
worldly position--if you can defend me against the Doones, for which, I
trow, I may trust you. And worldly position means wealth, and title,
and the right to be in great houses, and the pleasure of being envied.
I have not been here for a year, John, without learning something. Oh,
I hate it; how I hate it! Of all the people I know, there are but two,
besides my uncle, who do not either covet, or detest me. And who are
those two, think you?'

'Gwenny, for one,' I answered.

'Yes, Gwenny, for one. And the queen, for the other. The one is too far
below me (I mean, in her own opinion), and the other too high above.
As for the women who dislike me, without having even heard my voice, I
simply have nothing to do with them. As for the men who covet me, for
my land and money, I merely compare them with you, John Ridd; and all
thought of them is over. Oh, John, you must never forsake me, however
cross I am to you. I thought you would have gone, just now; and though I
would not move to stop you, my heart would have broken.'

'You don't catch me go in a hurry,' I answered very sensibly, 'when the
loveliest maiden in all the world, and the best, and the dearest, loves
me. All my fear of you is gone, darling Lorna, all my fear--'

'Is it possible you could fear me, John, after all we have been through
together? Now you promised not to interrupt me; is this fair behaviour?
Well, let me see where I left off--oh, that my heart would have broken.
Upon that point, I will say no more, lest you should grow conceited,
John; if anything could make you so. But I do assure you that half
London--however, upon that point also I will check my power of speech,
lest you think me conceited. And now to put aside all nonsense; though I
have talked none for a year, John, having been so unhappy; and now it is
such a relief to me--'

'Then talk it for an hour,' said I; 'and let me sit and watch you. To me
it is the very sweetest of all sweetest wisdom.'

'Nay, there is no time,' she answered, glancing at a jewelled timepiece,
scarcely larger than an oyster, which she drew from her waist-band; and
then she pushed it away, in confusion, lest its wealth should startle
me. 'My uncle will come home in less than half an hour, dear: and you
are not the one to take a side-passage, and avoid him. I shall tell him
that you have been here; and that I mean you to come again.'

As Lorna said this, with a manner as confident as need be, I saw that
she had learned in town the power of her beauty, and knew that she could
do with most men aught she set her mind upon. And as she stood there,
flushed with pride and faith in her own loveliness, and radiant with the
love itself, I felt that she must do exactly as she pleased with every
one. For now, in turn, and elegance, and richness, and variety, there
was nothing to compare with her face, unless it were her figure.
Therefore I gave in, and said,--

'Darling, do just what you please. Only make no rogue of me.'

For that she gave me the simplest, kindest, and sweetest of all kisses;
and I went down the great stairs grandly, thinking of nothing else but
that.



CHAPTER LXVIII

JOHN IS JOHN NO LONGER

It would be hard for me to tell the state of mind in which I lived for a
long time after this. I put away from me all torment, and the thought of
future cares, and the sight of difficulty; and to myself appeared,
which means that I became the luckiest of lucky fellows, since the world
itself began. I thought not of the harvest even, nor of the men who
would get their wages without having earned them, nor of my mother's
anxiety and worry about John Fry's great fatness (which was growing upon
him), and how she would cry fifty times in a day, 'Ah, if our John would
only come home, how different everything would look!'

Although there were no soldiers now quartered at Plover's Barrows, all
being busied in harassing the country, and hanging the people where the
rebellion had thriven most, my mother, having received from me a message
containing my place of abode, contrived to send me, by the pack-horses,
as fine a maund as need be of provisions, and money, and other comforts.
Therein I found addressed to Colonel Jeremiah Stickles, in Lizzie's best
handwriting, half a side of the dried deer's flesh, in which he rejoiced
so greatly. Also, for Lorna, a fine green goose, with a little salt
towards the tail, and new-laid eggs inside it, as well as a bottle of
brandied cherries, and seven, or it may have been eight pounds of fresh
homemade butter. Moreover, to myself there was a letter full of good
advice, excellently well expressed, and would have been of the greatest
value, if I had cared to read it. But I read all about the farm affairs,
and the man who had offered himself to our Betty for the five pounds
in her stocking; as well as the antics of Sally Snowe, and how she had
almost thrown herself at Parson Bowden's head (old enough to be her
grandfather), because on the Sunday after the hanging of a Countisbury
man, he had preached a beautiful sermon about Christian love; which
Lizzie, with her sharp eyes, found to be the work of good Bishop Ken.
Also I read that the Doones were quiet; the parishes round about having
united to feed them well through the harvest time, so that after the
day's hard work, the farmers might go to bed at night. And this plan had
been found to answer well, and to save much trouble on both sides, so
that everybody wondered it had not been done before. But Lizzie thought
that the Doones could hardly be expected much longer to put up with it,
and probably would not have done so now, but for a little adversity; to
wit, that the famous Colonel Kirke had, in the most outrageous manner,
hanged no less than six of them, who were captured among the rebels;
for he said that men of their rank and breeding, and above all of
their religion, should have known better than to join plough-boys, and
carters, and pickaxemen, against our Lord the King, and his Holiness
the Pope. This hanging of so many Doones caused some indignation among
people who were used to them; and it seemed for a while to check the
rest from any spirit of enterprise.

Moreover, I found from this same letter (which was pinned upon the
knuckle of a leg of mutton, for fear of being lost in straw) that good
Tom Faggus was at home again, and nearly cured of his dreadful wound;
but intended to go to war no more, only to mind his family. And it
grieved him more than anything he ever could have imagined, that his
duty to his family, and the strong power of his conscience, so totally
forbade him to come up and see after me. For now his design was to lead
a new life, and be in charity with all men. Many better men than he had
been hanged, he saw no cause to doubt; but by the grace of God he hoped
himself to cheat the gallows.

There was no further news of moment in this very clever letter, except
that the price of horses' shoes was gone up again, though already
twopence-farthing each; and that Betty had broken her lover's head with
the stocking full of money; and then in the corner it was written that
the distinguished man of war, and worshipful scholar, Master Bloxham,
was now promoted to take the tolls, and catch all the rebels around our
part.

Lorna was greatly pleased with the goose, and the butter, and the
brandied cherries; and the Earl Brandir himself declared that he never
tasted better than those last, and would beg the young man from the
country to procure him instructions for making them. This nobleman,
being as deaf as a post, and of a very solid mind, could never be
brought to understand the nature of my thoughts towards Lorna. He looked
upon me as an excellent youth, who had rescued the maiden from the
Doones, whom he cordially detested; and learning that I had thrown two
of them out of window (as the story was told him), he patted me on the
back, and declared that his doors would ever be open to me, and that I
could not come too often.

I thought this very kind of his lordship, especially as it enabled me to
see my darling Lorna, not indeed as often as I wished, but at any
rate very frequently, and as many times as modesty (ever my leading
principle) would in common conscience approve of. And I made up my mind
that if ever I could help Earl Brandir, it would be--as we say, when
with brandy and water--the 'proudest moment of my life,' when I could
fulfil the pledge.

And I soon was able to help Lord Brandir, as I think, in two different
ways; first of all as regarded his mind, and then as concerned his body:
and the latter perhaps was the greatest service, at his time of life.
But not to be too nice about that; let me tell how these things were.

Lorna said to me one day, being in a state of excitement--whereto she
was over prone, when reft of my slowness to steady her,--

'I will tell him, John; I must tell him, John. It is mean of me to
conceal it.'

I thought that she meant all about our love, which we had endeavoured
thrice to drill into his fine old ears; but could not make him
comprehend, without risk of bringing the house down: and so I said, 'By
all means; darling; have another try at it.'

Lorna, however, looked at me--for her eyes told more than tongue--as
much as to say, 'Well, you are a stupid. We agreed to let that subject
rest.' And then she saw that I was vexed at my own want of quickness;
and so she spoke very kindly,--

'I meant about his poor son, dearest; the son of his old age almost;
whose loss threw him into that dreadful cold--for he went, without hat,
to look for him--which ended in his losing the use of his dear old ears.
I believe if we could only get him to Plover's Barrows for a month, he
would be able to hear again. And look at his age! he is not much over
seventy, John, you know; and I hope that you will be able to hear me,
long after you are seventy, John.'

'Well,' said I, 'God settles that. Or at any rate, He leaves us time
to think about those questions, when we are over fifty. Now let me know
what you want, Lorna. The idea of my being seventy! But you would still
be beautiful.'

'To the one who loves me,' she answered, trying to make wrinkles in her
pure bright forehead: 'but if you will have common sense, as you always
will, John, whether I wish it or otherwise--I want to know whether I am
bound, in honour, and in conscience, to tell my dear and good old uncle
what I know about his son?'

'First let me understand quite clearly,' said I, never being in a hurry,
except when passion moves me, 'what his lordship thinks at present; and
how far his mind is urged with sorrow and anxiety.' This was not the
first time we had spoken of the matter.

'Why, you know, John, well enough,' she answered, wondering at my
coolness, 'that my poor uncle still believes that his one beloved
son will come to light and live again. He has made all arrangements
accordingly: all his property is settled on that supposition. He knows
that young Alan always was what he calls a "feckless ne'er-do-weel;" but
he loves him all the more for that. He cannot believe that he will die,
without his son coming back to him; and he always has a bedroom ready,
and a bottle of Alan's favourite wine cool from out the cellar; he has
made me work him a pair of slippers from the size of a mouldy boot; and
if he hears of a new tobacco--much as he hates the smell of it--he will
go to the other end of London to get some for Alan. Now you know how
deaf he is; but if any one say, "Alan," even in the place outside the
door, he will make his courteous bow to the very highest visitor, and be
out there in a moment, and search the entire passage, and yet let no one
know it.'

'It is a piteous thing,' I said; for Lorna's eyes were full of tears.

'And he means me to marry him. It is the pet scheme of his life. I am
to grow more beautiful, and more highly taught, and graceful; until
it pleases Alan to come back, and demand me. Can you understand this
matter, John? Or do you think my uncle mad?'

'Lorna, I should be mad myself, to call any other man mad, for hoping.'

'Then will you tell me what to do? It makes me very sorrowful. For I
know that Alan Brandir lies below the sod in Doone-valley.'

'And if you tell his father,' I answered softly, but clearly, 'in a few
weeks he will lie below the sod in London; at least if there is any.'

'Perhaps you are right, John,' she replied: 'to lose hope must be a
dreadful thing, when one is turned of seventy. Therefore I will never
tell him.'

The other way in which I managed to help the good Earl Brandir was of
less true moment to him; but as he could not know of the first, this was
the one which moved him. And it happened pretty much as follows--though
I hardly like to tell, because it advanced me to such a height as I
myself was giddy at; and which all my friends resented greatly (save
those of my own family), and even now are sometimes bitter, in spite of
all my humility. Now this is a matter of history, because the King was
concerned in it; and being so strongly misunderstood, (especially in
my own neighbourhood, I will overcome so far as I can) my diffidence in
telling it.

The good Earl Brandir was a man of the noblest charity. True charity
begins at home, and so did his; and was afraid of losing the way, if it
went abroad. So this good nobleman kept his money in a handsome
pewter box, with his coat of arms upon it, and a double lid and locks.
Moreover, there was a heavy chain, fixed to a staple in the wall, so
that none might carry off the pewter with the gold inside of it. Lorna
told me the box was full, for she had seen him go to it, and she often
thought that it would be nice for us to begin the world with. I told
her that she must not allow her mind to dwell upon things of this sort;
being wholly against the last commandment set up in our church at Oare.

Now one evening towards September, when the days were drawing in,
looking back at the house to see whether Lorna were looking after me,
I espied (by a little glimpse, as it were) a pair of villainous fellows
(about whom there could be no mistake) watching from the thicket-corner,
some hundred yards or so behind the good Earl's dwelling. 'There is
mischief afoot,' thought I to myself, being thoroughly conversant with
theft, from my knowledge of the Doones; 'how will be the moon to-night,
and when may we expect the watch?'

I found that neither moon nor watch could be looked for until the
morning; the moon, of course, before the watch, and more likely to be
punctual. Therefore I resolved to wait, and see what those two villains
did, and save (if it were possible) the Earl of Brandir's pewter box.
But inasmuch as those bad men were almost sure to have seen me leaving
the house and looking back, and striking out on the London road, I
marched along at a merry pace, until they could not discern me; and
then I fetched a compass round, and refreshed myself at a certain inn,
entitled The Cross-bones and Buttons.

Here I remained until it was very nearly as dark as pitch; and the house
being full of footpads and cutthroats, I thought it right to leave them.
One or two came after me, in the hope of designing a stratagem; but I
dropped them in the darkness; and knowing all the neighbourhood well, I
took up my position, two hours before midnight, among the shrubs at the
eastern end of Lord Brandir's mansion. Hence, although I might not see,
I could scarcely fail to hear, if any unlawful entrance either at back
or front were made.

From my own observation, I thought it likely that the attack would be
in the rear; and so indeed it came to pass. For when all the lights were
quenched, and all the house was quiet, I heard a low and wily whistle
from a clump of trees close by; and then three figures passed between me
and a whitewashed wall, and came to a window which opened into a part
of the servants' basement. This window was carefully raised by some one
inside the house; and after a little whispering, and something which
sounded like a kiss, all the three men entered.

'Oh, you villains!' I said to myself, 'this is worse than any Doone job;
because there is treachery in it.' But without waiting to consider the
subject from a moral point of view, I crept along the wall, and entered
very quietly after them; being rather uneasy about my life, because I
bore no fire-arms, and had nothing more than my holly staff, for even a
violent combat.

To me this was matter of deep regret, as I followed these vile men
inward. Nevertheless I was resolved that my Lorna should not be robbed
again. Through us (or at least through our Annie) she had lost that
brilliant necklace; which then was her only birthright: therefore it
behoved me doubly, to preserve the pewter box; which must belong to her
in the end, unless the thieves got hold of it.

I went along very delicately (as a man who has learned to wrestle can
do, although he may weigh twenty stone), following carefully the light,
brought by the traitorous maid, and shaking in her loose dishonest hand.
I saw her lead the men into a little place called a pantry; and there
she gave them cordials, and I could hear them boasting.

Not to be too long over it--which they were much inclined to be--I
followed them from this drinking-bout, by the aid of the light they
bore, as far as Earl Brandir's bedroom, which I knew, because Lorna had
shown it to me that I might admire the tapestry. But I had said that no
horse could ever be shod as the horses were shod therein, unless he had
the foot of a frog, as well as a frog to his foot. And Lorna had been
vexed at this (as taste and high art always are, at any small accurate
knowledge), and so she had brought me out again, before I had time to
admire things.

Now, keeping well away in the dark, yet nearer than was necessary to my
own dear Lorna's room, I saw these fellows try the door of the good Earl
Brandir, knowing from the maid, of course, that his lordship could hear
nothing, except the name of Alan. They tried the lock, and pushed at it,
and even set their knees upright; but a Scottish nobleman may be trusted
to secure his door at night. So they were forced to break it open; and
at this the guilty maid, or woman, ran away. These three rogues--for
rogues they were, and no charity may deny it--burst into Earl Brandir's
room, with a light, and a crowbar, and fire-arms. I thought to myself
that this was hard upon an honest nobleman; and if further mischief
could be saved, I would try to save it.

When I came to the door of the room, being myself in shadow, I beheld
two bad men trying vainly to break open the pewter box, and the third
with a pistol-muzzle laid to the night-cap of his lordship. With foul
face and yet fouler words, this man was demanding the key of the box,
which the other men could by no means open, neither drag it from the
chain.

'I tell you,' said this aged Earl, beginning to understand at last what
these rogues were up for; 'I will give no key to you. It all belongs to
my boy, Alan. No one else shall have a farthing.'

'Then you may count your moments, lord. The key is in your old cramped
hand. One, two, and at three, I shoot you.'

I saw that the old man was abroad; not with fear, but with great wonder,
and the regrets of deafness. And I saw that rather would he be shot
than let these men go rob his son, buried now, or laid to bleach in the
tangles of the wood, three, or it might be four years agone, but still
alive to his father. Hereupon my heart was moved; and I resolved to
interfere. The thief with the pistol began to count, as I crossed the
floor very quietly, while the old Earl fearfully gazed at the muzzle,
but clenched still tighter his wrinkled hand. The villain, with hair all
over his eyes, and the great horse-pistol levelled, cried 'three,' and
pulled the trigger; but luckily, at that very moment, I struck up the
barrel with my staff, so that the shot pierced the tester, and then
with a spin and a thwack I brought the good holly down upon the rascal's
head, in a manner which stretched him upon the floor.

Meanwhile the other two robbers had taken the alarm, and rushed at me,
one with a pistol and one with a hanger; which forced me to be very
lively. Fearing the pistol most, I flung the heavy velvet curtain of the
bed across, that he might not see where to aim at me, and then stooping
very quickly I caught up the senseless robber, and set him up for a
shield and target; whereupon he was shot immediately, without having the
pain of knowing it; and a happy thing it was for him. Now the other two
were at my mercy, being men below the average strength; and no hanger,
except in most skilful hands, as well as firm and strong ones, has
any chance to a powerful man armed with a stout cudgel, and thoroughly
practised in single-stick.

So I took these two rogues, and bound them together; and leaving them
under charge of the butler (a worthy and shrewd Scotchman), I myself
went in search of the constables, whom, after some few hours, I found;
neither were they so drunk but what they could take roped men to prison.
In the morning, these two men were brought before the Justices of the
Peace: and now my wonderful luck appeared; for the merit of having
defeated, and caught them, would never have raised me one step in the
State, or in public consideration, if they had only been common robbers,
or even notorious murderers. But when these fellows were recognised,
by some one in the court, as Protestant witnesses out of employment,
companions and understrappers to Oates, and Bedloe, and Carstairs, and
hand in glove with Dangerfield, Turberville; and Dugdale--in a word, the
very men against whom His Majesty the King bore the bitterest rancour,
but whom he had hitherto failed to catch--when this was laid before the
public (with emphasis and admiration), at least a dozen men came
up, whom I had never seen before, and prayed me to accept their
congratulations, and to be sure to remember them; for all were of
neglected merit, and required no more than a piece of luck.

I answered them very modestly, and each according to his worth, as
stated by himself, who of course could judge the best. The magistrate
made me many compliments, ten times more than I deserved, and took good
care to have them copied, that His Majesty might see them. And ere the
case was thoroughly heard, and those poor fellows were committed, more
than a score of generous men had offered to lend me a hundred pounds,
wherewith to buy a new Court suit, when called before His Majesty.

Now this may seem very strange to us who live in a better and purer
age--or say at least that we do so--and yet who are we to condemn our
fathers for teaching us better manners, and at their own expense? With
these points any virtuous man is bound to deal quite tenderly, making
allowance for corruption, and not being too sure of himself. And to tell
the truth, although I had seen so little of the world as yet, that which
astonished me in the matter, was not so much that they paid me court, as
