



THE THIRD OLYNTHIAC.

  THE ARGUMENT.

  The Athenians had dispatched succors to Olynthus, and
  received, as Libanius says, some favorable intelligence; more
  probably, however, some vague rumors, which led them to
  imagine the danger was for the time averted. They began, very
  prematurely, as the result showed, to be confident of success,
  and talked of punishing Philip for his presumption. In this
  they were encouraged by certain foolish orators, who sought to
  flatter the national prejudices. Demosthenes in this oration
  strives to check the arrogance of the people; reminds them of
  the necessity of defensive rather than offensive measures, and
  especially of the importance of preserving their allies.
  He again adverts (and this time more boldly) to the law of
  Eubulus, which he intimates ought to be repealed; and he
  exhorts the Athenians generally to make strenuous exertions
  against Philip,


Not the same ideas, men of Athens, are presented to me, when I look at
our condition and when at the speeches which are delivered. The
speeches, I find, are about punishing Philip; but our condition is come
to this, that we must mind we are not first damaged ourselves.
Therefore, it seems to me, these orators commit the simple error of not
laying before you the true subject of debate. That once we might safely
have held our own and punished Philip too, I know well enough; both have
been possible in my own time, not very long ago. But now, I am
persuaded, it is sufficient in the first instance to effect the
preservation of our allies. When this has been secured, one may look out
for revenge on Philip; but before we lay the foundation right, I deem it
idle to talk about the end.

The present crisis, O Athenians, requires, if any ever did, much thought
and counsel. Not that I am puzzled, what advice to give in the matter; I
am only doubtful, in what way, Athenians, to address you thereupon. For
I have been taught both by hearsay and experience, that most of your
advantages have escaped you, from unwillingness to do your duty, not
from ignorance. I request you, if I speak my mind, to be patient, and
consider only, whether I speak the truth, and with a view to future
amendment. You see to what wretched plight we are reduced by some men
haranguing for popularity.

I think it necessary, however, first to recall to your memory a few past
events. You remember, Athenians, when news came three or four years ago,
that Philip was in Thrace beieging Heraeum. [Footnote: A fortress on the
Propontis,(now Sea of Marmora,) near Perinthus. This was a post of
importance to the Athenians, who received large supplies of corn from
that district.] It was then the fifth month, [Footnote: Corresponding
nearly to our November. The Attic year began in July, and contained
twelve lunar months, of alternately 29 and 30 days. The Greeks attempted
to make the lunar and solar courses coincide by cycles of years, but
fell into great confusion. See _Calendarium_ in Arch. Dict.] and
after much discussion and tumult in the assembly you resolved to launch
forty galleys, that every citizen under forty-five [Footnote: This large
proportion of the serviceable citizens, [Greek: _ton en haelikia_],
shows the alarm at Athens. Philip's illness seems to have put a stop to
his progress in Thrace at this period. Immediately on his recovery he
began his aggression against Olynthus. See the Chronological Abstract
prefixed to this volume.] should embark, and a tax be raised of sixty
talents. That year passed; the first, second, third month arrived; in
that month, reluctantly, after the mysteries, [Footnote: The Eleusinian
Mysteries, in honor of Ceres and Proserpine, called The Mysteries from
their peculiar sanctity.] you dispatched Charidemus with ten empty ships
and five talents in money; for as Philip was reported to be sick or
dead, (both rumors came.) you thought there was no longer any occasion
for succors, and discontinued the armament. But that was the very
occasion; if we had then sent our succors quickly, as we resolved,
Philip would not have been saved to trouble us now.

Those events can not be altered. But here is the crisis of another war,
the cause why I mentioned the past, that you may not repeat your error.
How shall we deal with it, men of Athens? If you lend not the utmost
possible aid, see how you will have manoeuvred every thing for Philip's
benefit. There were the Olynthians, possessed of some power; and matters
stood thus: Philip distrusted them, and they Philip. We negotiated for
peace with them; this hampered (as it were) and annoyed Philip, that a
great city, reconciled to us, should be watching opportunities against
him. We thought it necessary by all means to make that people his
enemies; and lo, what erewhile you clamored for, has somehow or other
been accomplished. Then what remains, Athenians, but to assist them
vigorously and promptly? I know not. For besides the disgrace that would
fall upon us, if we sacrificed any of our interests, I am alarmed for
the consequences, seeing how the Thebans are affected toward us, the
Phocian treasury exhausted, nothing to prevent Philip, when he has
subdued what lies before him, from turning to matters here. Whoever
postpones until then the performance of his duty, wishes to see the
peril at hand, when he may hear of it elsewhere, and to seek auxiliaries
for himself, when he may be auxiliary to others; for that this will be
the issue, if we throw away our present advantage, we all know pretty
well.

But, it may be said, we have resolved that succors are necessary, and we
will send them; tell us only how. Marvel not then, Athenians, if I say
something to astonish the multitude. Appoint law-revisers: [Footnote: A
provision was made by Solon for a periodical revision, of the Athenian
laws by means of a legislative committee, called [Greek:
_Nomothetai_]. See my article _Nomothetes_, Arch. Dict.) They
were chosen by lot from the judicial body, on a reference to them by a
vote of the popular assembly, Demosthenes says, "enact no statutes,"
instead of saying, "let the committee enact no statutes." This is
because the committee would be taken from the people themselves, and the
part are treated as the whole. So in speeches to juries we shall
frequently observe that in mentioning the decision of some other jury he
says, "you did this or that," as if they were the same persons.] at
their session enact no statutes, for you have enough, but repeal those
which are at present injurious; I mean, just plainly, the laws
concerning our theatrical fund, and some concerning the troops, whereof
the former divide the military fund among stayers-at-home for theatrical
amusement, the latter indemnify deserters, and so dishearten men well
inclined to the service. When you have repealed these, and made the road
to good counsel safe, then find a man to propose what you all know to be
desirable. But before doing so, look not for one who will advise good
measures and be destroyed by you for his pains. Such a person you will
not find, especially as the only result would be, for the adviser and
mover to suffer wrongfully, and, without forwarding matters, to render
good counsel still more dangerous in future. Besides, Athenians, you
should require the same men to repeal these laws, who have introduced
them. It is unjust, that their authors should enjoy a popularity which
has injured the commonwealth, while the adviser of salutary measures
suffers by a displeasure that may lead to general improvement. Till this
is set right, Athenians, look not that any one should be so powerful
with you as to transgress these laws with impunity, or so senseless as
to plunge into ruin right before him.

Another thing, too, you should observe, Athenians, that a decree is
worth nothing, without a readiness on your part to do what you
determine. Could decrees of themselves compel you to perform your duty,
or execute what they prescribe, neither would you with many decrees have
accomplished little or nothing, nor would Philip have insulted you so
long. Had it depended on decrees, he would have been chastised long ago.
But the course of things is otherwise. Action, posterior in order of
time to speaking and voting, is in efficacy prior and superior. This
requisite you want; the others you possess. There are among you,
Athenians, men competent to advise what is needful, and you are
exceedingly quick at understanding it; ay, and you will be able now to
perform it, if you act rightly. For what time or season would you have
better than the present? When will you do your duty, if not now? Has not
the man got possession of all our strongholds? And if he become master
of this country, shall we not incur foul disgrace? Are not they, to whom
we promised sure protection in case of war, at this moment in
hostilities? Is he not an enemy, holding our possessions--a barbarian
[Footnote: _Barbarians_ (among the Greeks) designates persons who
were not of Hellenic origin. Alexander, an ancestor of Philip, had
obtained admission to the Olympic games by proving himself to be of
Argive descent. But the Macedonian people were scarcely considered as
Greeks till a much later period; and Demosthenes speaks rather with
reference to the nation than to Philip personally.]--anything you like
to call him? But, O heavens! after permitting, almost helping him to
accomplish these things, shall we inquire who were to blame for them? I
know we shall not take the blame to ourselves. For so in battles, no
runaway accuses himself, but his general, his neighbor, any one rather;
though, sure enough, the defeat is owing to all the runaways; for each
one who accuses the rest might have stood his ground, and had each done
so they would have conquered. Now then, does any man not give the best
advice? Let another rise and give it, but not censure the last speaker.
Does a second give better advice? Follow it, and success attend you!
Perhaps it is not pleasant: but that is not the speaker's fault, unless
he omits some needful prayer. [Footnote: Demosthenes sneers at the
custom of introducing into the debate sententious professions of
good-will, and prayers for prosperity; a poor substitute (he would say)
for good counsel. Compare Virg. Georg. III. 454.

      Alitur vitium vivitque tegendo,
  Dum medicas adhibere manus ad vulnera pastor
  Abnegat, et meliora, Deos sedet omina poscens.]

To pray is simple enough, Athenians, collecting all that one desires in
a short petition: but to decide, when measures are the subject of
consideration, is not quite so easy; for we must choose the profitable
rather than the pleasant, where both are not compatible.

But if any one can let alone our theatrical fund, and suggest other
supplies for the military, is he not cleverer? it may be asked. I grant
it, if this were possible: but I wonder if any man ever was or will be
able, after wasting his means in useless expenses, to find means for
useful. The wishes of men are indeed a great help to such arguments, and
therefore the easiest thing in the world is self-deceit; for every man
believes what he wishes, though the reality is often different. See
then, Athenians, what the realities allow, and you will be able to serve
and have pay. It becomes not a wise or magnanimous people, to neglect
military operations for want of money, and bear disgraces like these;
or, while you snatch up arms to march against Corinthians and Megarians,
to let Philip enslave Greek cities for lack of provisions for your
troops.

I have not spoken for the idle purpose of giving offense: I am not so
foolish or perverse, as to provoke your displeasure without intending
your good: but I think an upright citizen should prefer the advancement
of the commonweal to the gratification of his audience. And I hear, as
perhaps you do, that the speakers in our ancestors' time, whom all that
address you praise, but not exactly imitate, were politicians after this
form and fashion;--Aristides, Nicias, my namesake, [Footnote:
Demosthenes, the general so distinguished in the Peloponnesian war, who
defeated the Spartans at Pylus, and afterward lost his life in Sicily.]
Pericles. But since these orators have appeared, who ask, What is your
pleasure? what shall I move? how can I oblige you? the public welfare is
complimented away for a moment's popularity, and these are the results;
the orators thrive, you are disgraced. Mark, O Athenians, what a summary
contrast may be drawn between the doings in our olden time and in yours.
It is a tale brief and familiar to all; for the examples by which you
may still be happy are found not abroad, men of Athens, but at home. Our
forefathers, whom the speakers humored not nor caressed, as these men
caress you, for five-and-forty years took the leadership of the Greeks
by general consent, and brought above ten thousand talents into the
citadel; and the king of this country was submissive to them, as a
barbarian should be to Greeks; and many glorious trophies they erected
for victories won by their own fighting on land and sea, and they are
the sole people in the world who have bequeathed a renown superior to
envy. Such were their merits in the affairs of Greece: see what they
were at home, both as citizens and as men. Their public works are
edifices and ornaments of such beauty and grandeur in temples and
consecrated furniture, that posterity have no power to surpass them. In
private they were so modest and attached to the principle of our
constitution, that whoever knows the style of house which Aristides had,
or Miltiades, and the illustrious of that day, perceives it to be no
grander than those of the neighbors. Their politics were not for
money-making; each felt it his duty to exalt the commonwealth.
[Footnote: As Horace says:--

  Privatus illis census erat brevis,
  Commune magnum.]

By a conduct honorable toward the Greeks, pious to the gods, brotherlike
among themselves, they justly attained a high prosperity.

So fared matters with them under the statesmen I have mentioned. How
fare they with you under the worthies of our time? Is there any likeness
or resemblance? I pass over other topics, on which I could expatiate;
but observe: in this utter absence of competitors, (Lacedaemonians
depressed, Thebans employed, none of the rest capable of disputing the
supremacy with us,) when we might hold our own securely and arbitrate
the claims of others, we have been deprived of our rightful territory,
and spent above fifteen hundred talents to no purpose; the allies, whom
we gained in war, these persons have lost in peace, and we have trained
up against ourselves an enemy thus formidable. Or let any one come
forward and tell me, by whose contrivance but ours Philip has grown
strong. Well, sir, this looks bad, but things at home are better. What
proof can be adduced? The parapets that are whitewashed? The roads that
are repaired? fountains, and fooleries? [Footnote: Jacobs: _und
solches Geschwatz_. The proceedings of Eubulus are here more
particularly referred to.] Look at the men of whose statesmanship these
are the fruits. They have risen from beggary to opulence, or from
obscurity to honor; some have made their private houses more splendid
than the public buildings; and in proportion as the state has declined,
their fortunes have been exalted.

What has produced these results? How is it that all went prosperously
then, and nowgoes wrong? Because anciently the people, having the
courage to be soldiers, controlled the statesmen, and disposed of all
emoluments; any of the rest was happy to receive from the people his
share of honor, office, or advantage. Now, contrariwise, the statesmen
dispose of emoluments; through them every thing is done; you the people,
enervated, stripped of treasure and allies, are become as underlings and
hangers-on, happy if these persons dole you out show-money or send you
paltry beeves; [Footnote: Entertainments were frequently given to the
people after sacrifices, at which a very small part of the victim was
devoted to the gods, such as the legs and intestines, the rest being
kept for more profane purposes. Tho Athenians were remarkably
extravagant in sacrifices. Demades, ridiculing the donations of public
meat, compared the republic to an old woman, sitting at home in slippers
and supping her broth. Demosthenes, using the diminutive [Greek:
_boidia_], charges the magistrates with supplying lean and poor
oxen, whereas the victims ought to be healthy and large, [Greek:
teleia]. See Virgil, Aen. xi. 739.

  Hic amor, hoc studium; dum sacra secundus aruspex
  Nuntiet, ac lucos vocet hostia pinguis in altos.]

and, the unmanliest part of all, you are grateful for receiving your
own. They, cooping you in the city, lead you to your pleasures, and make
you tame and submissive to their hands. It is impossible, I say, to have
a high and noble spirit, while you are engaged in petty and mean
employments: whatever be the pursuits of men, their characters must be
similar. By Ceres, I should not wonder, if I, for mentioning these
things, suffered more from your resentment than the men who have brought
them to pass. For even liberty of speech you allow not on all subjects;
I marvel indeed you have allowed it here.

Would you but even now, renouncing these practices, perform military
service and act worthily of yourselves; would you employ these domestic
superfluities as a means to gain advantage abroad; perhaps, Athenians,
perhaps you might gain some solid and important advantage, and be rid of
these perquisites, which are like the diet ordered by physicians for the
sick. As that neither imparts strength, nor suffers the patient to die,
so your allowances are not enough to be of substantial benefit, nor yet
permit you to reject them and turn to something else. Thus do they
increase the general apathy. What? I shall be asked: mean you
stipendiary service? Yes, and forthwith the same arrangement for all,
Athenians, that each, taking his dividend from the public, may be what
the state requires. Is peace to be had? You are better at home, under no
compulsion to act dishonorably from indigence. Is there such an
emergency as the present? Better to be a soldier, as you ought, in your
country's cause, maintained by those very allowances. Is any one of you
beyond the military age? What he now irregularly takes without doing
service, let him take by just regulation, superintending and transacting
needful business. Thus, without derogating from or adding to our
political system, only removing some irregularity, I bring it into
order, establishing a uniform rule for receiving money, for serving in
war, for sitting on juries, for doing what each according to his age can
do, and what occasion requires. I never advise we should give to idlers
the wages of the diligent, or sit at leisure, passive and helpless, to
hear that such a one's mercenaries are victorious; as we now do. Not
that I blame any one who does you a service: I only call upon you,
Athenians, to perform on your own account those duties for which you
honor strangers, and not to surrender that post of dignity which, won
through many glorious dangers, your ancestors have bequeathed.

I have said nearly all that I think necessary. I trust you will adopt
that course which is best for the country and yourselves.




THE FIRST PHILIPPIC.

  THE ARGUMENT.

  Philip, after the defeat of Onomarchus, had marched toward
  the pass of Thermopylae, which, however, he found occupied by
  the Athenians, who had sent a force for the purpose of
  preventing his advance. Being baffled there, he directed his
  march into Thrace, and alarmed the Athenians for the safety
  of their dominions in the Chersonese. At the same time he sent
  a fleet to attack the islands of Lemnos and Imbrus, infested
  the commerce of Athens with his cruisers, and even insulted
  her coast. In Thrace he became involved in the disputes
  between the rival kings Amadocus and Cersobleptes, espousing
  the cause of the former; and for some time he was engaged in
  the interior of that country, either at war with Cersobleptes,
  or extending his own influence over other parts of Thrace,
  where he established or expelled the rulers, as it suited him.
  It was just at that time that Demosthenes spoke the following
  oration, the first in which he called the attention of his
  countrymen to the dangerous increase of Philip's power. He had
  become convinced by the course of events, and by observing the
  restless activity of Philip, that Athens had more to fear from
  him than from Thebes, or from any new combination of the
  Grecian republics. The orator himself, perhaps, hardly
  appreciated the extent of Philip's resources, strengthened as
  he was now by the friendship of Thessaly, possessed of a navy
  and maritime towns, and relieved from the presence of any
  powerful neighbors. What were the precise views of Demosthenes
  as to the extent of the impending danger, we can not say. It
  was not for him to frighten the Athenians too much, but to
