Still holding the tiller, Olaf kept his ship's prow ahead as before.

"Never yet have I fled from a battle," he called out to Thorkel Nefja.
"And although Sweyn Fork Beard had thrice two score of warships, I
would rather fight him than turn tail like a coward hound. God rules
over the lives of all Christian men, and why should we fear to
encounter King Sweyn and all his heathens? Let our cry be 'Onward,
Christ men; onward, Cross men!'"

Now when the Long Serpent, sweeping quickly along with all oars at
work, came nigh to her companions, Olaf saw that Earl Sigvaldi and his
vikings had passed on beyond the cape, while his own captains had
turned their prows about and were rowing back against the current.

"Why do ye take to flight?" roared Olaf in an angry voice of thunder.
"Never will I fly from any earthly enemy. He is no worthy king who
shuns his foes because of fear. Reverse your ships and follow the Long
Serpent, be it to glory or to death!"

And now, taking the lead, he arrayed his ships in order, with the Short
Serpent and the Crane together in his immediate wake, and his eight
other longships following close behind. Proudly, and with all his
banners flying, he sailed into the bay. Before him, at about a mile's
distance, he saw the seventy warships of his foes. Their vast number
and their compact battle array might well have struck fear into the
heart of one who had but eleven galleys at his back. But not for an
instant did Olaf Triggvison shrink from the unequal encounter. He
brought his vessels to a halt, but it was not from hesitation. It was
only that, taken wholly unawares, he had need to prepare for the coming
battle. Taking down his great war horn from the mast, he blew a
resounding blast. His warriors understood the call, and they hastily
donned their armour, brought their arrows and spears on deck and stood
at their stations with a readiness which showed how well their royal
master had trained them.

Olaf himself went below into his cabin. He knelt for a time before the
crucifix in silent prayer, and then, with his stout heart well prepared
for all that might happen to him, put on his finest armour and returned
to the deck.

As he stood beside his fluttering banner--a snow white banner with its
blood red cross--he could easily be distinguished from all who were
near him. His tall majestic figure was crowned with a crested helmet of
pure gold. Over his well wrought coat of mail he wore a short tunic of
scarlet silk. His shield, with its jewelled image of the crucified
Christ shone in the sunlight and could be distinctly seen by his
awaiting foes.

Some of his companions warned him of the danger of thus exposing
himself and making himself a mark for his enemies. But he answered
proudly that he wished all men, both friends and foes, to see that he
shunned no danger.

"The more I am seen," he said, "and the less fear I show in the battle,
the more shall I inspire my brave friends with confidence and my foes
with fear and terror."

As he spoke, he saw that King Sweyn with his ships was rowing slowly
out into the mid bay to meet him, leaving two detachments in his rear.
There was no sign of haste on board of any one of the ships, for all
men knew that there was a long day's fight before them, and that it was
well to make all their preparations with slow caution.

For some time after he had come on deck King Olaf was more intent upon
observing his enemies than in arraying his own small armament. He had
seen from the first that it would be his place to assume the defensive,
and he had given the order for his ships to be drawn up in line,
broadside to broadside.

This order was being carried out as he now stood watching the advance
of his enemy's battle.

"Who is the captain of the host now drawing up against us?" he asked of
Bersi the Strong, one of his chieftains who stood near him. "By the
standard on his prow methinks I should know him well."

"King Sweyn of the Forkedbeard it is, with his forces from Denmark,"
was Bersi's answer.

"That is even as I thought," returned Olaf. "But we are not afraid of
those cowards, for no more courage is there in Danes than in wood
goats. Never yet were Danes victorious over Norsemen, and they will not
vanquish us today. But what chief flies the standards to the right?"

"Those, lord, are the standards of Olaf the Swede King."

"The son of Queen Sigrid the Haughty stands in need of a little
practice in warfare," said Olaf. "But for the harm that he can do us,
he might well have stayed at home. And his heathen Sweden, I think,
would find it more agreeable to sit at the fireside and lick their
sacrificial bowls than to board the Long Serpent under the rain of our
weapons. We need not fear the horse eating Swedes. But who owns those
fine ships to the left of the Danes? A gallant man he must be, for his
men are far better arrayed than the rest and much bolder of aspect in
all ways."

"Earl Erik Hakonson is the owner of them," answered Bersi.

"He is the noblest champion who will fight against us today," said
Olaf, "and from him and the high born men that I see upon his decks we
may expect a hard battle. Earl Erik has just cause for attacking us,
and we must not forget that he and his crews are Norsemen like
ourselves. Now let us make ready!"

Then the king turned to his own ships. The eleven dragons had been
ranged side by side as he had ordered, with the Long Serpent in the
middle and the Crane and the Short Serpent at either side of her. To
right and to left of each of these four ships were placed. This was a
very small force, compared with the overwhelming numbers of the enemy,
and as Olaf glanced along his line he sorely missed the fifty of his
fleet that had gone out to seaward. Nevertheless he did not allow his
men to see that he was in any way anxious.

The seamen were now lashing the ships together stem by stem. Olaf saw
that they were tying the beak of the Long Serpent on a level with the
other prows, so that her poop stood out far behind. He called out
loudly to Ketil the Tall:

"Bring forward the large ship. Let her prow and not her stern stand
out. I will not lie behind my men when the battle begins!"

Then Wolf the Red, his standard bearer, whose station was forward in
the bow, mumbled a complaint:

"If the Serpent shall lie as far forward as she is longer than your
other ships, then there will be windy weather today in her bows."

The King answered: "I had the Serpent built longer than other ships, so
that she might be put forward more boldly in battle, and be well known
in fighting as in sailing. But when I chose her crew, I did not know
that I was appointing a stem defender who was both red and adread."

This playful taunt ruffled Red Wolf, who replied insolently: "There
need be nothing said, lord, if you will guard the poop as well as I
shall guard the forecastle."

The king had a bow in his hand. He laid an arrow on the string and
turned it on Wolf, who cried:

"Shoot another way, king, and not at me but at your foes, for what I
win in the fight I win for Norway, and maybe you will find that you
have not over many men before the evening comes."

The king lowered the arrow and did not shoot. When the men had finished
lashing the ships together he again took his war horn and blew a loud
blast upon it that echoed and re-echoed along the rocky shores of the
island. As he turned to put the horn aside he saw that Queen Thyra,
alarmed by the growing tumult, had come up on deck.

She looked out upon the bay, and seeing the enormous hostile fleet that
was closing in upon Olaf's diminished force she burst into tears.

Olaf went to her side and laid his hand on her shoulder.

"You must not weep," he said gently. "Come, dry your tears; for now you
have gotten what was due to you in Wendland; and today I mean to demand
of your brother Sweyn the tooth gift which you have so often asked me
for."



CHAPTER XXI: THE BATTLE IN SVOLD SOUND.


King Olaf stood on the poop deck of the Long Serpent, a conspicuous
figure among his fighting men, with his gold wrought helm towering high
above the others' heads. From this position he could survey the
movements of his foes, command the actions of his own shipmen, and
direct the defence. From this place also he could fire his arrows and
fling his spears over the heads of his Norsemen. His quivers were
filled with picked arrows, and he had near him many racks of javelins.
The larger number of his chosen chiefs--as Kolbiorn Stallare, Thorfinn
the Dashing, Ketil the Tall, and Thorstein Oxfoot--had their stations
forward on the forecastle deck or in the "close quarters" nearer the
prow. These stood ready with their spears and swords to resist
boarders, and they were protected by the shield men, who were ranged
before them at the bulwarks with their shields locked together. At
various points of vantage groups of archers had been placed, the best
marksmen being stationed before the mast, where no rigging or cordage
would mar their aim. At this part stood Einar Eindridson throughout the
whole battle. Loud and shrill sounded the war horns from both sides.
Nearer and nearer King Sweyn of Denmark drew onward to the attack. The
wind had fallen, the sea was calm; the sun hung hot and glaring in a
cloudless sky, flashing on burnished helmet and gilded dragon head.
King Olaf's prows were pointed towards the north, so that the enemy as
they came down upon him had the strong midday sunlight in their eyes.
King Sweyn Fork Beard opened his attack with a shower of arrows
directed at the stem defenders of the Long Serpent. King Olaf's archers
at once replied in like manner. This exchange of arrows was continued
without ceasing while Sweyn's ships came onward at their fullest speed.
Then, as the Danes drew yet closer under the Norsemen's prows, arrows
gave place to javelins and spears, which were hurled with unerring aim
from side to side.

Sweyn's men turned their stems towards both bows of the Long Serpent,
as she stood much further forward than any others of Olaf's ships. Many
who could not approach this coveted position turned their attention to
the Short Serpent and the Crane. And now the battle raged fiercely. Yet
the Norsemen stood firm as a wall of rock, while the Danes, assailed by
a heavy rain of spears and arrows from the Serpent's decks, began to
lose heart ere ever a man of them was able to make his way through the
close bulwark of shields. Olaf's prows were so lofty that they could
not be scaled, while the defenders, from their higher stand, had full
command over their foes. Thrand Squint Eye and Ogmund Sandy were the
first of the Norsemen to fall. These two leapt down upon the deck of
King Sweyn's dragon, where, after a tough hand to hand fight, in which
they vanquished nine of the Dane King's foremost warriors, they were
slain. Kolbiorn Stallare was very angry at these two having broken the
ranks, and he gave the order that none of the Norsemen were to attempt
to board the enemy's ships without express command.

Sweyn's ship lay under the larboard bow of the Serpent, and Wolf the
Red had thrown out grappling hooks, holding her there. She was a
longship, of twenty banks of oars, and her crew were the pick of all
the warmen of Denmark. Sharp and fierce was the fight at this side, and
great was the carnage. While Kolbiorn and others of Olaf's stem
defenders kept up an incessant battle with their javelins and swords,
King Olaf and his archers shot their arrows high in air so that they
fell in thick rain upon the Danish decks. Yet the Danes, and the Swedes
from the rear, were not slow to retaliate. Although they found it
impossible to board the Serpent, they nevertheless could assail her
crowded decks with arrows and well aimed spears, and the Norsemen fell
in great numbers. In the meantime Sweyn's other ships--not one of which
was larger than the smallest of King Olaf's eleven dragons--made a
vigorous onset upon Olaf's left and right wings. The Norsemen fought
with brave determination, and as one after another of the Dane ships
was cleared of men it was drawn off to the rear, and its place was
occupied by yet another ship, whose warriors, fresh and eager, renewed
the onset. All along Olaf's line there was not one clear space, not a
yard's breadth of bulwark unoccupied by fighting men. The air was
filled with flying arrows and flashing spears and waving swords. The
clang of the weapons upon the metal shields, the dull thud of blows,
the wild shouts of the warriors and cries of the wounded, mingled
together in a loud vibrating murmur. To Earl Sigvaldi, who lay with his
ships apart at the far end of the bay, it sounded like the humming of
bees about a hive. Not only at the prows, but also behind at the sterns
of Olaf's compact host, did the Danes attempt to board. The Norsemen,
indeed, were completely surrounded by their foemen. King Olaf fought
from the poop deck of the Serpent with no less vigour than did Kolbiorn
and his stem defenders at the prow. He assailed each ship as it
approached with showers of well directed arrows. Then, as the stem of
one of the Danish longships crashed into his vessel's stern, he dropped
his longbow and caught up his spears, one in either hand, and hurled
them into the midst of his clamouring foes. Time after time he called
to his followers, and led them with a fierce rush down upon the enemy's
decks, sweeping all before him. Seven of King Sweyn's vessels did he
thus clear; and at last no more came, and for a time he had rest. But a
great cry from the Serpent's forecastle warned him that his stem men
were having a hard struggle. So he gathered his men together and led
them forward. Many were armed with battleaxes, others with spears, and
all with swords. Calling to his shield bearers to make way for him, he
pressed through the gap and leapt down upon the deck of Sweyn
Forkbeard's dragon.

"Onward, Christ men, Cross men!" he cried as full three score of his
bravest warriors followed close at his back. And he cut his way through
the crowd of Danes, who, led by Sweyn himself, had been making a final
rally and preparing to board the Serpent. King Sweyn was wounded in the
right arm by a blow from Kolbiorn's sword. Kolbiorn was about to repeat
the blow when several of the Danes, retreating aft, crowded between him
and their king. Sweyn drew back, and crying aloud to his men to follow
him, turned tail and led them over the bulwarks on to the deck of a
ship that was alongside of him. This ship, which had not yet been
secured by the Norsemen's grappling irons, he now withdrew to the
farther shores of the bay. As he thus retreated from the battle he
sounded his horns, calling off those of his ships that were not yet
altogether vanquished. Tired, wounded, and despairing, he owned himself
no match for Olaf the Glorious. He had made the attack with five and
forty fully manned warships, and yet all this great force had been as
nothing against the superior skill and courage of the defenders. Thus
it befell, as Olaf Triggvison had guessed, that the Danes did not gain
a victory over the Norsemen. While the Danes were in full retreat the
Swedes hastened forward to renew the attack. The Swedish king,
believing that Olaf Triggvison must certainly have suffered terrible
loss at the hands of the Danes, had the fullest hope that he would take
very little time in turning the defeat of King Sweyn into a victory for
himself. He had already, from a distance, kept up an intermittent fire
of arrows into the midst of the Norse ships, and it may be that he had
thus helped to reduce King Olaf's strength. He now rowed proudly upon
the left wing of the Norse fleet. Here he divided his own forces,
sending one division to an attack upon Olaf's prows, and himself rowing
round to the rear. Many of the disabled Dane ships barred his way, but
he at last brought his own longship under the poop of the Long Serpent.
This interval had given the Norsemen a brief respite in which to clear
their disordered decks and refresh themselves with welcome draughts of
cooling water which their chief ordered to be served round.

Vain were the Swede king's hopes. When he advanced upon the Serpent
Olaf Triggvison was ready to meet him, refreshed by his brief rest,
unwounded still, and with his warlike spirit burning eager within him.

"Let us not lose courage at the sight of these heathen devourers of
horse flesh!" he cried as he rallied his men. "Onward, my brave
Christians! It is for Christ's faith that we fight today. Christ's
cross against Thor's hammer! Christian against pagan!"

Then, when the anchors and grappling hooks were fastened upon the Swede
king's ship, Olaf hastened to the rail and assailed her men first with
javelin and long spear, and then with sword. So high was the Serpent's
poop above the other's stem that the Norsemen had to bring their
weapons to bear right down below the level of their sandalled feet, and
whenever the Swedish soldiers, emboldened by seeing an occasional gap
in King Olaf's ranks, tried to climb on board, they were hewn down or
thrown back into the sea.

At last Olaf of Sweden came forward with a strong body of swordsmen and
axemen, intent upon being the first of the three hostile princes to
