those kings he attached by treaty a portion of the Bodunni, ruled by a
nation of the Catuellani. Leaving a garrison there he advanced farther.
On reaching a certain river, which the barbarians thought the Romans
would not be able to cross without a bridge,--a conviction which led them
to encamp in rather careless fashion on the opposite bank,--he sent ahead
Celtae who were accustomed to swim easily in full armor across the most
turbulent streams. These fell unexpectedly upon the enemy, but instead
of shooting at any of the men confined themselves to wounding the horses
that drew their chariots and consequently in the confusion not even the
mounted warriors could save themselves. Plautius sent across also Fiavius
Vespasian, who afterward obtained the imperial office, and his brother
Sabinus, a lieutenant of his. So they likewise got over the river in some
way and killed numbers of the foe, who were not aware of their approach.
The survivors, however, did not take to flight, and on the next day
joined issue with them again. The two forces were rather evenly matched
until Gnaeus Hosidius Geta, at the risk of being captured, managed to
conquer the barbarians in such a way that he received triumphal honors
without having ever been consul.

Thence the Britons retired to the river Thames at a point near where it
empties into the ocean and the latter's flood-tide forms a lake. This
they crossed easily because they knew where the firm ground in this
locality and the easy passages were; but the Romans in following them up
came to grief at this spot. However, when the Celtae swam across again and
some others had traversed a bridge a little way up stream, they assailed
the barbarians from many sides at once and cut down large numbers of
them. In pursuing the remainder incautiously they got into swamps from
which it was not easy to make one's way out, and in this way lost many
men.

[-21-] Shortly after Togodumnus perished, but the Britons so far from
yielding stood together all the more closely to avenge his death. Because
of this fact and his previous mishap Plautius became alarmed, and instead
of advancing farther proceeded to guard what he had already gained and
sent for Claudius. He had been notified to do this in case he met with
any particularly stubborn resistance, and a large reinforcement for the
army, consisting partly of elephants, had been assembled in advance.

When the message reached him, Claudius entrusted domestic affairs
(including the management of the soldiers) to his colleague Vitellius,
whom he had caused to become consul like himself for the entire six
months' period, and started himself on the expedition. He sailed down the
river to Ostia, and from there followed the coast to Massilia. Thence
advancing partly by land and partly along the water courses he came to
the ocean and crossed over to Britain, where he joined the legions that
were waiting for him near the Thames. Taking charge of these he crossed
the stream, and encountering the barbarians, who had gathered at his
approach, he defeated them in a pitched battle and captured Camulodunum,
the capital of Cynobelinus. Next he extended his authority over numerous
tribes, in some cases by treaty, in others by force, and was frequently,
contrary to precedent, saluted as imperator. The usual practice is that
no single person may receive this title more than once from one and the
same war. He deprived those he conquered of their arms and assigned them
to the attention of Plautius, bidding him to subjugate the regions that
were left. Claudius himself now hastened back to Rome, sending ahead the
news of the victory by his sons-in-law, Magnus and Silanus.

[-22-] The senate on learning of his achievement gave him the title of
Britannicus and allowed him to celebrate a triumph.

[A.D. 44 (_a. u._ 796)]

They voted also that there should be an animal festival commemorating the
event and that an arch bearing a trophy should be erected in the City and
a second in Gaul, because it was from that district that he had set sail
in crossing over to Britain. They bestowed on his son the same honorific
title as upon him, so that Claudius was known in a way as Britannicus
Proper. Messalina was granted the same privilege of front seats as Livia
had enjoyed and also the use of the carpentum. These were the honors
bestowed upon the imperial family.

The memory of Gaius disgusted the senators so much that they resolved
that all the bronze coinage which had his image stamped upon it should
be melted down. Though this was done, yet the bronze was converted to no
better use, for Messalina made statues of Mnester the dancer out of it.
Inasmuch as the latter had once been on intimate terms with Gaius,
she made this offering as a mark of gratitude for his consenting to a
_liaison_ with her. She had been madly enamored of him, and when she
found herself unable in any way either by promises or by frightening him
to persuade him to have intercourse with her, she had a talk with
her husband and asked him that the man might be forced to obey her,
pretending that she wanted his help for some different purpose. Claudius
accordingly told him to do whatsoever he should be ordered by Messalina.
On these terms he agreed to enjoy her, alleging that he had been
commanded to do so by her husband. Messalina adopted this same method
with numerous other men, and committed adultery feigning that Claudius
knew what was taking place and countenanced her unchastity.

[-23-] Portions of Britain, then, were captured at this time in the
manner described. After this, during the second consulship of Gaius
Crispus and the first of Titus Statilius, Claudius came to Rome at the
end of a six months' absence from the city (of which time he had spent
only sixteen days in Britain) and celebrated his triumph. In this he
followed the well-established precedents, even to the extent of ascending
the steps of the Capitol on his knees, with his sons-in-law supporting
him on each side. He granted to the senators taking part with him in the
procession triumphal honors, and this not merely to the ex-consuls ...
for he was accustomed to do that most lavishly on other occasions and
with the slightest excuse. Upon Rufrius Pollio the prefect he bestowed an
image and a seat in the senatorial body as often as he would enter that
assembly with him. And to avoid having it thought that he was making any
innovation, he declared that Augustus had done this in the case of a
certain Valerius, a Ligurian. He also increased the dignity of Laco
(formerly praefectus vigilum but now procurator of the Gauls) by this same
mark of esteem and in addition by the honors belonging to ex-consuls.

Having finished this business he held the festival following the triumph
and assumed for the occasion some of the consular authority. It took
place in both the theatres at once. In the course of the spectacle he
would frequently absent himself while others superintended it in his
place. He had announced as many horse-races as could find place in a
day, but they amounted to not more than ten altogether. For between the
separate courses bears were slaughtered and athletes struggled. Boys sent
for from Asia also executed the Pyrrhic dance. The performers in the
theatre gave, with the consent of the senate, another festival likewise
intended to commemorate the victory. All this was done on account of
the successes in Britain, and to the end that other nations might more
readily capitulate it was voted that all the agreements which Claudius or
the lieutenants representing him should make with any peoples should be
binding, the same as if sanctioned by the senate and the people.

[-24-] Achaea and Macedonia, which ever since Tiberius became emperor had
belonged to elected governors, Claudius now returned to the choice by
lot. And abolishing the office of "praetor charged with the administration
of funds" he put the business in the hands of quaestors as it had been of
old; and these were not annual magistrates, as was the case with them
previously and with the praetors subsequently, but the same two men
attended to their duties for three entire years. Some of these secured a
praetorship immediately afterward and others drew a salary the amount of
which depended on the impression of efficiency they had created while in
office.

The quaestors, then, were given charge of the treasury in place of
governorships in Italy outside of the City; for he did away with all of
the latter. To compensate the praetors he entrusted to their care several
kinds of judicial cases which the consuls were previously accustomed to
try. Those serving as soldiers, since by law they could not have wives,
were granted the privileges of married men. Marcus Julius Cottius
received an increase in his ancestral domain (which included the Alps
named after him) and was now for the first time called king. The Rhodians
were deprived of their liberty because they had impaled certain Romans.
And Umbonius Silio, governor of Baetica, was summoned and ejected from the
senate because he had sent so little grain to the soldiers then serving
in Mauretania. At least, this was the accusation brought against him. In
reality it was not so at all, but his treatment was due to his having
offended some of the freedmen. So he brought together all his furniture,
considerable in amount and very beautiful, in the auction room as if he
were going to call for bids on all of it: but he sold only his senatorial
dress. By this he showed that he had received no deadly blow and could
enjoy life as a private citizen.--Beside these events of the time
the weekly market was transferred to a different day because of some
religious rites. That happened, too, on many other occasions.

[A.D. 45 _(a. u._ 798)]

[-25-] following year Marcus Vinicius for the second and Statilius
Corvinus for the first time entered upon the office of consul. Claudius
himself took all the customary oaths in detail, but prevented the rest
from taking oath separately. Accordingly, as in earlier times, one man
who was a praetor and second who was a tribune and one each of the other
officials repeated the oaths for those of the same grade. This custom was
followed for several years.

Now since the City was becoming filled with numbers of images,--for those
who wished might without restrictions appear in public in a painting or
in bronze or stone,--he had most of those already existing set somewhere
else and for the future forbade that any private citizen be allowed to
follow the practice, unless the senate should grant permission or except
he had built or repaired some public work. Such persons and their
relatives might have their likenesses set up in the places in question.

Having banished the governor of a certain province for venality the
emperor confiscated to public uses all the extra funds that the man had
gathered in office. Again, to prevent these persons eluding those who
wished to bring them to trial, he would give to nobody one office
immediately after another. This had been the custom in earlier days also,
to the end that any one without difficulty might institute a suit against
them in the intervening period; indeed, those whose terms had expired and
who were granted leave of absence from the City might not even take these
absences in succession, since it was intended that, if officials should
be guilty of any irregularity, they should not gain the further benefit
of escaping investigation by either continuous office or continuous
absence. The custom had, however, fallen out of use. So carefully did
Claudius guard against both possibilities that he would not without out
some delay allow even an official who was his colleague to be chosen by
lot for the governorship of a province that would naturally belong to
him. Still, he allowed some of them to govern for two years and sometimes
he would send elected magistrates. Persons who preferred a request to
leave Italy for a time were given permission by Claudius himself without
action of the senate; yet, in order to appear to be doing it under some
form of law, he ordered that a decree to the effect be issued. Votes
of this sort were also passed the following year. At the time under
consideration he arranged the votive festival which he had promised in
commemoration of his campaign. To the populace supported by public dole
he gave seventy-five denarii in every case and in some cases more, so
that for a few it amounted to three hundred twelve and a half. He did
not, however, distribute all of it in person, but his sons-in-law also
took part, because the distribution lasted several days and he was
anxious to use them in holding court.

In the case of the Saturnalia he put back the fifth day which had been
appointed by Gaius but was later abolished. [-26-] and inasmuch as the
sun was to undergo an eclipse on his birthday, he feared that some
disturbance might result,--for already certain other portents had
occurred,--and therefore he gave notice beforehand not only that there
would be an eclipse and when and for how long, but also the reasons for
which this would necessarily take place. They are as follows:

The moon, which revolves lower down than the sun (or so it is believed),
either directly below him or perhaps with Mercury and likewise Venus
intervening, has a longitudinal movement just like him, and a higher and
lower movement just like him, but furthermore a latitudinal movement such
as nowhere belongs to the sun under any circumstances. When, therefore,
she gets in a direct line with him over our heads and passes under his
blaze, then she obscures his beams that extend toward the earth, for
some to a greater, for some to a less degree, but does not conceal his
presence for even the briefest moment. For since the sun has a light of
his own he can never surrender it, and consequently, when the moon is
not directly in people's way so as to throw a shadow over him, he always
appears entire.

This, then, is what happens to the sun and it was made public by Claudius
at the time mentioned. With regard to the moon, however,--for it is not
irrelevant to speak of lunar phenomena also, since once I have broached
this subject,--as often as she gets directly opposite the sun (and she
only takes such a position with reference to him at full moon, whereas
he takes it with reference to her at the season of new moon), a conical
shadow falls upon the earth. This occurs whenever in her motion to and
from us her revolution takes her between the sun and the earth; then she
is deprived of the sun's light and appears by herself just as she really
is. Such are the conditions of the case.

[A.D. 46 (a. u. 799)]

[-27-] At the close of that year Valerius Asiaticus for the second time
and also Marcus Silanus became consuls. The latter held office for the
period for which he was elected. Asiaticus, however, though elected to
serve for the whole year (as was done in other cases), failed to do so
and resigned voluntarily. Some others had done this, though mostly by
reason of poverty. The expenses connected with the horse-races had
greatly increased, for generally there was a series of twenty-four
contests. But Asiaticus withdrew simply by reason of his wealth, which
also proved his destruction. Inasmuch as he was extremely well-to-do and
by being consul a second time had aroused the dislike and jealousy of
many, he desired in a way to overthrow himself, feeling that by so
doing he would be less likely to encounter danger. Still he was
deceived.--Vinicius, on the other hand, suffered no harm from Claudius,
for though he was an illustrious man he managed by keeping quiet and
minding his own business to preserve his life; but he perished by poison
administered by Messalina. She suspected that he had killed his wife
Julia and was angry because he refused to have intercourse with her. He
was duly accorded a public funeral and eulogies,--an honor which had been
granted to many.

Asinius Gallus, half-brother of Drusus by the same mother, conspired
against Claudius but instead of being put to death was banished. The
reason perhaps was that he made ready no army and collected no funds in
advance but was emboldened merely by his extreme folly, which led him to
think that the Romans would submit to having him rule them on account
of his family. But the chief cause was that he was a very small and
unshapely person and was therefore held in contempt, incurring ridicule
rather than danger.

[-28-]The people were truly loud in praise of Claudius for his
moderation, and also, by Jupiter, at the fact that he showed displeasure
when a certain man sought the aid of the tribunes against the person who
had freed him, asking and securing thus a helper in his cause. Both the
man in question and those associated with him in the proceedings were
punished; and the emperor further forbade rendering assistance to persons
in this way against their former masters, on pain of being deprived of
the right to bring suit against others. Per contra, people were vexed at
seeing him so much the slave of his wife and freedmen. This feeling was
especially marked on an occasion when Claudius himself and all the rest
were anxious to kill Sabinus (former governor of the Celtae in the reign
of Gains) in a gladiatorial fight, but the latter approached Messalina
and she saved him. They were also irritated at her having withdrawn
Mnester from the theatre and keeping him with her. But whenever any talk
about his not dancing sprang up among the people, Claudius would appear
surprised and make various apologies, taking oath that he was not at his
house. The populace, believing him to be really ignorant of what was
going on, was grieved to think that he alone was not cognizant of what
was being done in the imperial apartments,--behavior so conspicuous
that news of it had already traveled to the enemy. They were unwilling,
however, to reveal to him the state of affairs, partly through awe of
Messalina and partly to spare Mnester. For he pleased the people as much
by his skill as he did the empress by his beauty. With his abilities in
dancing he combined great cleverness of repartee, so that once when the
crowd with mighty enthusiasm begged him to perform a famous pantomime, he
dared to come to the front of the stage and say:

  "To do this, friends, I may not try;
  Orestes' bedfellow am I."

This, then, was the relation of Claudius to these matters.

As the number of lawsuits was now beyond reckoning and persons summoned
would now no longer put in an appearance because they expected to be
defeated, he gave written notice that by a given day he should decide the
case against them, by default, so that they would lose it even if absent.
And there was no deviation from this rule.

  Mithridates king of the Iberians[8] undertook to rebel and was engaged
  in preparations for a war against the Romans. His mother,
  however, opposed him and since she could not win him over by persuasion,
  determined to take to flight: he then became anxious to conceal
  his project, and so, while himself continuing preparations, he sent
  his brother Cotys on an embassy to convey a friendly message to
  Claudius. But Cotys proved a treacherous ambassador and told the
  emperor all, and he was made king of Iberia in place of Mithridates.

[A.D. 47, (a. u. 800)]

[-29-]The following year, the eight hundredth anniversary of the founding
of the city of Rome, Claudius became consul for the fourth and Lucius
Vitellius for the third time. Claudius now ejected some members of
the senate, the majority of whom were not sorry to be driven out but
willingly stood aside on account of their poverty. Likewise he brought
in a number to fill their places. Among these he summoned with haste
one Surdinius Gallus, qualified to be a senator, who had emigrated to
Carthage, and said to him: "I will bind you with golden fetters." Gallus,
therefore, fettered by his rank, remained at home.

Although Claudius visited dire punishment upon the freedmen of others, in
case he caught them in any crime, he was very lenient with his own. One
day an actor in the theatre uttered this well-worn saying:

  "A knave who prospers scarce can be endured,"[9]

whereupon the whole assemblage looked at Polybius, the emperor's
freedman. He, undismayed, shouted out: "The same poet, however, says:--

  'Who once were goatherds now have royal power.'" [9]

and suffered no harm for his behavior.

Information was laid that some persons were plotting against Claudius,
but in the majority of instances he paid no attention, saying: "It
doesn't do to adopt the same defensive tactics against a flea as against
a beast of prey." Asiaticus, however, was tried before him and came very
near being acquitted. He entered a general denial, declaring: "I have
no knowledge of nor acquaintance with any of these persons who are
testifying against me." Then the soldier who stated he had been an
associate of his, being asked which one Asiaticus was, pointed out a
baldheaded man that happened to be standing near him. Baldness was the
only thing of which he was sure about Asiaticus. This event occasioned
much laughter and Claudius was on the point of freeing him, when
Vitellius to please Messalina made the statement that he had been sent
for by the prisoner, who requested the privilege of deciding the manner
of death to be visited upon him. Hearing this, Claudius believed that on
account of a guilty conscience Asiaticus had really condemned himself and
accordingly had him executed.

Among many others who were calumniated by Messalina he put to death
Asiaticus and likewise Magnus, his son-in-law. Asiaticus had property,
and the family of Magnus as well as his close relationship were irksome.
Of course, they were nominally convicted on different charges from these.

This year a new island, not large, made its appearance by the side of the
island Thera.

Claudius, monarch of the Romans, published a law to the effect that no
senator might journey above seven mile-posts from the City without the
monarch's express orders.[10]

Moreover, since many persons would afford their sick slaves no care,
but drove them out of their houses, a law was passed that all slaves
surviving such an experience should be free.

He also prohibited anybody's driving through the City [sic] seated in a
vehicle.[11]

[-30-]Vespasian in Britain had been hemmed in by the barbarians and was
in danger of annihilation, but his son Titus becoming alarmed about his
father managed by unusual daring to break through the enclosing line; he
then pursued and destroyed the fleeing enemy. Plautius for his skillful
handling of the war with Britain and his successes in it both received
praise from Claudius and obtained an ovation. [In the course of the armed
