love him. She despised the woman for her stupidity; none the less, that
was the wife she would choose, if she must needs choose another than
herself. "I have a mind to see this fool-woman of yours," she said
doubtfully. "Why does she not love the King?"

Wogan could have answered that she had never seen him. He thought
silence, however, was the more expressive. The silence led Maria
Vittoria to conjecture.

"Is there another picture at her heart?" she asked, and again Wogan was
silent. "Whose, then? You will not tell me."

It might have been something in Wogan's attitude or face which revealed
the truth to her; it might have been her recollection of what the King
had said concerning Wogan's enthusiasm; it might have been merely her
woman's instinct. But she started and took a step towards Wogan. Her
eyes certainly softened. "I will go with you to Bologna," she said; and
that afternoon with the smallest equipment she started from Rome. Wogan
had ridden alone from Bologna to Rome in four days; he had spent three
days in Rome; he now took six days to return in company with Mlle. de
Caprara and her few servants. He thus arrived in Bologna on the eve of
that day when he was to act as the King's proxy in the marriage.

It was about four o'clock in the afternoon when the tiny cavalcade
clattered through the Porta Castiglione. Wogan led the way to the
Pilgrim Inn, where he left Maria Vittoria, saying that he would return
at nightfall. He then went on foot to O'Toole's lodging. O'Toole,
however, had no news for him.

"There has been no mysterious visitor," said he.

"There will be one to-night," answered Wogan. "I shall need you."

"I am ready," said O'Toole.

The two friends walked back to the Pilgrim Inn. They were joined by
Maria Vittoria, and they then proceeded to the little house among the
trees. Outside the door in the garden wall Wogan posted O'Toole.

"Let no one pass," said he, "till we return."

He knocked on the door, and after a little delay--for the night had
fallen, and there was no longer a porter at the gate--a little hatch was
opened, and a servant inquired his business.

"I come with a message of the utmost importance," said Wogan. "I beg you
to inform her Highness that the Chevalier Wogan prays for two words with
her."

The hatch was closed, and the servant's footsteps were heard to retreat.
Wogan's anxieties had been increasing with every mile of that homeward
journey. On his ride to Rome he had been sensible of but one
obstacle,--the difficulty of persuading the real Vittoria to return with
him. But once that had been removed, others sprang to view, and each
hour enlarged them. There was but this one night, this one interview!
Upon the upshot of it depended whether a woman, destined by nature for a
queen, should set her foot upon the throne-steps, whether a cause should
suffer its worst of many eclipses, whether Europe should laugh or
applaud. These five minutes while he waited outside the door threw him
into a fever. "You will be friendly," he implored Mlle. de Caprara. "Oh,
you cannot but be! She must marry the King. I plead for him, not the
least bit in the world for her. For his sake she must complete the work
she has begun. She is not obstinate; she has her pride as a woman
should. You will tell her just the truth,--of the King's loyalty and
yours. Hearts cannot be commanded. Alas, mademoiselle, it is a hard
world at the end of it. It is mortised with the blood of broken hearts.
But duty, mademoiselle, duty, a consciousness of rectitude,--these are
very noble qualities. It will be a high consolation, mademoiselle, one
of these days, when the King sits upon his throne in England, to think
that your self-sacrifice had set him there." And Mr. Wogan hopped like a
bear on hot bricks, twittering irreproachable sentiments until the
garden door was opened.

Beyond the door stretched a level space of grass intersected by a gravel
path. Along this path the servant led Wogan and his companion into the
house. There were lights in the windows on the upper floor, and a small
lamp illuminated the hall. But the lower rooms were dark. The servant
mounted the stairs, and opening the door of a little library, announced
the Chevalier Wogan. Wogan led his companion in by the hand.

"Your Highness," said he, "I have the honour to present to you the
Princess Maria Vittoria Caprara." He left the two women standing
opposite to and measuring each other silently; he closed the door and
went down stairs into the hall. A door in the hall opened on to a small
parlour, with windows giving on to the garden. There once before Lady
Featherstone and Harry Whittington had spoken of Wogan's love for the
Princess Clementina and speculated upon its consequences. Now Wogan sat
there alone in the dark, listening to the women's voices overhead. He
had come to the end of his efforts and could only wait. At all events,
the women were talking, that was something; if he could only hear them
weeping! The sound of tears would have been very comforting to Wogan at
that moment, but he only heard the low voices talking, talking. He
assured himself over and over again that this meeting could not fail of
its due result. That Maria Vittoria had exacted some promise which held
his King in Spain he was now aware. She would say what that promise was,
the condition of their parting. She had come prepared to say it--and the
thread of Wogan's reasonings was abruptly cut. It seemed to him that he
heard something more than the night breeze through the trees,--a sound
of feet upon the gravel path, a whispering of voices.

The windows were closed, but not shuttered. Wogan pressed his eyes to
the pane and looked out. The night was dark, and the sky overclouded.
But he had been sitting for some minutes in the darkness, and his eyes
were able to prove that his ears had not deceived him. For he saw the
dim figures of two men standing on the lawn before the window. They
appeared to be looking at the lighted windows on the upper floor, then
one of them waved to his companion to stand still, and himself walked
towards the door. Wogan noticed that he made no attempt at secrecy; he
walked with a firm tread, careless whether he set his foot on gravel or
on grass. As this man approached the door, Wogan slipped into the hall
and opened it. But he blocked the doorway, wondering whether these men
had climbed the wall or whether O'Toole had deserted his post.

O'Toole had not deserted his post, but he had none the less admitted
these two men. For Wogan and Maria Vittoria had barely been ten minutes
within the house when O'Toole heard the sound of horses' hoofs in the
entrance of the alley. They stopped just within the entrance. O'Toole
distinguished three horses, he saw the three riders dismount; and while
one of the three held the horses, the other two walked on foot towards
the postern-door.

O'Toole eased his sword in its scabbard.

"The little fellows thought to catch Charles Wogan napping," he said to
himself with a smile, and he let them come quite close to him. He was
standing motionless in the embrasure of the door, nor did he move when
the two men stopped and whispered together, nor when they advanced
again, one behind the other. But he remarked that they held their cloaks
to their faces. At last they came to a halt just in front of O'Toole.
The leader produced a key.

"You stand in my way, my friend," said he, pleasantly, and he pushed by
O'Toole to the lock of the door. O'Toole put out a hand, caught him by
the shoulder, and sent him spinning into the road. The man came back,
however, and though out of breath, spoke no less pleasantly than before.

"I wish to enter," said he. "I have important business."

O'Toole bowed with the utmost dignity.

"_Romanus civis sum_," said he. "_Sum_ senator too. _Dic Latinam
linguam, amicus meus_."

O'Toole drew a breath; he could not but feel that he had acquitted
himself with credit. He half began to regret that there was to be a
learned professor to act as proxy on that famous day at the Capitol. His
antagonist drew back a little and spoke no longer pleasantly.

"Here's tomfoolery that would be as seasonable at a funeral," said he,
and he advanced again, still hiding his face. "Sir, you are blocking my
way. I have authority to pass through that door in the wall."

"_Murus?_" asked O'Toole. He shook his head in refusal.

"And by what right do you refuse me?"

O'Toole had an inspiration. He swept his arm proudly round and gave the
reason of his refusal.

"_Balbus aedificabat murum_," said he; and a voice that made O'Toole
start cried, "Enough of this! Stand aside, whoever you may be."

It was the second of the two men who spoke, and he dropped the cloak
from his face. "The King!" exclaimed O'Toole, and he stood aside. The
two men passed into the garden, and Wogan saw them from the window.

Just as O'Toole had blocked the King's entrance into the garden, so did
Wogan bar his way into the house.

"Who, in Heaven's name, are you?" cried the Chevalier.

"Nay, there's a question for me to ask," said Wogan.

"Wogan!" cried the Chevalier, and "The King!" cried Wogan in one breath.

Wogan fell back; the Chevalier pushed into the hall and turned.

"So it is true. I could not, did not, believe it. I came from Spain to
prove it false. I find it true," he said in a low voice. "You whom I so
trusted! God help me, where shall I look for honour?"

"Here, your Majesty," answered Wogan, without an instant's
hesitation,--"here, in this hall. There, in the rooms above."

He had seized the truth in the same second when he recognised his King,
and the King's first words had left him in no doubt. He knew now why he
had never found Harry Whittington in any corner of Bologna. Harry
Whittington had been riding to Spain.

The Chevalier laughed harshly.

"Sir, I suspect honour which needs such barriers to protect it. You are
here, in this house, at this hour, with a sentinel to forbid intrusion
at the garden door. Explain me this honourably."

"I had the honour to escort a visitor to her Highness, and I wait until
the visit is at an end."

"What? Can you not better that excuse?" said the Chevalier. "A visitor!
We will make acquaintance, Mr. Wogan, with your visitor, unless you have
another sentinel to bar my way;" and he put his foot upon the step of
the stairs.

"I beg your Majesty to pause," said Wogan, firmly. "Your thoughts wrong
me, and not only me."

"Prove me that!"

"I say boldly, 'Here is a servant who loves his Queen!' What then?"

"This! That you should say, 'Here is a man who loves a woman,--loves her
so well he gives his friends the slip, and with the woman comes alone to
Peri.'"

"Ah. To Peri! So I thought," began Wogan, and the Chevalier whispered,--

"Silence! You raise your voice too high. You no doubt are anxious in
your great respect that there should be some intimation of my coming.
But I dispense with ceremony. I will meet this fine visitor of yours at
once;" and he ran lightly up the stairs.

Then Wogan did a bold thing. He followed, he sprang past the King, he
turned at the stair-top and barred the way.

"Sir, I beg you to listen to me," he said quietly.

"Beg!" said the Chevalier, leaning back against the wall with his dark
eyes blazing from a white face; "you insist."

"Your Majesty will yet thank me for my insistence." He drew a
pocket-book out of his coat. "At Peri in Italy we were attacked by five
soldiers sent over the border by the Governor of Trent. Who guided those
five soldiers? Your Majesty's confidant and friend, who is now, I thank
God, waiting in the garden. Here is the written confession of the leader
of the five. I pray your Majesty to read it."

Wogan held out the paper. The Chevalier hesitated and took it. Then he
read it once and glanced at it again. He passed his hand over his
forehead.

"Whom shall I trust?" said he, in a voice of weariness.

"What honest errand was taking Whittington to Peri?" asked Wogan, and
again the Chevalier read a piece here and there of the confession. Wogan
pressed his advantage. "Whittington is not the only one of Walpole's men
who has hoodwinked us the while he filled his pockets. There are others,
one, at all events, who did not need to travel to Spain for an ear to
poison;" and he leaned forward towards the Chevalier.

"What do you mean?" asked the Chevalier, in a startled voice.

"Why, sir, that the same sort of venomous story breathed to you in Spain
has been spoken here in Bologna, only with altered names. I told your
Majesty I brought a visitor to this house to-night. I did; there was no
need I should, since the marriage is fixed for to-morrow. I brought her
all the way from Rome."

"From Rome?" exclaimed the Chevalier.

"Yes;" and Wogan flung open the door of the library, and drawing himself
up announced in his loudest voice, "The King!"

A loud cry came through the opening. It was not Clementina's voice which
uttered it. The Chevalier recognised the cry. He stood for a moment or
two looking at Wogan. Then he stepped over the threshold, and Wogan
closed the door behind him. But as he closed it he heard Maria Vittoria
speak. She said,--

"Your Majesty, a long while ago, when you bade me farewell, I demanded
of you a promise, which I have but this moment explained to the
Princess, who now deigns to call me friend. Your Majesty has broken the
promise. I had no right to demand it. I am very glad."

Wogan went downstairs. He could leave the three of them shut up in that
room to come by a fitting understanding. Besides, there was other work
for him below,--work of a simple kind, to which he had now for some
weeks looked forward. He crept down the stairs very stealthily. The hall
door was still open. He could see dimly the figure of a man standing on
the grass.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the Chevalier came down into the garden an hour afterwards, a man
was still standing on the grass. The man advanced to him. "Who is it?"
asked the Chevalier, drawing back. The voice which answered him was
Wogan's.

"And Whittington?"

"He has gone," replied Wogan.

"You have sent him away?"

"I took so much upon myself."

The Chevalier held out his hand to Wogan. "I have good reason to thank
you," said he, and before he could say another word, a door shut above,
and Maria Vittoria came down the stairs towards them. O'Toole was still
standing sentry at the postern-door, and the three men escorted the
Princess Caprara to the Pilgrim Inn. She had spoken no word during the
walk, but as she turned in the doorway of the inn, the light struck upon
her face and showed that her eyes glistened. To the Chevalier she said,
"I wish you, my lord, all happiness, and the boon of a great love. With
all my heart I wish it;" and as he bowed over her hand, she looked
across his shoulder to Wogan.

"I will bid you farewell to-morrow," she said with a smile, and the
Chevalier explained her saying afterwards as they accompanied him to his
lodging.

"Mlle. de Caprara will honour us with her presence to-morrow. You will
still act as my proxy, Wogan. I am not yet returned from Spain. I wish
no questions or talk about this evening's doings. Your friend will
remember that?"

"My friend, sir," said Wogan, "who was with me at Innspruck, is Captain
Lucius O'Toole of Dillon's regiment."

"_Et_ senator too," said the Chevalier, with a laugh; and he added a
friendly word or two which sent O'Toole back to his lodging in a high
pleasure. Wogan walked thither with him and held out his hand at the
door.

"But you will come up with me," said O'Toole. "We will drink a glass
together, for God knows when we speak together again. I go back to
Schlestadt to-morrow."

"Ah, you go back," said Wogan; and he came in at the door and mounted
the stairs. At the first landing he stopped.

"Let me rouse Gaydon."

"Gaydon went three days ago."

"Ah! And Misset is with his wife. Here are we all once more scattered,
and, as you say, God knows when we shall speak together again;" and he
went on to the upper storey.

O'Toole remarked that he dragged in his walk and that his voice had a
strange, sad note of melancholy.

"My friend," said he, "you have the black fit upon you; you are plainly
discouraged. Yet to-night sees the labour of many months brought to its
due close;" and as he lit the candles on his chimney, he was quite
amazed by the white, tired face which the light showed to him. Wogan,
indeed, harassed by misgivings, and worn with many vigils, presented a
sufficiently woe-begone picture. The effect was heightened by the
disorder of his clothes, which were all daubed with clay in a manner
quite surprising to O'Toole, who knew the ground to be dry underfoot.
