It came from seaward, and swelled up louder and louder and nearer,
until it passed over our heads--the yelp and bay of Odin's wild
hounds, and the trample and scream of his horses and their dead
riders. A great fear fell on me, so that the cold sweat stood on my
forehead, while the hunt seemed everywhere above us for a moment,
and then passed inland among the thunder that hardly drowned its
noises.

Then Osmund the jarl cried out:

"That was Odin's hunt. I have heard it before, and ill came
thereof. He hunts us who forsake him."

And out of the darkness Harek answered, without one shake in his
brave voice:

"Odin's hunt in truth it was, and the ill comes to Odin, who must
leave this land before the might of the Cross. We who bear the sign
of might he cannot touch."

Then I remembered myself, and the fear passed from me, and I was
ashamed. I had no doubt now that there was need for Odin's wrath,
seeing that he was surely defeated. And Osmund was silent also,
thinking doubtless the same things; for he had taken on him the
prime signing long ago, and had forgotten it maybe.

Then we went on, and the storm grew wilder. Harek sang now, but
what the words were I cannot tell. I think they were some that he
had learned from Alfred.

Now we began to go down the southern slope of the highest neck of
the hill, as it seemed, though we could not rightly say where we
were, and in a little silence that came between the thunderclaps I
heard the rattle of hoofs as of another rider coming after us,
going faster than we dared.

"Here is one who knows the hill well," I said; "maybe he will guide
us."

And then the lightning showed the horseman close to us. He reined
up, and cried in a great voice:

"Ho, strangers! are you wandering here?"

"Ay; we are lost till the storm passes. Can you guide us to shelter
before the rain comes?" I said.

"Whence come you?" he asked.

"We are Alfred's men from Taunton--going to the thane's house at
Cannington."

"Ay, is that so? Then I will guide you. Follow," he said, and he
rode on.

One could see him plainly when the lightning came, and it showed a
tall man, grey bearded, and clad in a long hooded horseman's cloak,
under which gleamed golden-shining mail. Well mounted on a great
horse he was also, and its sides were white with foam on the dark
skin, as though he had ridden hard.

We mounted and went after him, with the lightning playing round us
and glancing from the mail of our leader as his arm threw the cloak
back over his shoulder from time to time. He led us along the hill
crest northward, crossing the places where the fire beacons had
been; and we wondered whither he was taking us, for shelter here
was none. And now the storm grew wilder, with the wind and chill of
coming rain.

Then he turned downhill, riding fast until we came to a place where
rocks lay loose and scattered everywhere, and our horses stumbled
among them. There he reined up suddenly, holding up his hand, and
shouting through the uproar of wind and thunder:

"Hold, for your lives! Hearken!"

We stayed motionless, listening, and again we heard the cry and
clang of Odin's hunt, coming now from inland over us, and I made
the sign of the Cross on my breast, in fear thereof.

"Ho for Odin's hunt!" the strange man cried, in his mighty voice.
"Hear it, Alfred's men, for you shall join it and ride the wind
with him if you defy him."

"We fear him not," said Harek; "he has no power over us."

"Has he not?" the man roared, facing full upon us; and as he did so
the lightning glared on him, and I saw that his drawn sword was
aloft, and that from its point glowed a blue flame, and that blue
flames also seemed to start from his horse's ears. One-eyed the man
was also, and he glowered on us under shaggy eyebrows.

Harek saw also, and he raised his hand towards the man and signed
the holy sign, crying:

"Speak! who are you?"

Thereat the man gave a hoarse roar as of rage, and his horse
reared, trampling wildly on the loose rocks, and, lo, he was gone
from before our eyes as if he had never been, while the thunder
crashed above us and below us everywhere!

"Odin! the Cross has conquered!" Harek cried again, in a voice that
was full of triumph; and the blood rushed wildly through me at the
thought of what I had seen.

Then Harek's horse shifted, and his hoof struck a great stone that
rolled as if going far down the hill, and then stopped, and maybe
after one could count five came a crash and rattle underneath us
that died away far down somewhere in the bowels of the hill. And at
that Osmund shouted suddenly:

"Back to the hill; we are on the brink of the old mine shaft! Back,
and stay not!"

Nor did we wait, but we won back to the higher ground before we
drew rein.

"We have met with Odin himself," Osmund said when we stopped and
the thunder let him speak.

"Ay, and have driven him hellwards by the might of the holy sign,"
said Harek. "Nearly had he lured us to death, unbaptized as we are,
in that place."

"Come," said Osmund; "I know where we are now. We are well-nigh
under the great fort, and there is a farm near at hand."

We found that soon and the rain came, and the storm spent its fury
and passed as we sat under cover in the stables waiting. Then came
the moonlight and calm, and the sweetness of rain-soaked earth and
flowers refreshed, and we went on our way wondering, and came to
the thane's with the first daylight. And I thought that our faces
were pale and marked with the terror of the things through which we
had gone, and maybe also with a new light of victory {xvii}.



Chapter XIV. King Alfred's Will.


When we came back to Aller, the first thing that I did was to tell
Neot of our meeting with Odin while his wild hunt went on through
the tempest, telling him how that I had feared unwisely, and also
of Harek's brave withstanding of the danger.

"It is said that our forefathers met Odin in like wise in the days
of the first christening of our race," he said. "I do not know what
to make thereof, seeing that I hold Odin as nought; but I think
this, that in some way Satan tried to destroy you before you were
baptized. Wherefore, whether Odin or mortal man drew you to that
place, I have no doubt what power saved you."

But Sigehelm thought that we had met with Satan himself in the
shape of the old god, and so also thought Guerir the hermit, who
told strange tales of like appearings among the Welsh hills where
he was born.

As for Alfred the king, he marvelled, and said even as Neot. But he
added this:

"I know the mine shaft well, and it is in my mind that some day
Odin's bones will be found at the bottom thereof. Nevertheless
there is more than mortal in what has happened to you by way of
trial."

Now came the time when Guthrum and his thirty comrades should seek
the king, and I have no words to tell of that time when in the
peaceful church we heathen stood white-robed and unarmed altogether
at the font, while Sigehelm, with a wonderful gathering of priests,
enlisted us as warriors of the Cross. It was, as all men think, the
most mighty victory that Alfred had ever gained.

At that time he chose Guthrum as his own son in the faith, and
named him Athelstan {xviii}, as the first and most noble stone
of the new building up of the church among the Danes. Neot would
not have our names changed, for he said we had wronged the faith in
them not at all. Odda stood for Osmund, as Neot for us.

After that was joyous feasting, and the loosing of the chrism bands
at Alfred's royal town of Wedmore, whither we went in bright
procession through the long summer day. Four days we bided there,
till we knew that the great Danish host was on its march homewards,
and then Guthrum and his comrades must join it. But before he went
he accepted from Alfred the gifts that an under-king should take
from his overlord, and they were most splendid. All men knew by
those tokens given and taken that Alfred was king indeed, and that
Guthrum did but hold place by his sufferance. Those two parted in
wondrous friendship with the new bond of the faith woven round
them, and the host passed from Wessex and was gone.

Yet, as ever, many a long year must pass by before the track of the
Danes should be blotted out from the fair land they had laid waste.
Everywhere was work to hand on burnt hall and homestead, ruined
church, and wasted monastery. There was nought that men grieved
over more than the burning of King Ine's church at Glastonbury, for
that had been the pride of all the land. Once, after the Chippenham
flight, the monks had dared to go out in sad procession to meet the
fierce raiders at the long dike that bars the way to Avalon, and
for that time they had won safety for the place--maybe by the loss
of their treasures given as ransom, or, as some say, by the power
of fearless and unarmed men; for there were men in the Danish host
whose minds were noble, and might well be touched thereby. But
Hubba's men could not be withheld after they had lost their mighty
leader, and the place must feel their fury of revenge.

Now after the host was gone we went back to Taunton, and there
Alfred called together his Witan, that he might set all things in
order with their help; and at that time, before the levies were
dismissed, he bade me seek out such men as would take to the ships
as his paid seamen. Therein I had no hard task, for from the ruined
coast towns came seafarers, homeless and lonely, asking nought
better than to find a place in the king's fleet, and first of all
were the Parret-mouth men and my fisher of Wareham. Presently, with
one consent, the Witan made me leader of the king's Wessex sea
levies, offering me the rank and fee of an English ealdorman, with
power to demand help in the king's name from all sea-coast sheriffs
and port reeves in whatever was needed for the ships, being
answerable to the throne only for what I should do. And that I
accepted willingly for love of Alfred, who was my friend, and for
the sake of comradeship with those valiant men who had fought
beside me when Hubba fell, and at Edington.

Then must I set myself to my new charge, having nought to do with
all the inland work that was before the king; and when the next
day's business was over, I went to tell him of this wish of mine,
and of some other matters that were on my mind whereof one may
easily guess.

Alfred sat in his private chamber in the great house that King Ine
built, and on the table before him were a great ink horn and other
writing gear, and beside him sat on a low stool his chaplain,
reading to him out of a great book while the king wrote. The rough
horn cage wherein was a candle, that he had planned in wind-swept
Athelney, stood close at hand, against the time of dusk that was
near. Ever was Alfred planning things like this, even in his
greatest troubles; and therein he was wise, for it is not good to
keep the mind full of heavy things alone. Moreover, as we wondered
at his skilful devices in these little things, we took heart from
his cheerful pleasure in them.

When the chamberlain brought me in, the great book was put aside,
and the pen set down, and the king looked up at me with his bright
smile.

"Welcome, my ship thane," he said. "Come and sit here beside me. I
have somewhat to read to you."

So I sat down wondering, and he turned back to some place in his
writing, and took the little knife that lay by him--for he had lost
his jewelled book staff in Athelney--and running its point along
the words, read to me from the writings of some old Roman what he
had been busy putting into good Saxon:

"Now when the Roman folk would make a fleet hastily, and had no
rowers, nor time to train them rightly, they built stages like to
the oar benches of a ship in a certain lake, and so taught the men
the swing and catch of the long oars."

"Will not that plan serve us, Ranald?" he said.

"Ay, lord," I answered, laughing. "In good truth, if a man can
learn to keep time, and swing rightly, and back water, and the
like, on such a staging, it is somewhat. But it will be hard work
pulling against dead water from a stage that moves not. Nor will
there be the roll and plunge of waves that must be met."

"Nor the sore sickness whereof Odda speaks," Alfred said, with his
eyes twinkling. "But I think that if the Romans found the plan
good, it will be so for us."

So we talked of this for a while, and I will say now that in after
days we tried it, and the plan worked well enough, at least in the
saving of time. Alfred's book learning was ever used for the good
of his people, and this was but one way in which he found ready
counsel for them.

This was pleasant talk enough, and neither I nor the king grew
weary thereof, but the good monk slept at last, and presently the
darkness fell, and Alfred dismissed him.

One came and lit the torches on the wall, and still we spoke of my
work, until at last Alfred said:

"So you must be busy, and I am glad. When will you set out, and
where will you go first?"

Now what I wanted to ask him was where Osmund the jarl had gone. He
had ridden to Taunton from Aller, that he might be present at
Thora's christening, and that their chrism loosing {xix} might
be held at the same time; and I had looked to find both here, but
they were gone. Nor had they left any word for me, and I was
troubled about that. So I was about to tell the king what was in my
mind concerning Thora first of all, and my heart began to beat
strangely. But he waited not for me to answer him.

"Stay," he said, smiling a little. "Before you go I must have a
hostage from my wild viking, lest he be, as it were, let loose on
the high seas where I cannot reach him."

Then he laughed, at my puzzled face, I suppose, and I saw that he
had some jest that pleased him.

"What hostage can I give, lord king?" I said. "Shall I leave Harek
and his harp with you?"

"Harek would charm our ears, and would escape," Alfred answered.
"Nay, but I must give you house and lands for a home, and therein
you shall leave a fair wife, whose loneliness will bring you ashore
now and then."

I thought there was more to come, and I liked not this at all, for
it went too closely with my fears of what might be. So I bowed, and
answered nothing as yet, while he looked laughingly at me.

