The old crater of Mont Garou has long been extinct, and, like the old
crater of Mont Pelee, near St. Pierre, it had far down in its depths,
surrounded by sheer cliffs from 500 to 800 feet high, a lake. Glimpses
of the lake of Mont Garou are difficult to get, owing to the thick
verdure growing about the dangerous edges of the precipices, but those
who have seen it describe it as a beautiful sheet of deep blue water.


THE APPEARANCE OF THE SOUFRIERE


Previous to the eruption of 1812 the appearance of the Soufriere was
most interesting. The crater was half a mile in diameter and five
hundred feet in depth. In its centre was a conical hill, fringed with
shrubs and vines; at whose base were two small lakes, one sulphurous,
the other pure and tasteless. This lovely and beautiful spot was
rendered more interesting by the singularly melodious notes of a bird,
an inhabitant of these upper solitudes, and altogether unknown to the
other parts of the island--hence called, or supposed to be, "invisible,"
as it had never been seen. (It is of interest to state that Frederick
A. Ober, in a visit to the island some twenty years ago, succeeded in
obtaining specimens of this previously unknown bird.) From the fissures
of the cone a thin white smoke exuded, occasionally tinged with a light
blue flame. Evergreens, flowers and aromatic shrubs clothed the steep
sides of the crater, which made, as the first indication of the eruption
on April 27, 1812, a tremulous noise in the air. A severe concussion of
the earth followed, and then a column of thick black smoke burst from
the crater.


THE ERUPTION OF 1812


The eruption which followed these premonitory symptoms was one of the
most terrific which had occurred in the West Indies up to that time. It
was the culminating event which seemed to relieve a pressure within the
earth's crust which extended from the Mississippi Valley to Caracas,
Venezuela, producing terrible effects in the latter place. Here,
thirty-five days before the volcanic explosion, the ground was rent and
shaken by a frightful earthquake which hurled the city in ruins to the
ground and killed ten thousand of its inhabitants in a moment of time.

La Soufriere made the first historic display of its hidden powers in
1718, when lava poured from its crater. A far more violent demonstration
of its destructive forces was that above mentioned. On this occasion the
eruption lasted for three days, ruining a number of the estates in the
vicinity and destroying many lives. Myriads of tons of ashes, cinders,
pumice and scoriae, hurled from the crater, fell in every section of
the island. Volumes of sand darkened the air, and woods, ridges and cane
fields were covered with light gray ashes, which speedily destroyed all
vegetation. The sun for three days seemed to be in a total eclipse,
the sea was discolored and the ground bore a wintry appearance from the
white crust of fallen ashes.

Carib natives who lived at Morne Rond fled from their houses to
Kingstown. As the third day drew to a close flames sprang pyramidically
from the crater, accompanied by loud thunder and electric flashes,
which rent the column of smoke hanging over the volcano. Eruptive matter
pouring from the northwest side plunged over the cliff, carrying down
rocks and woods in its course. The island was shaken by an earthquake
and bombarded with showers of cinders and stones, which set houses on
fire and killed many of the natives.


THE TERRIBLE EARTHQUAKE AT CARACAS


For nearly two years before this explosion earthquakes had been common,
and sea and land had been agitated from the valley of the Mississippi to
the coasts of Venezuela and the mountains of New Grenada, and from the
Azores to the West Indies. On March 26, 1812, these culminated in the
terrible tragedy, spoken of above, of which Humboldt gives us a vivid
account.

On that day the people of the Venezuelan city of Caracas were assembled
in the churches, beneath a still and blazing sky, when the earth
suddenly heaved and shook, like a great monster waking from slumber,
and in a single minute 10,000 people were buried beneath the walls of
churches and houses, which tumbled in hideous ruin upon their heads. The
same earthquake made itself felt along the whole line of the Northern
Cordilleras, working terrible destruction, and shook the earth as far
as Santa Fe de Bogota and Honda, 180 leagues from Caracas. This was a
preliminary symptom of the internal disorder of the earth.

While the wretched inhabitants of Caracas who had escaped the earthquake
were dying of fever and starvation, and seeking among villages and
farms places of safety from the renewed earthquake shocks, the almost
forgotten volcano of St. Vincent was muttering in suppressed wrath. For
twelve months it had given warning, by frequent shocks of the earth,
that it was making ready to play its part in the great subterranean
battle. On the 27th of April its deep-hidden powers broke their bonds,
and the conflict between rock and fire began.


THE MOUNTAIN STONES A HERD-BOY


The first intimation of the outbreak was rather amusing than alarming.
A negro boy was herding cattle on the mountain side. A stone fell near
him. Another followed. He fancied that some other boys were pelting him
from the cliff above, and began throwing stones upward at his fancied
concealed tormentors. But the stones fell thicker, among them some too
large to be thrown by any human hand. Only then did the little fellow
awake to the fact that it was not a boy like himself, but the mighty
mountain, that was flinging these stones at him. He looked up and saw
that the black column which was rising from the crater's mouth was no
longer harmless vapor, but dust, ashes and stones. Leaving the cattle to
their fate, he fled for his life, while the mighty cannon of the Titans
roared behind him as he ran. For three days and nights this continued;
then, on the 30th, a stream of lava poured over the crater's rim and
rushed downward, reaching the sea in four hours, and the great eruption
was at an end.

On the same day, says Humboldt, at a distance of more than 200 leagues,
"the inhabitants not only of Caracas, but of Calabozo, situated in
the midst of the Lianos, over a space of 4,000 square leagues, were
terrified by a subterranean noise which resembled frequent discharges of
the heaviest cannon. It was accompanied by no shock, and, what is very
remarkable, was as loud on the coast as at eighty leagues' distance
inland, and at Caracas, as well as at Calabozo, preparations were made
to put the place in defence against an enemy who seemed to be advancing
with heavy artillery."

It was no enemy that man could deal with. Fortunately, it confined its
assault to deep noises, and desisted from earthquake shocks. Similar
noises were heard in Martinique and Guadeloupe, and here also without
shocks. The internal thunder was the signal of what was taking place on
St. Vincent. With this last warning sound the trouble, which had lasted
so long, was at an end. The earthquakes which for two years had shaken
a sheet of the earth's surface larger than half Europe, were stilled by
the eruption of St. Vincent's volcanic peak.


BARBADOS COVERED WITH ASHES


Northeast of the original crater of the Soufriere a new one was formed
which was a half mile in diameter and five hundred feet deep. The old
crater was in time transformed into a beautiful blue lake, as above
stated, walled in by ragged cliffs to a height of eight hundred feet.

It was looked upon as a remarkable circumstance that although the air
was perfectly calm during the eruption, Barbados, which is ninety-five
miles to the windward, was covered inches deep with ashes. The
inhabitants there and on other neighboring islands were terrified by the
darkness, which continued for four hours and a half. Troops were called
under arms, the supposition from the continued noise being that hostile
fleets were in an engagement.

The movement of the ashes to windward, as just stated, was viewed as a
remarkable phenomenon, and is cited by Elise Reclus, in "The Ocean," to
show the force of different aerial currents; "On the first day of May,
1812, when the northeast trade-wind was in all its force, enormous
quantities of ashes obscured the atmosphere above the Island of
Barbados, and covered the ground with a thick layer. One would have
supposed that they came from the volcanoes of the Azores, which were
to the northeast; nevertheless they were cast up by the crater in St.
Vincent, one hundred miles to the west. It is therefore certain that the
debris had been hurled, by the force of the eruption, above the moving
sheet of the trade-winds into an aerial river proceeding in a contrary
direction." For this it must have been hurled miles high into the air,
till caught by the current of the anti-trade winds.


KINGSLEY'S VISIT TO SAINT VINCENT


From Charles Kingsley's "At Last" we extract, from the account of the
visit of the author to St. Vincent, some interesting matter concerning
the 1812 eruption and its effect on the mountain; also its influence
upon distant Barbados, as just stated.

"The strangest fact about this eruption was, that the mountain did not
make use of its old crater. The original vent must have become so jammed
and consolidated, in the few years between 1785 and 1812, that it could
not be reopened, even by a steam force the vastness of which may be
guessed at from the vastness of the area which it had shaken for
two years. So, when the eruption was over, it was found that the old
crater-lake, incredible as it may seem, remained undisturbed, so far
as has been ascertained; but close to it, and separated only by a
knife-edge of rock some 700 feet in height, and so narrow that, as I
was assured by one who had seen it, it is dangerous to crawl along it,
a second crater, nearly as large as the first, had been blasted out, the
bottom of which, in like manner, was afterward filled with water.

"I regretted much that I could not visit it. Three points I longed
to ascertain carefully--the relative heights of the water in the two
craters; the height and nature of the spot where the lava stream issued;
and, lastly, if possible, the actual causes of the locally famous
Rabacca, or 'Dry River,' one of the largest streams in the island,
which was swallowed up during the eruption, at a short distance from its
source, leaving its bed an arid gully to this day. But it could not be,
and I owe what little I know of the summit of the soufriere principally
to a most intelligent and gentleman-like young Wesleyan minister, whose
name has escaped me. He described vividly, as we stood together on the
deck, looking up at the volcano, the awful beauty of the twin lakes, and
of the clouds which, for months together, whirl in and out of the cups
in fantastic shapes before the eddies of the trade wind.


BLACK SUNDAY AT BARBADOS


"The day after the explosion, 'Black Sunday,' gave a proof of, though no
measure of, the enormous force which had been exerted. Eighty miles to
windward lies Barbados. All Saturday a heavy cannonading had been heard
to the eastward. The English and French fleets were surely engaged. The
soldiers were called out; the batteries manned; but the cannonade died
away, and all went to bed in wonder. On the 1st of May the clocks struck
six, but the sun did not, as usual in the tropics, answer to the call.
The darkness was still intense, and grew more intense as the morning
wore on. A slow and silent rain of impalpable dust was falling over the
whole island. The negroes rushed shrieking into the streets. Surely the
last day was come. The white folk caught (and little blame to them) the
panic, and some began to pray who had not prayed for years. The pious
and the educated (and there were plenty of both in Barbados) were not
proof against the infection. Old letters describe the scene in the
churches that morning as hideous--prayers, sobs, and cries, in Stygian
darkness, from trembling crowds. And still the darkness continued and
the dust fell.


INCIDENTS AT BARBADOS


"I have a letter written by one long since dead, who had at least powers
of description of no common order, telling how, when he tried to go out
of his house upon the east coast, he could not find the trees on his own
lawn save by feeling for their stems. He stood amazed not only in utter
darkness, but in utter silence; for the trade-wind had fallen dead,
the everlasting roar of the surf was gone, and the only noise was the
crashing of branches, snapped by the weight of the clammy dust. He went
in again, and waited. About one o'clock the veil began to lift; a
lurid sunlight stared in from the horizon, but all was black overhead.
Gradually the dust drifted away; the island saw the sun once more, and
saw itself inches deep in black, and in this case fertilizing, dust. The
trade-wind blew suddenly once more out of the clear east, and the surf
roared again along the shore.

"Meanwhile a heavy earthquake-wave had struck part at least of the
shores of Barbados. The gentleman on the east coast, going out, found
traces of the sea, and boats and logs washed up some ten to twenty feet
above high-tide mark; a convulsion which seemed to have gone unmarked
during the general dismay.

"One man at least, an old friend of John Hunter, Sir Joseph Banks and
others their compeers, was above the dismay, and the superstitious panic
which accompanied it. Finding it still dark when he rose to dress, he
opened (so the story used to run) his window; found it stick, and felt
upon the sill a coat of soft powder. 'The volcano in St. Vincent has
broken out at last,' said the wise man, 'and this is the dust of it.' So
he quieted his household and his negroes, lighted his candles, and went
to his scientific books, in that delight, mingled with an awe not the
less deep, because it is rational and self-possessed, with which he,
like the other men of science, looked at the wonders of this wondrous
world."



CHAPTER XXX.

Submarine Volcanoes and their Work of Island Building.


In November, 1867, a volcano suddenly began to show signs of activity
beneath the deep sea of the Pacific Ocean. There are some islands nearly
two thousands miles to the east of Australia called the Navigator's
Group, in which there had been no history of an eruption, nor had such
an event been handed down by tradition. Most of the islands in the
Pacific Ocean are old volcanoes, or are made up of rocks cast forth from
extinct burning mountains. They rise up like peaks through the
great depths of the ocean, and the top, which just appears above the
sea-level, is generally encircled by a growth of coral. Hence they are
termed coral islands. These islands every now and then rise higher than
the sea-level, owing to some deep upheaving force, and then the coral is
lifted up above the water, and become a solid rock. But occasionally the
reverse of this takes place, and the islands begin to sink into the
sea, owing to a force which causes the base of the submarine mountain
to become depressed. Sometimes they disappear. All this shows that some
great disturbing forces are in action at the bottom of the sea, and just
within the earth's crust, and that they are of a volcanic nature.

For some time before the eruption in question, earthquakes shook the
surrounding islands of the Navigator's Group, and caused great alarm,
and when the trembling of the earth was very great, the sea began to be
agitated near one of the islands, and vast circles of disturbed water
were formed. Soon the water began to be forced upwards, and dead fish
were seen floating about. After a while, steam rushed forth, and jets of
mud and volcanic sand. Moreover, when the steam began to rush up out of
the water, the violence of the general agitation of the land and of the
surface of the sea increased.


AN ERUPTION DESCRIBED


When the eruption was at its height vast columns of mud and masses of
stone rushed into the air to a height of 2,000 feet, and the fearful
crash of masses of rock hurled upwards and coming in collision with
others which were falling attested the great volume of ejected matter
which accumulated in the bed of the ocean, although no trace of a
volcano could be seen above the surface of the sea. Similar submarine
volcanic action has been observed in the Atlantic Ocean, and crews of
ships have reported that they have seen in different places sulphurous
smoke, flame, jets of water, and steam, rising up from the sea, or they
have observed the waters greatly discolored and in a state of violent
agitation, as if boiling in large circles.

New shoals have also been encountered, or a reef of rocks just emerging
above the surface, where previously there was always supposed to have
been deep water. On some few occasions, the gradual building up of an
island by submarine volcanoes has been observed, as that of Sabrina in
1181, off St. Michael's, in the Azores. The throwing up of ashes in this
case, and the formation of a conical hill 300 feet high, with a crater
out of which spouted lava and steam, took place very rapidly. But the
waves had the best of it, and finally washed Sabrina into the depths of
the ocean. Previous eruptions in the same part of the sea were recorded
as having happened in 1691 and 1720.

In 1831, a submarine volcanic eruption occurred in the Mediterranean
Sea, between Sicily and that part of the African coast where Carthage
formerly stood. A few years before, Captain Smyth had sounded the
spot in a survey of the sea ordered by Government, and he found the
sea-bottom to be under 500 feet of water. On June 28, about a fortnight
before the eruption was visible, Sir Pulteney Malcom, in passing over
the spot in his ship, felt the shock of an earthquake as if he had
struck on a sandbank, and the same shocks were felt on the west coast of
Sicily, in a direction from south-west to north-east.


BUILDING UP OF AN ISLAND BY SUBMARINE VOLCANOES


About July 10, the captain of a Sicilian vessel reported that as he
passed near the place he saw a column of water like a waterspout, sixty
feet high, and 800 yards in circumference, rising from the sea, and soon
after a dense rush of steam in its place, which ascended to the height
of 1,800 feet. The same captain, on his return eighteen days after,
found a small island twelve feet high, with a crater in its centre,
throwing forth volcanic matter and immense columns of vapor, the sea
around being covered with floating cinders and dead fish. The eruption
continued with great violence to the end of the same month. By the end
of the month the island grew to ninety feet in height, and measured
three-quarters of a mile round. By August 4th it became 200 feet high
and three miles in circumference; after which it began to diminish in
size by the action of the waves. Towards the end of October the island
was levelled nearly to the surface of the sea.

Naval officers and foreign ministers alike took an absorbing interest
in this new island. The strong national thirst for territory manifested
itself and eager mariners waited only till the new land should be cool
enough to set foot on to strive who should be first to plant there
his country's flag. Names in abundance were given it by successive
observers,--Nerita, Sciacca, Fernandina, Julia, Hotham, Corrao, and
Graham. The last holds good in English speech, and as Graham's Island
it is known in books to-day, though the sea took back what it had given,
leaving but a shoal of cinders and sand.

The Bay of Santorin, in the island of that name, which lies immediately
to the north of Crete, has long been noted for its submarine volcanoes.
According to one account, indeed, the whole island was at a remote
period raised from the bottom of the sea; but this is questionable. It
is, with more reason, supposed that the bay is the site of an ancient
crater, which was situated on the summit of a volcanic cone that
subsequently fell in. Certain it is that islands have from time to time
been thrown up by volcanic forces from the bottom of the sea within this
bay, and that some of them have remained, while others have sunk again.


HOW AN ISLAND GREW


Of the existing islands, some were thrown up shortly before the
beginning of the Christian era; in particular, one called the Great
Cammeni, which, however, received a considerable accession to its size
by a fresh eruption in A. D. 726. The islet nearest Santorin was raised
in 1573, and was named the Little Cammeni; and in 1707 there was added,
between the other two, a third, which is now called the Black Island.
This made its appearance above water on the 23rd of May, 1707, and was
first mistaken for a wreck; but some sailors, who landed on it, found
it to be a mass of rock; consisting of a very white soft stone, to which
were adhering quantities of fresh oysters. While they were collecting
these, a violent shaking of the ground scared them away.

During several weeks the island gradually increased in volume; but in
July, at a distance of about sixty paces from the new islet, there was
thrown up a chain of black calcined rocks, followed by volumes of thick
black smoke, having a sulphurous smell. A few days thereafter the water
all around the spot became hot, and many dead fishes were thrown up.
Then, with loud subterraneous noises, flames arose, and fresh quantities
of stones and other substances were ejected, until the chain of black
rocks became united to the first islet that had appeared. This eruption
continued for a long time, there being thrown out quantities of ashes
and pumice, which covered the island of Santorin and the surface of the
sea--some being drifted to the coasts of Asia Minor and the Dardanelles.
The activity of this miniature volcano was prolonged, with greater or
less energy, for about ten years.

In 1866 similar phenomena took place in the Bay of Santorin, beginning
with underground sounds and slight shocks of earthquake, which were
followed by the appearance of flames on the surface of the sea. Soon
after there arose, out of a dense smoke, a small islet, which gradually
increased until in a week's time it was 60 feet high, 200 long and 90
wide. The people of Santorin named it "George," in honor of the King of
Greece. In another week it joined and became continuous with the Little
Cammeni. The detonations increased in loudness, and large quantities of
incandescent stones were thrown up from the crater.

About the same time, at the distance of nearly 150 feet from the coast,
to the westward of a point called Cape Phlego, there rose from the sea
another island, to which was given the name of Aphroessa. It sank and
reappeared several times before it established itself above water. The
detonations and ejection of incandescent lava and stones continued at
intervals during three weeks. From the crater of the islet George, which
attained a height of 150 feet, some stones several cubic yards in bulk
were projected to a great distance. One of them falling on board of a
merchant vessel, killed the captain and set fire to the ship.

By the 10th of March the eruptions had partially subsided, but were then
renewed, and a third island, which was named Reka, rose alongside of
Aphroessa. They were at first separated by a channel sixty feet deep;
but in three days this was filled up, and the two islets became united.

Reference may properly be made here to Monte Nuovo and Jorullo, not that
they appertain to the present subject, but that they form examples of
the action of similar forces, in the one instance exerted on a lake
bottom, in the other on dry land, each yielding permanent volcanic
elevations in every respect analogous to those which rise as islands
from the bottom of the sea.


IN THE ICELANDIC SEAS


Off the coast of Iceland islands have appeared during several of
the volcanic eruptions which that remote dependency of Denmark has
manifested, and at various periods in Iceland's history the sea has been
covered with pumice and other debris, which tell their own tale of what
has been going on, without being in sufficient quantity to reach the
surface in the form of an island mass. The sea off Reykjanes--Smoky
Cape, as the name means--has been a frequent scene of these submarine
eruptions. In 1240, during what the Icelandic historians describe as
the eighth outburst, a number of islets were formed, though most of them
subsequently disappeared, only to have their places occupied by others
born at a later date. In 1422 high rocks of considerable circumference
appeared. In 1783, about a month before the eruption of Skaptar Jokull,
a volcanic island named Nyoe, from which fire and smoke issued, was
built up. But in time it vanished under the waves, all that remains
of it to-day being a reef from five to thirty-five fathoms below the
sea-level. In 1830, after several long-continued eruptions of the usual
