
"Oh, well done, good horses; oh, well done!

"Kate, they be close at hand; they are making for the gate as a
dove to its nest!"

Then Kate suddenly threw both doors wide and stood out in the dim
moonlight.

"Fling yourselves from your horses, gentlemen, and come in!" she
cried, in clear, penetrating tones. "There is shelter behind these
walls. And the first man who dares to follow I shoot dead!"

Then as the foremost horseman obeyed her, flinging himself from the
saddle, and staggering rather than walking within the gates, at
either one of which stood one of the two girlish guardians, ready
at a moment's notice to fling them together again, a quick sharp
cry broke from Kate's lips, together with the one word:

"Father!"

The second horseman was now within the gates; the third was close
behind. But there was a yell as of triumph, and suddenly Kate's
eyes flashed fire. There was the sharp report of a gun. The girl
flung the smoking weapon in the face of a second assailant, and
dragged within the gate the prostrate form of the third traveller.
Cherry and Petronella banged to the iron portals in the very faces
of the foremost assailants, who had recoiled for a moment before
Kate's blows, and drew the heavy bolts; whilst the shower of oaths
and curses which arose from the rest of the band, who rode up at
that moment, showed how fully they recognized their defeat.

Even the horses had escaped them; for the sagacious animals had
recognized their locality, and had made for the yard door at the
back, where Joshua had admitted them without delay, glad enough to
do anything to assist the hardly-beset travellers in their hour of
need.

The travellers had sunk down just within the gates, so breathless
and exhausted that for the first few seconds they did not even know
how and by whom their rescue had been effected. But the banging to
of the gates, and the sullen murmurs of the highwaymen as they had
drawn off, recognizing their defeat, showed those within that for
the moment the peril was past. The doors were then thrown open;
lights streamed forth into the darkness. Sir Richard Trevlyn rose
to his feet, passing his hand across his brow, to find his son
passionately embracing the dark-eyed Petronella, who clung to him,
fairly sobbing in her excitement and wonder; whilst Kate knelt
beside the prostrate figure of Culverhouse, who lay with closed
eyes almost like one dead.

"Kate, my girl, is it to thee we owe our deliverance?"

"Father, is he dead--is he dead?"

The cry was so full of anguish that it went to the father's heart;
and disregarding the shrill welcome and asseverations of Mistress
Dowsabel, who had just recognized, to her immense relief, that they
had admitted their own kinsmen to their doors, he bent over the
Viscount, and lifted him in his arms.

"Dead! not a bit of it. Dead men do not ride as he did. But he was
wounded in the arm, and has been losing blood fast, and doubtless
fainted the moment the strain was over. See, we will lay him here
on this settle beside the fire. Give him some wine, and bind up
that arm, my girl. Thou wilt choose to wait upon him thyself, I
trow. He will soon be able to thank thee for this timely rescue. I
must hear more of thy tale when I have spoken with thine aunt."

All was confusion now in the house, but confusion of a pleasant and
bustling kind. Joshua brought news that the highwaymen had
retreated in disappointment and dudgeon, but, true to their
principles, without any attempt at taking vengeance upon the Cross
Way House. Sir Richard was striving to soothe the agitation of the
timid Dowsabel, and hearing of the absence of the mistress of the
house; whilst servants hurried to and fro, setting the table for
supper, and vying with each other to provide comforts for the weary
travellers, who had been through so much peril and hard riding.

Petronella sat beside Philip in a deep embrasure, and had eyes and
ears for him alone. Kate and Cherry, under the direction of Dyson,
bound up Lord Culverhouse's arm, and soon had the satisfaction of
seeing the colour come back into his face, and his closed eyes
slowly open.

When they did this they dwelt for some moments upon Kate's face in
a dreamy fashion, as though their owner thought himself still in
some sort of a dream; but when she raised his head and put a cup to
his lips, he seemed to awake with a start, and after thirstily
draining the contents of the vessel, he caught her hand,
exclaiming:

"Kate--my Kate!--is it truly thou?"

She gave a little cry of joy at hearing him speak in tones so like
his own. He pressed the hand he held, whilst she knelt beside him
and whispered softly in his ear:

"It is I, indeed, thy little wife. O Culverhouse--and I thought
that thou hadst but come hither to die!"

There was a catch in her voice that told how great had been the
strain of the past minutes--greater than he could know just then.
She found it hard to keep back the tears as she knelt beside him,
listening whilst he whispered to her of all that had been said
about that sudden marriage of theirs, and how that none would dare
to call him free of his plighted word.

"And so thou art in very truth my betrothed wife, sweet Kate," he
said, "and none may part us now. It was as I said when I bid thee
come and plight thy troth. It was a pledge too solemn to be broken.
My father and mother say so, and so does thy father. We may not be
able to wed just yet; but if what I hear be true, sure our day of
waiting need not be so very long."

The colour had come back into her face now; her eyes were sparkling
in their old fashion. She looked indeed the same "saucy Kate" that
he had known and loved ever since his early boyhood.

There were steps behind them, and Sir Richard emerged from the room
where he had been holding counsel with Mistress Dowsabel. He looked
at the two beside the fireplace, and at that other pair in the
window, both too much absorbed in each other to heed him; and with
a smile upon his face he strode forward and laid his hand upon
Kate's shoulder.

"And so, my headstrong daughter, it is to that strong will of
thine, and the reckless courage I have sometimes chidden, that we
owe our lives and our safety today?" he said.

Culverhouse looked up eagerly.

"What sayest thou, sir?" he asked, whilst Kate's face crimsoned
over from brow to chin.

"Say, my lad? why, I say that but for this hardy wench of mine,
who, instead of retreating behind the strong walls of the house,
flung open with her own hands the iron gates to let us in, we
should by this time have been in sorry plight enow, had we not all
been dead men. It was she who opened those gates when all else
feared to do so--she who (aided by her two companions, whom she
inspired by her own courage) saved us from our foes. It was she who
shot down the foremost enemies, who would else have had thy life,
Culverhouse, and with her own hands dragged thee, all unconscious
as thou wert, within these gates.

"Wherefore, as to thee, boy, I owe my life (for that thou didst
receive in thine arm the charge that else would have dashed out my
brains), and that to her we both owe this timely rescue, methinks
that no wife nor daughter could do more, and that we must let
bygones be bygones and wed you so soon as may be. I will give my
fatherly blessing to you twain, for you are worthy of each other,
and have proved it this night. And so soon as you can win the
sanction of your good parents to your nuptials, Culverhouse, I will
give my saucy Kate to you without a doubt or a fear."



Chapter 25: "On The Dark Flowing River."


"That is our man! Seize him, bind him, and bring him before the
chief!"

Cuthbert heard these words spoken in a clear low tone not far away;
but the fog wreaths were hanging upon the river, and he could not
see the speakers. Instinctively he bent harder to his oar. The
wherry shot at redoubled speed through the dull, gleaming water;
but there were sounds astern of other plashing oars, the sound of
voices low yet eager, and Cuthbert felt sure he heard the name of
Trevlyn spoken in accents of subdued fierceness. He could hear by
the sound of the oars in the rowlocks that there were many rowers
in the pursuing boat. That they were in pursuit of him he could not
doubt, and he set his teeth hard as he plied his oars, for he felt
that the issue of this chase might mean life or death to him.

Esther's warning was ringing in his ears: "Beware the dark-flowing
river--the lone house--the black cellar!"

How had he regarded that warning? He had not heeded it at all. He
had let his curiosity and love of adventure conquer both prudence
and caution; and now he was well aware that he was in some
immediate and imminent peril.

He had been warned to fly from London, but he had not obeyed that
warning. This had been partly out of generosity to his kinsmen, for
it seemed to him that by his presence amongst them he might be
increasing the peril in which they stood, and he had been told that
that was in great part due to his own rashness and hardihood.

He had remained in London. This day was the very eve of that fifth
of November on which the King's Parliament was to assemble in
state. All the city was silent and tranquil. The vague sense of
expectation and excitement that Cuthbert had observed amongst some
of his acquaintances a few days back seemed now to have died down.
Was it the hush that immediately precedes the breaking of the storm
cloud; or had the fearful tale whispered to him by the wise woman
been but the product of her weird fancy, and all his fears and
terrors groundless?

This was the question which had been agitating Cuthbert during the
past two days; and upon this dim, foggy afternoon he had taken his
wherry and resolved to find out for himself the whole truth of the
matter.

Cuthbert had not forgotten Robert Catesby, or the priest to whom he
always felt he owed his life. If any plot were in hand at this
juncture, both these men were most certainly concerned in it. And
at the lone house at Lambeth he could surely get speech of Catesby,
or learn where he was to be found; and it seemed to Cuthbert that
he could not sleep another night until he had set at rest the
doubts and fears crowding his mind.

Did he go with a view of warning Catesby that the plot was
discovered--that the dark secret was out? He himself scarcely knew.
He was not at all sure that he believed himself in the hideous
magnitude of the contemplated deed as Esther had described it.
Remembering as he did all he had heard and seen, he could not doubt
that some secret plot was afoot, but he thought it highly probable
that the scope and purpose of it had been misunderstood; and there
was certainly this feeling in his mind, that a timely word of
warning to those concerned might serve to avert a terrible doom
from any who might lie already under suspicion.

He had not been able to gain speech with Father Urban; for although
he was convinced the priest was in hiding within the house of the
Coles, both father and son resolutely denied this, and it seemed of
late as though they distrusted Cuthbert himself, and desired no
more of his company.

Martin Holt and honest Jacob Dyson had warned him to be cautious in
his dealings with any of the Romish persuasion, and Cuthbert had
been content to take this advice. But this last afternoon before
the great day so long anticipated might surely be put to some good
purpose, and the thought that those men in that Lambeth house might
be unwittingly remaining to be caught in a trap impelled Cuthbert
to strive to have speech with Master Robert Catesby and put him on
his guard, if he could not persuade him to abandon whatever rash
scheme he had in his head.

Sympathy with the persecuted went some small way in blinding
Cuthbert's eyes to the terrible nature of the purposed crime.
Moreover, he thought it like enough that Esther had heard a grossly
exaggerated account of what was determined. Still, what she had
heard others might have heard, and nothing was too bad to find
credit with those who planned and desired the ruin of all who held
views different from their own.

These and similar thoughts had been occupying Cuthbert's mind as he
bent to his oars and propelled his light wherry upstream towards
the lonely house. The tide was running out, and rowing was hard
work; but he was making progress steadily, and had no thought of
any personal peril until the sound of voices through the fog broke
upon his ear, and he realized that he himself was an object of
pursuit.

Then the wise woman's warnings flashed across him with vivid
distinctness. Had she not bidden him beware of just those perils
which he seemed resolved to court? Why had he forgotten or
disregarded her words? Had they not proved words of wisdom again
and again? And now here was he on the dark-flowing river alone,
unarmed save for the dagger in his belt, and far from all chance of
help.

Just behind was a boat in hot pursuit, and there were many rowers
in that boat, as the sounds told him. If he could hear their oars,
they could hear his. And though the twilight was creeping on, the
fog seemed to be lifting. Only the vapour wreaths hid him from the
gaze of his foes. If these were to be dispersed his last chance was
gone.

The river was absolutely lonely and deserted at this time of year
and at this spot. Lower down, schooners and barges were moored.
Near to the bridge he might have had some hope of being heard had
he shouted aloud for aid; here there was no such hope. He was away
on the Lambeth side: there were no houses and no boats of any kind.
His only chance lay in reaching the shore, springing to land, and
trusting to his fleetness to carry him into hiding. The lonely
house could not be far away. Perchance within its walls he might
find a hiding place, or gain admittance within its doors. At least
that was the only chance he had; and inspired by this thought he
drove his light wherry swiftly through the water, and felt the keel
grate against the bank almost before he was prepared for it.

The pursuers were still coming on, but did not appear to be
distressing themselves. Probably they felt so secure of their prey
that they could afford to be moderately cautious in the midst of
these fog wreaths that made river travelling somewhat perilous.
Cuthbert shipped his oars and sprang lightly ashore, leaving the
wherry to its fate. Then he raced like a hunted hare along the
margin of the river, and before five minutes had passed he had
scrambled up and leaped the wall of this lonely river-side house,
and was crouching breathless and exhausted in a thick covert upon
the farther side, straining his ears for sounds of pursuit.

These were not long in coming. He heard regular steps approaching
the wall, and a voice said:

"Here are the tracks. He got over here. Follow, and find him now.
He is in a trap!"

"Am I indeed in a trap?" thought Cuthbert, setting his teeth hard;
"that remains to be proved!"

And gliding out from the covert with that noiseless movement he had
learned during his residence in the forest, he raced like a
veritable shadow in the direction of the house.

He had reached the building rising black and grim against the
darkening sky; he had almost laid his hand upon the knocker,
intending to make known his presence and his peril, and demand
admittance and speech with Master Robert Catesby, when forth from
the shadows of the porch stepped a tall dark figure, and he felt a
shiver of dismay run through him as a loaded pistol was levelled at
his head.

"It is the spy again--the spy I have sworn to sweep from our path.
False Trevlyn, thine hour has come!"

A puff of smoke--a loud report. Cuthbert had flung up his hand to
shield his face, for the barrel was aimed straight at his temple.
He was conscious of a sudden stinging pain in his wrist. A
momentary giddiness seized him, and he stumbled and fell. A
sardonic laugh seemed to ring in his ears. He thought he heard the
banging of a door and the drawing of heavy bolts. Probably the man
who had fired was so certain of his aim that he did not even pause
to see how the shot had told.

"Your tongue will not wag again before the morrow!"

Those words seemed to be ringing in Cuthbert's ears, and then for a
moment all was blackness and darkness, with a sense of distress and
suffocation and stabs of sudden pain.

When he awoke from what he first thought had been a nightmare
dream, he was puzzled indeed to know where he was, and for a while
believed that he was dreaming still, and that he should soon awake
to find himself in his little attic chamber in the bridge house.
But as his senses gradually cleared themselves he became aware that
he was in no such safe or desirable spot. He was lying on some
cloaks in the bow of a large boat, which was being rowed steadily
and silently up stream by four stalwart men. The daylight was gone,
but so too was the fog, and the moon was shining down and giving a
sufficient light. In the stern of the boat sat two other men, whose
faces Cuthbert could dimly see, though their hats were drawn down
over their brows. These faces did not seem entirely unfamiliar, yet
he could not remember where it was he had seen them before. His
senses were cloudy and confused. He felt giddy and exhausted. He
had no disposition to try to move; but he soon found that even had
he been so disposed he could have accomplished little. His feet
were bound together by a cord, and his right hand was bound up and
utterly powerless. He remembered the shot levelled at him in the
garden of the river-side house, and felt certain that his wrist was
broken.

And who were these men who were carrying him away captive, and what
was their motive? He imagined that they must surely be those fierce
pursuers who had striven to capture him upon the river, and who had
followed him into the garden where he had hoped to hide himself
from their malice. Doubtless they had found him as he lay in a
momentary faint, and had borne him back to their boat; though what
was their motive in thus capturing him, and whither they were now
transporting him, he could not imagine. His mind was still confused
and weak. Esther's words of warning seemed to mingle with the
gurgle of the water against the bows of the boat. His temples
throbbed, there was burning pain in his wounded arm; but the night
wind fanned his brow, and brought with it a certain sense of
refreshment.

Hitherto there had been unbroken silence in the boat, and the
rowers had steadily plied their oars without uttering a word; but
now that they were out in mid river, without the smallest fear of
pursuit, far away from sight or sound from the shore, they paused
as by common consent, and one of them suddenly said:

"Now, comrades, we must settle which it is to be. Are we to take
him to Miriam or to Tyrrel?"

Those words told Cuthbert who were his captors. He was in the hands
of the gipsies or highwaymen--probably the prisoner of a mixed band
who had joined together to effect his capture. As the discussion
went on it became more evident that there were two parties and two
factions, both anxious to possess his person, and he listened with
bated breath and a beating heart to every word that passed.

"I say to Miriam," spoke up one swarthy fellow, with a backward
look towards the prisoner in the bow. "Miriam is wild to have him.
She is certain sure he has killed Long Robin. She would give her
two eyes to have vengeance on some Trevlyn. Why not let her have
the boy, to do with as she will?"

"Because all she cares for is to burn him alive, as her old mother
was burnt by some Trevlyn long ago; and what good would that do to
the rest of us? Long Robin was no such friend to us. If Miriam's
story be true, he was a treacherous fox, and deserved the fate he
got. If he it was who stole and hid the treasure, and kept the
secret all these years, hoping to enjoy the fruits of it alone,
why, he was a knave and a villain, say I; and that old hag is
little better. What do we care for her vow of vengeance? what is it
to us? Tyrrel, now, wants the prisoner for a purpose. This lad
knows where the treasure is, and he must give up the secret to us.
Once we know where he found it, and if moved where he has stowed
it, we shall speedily be rich for the rest of our days. You all
know that the forest is getting something too hot for us. Tyrrel
has decreed that we must go elsewhere, where we are less known. It
would be a thousand pities to go without this treasure, since it
really lies beneath our hand. A curse upon Long Robin, say I, for
keeping it hid all these years! It was a scurvy trick! and Miriam
was privy to it. I will raise no hand to help her. She may die with
her vow unfulfilled for all I care. Had she but acted fairly by us,
then would we have given yon lad up to her tender mercies; but not
now--not now!"

A murmur of assent ran through the whole party. The only one to
demur was the first speaker.

"The old woman got her death blow when Robin's corpse was found.
She will not last many weeks more, they say. I should well like to
bring her a bit of happiness at the end; and her one cry is for
vengeance upon the Trevlyn brood. She would well like to have yon
prisoner brought bound to her, Why not lead him first to Tyrrel and
then to Miriam?"

"When Tyrrel has him, he will decree what is done with him, not
we," said another voice. "He has no love for Miriam and her
insensate hate. Miriam and Long Robin have both played us false;
and Tyrrel loves the dark-eyed Joanna, and she will not stoop to
any deed of cruelty or tyranny. He will have a care how he treats
the boy over whom her mantle has once been thrown. But the secret
of the gold he must and will have. We will not let him go without
that."

"To Tyrrel then!" cried several voices with one accord. "I trow he
will have scant patience with any son of the house of Trevlyn,
since he was so bested by those other Trevlyns but two short
evenings back. He will be glad enow to have this lad brought before
him, for he verily feared that the whole brood had found shelter
within the gates of the Cross Way House."

Cuthbert listened eagerly to these last words, which told him that
his kinsmen at least had escaped peril and had found a safe shelter
where the treasure lay. Knowing that this was so, and that the
treasure was under their safe keeping, even did these men throw
aside the tradition of years and make a raid upon the home of the
Wyverns, his mind became somewhat calmed, although his own fate was
terribly uncertain, and he might have to pay the penalty of his
rashness with his life.

The rowers bent to their oars once again when this knotty point had
been settled. They rowed on steadily for a short time, and then out
of the darkness came a sharp clear hail.

"Who goes there?"

"Friends. We have caught the quarry; we are bringing him to
Tyrrel."

"Good. He has been waiting with impatience this two hours for news.
His wound doth not make him the more patient."

"We bring him at least the best medicine.

"Easy, lads! Ship your oars. Catch hold of her prow, Toby. So here
we are safe and sound, and there is the prisoner!"

Cuthbert had raised his head, and supporting himself on his left
elbow was gazing about him from side to side. He was still in the
middle of the river; but the boat was now alongside a big barge
moored in midstream, and from this barge several lights were
gleaming, whilst voices were answering and asking questions, and
the name of Tyrrel passed continually from mouth to mouth.

Then the rowers in the bow came and lifted him bodily in their
arms, taking care not to be needlessly rough with the broken arm
that gave him considerable pain; and so soon as he was placed upon
the barge, the rope that bound his feet was cut, somebody remarking
that it was needless now to hobble him, since he was safely on
board and beneath the eye of the whole crew.

"And where is Tyrrel?" asked several voices.

"Below in the cabin, and waiting impatiently for news. Go, and take
the boy with you; the sight of him will be the best medicine for
him."

Cuthbert was led along, dazed and bewildered, but calm from a sense
of his own helplessness, and perhaps from bodily weakness, too.
This weakness surprised him, for he did not know how much blood he
had lost, and he could not account for the way in which the lights
swam before his eyes and his steps reeled, as he was taken down a
dark ladder-like staircase and into a low long room with a swinging
lamp suspended from the ceiling. It felt close and airless after
the coldness of the night, and everything swam in a mist before his
eyes; but he heard a voice not altogether unfamiliar say in
authoritative accents: "Let him sit down, and give him a stoup of
wine;" and presently his vision cleared, and he found himself
sitting at one side of a rude table opposite the highway chieftain
Tyrrel, whose face he well remembered. They were surrounded by a
ring of stalwart men, some of whose faces were vaguely familiar to
him from having been seen at the old mill a year ago from now.

He noted that Tyrrel's face was pale, and that his head was
bandaged. It was plain that he had received recent injuries, and
apparently these did not smooth his temper. His face was dark and
stern, and the eyes that looked straight at Cuthbert gleamed
ominously beneath their heavy brows.

"Well, boy," he said at length, seeing Cuthbert's gaze fasten upon
him with inquiry and recognition, "so we meet again."

Cuthbert answered nothing. He did not intend to speak a needless
word. He had some inkling now of the motive for his capture, but he
was not going to show his hand.

"Cuthbert Trevlyn," said Tyrrel, in brief, terse sentences, "I have
not brought thee here to bandy words with thee; I will to the point
at once. I will tell thee why thou art here. Thou art in deadly
peril from without. There is a vile Popish plot but recently
discovered. The perpetrators and conspirators will all be seized
upon the morrow. Thou art held to be one of these. Thou wilt be
seized amongst others. Innocent or guilty, it matters not. Thou
wilt die the traitor's death--the hideous doom of those accused of
high treason. Thou wilt be lucky if thou art not racked first to
make thee confess what men hold (whether truly or falsely) that
thou knowest. I have interposed to save thee from that fate. I have
had thee pursued and brought hither to me. I can and I will save
thee and hide thee till all pursuit is over. But thou must purchase
my protection at a price."

Cuthbert listened as one in a dream. He knew that Tyrrel might be
speaking truth. He knew that he had received warnings before
telling him he was suspected and watched. He recalled many past
moments when he had felt that he had placed himself in a false
position and might have laid himself open to misconstruction. But
he had never thought himself in actual peril from the arm of the
law. Was Tyrrel speaking the truth now, or was he only striving to
