So I went back to Bures, and there is no need to say how my poor
folk rejoiced. But Ailwin was not there, nor had Gunnhild been
seen. The young priest was there yet, and well loved.

Then I said to myself:

"Let things bide for a while. When peace comes altogether and
certainly, then will Ailwin bring back Hertha, and there will be
trouble enough then, maybe. As it is, my house must be rebuilt, and
the land has to settle down after war."

With that I set to work to gather the timber together from my own
woods, that we might begin to build in the coming springtime, and I
grew happy enough at that work, though I would that I worked for
Uldra.

Then came the news that Eadmund our king was dead, slain by
Streone's men--some say by the Earl's son, others by the king's own
men, whom he bribed. One will, I suppose, never know what hands did
the deed, but Streone's doing it was when all is told.

There is more in my mind about this than I will say. But Thrand,
who had been with me, begged that he might go to Colchester for a
while; and I let him go, for he waxed restless, though I knew not
what he would leave me for.

Then the kingdom was Cnut's, and he spoke to the Wessex nobles at a
great council in London in such wise that they hailed him for king.
There was naught else for them to do. And he promised to keep the
laws of Eadgar {15}, and to defend Holy Church, and to make no
difference between Dane and Saxon, and by that time men knew that
what Cnut the king promised that he would perform.

So came the strong hand that Ethelred our dying king had foretold,
and sure and lasting peace lay fair before England. Above all
things that made for our content Cnut promised to send home his
host. Nor was it long before Jarl Eirik sailed away with all but
those to whom lands had fallen. There were many manors whose
English lords had died, and they must own Danish masters.

And I will say this other word, that now at the time that I write
of these things, men speak of English only, for Cnut has welded the
races of England into one in such wise as has never been before.

So I mourned for Eadmund, and wrought at home-making until the
springtime came, and all the while the thought of Uldra grew dearer
to me, and I longed to seek her again. And the thought of Hertha
and my betrothal seemed as bondage to me. Yet I would do nought
till Ailwin came or till I could find him. But none knew where he
was.

I knew now that it was well that Hertha and I should not meet till
all was broken off, for her I could not love, and she knew nought
of me. Yet for her sake I set the Wormingford thralls at work in
the like manner as my own people were busied, that she might find
withal to build her own house place afresh, when, if ever, she
should return.

Now, one day as I stood watching the shaping of the timber for the
first framing of my hall, Thrand came back. He ran to me when he
saw me, and cried:

"Master all is avenged! Streone the traitor is no more."

I took him away to a quiet place, for this news was strange, and
the thralls were listening wonderingly, and I asked him how this
came about.

"Master, I slew him myself," he said grimly.

Then said I:

"By subtlety--after his own manner?"

"Not so, master. But even in Cnut's own presence."

So I was amazed, and bade him tell all.

"When I left you, master," he said, "I took service with Jarl
Thorkel. Then he went to court in London, even as I hoped, for that
was all I needed, and presently came Streone with a great train to
see Cnut. Now the king is not a great and strong man, as men think
who have not seen him, but is tall and overgrown for his years,
looking eighteen or twenty, though he is younger. He will be a
powerful man some day, but his mail hangs loosely on him now. He is
like an eagle in face, for his nose is high and bent, and his eyes
are clear and piercing. Quiet and very pleasant is he in his way,
and being so young also, some think they can do as they will with
him. But that they try not twice.

"This is what Streone thought, for he deemed that he should be the
king's master if he set him on the throne. So he must needs try to
gain more wealth from the king, and after he had been at court for
a while, one might see that Cnut grew weary of his words. But at
last there was a great feast, and I stood behind Thorkel at the
high place, and Streone was next to Thorkel, and Thorkel to the
king on his right hand. When the ale was going round, Streone began
to find fault with some ordering of Cnut's, and at last said:

"Maybe one might judge how things would go when the man who gave
you this kingdom is treated thus.'

"Then Cnut looked at him very quietly and said:

"'You have the same honours from me as from Ethelred.'

"'Not so, not so,' he said. 'I was wont to sit at the king's right
hand, with none between me and him.'

"Thereat Thorkel would have spoken, but Cnut held up his hand. I
saw his bright eyes shining, and Streone should have taken warning,
but his fate was on him.

"'You think, then, that you have not all you deserve?' the king
said.

"'I have not. You have all--owing to me.'

"Then Cnut rose up and faced him, and a great hush fell on all the
assembly.

"'This earl, as it seems, will be content with nothing short of the
king's seat. Two kings has he pulled down, and one has he slain of
those two. We have profited by this, as all men know. But here do I
proclaim myself clear from all part in the slaying of Eadmund my
brother, who, but for this man, might hereafter have taken all the
kingdom when I died, according to our oaths. I suppose that no man
will believe that I had nought to do with this murder, but I am
clear thereof, both in thought or wish or deed.

"'Now in gaining the kingdom which has been the right of the Danish
kings--if tribute paid for conquest in old time means aught--at
least since the days of Guthrum, if not before, I have used the
help of this earl, for Mercia was ours by right, as in the
Danelagh. I will not say that his way of helping me has been what
one would wish, but in war one uses what weapons one can find. For
his help to me the Earl of Mercia has been well paid. Now, what
shall be given to the man who betrayed to death the foster son who
believed in him as in himself?'

"Then I, Thrand the freeman of Colchester, nowise caring what
befell me, answered in a loud voice:

"'Let him die. He is not fit to live.'

"'Slay him, therefore,' said Cnut.

"Thereat Streone cried for mercy once, grovelling. And he having
done so, I lifted the axe I bore and slew him, even on the high
place at the king's feet.

"Then one in the hall said in a great voice:

"'Justice is from the hands of Cnut the king.'

"There went round a murmur of assent to that, and I called to me
another of Thorkel's men, a Colchester man of your guard also, and
while all held their peace and Cnut stood still looking at what was
done, stirring neither hand nor foot, but with his eyes burning
bright with rage and his head a little forward, as an eagle that
will strike, we two bore the traitor's body to the window that
overhangs the Thames, and cast it thereout into the swift tide.

"After that I went my way down the hall, and the king cried:

"'Let the man go forth.'

"So that none spoke to me or withstood me.

"When I got to the street it was dark, and it seemed to me that the
best thing that I could do was to fly. So I went by day and night,
and I am here."

So that was the traitor's end. And I was glad, for I knew that
England was free from her greatest foe. Justly was Edric Streone
slain, and all men held that it was well done. Nor did any man ever
seek Thrand to avenge the earl's death on his slayer. I think none
held him worth avenging.

I bade Thrand hold his peace concerning his part in this matter,
for a while at least, lest I should lose him.

After Streone's death it was plain that Cnut was king indeed, for
his Danish jarls knew him too well to despise him. They went each
to his place, and the land began to smile again with the peace that
had come, and Cnut sent Eirik the jarl home to Denmark with the
host, as I have said.



Chapter 16: By Wormingford Mere.


Now it was not long after Streone's death that I had a message from
Emma the queen to bid me to her wedding with Cnut, that should be
completed with all magnificence. And I went with Thorkel the jarl
and Egil, and I could not complain of the welcome I had both from
the queen and from Cnut. I might say much of that wedding, for it
was wonderful, but I cared not much for it, except that there I met
Elfric the abbot again, and he would have me stay in his house, so
that it was most pleasant to be with him, and away from the bustle
and mirth of the strangers who were with the king.

But for this wedding Eadward Atheling would not come from Normandy.
Men said that he was likely to gather forces against his new
stepfather, but that it would be of no use. So thought I, for it
was a true word that I had heard at Senlac in the hut on Caldbec
hill--that Cnut should have the goodwill of all men, even of
myself. For so it was, as one might see written in the faces of the
London burghers, who alone of all England had baffled him again and
again, and now could not do enough honour to him. He had won even
their love.

When I would go back to Bures, Emma the queen sent for me, hearing
that I would speak with her ere I went, and she received me most
kindly, coming down from her high place to greet me.

"Redwald," she said, laughing a little, "I was a sore burden to you
when we fled hence."

"My queen," I answered, "the danger was the burden. It weighed on
all of us."

"That is a court speech," she said; "but we taught you court ways,
and I will not blame it. Nevertheless, though you will not tell me
so plainly, I know that I made things worse for you by my
foolishness. Forgive the abbess, if the queen may expect nought but
smooth words."

"I do not know how I can answer you, Queen Emma," said I at that,
"but it is true that for you I would go through the same again."

"Then I am forgiven," she said. "Now tell me what became of the
brave maiden who withstood the Danes with you, and also my sharp
tongue--trouble sharpened it, Redwald, and I have repented my hard
words to her."

"She is with friends at Penhurst, near to Earl Wulfnoth's castle of
Pevensea. And she feared that you would hate her."

"I would that I could reward her rather," the queen said. "Have you
seen her of late?"

"Not since just before last midsummer," I answered; and I suppose
my face showed some feeling that the queen noted.

"Redwald," she said, "if you would wed this maiden it is I who
would give her a portion that should be worthy of her and of you.
Can it be so?"

"My queen," I said with a great hope in my heart, "if that is your
will, I think that it must be so. But in honesty I will tell you
that an old betrothal that was when I was a child seems to stand in
the way. But neither I nor the child to whom I was betrothed have
seen one another since the coming of Swein's host. And I know not
where she is."

"Ah! you would have it broken, and I wonder not. That can surely
be."

Then all at once came over me one thought of how Hertha had
perhaps, after all, longed and waited and prayed for my coming. I
remembered words that Ailwin had spoken that seemed to say that
this might be so; and thus on the very threshold of freedom I
shrank back lest I should wrong the child I had loved by breaking
my troth so solemnly plighted; and I knew not what to say, while
the queen looked at me wondering.

Then she smiled and said:

"Maybe you cannot love the maiden. Wait awhile, and let me hear of
you again. One may not, in kindness, force these matters. But I
will trust you to tell me if she is to wed any other than you--for
her portion shall be ready for her. The riches of England and
Denmark and Norway are mine."

There spoke Emma of Normandy again, and her proud look came back.
The maidens on the dais were smiling at one another, for the queen
was turned away from them.

"Let it be thus, my queen," I said, after I had thanked her.

And she said that it should be so, deeming that I had thought of
Uldra not at all, maybe.

Then she spoke of my own doings, and Cnut came as we did so. I
bowed to him, and he took my hand, calling me "thane" in all good
faith.

"Now I have to come ere long into your country," he said, "for I
have vowed to build a church in each place where I have fought and
conquered. Have you a house where I may stay?"

"My place is far from Ashingdon, lord king," I answered, "and I am
rebuilding my father's house as best I can."

"I suppose my men burnt it?" he said plainly.

"Your father's men did so in the first coming."

"Therefore shall his son rebuild for your father's son," said the
king. "Will you accept aught from me?"

"Lord king," said I, "I have fought against you, and have owned you
unwillingly at first."

"That is certain," he said laughing, "else had you not tried to
take away my queen. Go to, Redwald, you are a troublesome subject."

"I think I shall be so no longer," I answered.

So those two most royal ones bade me farewell, and I went away to
Elfric, and found Godwine there. The young earl was high in favour
with Cnut, and rightly.

Presently came one from the king with somewhat for me, and that was
a goodly gift of money, which I hardly cared to take at first.

Then Godwine laughed at me.

"We have a great chest half full of gold at Pevensea out of which
you may take a double handful whenever you need it. Cnut has the
gold of three kingdoms and says you may do the same out of his
hoards. Head breaking brought you the first, and hardship the
second. Take one as you would the other, man. It is your due."

And Elfric added that the king's gift was surely out of goodness of
heart. There could be no thought of bribes now. So I took it, and
was glad thereof, for I could not ask my people for rents and dues
yet.

Elfric asked me of Uldra, as one might suppose, and was glad when
he heard of her welfare.

"I suppose that when I get back to Medehamstede her folk will want
to know how she fares in Normandy, or the like. Maybe they have
troubled the good abbess already more than enough, for she brought
her to me."

"Whose daughter was she?" I asked.

"Maybe I heard, but I have forgotten," he said. "The abbess knows.
I saw not her folk, for the sisters brought her with them with my
consent."

So I went back to Bures well content with all but one thing, and
that was what troubled me more than enough. But I knew not that to
my dying day I shall rejoice that I kept my troth to Hertha.

It was on one of those wondrous days that come in October, with
glory of sunshine and clear sky over gold and crimson of forest and
copse, that I learnt this.

I would go to Wormingford now and then to see that all was going
well with the rebuilding of Hertha's home, for Cnut's gift was
enough for that also, seeing that all one needed was at hand and
did but require setting up by skilled workers. Our priest, Father
Oswin, found me such craftsmen as I needed.

"Let me rebuild the church first, father," I had said to him when I
returned thus rich.

"Not so, my son. That is a matter which must be taken in hand
presently, and not hurriedly. Shelter first the man who shall do
it, and provide for the fatherless at Wormingford, and it will be
better done after all."

Therefore I was very busy. And on this day of which I speak I
walked in the late afternoon, and must needs turn aside into the
woods by the mere, for I had often done that of late, loving the
place for old memories the more now that Olaf came into them. It
seemed to me that I had never seen the still mere look more
wondrously beautiful than on this day, for we had had neither wind
nor rain to mar the autumn beauty of the trees, and that was
doubled by the mirror of the water.

So I lingered in that place where Olaf and I had been so nearly
slain, thinking of that night and of many other days, and then I
heard a footstep coming through the wood, and turned to see who it
might be, for I had never met any other in the haunted place.

And there came towards me slowly a white-robed maiden who looked
steadfastly at me, saying nought. And I thought that surely she was
the White Lady of the Mere. The shadows flickered across her face
and dress, and in her hand she bore a basket with crimson leaves
and the like.

