been revenged if I might, but there was no way. I led an evil life, and
when nearly twenty years had gone by, chance took me to England on a
trading journey. By chance I learned that your father and mother lived
near Yarmouth, and I determined to see her, though at that time I had no
thought of killing her. Fortune favoured me, and we met in the woodland,
and I saw that she was still beautiful and knew that I loved her more
than ever before. I gave her choice to fly with me or to die, and after
a while she died. But as she shrank up the wooded hillside before my
sword, of a sudden she stood still and said:

'"Listen before you smite, Juan. I have a death vision. As I have fled
from you, so shall you fly before one of my blood in a place of fire and
rock and snow, and as you drive me to the gates of heaven, so he shall
drive you into the mouth of hell."'

'In such a place as this, cousin,' I said.

'In such a place as this,' he whispered, glancing round.

'Continue.'

Again he strove to be silent, but again my will mastered him and he
spoke.

'It was too late to spare her if I wished to escape myself, so I killed
her and fled. But terror entered my heart, terror which has never left
it to this hour, for always before my eyes was the vision of him of
your mother's blood, before whom I should fly as she fled before me, who
shall drive me into the mouth of hell.'

'That must be yonder, cousin,' I said, pointing with the sword toward
the pit of the crater.

'It is yonder; I have looked.'

'But only for the body, cousin, not for the spirit.'

'Only for the body, not for the spirit,' he repeated after me.

'Continue,' I said.

'Afterwards on that same day I met you, Thomas Wingfield. Already your
dead mother's prophecy had taken hold of me, and seeing one of her blood
I strove to kill him lest he should kill me.'

'As he will do presently, cousin.'

'As he will do presently,' he repeated like a talking bird.

'You know what happened and how I escaped. I fled to Spain and strove
to forget. But I could not. One night I saw a face in the streets of
Seville that reminded me of your face. I did not think that it could
be you, yet so strong was my fear that I determined to fly to the far
Indies. You met me on the night of my flight when I was bidding farewell
to a lady.'

'One Isabella de Siguenza, cousin. I bade farewell to her afterwards and
delivered her dying words to you. Now she waits to welcome you again,
she and her child.'

He shuddered and went on. 'In the ocean we met again. You rose out of
the sea. I did not dare to kill you at once, I thought that you must die
in the slave-hold and that none could bear witness against me and hold
me guilty of your blood. You did not die, even the sea could not destroy
you. But I thought that you were dead. I came to Anahuac in the train
of Cortes and again we met; that time you nearly killed me. Afterwards
I had my revenge and I tortured you well; I meant to murder you on the
morrow, though first I would torture you, for terror can be very cruel,
but you escaped me. Long years passed, I wandered hither and thither, to
Spain, back to Mexico, and elsewhere, but wherever I went my fear,
the ghosts of the dead, and my dreams went with me, and I was never
fortunate. Only the other day I joined the company of Diaz as an
adventurer. Not till we reached the City of Pines did I learn that you
were the captain of the Otomie; it was said that you were long dead. You
know the rest.'

'Why did you murder my son, cousin?'

'Was he not of your mother's blood, of the blood that should bring my
doom upon me, and did I owe you no reward for all the terrors of these
many years? Moreover he is foolish who strives to slay the father and
spares the son. He is dead and I am glad that I killed him, though he
haunts me now with the others.'

'And shall haunt you eternally. Now let us make an end. You have your
sword, use it if you can. It will be easier to die fighting.'

'I cannot,' he groaned; 'my doom is upon me.'

'As you will,' and I came at him, sword up.

He ran from before me, moving backwards and keeping his eyes fixed upon
mine, as I have seen a rat do when a snake is about to swallow it. Now
we were upon the edge of the crater, and looking over I saw an awful
sight. For there, some thirty feet beneath us, the red-hot lava glowing
sullenly beneath a shifting pall of smoke, rolled and spouted like a
thing alive. Jets of steam flew upwards from it with a screaming sound,
lines of noxious vapours, many-coloured, crept and twisted on its
surface, and a hot and horrid stench poisoned the heated air. Here
indeed was such a gate as I could wish for de Garcia to pass through to
his own abode.

I looked, pointed with my sword, and laughed; he looked and shrieked
aloud, for now all his manhood had left him, so great was his terror of
what lay beyond the end. Yes, this proud and haughty Spaniard screamed
and wept and prayed for mercy; he who had done so many villanies beyond
forgiveness, prayed for mercy that he might find time to repent. I stood
and watched him, and so dreadful was his aspect that horror struck me
even through the calm of my frozen heart.

'Come, it is time to finish,' I said, and again I lifted my sword, only
to let it fall, for suddenly his brain gave way and de Garcia went mad
before my eyes!

Of all that followed I will not write. With his madness courage came
back to him, and he began to fight, but not with ME.

He seemed to perceive me no more, but nevertheless he fought, and
desperately, thrusting at the empty air. It was terrible to see him
thus doing battle with his invisible foes, and to hear his screams and
curses, as inch by inch they drove him back to the edge of the
crater. Here he stood a while, like one who makes a last stand against
overpowering strength, thrusting and striking furiously. Twice he nearly
fell, as though beneath a mortal wound, but recovering himself, fought
on with Nothingness. Then, with a sharp cry, suddenly he threw his arms
wide, as a man does who is pierced through the heart; his sword dropped
from his hand, and he fell backwards into the pit.

I turned away my eyes, for I wished to see no more; but often I have
wondered Who or What it was that dealt de Garcia his death wound.



CHAPTER XXXVIII

OTOMIE'S FAREWELL


Thus then did I accomplish the vengeance that I had sworn to my father
I would wreak upon de Garcia, or rather, thus did I witness its
accomplishment, for in the end he died, terribly enough, not by my hand
but by those of his own fears. Since then I have sorrowed for this, for,
when the frozen and unnatural calm passed from my mind, I hated him as
bitterly as ever, and grieved that I let him die otherwise than by my
hand, and to this hour such is my mind towards him. Doubtless, many may
think it wicked, since we are taught to forgive our enemies, but here I
leave the forgiveness to God, for how can I pardon one who betrayed my
father to the priests, who murdered my mother and my son, who chained
me in the slave-ship and for many hours tortured me with his own hand?
Rather, year by year, do I hate him more. I write of this at some
length, since the matter has been a trouble to me. I never could say
that I was in charity with all men living and dead, and because of this,
some years since, a worthy and learned rector of this parish took upon
himself to refuse me the rites of the church. Then I went to the bishop
and laid the story before him, and it puzzled him somewhat.

But he was a man of large mind, and in the end he rebuked the rector
and commanded him to minister to me, for he thought with me that the
Almighty could not ask of an erring man, that he should forgive one who
had wrought such evils on him and his, even though that enemy were dead
and gone to judgment in another place.

But enough of this question of conscience.


When de Garcia was gone into the pit, I turned my steps homewards, or
rather towards the ruined city which I could see beneath me, for I had
no home left. Now I must descend the ice cap, and this I found less
easy than climbing it had been, for, my vengeance being accomplished, I
became as other men are, and a sad and weary one at that, so sad indeed
that I should not have sorrowed greatly if I had made a false step upon
the ice.

But I made none, and at length I came to the snow where the travelling
was easy. My oath was fulfilled and my vengeance was accomplished, but
as I went I reckoned up the cost. I had lost my betrothed, the love of
my youth; for twenty years I had lived a savage chief among savages and
made acquaintance with every hardship, wedded to a woman who, although
she loved me dearly, and did not lack nobility of mind, as she had shown
the other day, was still at heart a savage or, at the least, a thrall
of demon gods. The tribe that I ruled was conquered, the beautiful city
where I dwelt was a ruin, I was homeless and a beggar, and my fortune
would be great if in the issue I escaped death or slavery. All this I
could have borne, for I had borne the like before, but the cruel end of
my last surviving son, the one true joy of my desolate life, I could
not bear. The love of those children had become the passion of my middle
age, and as I loved them so they had loved me. I had trained them from
babyhood till their hearts were English and not Aztec, as were their
speech and faith, and thus they were not only my dear children, but
companions of my own race, the only ones I had. And now by accident, by
sickness, and by the sword, they were dead the three of them, and I was
desolate.

Ah! we think much of the sorrows of our youth, and should a sweetheart
give us the go by we fill the world with moans and swear that it holds
no comfort for us. But when we bend our heads before the shrouded shape
of some lost child, then it is that for the first time we learn how
terrible grief can be. Time, they tell us, will bring consolation,
but it is false, for such sorrows time has no salves--I say it who am
old--as they are so they shall be. There is no hope but faith, there is
no comfort save in the truth that love which might have withered on the
earth grows fastest in the tomb, to flower gloriously in heaven; that no
love indeed can be perfect till God sanctifies and completes it with His
seal of death.

I threw myself down there upon the desolate snows of Xaca, that none had
trod before, and wept such tears as a man may weep but once in his life
days.

'O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for
thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!' I cried with the ancient king--I whose
grief was greater than his, for had I not lost three sons within as many
years? Then remembering that as this king had gone to join his son
long centuries ago, so I must one day go to join mine, and taking such
comfort from the thought as may be found in it, I rose and crept back to
the ruined City of Pines.

It was near sunset when I came thither, for the road was long and I grew
weak. By the palace I met the Captain Diaz and some of his company, and
they lifted their bonnets to me as I went by, for they had respect for
my sorrows. Only Diaz spoke, saying:

'Is the murderer dead?'

I nodded and went on. I went on to our chamber, for there I thought that
I should find Otomie.

She sat in it alone, cold and beautiful as though she had been fashioned
in marble.

'I have buried him with the bones of his brethren and his forefathers,'
she said, answering the question that my eyes asked. 'It seemed best
that you should see him no more, lest your heart should break.'

'It is well,' I answered; 'but my heart is broken already.'

'Is the murderer dead?' she said presently in the very words of Diaz.

'He is dead.'

'How?'

I told her in few words.

'You should have slain him yourself; our son's blood is not avenged.'

'I should have slain him, but in that hour I did not seek vengeance, I
watched it fall from heaven, and was content. Perchance it is best so.
The seeking of vengeance has brought all my sorrows upon me; vengeance
belongs to God and not to man, as I have learned too late.'

'I do not think so,' said Otomie, and the look upon her face was that
look which I had seen when she smote the Tlascalan, when she taunted
Marina, and when she danced upon the pyramid, the leader of the
sacrifice. 'Had I been in your place, I would have killed him by inches.
When I had done with him, then the devils might begin, not before. But
it is of no account; everything is done with, all are dead, and my heart
with them. Now eat, for you are weary.'

So I ate, and afterwards I cast myself upon the bed and slept.


In the darkness I heard the voice of Otomie that said, 'Awake, I would
speak with you,' and there was that about her voice which stirred me
from my heavy sleep.

'Speak on,' I said. 'Where are you, Otomie?'

'Seated at your side. I cannot rest, so I am seated here. Listen. Many,
many years ago we met, when you were brought by Guatemoc from Tobasco.
Ah! well do I remember my first sight of you, the Teule, in the court
of my father Montezuma, at Chapoltepec. I loved you then as I have loved
you ever since. At least I have never gone astray after strange gods,'
and she laughed bitterly.

'Why do you talk of these things, Otomie?' I asked.

'Because it is my fancy to do so. Cannot you spare me one hour from your
sleep, who have spared you so many? You remember how you scorned me--oh!
I thought I should have died of shame when, after I had caused myself
to be given to you as wife, the wife of Tezcat, you told me of the
maid across the seas, that Lily maid whose token is still set upon
your finger. But I lived through it and I loved you the better for your
honesty, and then you know the rest. I won you because I was brave and
lay at your side upon the stone of sacrifice, where you kissed me and
told me that you loved me. But you never loved me, not truly, all the
while you were thinking of the Lily maid. I knew it then, as I know it
now, though I tried to deceive myself. I was beautiful in those days and
this is something with a man. I was faithful and that is more, and once
or twice you thought that you loved me. Now I wish that those Teules had
come an hour later, and we had died together there upon the stone, that
is I wish it for my own sake, not for yours. Then we escaped and the
great struggle came. I told you then that I understood it all. You had
kissed me on the stone of sacrifice, but in that moment you were as one
dead; when you came back to life, it was otherwise. But fortune took the
game out of your hands and you married me, and swore an oath to me, and
this oath you have kept faithfully. You married me but you did not know
whom you married; you thought me beautiful, and sweet, and true, and all
these things I was, but you did not understand that I was far apart from
you, that I was still a savage as my forefathers had been. You thought
that I had learned your ways, perchance even you thought that I
reverenced your God, as for your sake I have striven to do, but all the
while I have followed the ways of my own people and I could not quite
forget my own gods, or at the least they would not suffer me, their
servant, to escape them. For years and years I put them from me, but at
last they were avenged and my heart mastered me, or rather they mastered
me, for I knew nothing of what I did some few nights since, when I
celebrated the sacrifice to Huitzel and you saw me at the ancient rites.

'All these years you had been true to me and I had borne you children
whom you loved; but you loved them for their own sake, not for mine,
indeed, at heart you hated the Indian blood that was mixed in their
veins with yours. Me also you loved in a certain fashion and this half
love of yours drove me well nigh mad; such as it was, it died when you
saw me distraught and celebrating the rites of my forefathers on the
teocalli yonder, and you knew me for what I am, a savage. And now the
children who linked us together are dead--one by one they died in this
way and in that, for the curse which follows my blood descended upon
them--and your love for me is dead with them. I alone remain alive, a
monument of past days, and I die also.

'Nay, be silent; listen to me, for my time is short. When you bade me
call you "husband" no longer, then I knew that it was finished. I obey
you, I put you from me, you are no more my husband, and soon I shall
cease to be your wife; still, Teule, I pray you listen to me. Now it
seems to you in your sorrow, that your days are done and that there is
no happiness left for you. This is not so. You are still but a man in
the beginning of middle age, and you are yet strong. You will escape
from this ruined land, and when you shake the dust of it off your feet
its curse shall fall from you; you will return to your own place, and
there you will find one who has awaited your coming for many years.
There the savage woman whom you mated with, the princess of a fallen
house, will become but a fantastic memory to you, and all these strange
eventful years will be as a midnight dream. Only your love for the dead
children will always remain, these you must always love by day and by
night, and the desire of them, that desire for the dead than which there
is nothing more terrible, shall follow you to your grave, and I am glad
that it should be so, for I was their mother and some thought of me must
go with them. This alone the Lily maid has left to me, and there only
I shall prevail against her, for, Teule, no child of hers shall live to
rob your heart of the memory of those I gave you.

'Oh! I have watched you by day and by night: I have seen the longing in
your eyes for a face which you have lost and for the land of your youth.
Be happy, you shall gain both, for the struggle is ended and the Lily
maid has been too strong for me. I grow weak and I have little more to
say. We part, and perhaps for ever, for what is there between us save
the souls of those dead sons of ours? Since you desire me no more, that
I may make our severance perfect, now in the hour of my death I renounce
your gods and I seek my own, though I think that I love yours and hate
those of my people. Is there any communion between them? We part, and
perchance for ever, yet I pray of you to think of me kindly, for I have
loved you and I love you; I was the mother of your children, whom being
Christian, you will meet again. I love you now and for always. I am
glad to have lived because you kissed me on the stone of sacrifice, and
afterwards I bore you sons. They are yours and not mine; it seems to me
now that I only cared for them because they were yours, and they
loved you and not me. Take them--take their spirits as you have taken
everything. You swore that death alone should sever us, and you have
kept your oath in the letter and in the thought. But now I go to the
Houses of the Sun to seek my own people, and to you, Teule, with whom
I have lived many years and seen much sorrow, but whom I will no longer
call husband, since you forbade me so to do, I say, make no mock of
me to the Lily maid. Speak of me to her as little as you may--be happy
and--farewell!'


Now as she spoke ever more faintly, and I listened bewildered, the light
of dawn grew slowly in the chamber. It gathered on the white shape of
Otomie seated in a chair hard by the bed, and I saw that her arms hung
down and that her head was resting on the back of the chair. Now I
sprang up and peered into her face. It was white and cold, and I could
feel no breath upon her lips. I seized her hand, that also was cold. I
spoke into her ear, I kissed her brow, but she did not move nor answer.
The light grew quickly, and now I saw all. Otomie was dead, and by her
own act.

This was the manner of her death. She had drunk of a poison of which the
Indians have the secret, a poison that works slowly and without pain,
leaving the mind unclouded to the end. It was while her life was fading
from her that she had spoken to me thus sadly and bitterly. I sat upon
the bed and gazed at her. I did not weep, for my tears were done, and as
I have said, whatever I might feel nothing could break my calm any more.
And as I gazed a great tenderness and sorrow took hold of me, and I
loved Otomie better now that she was dead before me than ever I had done
in her life days, and this is saying much. I remembered her in the glory
of her youth as she was in the court of her royal father, I remembered
the look which she had given me when she stepped to my side upon the
stone of sacrifice, and that other look when she defied Cuitlahua the
emperor, who would have slain me. Once more I seemed to hear her cry of
bitter sorrow as she uncovered the body of the dead babe our firstborn,
and to see her sword in hand standing over the Tlascalan.

Many things came back to me in that sad hour of dawn while I watched
by the corpse of Otomie. There was truth in her words, I had never
forgotten my first love and often I desired to see her face. But it was
not true to say that I had no love for Otomie. I loved her well and I
was faithful in my oath to her, indeed, not until she was dead did I
know how dear she had grown to me. It is true that there was a great
gulf between us which widened with the years, the gulf of blood and
faith, for I knew well that she could not altogether put away her old
beliefs, and it is true that when I saw her leading the death chant, a
great horror took me and for a while I loathed her. But these things I
might have lived to forgive, for they were part of her blood and nature,
moreover, the last and worst of them was not done by her own will, and
when they were set aside there remained much that I could honour and
love in the memory of this most royal and beautiful woman, who for so
many years was my faithful wife. So I thought in that hour and so I
think to this day. She said that we parted for ever, but I trust and I
believe that this is not so. Surely there is forgiveness for us all, and
a place where those who were near and dear to each other on the earth
may once more renew their fellowship.

At last I rose with a sigh to seek help, and as I rose I felt that there
was something set about my neck. It was the collar of great emeralds
which Guatemoc had given to me, and that I had given to Otomie. She had
set it there while I slept, and with it a lock of her long hair. Both
shall be buried with me.


I laid her in the ancient sepulchre amid the bones of her forefathers
and by the bodies of her children, and two days later I rode to Mexico
in the train of Bernal Diaz. At the mouth of the pass I turned and
looked back upon the ruins of the City of Pines, where I had lived
so many years and where all I loved were buried. Long and earnestly I
gazed, as in his hour of death a man looks back upon his past life, till
at length Diaz laid his hand upon my shoulder:

'You are a lonely man now, comrade,' he said; 'what plans have you for
the future?'

'None,' I answered, 'except to die.'

'Never talk so,' he said; 'why, you are scarcely forty, and I who am
fifty and more do not speak of dying. Listen; you have friends in your
own country, England?'

'I had.'

'Folk live long in those quiet lands. Go seek them, I will find you a
passage to Spain.'

'I will think of it,' I answered.

In time we came to Mexico, a new and a strange city to me, for Cortes
had rebuilt it, and where the teocalli had stood, up which I was led to
sacrifice, a cathedral was building, whereof the foundations were fitly
laid with the hideous idols of the Aztecs. The place was well enough,
but it is not so beautiful as the Tenoctitlan of Montezuma, nor ever
will be. The people too were changed; then they were warriors and free,
now they are slaves.

In Mexico Diaz found me a lodging. None molested me there, for the
pardon that I had received was respected. Also I was a ruined man, no
longer to be feared, the part that I had played in the noche triste and
in the defence of the city was forgotten, and the tale of my sorrows won
me pity even from the Spaniards. I abode in Mexico ten days, wandering
sadly about the city and up to the hill of Chapoltepec, where
Montezuma's pleasure-house had been, and where I had met Otomie. Nothing
was left of its glories except some of the ancient cedar trees. On the
eighth day of my stay an Indian stopped me in the street, saying that an
old friend had charged him to say that she wished to see me.

I followed the Indian, wondering who the friend might be, for I had no
friends, and he led me to a fine stone house in a new street. Here I was
seated in a darkened chamber and waited there a while, till suddenly
a sad and sweet voice that seemed familiar to me, addressed me in the
Aztec tongue, saying, 'Welcome, Teule.'

I looked and there before me, dressed in the Spanish fashion, stood
a lady, an Indian, still beautiful, but very feeble and much worn, as
though with sickness and sorrow.

'Do you not know Marina, Teule?' she said again, but before the words
had left her lips I knew her. 'Well, I will say this, that I should
scarcely have known YOU, Teule. Trouble and time have done their work
with both of us.'

I took her hand and kissed it.

'Where then is Cortes?' I asked.

Now a great trembling seized her.

'Cortes is in Spain, pleading his suit. He has wed a new wife there,
Teule. Many years ago he put me away, giving me in marriage to Don
Juan Xaramillo, who took me because of my possessions, for Cortes dealt
liberally with me, his discarded mistress.' And she began to weep.

Then by degrees I learned the story, but I will not write it here, for
