    This deed hath been perform'd; for when myself
    And noble Mentor counsell'd you to check
    The sin and folly of your sons, ye would not.
    Great was their wickedness, and flagrant wrong
    They wrought, the wealth devouring and the wife
    Dishonouring of an illustrious Chief
    Whom they deem'd destined never to return.
    But hear my counsel. Go not, lest ye draw                        540
    Disaster down and woe on your own heads.
      He ended; then with boist'rous roar (although
    Part kept their seats) upsprang the multitude,
    For Halitherses pleased them not, they chose
    Eupithes' counsel rather; all at once
    To arms they flew, and clad in dazzling brass
    Before the city form'd their dense array.
    Leader infatuate at their head appear'd
    Eupithes, hoping to avenge his son
    Antinoues, but was himself ordain'd                               550
    To meet his doom, and to return no more.
    Then thus Minerva to Saturnian Jove.
      Oh father! son of Saturn! Jove supreme!
    Declare the purpose hidden in thy breast.
    Wilt thou that this hostility proceed,
    Or wilt thou grant them amity again?
      To whom the cloud-assembler God replied.
    Why asks my daughter? didst thou not design
    Thyself, that brave Ulysses coming home
    Should slay those profligates? act as thou wilt,                 560
    But thus I counsel, since the noble Chief
    Hath slain the suitors, now let peace ensue
    Oath-bound, and reign Ulysses evermore!
    The slaughter of their brethren and their sons
    To strike from their remembrance, shall be ours.
    Let mutual amity, as at the first,
    Unite them, and let wealth and peace abound.
      So saying, he animated to her task
    Minerva prompt before, and from the heights
    Olympian down to Ithaca she flew.                                570
    Meantime Ulysses (for their hunger now
    And thirst were sated) thus address'd his hinds.
      Look ye abroad, lest haply they approach.
    He said, and at his word, forth went a son
    Of Dolius; at the gate he stood, and thence
    Beholding all that multitude at hand,
    In accents wing'd thus to Ulysses spake.
      They come--they are already arrived--arm all!
    Then, all arising, put their armour on,
    Ulysses with his three, and the six sons                         580
    Of Dolius; Dolius also with the rest,
    Arm'd and Laertes, although silver-hair'd,
    Warriors perforce. When all were clad alike
    In radiant armour, throwing wide the gates
    They sallied, and Ulysses led the way.
    Then Jove's own daughter Pallas, in the form
    And with the voice of Mentor, came in view,
    Whom seeing Laertiades rejoiced,
    And thus Telemachus, his son, bespake.
      Now, oh my son! thou shalt observe, untold                     590
    By me, where fight the bravest. Oh shame not
    Thine ancestry, who have in all the earth
    Proof given of valour in all ages past.
      To whom Telemachus, discrete, replied.
    My father! if thou wish that spectacle,
    Thou shalt behold thy son, as thou hast said,
    In nought dishonouring his noble race.
      Then was Laertes joyful, and exclaim'd,
    What sun hath ris'n to-day?[114] oh blessed Gods!
    My son and grandson emulous dispute                              600
    The prize of glory, and my soul exults.
      He ended, and Minerva drawing nigh
    To the old King, thus counsell'd him. Oh friend
    Whom most I love, son of Arcesias! pray'r
    Preferring to the virgin azure-eyed,
    And to her father Jove, delay not, shake
    Thy lance in air, and give it instant flight.
      So saying, the Goddess nerved his arm anew.
    He sought in pray'r the daughter dread of Jove,
    And, brandishing it, hurl'd his lance; it struck                 610
    Eupithes, pierced his helmet brazen-cheek'd
    That stay'd it not, but forth it sprang beyond,
    And with loud clangor of his arms he fell.
    Then flew Ulysses and his noble son
    With faulchion and with spear of double edge
    To the assault, and of them all had left
    None living, none had to his home return'd,
    But that Jove's virgin daughter with a voice
    Of loud authority thus quell'd them all.
    Peace, O ye men of Ithaca! while yet                             620
    The field remains undeluged with your blood.
      So she, and fear at once paled ev'ry cheek.
    All trembled at the voice divine; their arms
    Escaping from the grasp fell to the earth,
    And, covetous of longer life, each fled
    Back to the city. Then Ulysses sent
    His voice abroad, and with an eagle's force
    Sprang on the people; but Saturnian Jove,
    Cast down, incontinent, his smouldring bolt
    At Pallas' feet, and thus the Goddess spake.                     630
      Laertes' noble son, for wiles renown'd!
    Forbear; abstain from slaughter; lest thyself
    Incur the anger of high thund'ring Jove.
      So Pallas, whom Ulysses, glad, obey'd.
    Then faithful covenants of peace between
    Both sides ensued, ratified in the sight
    Of Pallas progeny of Jove, who seem'd,
    In voice and form, the Mentor known to all.


FOOTNOTES:

[111]
    +Trizousai--tetriguiai+--the ghosts
              Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets.

    SHAKSPEARE.

[112]
    --Behemoth, biggest born of earth,
    Upheav'd his vastness.

    MILTON.

[113] The fruit is here used for the tree that bore it, as it is in the
Greek; the Latins used the same mode of expression, neither is it
uncommon in our own language.

[114] +Tis nu moi hemere hede?+--So Cicero, who seems to translate
it--Proh dii immortales! Quis hic illuxit dies! See Clarke in loco.


END OF THE ODYSSEY




NOTES


NOTE I.

Bk. x. l. 101-106 (Hom. x. l. 81-86).--It is held now that this passage
should be explained by the supposition that the Homeric bards had heard
tales of northern latitudes, where, in summer-time, the darkness was so
short that evening was followed almost at once by morning. Thus the
herdsman coming home in the twilight at one day's close might meet and
hail the shepherd who was starting betimes for the next day's work.

Line 86 in the Greek ought probably to be translated, "For the paths of
night and day are close together," _i.e._, the entrance of day follows
hard on the entrance of night.


NOTE II.

Bk. xi. l. 162, 163 (Hom. xi. l. 134, 135).--

              +thanatos de toi ex halos autoi
    ablechros mala toios eleusetai+.

Others translate, "And from the sea shall thy own death come," suggesting
that Ulysses after all was lost at sea. This is the rendering followed by
Tennyson in his poem "Ulysses" (and see Dante, _Inferno_, Canto xxvi.).
It is a more natural translation of the Greek, and gives a far more
wonderful vista for the close of the Wanderer's life.


NOTE III.

Bk. xix. l. 712 (Hom. xix. l. 573).--The word +pelekeas+, for
which Cowper gives as a paraphrase "spikes, crested with a ring,"
elsewhere means _axes_, and ought so to be translated here. For since
Cowper's day an axe-head of the Mycenaean period has been discovered _with
the blade pierced_ so as to form a hole through which an arrow could
pass. (See Tsountas and Manatt, _The Mycenaean Age_.) Axes of this type
were not known to Cowper, and hence the hypothesis in his text. He
realised correctly the essential conditions of the feat proposed: the
axes must have been set up, one behind the other, in the way he suggested
for his ringed stakes.


NOTE IV.

Bk. xxii. l. 139-162 (Hom. xxii. l. 126-143).--How Melanthius got out of
the hall remains a puzzle. Cowper assumes a second postern, but there is
no evidence for this, and l. 139 ff. (l. 126 ff. in the Greek) suggest
rather strongly that there was only _one_. Unfortunately, the crucial
word +rhoges+ which occurs in the line describing Melanthius' exit
is not found elsewhere. "He went up," the poet says, "through the
+rhoges+ of the hall." Merry suggests that "he scrambled up to the
loopholes that were pierced in the wall." Others suppose that there was a
ladder at the inner end of the hall leading to the upper story, and on
through passages to the armoury.

In l. 141 (l. 128 in the Greek) the word translated "street" by Cowper is
usually rendered "corridor."

  F. M. S.


MADE AT THE TEMPLE PRESS LETCHWORTH GREAT BRITAIN




EVERYMAN'S LIBRARY

A LIST OF THE 812 VOLUMES ARRANGED UNDER AUTHORS


  _Anonymous works are given under titles._
  _Anthologies, etc., are arranged at the end of the list._


  Abbott's Rollo at Work, etc., 275

  Addison's Spectator, 164-167

  AEschylus' Lyrical Dramas, 62

  AEsop's and Other Fables, 657

  Aimard's The Indian Scout, 428

  Ainsworth's Tower of London, 400
    "         Old St. Paul's, 522
    "         Windsor Castle, 709
    "         The Admirable Crichton, 804

  A'Kempis' Imitation of Christ, 484

  Alcott's Little Women, and Good Wives, 248
    "      Little Men, 512

  Alpine Club. Peaks, Passes and Glaciers, 778

  Andersen's Fairy Tales, 4

  Anglo-Saxon Poetry, 794

  Anson's Voyages, 510

  Aristophanes' The Acharnians, etc., 344
    "           The Frogs, etc., 516

  Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics, 547
    "         Politics, 605

  Armour's Fall of the Nibelung, 312

  Arnold's (Matthew) Essays, 115
    "                Poems, 334
    "                Study of Celtic Literature, etc., 458

  Aucassin and Nicolette, 497

  Augustine's (Saint) Confessions, 200

  Aurelius' (Marcus) Golden Book, 9

  Austen's (Jane) Sense and Sensibility, 21
    "             Pride and Prejudice, 22
    "             Mansfield Park, 23
    "             Emma, 24
    "             Northanger Abbey, and Persuasion, 25


  Bacon's Essays, 10
    "     Advancement of Learning, 719

  Bagehot's Literary Studies, 520, 521

  Baker's (Sir S. W.) Cast up by the Sea, 539

  Ballantyne's Coral Island, 245
    "          Martin Rattler, 246
    "          Ungava, 276

  Balzac's Wild Ass's Skin, 26
    "      Eugenie Grandet, 169
    "      Old Goriot, 170
    "      Atheist's Mass, etc., 229
    "      Christ in Flanders, etc., 284
    "      The Chouans, 285
    "      Quest of the Absolute, 286
    "      Cat and Racket, etc., 349
    "      Catherine de Medici, 419
    "      Cousin Pons, 463
    "      The Country Doctor, 520
    "      Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau, 596
    "      Lost Illusions, 656
    "      The Country Parson, 686
    "      Ursule Mirouet, 733

  Barbusse's Under Fire, 798

  Barca's (Mme. C. de la) Life in Mexico, 664

  Bates' Naturalist on the Amazons, 446

  Beaumont and Fletcher's Select Plays, 506

  Beaumont's (Mary) Joan Seaton, 597

  Bede's Ecclesiastical History, etc., 479

  Belt's The Naturalist in Nicaragua, 561

  Berkeley's (Bishop) Principles of Human Knowledge, New Theory of Vision,
    etc., 483

  Berlioz (Hector), Life of, 602

  Binns' Life of Abraham Lincoln, 783

  Bjoernson's Plays, 625, 696

  Blackmore's Lorna Doone, 304
    "         Springhaven, 350

  Blackwell's Pioneer Work for Women, 667

  Blake's Poems and Prophecies, 792

  Boehme's The Signature of All Things, etc., 569

  Bonaventura's The Little Flowers, The Life of St. Francis, etc., 485

  Borrow's Wild Wales, 49
    "      Lavengro, 119
    "      Romany Rye, 120
    "      Bible in Spain, 151
    "      Gypsies in Spain, 697

  Boswell's Life of Johnson, 1, 2
    "       Tour in the Hebrides, etc., 387

  Boult's Asgard and Norse Heroes, 689

  Boyle's The Sceptical Chymist, 559

  Bright's (John) Speeches, 252

  Bronte's (A.) The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, 685

  Bronte's (C.) Jane Eyre, 287
    "           Shirley, 288
    "           Villette, 351
    "           The Professor, 417

  Bronte's (E.) Wuthering Heights, 243

  Brooke's (Stopford A.) Theology in the English Poets, 493

  Brown's (Dr. John) Rab and His Friends, etc., 116

  Browne's (Frances) Grannie's Wonderful Chair, 112

  Browne's (Sir Thos.) Religio Medici, etc., 92

  Browning's Poems, 1833-1844, 41
    "          "    1844-1864, 42
    "        The Ring and the Book, 502

  Buchanan's Life and Adventures of Audubon, 601

  Bulfinch's The Age of Fable, 472
    "        Legends of Charlemagne, 556

  Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, 204

  Burke's American Speeches and Letters, 340
    "     Reflections on the French Revolution, etc., 460

  Burnet's History of His Own Times, 85

  Burney's Evelina, 352

  Burns' Poems and Songs, 94

  Burrell's Volume of Heroic Verse, 574

  Burton's East Africa, 500

  Butler's Analogy of Religion, 90

  Buxton's Memoirs, 773

  Byron's Complete Poetical and Dramatic Works, 486-488


  Caesar's Gallic War, etc., 702

  Canton's Child's Book of Saints, 61

  Canton's Invisible Playmate, etc., 566

  Carlyle's French Revolution, 31, 32
    "       Letters, etc., of Cromwell, 266-268
    "       Sartor Resartus, 278
    "       Past and Present, 608
    "       Essays, 703, 704

  Castiglione's The Courtier, 807

  Cellini's Autobiography, 51

  Cervantes' Don Quixote, 385, 386

  Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, 307

  Chretien de Troyes' Eric and Enid, 698

  Cibber's Apology for his Life, 668

  Cicero's Select Letters and Orations, 345

  Clarke's Tales from Chaucer, 537
    "      Shakespeare's Heroines, 109-111

  Cobbett's Rural Rides, 638, 639

  Coleridge's Biographia, 11
    "         Golden Book, 43
    "         Lectures on Shakespeare, 162

  Collins' Woman in White, 464

  Collodi's Pinocchio, 538

  Converse's Long Will, 328

  Cook's Voyages, 99

  Cooper's The Deerslayer, 77
    "      The Pathfinder, 78
    "      Last of the Mohicans, 79
    "      The Pioneer, 171
    "      The Prairie, 172

  Cousin's Biographical Dictionary of English Literature, 449

  Cowper's Letters, 774

  Cox's Tales of Ancient Greece, 721

  Craik's Manual of English Literature, 346

  Craik (Mrs.). _See_ Mulock.

  Creasy's Fifteen Decisive Battles, 300

  Crevecoeur's Letters from an American Farmer, 640

  Curtis's Prue and I, and Lotus, 418

  Curtis and Robinson's Fairy Tales from the Arabian Nights, 249


  Dana's Two Years Before the Mast, 588

  Dante's Divine Comedy, 308

  Darwin's Origin of Species, 811

  Darwin's Voyage of the Beagle, 104

  Dasent's The Story of Burnt Njal, 558

  Daudet's Tartarin of Tarascon, 423

  Defoe's Robinson Crusoe, 59
    "     Captain Singleton, 74
    "     Memoirs of a Cavalier, 283
    "     Journal of Plague, 289

  De Joinville's Memoirs of the Crusades, 333

  Demosthenes' Select Orations, 546

  Dennis' Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria, 183, 184

  De Quincey's Lake Poets, 163
    "          Opium-Eater, 223
    "          English Mail Coach, etc., 609

  De Retz (Cardinal), Memoirs of, 735, 736

  Descartes' Discourse on Method, 570

  Dickens' Barnaby Rudge, 76
    "      Tale of Two Cities, 102
    "      Old Curiosity Shop, 173
    "      Oliver Twist, 233
    "      Great Expectations, 234
    "      Pickwick Papers, 235
    "      Bleak House, 236
    "      Sketches by Boz, 237
    "      Nicholas Nickleby, 238
    "      Christmas Books, 239
    "      Dombey & Son, 240
    "      Martin Chuzzlewit, 241
    "      David Copperfield, 242
    "      American Notes, 290
    "      Child's History of England, 291
    "      Hard Times, 292
    "      Little Dorrit, 293
    "      Our Mutual Friend, 294
    "      Christmas Stories, 414
    "      Uncommercial Traveller, 536
    "      Edwin Drood, 725
    "      Reprinted Pieces, 744

  Disraeli's Coningsby, 535

  Dixon's Fairy Tales from Arabian Nights, 249

  Dodge's Hans Brinker, or the Silver Skates, 620

  Dostoieffsky's Crime and Punishment, 501
    "            The House of the Dead, or Prison Life in Siberia, 533
    "            Letters from the Underworld, etc., 654
    "            The Idiot, 682
    "            Poor Folk, and the Gambler, 711
    "            The Brothers Karamazov, 802, 803

  Dowden's Life of R. Browning, 701

  Dryden's Dramatic Essays, 568

  Dufferin's Letters from High Latitudes, 499

  Dumas' The Three Musketeers, 81
    "    The Black Tulip, 174
    "    Twenty Years After, 175
    "    Marguerite de Valois, 326
    "    The Count of Monte Cristo, 393, 394
    "    The Forty-Five, 420
    "    Chicot the Jester, 421
    "    Vicomte de Bragelonne, 593-595

  Dumas' Le Chevalier de Maison Rouge, 614

  Duruy's History of France, 737, 738


  Edgar's Cressy and Poictiers, 17
    "     Runnymede and Lincoln Fair, 320
    "     Heroes of England, 471

  Edgeworth's Castle Rackrent, etc., 410

  Edwardes and Spence's Dictionary of Non-Classical Mythology, 632

  Eliot's Adam Bede, 27
    "     Silas Marner, 121
    "     Romola, 231
    "     Mill on the Floss, 325
    "     Felix Holt, 353
    "     Scenes of Clerical Life, 468

  Elizabethan Drama (Minor), 491, 492

  Elyot's Gouernour, 227

  Emerson's Essays, 12
    "       Representative Men, 279
    "       Nature, Conduct of Life, etc., 322
    "       Society and Solitude, etc., 567
    "       Poems, 715

  Epictetus' Moral Discourses, etc., 404

  Erckmann-Chatrian's The Conscript and Waterloo, 354
    "                 Story of a Peasant, 706, 707

  Euripides' Plays, 63, 271
