hapless parents, so wailed Achilles as he burnt the bones of his
comrade, going heavily round the burning pile, with many moans.

But at the hour when the Morning star goeth forth to herald light upon
the earth, the star that saffron-mantled Dawn cometh after, and
spreadeth over the salt sea, then grew the burning faint, and the flame
died down. And the Winds went back again to betake them home over the
Thracian main, and it roared with a violent swell. Then the son of
Peleus turned away from the burning and lay down wearied, and sweet
sleep leapt on him. But they who were with Atreus' son gathered all
together, and the noise and clash of their approach aroused him; and he
sate upright and spake a word to them: "Son of Atreus and ye other
chiefs of the Achaians, first quench with gleaming wine all the burning
so far as the fire's strength hath reached, and then let us gather up
the bones of Patroklos, Menoitios' son, singling them well, and easy are
they to discern, for he lay in the middle of the pyre, while the rest
apart at the edge burnt-confusedly, horses and men. And his bones let us
put within a golden urn, and double-folded fat, until that I myself be
hidden in Hades. But no huge barrow I bid you toil to raise--a seemly
one, no more: then afterward do ye Achaians build it broad and high,
whosoever of you after I am gone may be left in the benched ships."

Thus spake he, and they hearkened to the fleet-footed son of Peleus.
First quenched they with gleaming wine the burning so far as the flame
went, and the ash had settled deep: then with lamentation they gathered
up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn and
double-folded fat, and placed the urn in the hut and covered it with a
linen veil. And they marked the circle of the barrow, and set the
foundations thereof around the pyre, and straightway heaped thereon a
heap of earth. Then when they had heaped up the barrow they were for
going back. But Achilles stayed the folk in that place, and made them
sit in wide assembly, and from his ships he brought forth prizes,
caldrons and tripods, and horses and mules and strong oxen, and
fair-girdled women, and grey iron.

First for fleet chariot-racers he ordained a noble prize, a woman
skilled in fair handiwork for the winner to lead home, and an eared
tripod that held two-and-twenty measures; these for the first man; and
for the second he ordained a six-year-old mare unbroke with a mule foal
in her womb; and for the third he gave a goodly caldron yet untouched by
fire, holding four measures, bright as when first made; and for the
fourth he ordained two talents of gold; and for the fifth a two-handled
urn untouched of fire, Then he stood up and spake a word among the
Argives: "Son of Atreus and ye other well-greaved Achaians, for the
chariot-racers these prizes lie awaiting them in the lists. If in some
other's honour we Achaians were now holding our games, it would be I who
should win the first prize and bear it to my hut; for ye know how far my
pair of horses are first in excellence, for they are immortal and
Poseidon gave them to my father Peleus, and he again to me. But verily I
will abide, I and my whole-hooved horses, so glorious a charioteer have
they lost, and one so kind, who on their manes full often poured smooth
oil, when he had washed them in clear water. For him they stand and
mourn, and their manes are trailing on the ground, and there stand they
with sorrow at their hearts. But ye others throughout the host get ye to
your places, whosoever of the Achalans hath trust in his horses and
firm-jointed car."

Thus spake the son of Peleus, and the fleet chariot-racers were
gathered. First of all arose up Eumelos king of men, Admetos' son, a
skilful charioteer; and next to him arose Tydeus' son, valiant Diomedes,
and yoked his horses of the breed of Tros, which on a time he seized
from Aineias, when Apollo saved their lord. And after him arose Atreus'
son, fair-haired heaven-sprung Menelaos, and yoked him a swift pair
Aithe, Agamemnon's mare, and his own horse Podargos. Her unto Agamemnon
did Anchises' son Echepolos give in fee, that he might escape from
following him to windy Ilios and take his pleasure at home; for great
wealth had Zeus given him, and he dwelt in Sikyon of spacious lawns:--
so Menelaos yoked her, and she longed exceedingly for the race. And
fourth, Antilochos made ready his fair-maned horses, even the noble son
of Nestor, high-hearted king, who was the son of Neleus; and fleet
horses bred at Pylos drew his car. And his father standing by his side
spake counselling him to his profit, though himself was well advised:
"Antilochos, verily albeit thou art young, Zeus and Poseidon have loved
thee and taught thee all skill with horses; wherefore to teach thee is
no great need, for thou well knowest how to wheel round the post; yet
are thy horses very slow in the race: therefore methinks there will be
sad work for thee. For the horses of the others are fleeter, yet the men
know not more cunning than thou hast. So come, dear son, store thy mind
with all manner of cunning, that the prize escape thee not. By cunning
is a woodman far better than by force; by cunning doth a helmsman on the
wine-dark deep steer his swift ship buffeted by winds; by cunning hath
charioteer the better of charioteer. For whoso trusting in his horses
and car alone wheeleth heedlessly and wide at either end, his horses
swerve on the course, and he keepeth them not in hand. But whoso is of
crafty mind, though he drive worse horses, he ever keeping his eye upon
the post turneth closely by it, neither is unaware how far at first to
force his horses by the ox-hide reins, but holdeth them safe in hand and
watcheth the leader in the race. Now will I tell thee a certain sign,
and it shall not escape thee. A fathom's height above the ground
standeth a withered stump, whether of oak or pine: it decayeth not in
the rain, and two white stones on either side thereof are fixed at the
joining of the track, and all round it is smooth driving ground. Whether
it be a monument of some man dead long ago, or have been made their goal
in the race by ancient men, this now is the mark fixed by fleet-footed
Achilles. Wherefore do thou drive close and bear thy horses and chariot
hard thereon, and lean thy body on the well-knit car slightly to their
left, and call upon the off-horse with voice and lash, and give him rein
from thy hand. But let the near horse hug the post so that the nave of
the well-wrought wheel seem to graze it--yet beware of touching the
stone, lest thou wound the horses and break the chariot; so would that
be triumph to the rest and reproach unto thyself. But, dear son, be wise
and on thy guard; for if at the turning-post thou drive past the rest,
there is none shall overtake thee from behind or pass thee by, not
though he drave the goodly Arion in pursuit, the fleet horse of
Adrastos, of divine descent, or the horses of Laomedon, best of all bred
in this land."

Thus spake Neleian Nestor and sate him down again in his place, when he
had told his son the sum of every matter.

And Meriones was the fifth to make ready his sleek-coated steeds. Then
went they up into their chariots, and cast in the lots: and Achilles
shook them, and forth leapt the lot of Antilochos Nestor's son, and the
next lot had lord Eumelos, and next to him the son of Atreus,
spear-famed Menelaos, and next to him drew Meriones his place; then
lastly Tydeides, far the best of all, drew his lot for his chariot's
place. Then they stood side by side, and Achilles showed to them the
turning post, far off in the smooth plain; and beside it he placed an
umpire, godlike Phoinix, his father's follower, that he might note the
running and tell the truth thereof.

Then all together lifted the lash above their steeds, and smote them
with the reins, and called on them eagerly with words: and they
forthwith sped swiftly over the plain, leaving the ships behind; and
beneath their breasts stood the rising dust like a cloud or whirlwind,
and their manes waved on the blowing wind. And the chariots ran
sometimes on the bounteous earth, and other whiles would bound into the
air. And the drivers stood in the cars, and the heart of every man beat
in desire of victory, and they called every man to his horses, that flew
amid their dust across the plain.

But when the fleet horses were now running the last part of the course,
back toward the grey sea, then was manifest the prowess of each, and the
horses strained in the race; and presently to the front rushed the fleet
mares of Pheres' grandson, and next to them Diomedes' stallions of the
breed of Tros, not far apart, but hard anigh, for they seemed ever as
they would mount Eumelos' car, and with their breath his back was warm
and his broad shoulders, for they bent their heads upon him as they flew
along. Thus would Tydeus' son have either outstripped the other or made
it a dead heat, had not Phoebus Apollo been wroth with him and smitten
from his hand the shining lash. Then from his eyes ran tears of anger,
for that he saw the mares still at speed, even swiftlier than before,
while his own horses were thrown out, as running without spur. But
Athene was not unaware of Apollo's guile against Tydeides, and presently
sped after the shepherd of hosts, and gave him back the lash, and put
spirit into his steeds. Then in wrath after the son of Admetos was the
goddess gone, and brake his steeds' yoke, and the mares ran sideways off
the course, and the pole was twisted to the ground. And Eumelos was
hurled out of the car beside the wheel, and his elbows and mouth and
nose were flayed, and his forehead bruised above his eyebrows; and his
eyes filled with tears and his lusty voice was choked. Then Tydeides
held his whole-hooved horses on one side, darting far out before the
rest, for Athene put spirit into his steeds and shed glory on himself.
Now next after him came golden-haired Menelaos Atreus' son. But
Antilochos called to his father's horses: "Go ye too in, strain to your
fleetest pace. Truly I nowise bid you strive with those, the horses of
wise Tydeides, unto which Athene hath now given speed, and shed glory on
their charioteer. But overtake Atreides' horses with all haste, and be
not outstripped by them, lest Aithe that is but a mare pour scorn on
you. Why are ye outstripped, brave steeds? Thus will I tell you, and
verily it shall be brought to pass--ye will find no tendance with Nestor
shepherd of hosts, but straightway he will slay you with the edge of the
sword if through heedlessness we win but the worse prize. Have after
them at your utmost speed, and I for my part will devise a plan to pass
them in the strait part of the course, and this shall fail me not."

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince ran swiftlier
some little while; and presently did the good warrior Antilochos espy a
strait place in a sunk part of the way. There was a rift in the earth,
where torrent water gathered and brake part of the track away, and
hollowed all the place; there drave Menelaos, shunning the encounter of
the wheels. But Antilochos turned his whole-hooved horses out of the
track, and followed him a little at one side. And the son of Atreus took
alarm and shouted to Antilochos: "Antilochos, thou art driving
recklessly--hold in thy horses! The road is straitened, soon thou mayest
pass me in a wider place, lest thou foul my chariot and undo us both."

Thus spake he, but Antilochos drave even fiercelier than before, plying
his lash, as though he heard him not. As far as is the range of a disk
swung from the shoulder when a young man hurleth it, making trial of his
force, even so far ran they on; then the mares of Atreus' son gave back,
for he ceased of himself to urge them on, lest the whole-hooved steeds
should encounter on the track, and overset the well-knit cars, and the
drivers fall in the dust in their zeal for victory. So upbraiding
Antilochos spake golden-haired Menelaos: "Antilochos, no mortal man is
more malicious than thou. Go thy mad way, since falsely have we Achaians
called thee wise. Yet even so thou shalt not bear off the prize
unchallenged to an oath."

Thus saying he called aloud to his horses: "Hold ye not back nor stand
still with sorrow at heart. Their feet and knees will grow weary before
yours, for they both lack youth."

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince sped faster on,
and were quickly close upon the others.

Now the Argives sitting in concourse were gazing at the horses, and they
came flying amid their dust over the plain. And the first aware of them
was Idomeneus, chief of the Cretans, for he was sitting outside the
concourse in the highest place of view, and when he heard the voice of
one that shouted, though afar off, he knew it; and he was aware of a
horse showing plainly in the front, a chestnut all the rest of him, but
in the forehead marked with a white star round like the moon. And he
stood upright and spoke among the Argives: "Friends, chiefs, and
counsellors of the Argives, is it I alone who see the horses, or do ye
also? A new pair seem to me now to be in front, and a new charioteer
appeareth; the mares which led in the outward course must have been
thrown out there in the plain. For I saw them turning first the hither
post, but now can see them nowhere, though my eyes are gazing everywhere
along the Trojan plain. Did the reins escape the charioteer so that he
could not drive aright round the post and failed in the turn? There,
methinks, must he have been cast forth, and have broken his chariot, and
the mares must have left the course, in the wildness of their heart. But
stand up ye too and look, for myself I discern not certainly, but the
first man seemeth to me one of Aitolian race, and he ruleth among
Argives, the son of horse-taming Tydeus, stalwart Diomedes."

Then fleet Aias Oileus' son rebuked him in unseemly sort: "Idomeneus,
why art thou a braggart of old? As yet far off the high-stepping mares
are coursing over the wide plain. Neither art thou so far the youngest
among the Argives, nor do thy eyes look so far the keenliest from thy
head, yet continually braggest thou. It beseemeth thee not to be a
braggart, for there are here better men. And the mares leading are they
that led before, Eumelos' mares, and he standeth and holdeth the reins
within the car."

Then wrathfully in answer spake the chief of Cretans: "Aias, master of
railing, ill-counselled, in all else art thou behind other Argives, for
thy mind is unfriendly. Come then let us wager a tripod or caldron, and
make Agamemnon Atreus' son our umpire, which mares are leading, that
thou mayest pay and learn."

Thus said he, and straightway fleet Aias Oileus' son arose angrily to
answer with harsh words: and strife between the twain would have gone
further, had not Achilles himself stood up and spake a word: "No longer
answer each other with harsh words, Aias and Idomeneus, ill words, for
it beseemeth not. Surely ye are displeased with any other who should do
thus. Sit ye in the concourse and keep your eyes upon the horses; soon
they in zeal for victory will come hither, and then shall ye know each
of you the Argives' horses, which follow, and which lead."

He said, and the son of Tydeus came driving up, and with his lash smote
now and again from the shoulder, and his horses were stepping high as
they sped swiftly on their way. And sprinklings of dust smote ever the
charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold and tin ran behind his
fleet-footed steeds, and small trace was there of the wheel-tires behind
in the fine dust, as they flew speeding on. Then he drew up in the mid
concourse, and much sweat poured from the horses' heads and chests to
the ground. And Diomedes leapt to earth from the shining car, and leant
his lash against the yoke. Then stalwart Sthenelos tarried not, but
promptly took the prize, and gave to his proud comrades the woman to
lead and the eared tripod to bear away, and he loosed the horses from
the yoke.

And next after him drave Neleian Antilochos his horses, by craft, not
swiftness, having passed by Menelaos; yet even now Menelaos held his
swift steeds hard anigh. As far as a horse is from the wheel, which
draweth his master, straining with the car over the plain--his hindmost
tail-hairs touch the tire, for the wheel runneth hard anigh nor is much
space between, as he speedeth far over the plain--by so much was
Menelaos behind high-born Antilochos, howbeit at first he was a whole
disk-cast behind, but quickly he was catching Antilochos up, for the
high mettle of Agamemnon's mare, sleek-coated Aithe, was rising in her.
And if yet further both had had to run he would have passed his rival
nor left it even a dead heat. But Meriones, stout squire of Idomeneus,
came in a spear-throw behind famous Menelaos, for tardiest of all were
his sleek-coated horses, and slowest he himself to drive a chariot in
the race. Last of them all came Admetos' son, dragging his goodly car
driving his steeds in front. Him when fleet-footed noble Achilles beheld
he pitied him, and he stood up and spake winged words among the Argives:
"Last driveth his whole-hooved horses the best man of them all. But come
let us give him a prize, as is seemly, prize for the second place, but
the first let the son of Tydeus take."

Thus spake he, and all applauded that he bade. And he would have given
him the mare, for the Achaians applauded, had not Antilochos, son of
great-hearted Nestor; risen up and answered Peleian Achilles on behalf
of his right: "O Achilles, I shall be sore angered with thee if thou
accomplish this word, for thou art minded to take away my prize, because
thou thinkest of how his chariot and fleet steeds miscarried, and
himself withal, good man though he be. Nay, it behoved him to pray to
the Immortals, then would he not have come in last of all in the race.
But if thou pitiest him and he be dear to thy heart, there is much gold
in thy hut, bronze is there and sheep, hand-maids are there and
whole-hooved horses. Thereof take thou and give unto him afterward even
a richer prize, or even now at once, that the Achaians may applaud thee.
But the mare I will not yield; for her let what man will essay the
battle at my hands."

Thus spake he, and fleet-footed noble Achilles smiled, pleased with
Antilochos, for he was his dear comrade; and spake in answer to him
winged words: "Antilochos, if thou wouldst have me give Eumelos some
other thing beside from out my house, that also will I do. I will give
unto him a breast-plate that I took from Asteropaios, of bronze, whereon
a casting of bright tin is overlaid, and of great worth will it be to
him." He said, and bade his dear comrade Automedon bring it from the
hut, and he went and brought it. [Then he placed it in Eumelos' hands,
and he received it gladly.]

But Menelaos also arose among them, sore at heart, angered exceedingly
against Antilochos; and the herald set the staff in his hand, and called
for silence among the Argives; then spake among them that godlike man:
"Antilochos, who once wert wise, what thing is this thou hast done? Thou
hast shamed my skill and made my horses fail, thrusting thine own in
front that are far worse. Come now, ye chiefs and counsellors of the
Argives, give judgment between us both, and favour neither: lest some
one of the mail-clad Achalans say at any time: 'By constraining
Antilochos through false words hath Menelaos gone off with the mare, for
his horses were far worse, howbeit he hath advantage in rank and power.'
Nay, I myself will bring the issue about, and I deem that none other of
the Danaans shall reproach me, for the trial shall be just. Antilochos,
fosterling of Zeus, come thou hither and as it is ordained stand up
before thy horses and chariot and take in thy hand the pliant lash
wherewith thou dravest erst, and touching thy horses swear by the
Enfolder and Shaker of the earth that not wilfully didst thou hinder
my chariot by guile."

Then answered him wise Antilochos: "Bear with me now, for far younger am
I than thou, king Menelaos, and thou art before me and my better. Thou
knowest how a young man's transgressions come about, for his mind is
hastier and his counsel shallow. So let thy heart suffer me, and I will
of myself give to thee the mare I have taken. Yea, if thou shouldst ask
some other greater thing from my house, I were fain to give it thee
straightway, rather than fall for ever from my place in thy heart, O
fosterling of Zeus, and become a sinner against the gods."

Thus spake great-hearted Nestor's son, and brought the mare and put her
in the hand of Menelaos. And his heart was gladdened as when the dew
cometh upon the ears of ripening harvest-corn, what time the fields are
bristling. So gladdened was thy soul, Menelaos, within thy heart. And he
spake unto Antilochos and uttered winged words: "Antilochos, now will I
of myself put away mine anger against thee, since no wise formerly wert
thou flighty or light-minded, howbeit now thy reason was overcome of
youthfulness. Another time be loth to outwit better men. Not easily
should another of the Achaians have persuaded me, but thou hast suffered
and toiled greatly, and thy brave father and brother, for my sake:
therefore will I hearken to thy prayer, and will even give unto thee the
mare, though she is mine, that these also may know that my heart was
never overweening or implacable."

He said, and gave the mare to Noemon Antilochos' comrade to lead away,
and then took the shining caldron. And Meriones took up the two talents
of gold in the fourth place, as he had come in. So the fifth prize was
left unclaimed, a two-handled cup; to Nester gave Achilles this,
bearing it to him through the concourse of Argives, and stood by him and
said: "Lo now for thee too, old man, be this a treasure, a memorial of
Patroklos' burying; for no more shalt thou behold him among the Argives.
Now give I thee this prize unwon, for not in boxing shalt thou strive,
neither wrestle, nor enter on the javelin match, nor race with thy feet;
for grim old age already weigheth on thee."

Thus saying he placed it in his hand, and Nestor received it gladly, and
spake unto him winged words: "Ay, truly all this, my son, thou hast
meetly said; for no longer are my limbs, friend, firm, nor my feet, nor
do my arms at all swing lightly from my shoulders either side. Would
that my youth were such and my force so firm as when the Epeians were
burying lord Amarynkes at Buprasion, and his sons held the king's
funeral games. Then was no man found like me, neither of the Epeians nor
of the Pylians themselves or the great-hearted Aitolians. In boxing I
overcame Klytomedes, son of Enops, and in wrestling Ankaios of Pleuron,
who stood up against me, and in the foot-race I outran Iphiklos, a right
good man, and with the spear outthrew Phyleus and Polydoros; only in the
chariot-race the two sons of Aktor beat me [by crowding their horses in
front of me, jealous for victory, because the chief prizes were left at
home.] Now they were twins--one ever held the reins, the reins he ever
held, the other called on the horses with the lash. Thus was I once, but
now let younger men join in such feats; I must bend to grievous age, but
then was I of mark among heroes. But come hold funeral for thy comrade
too with with games. This gift do I accept with gladness, and my heart
rejoiceth that thou rememberest ever my friendship to thee--(nor forget
I thee)--and the honour wherewith it is meet that I be honoured among
the Achaians. And may the gods for this grant thee due grace."

Thus spake he, and Peleides was gone down the full concourse of
Achaians, when he had hearkened to all the thanks of Neleus' son. Then
he ordained prizes of the violent boxing match; a sturdy mule he led
forth and tethered amid the assembly, a six-year mule unbroken, hardest
of all to break; and for the loser set a two-handled cup. Then he stood
up and spake a word among the Argives: "Son of Atreus and ye other
well-greaved Achaians, for these rewards we summon two men of the best
to lift up their hands to box amain. He to whom Apollo shall grant
endurance to the end, and all the Achaians acknowledge it, let him take
the sturdy mule and return with her to his hut; and the loser shall take
with him the two-handled-cup."

Thus spake he, and forthwith arose a man great and valiant and skilled
in boxing, Epeios son of Panopeus, and laid his hand on the sturdy mule
and said aloud: "Let one come nigh to bear off the two-handled cup; the
mule I say none other of the Achaians shall take for victory with his
fists, for I claim to be the best man here. Sufficeth it not that I fall
short of you in battle? Not possible is it that in all arts a man be
skilled. Thus proclaim I, and it shall be accomplished: I will utterly
bruise mine adversary's flesh and break his bones, so let his friends
abide together here to bear him forth when vanquished by my hands."

Thus spake he, and they all kept deep silence. And alone arose against
him Euryalos, a godlike man, son of king Mekisteus the son of Talaos,
Mekisteus, who came on a time to Thebes when Oedipus had fallen, to his
burial, and there he overcame all the sons of Kadmos. Thus Tydeides
famous with the spear made ready Euryalos for the fight, cheering him
with speech, and greatly desired for him victory. And first he cast
about him a girdle, and next gave him well-cut thongs of the hide of an
ox of the field. And the two boxers being girt went into the midst of
the ring, and both lifting up their stalwart hands fell to, and their
hands joined battle grievously. Then was there terrible grinding of
teeth, and sweat flowed from all their limbs. And noble Epeios came on,
and as the other spied for an opening, smote him on the cheek, nor could
he much more stand, for his limbs failed straightway under him. And as
when beneath the North Wind's ripple a fish leapeth on a tangle-covered
beach, and then the black wave hideth it, so leapt up Euryalos at that
blow. But great-hearted Epeios took him in his hands and set him
upright, and his dear comrades stood around him, and led him through the
ring with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood, drooping his head
awry, and they set him down in his swoon among them and themselves went
forth and fetched the two-handled cup.

