[Footnote 1607: The myth accounts for the separation of Heaven and
Earth. In Egyptian cosmology Nut (the Sky) is thrust and held apart from
her brother Geb (the Earth) by their father Shu, who corresponds to the
Greek Atlas.]

[Footnote 1608: Nymphs of the ash-trees, as Dryads are nymphs of the
oak-trees. Cp. note on "Works and Days", l. 145.]

[Footnote 1609: 'Member-loving': the title is perhaps only a perversion
of the regular PHILOMEIDES (laughter-loving).]

[Footnote 1610: Cletho (the Spinner) is she who spins the thread of
man's life; Lachesis (the Disposer of Lots) assigns to each man his
destiny; Atropos (She who cannot be turned) is the 'Fury with the
abhorred shears.']

[Footnote 1611: Many of the names which follow express various qualities
or aspects of the sea: thus Galene is 'Calm', Cymothoe is the
'Wave-swift', Pherusa and Dynamene are 'She who speeds (ships)' and
'She who has power'.]

[Footnote 1612: The 'Wave-receiver' and the 'Wave-stiller'.]

[Footnote 1613: 'The Unerring' or 'Truthful'; cp. l. 235.]

[Footnote 1614: i.e. Poseidon.]

[Footnote 1615: Goettling notes that some of these nymphs derive their
names from lands over which they preside, as Europa, Asia, Doris,
Ianeira ('Lady of the Ionians'), but that most are called after some
quality which their streams possessed: thus Xanthe is the 'Brown' or
'Turbid', Amphirho is the 'Surrounding' river, Ianthe is 'She who
delights', and Ocyrrhoe is the 'Swift-flowing'.]

[Footnote 1616: i.e. Eos, the 'Early-born'.]

[Footnote 1617: Van Lennep explains that Hecate, having no brothers to
support her claim, might have been slighted.]

[Footnote 1618: The goddess of the hearth (the Roman "Vesta"), and so of
the house. Cp. "Homeric Hymns" v.22 ff.; xxxix.1 ff.]

[Footnote 1619: The variant reading 'of his father' (sc. Heaven) rests
on inferior MS. authority and is probably an alteration due to the
difficulty stated by a Scholiast: 'How could Zeus, being not yet
begotten, plot against his father?' The phrase is, however, part of the
prophecy. The whole line may well be spurious, and is rejected by Heyne,
Wolf, Gaisford and Guyet.]

[Footnote 1620: Pausanias (x. 24.6) saw near the tomb of Neoptolemus 'a
stone of no great size', which the Delphians anointed every day with
oil, and which he says was supposed to be the stone given to Cronos.]

[Footnote 1621: A Scholiast explains: 'Either because they (men) sprang
from the Melian nymphs (cp. l. 187); or because, when they were born
(?), they cast themselves under the ash-trees, that is, the trees.' The
reference may be to the origin of men from ash-trees: cp. "Works and
Days", l. 145 and note.]

[Footnote 1622: sc. Atlas, the Shu of Egyptian mythology: cp. note on
line 177.]

[Footnote 1623: Oceanus is here regarded as a continuous stream
enclosing the earth and the seas, and so as flowing back upon himself.]

[Footnote 1624: The conception of Oceanus is here different: he has nine
streams which encircle the earth and then flow out into the 'main' which
appears to be the waste of waters on which, according to early Greek and
Hebrew cosmology, the disk-like earth floated.]

[Footnote 1625: i.e. the threshold is of 'native' metal, and not
artificial.]

[Footnote 1626: According to Homer Typhoeus was overwhelmed by Zeus
amongst the Arimi in Cilicia. Pindar represents him as buried under
Aetna, and Tzetzes reads Aetna in this passage.]

[Footnote 1627: The epithet (which means literally 'well-bored') seems
to refer to the spout of the crucible.]

[Footnote 1628: The fire god. There is no reference to volcanic action:
iron was smelted on Mount Ida; cp. "Epigrams of Homer", ix. 2-4.]

[Footnote 1629: i.e. Athena, who was born 'on the banks of the river
Trito' (cp. l. 929l)]

[Footnote 1630: Restored by Peppmuller. The nineteen following lines
from another recension of lines 889-900, 924-9 are quoted by Chrysippus
(in Galen).]

[Footnote 1631: sc. the aegis. Line 929s is probably spurious, since it
disagrees with l. 929q and contains a suspicious reference to Athens.]

[Footnote 1701: A catalogue of heroines each of whom was introduced with
the words E OIE, 'Or like her'.]

[Footnote 1702: An antiquarian writer of Byzantium, c. 490-570 A.D.]

[Footnote 1703: Constantine VII. 'Born in the Porphyry Chamber', 905-959
A.D.]

[Footnote 1704: "Berlin Papyri", 7497 (left-hand fragment) and
"Oxyrhynchus Papyri", 421 (right-hand fragment). For the restoration see
"Class. Quart." vii. 217-8.]

[Footnote 1705: As the price to be given to her father for her: so in
"Iliad" xviii. 593 maidens are called 'earners of oxen'. Possibly
Glaucus, like Aias (fr. 68, ll. 55 ff.), raided the cattle of others.]

[Footnote 1706: i.e. Glaucus should father the children of others. The
curse of Aphrodite on the daughters of Tyndareus (fr. 67) may be
compared.]

[Footnote 1707: Porphyry, scholar, mathematician, philosopher and
historian, lived 233-305 (?) A.D. He was a pupil of the neo-Platonist
Plotinus.]

[Footnote 1708: Author of a geographical lexicon, produced after 400
A.D., and abridged under Justinian.]

[Footnote 1709: Archbishop of Thessalonica 1175-1192 (?) A.D., author of
commentaries on Pindar and on the "Iliad" and "Odyssey".]

[Footnote 1710: In the earliest times a loin-cloth was worn by athletes,
but was discarded after the 14th Olympiad.]

[Footnote 1711: Slight remains of five lines precede line 1 in the
original: after line 20 an unknown number of lines have been lost, and
traces of a verse preceding line 21 are here omitted. Between lines 29
and 30 are fragments of six verses which do not suggest any definite
restoration. (NOTE: Line enumeration is that according to Evelyn-White;
a slightly different line numbering system is adopted in the original
publication of this fragment.--DBK)]

[Footnote 1712: The end of Schoeneus' speech, the preparations and the
beginning of the race are lost.]

[Footnote 1713: Of the three which Aphrodite gave him to enable him to
overcome Atalanta.]

[Footnote 1714: The geographer; fl. c.24 B.C.]

[Footnote 1715: Of Miletus, flourished about 520 B.C. His work, a
mixture of history and geography, was used by Herodotus.]

[Footnote 1716: The Hesiodic story of the daughters of Proetus can be
reconstructed from these sources. They were sought in marriage by all
the Greeks (Pauhellenes), but having offended Dionysus (or, according to
Servius, Juno), were afflicted with a disease which destroyed their
beauty (or were turned into cows). They were finally healed by
Melampus.]

[Footnote 1717: Fl. 56-88 A.D.: he is best known for his work on
Vergil.]

[Footnote 1718: This and the following fragment segment are meant to be
read together.--DBK.]

[Footnote 1719: This fragment as well as fragments #40A, #101, and #102
were added by Mr. Evelyn-White in an appendix to the second edition
(1919). They are here moved to the "Catalogues" proper for easier use by
the reader.--DBK.]

[Footnote 1720: For the restoration of ll. 1-16 see "Ox. Pap." pt. xi.
pp. 46-7: the supplements of ll. 17-31 are by the Translator (cp.
"Class. Quart." x. (1916), pp. 65-67).]

[Footnote 1721: The crocus was to attract Europa, as in the very similar
story of Persephone: cp. "Homeric Hymns" ii. lines 8 ff.]

[Footnote 1722: Apollodorus of Athens (fl. 144 B.C.) was a pupil of
Aristarchus. He wrote a Handbook of Mythology, from which the extant
work bearing his name is derived.]

[Footnote 1723: Priest at Praeneste. He lived c. 170-230 A.D.]

[Footnote 1724: Son of Apollonius Dyscolus, lived in Rome under Marcus
Aurelius. His chief work was on accentuation.]

[Footnote 1725: This and the next two fragment segments are meant to be
read together.--DBK.]

[Footnote 1726: Sacred to Poseidon. For the custom observed there, cp.
"Homeric Hymns" iii. 231 ff.]

[Footnote 1727: The allusion is obscure.]

[Footnote 1728: Apollonius 'the Crabbed' was a grammarian of Alexandria
under Hadrian. He wrote largely on Grammar and Syntax.]

[Footnote 1729: 275-195 (?) B.C., mathematician, astronomer, scholar,
and head of the Library of Alexandria.]

[Footnote 1730: Of Cyme. He wrote a universal history covering the
period between the Dorian Migration and 340 B.C.]

[Footnote 1731: i.e. the nomad Scythians, who are described by Herodotus
as feeding on mares' milk and living in caravans.]

[Footnote 1732: The restorations are mainly those adopted or suggested
in "Ox. Pap." pt. xi. pp. 48 ff.: for those of ll. 8-14 see "Class.
Quart." x. (1916) pp. 67-69.]

[Footnote 1733: i.e. those who seek to outwit the oracle, or to ask of
it more than they ought, will be deceived by it and be led to ruin: cp.
"Hymn to Hermes", 541 ff.]

[Footnote 1734: Zetes and Calais, sons of Boreas, who were amongst the
Argonauts, delivered Phineus from the Harpies. The Strophades ('Islands
of Turning') are here supposed to have been so called because the sons
of Boreas were there turned back by Iris from pursuing the Harpies.]

[Footnote 1735: An Epicurean philosopher, fl. 50 B.C.]

[Footnote 1736: 'Charming-with-her-voice' (or 'Charming-the-mind'),
'Song', and 'Lovely-sounding'.]

[Footnote 1737: Diodorus Siculus, fl. 8 B.C., author of an universal
history ending with Caesar's Gallic Wars.]

[Footnote 1738: The first epic in the "Trojan Cycle"; like all ancient
epics it was ascribed to Homer, but also, with more probability, to
Stasinus of Cyprus.]

[Footnote 1739: This fragment is placed by Spohn after "Works and Days"
l. 120.]

[Footnote 1740: A Greek of Asia Minor, author of the "Description of
Greece" (on which he was still engaged in 173 A.D.).]

[Footnote 1741: Wilamowitz thinks one or other of these citations
belongs to the Catalogue.]

[Footnote 1742: Lines 1-51 are from Berlin Papyri, 9739; lines 52-106
with B. 1-50 (and following fragments) are from Berlin Papyri, 10560. A
reference by Pausanias (iii. 24. 10) to ll. 100 ff. proves that the two
fragments together come from the "Catalogue of Women". The second book
(the beginning of which is indicated after l. 106) can hardly be the
second book of the "Catalogues" proper: possibly it should be assigned
to the EOIAI, which were sometimes treated as part of the "Catalogues",
and sometimes separated from it. The remains of thirty-seven lines
following B. 50 in the Papyrus are too slight to admit of restoration.]

[Footnote 1743: sc. the Suitor whose name is lost.]

[Footnote 1744: Wooing was by proxy; so Agamemnon wooed Helen for his
brother Menelaus (ll. 14-15), and Idomeneus, who came in person and sent
no deputy, is specially mentioned as an exception, and the reasons for
this--if the restoration printed in the text be right--is stated (ll. 69
ff.).]

[Footnote 1745: The Papyrus here marks the beginning of a second book
("B"), possibly of the EOIAE. The passage (ll. 2-50) probably led up to
an account of the Trojan (and Theban?) war, in which, according to
"Works and Days" ll. 161-166, the Race of Heroes perished. The opening
of the "Cypria" is somewhat similar. Somewhere in the fragmentary lines
13-19 a son of Zeus--almost certainly Apollo--was introduced, though for
what purpose is not clear. With l. 31 the destruction of man (cp. ll.
4-5) by storms which spoil his crops begins: the remaining verses are
parenthetical, describing the snake 'which bears its young in the spring
season'.]

[Footnote 1746: i.e. the snake; as in "Works and Days" l. 524, the
"Boneless One" is the cuttle-fish.]

[Footnote 1747: c. 1110-1180 A.D. His chief work was a poem,
"Chiliades", in accentual verse of nearly 13,000 lines.]

[Footnote 1748: According to this account Iphigeneia was carried by
Artemis to the Taurie Chersonnese (the Crimea). The Tauri (Herodotus iv.
103) identified their maiden-goddess with Iphigeneia; but Euripides
("Iphigeneia in Tauris") makes her merely priestess of the goddess.]

[Footnote 1749: Of Alexandria. He lived in the 5th century, and compiled
a Greek Lexicon.]

[Footnote 1750: For his murder Minos exacted a yearly tribute of boys
and girls, to be devoured by the Minotaur, from the Athenians.]

[Footnote 1751: Of Naucratis. His "Deipnosophistae" ("Dons at Dinner")
is an encyclopaedia of miscellaneous topics in the form of a dialogue.
His date is c. 230 A.D.]

[Footnote 1752: There is a fancied connection between LAAS ('stone') and
LAOS ('people'). The reference is to the stones which Deucalion and
Pyrrha transformed into men and women after the Flood.]

[Footnote 1753: Eustathius identifies Ileus with Oileus, father of Aias.
Here again is fanciful etymology, ILEUS being similar to ILEOS
(complaisant, gracious).]

[Footnote 1754: Imitated by Vergil, "Aeneid" vii. 808, describing
Camilla.]

[Footnote 1755: c. 600 A.D., a lecturer and grammarian of
Constantinople.]

[Footnote 1756: Priest of Apollo, and, according to Homer, discoverer of
wine. Maronea in Thrace is said to have been called after him.]

[Footnote 1757: The crow was originally white, but was turned black by
Apollo in his anger at the news brought by the bird.]

[Footnote 1758: A philosopher of Athens under Hadrian and Antonius. He
became a Christian and wrote a defence of the Christians addressed to
Antoninus Pius.]

[Footnote 1759: Zeus slew Asclepus (fr. 90) because of his success as a
healer, and Apollo in revenge killed the Cyclopes (fr. 64). In
punishment Apollo was forced to serve Admetus as herdsman. (Cp.
Euripides, "Alcestis", 1-8)]

[Footnote 1760: For Cyrene and Aristaeus, cp. Vergil, "Georgics", iv.
315 ff.]

[Footnote 1761: A writer on mythology of uncertain date.]

[Footnote 1762: In Epirus. The oracle was first consulted by Deucalion
and Pyrrha after the Flood. Later writers say that the god responded in
the rustling of leaves in the oaks for which the place was famous.]

[Footnote 1763: The fragment is part of a leaf from a papyrus book of
the 4th century A.D.]

[Footnote 1764: According to Homer and later writers Meleager wasted
away when his mother Althea burned the brand on which his life depended,
because he had slain her brothers in the dispute for the hide of the
Calydonian boar. (Cp. Bacchylides, "Ode" v. 136 ff.)]

[Footnote 1765: The fragment probably belongs to the "Catalogues" proper
rather than to the Eoiae; but, as its position is uncertain, it may
conveniently be associated with Frags. 99A and the "Shield of
Heracles".]

[Footnote 1766: Most of the smaller restorations appear in the original
publication, but the larger are new: these last are highly conjectual,
there being no definite clue to the general sense.]

[Footnote 1767: Alcmaon (who took part in the second of the two heroic
Theban expeditions) is perhaps mentioned only incidentally as the son of
Amphiaraus, who seems to be clearly indicated in ll. 7-8, and whose
story occupies ll. 5-10. At l. 11 the subject changes and Electryon is
introduced as father of Alcmena.]

[Footnote 1768: The association of ll. 1-16 with ll. 17-24 is presumed
from the apparent mention of Erichthonius in l. 19. A new section must
then begin at l. 21. See "Ox. Pap." pt. xi. p. 55 (and for restoration
of ll. 5-16, ib. p. 53). ll. 19-20 are restored by the Translator.]
