outbreak. Carlo had begun to speak when Corte drew his attention to the
fact that ladies were present, at which Carlo put out his hand as if
introducing them, and went on speaking.

"Your wife is here," said Corte.

"My wife and signora Piaveni," Carlo rejoined. "I have consented to my
wife's particular wish to be present."

"The signora Piaveni's opinions are known: your wife's are not."

"Countess Alessandra shares mine," said Laura, rather tremulously.

Countess Ammiani at the same time returned and took Vittoria's hand and
pressed it with force. Carlo looked at them both.

"I have to ask your excuses, gentlemen. My wife, my mother, and signora
Piaveni, have served the cause we worship sufficiently to claim a
right--I am sorry to use such phrases; you understand my meaning. Permit
them to remain. I have to tell you that Barto Rizzo has been here: he
has started for Brescia. I should have had to kill him to stop him--a
measure that I did not undertake."

"Being your duty!" remarked Corte.

Agostino corrected him with a sarcasm.

"I cannot allow the presence of ladies to exclude a comment on manifest
indifference," said Corte. "Pass on to the details, if you have any."

"The details are these," Carlo resumed, too proud to show a shade
of self-command; "my cousin Angelo leaves Milan before morning. You,
Colonel Corte, will be in Bergamo at noon to-morrow. Marco and Angelo
will await my coming in Brescia, where we shall find Giulio and the
rest. I join them at five on the following afternoon, and my arrival
signals the revolt. We have decided that the news from the king's army
is good."

A perceptible shudder in Vittoria's frame at this concluding sentence
caught Corte's eye.

"Are you dissatisfied with that arrangement?" he addressed her boldly.

"I am, Colonel Corte," she replied. So simple was the answering tone of
her voice that Corte had not a word.

"It is my husband who is going," Vittoria spoke on steadily; "him I am
prepared to sacrifice, as I am myself. If he thinks it right to throw
himself into Brescia, nothing is left for me but to thank him for having
done me the honour to consult me. His will is firm. I trust to God
that he is wise. I look on him now as one of many brave men whose lives
belong to Italy, and if they all are misdirected and perish, we have no
more; we are lost. The king is on the Ticino; the Chief is in Rome. I
desire to entreat you to take counsel before you act in anticipation of
the king's fortune. I see that it is a crushed life in Lombardy. In Rome
there is one who can lead and govern. He has suffered and is calm.
He calls to you to strengthen his hands. My prayer to you is to take
counsel. I know the hour is late; but it is not too late for wisdom.
Forgive me if I am not speaking humbly. Brescia is but Brescia; Rome
is Italy. I have understood little of my country until these last days,
though I have both talked and sung of her glories. I know that a deep
duty binds you to Bergamo and to Brescia--poor Milan we must not think
of. You are not personally pledged to Rome: yet Rome may have the
greatest claims on you. The heart of our country is beginning to beat
there. Colonel Corte! signor Marco! my Agostino! my cousin Angelo! it is
not a woman asking for the safety of her husband, but one of the blood
of Italy who begs to offer you her voice, without seeking to disturb
your judgement."

She ceased.

"Without seeking to disturb their judgement!" cried Laura. "Why not,
when the judgement is in error?"

To Laura's fiery temperament Vittoria's speech had been feebleness.
She was insensible to that which the men felt conveyed to them by the
absence of emotion in the language of a woman so sorrowfully placed.
"Wait," she said, "wait for the news from Carlo Alberto, if you
determine to play at swords and guns in narrow streets." She spoke long
and vehemently, using irony, coarse and fine, with the eloquence which
was her gift. In conclusion she apostrophized Colonel Corte as one who
had loved him might have done. He was indeed that figure of indomitable
strength to which her spirit, exhausted by intensity of passion, clung
more than to any other on earth, though she did not love him, scarcely
liked him.

Corte asked her curiously--for she had surprised and vexed his softer
side--why she distinguished him with such remarkable phrases only to
declare her contempt for him.

"It's the flag whipping the flag-pole," murmured Agostino; and he now
spoke briefly in support of the expedition to Rome; or at least in
favour of delay until the King of Sardinia had gained a battle. While he
was speaking, Merthyr entered the room, and behind him a messenger who
brought word that Bergamo had risen.

The men drew hurriedly together, and Countess Ammiani, Vittoria and
Laura stood ready to leave them.

"You will give me, five minutes?" Vittoria whispered to her husband, and
he nodded.

"Merthyr," she said, passing him, "can I have your word that you will
not go from me?"

Merthyr gave her his word after he had looked on her face.

"Send to me every two hours, that I may know you are near," she added;
"do not fear waking me. Or, no, dear friend; why should I have any
concealment from you? Be not a moment absent, if you would not have me
fall to the ground a second time: follow me."

Even as he hesitated, for he had urgent stuff to communicate to Carlo,
he could see a dreadful whiteness rising on her face, darkening the
circles of her eyes.

"It's life or death, my dearest, and I am bound to live," she said. Her
voice sprang up from tears.

Merthyr turned and tried in vain to get a hearing among the excited,
voluble men. They shook his hand, patted his shoulder, and counselled
him to leave them. He obtained Carlo's promise that he would not quit
the house without granting him an interview; after which he passed out
to Vittoria, where Countess Ammiani and Laura sat weeping by the door.




CHAPTER XLIV

THE WIFE AND THE HUSBAND

When they were alone Merthyr said: "I cannot give many minutes, not much
time. I have to speak to your husband."

She answered: "Give me many minutes--much time. All other speaking is
vain here."

"It concerns his safety."

"It will not save him."

"But I have evidence that he is betrayed. His plans are known; a trap is
set for him. If he moves, he walks into a pit."

"You would talk reason, Merthyr," Vittoria sighed. "Talk it to me. I can
listen; I thirst for it. I beat at the bars of a cage all day. When I
saw you this afternoon, I looked on another life. It was too sudden,
and I swooned. That was my only show of weakness. Since then you are the
only strength I feel."

"Have they all become Barto Rizzos?" Merthyr exclaimed.

"Beloved, I will open my mind to you," said Vittoria. "I am cowardly,
and I thought I had such courage! Tonight a poor mad creature has been
here, who has oppressed me, I cannot say how long, with real fear--that
I only understand now that I know the little ground I had for it. I am
even pleased that one like Barto Rizzo should see me in a better light.
I find the thought smiling in my heart when every other thing is utterly
dark there. You have heard that Carlo goes to Brescia. When I was
married, I lost sight of Italy, and everything but happiness. I suffer
as I deserve for it now. I could have turned my husband from this black
path; I preferred to dream and sing. I would not see--it was my pride
that would not let me see his error. My cowardice would not let me wound
him with a single suggestion. You say that he is betrayed. Then he is
betrayed by the woman who has never been unintelligible to me. We were
in Turin surrounded by intrigues, and there I thanked her so much for
leaving me the days with my husband by Lake Orta that I did not seek to
open his eyes to her. We came to Milan, and here I have been thanking
her for the happy days in Turin. Carlo is no longer to blame if he will
not listen to me. I have helped to teach him that I am no better than
any of these Italian women whom he despises. I spoke to him as his wife
should do, at last. He feigned to think me jealous, and I too remember
the words of the reproach, as if they had a meaning. Ah, my friend!
I would say of nothing that it is impossible, except this task of
recovering lost ground with one who is young. Experience of trouble has
made me older than he. When he accused me of jealousy, I could mention
Countess d'Isorella's name no more. I confess to that. Yet I knew my
husband feigned. I knew that he could not conceive the idea of jealousy
existing in me, as little as I could imagine unfaithfulness in him. But
my lips would not take her name! Wretched cowardice cannot go farther.
I spoke of Rome. As often as I spoke, that name was enough to shake
me off: he had but to utter it, and I became dumb. He did it to obtain
peace; for no other cause. So, by degrees, I have learnt the fatal
truth. He has trusted her, for she is very skilful; distrusting her,
for she is treacherous. He has, therefore, believed excessively in his
ability to make use of her, and to counteract her baseness. I saw his
error from the first; and I went on dreaming and singing; and now this
night has come!"

Vittoria shadowed her eyes.

"I will go to him at once," said Merthyr.

"Yes; I am relieved. Go, dear friend," she sobbed; "you have given me
tears, as I hoped. You will not turn him; had it been possible, could I
have kept you from him so long? I know that you will not turn him from
his purpose, for I know what a weight it is that presses him forward in
that path. Do not imagine our love to be broken. He will convince you
that it is not. He has the nature of an angel. He permitted me to speak
before these men to-night--feeble thing that I am! It was a last effort.
I might as well have tried to push a rock."

She rose at a noise of voices in the hall below.

"They are going, Merthyr. See him now. There may be help in heaven; if
one could think it! If help were given to this country--if help were
only visible! The want of it makes us all without faith."

"Hush! you may hear good news from Carlo Alberto in a few hours," said
Merthyr.

"Ask Laura; she has witnessed how he can be shattered," Vittoria replied
bitterly.

Merthyr pressed her fingers. He was met by Carlo on the stairs.

"Quick!" Carlo said; "I have scarce a minute to spare. I have my adieux
to make, and the tears have set in already. First, a request: you
will promise to remain beside my wife; she will want more than her own
strength."

Such a request, coming from an Italian husband, was so great a proof of
the noble character of his love and his knowledge of the woman he loved,
that Merthyr took him in his arms and kissed him.

"Get it over quickly, dear good fellow," Carlo murmured; "you have
something to tell me. Whatever it is, it's air; but I'll listen."

They passed into a vacant room. "You know you are betrayed," Merthyr
began.

"Not exactly that," said Carlo, humming carelessly.

"Positively and absolutely. The Countess d'Isorella has sold your
secrets."

"I commend her to the profit she has made by it."

"Do you play with your life?"

Carlo was about to answer in the tone he had assumed for the interview.
He checked the laugh on his lips.

"She must have some regard for my life, such as it's worth, since, to
tell you the truth, she is in the house now, and came here to give me
fair warning."

"Then, you trust her."

"I? Not a single woman in the world!--that is, for a conspiracy."

It was an utterly fatuous piece of speech. Merthyr allowed it to slip,
and studied him to see where he was vulnerable.

"She is in the house, you say. Will you cause her to come before me?"

"Curiously," said Carlo, "I kept her for some purpose of the sort. Will
I? and have a scandal now? Oh! no. Let her sleep."

Whether he spoke from noble-mindedness or indifference, Merthyr could
not guess.

"I have a message from your friend Luciano. He sends you his love, in
case he should be shot the first, and says that when Lombardy is free he
hopes you will not forget old comrades who are in Rome."

"Forget him! I would to God I could sit and talk of him for hours.
Luciano! Luciano! He has no wife."

Carlo spoke on hoarsely. "Tell me what authority you have for charging
Countess d'Isorella with... with whatever it may be."

"A conversation between Countess Anna of Lenkenstein and a Major Nagen,
in the Duchess of Graatli's house, was overheard by our Beppo.
They spoke German. The rascal had a German sweetheart with him. She
imprisoned him for some trespass, and had come stealing in to rescue
him, when those two entered the room. Countess Anna detailed to Nagen
the course of your recent plotting. She named the hour this morning when
you are to start for Brescia. She stated what force you have, what arms
you expect; she named you all."

"Nagen--Nagen," Carlo repeated; "the man's unknown to me."

"It's sufficient that he is an Austrian officer."

"Quite. She hates me, and she has reason, for she's aware that I mean to
fight her lover, and choose my time. The blood of my friends is on that
man's head."

"I will finish what I have to say," pursued Merthyr. "When Beppo had
related as much as he could make out from his sweetheart's translation,
I went straight to the duchess. She is an Austrian, and a good and
reasonable woman. She informed me that a letter addressed by Countess
Anna to Countess d'Isorella fell into her hands this night. She burnt it
unopened. I leave it to you to consider whether you have been betrayed
and who has betrayed you. The secret was bought. Beppo himself caught
the words, 'from a mercenary Italian.' The duchess tells me that
Countess Anna is in the habit of alluding to Countess d'Isorella in
those terms."

Carlo stretched his arms like a man who cannot hide the yawning fit.

"I promised my wife five minutes, though we have had the worst of the
parting over. Perhaps you will wait for me; I may have a word to say."

He was absent for little more than the space named. When he returned, he
was careful to hide his face. He locked the door, and leading Merthyr to
an inner room, laid his watch on the table, and said: "Now, friend,
you will see that I have nothing to shrink from, for I am going to do
execution upon myself, and before him whom I would, above all other
men, have think well of me. My wife supposes that I am pledged to this
Brescian business because I am insanely patriotic. If I might join
Luciano tomorrow I would shout like a boy. I would be content to serve
as the lowest in the ranks, if I might be with you all under the Chief.
Rome crowns him, and Brescia is my bloody ditch, and it is deserved!
When I was a little younger--I am a boy still, no doubt--I had the
honour to be distinguished by a handsome woman; and when I grew a little
older, I discovered by chance that she had wit. The lady is the Countess
Violetta d'Isorella. It is a grief to me to know that she is sordid:
it hurts my vanity the more. Perhaps: you begin to perceive that vanity
governs me. The signora Laura has not expressed her opinion on this
subject with any reserve, but to Violetta belongs the merit of having
seen it without waiting for the signs. First--it is a small matter, but
you are English--let me assure you that my wife has had no rival. I have
taunted her with jealousy when I knew that it was neither in her nature
to feel it, nor in mine to give reason for it. No man who has a spark of
his Maker in him could be unfaithful to such a woman. When Lombardy was
crushed, we were in the dust. I fancy we none of us knew how miserably
we had fallen--we, as men. The purest--I dare say, the bravest--marched
to Rome. God bless my Luciano there! But I, sir, I, my friend, I,
Merthyr, I said proudly that I would not abandon a beaten country: and I
was admired for my devotion. The dear old poet, Agostino, praised me.
It stopped his epigrams--during a certain time, at least. Colonel Corte
admired me. Marco Sana, Giulio Bandinelli admired me. Vast numbers
admired me. I need not add that I admired myself. I plunged into
intrigues with princes, and priests, and republicans. A clever woman was
at my elbow. In the midst of all this, my marriage: I had seven weeks of
peace; and then I saw what I was. You feel that you are tired, when you
want to go another way and you feel that you have been mad when you want
to undo your work. But I could not break the chains I had wrought, for
I was a chief of followers. The men had come from exile, or they
had refused to join the Roman enterprise:--they, in fact, had bound
themselves to me; and that means, I was irrevocably bound to them. I had
an insult to wipe out: I refrained from doing it, sincerely, I may tell
you, on the ground that this admired life of mine was precious. I will
heap no more clumsy irony on it: I can pity it. Do you see now how I
stand? I know that I cannot rely on the king's luck or on the skill of
his generals, or on the power of his army, or on the spirit in Lombardy:
neither on men nor on angels. But I cannot draw back. I have set going
a machine that's merciless. From the day it began working, every moment
has added to its force. Do not judge me by your English eyes: other
lands, other habits; other habits, other thoughts. And besides, if
honour said nothing, simple humanity would preserve me from leaving my
band to perish like a flock of sheep."

He uttered this with a profound conviction of his quality as leader,
that escaped the lurid play of self-inspection which characterized what
he had previously spoken, and served singularly in bearing witness to
the truth of his charge against himself.

"Useless!" he said, waving his hand at anticipated remonstrances.
"Look with the eyes of my country; not with your own, my friend. I am
disgraced if I do not go out. My friends are disgraced if I do not head
them in. Brescia--sacrificed!--murdered!--how can I say what? Can I live
under disgrace or remorse? The king stakes on his army; I on the king.
Whether he fights and wins, or fights and loses, I go out. I have
promised my men--promised them success, I believe!--God forgive me! Did
you ever see a fated man before? None had plotted against me. I have
woven my own web, and that's the fatal thing. I have a wife, the
sweetest woman of her time. Goodnight to her! our parting is over."

He glanced at his watch. "Perhaps she will be at the door below. Her
heart beats like mine just now. You wish to say that you think me
betrayed, and therefore I may draw back? Did you not hear that Bergamo
has risen? The Brescians are up too by this time. Gallant Brescians!
they never belie the proverb in their honour; and to die among them
would be sweet if I had all my manhood about me. You would have me
making a scene with Violetta."

"Set the woman face to face with me!" cried Merthyr, sighting a gleam of
hope.

Carlo smiled. "Can she bear my burden though she be ten times guilty?
Let her sleep. I have her here harmless for the night. The Brescians are
up:--that's an hour that has struck, and there's no calling it to move
a step in the rear. Brescia under the big Eastern hill which throws
a cloak on it at sunrise! Brescia is always the eagle that looks over
Lombardy! And Bergamo! you know the terraces of Bergamo. Aren't they
like a morning sky? Dying there is not death; it's flying into the dawn.
You Romans envy us. Come, confess it; you envy us. You have no Alps,
no crimson hills, nothing but old walls to look on while you fight.
Farewell, Merthyr Powys. I hear my servant's foot outside. My horse is
awaiting me saddled, a mile from the city. Perhaps I shall see my wife
again at the door below, or in heaven. Addio! Kiss Luciano for me. Tell
him that I knew myself as well as he did, before the end came. Enrico,
Emilio, and the others--tell them I love them. I doubt if there will
ever be but a ghost of me to fight beside them in Rome. And there's no
honour, Merthyr, in a ghost's fighting, because he's shotproof; so I
won't say what the valiant disembodied 'I' may do by-and-by."

He held his hands out, with the light soft smile of one who asks
forgiveness for flippant speech, and concluded firmly: "I have talked
enough, and you are the man of sense I thought you; for to give me
advice is childish when no power on earth could make me follow it.
Addio! Kiss me."

They embraced. Merthyr said no more than that he would place messengers
on the road to Brescia to carry news of the king's army. His voice was
thick, and when Carlo laughed at him, his sensations strangely reversed
their situations.

There were two cloaked figures at different points in the descent of
the stairs. These rose severally at Carlo's approach, took him to their
bosoms, and kissed him in silence. They were his mother and Laura. A
third crouched by the door of the courtyard, which was his wife.

Merthyr kept aloof until the heavy door rolled a long dull sound.
Vittoria's head was shawled over. She stood where her husband had left
her, groping for him with one hand, that closed tremblingly hard on
Merthyr when he touched it. Not a word was uttered in the house.




CHAPTER XLV

SHOWS MANY PATHS CONVERGING TO THE END

Until daylight Merthyr sat by himself, trying to realize the progressive
steps of the destiny which seemed like a visible hand upon Count
Ammiani, that he might know it to be nothing else than Carlo's work. He
sat in darkness in the room where Carlo had spoken, thinking of him
as living and dead. The brilliant life in Carlo protested against a
possible fatal tendency in his acts so irrevocable as to plunge him to
destruction when his head was clear, his blood cool, and a choice lay
open to him. That brilliant young life, that fine face, the tones of
Carlo's voice, swept about Merthyr, accusing him of stupid fatalism.
Grief stopped his answer to the charge; but in his wise mind he knew
Carlo to have surveyed things justly; and that the Fates are within
us. Those which are the forces of the outer world are as shadows to
the power we have created within us. He felt this because it was his
gathered wisdom. Human compassion, and love for the unhappy youth,
crushed it in his heart, and he marvelled how he could have been
paralyzed when he had a chance of interceding. Can a man stay a torrent?
But a noble and fair young life in peril will not allow our philosophy
to liken it to things of nature. The downward course of a fall that
takes many waters till it rushes irresistibly is not the course of any
life. Yet it is true that our destiny is of our own weaving. Carlo's
involvements cast him into extreme peril, almost certain death, unless
he abjured his honour, dearer than a life made precious by love. Merthyr
saw that it was not vanity, but honour; for Carlo stood pledged to lead
a forlorn enterprise, the ripeness of his own scheming. In the imminent
hour Carlo had recognized his position as Merthyr with the wisdom of
years looked on it. That was what had paralyzed the older man, though
he could not subsequently trace the cause. Thinking of the beauty of
the youth, husband of the woman who was to his soul utterly an angel,
Merthyr sat in the anguish of self-accusation, believing that some
remonstrance, some inspired word, might have turned him, and half
dreading to sound his own heart, as if an evil knowledge of his nature
haunted it.

He rose up at last with a cry. The door opened, and Giacinta, Vittoria's
maid, appeared, bearing a lamp. She had been sitting outside, waiting
to hear him stir before she intruded. He touched her cheek kindly, and
thought that one could do little better than die, if need were, in the
service of such a people. She said that her mistress was kneeling. She
wished to make coffee for him, and Merthyr let her do it, knowing the
comfort there is to a woman in the ministering occupation of her hands.
It was soon daylight. Beppo had not come back to the house.

"No one has left the house?" Merthyr asked.

"Not since--" she answered convulsively.

"The Countess d'Isorella is here?"

"Yes, signore."

"Asleep?" he put the question mournfully, in remembrance of Carlo's "Let
her sleep!"

"Yes, signore; like the first night after confession."

"She resides, I think, in the Corso Venezia. When she awakens, let her
know that I request to have the honour of conducting her."

"Yes, signore. Her carriage is still at the gates. The countess's horses
are accustomed to stand."

Merthyr knew this for a hint against his leaving, as well as against the
lady's character.

"Let your mistress be assured that I shall on no account be long absent
at any time."

"Signore, I shall do so," said Giacinta.

She brought him word soon after, that Countess d'Isorella was stirring.
Merthyr met Violetta on the stairs.

"Can it be true?" she accosted him first.

"Count Ammiani has left for Brescia," he replied.

"In spite of my warning?"

Merthyr gave space for her to pass into the room. She appeared
undecided, saying that she had a dismal apprehension of her not having
dismissed her coachman overnight.

"In spite of my warning," she murmured again, "he has really gone?
Surely I cannot have slept more than three hours."

"It was Count Ammiani's wish that you should enjoy your full sleep
undisturbed in his house," said Merthyr, "As regards your warning to
him, he has left Milan perfectly convinced of the gravity of a warning
that comes from you."

Violetta shrugged lightly. "Then all we have to do is to pray for the
success of Carlo Alberto."

"Oh! pardon me, countess," Merthyr rejoined, "prayers may be useful, but
you at least have something to do besides."

His eyes caught hers firmly as they were letting a wild look of
interrogation fall on him, and he continued with perfect courtesy, "You
will accompany me to see Countess Anna of Lenkenstein. You have great
influence, madame. It is not Count Ammiani's request; for, as I informed
you, it was his wish that you should enjoy your repose. The request is
mine, because his life is dear to me. Nagen, I think, is the name of the
Austrian officer who has started for Brescia."

She had in self-defence to express surprise while he spoke, which
compelled her to meet his mastering sight and submit to a struggle
of vision sufficient to show him that he had hit a sort of guilty
consciousness. Otherwise she was not discomposed, and with marvellous
sagacity she accepted the forbearance he assumed, not affecting
innocence to challenge it, as silly criminals always do when they are
exposed, but answering quite in the tone of innocence, and so throwing
the burden by an appearance of mutual consent on some unnamed third
person.

"Certainly; let us go to Countess Anna of Lenkenstein, if you think fit.
I have to rely on your judgement. I quite abjure my own. If I have to
plead for anything, I am going before a woman, remember."

"I do not forget it," said Merthyr.

"The expedition to Brescia may be unfortunate," she resumed hurriedly;
"I wish it had not been undertaken. At any rate, it rescues Count
Ammiani from an expedition to Rome, and his slavish devotion to that
priest-hating man whom he calls, or called, his Chief. At Brescia he is
not outraging the head of our religion. That is a gain."

"A gain for him in the next world?" said Merthyr. "I believe that
Countess Anna of Lenkenstein is also a fervent Catholic; is she not?"

"I trust so."

"On behalf of her peace of mind, I trust so, too. In that case, she also
must be a sound sleeper."

"We shall have to awaken her. What excuse--what am I to say to her?"

"I beg you to wait for the occasion, Countess d'Isorella. The words will
come."

Violetta bit her lip. She had consented to this extraordinary step in
an amazement. As she contemplated it now, it seemed worse than a partial
confession and an appeal to his generosity. She broke out in pity for
her horses, in dread of her coachman, declaring that it was impossible
for her to give him the order to drive her anywhere but home.

"With your permission, countess, I will undertake to give him the
order," said Merthyr.

"But have you no compassion, signor Powys? and you are an Englishman! I
thought that Englishmen were excessively compassionate with horses."

"They have been known to kill them in the service of their friends,
nevertheless."

"Well!"--Violetta had recourse to the expression of her shoulders--"and
I am really to see Countess Anna?"

"In my presence."

"Oh! that cannot be. Pardon me; it is impossible. She will decline the
scene. I say it with the utmost sincerity: I know that she will refuse."

"Then, countess," Merthyr's face grew hard, "if I am not to be in your
company to prompt you, allow me to instruct you beforehand."

Violetta looked at him eagerly, as one looks for tidings, with an
involuntary beseeching quiver of the strained eyelids.

"No irony!" she said, fearing horribly that he was about to throw off
the mask of irony.

This desperate effort of her wits at the crisis succeeded.

Merthyr, not knowing what design he had, hopeless of any definite end in
tormenting the woman, and never having it in his mind merely to punish,
was diverted by the exclamation to speak ironically. "You can tell
Countess Anna that it is only her temporal sovereign who is attacked,
and that therefore--" he could not continue.

"Some affection?" he murmured, in intense grief.

His manly forbearance touched her whose moral wit was too blunt to
apprehend the contempt in it.

"Much affection--much!" Violetta exclaimed. "I have a deep affection for
Count Ammiani; an old friendship. Believe me! believe me! I came here
last night to save him. Anything on earth that I can do, I will do--on
my honour; and do not smile at that--I have never pledged it without
fulfilling the oath. I will not sleep while I can aid in preserving him.
He shall know that I am not the base person he has conceived me to be.
You, signor Powys, are not a man to paint all women black that are a
little less than celestial--are you? I am told it is a trick with your
countrymen; and they have a poet who knew us! I entreat you to
confide in me. I am at present quite unaware that Count Ammiani runs
particular--I mean personal danger. He is in danger, of course; everyone
can see it. But, on my honour--and never in my life have I spoken so
earnestly, my friends would hardly recognize me--I declare to you on my
faith as a Christian lady, I am ignorant of any plot against him. I
can take a Cross and kiss it, like a peasant, and swear to you by the
Madonna that I know nothing of it."

She corrected her ardour, half-exulting in finding herself carried so
far and so swimmingly on a tide of truth, half wondering whether the
flowering beauty of her face in excitement had struck his sensibility.
He was cold and speculative.

"Ah!" she said, "if I were to ask my compatriots to put faith in a
woman's pure friendship for a man, I should know the answer; but you,
signor Powys, who have shown us that a man is capable of the purest
friendship for a woman, should believe me."

He led her down to the gates, where her coachman sat muffled in a
three-quarter sleep. The word was given to drive to her own house;
rejoiced by which she called his attention deploringly to the condition
of her horses, requesting him to say whether he could imagine them the
best English, and confessing with regret, that she killed three sets
a year--loved them well, notwithstanding. Merthyr saw enough of her to
feel that she was one of the weak creatures who are strong through our
greater weakness; and, either by intuition or quick wit, too lively
and too subtle to be caught by simple suspicion. She even divined that
reflection might tell him she had evaded him by an artifice--a piece
of gross cajolery; and said, laughing: "Concerning friendship, I could
offer it to a boy, like Carlo Ammiani; not to you, signor Powys. I know
that I must check a youth, and I am on my guard. I should be eternally
tormented to discover whether your armour was proof."

"I dare say that a lady who had those torments would soon be able to
make them mine," said Merthyr.

"You could not pay a fairer compliment to some one else," she remarked.
In truth, the candid personal avowal seemed to her to hold up Vittoria's
sacred honour in a crystal, and the more she thought of it, the more she
respected him, for his shrewd intelligence, if not for his sincerity;
but on the whole she fancied him a loyal friend, not solely a clever
maker of phrases; and she was pleased with herself for thinking such a
matter possible, in spite of her education.

"I do most solemnly hope that you may not have to sustain Countess
Alessandra under any affliction whatsoever," she said at parting.

Violetta had escaped an exposure--a rank and naked accusation of
her character and deeds. She feared nothing but that, being quite
indifferent to opinion; a woman who would not have thought it
preternaturally sad to have to walk as a penitent in the streets, with
the provision of a very thick veil to cover her. She had escaped, but
the moment she felt herself free, she was surprised by a sharp twinge of
remorse. She summoned her maid to undress her, and smelt her favourite
perfume, and lay in her bed, to complete her period of rest, closing
her eyes there with a child's faith in pillows. Flying lights and
blood-blotches rushed within a span of her forehead. She met this
symptom promptly with a medical receipt; yet she had no sleep; nor
would coffee give her sleep. She shrank from opium as deleterious to the
constitution, and her mind settled on music as the remedy.

Some time after her craving for it had commenced, an Austrian foot
regiment, marching to the drum, passed under her windows. The fife is a
merry instrument; fife and drum colour the images of battle gaily; but
the dull ringing Austrian step-drum, beating unaccompanied, strikes
the mind with the real nature of battles, as the salt smell of powder
strikes it, and more in horror, more as a child's imagination realizes
bloodshed, where the scene is a rolling heaven, black and red on
all sides, with pitiable men moving up to the mouth of butchery, the
insufferable flashes, the dark illumination of red, red of black, like a
vision of the shadows Life and Death in a shadow-fight over the dear men
still living. Sensitive minds may be excited by a small stimulant to see
such pictures. This regimental drum is like a song of the flat-headed
savage in man. It has no rise or fall, but leads to the bloody business
with an unvarying note, and a savage's dance in the middle of the
rhythm. Violetta listened to it until her heart quickened with alarm
lest she should be going to have a fever. She thought of Carlo Ammiani,
and of the name of Nagen; she had seen him at the Lenkensteins. Her
instant supposition was that Anna had perhaps paid heavily for the
secret of Carlo's movements an purpose to place Major Nagen on the
Brescian high-road to capture him. Capture meant a long imprisonment, if
not execution. Partly for the sake of getting peace of mind--for she was
shocked by her temporary inability to command repose--but with some hope
of convincing Carlo that she strove to be of use to him, she sent for
the spy Luigi, and at a cost of two hundred and twenty Austrian florins,
obtained his promise upon oath to follow Count Ammiani into Brescia, if
necessary, and deliver to him a letter she had written, wherein Nagen's
name was mentioned, and Carlo was advised to avoid personal risks; the
letter hinted that he might have incurred a private enmity, and he had
better keep among his friends. She knew the writing of this letter to
be the foolishest thing she had ever done. Two hundred and twenty
florins--the man originally stipulated to have three hundred--was a
