the command of the rear, a post which, altho' honourable, was
attended with great danger, many difficulties, and no small
fatigue; for the Prince, being apprehensive that his retreat to
Scotland might be cut off by Marischall Wade, who lay to the
northward of him with an armie much supperior to what H.R.H. had,
while the Duke of Comberland with his whole cavalrie followed hard
in the rear, was obliged to hasten his marches. It was not,
therefore, possible for the artilirie to march so fast as the
Prince's army, in the depth of winter, extremely bad weather, and
the worst roads in England; so Lord George Murray was obliged
often to continue his marches long after it was dark almost every
night, while at the same time he had frequent allarms and
disturbances from the Duke of Comberland's advanc'd parties.

'Towards the evening of the twentie-eight December 1745 the Prince
entered the town of Penrith, in the Province of Comberland. But as
Lord George Murray could not bring up the artilirie so fast as he
wou'd have wish'd, he was oblig'd to pass the night six miles
short of that town, together with the regiment of MacDonel of
Glengarrie, which that day happened to have the arrear guard. The
Prince, in order to refresh his armie, and to give My Lord George
and the artilirie time to come up, resolved to sejour the 29th at
Penrith; so ordered his little army to appear in the morning under
arms, in order to be reviewed, and to know in what manner the
numbers stood from his haveing entered England. It did not at that
time amount to 5000 foot in all, with about 400 cavalrie, compos'd
of the noblesse who serv'd as volunteers, part of whom form'd a
first troop of guards for the Prince, under the command of My Lord
Elchoe, now Comte de Weems, who, being proscribed, is presently in
France. Another part formed a second troup of guards under the
command of My Lord Balmirino, who was beheaded at the Tower of
London. A third part serv'd under My Lord le Comte de Kilmarnock,
who was likewise beheaded at the Tower. A fourth part serv'd under
My Lord Pitsligow, who is also proscribed; which cavalrie, tho'
very few in numbers, being all noblesse, were very brave, and of
infinite advantage to the foot, not only in the day of battle, but
in serving as advanced guards on the several marches, and in
patroling dureing the night on the different roads which led
towards the towns where the army happened to quarter.

'While this small army was out in a body on the 2Qth December,
upon a riseing ground to the northward of Penrith, passing review,
Mons. de Cluny, with his tribe, was ordered to the Bridge of
Clifton, about a mile to southward of Penrith, after having pass'd
in review before Mons. Pattullo, who was charged with the
inspection of the troops, and was likeways Quarter-Master-General
of the army, and is now in France. They remained under arms at the
bridge, waiting the arrival of My Lord George Murray with the
artilirie, whom Mons. de Cluny had orders to cover in passing the
bridge. They arrived about sunsett closly pursued by the Duke of
Comberland with the whole body of his cavalrie, reckoned upwards
of 3000 strong, about a thousand of whom, as near as might be
computed, dismounted, in order to cut off the passage of the
artilirie towards the bridge, while the Duke and the others
remained on horseback in order to attack the rear.

'My Lord George Murray advanced, and although he found Mons. de
Cluny and his tribe in good spirits under arms, yet the
circumstance appear'd extremely delicate. The numbers were vastly
unequall, and the attack seem'd very dangerous; so My Lord George
declin'd giving orders to such time as he ask'd Mons. de Cluny's
oppinion. "I will attack them with all my heart," says Mons. de
Cluny, "if you order me." "I do order it then," answered My Lord
George, and immediately went on himself along with Mons. de Cluny,
and fought sword in hand on foot at the head of the single tribe
of Macphersons. They in a moment made their way through a strong
hedge of thorns, under the cover whereof the cavalrie had taken
their station, in the strugle of passing which hedge My Lord
George Murray, being dressed en montagnard, as all the army were,
lost his bonet and wig; so continued to fight bare-headed during
the action. They at first made a brisk discharge of their firearms
on the enemy, then attacked them with their sabres, and made a
great slaughter a considerable time, which obliged Comberland and
his cavalrie to fly with precipitation and in great confusion; in
so much that, if the Prince had been provided in a sufficient
number of cavalrie to have taken advantage of the disorder, it is
beyond question that the Duke of Comberland and the bulk of his
cavalrie had been taken prisoners.

'By this time it was so dark that it was not possible to view or
number the slain who filled all the ditches which happened to be
on the ground where they stood. But it was computed that, besides
those who went off wounded, upwards of a hundred at least were
left on the spot, among whom was Colonel Honywood, who commanded
the dismounted cavalrie, whose sabre of considerable value Mons.
de Cluny brought off and still preserves; and his tribe lykeways
brought off many arms;--the Colonel was afterwards taken up, and,
his wounds being dress'd, with great difficultie recovered. Mons.
de Cluny lost only in the action twelve men, of whom some haveing
been only wounded, fell afterwards into the hands of the enemy,
and were sent as slaves to America, whence several of them
returned, and one of them is now in France, a sergeant in the
Regiment of Royal Scots. How soon the accounts of the enemies
approach had reached the Prince, H.R.H. had immediately ordered
Mi-Lord le Comte de Nairne, Brigadier, who, being proscribed, is
now in France, with the three batalions of the Duke of Athol, the
batalion of the Duke of Perth, and some other troups under his
command, in order to support Cluny, and to bring off the
artilirie. But the action was entirely over before the Comte de
Nairne, with his command, cou'd reach nigh to the place. They
therefore return'd all to Penrith, and the artilirie marched up in
good order.

'Nor did the Duke of Comberland ever afterwards dare to come
within a day's march of the Prince and his army dureing the course
of all that retreat, which was conducted with great prudence and
safety when in some manner surrounded by enemies.'

NOTE 14, p. 215

As the heathen deities contracted an indelible obligation if they
swore by Styx, the Scottish Highlanders had usually some peculiar
solemnity attached to an oath which they intended should be
binding on them. Very frequently it consisted in laying their
hand, as they swore, on their own drawn dirk; which dagger,
becoming a party to the transaction, was invoked to punish any
breach of faith. But by whatever ritual the oath was sanctioned,
the party was extremely desirous to keep secret what the especial
oath was which he considered as irrevocable. This was a matter of
great convenience, as he felt no scruple in breaking his
asseveration when made in any other form than that which he
accounted as peculiarly solemn; and therefore readily granted any
engagement which bound him no longer than he inclined. Whereas, if
the oath which he accounted inviolable was once publicly known, no
party with whom he might have occasion to contract would have
rested satisfied with any other.

Louis XI of France practised the same sophistry, for he also had a
peculiar species of oath, the only one which he was ever known to
respect, and which, therefore, he was very unwilling to pledge.
The only engagement which that wily tyrant accounted binding upon
him was an oath by the Holy Cross of Saint Lo d'Angers, which
contained a portion of the True Cross. If he prevaricated after
taking this oath Louis believed he should die within the year. The
Constable Saint Paul, being invited to a personal conference with
Louis, refused to meet the king unless he would agree to ensure
him safe conduct under sanction of this oath. But, says Comines,
the king replied, he would never again pledge that engagement to
mortal man, though he was willing to take any other oath which
could be devised. The treaty broke oft, therefore, after much
chaffering concerning the nature of the vow which Louis was to
take. Such is the difference between the dictates of superstition
and those of conscience.





GLOSSARY


A', all.

ABOON, abune, above.

AE, one.

AFF, off.

AFORE, before.

AHINT, behind.

AIN, own.

AITS, oats.

AMAIST, almost.

AMBRY, a cupboard, a pantry.

AN, if.

ANE, one.

ANEUCH, enough.

ARRAY, annoy, trouble.

ASSOILZIED, absolved, acquitted.

ASSYTHMENT, satisfaction,

AULD, old.

BAFF, a blow.

BAGGANET, a bayonet.

BAILIE, a city magistrate in Scotland.

BAIRN, a child.

BAITH, both.

BANES, bones.

BANG-UP, get up quickly, bounce.

BARLEY, a parley, a truce.

BAULD, bold.

BAULDER, bolder.

BAWBEE, a halfpenny.

BAWTY, sly, cunning.

BEES, in the, bewildered, stupefied.

BEFLUMM'D, flattered, cajoled.

BEGUNK, a trick, a cheat.

BEN, within, inside.

BENEMPT, named.

BICKER, a wooden dish.

BIDE, stay, endure.

BIELDY, affording shelter.

BIGGING, building.

BIRLIEMAN, a peace officer.

BLACK-COCK, the black grouse.

BLACK-FISHING, ashing by torchlight, poaching.

BLUDE, bluid, blood.

BODDLE, bodle, a copper coin, worth one third of an English penny.

BOGLE ABOUT THE BUSH, beat about the bush, a children's game.

BONNIE, beautiful, comely, fine,

BOUNE, prepared.

BRA', fine, handsome, showy.

BRANDER, broil.

BREEKS, breeches.

BRENT, smooth, unwrinkled.

BROGUES, Highland shoes.

BROO, brew, broth.

BRUCKLE, brittle, infirm.

BRUIK, enjoy.

BRULZIE, bruilzie, a broil, a fray.

BUCKIE, a perverse or refractory person.

BUTTOCK-MAIL, a fine for fornication.

BYDAND, awaiting.

CA', call.

CADGER, a country carrier.

CAILLIACHS, old women on whom devolved the duty of lamenting for
the dead, which the Irish call keening.

CALLANT, a stripling, a fine fellow.

CANNILY, prudently.

CANNY, cautious, lucky.

CARLE, a churl, an old man.

CATERAN, a freebooter.

CHIEL, a young man.

CLACHAN, a village, a hamlet.

CLAMYHEWIT, a blow, a drubbing.

CLASH, chatter, gossip.

CLATTER, tattle, noisy talk.

CLOSE, a narrow passage.

CLOUR, a bump, a bruise.

COCKY-LEEKY, a soup made of a cock, seasoned with leeks.

COGHLING AND DROGHLING, wheezing and blowing.

CORONACH, a dirge.

CORRIE, a mountain hollow.

COUP, fall.

COW YER CRACKS, cut short your talk, hold your tongues.

CRACK, boast.

CRAIG, the neck, the throat.

CRAMES, merchants' shops, booths.

CUT-LUGGED, crop-eared.

DAFT, foolish, mad, crazy.

DAUR, dare.

DEAVING, deafening.

DECREET, an order of decree.

DELIVER, light, agile.

DERN, hidden, concealed, secret.

DING, knock, beat, surpass.

DINGLE, dinnle, tingle, vibrate with sound.

DOER, an agent, a manager.

DOG-HEAD, the hammer of a gun.

DOILED, crazed, silly.

DOITED, having the faculties impaired.

DORLACH, a bundle.

DOW, a dove.

DOWF, dowff, dull, spiritless.

DRAPPIE, a little drop, a small quantity of drink.

EFFEIR, what is becoming.

ENEUGH, enough.

ETTER-CAP, a spider, an ill-natured person.

EVITE, avoid, escape.

EWEST, ewast, contiguous.

FALLOW, a fellow.

FAULD, fold.

FEARED, afraid.

