family is in Corinth, and when I think of that, then to be sure--"

"Then to be sure?" enquired the Roman in sharp, grave tone.

"Then I reflect that a water-bearer--the daughter of an outlawed man, in
our house--"

"And do you consider mine as being any less illustrious in Rome than
your own is in Corinth?" asked Publius sternly.

"On the contrary, Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica. We are important by
our wealth, you by your power and estates."

"So it is--and yet I am about to conduct Irene's sister Klea as my
lawful wife to my father's house."

"You are going to do that!" cried Lysias springing from his seat, and
flinging himself on the Roman's breast, though at this moment a party
of Egyptians were passing by in the deserted street. "Then all is well,
then--oh! what a weight is taken off my mind!--then Irene shall be
my wife as sure as I live! Oh Eros and Aphrodite and Father Zeus and
Apollo! how happy I am! I feel as if the biggest of the Pyramids yonder
had fallen off my heart. Now, you rascal, run up and carry to the fair
Irene, the betrothed of her faithful Lysias--mark what I say--carry her
at once this tablet and bracelet. But you will not say it right; I will
write here above my distich: 'From the faithful Lysias to the fair Irene
his future wife.' There--and now I think she will not send the thing
back again, good girl that she is! Listen, rascal, if she keeps it you
may swallow cakes to-day out on the Grand Square till you burst--and
yet I have only just paid five gold pieces for you. Will she keep the
bracelet, Publius--yes or no?"

"She will keep it."

A few minutes later the boy came hurrying back, and pulling the Greek
vehemently by his dress, he cried:

"Come, come with me, into the house." Lysias with a light and graceful
leap sprang right over the little fellow's head, tore open the door, and
spread out his arms as he caught sight of Irene, who, though trembling
like a hunted gazelle, flew down the narrow ladder-like stairs to meet
him, and fell on his breast laughing and crying and breathless.

In an instant their lips met, but after this first kiss she tore herself
from his arms, rushed up the stairs again, and then, from the top step,
shouted joyously:

"I could not help seeing you this once! now farewell till Klea comes,
then we meet again," and she vanished into an upper room.

Lysias turned to his friend like one intoxicated, he threw himself down
on his bench, and said:

"Now the heavens may fall, nothing can trouble me! Ye immortal gods, how
fair the world is!"

"Strange boy!" exclaimed the Roman, interrupting his friend's rapture.
"You can not stay for ever in this dingy stall."

"I will not stir from this spot till Klea comes. The boy there shall
fetch me victuals as an old sparrow feeds his young; and if necessary I
will lie here for a week, like the little sardines they preserve in oil
at Alexandria."

"I hope you will have only a few hours to wait; but I must go, for I am
planning a rare surprise for King Euergetes on his birthday, and must
go to the palace. The festival is already in full swing. Only listen how
they are shouting and calling down by the harbor; I fancy I can hear the
name of Euergetes."

"Present my compliments to the fat monster! May we meet again
soon--brother-in-law!"




CHAPTER XXV.

King Euergetes was pacing restlessly up and down the lofty room which
his brother had furnished with particular magnificence to be his
reception-room. Hardly had the sun risen on the morning of his birthday
when he had betaken himself to the temple of Ptah with a numerous
suite--before his brother Philometor could set out--in order to
sacrifice there, to win the good graces of the high-priest of the
sanctuary, and to question of the oracle of Apis. All had fallen out
well, for the sacred bull had eaten out of his hand; and yet he would
have been more glad--though it should have disdained the cake he offered
it, if only Eulaeus had brought him the news that the plot against the
Roman's life had been successful.

Gift after gift, addresses of congratulation from every district of the
country, priestly decrees drawn up in his honor and engraved on tablets
of hard stone, lay on every table or leaned against the walls of the
vast ball which the guests had just quitted. Only Hierax, the king's
friend, remained with him, supporting himself, while he waited for some
sign from his sovereign, on a high throne made of gold and ivory and
richly decorated with gems, which had been sent to the king by the
Jewish community of Alexandria.

The great commander knew his master well and knew too that it was not
prudent to address him when he looked as he did now. But Euergetes
himself was aware of the need for speech, and he began, without pausing
in his walk or looking at his dignified friend:

"Even the Philobasilistes have proved corrupt; my soldiers in the
citadel are more numerous and are better men too than those that have
remained faithful to Philometor, and there ought to be nothing more for
me to do but to stir up a brief clatter of swords on shields, to spring
upon the throne, and to have myself proclaimed king; but I will never go
into the field with the strongest division of the enemy in my rear.
My brother's head is on my sister's shoulders, and so long as I am not
certain of her--"

A chamberlain rushed into the room as the king spoke, and interrupted
him by shouting out:

"Queen Cleopatra."

A smile of triumph flashed across the features of the young giant; he
flung himself with an air of indifference on to a purple divan, and
desired that a magnificent lyre made of ivory, and presented to him by
his sister, should be brought to him; on it was carved with wonderful
skill and delicacy a representation of the first marriage, that of
Cadmus with Harmonia, at which all the gods had attended as guests.

Euergetes grasped the chords with wonderful vigor and mastery, and began
to play a wedding march, in which eager triumph alternated with tender
whisperings of love and longing.

The chamberlain, whose duty it was to introduce the queen to her
brother's presence, wished to interrupt this performance of his
sovereign's; but Cleopatra held him back, and stood listening at the
door with her children till Euergetes had brought the air to a rapid
conclusion with a petulant sweep of the strings, and a loud and
ear-piercing discord; then he flung his lute on the couch and rose with
well-feigned surprise, going forward to meet the queen as if, absorbed
in playing, he had not heard her approach.

He greeted his sister affectionately, holding out both his hands to her,
and spoke to the children--who were not afraid of him, for he knew how
to play madcap games with them like a great frolicsome boy--welcoming
them as tenderly as if he were their own father.

He could not weary of thanking Cleopatra for her thoughtful present--so
appropriate to him, who like Cadmus longed to boast of having mastered
Harmonia, and finally--she not having found a word to say--he took her
by the hand to exhibit to her the presents sent him by her husband and
from the provinces. But Cleopatra seemed to take little pleasure in all
these things, and said:

"Yes, everything is admirable, just as it has always been every year for
the last twenty years; but I did not come here to see but to listen."

Her brother was radiant with satisfaction; she on the contrary was
pale and grave, and, could only now and then compel herself to a forced
smile.

"I fancied," said Euergetes, "that your desire to wish me joy was
the principal thing that had brought you here, and, indeed, my vanity
requires me to believe it. Philometor was with me quite early, and
fulfilled that duty with touching affection. When will he go into the
banqueting-hall?"

"In half an hour; and till then tell me, I entreat you, what yesterday
you--"

"The best events are those that are long in preparing," interrupted
her brother. "May I ask you to let the children, with their attendants,
retire for a few minutes into the inner rooms?"

"At once!" cried Cleopatra eagerly, and she pushed her eldest boy, who
clamorously insisted on remaining with his uncle, violently out of the
door without giving his attendant time to quiet him or take him in her
arms.

While she was endeavoring, with angry scolding and cross words, to
hasten the children's departure, Eulaeus came into the room. Euergetes,
as soon as he saw him, set every limb with rigid resolve, and drew
breath so deeply that his broad chest heaved high, and a strong
respiration parted his lips as he went forward to meet the eunuch,
slowly but with an enquiring look.

Eulaeus cast a significant glance at Hierax and Cleopatra, went quite
close up to the king, whispered a few words into his ear, and answered
his brief questions in a low voice.

"It is well," said Euergetes at last, and with a decisive gesture of his
hand he dismissed Eulaeus and his friend from the room.

Then he stood, as pale as death, his teeth set in his under-lip, and
gazing blankly at the ground.

He had his will, Publius Cornelius Scipio lived no more; his ambition
might reach without hindrance the utmost limits of his desires, and yet
he could not rejoice; he could not escape from a deep horror of himself,
and he struck his broad forehead with his clenched fists. He was face to
face with his first dastardly murder.

"And what news does Eulaeus bring?" asked Cleopatra in anxious
excitement, for she had never before seen her brother like this; but he
did not hear these words, and it was not till she had repeated them with
more insistence that he collected himself, stared at her from head to
foot with a fixed, gloomy expression, and then, letting his hand fall
on her shoulder so heavily that her knees bent under her and she gave a
little cry, asked her in a low but meaning tone:

"Are you strong enough to bear to hear great news?"

"Speak," she said in a low voice, and her eyes were fixed on his lips
while she pressed her hand on her heart. Her anxiety to hear fettered
her to him, as with a tangible tie, and he, as if he must burst it by
the force of his utterance, said with awful solemnity, in his deepest
tones and emphasizing every syllable:

"Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica is dead."

At these words Cleopatra's pale cheeks were suddenly dyed with a crimson
glow, and clenching her little hands she struck them together, and
exclaimed with flashing eyes:

"I hoped so!"

Euergetes withdrew a step from his sister, and said: "You were right.
It is not only among the race of gods that the most fearful of all are
women!"

"What have you to say?" retorted Cleopatra. "And am I to believe that a
toothache has kept the Roman away from the banquet yesterday, and again
from coming to see me to-day? Am I to repeat, after you, that he died of
it? Now, speak out, for it rejoices my heart to hear it; where and how
did the insolent hypocrite meet his end?"

"A serpent stung him," replied Euergetes, turning from his sister. "It
was in the desert, not far from the Apis-tombs."

"He had an assignation in the Necropolis at midnight--it would seem to
have begun more pleasantly than it ended?"

Euergetes nodded assent to the question, and added gravely:

"His fate overtook him--but I cannot see anything very pleasing in the
matter."

"No?" asked the queen. "And do you think that I do not know the asp that
ended that life in its prime? Do you think that I do not know, who set
the poisoned serpent on the Roman? You are the assassin, and Eulaeus and
his accomplices have helped you! Only yesterday I would have given my
heart's blood for Publius, and would rather have carried you to the
grave than him; but to-day, now that I know the game that the wretch has
been playing with me, I would even have taken on myself the bloody deed
which, as it is, stains your hands. Not even a god should treat your
sister with such contempt--should insult her as he has done--and
go unpunished! Another has already met the same fate, as you
know--Eustorgos, Hipparchon of Bithynia, who, while he seemed to be
dying of love for me, was courting Kallistrata my lady in waiting;
and the wild beasts and serpents exercised their dark arts on him too.
Eulaeus' intelligence has fallen on you, who are powerful, like a
cold hand on your heart; in me, the weak woman, it rouses unspeakable
delight. I gave him the best of all a woman has to bestow, and he dared
to trample it in the dust; and had I no right to require of him that he
should pour out the best that he had, which was his life, in the same
way as he had dared to serve mine, which is my love? I have a right to
rejoice at his death. Aye! the heavy lids now close those bright eyes
which could be falser than the stern lips that were so apt to praise
truth. The faithless heart is forever still which could scorn the love
of a queen--and for what? For whom? Oh, ye pitiful gods!"

With these words the queen sobbed aloud, hastily lifting her hands
to cover her eyes, and ran to the door by which she had entered her
brother's rooms.

But Euergetes stood in her way, and said sternly and positively:

"You are to stay here till I return. Collect yourself, for at the next
event which this momentous day will bring forth it will be my turn to
laugh while your blood shall run cold." And with a few swift steps he
left the hall.

Cleopatra buried her face in the soft cushions of the couch, and wept
without ceasing, till she was presently startled by loud cries and the
clatter of arms. Her quick wit told her what was happening. In frantic
haste she flew to the door but it was locked; no shaking, no screaming,
no thumping seemed to reach the ears of the guard whom she heard
monotonously walking up and down outside her prison.

And now the tumult and clang of arms grew louder and louder, and the
rattle of drums and blare of trumpets began to mingle with the sound.
She rushed to the window in mortal fear, and looked down into the
palace-yard; at that same instant the door of the great banqueting-hall
was flung open, and a flying crowd streamed out in distracted
confusion--then another, and a third--all troops in King Philometor's
uniform. She ran to the door of the room into which she had thrust her
children; that too was locked. In her desperation she once more sprang
to the window, shouted to the flying Macedonians to halt and make a
stand--threatening and entreating; but no one heard her, and their
number constantly increased, till at length she saw her husband standing
on the threshold of the great hall with a gaping wound on his forehead,
and defending himself bravely and stoutly with buckler and sword against
the body-guard of his own brother, who were pressing him sorely. In
agonized excitement she shouted encouraging words to him, and he seemed
to hear her, for with a strong sweep of his shield he struck his nearest
antagonist to the earth, sprang with a mighty leap into the midst of his
flying adherents, and vanished with them through the passage which led
to the palace-stables.

The queen sank fainting on her knees by the window, and, through the
gathering shades of her swoon her dulled senses still were conscious
of the trampling of horses, of a shrill trumpet-blast, and at last of a
swelling and echoing shout of triumph with cries of, "Hail: hail to the
son of the Sun--Hail to the uniter of the two kingdoms; Hail to the King
of Upper and Lower Egypt, to Euergetes the god."

But at the last words she recovered consciousness entirely and started
up. She looked down into the court again, and there saw her brother
borne along on her husband's throne-litter by dignitaries and nobles.
Side by side with the traitor's body-guard marched her own and
Philometor's Philobasilistes and Diadoches.

The magnificent train went out of the great court of the palace, and
then--as she heard the chanting of priests--she realized that she had
lost her crown, and knew whither her faithless brother was proceeding.

She ground her teeth as her fancy painted all that was now about to
happen. Euergetes was being borne to the temple of Ptah, and proclaimed
by its astonished chief-priests, as King of Upper and Lower Egypt, and
successor to Philometor. Four pigeons would be let fly in his presence
to announce to the four quarters of the heavens that a new sovereign
had mounted the throne of his fathers, and amid prayer and sacrifice a
golden sickle would be presented to him with which, according to ancient
custom, he would cut an ear of corn.

Betrayed by her brother, abandoned by her husband, parted from her
children, scorned by the man she had loved, dethroned and powerless,
too weak and too utterly crushed to dream of revenge--she spent two
interminably long hours in the keenest anguish of mind, shut up in her
prison which was overloaded with splendor and with gifts. If poison had
been within her reach, in that hour she would unhesitatingly have put
an end to her ruined life. Now she walked restlessly up and down, asking
herself what her fate would be, and now she flung herself on the couch
and gave herself up to dull despair.

There lay the lyre she had given to her brother; her eye fell on the
relievo of the marriage of Cadmus and Harmonia, and on the figure of a
woman who was offering a jewel to the bride. The bearer of the gift
was the goddess of love, and the ornament she gave--so ran the
legend--brought misfortune on those who inherited it. All the darkest
hours of her life revived in her memory, and the blackest of them all
had come upon her as the outcome of Aphrodite's gifts. She thought with
a shudder of the murdered Roman, and remembered the moment when Eulaeus
had told her that her Bithynian lover had been killed by wild beasts.
She rushed from one door to another--the victim of the avenging
Eumenides--shrieked from the window for rescue and help, and in that one
hour lived through a whole year of agonies and terrors.

At last--at last, the door of the room was opened, and Euergetes came
towards her, clad in the purple, with the crown of the two countries on
his grand head, radiant with triumph and delight.

"All hail to you, sister!" he exclaimed in a cheerful tone, and lifting
