Yet the bright sense of happiness which pervaded her whole being
rendered it easy for her to thrust the image of the unloved woman far
into the shade, and the next morning became a glorious festival for her;
she used it to pay a visit to the Dubois couple, and when she told them
what she had heard from Wolf, and saw Frau Traut sob aloud in her joy
and Adrian wipe tears of grateful emotion from his aged eyes, her own
happiness was doubled by the others' sympathy.

Barbara had anticipated Wolf, but while going home she met him on his
way to the Dubois house. He joined her, and still had many questions to
answer.

During the next few days her friend helped her compose a letter to
her son; but he was constantly obliged to impose moderation upon the
passionate vehemence of her feelings. She often yielded to his superior
prudence, only she would not fulfil his desire to address her boy as
"your Excellency."

When she read the letter, she thought she had found the right course.

Barbara first introduced herself to John as his real mother. She had
loved and honoured his great father with all the strength of her soul,
and she might boast of having been clear to him also. By the Emperor
Charles's command he, her beloved child, had been taken from her. She
had submitted with a bleeding heart and, to place him in the path of
fortune, had inflicted the deepest wounds upon her own soul. Now her
self-sacrifice was richly rewarded, and it would make her happier than
himself if she should learn that his own merit had led him to the height
of fame which she prayed that he might reach.

Then she congratulated him, and begged him not to forget her entirely
amid his grandeur. She was only a plain woman, but she, too, belonged
to an ancient knightly race, and therefore he need not be ashamed of his
mother's blood.

Lastly, at Wolf's desire, she requested her son to thank the lady who so
lovingly filled her place to him.

Her friend was to give this letter himself to Don John of Austria, and
he voluntarily promised to lead the high-minded boy to the belief that
his own mother had also been worthy of an Emperor's love.

Lastly, Wolf promised to inform her of any important event in her son's
life or his own. During the last hour of their meeting he admitted that
he was one of the few who felt satisfied with their lot. True, he
could not say that he had no wishes; but up to this hour he had desired
nothing more constantly and longingly than to hear her sing once more,
as in that never-to-be-forgotten May in the Ratisbon home. He might now
hope, sooner or later, to have this wish, too, fulfilled. These were
kind, cheering words, and with a grateful ebullition of feeling she
admitted that, after his glad tidings, she, too, again felt capable of
believing in a happy future.

So the friends from childhood bade each other farewell.




CHAPTER XVIII.

During the following days Barbara's life path was illumined by the
reflection of the happiness bestowed by the wonderful change in the fate
of her child of sorrow, who now promised to become a giver of joy to
her.

Doubtless during the ensuing years many dark shadows fell upon her
existence and her heart; but when everything around and within was
gloomy, she only needed to think of the son whom she had given the
Emperor, and the constantly increasing brilliancy of his career, to
raise her head with fresh confidence. Yet the cloud obscuring her
happiness which she found it hardest to bear proceeded directly from
him.

He had probably mentioned her to his royal brother, and revenues had
been granted her far exceeding poor Wawerl's dreams, and doubtless a
reflection of the admiration which her son earned fell upon her, and her
pride was greatly increased. Moreover, she could again devote
herself without fear to her ardently beloved art, for even honest old
Appenzelder declared that he liked to listen to her, though her voice
still lacked much of the overpowering magic of former days. She was in
a position, too, to gratify many a taste for whose satisfaction she had
often yearned, yet she could not attain a genuine and thorough new sense
of happiness.

The weeks which, a few years after her John's recognition, she spent
with self-sacrificing devotion beside her husband's couch of pain, which
was to become his deathbed, passed amid anxiety and grief, and when her
affectionate, careful nursing proved vain, and Pyramus died, deep and
sincere sorrow overpowered her. True, he had not succeeded in winning
her to return his tender love; but after he had closed his eyes she
realized for the first time what a wealth of goodness and fidelity was
buried with him and lost to her forever.

Her youngest boy, soon after his father's death, was torn from her by
falling into a cistern, and she yielded herself to such passionate grief
for his loss that she thought she could never conquer it; but it was
soon soothed by the belief that, for the sake of this devout child,
whose training for a religious life had already commenced, Heaven had
resigned its claims upon John, and that the boy was dwelling in the
immediate presence of the Queen of Heaven.

Thus, ere she was aware of it, her burning anguish changed into a
cheerful remembrance. Earlier still--more than two years after Wolf's
departure--tidings closely associated with the sorrow inflicted
through her John had saddened her. The ship which was to bear the loyal
companion of her youth to Spain was wrecked just before the end of the
voyage, and Wolf went down with it. Barbara learned the news only by
accident, and his death first made her realize with full distinctness
how dear he had been to her.

The letter which she had addressed to her son was lost with the man in
whom Fate had wrested from her the last friend who would have been able
and willing to show her John clearly and kindly a correct picture of his
mother's real character.

For two years she had hoped that Wolf would complete her letter in his
own person, and tell her son how her voice and her beauty had won his
father's heart. Quijada had known it; but if he spoke of her to his wife
and foster-son, it was scarcely in her favour--he cared little for music
and singing.

So the loss of this letter seemed to her, with reason, a severe
misfortune. What she now wrote to John could hardly exert much influence
upon him. Yet she did write, this time with the aid of Hannibal. But the
new letter, which began with thanks for the financial aid which the son
had conferred upon his mother through his royal brother, was distasteful
both to her pride and her maternal affection. Half prosaic, half far too
effusive, it gave a distorted idea of her real feelings, and she tore it
up before giving it to the messenger.

Yet she did not cease to hope that, in some favourable hour, the heart
of the idol of her soul would urge him to approach his mother; but year
after year elapsed without bringing her even the slightest token of
his remembrance, and this omission was the bitter drop that spoiled the
happiness which, after the death of her youngest boy, was clouded by no
outward event.

When at last she addressed herself to John in a third letter, which this
time she dictated to Hannibal as her heart prompted, she received an
answer, it is true, though not from him, but from Dona Magdalena.

In kind words this lady urged her not to write to "her"--Dona
Magdalena's--son in future. She had taught him to think of the woman
who bore him with fitting respect, but it would be impossible for him
to maintain the relation with her. She must spare her the explanation of
the reasons which made this appear to be an obstacle to his career.
Don John would prove in the future, by his care for her prosperity and
comfort, that he did not forget her. She had no right, it is true, to
counsel her; but when she transported herself into the soul of the woman
who had enjoyed the love of the Emperor Charles, and on whom Heaven had
bestowed a son like John of Austria, she felt sure that this woman would
act wisely and promote her real welfare if she preferred communion with
her Saviour, in the quiet of a cloister, to the bustle of life amid
surroundings which certainly were far too humble for her.

Barbara felt wounded to the inmost depths of her being by this letter.
Had the officious adviser, who had certainly despatched the reply
without her son's knowledge, been within her reach, she would have
showed her how little inclination she felt to be patronized by the
person who, after alienating the son's heart from his mother, even
presumed to dictate to her to rob herself of her last claim upon his
regard.

True, in one respect she agreed with the writer of the letter.

Precisely because it appeared as if Heaven had accepted her sacrifice
and the grandeur for which she had made it seemed to be awaiting her
son, she ought to attempt nothing that might impede his climbing to the
height, and her open connection with him might easily have placed stones
in his path. His elevation depended upon King Philip, whose boundless
pride had gazed at her from his chilling face.

So she resolved to make no more advances to her child until the day
came--and a voice within told her that come it must--when he himself
longed for his own mother. Meanwhile she would be content with the joy
of watching his brilliant course from the distance.

The miracles which she had anticipated and prayed for in his behalf were
accomplished. First, she heard that Count Ribadavia's splendid palace
would be prepared for her son, that the sons of noble families would be
assigned to attend him, and that a body-guard of Spaniards and Germans
and a train of his own were at his command.

Then she learned in what a remarkable manner Elizabeth of Valois, the
King's new wife, favoured the lad of thirteen. At the taking of the oath
by which the Cortes recognised Don Carlos as the heir to the throne,
John had been summoned directly after the Infant as the first person
entitled to homage.

Next, she learned that he had entered the famous University of Alcala de
Henares.

And his classmates and friends? They were no less important personages
than Don Carlos himself and Alessandro Farnese, John's nephew, the
son of that Ottavio at whose admission as Knight of the Golden Fleece
Barbara had made at Landshut the most difficult resolution of her life.

He was said to share everything with these distinguished companions,
and to be himself the handsomest and most attractive of the illustrious
trio. He was particularly inseparable from Alessandro, the son of the
woman now ruling as regent in Brussels, who was John's sister.

What reply would he have made to this illustrious scion of one of the
most ancient and noble royal races if a letter from her had reached him,
and the duke's son had asked, "Who is this Frau Barbara Blomberg?" or,
as she now signed herself, "Madame de Blomberg"?

The answer must have been: "My mother."

Oh, no, no, never!

It would have been cruel to expect this from him; never would she place
her beloved child, her pride, her joy, in so embarrassing a position.

Besides, though she could only watch him from a distance, thanks to
his generosity or his brother's, she could lead a pleasant life. To sun
herself in his glory, too, was sufficiently cheering, and must satisfy
her.

He spent three years at the University of Aleala, and nothing but
good news of him reached her. Then she received tidings which gave
her special joy, for one of the wishes she had formed in Landshut was
fulfilled. He had been made a Knight of the Golden Fleece, and
how becoming the jewel on the red ribbon must be to the youth of
one-and-twenty! How many of her acquaintances belonging to the partisans
of the King and Spain came to congratulate her upon it! Because John had
become Spanish, and risen in Spain to the position which she desired for
him, she wished to become so, and studied the Spanish language with the
zeal and industry of a young girl. She succeeded in gaining more and
more knowledge of it, and, finally, through intercourse with Spaniards,
in mastering it completely.

At that time the prospects for her party were certainly gloomy; the
heretical agitation and the boldness of the rebellious enthusiasts for
independence and liberty surpassed all bounds.

The King therefore sent the Duke of Alba to the Netherlands to restore
order, and, with the twenty thousand men he commanded, make the
insurgents feel the resistless power of offended majesty and the angered
Church.

Barbara and her friends greeted the stern duke as a noble champion of
the faith, who was resolved to do his utmost. The new bishoprics, which
by Granvelle's advice had been established, the foreign soldiers, and
the Spanish Inquisition, which pursued the heretics with inexorable
harshness, had roused the populace to unprecedented turmoil, and induced
them to resist the leading nobles, who were indebted to the King
for great favours, to the intense wrath of these aristocrats and the
partisans of Spain.

Barbara, with all her party, had welcomed the new bishoprics as an
arrangement which promised many blessings, and the foreign troops seemed
to her necessary to maintain order in the rebellious Netherlands. The
cruelty of the Inquisition was only intended to enforce respect for the
edicts which the Emperor Charles, in his infallible wisdom, had
issued, and the hatred which the nobles, especially, displayed against
Granvelle, Barbara's kind patron, the greatest statesman of his time and
the most loyal servant of his King, seemed to her worthy of the utmost
condemnation.

The scorn with which the rebels, after the compromise signed by the
highest nobles, had called themselves Geusen, or Beggars, and endangered
repose, would have been worthy of the severest punishment. What induced
these people to risk money and life for privileges which a wise policy
of the government--this was the firm conviction of those who shared
Barbara's views--could not possibly grant, was incomprehensible to her,
and she watched the course of the rebels with increasing aversion. Did
they suppose their well-fed magistrates and solemn States-General, who
never looked beyond their own city and country, would govern them better
than the far-sighted wisdom of a Granvelle or the vast intellect of a
Viglius, which comprised all the knowledge of the world?

What they called their liberties were privileges which a sovereign
bestowed. Ought they to wonder if another monarch, whom they had deeply
angered, did not regard them as inviolable gifts of God? The quiet
comfort of former days had been clouded, nay, destroyed, by these
patriots. Peace could be restored only by the King's silencing them. So
she wished the Spaniards a speedy success, and detested the efforts
of independent minds; above all, of William of Orange, their only too
clear-sighted, cautious, devoted leader, also skilled in the arts of
dissimulation, in whom she recognised the most dangerous foe of Spanish
sovereignty and the unity of the Church.

When, by the Duke of Alba's orders, the Counts Egmont and Horn were
executed one June day in the market place of Brussels, opinions, even of
members of the Spanish party, were divided, especially as Count Egmont
was a Catholic, and had acted finally according to the views of the
government.

Barbara sincerely lamented his terrible end, for she had seen in him a
brilliant model for her John. In hours of depression, the sudden fall of
this favourite of the people seemed like an evil omen. But she would not
let these disquieting thoughts gain power over her, for she wished at
last to enjoy life and, as the mother of such a son, felt entitled to do
so.

She regarded this cruel deed of Alba as a false step at any rate, for,
though she kept so far aloof from the Netherland burghers and common
people, she perceived what deep indignation this measure aroused.

Meanwhile the Prince of Orange, the spirit and soul of this execrable
rebellion, had escaped the sentence of the court.

Nevertheless, she regarded Alba with great admiration, for he was a man
of ability, whom the Emperor Charles had held in high esteem. Besides,
after her husband's death the haughty noble had been courteous enough to
assure her of his sympathy.

Moreover, a time was just approaching in which she withdrew too far from
this conflict to follow it with full attention, for her son's first deed
of heroism became known in Brussels.

The King had appointed John to the command of the fleet, and sent him
against the pirates upon the African coast. He could now gather his
first laurels, and to do everything in her power for the success of his
arms, Barbara spent the greater portion of her time in church, praying
devoutly. In September he was greeted in Madrid as a conqueror, but
her joy was not unclouded; for the Infant Don Carlos had yielded up his
young life in July as a prisoner, and she believed him to be her John's
best friend, and lamented his death because she thought that it would
grieve her hero son.

But this little cloud soon vanished, and how brilliantly the blue
sky arched above her the next year, when she learned that Don John of
Austria had received the honourable commission of crushing the rebellion
of the infidel Moriscoes in Andalusia! Here her royal son first proved
himself a glorious military hero, and his deeds at the siege of Galera
and before Seron filled her maternal heart with inexpressible pride. The
words which he shouted to his retreating men: "Do you call yourselves
Spaniards and not know what honour means? What have you to fear when I
am with you?" echoed in her ears like the most beautiful melody which
she had ever sting or heard.

Yet a dark shadow fell on these radiant joys also; her John's friend and
foster-father, Don Luis Quijada, had been wounded in these battles, and
died from his injuries. Barbara felt what deep pain this would cause her
distant son, and expressed her sympathy to him in a letter.

But the greatest happiness was still in store for her and for him. On
the 7th of October, 1571, the young hero, now twenty-four years old, as
commander of the united fleets of Spain, Venice, and the Pope, gained
the greatest victory which any Castilian force had ever won over the
troops of the infidels.

Instead of the name received at his baptism, and the one which he owed
to his brother, that of Victor of Lepanto now adorned him. Not one
of all the generals in the world received honours even distantly
approaching those lavished upon him. And besides the leonine courage and
talent for command which he had displayed, his noble nature was praised
with ardent enthusiasm. How he had showed it in the distribution of the
booty to the widow of the Turkish high admiral Ali Pasha! This renowned
Moslem naval commander had fallen in the battle, and his two sons had
been delivered to Don John as prisoners. When the unfortunate mother
entreated him to release the boys for a large ransom, he restored one to
her love with the companions for whose liberty he had interceded, with
a letter containing the words, "It does not beseem me to keep your
presents, since my rank and birth require me to give, not to receive."

These noble words were written by Barbara Blomberg's son, the boy to
whom she gave birth, and who had now become just what her lofty soul
desired.

After the conquest of Cyprus, the Crescent had seriously threatened the
Cross in the Mediterranean, and it was Don John who had broken the power
of the Turks.

Alas, that her father could not have lived to witness this exploit of
his grandson! What a happy man the victory of Lepanto, gained by his
"Wawerl's" son, would have made him! How the fearless old champion of
the faith would have rejoiced in this grandchild, his deeds, and nature!

And what honours were bestowed upon her John!

King Philip wrote to him, "Next to God, gratitude for what has been
accomplished is due to you." A statue was erected to him in Messina. The
Pope had used the words of Scripture, "There was a man sent by God, and
his name was John." Now, yes, now she was more than rewarded for the
sacrifice of Landshut; now the splendour and grandeur for which she had
longed and prayed was far, far exceeded.

This time it was gratitude, fervent gratitude, which detained her in
church. The child of her love, her suffering, her pride, was now happy,
must be happy.

When, two years later, Don John captured Tunis, the exploit could no
longer increase his renown.

At this time also happened many things which filled the heart of a woman
so closely connected with royalty sometimes with joy, sometimes with
anxiety.

In Paris, the night of St. Bartholomew, a year after her son had
chastised the Moslems at Lepanto, dealt the French heretics a deep,
almost incurable wound, and in the Netherlands there were not gallows
enough to hang the misguided fanatics.

Yet this rebellious nation did not cease to cause the King unspeakable
difficulties and orthodox Christians sorrow. On the sea the "Beggars"
conquered his Majesty's war ships; Haarlem, it is true, had been forced
by the Spanish troops to surrender, but what terrible sacrifices the
siege had cost where women had taken part in the defence with the
courage of men!

And, in spite of everything, Alba's harshness had been futile.

Then Philip recalled him and put in his place the gentle Don Luis de
Requesens, who had been governor in Milan. He would willingly have made
peace with the people bleeding from a thousand wounds, but how could he
concede the toleration of the heretical faith and the withdrawal of the
troops on which he relied? And how did the rebels show their gratitude
to him for his kindness and good will?

The Beggars destroyed his fleet, and, though the brother of William
of Orange had been defeated upon the Mooker-Heide, this by no means
disheartened the enraged nation, resolved upon extremes, and their
silent but wise and tireless leader.

In Leyden the obstinacy of the foes of the King and the Church showed
itself in a way to which even Barbara and her party could not deny a
certain degree of admiration. True, the nature of the country aided the
rebels like an ally. Mortal warriors could not contend against wind and
storm. But he who from without directed the defence here, who had issued
the order to break through the dikes, and then with shameful effrontery
had founded in the scarcely rescued city a university which was to
nurture the spirit of resistance in the minds of the young men, was
again the Prince of Orange; and who else than he, his shrewdness and
firmness, robbed Requesens of gratitude for his mildness and the success
of his honest labours?

But how much easier was the part of the leader of the enemy, who in
Brussels had escaped the fate of Egmont, than the King's kindly disposed
governor! When Barbara chanced to hear the men of the people talking
with each other, and they spoke of "Father William," they meant the
Prince of Orange; and with what abuse, both verbally and in handbills,
King Philip and the Spanish Government were loaded!

To Barbara, as well as to the members of her party, William of Orange,
whom she often heard called the "Antichrist" and "rebel chief," was
an object of hatred. Now he frustrated the kind Requesens's attempt at
mediation, and it was also his fault that two provinces had publicly
revolted from the Holy Church. The Protestant worship of God was now
exercised as freely there as in Ratisbon. Like William of Orange, most
of the citizens professed the doctrine of Calvin, but there was no lack
of Lutherans, and the clergyman whose sermons attracted the largest
congregations was Erasmus Eckhart, Barbara's old acquaintance, Dr.
Hiltner's foster-son, who during the Emperor Charles's reign had come to
the Netherlands as an army chaplain, and, amid great perils, was said to
have lured thousands from the Catholic Church. Deeply as her sentiments
rebelled, here, too, Barbara had become his preserver; for when the
Bloody Council had sentenced him to the gallows, she had succeeded, with
great difficulty, through her manifold relations to the heads of the
Spanish party, in obtaining his pardon. A grateful letter from Frau
Sabina Hiltner had abundantly repaid her for these exertions.

The boldness with which William of Orange, who was himself the most
dangerous heretic and rebel, protested that he was willing to grant
every one full religious liberty, had no desire to injure the Catholic
Church in any way, and was even ready to acknowledge the supremacy of
the King, could not fail to enrage every pious Catholic and faithful
subject of King Philip.

To spoil a Requesens's game was no difficult task for the man who,
though by no means as harmless as the dove, was certainly as wise as the
serpent; but that the Duke of Alba, the tried, inflexible commander, had
been obliged to yield and retire vanquished before the little, merry,
industrious, thoroughly peaceful nation which intrusted itself to the
leadership of William of Orange, had been too much for her and, when it
happened, seemed like a miracle.

What spirits were aiding the Prince of Orange to resist the King and the
power of the Church so successfully? He was in league with hell, her old
confessor said, and there were rumours that his Majesty was trying to
have the abominable mischief-maker secretly put out of the world. But
this would have been unworthy of a King, and Barbara would not believe
it.

In the northern provinces the Spanish power was only a shadow, but in
the southern ones also hatred of the Spaniards was already bursting into
flames, and Requesens was too weak to extinguish them.

The King and Barbara's political friends perceived that Alba's pitiless,
murderous severity had injured the cause of the crown and the Church far
more than it had benefited them. Personally, he had treated her on
the whole kindly, but he had inflicted two offences which were hard to
conquer. In the first place, he urged her to leave Brussels and settle
in Mons; and, secondly, he had refused to receive her Conrad, who had
grown up into a steady, good-looking, but in no respect remarkable young
man, in one of his regiments, with the prospect of promotion to the rank
of officer.

In both cases she had not remained quiet and, at the second audience
which the duke gave her, her hot blood, though it had grown so much
cooler, played her a trick, and she became involved in a vehement
argument with him. In the course of this he had been compelled to
be frank, and she now knew that Alba had persuaded her to change her
residence at the King's desire, and why it was done.

She afterward learned from acquaintances that the duke had said one was
apt to be the loser in a dispute with her; yet she had yielded,
though solely and entirely to benefit her John, but she could not help
confessing to herself that her residence in the capital could not be
agreeable to him. The highest Spanish officials and military commanders
lived there, as well as the ambassadors of foreign powers, and it was
not desirable to remind them of the maternal descent of the general who
now belonged to the King's family.

The case was somewhat similar, as Alba himself had confessed to her,
with regard to her son Conrad's promotion to the rank of an officer;
for if he attained that position he might, as the brother of Don John of
Austria, make pretensions which threatened to place the hero of Lepanto
in a false, nay, perhaps unpleasant position. This, too, she did not
desire. But in removing from Brussels she had possibly rendered Don John
a greater service than she admitted to herself, for, since her son's
brilliant successes had made her happy and her external circumstances
had permitted it, she had emerged from the miserable seclusion of former
years.

Her dress, too, she now suited to the position which she arrogated to
herself. But in doing so she had become a personage who could scarcely
be overlooked, and she rarely failed to be present on the very occasions
which brought together the most aristocratic Spanish society in
Brussels.

So, after a fresh dispute with Alba, in which the victor on many a
battlefield was forced to yield, she had obtained his consent to retire
to Ghent instead of Mons.

True, the duke would have preferred to induce her to go to Spain, and
tried to persuade her to do so by the assurance that the King himself
desired to receive her there.

But she had been warned.

Through Hannibal Melas and other members of her own party she had
learned that Philip intended, if she came to Spain, to remove her from
the eyes of the world by placing her in a convent, and never had she
felt less inclination to take the veil.

Her departure from Brussels had done Alba and his functionaries a
service, for she had constantly forced herself into the government
building to obtain news of her son.

The great and opulent city of Ghent, the birthplace of the Emperor
Charles, of which he had once said to Francis I, the King of France,
that Paris would go into his glove (Gant), had been chosen by Barbara
for several reasons. The principal one was that she would find there
several old friends of former days, one of whom, her singing-master
Feys, had promised to accept her voice and enable her to serve her art
again with full pleasure.

The other was Hannibal Melas, who before Granvelle's fall had been
transferred there as one of the higher officials of the government.

She also entered into relations with other heads of the Spanish party,
and thus found in Ghent what she sought. The pension allowed her enabled
her to hire a pretty house, and to furnish it with a certain degree of
splendour. A companion, for whom she selected an elderly unmarried lady
who belonged to an impoverished noble family, accompanied her in her
walks; a major-domo governed the four men-servants and the maids of
the household; Frau Lamperi retained her position as lady's maid; the
steward and cook attended to the kitchen and the cellar; and two pages,
with a pretty one-horse carriage, lent an air of elegance to her style
of living.

For the religious service, which was directed by her own chaplain,
she had had a chapel fitted up in the house, according to the Ratisbon
fashion. The poor were never turned from her door without alms, and
where she encountered great want she often relieved it with a generosity
far beyond her means. Under the instruction of Maestro Feys, she eagerly
devoted herself to new exercises in singing. Doubtless she realized that
time and the long period of hoarseness had seriously injured her voice,
but even now she could compare with the best singers in the city.

Thus Barbara saw her youthful dreams of fortune realized--nay,
surpassed--and in the consciousness of liberty which she now enjoyed,
elevated by the success gained by the person she loved best, she again
followed her lover's motto. With the impelling "More, farther" before
her eyes, she took care that she did not lack the admiration for which
she had never ceased to long, and to which, in better days, she had
possessed so well-founded a claim.

Now a lavish and gracious hospitality, as well as her relationship to
the greatest and most popular hero of his time, must give her what she
had formerly obtained through her art; for she rarely sang in large
companies, and when she did so, no matter how loudly her hearers
expressed their delight, she could not regain the old confident security
that she was justly entitled to it. But she could believe all the more
firmly that the acknowledgments of pleasure which she reaped from her
little evening parties were sincere. They even gained a certain degree
of celebrity, for the kitchen in her house was admirably managed, and
whatever came from it found approval even in the home of the finest
culinary achievements. But it was especially the freedom--though not the
slightest indecorum was permitted--with which people met at "Madame de
Blomberg's," as she now styled herself, that lent her house so great an
attraction, and finally added the more aristocratic members of her party
to the number of her guests.

The very different elements assembled in her home were united by
Barbara's unaffected vivacity and frank, enthusiastic temperament,
receptive to the veriest trifle. These evening entertainments rarely
lacked music; but she had learned to retire into the background, and
when there were talented artists among her guests she gave them the
precedence. The way in which she understood how to discover and bring
out the best qualities of every visitor rendered her a very agreeable
hostess.

Maestro Feys made her acquainted with his professional friends in Ghent,
and her opinion of music was soon highly valued among them. Where women
choirs were being trained, she was asked to join them, and often took
a part which seemed to the others too difficult. Thus Barbara was heard
and known in larger circles, and she had the pleasure of hearing her
admirable training and excellent method of delivery praised by the
director of the choir of the Cathedral of Saint Bavon, one of the
greatest musicians in the Netherlands. But it afforded her special
gratification when a choir of Catholic women chose her for their leader.
She devoted a large portion of her time and strength to it, and felt
honoured and elevated by its progress and admirable performances.

Although nearly fifty, she was still a very fine-looking woman. The few
silver threads which now mingled in her hair were skilfully concealed by
Lamperi's art, and few ladies in Ghent were more tastefully and richly
apparelled.

Among the guests who thronged to her house there was no lack of elderly
gentlemen who would gladly have married the vivacious, unusual woman,
who was so nearly connected with the royal family, and lived in such
luxurious style.

Never had she had more suitors than at this time; but she had learned
the meaning of a loveless marriage, and her heart still belonged to the
one man to whom, notwithstanding the deep wounds he had inflicted, she
owed a brief but peerlessly sublime happiness.

She could not even have bestowed upon her husband the alms of a sincere
interest, for, in spite of the increasing number of social and musical
engagements which filled her life, one thought alone occupied the depths
of her soul--her John, his renown, grandeur, and honour.

Her son Conrad had no cause to complain of lack of affection from his
mother, but the victor of Lepanto was to her the all-animating sun, the
former only a friendly little star. Besides, she rarely saw him now, as
he was studying in Lowen.

As she had modelled her housekeeping after that of the Castilian nobles,
and her guests almost exclusively belonged to the royal party, she
also sought Spanish houses or those of the city magistrates who were
partisans of the King.

News of her son would be most fully supplied there, and many an officer
whom she met had served under her John, and willingly told the
mother what he admired and had learned from him. The young Duke of
Ferdinandina, a Spanish colonel, who had studied with John in Alcala,
and then fought by his side at the conquest of Tunis, stirred her heart
most deeply by his enthusiastic admiration for the comrade who was his
superior in every respect.

All the pictures of Don John, the young officer who had shared his tent
declared, gave a very faint idea of his wonderful beauty and bewitching
chivalrous grace. Not only women's hearts rushed to him; his frank,
lovable nature also won men. As a rider in the tournament, in games of
ball and quarter staff, he had no peer; for his magnificently formed
body was like steel, and he himself had seen Don John share in playing
racket for six hours in succession with the utmost eagerness, and then
show no more fatigue than a fish does in water. But he was also sure of
success where proof of intellect must be given. He did not understand
where Don John had found time to learn to speak French, German, and
Italian. Moreover, he was thoroughly the great noble. On the pilgrimage
which he made to Loretto he had distributed more than ten thousand
ducats among the poor. The piety and charity which distinguished him--he
had told him so himself--owed to the lady who reared him, the widow of
the never-to-be-forgotten Don Luis Quijada. His eye filled with tears
when he spoke of her. But even she, Barbara, could not love him more
tenderly or faithfully than this admirable woman. Up to the day she
insisted upon supplying his body linen. The finest linen spun and woven
in Villagarcia was used for the purpose, and the sewing was done by
her own skilful hands. Nothing of importance befel him that he did not
discuss with Tia in long letters.--["Tia," the Spanish word for aunt.]

Barbara had listened to the young Spaniard with joyous emotion until, at
the last communication, her heart contracted again.

How much that by right was hers this worm snatched, as it were, from
her lips! What delight it would also have given her to provide her son's
linen, and how much finer was the Flanders material than that made at
Villagarcia! how much more artistically wrought were Mechlin and Brusse
laces than those of Valladolid or Barcelona!

And the letters!

How many Dona Magdalena probably possessed! But she had not yet beheld a
single pen stroke from her son's hand.

Yet she thanked the enthusiastic young panegyrist for his news, and the
emotion of displeasure which for a short time destroyed her joy melted
like mist before the sun when he closed with the assurance that, no
matter how much he thought and pondered, he could find neither spot nor
stain the brilliantly pure character of her son, irradiated by nobility
of nature, the favour of fortune, and renown.

The already vivid sense of happiness which filled her was strongly
enhanced by this description of the personality of her child and, in a
period which saw so many anxious and troubled faces in the Netherlands,
a sunny radiance brightened hers.

She felt rejuvenated, and the acquaintances and friends who declared
that no one would suppose her to be much older than her famous son,
whose age was known to the whole world, were not guilty of undue
exaggeration.

Heaven, she thought, would pour its favour upon her too lavishly if the
report that Don John was to be appointed Governor of the Netherlands
should be verified.

It was not in Barbara's nature to shut such a wealth of joy into her own
heart, and never had her house been more frequently opened to guests,
never had her little entertainments been more brilliant, never since the
time of her recovery had the music of her voice been more beautiful than
in the days which followed the sudden death of the governor, Requesens.

Meanwhile she had scarcely noticed how high the longing for liberty was
surging in the Netherland nation, and with how fierce a glow hatred of
the Spanish tyrants was consuming the hearts of the people.

But even Barbara was roused from her ecstasy of happiness when she heard
of the atrocities that threatened the provinces.

What did it avail that the King meanwhile left the government to the
