There was much in this letter which it was necessary her father and
mother should hear--the Earl's message to them--Hyde's own proposition
for an immediate marriage, and various necessities referring to this
event. But she was proud and happy to read words of such noble,
straightforward affection; and the Doctor was especially pleased by the
deference expressed for his wishes. When he left the house that day he
kissed his daughter with pride and tenderness, and said to Mrs. Moran--

"Ava, there will be much to get, and much to do in a short time, but
money manages all things Do not spare where it is necessary." And then
what important and interesting consultations followed! what lists of
lovely garments became imperative, which an hour before had not been
dreamed of! what discussions as to mantua makers and milliners! as to
guests and ceremonies! as to all the details of a life unknown, but
invested by love and youth, with a delightfully overwhelming importance.

Cornelia was so happy that her ordinary dress of grey camelot did not
express her; she felt constrained to add to it some bows of bright
scarlet ribbon, and then she looked round about her room, and went
through her drawers, to find something else to be a visible witness to
the light heart singing within her. And she came across some coral
combs that Madame Jacobus had given her, and felt their vivid colouring
in the shining masses of her dark hair, to be one of the right ways of
saying to herself, and all she loved, "See how happy I am!"

In the afternoon, when the shopping for the day had been accomplished,
she went to Captain Jacobus, to play with him the game of backgammon
which had become an almost daily duty, and to which the Captain
attached a great importance. Indeed, for many weeks it had been the
event of every day to him; and if he was no longer dependent on it, he
was grateful enough to acknowledge all the good it had done him. "I owe
your daughter as much as I owe you, sir," he would say to Doctor Moran,
"and I owe both of you a bigger debt than I can clear myself of."

This afternoon he looked at his visitor with a wondering speculation.
There was something in her face, and manner, and voice, he had never
before seen or heard, and madame--who watched every expression of her
husband--was easily led to the same observation. She observed Cornelia
closely, and her gay laugh especially revealed some change. It was like
the burst of bird song in early spring, and she followed the happy girl
to the front door, and called her back when she had gone down the
steps, and said, as she looked earnestly in her face--

"You have heard from Joris Hyde? I know you have!" and Cornelia nodded
her head, and blushed, and smiled, and ran away from further question.

When she reached home she found Madame Van Heemskirk sitting with her
mother, and the sweet old lady rose to meet her, and said before
Cornelia could utter a word:

"Come to me, Cornelia. This morning a letter we have had from my Joris,
and sorry am I that I did thee so much wrong."

"Madame, I have long ago forgotten it; and there was a mistake all
round," answered Cornelia, cheerfully.

"That is so--and thy mistake first of all. Hurry is misfortune; even to
be happy, it is not wise to hurry. Listen now! Joris has written to his
grandfather, and also to me, and very busy he will keep us both. His
grandfather is to look after the stables and the horses, and to buy
more horses, and to hire serving men of all kinds. And a long letter
also I have had from my daughter Katherine, and she tells me to make
her duty to thee my duty. That is my pleasure also, and I have been
talking with thy mother about the house. Now I shall go there, and a
very pleasant home I shall make it. Many things Joris will bring with
him--two new carriages and much fine furniture--and I know not what
else beside."

Then Cornelia kissed madame, and afterwards removed her bonnet; and
madame looked at her smiling. The vivid coral in her dark hair, the
modest grey dress with its knots of colour, and above all the lovely
face alight with love and hope, delighted her.

"Very pretty art thou, very pretty indeed!" she said, impulsively; and
then she added, "Many other girls are very pretty also, but my Joris
loves thee, and I am glad that it is thee, and very welcome art thou to
me, and very proud is my husband of thee. And now I must go, because
there is much to do, and little time to do it in."

For nearly a week Cornelia was too busy to take Arenta into her
consideration. She did not care to tell her about Rem's cruel and
dishonourable conduct, and she was afraid the shrewd little Marquise
would divine some change, and get the secret out of her. Indeed, Arenta
was not long in suspecting something unusual in the Doctor's
household--the number of parcels and of work people astonished her; and
she was not a little offended at Madame Van Heemskirk spending a whole
afternoon so near to her, and "never even," as she said to her father,
"turning her head this way." For Arenta had drunk a rather long draught
of popular interest, and she could not bear to believe it was
declining. Was she not the American heroine of 1793? It was almost a
want of patriotism in Madame Van Heemskirk to neglect her.

After a week had elapsed Cornelia went over one morning to see her
friend. But by this time Arenta knew everything. Her brother Rem had
been with her and confessed all to his sister. It had not been a
pleasant meeting by any means. She heard the story with indignation,
but contrived to feel that somehow Rem was not so much to blame as
Cornelia, and other people.

"You are right served," she said to her brother, "for meddling with
foreigners, and especially for mixing your love affairs up with an
English girl. Proud, haughty creatures all of them! And you are a very
fool to tell any woman such a--crime. Yes, it is a crime. I won't say
less. That girl over the way nearly died, and you would have let her
die. It was a shame. I don't love Cornelia--but it was a shame."

"The letter was addressed to me, Arenta."

"Fiddlesticks! You knew it was not yours. You knew it was Hyde's. Where
is it now?"

She asked the question in her usual dominant way, and Rem did not feel
able to resist it. He looked for a moment at the angry woman, and was
subdued by her air of authority. He opened his pocketbook and from a
receptacle in it, took the fateful letter. She seized and read it, and
then without a word, or a moment's hesitation threw it into the fire.

Rem blustered and fumed, and she stood smiling defiantly at him. "You
are like all criminals," she said; "you must keep something to accuse
yourself with. I love you too well to permit you to carry that bit of
paper about you. It has worked you harm enough. What are you going to
do? Is Miss Darner's refusal quite final?"

"Quite. It was even scornful."

"Plenty of nice girls in Boston."

"I cannot go back to Boston."

"Why then?"

"Because Mary's cousin has told the whole affair."

"Nonsense!"

"She has. I know it. Men, whom I had been friendly with, got out of my
way; women excused themselves at their homes, and did not see me on the
streets. I have no doubt all Boston is talking of the affair."

"Then come back to New York. New Yorkers attend strictly to their own
love affairs. Father will stand by you; and I will."

"Father will not. He called me a scoundrel, when I told him last night,
and advised me to go to the frontier. Joris Van Heemskirk will not
talk, but madame will chatter for him, and I could not bear to meet
Doctor Moran. As for Captain Jacobus, he would invent new words and
oaths to abuse me with, and Aunt Angelica would, of course, say amen to
all he says;--and there are others."

"Yes, there is Lord Hyde."

"Curse him! But I intended to give him his letter--now you have burnt
it."

"You intended nothing of the kind, Rem. Go away as soon as you can. I
don't want to know where you go just yet. New York is impossible, and
Boston is impossible. Father says go to the frontier, I say go South.
What you have done, you have done; and it cannot be undone; so don't
carry it about with you. And I would let women alone--they are beyond
you--go in for politics."

That day Rem lingered with his sister, seeing no one else; and in the
evening shadows he slipped quietly away. He was very wretched, for he
really loved Mary Damer, and his disappointment was bitterly keen and
humiliating. Besides which, he felt that his business efforts for two
years were forfeited, and that he had the world to begin over again.
Without a friend to wish him a Godspeed the wretched man went on board
the Southern packet, and in her dim lonely cabin sat silent and
despondent, while she fought her way through swaying curtains of rain
to the open sea. Its great complaining came up through the darkness to
him, and seemed to be the very voice of the miserable circumstances,
that had separated and estranged his life from all he loved and desired.

This sudden destruction of all her hopes for her brother distressed
Arenta. Her own marriage had been a most unfortunate one, but its
misfortunes had the importance of national tragedy. She had even
plucked honour to herself from the bloody tumbril and guillotine. But
Rem's matrimonial failure had not one redeeming quality; it was
altogether a shameful and well-deserved retribution. And she had
boasted to her friends not a little of the great marriage her brother
was soon to make, and even spoken of Miss Damer, as if a sisterly
affection already existed between them. She could anticipate very well
the smiles and shrugs, the exclamations and condolences she might have
to encounter, and she was not pleased with her brother for putting her
in a position likely to make her disagreeable to people.

But the heart of her anger was Cornelia--"but for that girl," Rem
would have married Mary Damer, and his home in Boston might have been
full of opportunities for her, as well as a desirable change when she
wearied of New York. Altogether it was a hard thing for her, as well as
a dreadful sorrow for Rem; and she could not think of Cornelia without
anger, "Just for her," she kept saying as she dressed herself with an
elaborate simplicity, "Just for her! Very much she intruded herself
into my affairs; my marriage was her opportunity with Lord Hyde, and
now all she can do is to break up poor Rem's marriage."

When Cornelia entered the Van Ariens parlour Arenta was already there.
She was dressed in a gown of the blackest and softest bombazine and
crape. It had a distinguishing want of all ornament, but it was for
that reason singularly effective against her delicate complexion and
pale golden hair. She looked offended, and hardly spoke to her old
friend, but Cornelia was prepared for some exhibition of anger. She had
not been to see Arenta for a whole week, and she did not doubt she had
been well aware of something unusual in progress. But that Rem had
accused himself did not occur to her; therefore she was hardly prepared
for the passionate accusations with which Arenta assailed her.

"I think," she said, "you have behaved disgracefully to poor Rem! You
would not have him yourself, and yet you prevent another girl--whom he
loves far better than ever he loved you--from marrying him. He has gone
away 'out of the world,' he says, and indeed I should not wonder if he
kills himself. It is most certain you have done all you can to drive
him to it."

"Arenta! I have no idea what you mean. I have not seen Rem, nor written
to Rem, for more than two years."

"Very likely, but you have written about him. You wrote to Miss Darner,
and told her Rem purposely kept a letter, which you had sent to Lord
Hyde."

"I did not write to Miss Damer. I do not know the lady. But Rem DID
keep a letter that belonged to Lord Hyde."

Then anger gave falsehood the bit and she answered, "Rem did NOT keep
any letter that belonged to Lord Hyde. Prove that he did so, before you
accuse him. You cannot."

"I unfortunately directed Lord Hyde's letter to Rem, and Rem's letter
to Lord Hyde. Rem knew that he had Lord Hyde's letter, and he should
have taken it at once to him."

"Lord Hyde had Rem's letter; he ought to have taken it at once to Rem."

"There was not a word in Rem's letter to identify it as belonging to
him."

"Then you ought to be ashamed to write love letters that would do for
any man that received them. A poor hand you must be, to blunder over
two love letters. I have had eight, and ten, at once to answer, and I
never failed to distinguish each; and while rivers run into the sea I
never shall misdirect my love letters. I do not believe Rem ever got
your letter, and I will not believe it, either now or ever. I dare be
bound, Balthazar lost it on the way. Prove to me he did not."

"Oh, indeed! I think you know better."

"Very clever is Lord Hyde to excuse himself by throwing the blame on
poor Rein. Very mean indeed to accuse him to the girl he was going to
marry. To be sure, any one with an ounce of common sense to guide them,
must see through the whole affair."

"Arenta, I have the most firm conviction of Rem's guilt, and the
greatest concern for his disappointment. I assure you I have."

"Kindly reserve your concern, Miss Moran, till Rem Van Ariens asks for
it. As for his guilt, there is no guilt in question. Even supposing
that Rem did keep Lord Hyde's letter, what then? All things are fair in
love and war, Willie Nicholls told me last night, he would keep a
hundred letters, if he thought he could win me by doing so. Any man of
sense would."

"All I blame Rem for is--"

"All I blame Rem for is, that he asked you to marry him. So much for
that! I hope if he meddles with women again, he will seek an all-round
common-sense Dutch girl, who will know how to direct her letters--or
else be content with one lover."

"Arenta, I shall go now. I have given you an opportunity to be rude and
unkind. You cannot expect me to do that again."

She watched Cornelia across the street, and then turned to the mirror,
and wound her ringlets over her fingers. "I don't care," she muttered.
"It was her fault to begin with. She tempted Rem, and he fell. Men
always fall when women tempt them; it is their nature to. I am going to
stand by Rem, right or wrong, and I only wish I could tell Mary Damer
what I think of her. She has another lover, of course she has--or she
would not have talked about her 'honour' to Rem."

To such thoughts she was raging, when Peter Van Ariens came home to
dinner, and she could not restrain them. He listened for a minute or
two, and then struck the table no gentle blow?

"In my house, Arenta," he said, "I will have no such words. What you
think, you think; but such thoughts must be shut close in your mind. In
keeping that letter, I say Rem behaved like a scoundrel; he was cruel,
and he was a coward. Because he is my son I will not excuse him. No
indeed! For that very reason, the more angry am I at such a deed. Now
then, he shall acknowledge to George Hyde and Cornelia Moran the wrong
he did them, ere in my home and my heart, he rights himself."

"Is Cornelia going to be married?"

"That is what I hear."

"To Lord Hyde?"

"That also, is what I hear."

"Well, as I am in mourning, I cannot go to the wedding; so then I am
delighted to have told her a little of my mind."

"It is a great marriage for the Doctor's daughter; a countess she will
be."

"And a marquise I am. And will you please say, if either countess or
marquise is better than mistress or madame? Thank all the powers that
