where he had expected petulant and artful resistance. He almost felt
guilty and ashamed, as he looked down into that beautiful imploring
face, convulsed with simple sorrow, as of a child for a broken toy.....
At last she spoke.

'Oh, what have I done-what have I done? Why must you take him from me?
What have I done but love him, honour him, worship him? I know you love
him; and I love you for it.--I do indeed! But you--what is your love
to mine? Oh, I would die for him--be torn in pieces for him--now, this
moment!....

Wulf was silent.

'What have I done but love him? What could I wish but to make him
happy? I was rich enough, praised, and petted;.... and then he came,....
glorious as he is, like a god among men--among apes rather--and I
worshipped him: was I wrong in that? I gave up all for him: was I wrong
in that? I gave him myself: what could I do more? He condescended to
like me--he the hero! Could I help submitting? I loved him: could I help
loving him? Did I wrong him in that? Cruel, cruel Wulf!....'

Wulf was forced to be stern, or he would have melted at once.

'And what was your love worth to him? What has it done for him? It has
made him a sot, an idler, a laughing-stock to these Greek dogs, when he
might have been their conqueror, their king. Foolish woman, who cannot
see that your love has been his bane, his ruin! He, who ought by now
to have been sitting upon the throne of the Ptolemies, the lord of all
south of the Mediterranean--as he shall be still!'

Pelagia looked tip at him wide-eyed, as if her mind was taking in slowly
some vast new thought, under the weight of which it reeled already. Then
she rose slowly.

'And he might be Emperor of Africa.'

'And he shall be; but not--'

'Not with me!' she almost shrieked. 'No! not with wretched, ignorant,
polluted me! I see--oh God, I see it all! And this is why you want him
to marry her--her--'

She could not utter the dreaded name.

Wulf could not trust himself to speak; but he bowed his head in
acquiescence. ...............

'Yes--I will go--up into the desert--with Philammon--and you shall never
hear of me again. And I will be a nun, and pray for him, that he may be
a great king, and conquer all the world. You will tell him why I went
away, will you not? Yes, I will go,--now, at once--'

She turned away hurriedly, as if to act upon her promise, and then she
sprang again to Wulf with a sudden shudder.

'I cannot, Wulf!--I cannot leave him! I shall go mad if I do! Do not
be angry;--I will promise anything--take any oath you like, if you will
only let me stay here. Only as a slave--as anything--if I may but look
at him sometimes. No--not even that--but to be tinder the same roof with
him, only--Oh, let me be but a slave in the kitchen! I will make over
all I have to him--to you--to any one! And you shall tell him that I am
gone--dead, if you will.--Only let me stay! And I will wear rags, and
grind in the mill.... Even that will be delicious, to know that he
is eating the bread which I have made! And if I ever dare speak to
him--even to come near hint--let the steward hang me up by the wrists,
and whip me, like the slave which I deserve to be!... And then shall
I soon grow old and ugly with grief, and--there will be no more danger
then, dear Wulf, will there, from this accursed face of mine? Only
promise me that, and--There he is calling you! Don't let him come in
and see me!--I cannot bear it! Go to him, quick, and tell him all.--No,
don't tell him yet....'

And she sank down again on the floor, as Wulf went out murmuring to
himself--

'Poor child! poor child! well for thee this clay if thou wert dead, and
at the bottom of Hela!'

And Pelagia heard what he said.

Gradually, amid sobs and tears, and stormy confusion of impossible hopes
and projects, those words took root in her mind, and spread, till they
filled her whole heart and brain.

'Well for me if I were dead?'

And she rose slowly.

'Well for me if I were dead? And why not? Then it would indeed be
all settled. There would be no more danger from poor little Pelagia
then....'

She went slowly, firmly, proudly, into the well-known chamber.... She
threw herself upon the bed, and covered the pillow with kisses. Her eye
fell on the Amal's sword, which hung across the bed's-head, after the
custom of Gothic warriors. She seized it, and took it down, shuddering.

'Yes!.... Let it be with this, if it must be. And it must be. I cannot
bear it! Anything but shame! To have fancied all my life--vain fool that
I was!--that every one loved and admired me, and to find that they were
despising me, hating me, all along! Those students at the lecture-room
door told me I was despised. The old monk told me so--Fool that I was!
I forgot it next day!--For he--he loved me still!--All--how could I
believe them, till his own lips had said it?.... Intolerable!.... And
yet women as bad as I am have been honoured--when they were dead. What
was that song which I used to sing about Epicharis, who hung herself in
the litter, and Leaina, who bit out her tongue, lest the torture should
drive them to betray their lovers? There used to be a statue of Leaina,
they say, at Athens,--a lioness without a tongue.... And whenever I sang
the song, the theatre used to rise, and shout, and call them noble and
blessed.... I never could tell why then; but I know now!--I know now!
Perhaps they may call me noble, after all. At least, they may say "She
was a--a--but she dare die for the man she loved!".... Ay, but God
despises me too, and elates me. He will send me to eternal fire.
Philammon said so--though he was my brother. The old monk said
so--though he wept as he said it.... The flames of hell for ever! Oh,
not for ever! Great, dreadful God! Not for ever! Indeed, I did not know!
No one taught me about right and wrong, and I never knew that I had been
baptized--Indeed, I never knew! And it was so pleasant--so pleasant to
be happy, and praised, and loved, and to see happy faces round me. How
could I help it? The birds there who are singing in the darling, beloved
court--they do what they like, and Thou art not angry with them for
being happy! And Thou wilt not be more cruel to me than to them, great
God--for what did I know more than they? Thou hast made the beautiful
sunshine, and the pleasant, pleasant world, and the flowers, and the
birds--Thou wilt not send me to burn for ever and ever? Will not a
hundred years be punishment enough-or a thousand? Oh God! is not this
punishment enough already,--to have to leave him, just as just as I
am beginning to long to be good, and to be worthy of him?.... Oh, have
mercy--mercy--mercy--and let me go after I have been punished enough!
Why may I not turn into a bird, or even a worm, and come back again out
of that horrible place, to see the sun shine, and the flowers grow
once more? Oh, am I not punishing myself already? Will not this help to
atone?.... Yes--I will die!--and perhaps so God may pity me!'

And with trembling hands she drew the sword from its sheath and covered
the blade with kisses.

'Yes--on this sword--with which he won his battles. That is right--his
to the last! How keen and cold it looks! Will it be very painful?....
No--I will not try the point, or my heart might fail me. I will fall on
it at once: let it hurt me as it may, it will be too late to draw back
then. And after all it is his sword--It will not have the heart to
torture me much. And yet he struck me himself this morning!'

And at that thought, a long wild cry of misery broke from her lips, and
rang through the house. Hurriedly she fastened the sword upright to the
foot of the bed, and tore open her tunic.... 'Here--under this widowed
bosom, where his head will never lie again! There are footsteps in the
passage! Quick, Pelagia! Now--'

And she threw up her arms wildly, in act to fall....

'It is his step! And he will find me, and never know that it is for him
I die!'

The Amal tried the door. It was fast. With a single blow he burst it
open, and demanded--

'What was that shriek? What is the meaning of this? Pelagia!'

Pelagia, like a child caught playing with a forbidden toy, hid her face
in her hands and cowered down.

'What is it?' cried he, lifting her.

But she burst from his arms.

'No, no!--never more! I am not worthy of you! Let me die, wretch that
I am! I can only drag you down. You must be a king. You must marry
her--the wise woman!'

'Hypatia! She is dead!'

'Dead?' shrieked Pelagia.

'Murdered, an hour ago, by those Christian devils.'

Pelagia put her hands over her eyes, and burst into tears. Were they of
pity or of joy?... She did not ask herself; and we will not ask her.

'Where is my sword? Soul of Odin! Why is it fastened here?'

'I was going to--Do not be angry!.... They told me that I had better
die, and--

The Amal stood thunderstruck for a moment.

'Oh, do not strike me again! Send me to the mill. Kill me now with your
own hand! Anything but another blow!'

'A blow?--Noble woman!'cried the Amal, clasping her in his arms.

The storm was past; and Pelagia had been nestling to that beloved heart,
cooing like a happy dove, for many a minute before the Amal aroused
himself and her....

'Now!--quick! We have not a moment to lose. Up to the tower, where you
will be safe; and then to show these curs what comes of snarling round
the wild wolves' den!'



CHAPTER XXIX: NEMESIS


And was the Amal's news true, then?

Philammon saw Raphael rush across the street into the Museum gardens.
His last words had been a command to stay where he was; and the boy
obeyed him. The black porter who let Raphael out told him somewhat
insolently, that his mistress would see no one, and receive no messages:
but he had made up his mind: complained of the sun, quietly ensconced
himself behind a buttress, and sat coiled up on the pavement, ready for
a desperate spring. The slave stared at him: but he was accustomed to
the vagaries of philosophers; and thanking the gods that he was not born
in that station of life, retired to his porter's cell, and forgot the
whole matter.

There Philammon awaited a full half-hour. It seemed to him hours, days,
years. And yet Raphael did not return: and yet no guards appeared. Was
the strange Jew a traitor? Impossible!--his face had shown a desperate
earnestness of terror as intense as Philammon's own.... Yet why did he
not return?

Perhaps he had found out that the streets were clear; their mutual fears
groundless.... What meant that black knot of men some two hundred yards
off, hanging about the mouth of the side street, just opposite the
door which led to her lecture-room? He moved to watch them: they had
vanished. He lay down again and waited.... There they were again. It was
a suspicious post. That street ran along the back of the Caesareum, a
favourite haunt of monks, communicating by innumerable entries and back
buildings with the great Church itself.... And yet, why should there
not be a knot of monks there? What more common in every street of
Alexandria? He tried to laugh away his own fears. And yet they ripened,
by the very intensity of thinking on them, into certainty. He knew that
something terrible was at hand. More than once he looked out from his
hiding-place--the knot of men were still there;.... it seemed to have
increased, to draw nearer. If they found him, what would they not
suspect? What did he care? He would die for her, if it came to that--not
that it could come to that: but still he must speak to her--he must warn
her. Passenger after passenger, carriage after carriage passed along the
street: student after student entered the lecture-room; but he never saw
them, not though they passed him close. The sun rose higher and higher,
and turned his whole blaze upon the corner where Philammon crouched,
till the pavement scorched like hot iron, and his eyes were dazzled by
the blinding glare: but he never heeded it. His whole heart, and sense,
and sight, were riveted upon that well-known door, expecting it to
open....

At last a curricle, glittering with silver, rattled round the corner
and stopped opposite him. She must becoming now. The crowd had vanished.
Perhaps it was, after all, a fancy of his own. No; there they were,
peeping round the corner, close to the lecture-room--the hell-hounds! A
slave brought out an embroidered cushion--and then Hypatia herself
came forth, looking more glorious than ever; her lips set in a sad firm
smile; her eyes uplifted, inquiring, eager, and yet gentle, dimmed by
some great inward awe, as if her soul was far away aloft, and face to
face with God.

In a moment he sprang up to her, caught her robe convulsively, threw
himself on his knees before her--

'Stop! Stay! You are going to destruction!'

Calmly she looked down upon him.

'Accomplice of witches! Would you make of Theon's daughter a traitor
like yourself?'

He sprang up, stepped back, and stood stupefied with shame and
despair....

She believed him guilty, then!.... It was the will of God!

The plumes of the horses were waving far down the street before he
recovered himself, and rushed after her, shouting he knew not what.

It was too late! A dark wave of men rushed from the ambuscade, surged
up round the car.... swept forward.... she had disappeared! and as
Philammon followed breathless, the horses galloped past him madly
homeward with the empty carriage.

Whither were they dragging her? To the Caesareum, the Church of God
Himself? Impossible! Why thither of all places of the earth? Why did the
mob, increasing momentarily by hundreds, pour down upon the beach, and
return brandishing flints, shells, fragments of pottery?

She was upon the church steps before he caught them up, invisible among
the crowd; but he could track her by the fragments of her dress.

Where were her gay pupils now? Alas! they had barricaded themselves
shamefully in the Museum, at the first rush which swept her from the
door of the lecture-room. Cowards! he would save her!

And he struggled in vain to pierce the dense mass of Parabolani and
monks, who, mingled with the fishwives and dock-workers, leaped and
yelled around their victim. But what he could not do another and a
weaker did--even the little porter. Furiously--no one knew how or
whence--he burst up as if from the ground in the thickest of the crowd,
with knife, teeth, and nails, like a venomous wild-cat, tearing his way
towards his idol. Alas! he was torn down himself, rolled over the steps,
and lay there half dead in an agony of weeping, as Philammon sprang up
past him into the church.

Yes. On into the church itself! Into the cool dim shadow, with its
fretted pillars, and lowering domes, and candles, and incense, and
blazing altar, and great pictures looking from the walls athwart the
gorgeous gloom. And right in front, above the altar, the colossal Christ
watching unmoved from off the wall, His right hand raised to give a
blessing--or a curse?

On, up the nave, fresh shreds of her dress strewing the holy
pavement--up the chancel steps themselves--up to the altar--right
underneath the great still Christ: and there even those hell-hounds
paused.

She shook herself free from her tormentors, and springing back, rose for
one moment to her full height, naked, snow-white against the dusky mass
around--shame and indignation in those wide clear eyes, but not a stain
of fear. With one hand she clasped her golden locks around her; the
other long white arm was stretched upward toward the great still Christ
appealing--and who dare say in vain?--from man to God. Her lips were
opened to speak: but the words that should have come from them reached
God's ear alone; for in an instant Peter struck her down, the dark
mass closed over her again.... and then wail on wail, long, wild,
ear-piercing, rang along the vaulted roofs, and thrilled like the
trumpet of avenging angels through Philammon's ears.

Crushed against a pillar, unable to move in the dense mass, he pressed
his hands over his ears. He could not shut out those shrieks! When would
they end? What in the name of the God of mercy were they doing? Tearing
her piecemeal? Yes, and worse than that. And still the shrieks rang
on, and still the great Christ looked down on Philammon with that calm,
intolerable eye, and would not turn away. And over His head was written
in the rainbow, 'I am the same, yesterday, to-day, and for ever!' The
same as He was in Judea of old, Philammon? Then what are these, and in
whose temple? And he covered his face with his hands, and longed to die.

It was over. The shrieks had died away into moans; the moans to silence.
How long had he been there? An hour, or an eternity? Thank God it was
over! For her sake--but for theirs? But they thought not of that as a
new cry rose through the dome.

'To the Cinaron! Burn the bones to ashes! Scatter them into the sea!'
And the mob poured past him again....

He turned to flee: but, once outside the church, he sank exhausted, and
lay upon the steps, watching with stupid horror the glaring of the
fire, and the mob who leaped and yelled like demons round their Moloch
sacrifice.

A hand grasped his arm; he looked up; it was the porter.

'And this, young butcher, is the Catholic and apostolic Church?'

'No! Eudaimon, it is the church of the devils of hell!' And gathering
himself up, he sat upon the steps and buried his head within his hands.
He would have given life itself for the power of weeping: but his eyes
and brain were hot and dry as the desert.

Eudaimon looked at him a while. The shock had sobered the poor fop for
once.

'I did what I could to die with her!' said he.

'I did what I could to save her!' answered Philammon.

'I know it. Forgive the words which I just spoke. Did we not both love
her?'

And the little wretch sat down by Philammon's side, and as the blood
dripped from his wounds upon the pavement, broke out into a bitter agony
of human tears.

There are times when the very intensity of our misery is a boon, and
kindly stuns us till we are unable to torture ourselves by thought. And
so it was with Philammon then. He sat there, he knew not how long.

'She is with the gods,' said Eudaimon at last.

'She is with the God of gods,' answered Philammon: and they both were
silent again.

Suddenly a commanding voice aroused them.

They looked up, and saw before them Raphael Aben-Ezra.

He was pale as death, but calm as death. One look into his face told
them that he knew all.

'Young monk,' he said, between his closed teeth, 'you seem to have loved
her?'

Philammon looked up, but could not speak.

'Then arise, and flee for your life into the farthest corner of the
desert, ere the doom of Sodom and Gomorrha fall upon this accursed city.
Have you father, mother, brother, sister,--ay, cat, dog, or bird for
which you care, within its walls?'

Philammon started; for he recollected Pelagia.... That evening, so Cyril
had promised, twenty trusty monks were to have gone with him to seize
her.

'You have? Then take them with you, and escape, and remember Lot's wife.
Eudaimon, come with me. You must lead me to your house, to the lodging
of Miriam the Jewess. Do not deny! I know that she is there. For the
sake of her who is gone I will hold you harmless, ay, reward you richly,
if you prove faithful. Rise!'

Eudaimon, who knew Raphael's face well, rose and led the way trembling;
and Philammon was left alone.

They never met again. But Philammon knew that he had been in the
presence of a stronger man than himself, and of one who hated even more
bitterly than he himself that deed at which the very sun, it seemed,
ought to have veiled his face. And his words, 'Arise, and flee for thy
life,' uttered as they were with the stern self-command and writhing lip
of compressed agony, rang through his ears like the trump of doom. Yes,
he would flee. He had gone forth to see the world, and he had seen it.
Arsenius was in the right after all. Home to the desert! But first he
would go himself, alone, to Pelagia, and implore her once more to flee
with him. Beast, fool, that he had been to try to win her by force--by
the help of such as these! God's kingdom was not a kingdom of fanatics
yelling for a doctrine, but of willing, loving, obedient hearts. If he
could not win her heart, her will, he would go alone, and die praying
for her.

He sprang from the steps of the Caesareum, and turned up the street of
the Museum. Alas! it was one roaring sea of heads! They were sacking
Theon's house--the house of so many memories! Perhaps the poor old man
too had perished! Still--his sister! He must save her and flee. And he
turned up a side street and tried to make his way onward.

Alas again! the whole of the dock-quarter was up and out. Every street
poured its tide of furious fanatics into the main river; and ere he
could reach Pelagia's house the sun was set, and close behind him,
echoed by ten thousand voices, was the cry of 'Down with all heathens!
Root out all Arian Goths! Down with idolatrous wantons! Down with
Pelagia Aphrodite!'

He hurried down the alley, to the tower door, where Wulf had promised
to meet him. It was half open, and in the dusk he could see a figure
standing in the doorway. He sprang up the steps, and found, not Wulf,
but Miriam.

'Let me pass!'

'Wherefore?'

He made no answer, and tried to push past her.

'Fool, fool, fool!' whispered the hag, holding the door against him with
all her strength. 'Where are your fellow-kidnappers? Where are your band
of monks?'

Philammon started back. How had she discovered his plan?

'Ay--where are they? Besotted boy! Have you not seen enough of monkery
this afternoon, that you must try still to make that poor girl even such
a one as yourselves? Ay, you may root out your own human natures if you
will, and make yourselves devils in trying to become angels: but woman
she is, and woman she shall live or die!'

'Let me pass!' cried Philammon furiously.

'Raise your voice--and I raise mine: and then your life is not worth a
moment's purchase. Fool, do you think I speak as a Jewess? I speak as
a woman--as a nun! I was a nun once, madman--the iron entered into my
soul!--God do so to me, and more also, if it ever enter into another
soul while I can prevent it! You shall not have her! I will strangle her
with my own hand first!' And turning from him, she darted up the winding
stair.

He followed: but the intense passion of the old hag hurled her onward
with the strength and speed of a young Maenad. Once Philammon was
near passing her. But he recollected that he did not know his way, and
contented himself with keeping close behind, and making the fugitive his
guide.

Stair after stair, he fled upward, till she turned suddenly into a
chamber door. Philammon paused. A few feet above him the open sky showed
at the stair-head. They were close then to the roof! One moment more,
and the hag darted out of the room again, and turned to flee upward
still. Philammon caught her by the arm, hurled her back into the empty
chamber, shut the door upon her; and with a few bounds gained the roof,
and met Pelagia face to face.

'Come!' gasped he breathlessly. 'Now is the moment! Come, while they are
all below!' and he seized her hand.

But Pelagia only recoiled.

'No, no,' whispered she in answer, 'I cannot, cannot--he has forgiven me
all, all! and I am his for ever! And now, just as he is in danger, when
he may be wounded--ah, heaven! would you have me do anything so base as
to desert him?'

'Pelagia, Pelagia, darling sister!' cried Philammon, in an agonised
voice, 'think of the doom of sin! Think of the pains of hell!'

'I have thought of them this day: and I do not believe you! No--I do
not! God is not so cruel as you say! And if He were:--to lose my love,
that is hell! Let me burn hereafter, if I do but keep him now!'

Philammon stood stupefied and shuddering. All his own early doubts
flashed across him like a thunderbolt, when in the temple-cave he had
seen those painted ladies at their revels, and shuddered, and asked
himself, were they burning for ever and ever?

'Come!' gasped he once again; and throwing himself on his knees before
her, covered her hands with kisses, wildly entreating: but in vain.

'What is this?' thundered a voice; not Miriam's, but the Amal's. He was
unarmed but he rushed straight upon Philammon.

'Do not harm him!' shrieked Pelagia; 'he is my brother--my brother of
whom I told you!'

'What does he here?' cried the Amal, who instantly divined the truth.

Pelagia was silent.

'I wish to deliver my sister, a Christian, from the sinful embraces of
an Arian heretic; and deliver her I will, or die!'

'An Arian?' laughed the Amal. 'Say a heathen at once, and tell the
truth, young fool! Will you go with him, Pelagia, and turn nun in the
sand-heaps?'

Pelagia sprang towards her lover: Philammon caught her by the arm for
one last despairing appeal: and in a moment, neither knew how, the Goth
and the Greek were locked in deadly struggle, while Pelagia stood in
silent horror, knowing that a call for help would bring instant death to
her brother.

It was over in a few seconds. The Goth lifted Philammon like a baby in
his arms, and bearing him to the parapet, attempted to hurl him into the
canal below. But the active Greek had wound himself like a snake around
him, and held him by the throat with the strength of despair. Twice they
rolled and tottered on the parapet; and twice recoiled. A third fearful
lunge--the earthen wall gave way; and down to the dark depths, locked in
each other's arms, fell Goth and Greek.

Pelagia rushed to the brink, and gazed downward into the gloom, dumb and
dry-eyed with horror. Twice they turned over together in mid-air.... The
foot of the tower, as was usual in Egypt, sloped outwards towards the
water. They must strike upon that--and then! ....It seemed an eternity
ere they touched the masonry.... The Amal was undermost.... She saw his
fair floating locks dash against the cruel stone. His grasp suddenly
loosened, his limbs collapsed; two distinct plunges broke the dark
sullen water; and then all was still but the awakened ripple, lapping
angrily against the wall.

Pelagia gazed down one moment more, and then, with a shriek which rang
along roof and river, she turned, and fled down the stairs and out into
the night.

Five minutes afterwards, Philammon, dripping, bruised, and bleeding, was
crawling up the water-steps at the lower end of the lane. A woman rushed
from the postern door, and stood on the quay edge, gazing with clasped
hands into the canal. The moon fell full on her face. It was Pelagia.
She saw him, knew him, and recoiled.

'Sister!--my sister! Forgive me!'

'Murderer!' she shrieked, and dashing aside his outspread hands, fled
wildly up the passage.

The way was blocked with bales of merchandise: but the dancer bounded
over them like a deer; while Philammon, half stunned by his fall, and
blinded by his dripping locks, stumbled, fell, and lay, unable to rise.
She held on for a few yards towards the torch-lit mob, which was surging
and roaring in the main street above, then turned suddenly into a side
alley, and vanished; while Philammon lay groaning upon the pavement,
without a purpose or a hope upon earth.

Five minutes more, and Wulf was gazing over the broken parapet, at the
head of twenty terrified spectators, male and female, whom Pelagia's
shriek had summoned.

He alone suspected that Philammon had been there; and shuddering at the
thought of what might have happened, he kept his secret.

But all knew that Pelagia had been on the tower; all had seen the Amal
go up thither. Where were they now? And why was the little postern gate
found open, and shut only just in time to prevent the entrance of the
mob?

Wulf stood, revolving in a brain but too well practised in such cases,
all possible contingencies of death and horror. At last--

'A rope and a light, Smid!' he almost whispered.

They were brought, and Wulf, resisting all the entreaties of the younger
men to allow them to go on the perilous search, lowered himself through
the breach.

He was about two-thirds down, when he shook the rope, and called in a
stifled voice, to those above--

'Haul up. I have seen enough.'

Breathless with curiosity and fear, they hauled him up. He stood among
them for a few moments, silent, as if stunned by the weight of some
enormous woe.

'Is he dead?'

'Odin has taken his son home, wolves of the Goths!' And he held out
his right hand to the awe-struck ring, and burst into an agony of
weeping.... A clotted tress of long fair hair lay in his palm.

It was snatched; handed from man to man.... One after another recognised
the beloved golden locks. And then, to the utter astonishment of the
girls who stood round, the great simple hearts, too brave to be ashamed
of tears, broke out and wailed like children .... Their Amal! Their
heavenly man! Odin's own son, their joy and pride, and glory! Their
'Kingdom of heaven,' as his name declared him, who was all that each
wished to be, and more, and yet belonged to them, bone of their bone,
flesh of their flesh! Ah, it is bitter to all true human hearts to be
robbed of their ideal, even though that ideal be that of a mere wild
bull, and soulless gladiator....
