
Guglielmo Marconi, the wireless inventor, was the next witness.

Marconi said he was chairman of the British Marconi Company. Under
instructions of the company, he said, operators must take their orders
from the captain of the ship on which they are employed.

"Do the regulations prescribe whether one or two operators should be
aboard the ocean vessels?"

"Yes, on ships like the late Titanic and Olympic two are carried," said
Marconi. "The Carpathia, a smaller boat, carries one. The Carpathia's
wireless apparatus is a short-distance equipment."


TITANIC WELL EQUIPPED

"Do you consider that the Titanic was equipped with the latest improved
wireless apparatus?"

"Yes; I should say that it had the very best."

"Did you hear the captain of the Carpathia say, in his testimony,
that they caught this distress message from the Titanic almost
providentally?" asked Senator Smith.

"Yes, I did. It was absolutely providential."

"Is there any signal for the operator if he is not at his post?'{'}

"I think there is none," said Marconi.

"Ought it not be incumbent upon ships to have an operator always at the
key?"

"Yes; but ship-owners don't like to carry two operators when they can
get along with one. The smaller boat owners do not like the expense of
two operators."


SECOND OFFICER TESTIFIES

Charles Herbert Lightoller, second officer of the Titanic, followed
Marconi on the stand. Mr. Lightoller said he understood the maximum
speed of the Titanic, as shown by its trial tests, to have been
twenty-two and a half to twenty-three knots. Senator Smith asked if
the rule requiring life-saving apparatus to be in each room for each
passenger was complied with.

"Everything was complete," said Lightoller. "Sixteen life-boats, of
which four were collapsible, were on the Titanic," he added. During the
tests, he said, Captain Clark, of the British Board of Trade, was aboard
the Titanic to inspect its life-saving equipment.

"How thorough are these captains of the Board of Trade in inspecting
ships?" asked Senator Smith.

"Captain Clark is so thorough that we called him a nuisance."


TITANIC KILLED RAPIDLY

After testifying to the circumstances under which the life-boats were
filled and lowered, Lightoller continued. "The boat's deck was only ten
feet from the water when I lowered the sixth boat. When we lowered the
first, the distance to the water was seventy feet."

"If the same course was pursued on the starboard side as you pursued on
the port, in filling boats, how do you account for so many members of
the crew being saved?" asked Chairman Smith.

"I have inquired especially and have found that for every six persons
picked up, five were either firemen or stewards."


COTTAM TELLS HIS STORY

Thomas Cottam, of Liverpool, the Marconi operator on the Carpathia, was
the next witness.

Cottam said that he was about ready to retire Sunday night, having
partially removed his clothes, and was waiting for a reply to a message
to the Parisian when he heard Cape Cod trying to call the Titanic.
Cottam called the Titanic operator to inform him of the fact, and
received the reply. 'Come at once; this is a distress message. C. Q. D.'
"

"What did you do then?"

"I confirmed the distress message by asking the Titanic if I should
report the distress message to the captain of the Carpathia."

"How much time elapsed after you received the Titanic's distress message
before you reported it to Captain Rostron?"

"About a couple of minutes," Cottam answered.


COTTAM RECALLED

When the committee resumed the investigation on April 20th, Cottam was
recalled to the stand.

Senator Smith asked the witness if he had received any messages from the
time the Carpathia left the scene of the disaster until it reached New
York. The purpose of this question was to discover whether any official
had sought to keep back the news of the disaster.

"No, sir," answered Cottam. "I reported the entire matter myself to the
steamship Baltic at 10.30 o'clock Monday morning. I told her we had been
to the wreck and had picked up as many of the passengers as we could."

Cottam denied that he had sent any message that all passengers had been
saved, or anything on which such a report could be based.

Cottam said he was at work Monday and until Wednesday. He repeated
his testimony of the previous day and said he had been without sleep
throughout Sunday, Monday, Tuesday and until late Wednesday afternoon
when he had been relieved by Bride.

"Did you or Bride send any message declaring that the Titanic was being
towed into Halifax?"

"No, sir," said the witness, with emphasis.


MARCONI EXPLAINS

In an effort to determine whether the signal "C. Q. D." might not have
been misunderstood by passing ships, Senator Smith called upon Mr.
Marconi.

"The 'C. Q.,'" said Marconi, "is an international signal which meant
that all stations should cease sending except the one using the call.
The 'D.' was added to indicate danger. The call, however, now has been
superseded by the universal call, 'S. O. S.'"

BRIDE ON THE STAND

Harold S. Bride, the sole surviving operator of the Titanic, was then
called.

Bride said he knew the Frankfurt was nearer than the Carpathia when he
called for assistance, but that he ceased his efforts to communicate
with the former because her operator persisted in asking, "What is the
matter?" despite Bride's message that the ship was in distress.

Time after time Senator Smith asked in varying forms why the Titanic did
not explain its condition to the Frankfurt.

"Any operator receiving 'C. Q. D.' and the position of the ship, if he
is on the job," said Bride, "would tell the captain at once."

Marconi again testified to the distress signals, and said that the
Frankfurt was equipped with Marconi wireless. He said that the receipt
of the signal "C. Q. D." by the Frankfurt's operator should have been
all-sufficient to send the Frankfurt to the immediate rescue.


ALL APPEALS RECEIVED

Under questioning by Senator Smith, Bride said that undoubtedly the
Frankfurt received all of the urgent appeals for help sent subsequently
to the Carpathia.


INVESTIGATION CARRIED TO WASHINGTON

The first witness when the investigation was resumed in Washington on
April 22d was P. A. S. Franklin, vice-president of the International
Mercantile Marine Company.

Franklin testified that he had had no communication with Captain Smith
during the Titanic's voyage, nor with Ismay, except one cable from
Southampton.

Senator Smith then showed Mr. Franklin the telegram received by
Congressman Hughes, of West Virginia, from the White Star Line, dated
New York, April 15th, and addressed to J. A. Hughes, Huntington, W. Va.,
as follows:


"Titanic proceeding to Halifax. Passengers probably land on Wednesday.
All safe.

            (Signed)            "THE WHITE STAR LINE. "


TELEGRAM A MYSTERY

"I ask you," continued the senator, "whether you know about the sending
of that telegram, by whom it was authorized and from whom it was sent?"

"I do not, sir," said Franklin. "Since it was mentioned at the Waldorf
Saturday we have had the entire passenger staff examined and we cannot
find out."

Asked when he first knew that the Titanic had sunk, Franklin said he
first knew it about 6.27 P.M., Monday.

Mr. Franklin then produced a thick package of telegrams which he had
received in relation to the disaster.

"About twenty minutes of two on Monday morning," said he, "I was
awakened by a telephone bell, and was called by a reporter for some
paper who informed me that the Titanic had met with an accident and was
sinking. I asked him where he got the information. He told me that
it had come by wireless from the steamship Virginian, which had been
appealed to by the Titanic for aid."

Mr. Franklin said he called up the White Star docks, but they had no
information, and he then appealed to the Associated Press, and there was
read to him a dispatch from Cape Race advising him of the accident.

"I asked the Associated Press," said Mr. Franklin, "not to send out
the dispatch until we had more detailed information, in order to avoid
causing unnecessary alarm. I was told, however, that the story already
had been sent."

The reassuring statements sent out by the line in the early hours of the
disaster next were made the subject of inquiry.

"Tell the committee on what you based those statements," directed
Senator Smith.

"We based them on reports and rumors received at Cape Race by
individuals and by the newspapers. They were rumors, and we could not
place our finger on anything authentic."


FIRST DEFINITE NEWS

"At 6.20 or 6.30 Monday evening," Mr. Franklin continued, "a message was
received telling the fateful news that the Carpathia reached the Titanic
and found nothing but boats and wreckage; that the Titanic had foundered
at 2.20 A.M. in 41.16 north, 50.14 west; that the Carpathia picked up
all the boats and had on board about 675 Titanic survivors--passengers
and crew.

"It was such a terrible shock that it took me several moments to think
what to do. Then I went downstairs to the reporters, I began to read the
message, holding it high in my hand. I had read only to the second line,
which said that the Titanic had sunk, when there was not a reporter
left--they were so anxious to get to the telephones.


SAFETY EQUIPMENT

"The Titanic's equipment was in excess of the law," said the witness.
"It carried its clearance in the shape of a certificate from the British
Board of Trade. I might say that no vessel can leave a British port
without a certificate that it is equipped to care for human lives aboard
in case of accident. It is the law."

"Do you know of anyone, any officer or man or any official, whom you
deem could be held responsible for the accident and its attendant loss
of life?"

"Positively not. No one thought such an accident could happen. It was
undreamed of. I think it would be absurd to try to hold some individual
responsible. Every precaution was taken; that the precautions were of
no avail is a source of the deepest sorrow. But the accident was
unavoidable."


FOURTH OFFICER TESTIFIES

J. B. Boxhall, the fourth officer, was then questioned.

"Were there any drills or any inspection before the Titanic sailed?" he
was asked.

"Both," said the witness. "The men were mustered and the life-boats
lowered in the presence of the inspectors from the Board of Trade."

"How many boats were lowered?"

"Just two, sir."

"One on each side of the ship?"

"No, sir. They were both on the same side. We were lying in dock."

The witness said he did not know whether the lowering tackle ran free or
not on that occasion.

"In lowering the life-boats at the test, did the gear work
satisfactorily?"

"So far as I know."

In lowering a life-boat, he said, first the boat has to be cleared,
chocks knocked down and the boat hangs free. Then the davits are screwed
out to the ship's side and the boat lowered.

At the time of the tests all officers of the Titanic were present.

Boxhall said that under the weather conditions experienced at the
time of the collision the life-boats were supposed to carry sixty-five
persons. Under the regulations of the British Board of Trade, in
addition to the oars, there were in the boats water breakers, water
dippers, bread, bailers, mast and sail and lights and a supply of oil.
All of these supplies, said Boxhall, were in the boats when the Titanic
left Belfast. He could not say whether they were in when the vessel left
Southampton.

"Now," repeated Senator Smith, "suppose the weather was clear and the
sky unruffled, as it was at the time of the disaster, how many would the
boat hold?"

"Really, I don't know. It would depend largely upon the people who
were to enter. If they did as they were told I believe each boat could
accommodate sixty-five persons."

Boxhall testified to the sobriety and good habits of his superior and
brother officers.


NO TRACE OF DAMAGE INSIDE

Boxhall said he went down to the steerage, inspected all the decks in
the vicinity of where the ship had struck, found no traces of any damage
and went directly to the bridge and so reported.


CARPENTER FOUND LEAKS

"The captain ordered me to send a carpenter to sound the ship, but I
found a carpenter coming up with the announcement that the ship was
taking water. In the mail room I found mail sacks floating about while
the clerks were at work. I went to the bridge and reported, and the
captain ordered the life-boats to be made ready."
