sing another song," retorted the Gael.

"And being the day it is," said Henry, with the same contemptuous
indifference, "I pray you to stand out of my light."

"You are an uncivil person; but her own self is fir nan ord too; and she
knows the smith is fiery when the iron is hot."

"If her nainsell be hammer man herself, her nainsell may make her nain
harness," replied Henry.

"And so her nainsell would, and never fash you for the matter; but it
is said, Gow Chrom, that you sing and whistle tunes over the swords and
harnishes that you work, that have power to make the blades cut steel
links as if they were paper, and the plate and mail turn back steel
lances as if they were boddle prins?"

"They tell your ignorance any nonsense that Christian men refuse to
believe," said Henry. "I whistle at my work whatever comes uppermost,
like an honest craftsman, and commonly it is the Highlandman's 'Och hone
for Houghman stares!' My hammer goes naturally to that tune."

"Friend, it is but idle to spur a horse when his legs are ham shackled,"
said the Highlander, haughtily. "Her own self cannot fight even now, and
there is little gallantry in taunting her thus."

"By nails and hammer, you are right there," said the smith, altering his
tone. "But speak out at once, friend, what is it thou wouldst have of
me? I am in no humour for dallying."

"A hauberk for her chief, Eachin MacIan," said the Highlander.

"You are a hammer man, you say? Are you a judge of this?" said our
smith, producing from a chest the mail shirt on which he had been lately
employed.

The Gael handled it with a degree of admiration which had something of
envy in it. He looked curiously at every part of its texture, and at
length declared it the very best piece of armour that he had ever seen.

"A hundred cows and bullocks and a good drift of sheep would be e'en
ower cheap an offer," said the Highlandman, by way of tentative; "but
her nainsell will never bid thee less, come by them how she can."

"It is a fair proffer," replied Henry; "but gold nor gear will never buy
that harness. I want to try my own sword on my own armour, and I will
not give that mail coat to any one but who will face me for the best of
three blows and a thrust in the fair field; and it is your chief's upon
these terms."

"Hut, prut, man--take a drink and go to bed," said the Highlander, in
great scorn. "Are ye mad? Think ye the captain of the Clan Quhele will
be brawling and battling with a bit Perth burgess body like you? Whisht,
man, and hearken. Her nainsell will do ye mair credit than ever belonged
to your kin. She will fight you for the fair harness hersell."

"She must first show that she is my match," said Henry, with a grim
smile.

"How! I, one of Eachin MacIan's leichtach, and not your match!"

"You may try me, if you will. You say you are a fir nan ord. Do you know
how to cast a sledge hammer?"

"Ay, truly--ask the eagle if he can fly over Farragon."

"But before you strive with me, you must first try a cast with one of my
leichtach. Here, Dunter, stand forth for the honour of Perth! And now,
Highlandman, there stands a row of hammers; choose which you will, and
let us to the garden."

The Highlander whose name was Norman nan Ord, or Norman of the Hammer,
showed his title to the epithet by selecting the largest hammer of the
set, at which Henry smiled. Dunter, the stout journeyman of the smith,
made what was called a prodigious cast; but the Highlander, making a
desperate effort, threw beyond it by two or three feet, and looked with
an air of triumph to Henry, who again smiled in reply.

"Will you mend that?" said the Gael, offering our smith the hammer.

"Not with that child's toy," said Henry, "which has scarce weight to
fly against the wind. Jannekin, fetch me Sampson; or one of you help the
boy, for Sampson is somewhat ponderous."

The hammer now produced was half as heavy again as that which the
Highlander had selected as one of unusual weight. Norman stood
astonished; but he was still more so when Henry, taking his position,
swung the ponderous implement far behind his right haunch joint, and
dismissed it from his hand as if it had flown from a warlike engine. The
air groaned and whistled as the mass flew through it. Down at length it
came, and the iron head sunk a foot into the earth, a full yard beyond
the cast of Norman.

The Highlander, defeated and mortified, went to the spot where the
weapon lay, lifted it, poised it in his hand with great wonder, and
examined it closely, as if he expected to discover more in it than a
common hammer. He at length returned it to the owner with a melancholy
smile, shrugging his shoulders and shaking his head as the smith asked
him whether he would not mend his cast.

"Norman has lost too much at the sport already," he replied. "She has
lost her own name of the Hammerer. But does her own self, the Gow Chrom,
work at the anvil with that horse's load of iron?"

"You shall see, brother," said Henry, leading the way to the smithy.
"Dunter," he said, "rax me that bar from the furnace"; and uplifting
Sampson, as he called the monstrous hammer, he plied the metal with a
hundred strokes from right to left--now with the right hand, now with
the left, now with both, with so much strength at once and dexterity,
that he worked off a small but beautifully proportioned horseshoe in
half the time that an ordinary smith would have taken for the same
purpose, using a more manageable implement.

"Oigh--oigh!" said the Highlander, "and what for would you be fighting
with our young chief, who is far above your standard, though you were
the best smith ever wrought with wind and fire?"

"Hark you!" said Henry; "you seem a good fellow, and I'll tell you the
truth. Your master has wronged me, and I give him this harness freely
for the chance of fighting him myself."

"Nay, if he hath wronged you he must meet you," said the life guardsman.
"To do a man wrong takes the eagle's feather out of the chief's bonnet;
and were he the first in the Highlands, and to be sure so is Eachin,
he must fight the man he has wronged, or else a rose falls from his
chaplet."

"Will you move him to this," said Henry, "after the fight on Sunday?"

"Oh, her nainsell will do her best, if the hawks have not got her
nainsell's bones to pick; for you must know, brother, that Clan
Chattan's claws pierce rather deep."

"The armour is your chief's on that condition," said Henry; "but I will
disgrace him before king and court if he does not pay me the price."

"Deil a fear--deil a fear; I will bring him in to the barrace myself,"
said Norman, "assuredly."

"You will do me a pleasure," replied Henry; "and that you may remember
your promise, I will bestow on you this dirk. Look--if you hold it
truly, and can strike between the mail hood and the collar of your
enemy, the surgeon will be needless."

The Highlander was lavish in his expressions of gratitude, and took his
leave.

"I have given him the best mail harness I ever wrought," said the smith
to himself, rather repenting his liberality, "for the poor chance
that he will bring his chief into a fair field with me; and then let
Catharine be his who can win her fairly. But much I dread the youth will
find some evasion, unless he have such luck on Palm Sunday as may induce
him to try another combat. That is some hope, however; for I have often,
ere now, seen a raw young fellow shoot up after his first fight from a
dwarf into a giant queller."

Thus, with little hope, but with the most determined resolution, Henry
Smith awaited the time that should decide his fate. What made him augur
the worst was the silence both of the glover and of his daughter.

"They are ashamed," he said, "to confess the truth to me, and therefore
they are silent."

Upon the Friday at noon, the two bands of thirty men each, representing
the contending clans, arrived at the several points where they were to
halt for refreshments.

The Clan Quhele was entertained hospitably at the rich abbey of Scone,
while the provost regaled their rivals at his Castle of Kinfauns, the
utmost care being taken to treat both parties with the most punctilious
attention, and to afford neither an opportunity of complaining of
partiality. All points of etiquette were, in the mean while, discussed
and settled by the Lord High Constable Errol and the young Earl of
Crawford, the former acting on the part of the Clan Chattan and the
latter patronising the Clan Quhele. Messengers were passing continually
from the one earl to the other, and they held more than: six meetings
within thirty hours, before the ceremonial of the field could be exactly
arranged.

Meanwhile, in case of revival of ancient quarrel, many seeds of
which existed betwixt the burghers and their mountain neighbours, a
proclamation commanded the citizens not to approach within half a mile
of the place where the Highlanders were quartered; while on their part
the intended combatants were prohibited from approaching Perth without
special license. Troops were stationed to enforce this order, who did
their charge so scrupulously as to prevent Simon Glover himself, burgess
and citizen of Perth, from approaching the town, because he owned having
come thither at the same time with the champions of Eachin MacIan, and
wore a plaid around him of their check or pattern. This interruption
prevented Simon from seeking out Henry Wynd and possessing him with a
true knowledge of all that had happened since their separation, which
intercourse, had it taken place, must have materially altered the
catastrophe of our narrative.

On Saturday afternoon another arrival took place, which interested the
city almost as much as the preparations for the expected combat. This
was the approach of the Earl Douglas, who rode through the town with a
troop of only thirty horse, but all of whom were knights and gentlemen
of the first consequence. Men's eyes followed this dreaded peer as they
pursue the flight of an eagle through the clouds, unable to ken the
course of the bird of Jove yet silent, attentive, and as earnest in
observing him as if they could guess the object for which he sweeps
through the firmament; He rode slowly through the city, and passed out
at the northern gate. He next alighted at the Dominican convent and
desired to see the Duke of Albany. The Earl was introduced instantly,
and received by the Duke with a manner which was meant to be graceful
and conciliatory, but which could not conceal both art and inquietude.
When the first greetings were over, the Earl said with great gravity:
"I bring you melancholy news. Your Grace's royal nephew, the Duke of
Rothsay, is no more, and I fear hath perished by some foul practices."

"Practices!" said the Duke' in confusion--"what practices? Who dared
practise on the heir of the Scottish throne?"

"'Tis not for me to state how these doubts arise," said Douglas; "but
men say the eagle was killed with an arrow fledged from his own wing,
and the oak trunk rent by a wedge of the same wood."

"Earl of Douglas," said the Duke of Albany, "I am no reader of riddles."

"Nor am I a propounder of them," said Douglas, haughtily, "Your Grace
will find particulars in these papers worthy of perusal. I will go for
half an hour to the cloister garden, and then rejoin you."

"You go not to the King, my lord?" said Albany.

"No," answered Douglas; "I trust your Grace will agree with me that we
should conceal this great family misfortune from our sovereign till the
business of tomorrow be decided."

"I willingly agree," said Albany. "If the King heard of this loss, he
could not witness the combat; and if he appear not in person, these men
are likely to refuse to fight, and the whole work is cast loose. But
I pray you sit down, my lord, while I read these melancholy papers
respecting poor Rothsay."

He passed the papers through his hands, turning some over with a hasty
glance, and dwelling on others as if their contents had been of the
last importance. When he had spent nearly a quarter of an hour in this
manner, he raised his eyes, and said very gravely: "My lord, in these
most melancholy documents, it is yet a comfort to see nothing which can
renew the divisions in the King's councils, which were settled by the
last solemn agreement between your lordship and myself. My unhappy
nephew was by that agreement to be set aside, until time should send him
a graver judgment. He is now removed by Fate, and our purpose in that
matter is anticipated and rendered unnecessary."

"If your Grace," replied the Earl, "sees nothing to disturb the good
understanding which the tranquillity and safety of Scotland require
should exist between us, I am not so ill a friend of my country as to
look closely for such."

"I understand you, my Lord of Douglas," said Albany, eagerly. "You
hastily judged that I should be offended with your lordship for
exercising your powers of lieutenancy, and punishing the detestable
murderers within my territory of Falkland. Credit me, on the contrary, I
am obliged to your lordship for taking out of my hands the punishment of
these wretches, as it would have broken my heart even to have looked
on them. The Scottish Parliament will inquire, doubtless, into this
sacrilegious deed; and happy am I that the avenging sword has been
in the hand of a man so important as your lordship. Our communication
together, as your lordship must well recollect, bore only concerning a
proposed restraint of my unfortunate nephew until the advance of a year
or two had taught him discretion?"

"Such was certainly your Grace's purpose, as expressed to me," said the
Earl; "I can safely avouch it."

"Why, then, noble earl, we cannot be censured because villains, for
their own revengeful ends, appear to have engrafted a bloody termination
on our honest purpose?"

"The Parliament will judge it after their wisdom," said Douglas. "For my
part, my conscience acquits me."

"And mine assoilzies me," said the Duke with solemnity. "Now, my lord,
touching the custody of the boy James, who succeeds to his father's
claims of inheritance?"

"The King must decide it," said Douglas, impatient of the conference.
"I will consent to his residence anywhere save at Stirling, Doune, or
Falkland."

With that he left the apartment abruptly.

"He is gone," muttered the crafty Albany, "and he must be my ally, yet
feels himself disposed to be my mortal foe. No matter, Rothsay sleeps
with his fathers, James may follow in time, and then--a crown is the
recompense of my perplexities."



CHAPTER XXXIV.

     Thretty for thretty faucht in barreris,
     At Sanct Johnstoun on a day besyde the black freris.

     WYNTOUN.


Palm Sunday now dawned. At an earlier period of the Christian Church,
the use of any of the days of Passion Week for the purpose of combat
would have been accounted a profanity worthy of excommunication. The
Church of Rome, to her infinite honour, had decided that during the holy
season of Easter, when the redemption of man from his fallen state was
accomplished, the sword of war should be sheathed, and angry monarchs
should respect the season termed the Truce of God. The ferocious
violence of the latter wars betwixt Scotland and England had destroyed
all observance of this decent and religious Ordinance. Very often the
most solemn occasions were chosen by one party for an attack, because
they hoped to find the other engaged in religious duties and unprovided
for defence. Thus the truce, once considered as proper to the season,
had been discontinued; and it became not unusual even to select the
sacred festivals of the church for decision of the trial by combat, to
which this intended contest bore a considerable resemblance.

On the present occasion, however, the duties of the day were observed
with the usual solemnity, and the combatants themselves took share in
them. Bearing branches of yew in their hands, as the readiest substitute
for palm boughs, they marched respectively to the Dominican and
Carthusian convents, to hear High Mass, and, by a show at least of
devotion, to prepare themselves for the bloody strife of the day. Great
care had of course been taken that, during this march, they should not
even come within the sound of each other's bagpipes; for it was certain
that, like game cocks exchanging mutual notes of defiance, they would
have sought out and attacked each other before they arrived at the place
of combat.

The citizens of Perth crowded to see the unusual procession on the
streets, and thronged the churches where the two clans attended their
devotions, to witness their behaviour, and to form a judgment from
their appearance which was most likely to obtain the advantage in
the approaching conflict. Their demeanour in the church, although not
habitual frequenters of places of devotion, was perfectly decorous; and,
notwithstanding their wild and untamed dispositions, there were few of
the mountaineers who seemed affected either with curiosity or wonder.
They appeared to think it beneath their dignity of character to testify
either curiosity or surprise at many things which were probably then
presented to them for the first time.

On the issue of the combat, few even of the most competent judges dared
venture a prediction; although the great size of Torquil and his eight
stalwart sons induced some who professed themselves judges of the thewes
and sinews of men to incline to ascribe the advantage to the party of
the Clan Quhele. The opinion of the female sex was much decided by
the handsome form, noble countenance, and gallant demeanour of Eachin
MacIan. There were more than one who imagined they had recollection
of his features, but his splendid military attire rendered the humble
glover's apprentice unrecognisable in the young Highland chief, saving
by one person.

That person, as may well be supposed, was the Smith of the Wynd, who
had been the foremost in the crowd that thronged to see the gallant
champions of Clan Quhele. It was with mingled feelings of dislike,
jealousy, and something approaching to admiration that he saw the
glover's apprentice stripped of his mean slough, and blazing forth as a
chieftain, who, by his quick eye and gallant demeanour, the noble shape
of his brow and throat, his splendid arms and well proportioned limbs,
seemed well worthy to hold the foremost rank among men selected to live
or die for the honour of their race. The smith could hardly think that
he looked upon the same passionate boy whom he had brushed off as
he might a wasp that stung him, and, in mere compassion, forebore to
despatch by treading on him.

"He looks it gallantly with my noble hauberk," thus muttered Henry to
himself, "the best I ever wrought. Yet, if he and I stood together where
there was neither hand to help nor eye to see, by all that is blessed in
this holy church, the good harness should return to its owner! All that
I am worth would I give for three fair blows on his shoulders to undo my
own best work; but such happiness will never be mine. If he escape from
the conflict, it will be with so high a character for courage, that he
may well disdain to put his fortune, in its freshness, to the risk of
an encounter with a poor burgess like myself. He will fight by his
champion, and turn me over to my fellow craftsman the hammerer, when all
I can reap will be the pleasure of knocking a Highland bullock on the
head. If I could but see Simon Glover! I will to the other church in
quest of him, since for sure he must have come down from the Highlands."

The congregation was moving from the church of the Dominicans when the
smith formed this determination, which he endeavoured to carry into
speedy execution, by thrusting through the crowd as hastily as the
solemnity of the place and occasion would permit. In making his way
through the press, he was at one instant carried so close to Eachin
that their eyes encountered. The smith's hardy and embrowned countenance
coloured up like the heated iron on which he wrought, and retained
its dark red hue for several minutes. Eachin's features glowed with a
brighter blush of indignation, and a glance of fiery hatred was shot
from his eyes. But the sudden flush died away in ashy paleness, and his
gaze instantly avoided the unfriendly but steady look with which it was
encountered.

Torquil, whose eye never quitted his foster son, saw his emotion, and
looked anxiously around to discover the cause. But Henry was already
at a distance, and hastening on his way to the Carthusian convent. Here
also the religious service of the day was ended; and those who had so
lately borne palms in honour of the great event which brought peace
on earth and goodwill to the children of men were now streaming to
the place of combat--some prepared to take the lives of their fellow
creatures or to lose their own, others to view the deadly strife with
the savage delight which the heathens took in the contests of their
gladiators.

The crowd was so great that any other person might well have despaired
of making way through it. But the general deference entertained for
Henry of the Wynd, as the champion of Perth, and the universal sense of
his ability to force a passage, induced all to unite in yielding room
for him, so that he was presently quite close to the warriors of the
Clan Chattan. Their pipers marched at the head of their column. Next
followed the well known banner, displaying a mountain cat rampant, with
the appropriate caution, "Touch not the cat, but (i.e. without) the
glove." The chief followed with his two handed sword advanced, as if to
protect the emblem of the tribe. He was a man of middle stature, more
than fifty years old, but betraying neither in features nor form any
decay of strength or symptoms of age. His dark red close curled locks
were in part chequered by a few grizzled hairs, but his step and gesture
were as light in the dance, in the chase, or in the battle as if he had
not passed his thirtieth year. His grey eye gleamed with a wild light
expressive of valour and ferocity mingled; but wisdom and experience
dwelt on the expression of his forehead, eyebrows, and lips. The chosen
champions followed by two and two. There was a cast of anxiety on
several of their faces, for they had that morning discovered the absence
of one of their appointed number; and, in a contest so desperate as was
expected, the loss seemed a matter of importance to all save to their
high mettled chief, MacGillie Chattanach.

"Say nothing to the Saxons of his absence," said this bold leader, when
the diminution of his force was reported to him. "The false Lowland
tongues might say that one of Clan Chattan was a coward, and perhaps
that the rest favoured his escape, in order to have a pretence to avoid
the battle. I am sure that Ferquhard Day will be found in the ranks ere
we are ready for battle; or, if he should not, am not I man enough for
two of the Clan Quhele? or would we not fight them fifteen to thirty,
rather than lose the renown that this day will bring us?"

The tribe received the brave speech of their leader with applause, yet
there were anxious looks thrown out in hopes of espying the return of
the deserter; and perhaps the chief himself was the only one of the
determined band who was totally indifferent on the subject.

They marched on through the streets without seeing anything of Ferquhard
Day, who, many a mile beyond the mountains, was busied in receiving such
indemnification as successful love could bestow for the loss of honour.
MacGillie Chattanach marched on without seeming to observe the absence
of the deserter, and entered upon the North Inch, a beautiful and level
plain, closely adjacent to the city, and appropriated to the martial
exercises of the inhabitants.

The plain is washed on one side by the deep and swelling Tay. There was
erected within it a strong palisade, inclosing on three sides a space of
one hundred and fifty yards in length and seventy-four yards in width.
The fourth side of the lists was considered as sufficiently fenced
by the river. An amphitheatre for the accommodation of spectators
surrounded the palisade, leaving a large space free to be occupied by
armed men on foot and horseback, and for the more ordinary class of
spectators. At the extremity of the lists which was nearest to the city,
there was a range of elevated galleries for the King and his courtiers,
so highly decorated with rustic treillage, intermingled with gilded
ornaments, that the spot retains to this day the name of the Golden, or
Gilded, Arbour.

The mountain minstrelsy, which sounded the appropriate pibrochs or
battle tunes of the rival confederacies, was silent when they entered on
the Inch, for such was the order which had been given. Two stately but
aged warriors, each bearing the banner of his tribe, advanced to the
opposite extremities of the lists, and, pitching their standards into
the earth, prepared to be spectators of a fight in which they were not
to join. The pipers, who were also to be neutral in the strife, took
their places by their respective brattachs.

The multitude received both bands with the same general shout with which
on similar occasions they welcome those from whose exertion they expect
amusement, or what they term sport. The destined combatants returned
no answer to this greeting, but each party advanced to the opposite
extremities of the lists, where were entrances by which they were to be
admitted to the interior. A strong body of men at arms guarded either
access; and the Earl Marshal at the one and the Lord High Constable at
the other carefully examined each individual, to see whether he had the
appropriate arms, being steel cap, mail shirt, two handed sword, and
dagger. They also examined the numbers of each party; and great was the
alarm among the multitude when the Earl of Errol held up his hand and
cried: "Ho! The combat cannot proceed, for the Clan Chattan lack one of
their number."

"What reek of that?" said the young Earl of Crawford; "they should have
counted better ere they left home."

The Earl Marshal, however, agreed with the Constable that the fight
could not proceed until the inequality should be removed; and a general
apprehension was excited in the assembled multitude that, after all the
preparation, there would be no battle.

Of all present there were only two perhaps who rejoiced at the prospect
of the combat being adjourned, and these were the captain of the Clan
Quhele and the tender hearted King Robert. Meanwhile the two chiefs,
each attended by a special friend and adviser, met in the midst of the
lists, having, to assist them in determining what was to be done, the
Earl Marshal, the Lord High Constable, the Earl of Crawford, and Sir
Patrick Charteris. The chief of the Clan Chattan declared himself
willing and desirous of fighting upon the spot, without regard to the
disparity of numbers.

"That," said Torquil of the Oak, "Clan Quhele will never consent to.
You can never win honour from us with the sword, and you seek but a
subterfuge, that you may say when you are defeated, as you know you will
be, that it was for want of the number of your band fully counted out.
But I make a proposal: Ferquhard Day was the youngest of your band,
Eachin MacIan is the youngest of ours; we will set him aside in place of
the man who has fled from the combat."

"A most unjust and unequal proposal," exclaimed Toshach Beg, the second,
as he might be termed, of MacGillie Chattanach. "The life of the chief
is to the clan the breath of our nostrils, nor will we ever consent that
our chief shall be exposed to dangers which the captain of Clan Quhele
does not share."

Torquil saw with deep anxiety that his plan was about to fail when the
objection was made to Hector's being withdrawn from the battle, and
he was meditating how to support his proposal, when Eachin himself
interfered. His timidity, it must be observed, was not of that sordid
and selfish nature which induces those who are infected by it calmly
to submit to dishonour rather than risk danger. On the contrary, he was
morally brave, though constitutionally timid, and the shame of avoiding
the combat became at the moment more powerful than the fear of facing
it.

"I will not hear," he said, "of a scheme which will leave my sword
sheathed during this day's glorious combat. If I am young in arms, there
are enough of brave men around me whom I may imitate if I cannot equal."

He spoke these words in a spirit which imposed on Torquil, and perhaps
on the young chief himself.

"Now, God bless his noble heart!" said the foster father to himself.
"I was sure the foul spell would be broken through, and that the tardy
spirit which besieged him would fly at the sound of the pipe and the
first flutter of the brattach!"

"Hear me, Lord Marshal," said the Constable. "The hour of combat may not
be much longer postponed, for the day approaches to high noon. Let the
chief of Clan Chattan take the half hour which remains, to find, if he
can, a substitute for this deserter; if he cannot, let them fight as
they stand."

"Content I am," said the Marshal, "though, as none of his own clan are
nearer than fifty miles, I see not how MacGillis Chattanach is to find
an auxiliary."

"That is his business," said the High Constable; "but, if he offers a
high reward, there are enough of stout yeomen surrounding the lists,
who will be glad enough to stretch their limbs in such a game as is
expected. I myself, did my quality and charge permit, would blythely
take a turn of work amongst these wild fellows, and think it fame won."

They communicated their decision to the Highlanders, and the chief of
the Clan Chattan replied: "You have judged unpartially and nobly, my
lords, and I deem myself obliged to follow your direction. So make
proclamation, heralds, that, if any one will take his share with Clan
Chattan of the honours and chances of this day, he shall have present
payment of a gold crown, and liberty to fight to the death in my ranks."

"You are something chary of your treasure, chief," said the Earl
Marshal: "a gold crown is poor payment for such a campaign as is before
you."

"If there be any man willing to fight for honour," replied MacGillis
Chattanach, "the price will be enough; and I want not the service of a
fellow who draws his sword for gold alone."

The heralds had made their progress, moving half way round the lists,
stopping from time to time to make proclamation as they had been
directed, without the least apparent disposition on the part of any one
to accept of the proffered enlistment. Some sneered at the poverty of
the Highlanders, who set so mean a price upon such a desperate service.
Others affected resentment, that they should esteem the blood of
citizens so lightly. None showed the slightest intention to undertake
the task proposed, until the sound of the proclamation reached Henry of
the Wynd, as he stood without the barrier, speaking from time to time
with Baillie Craigdallie, or rather listening vaguely to what the
magistrate was saying to him.

"Ha! what proclaim they?" he cried out.

"A liberal offer on the part of MacGillie Chattanach," said the host of
the Griffin, "who proposes a gold crown to any one who will turn wildcat
for the day, and be killed a little in his service! That's all."

"How!" exclaimed the smith, eagerly, "do they make proclamation for a
man to fight against the Clan Quhele?"

"Ay, marry do they," said Griffin; "but I think they will find no such
fools in Perth."

He had hardly said the word, when he beheld the smith clear the barriers
at a single bound and alight in the lists, saying: "Here am I, sir
herald, Henry of the Wynd, willing to battle on the part of the Clan
Chattan."

A cry of admiration ran through the multitude, while the grave burghers,
not being able to conceive the slightest reason for Henry's behaviour,
concluded that his head must be absolutely turned with the love of
fighting. The provost was especially shocked.

"Thou art mad," he said, "Henry! Thou hast neither two handed sword nor
shirt of mail."

"Truly no," said Henry, "for I parted with a mail shirt, which I had
made for myself, to yonder gay chief of the Clan Quhele, who will soon
find on his shoulders with what sort of blows I clink my rivets! As for
two handed sword, why, this boy's brand will serve my turn till I can
master a heavier one."

"This must not be," said Errol. "Hark thee, armourer, by St. Mary, thou
shalt have my Milan hauberk and good Spanish sword."

"I thank your noble earlship, Sir Gilbert Hay, but the yoke with which
your brave ancestor turned the battle at Loncarty would serve my turn
well enough. I am little used to sword or harness that I have not
wrought myself, because I do not well know what blows the one will bear
out without being cracked or the other lay on without snapping."

The cry had in the mean while run through the multitude and passed into
the town, that the dauntless smith was about to fight without armour,
when, just as the fated hour was approaching, the shrill voice of a
female was heard screaming for passage through the crowd. The multitude
gave place to her importunity, and she advanced, breathless with haste
under the burden of a mail hauberk and a large two handed sword. The
widow of Oliver Proudfute was soon recognised, and the arms which she
bore were those of the smith himself, which, occupied by her husband on
the fatal evening when he was murdered, had been naturally conveyed
to his house with the dead body, and were now, by the exertions of
his grateful widow, brought to the lists at a moment when such proved
weapons were of the last consequence to their owner. Henry joyfully
received the well known arms, and the widow with trembling haste
assisted in putting them on, and then took leave of him, saying: "God
for the champion of the widow and orphan, and ill luck to all who come
before him!"

Confident at feeling himself in his well proved armour, Henry shook
himself as if to settle the steel shirt around him, and, unsheathing
the two handed sword, made it flourish over his head, cutting the air
through which it whistled in the form of the figure eight with an ease
and sleight of hand that proved how powerfully and skilfully he could
wield the ponderous weapon. The champions were now ordered to march
in their turns around the lists, crossing so as to avoid meeting each
other, and making obeisance as they passed the Golden Arbour where the
King was seated.

While this course was performing, most of the spectators were again
curiously comparing the stature, limbs, and sinews of the two parties,
and endeavouring to form a conjecture an to the probable issue of the
combat. The feud of a hundred years, with all its acts of aggression
