Christ until his latest breath.

The other tale, given at length by Roger Wendover, tells that Ragnar
Lodbrog, with only his hawk in his hand, was driven by a storm to the
coast of East Anglia, that King Edmund made him his huntsman, but the
former huntsman, Beorn, slew him through jealousy; that King Edmund
put Beorn bound in the boat which had brought Lodbrog over, and sent
him adrift to perish at sea. But the storm in turn blew him to
Denmark, where he told the sons of the man he had slain that Edmund
had murdered their father. Hence they came to avenge him. The
remainder of the tale agrees with the former narrative, and is the
only portion which certainly possesses historical truth.

St. Edmund has been much venerated in the eastern counties, and his
shrine at Edmundsbury was greatly reverenced. The tale of the death of
Sweyn, given in chapter 18, is a proof of this feeling, in which
perhaps the legend partly originated.

vii The Rista Oern.

This punishment was usual among the Northmen, and was called "at rista
oern," from the supposed resemblance of the victim to the figure of an
eagle. The operation was generally performed by the chief himself. It
is thus described by Snorre:

"Ad speciem aquilae dorsum ita ei laniabat, ut adacto ad spinam
gladio, costisque omnibus ad lumbos usque a tergo divisis, pulmones
extraheret."--Snorre, p. 108.

viii First appearance of Edmund.

The first mention of Edmund in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle as the
commander of the English forces is A.D. 1015, where he was joined with
Edric in the command, as related in the text, chapter 18. The date of
his birth is uncertain, but the comparison of authorities appeared to
the author to justify the ascription of the character and actions,
with which he is credited in the tale, to the English hero who first
taught his generation to assert their equality with the fierce Danish
invaders.

ix The appellations Wiltshire and Berkshire are of course of later
date.

x The early name of Abingdon.

Johnson, the compiler of the famous collection of English canons, is
of opinion that Cloveshoo, where the famous provincial council was
held A.D. 803, is identical with Abingdon, and that the town lost its
ancient name simply owing to the growing notoriety of the famous
abbey; for "no one," says he, "can doubt that the name Abingdon was
taken from the abbey." The first memorial, he adds, in which he finds
the name Abingdon, is in the Chronicle wherein the burial of Bishop
Sidesman, A.D. 977, in St. Mary's Minster, "which is at Abingdon," is
mentioned, who was honourably buried on the north side of that fane in
St. Paul's Chapel.

On the other hand, some learned antiquarians have maintained the
opposite opinion, that the name Abingdon existed even prior to the
foundation of the monastery; thus the Rev. Joseph Stevenson, in his
edition of the "Chronicle of the Abbey of Abingdon," says--"Abingdon
derives its name, not, as might at first sight be supposed, from the
abbey there founded--Abbey dune or Abbots dune: philology forbids it.
The place was so called from Abba, one of the early colonists of
Berkshire."

xi Bishops of Dorchester.

There appears to have been much uncertainty concerning the succession
of the bishops of this important see, owing, perhaps, to the confusion
caused by its having been the seat of two totally distinct
jurisdictions--the one over Wessex, the other over great part of
Mercia.

The names of the bishops in the narrative are taken from a list kindly
furnished by the Rev. W. Macfarlane, the present vicar of the Abbey
Church, whose indefatigable efforts have restored to the ancient fane
much of the glory of its ancient days.

According to this list, Ednoth was bishop from 1006 to 1016, when he
was slain by the Danes as recorded in the text; and Ethelm succeeding,
ruled the see till A.D. 1034, through the comparatively happy days of
Canute.

xii End of the Campaign of 1006.

The following extract from the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" gives the
further history of the campaign very concisely:

"Then went the Danes to Wallingford, and that all burned, and were
then one day in Cholsey: and they went then along Ashdown to
Cuckamsley hill, and there abode, as a daring boast; for it had been
often said, if they should reach Cuckamsley hill, that they would
never again get to the sea: then they went homewards another way. Then
were forces assembled at Kennet, and they there joined battle: and
they soon put that band to flight, and afterwards brought their booty
to the sea. But there might the Winchester men see an army daring and
fearless, as they went by their gates towards the sea, and fetched
themselves food and treasures over fifty miles from thence. Then had
the king gone over Thames into Shropshire, and there took up his abode
during the midwinter's tide. Then became the dread of the army so
great, that no man could think or discover how they could be driven
out of the land, or this land maintained against them; for they had
every shire in Wessex sadly marked by burning and by plundering. Then
the king began earnestly with the witan to consider what might seem
most advisable to them all, so that this land might be saved, before
it was utterly destroyed. Then the king and his witan decreed, for the
behoof of the whole nation, though it was hateful to them all, that
they needs must pay tribute to the Danish army. Then the king sent to
the army, and directed it to be made known to them that he would that
there should be a truce between them, and that tribute should be paid,
and food given them. And then all that they accepted, and then were
they victualled from throughout the English nation."--Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle, Bohn's Edition.

xiii This is copied almost verbatim from the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle.

xiv The account is taken almost verbatim from Florence of
Worcester.

xv Children of Ethelred.

By his two wives--(1) Aelfleda--(2) Emma, Ethelred had fourteen
children, of whom only four or five have been mentioned in this
narrative, or are of importance to the student--Edmund Ironside and
his brother Edwy (chapter 25), by Aelfleda, and Alfred and Edward by
Emma--the last well known in history as Edward the Confessor, and
introduced in Chapter XIX. of this tale. The following genealogical
table from Edgar to the children of Edmund may be of use. It will be
remembered that the lineage of the present royal house passes through
the last-named son of Edmund Ironside to Egbert:

Edgar
  * Edward the Martyr, d. 979.
  * Ethelred the Unready, d. 1016.
       + Edmund Ironside, 1016.
            o Edmund.
            o Edward, who became the great-grandfather of Henry the
              Second.
       + Edwy.
       + Elgitha.
       + Alfred, 1036.
       + Edward the Confessor, 1066.

xvi Sceorstan.

Antiquarians differ much about the site of this famous battle. Sharp
thinks it was near Chipping Norton in Oxfordshire, and Thorpe, in his
notes to "Florence of Worcester," says--"May not Chimney be the spot,
a hamlet in Oxfordshire, in the parish of Bampton-in-the-Bush, near
the edge of Gloucestershire, the name of Chimney being merely a
translation, introduced after the Norman Conquest, of Sceorstan, which
may probably have owed its origin to a Saxon house or hall,
conspicuous for having a chimney when that luxury was of rare
occurrence?" Others say that Sceorstan was not in Anglo-Saxon "a
chimney," but "a graven stone," and make the site that of a boundary
stone, still separating the four counties of Oxford, Gloucester,
Worcester, and Warwick, near Chipping Norton. Bosworth says it is
Sherston in Wilts.

xvii Single Combat between Edmund and Canute.

The following account is from Roger of Wendover:

"A few days after this lamentable battle (Assingdun), in which so many
nobles fell, King Edmund pursued Canute, who was now committing
ravages in Gloucestershire. The said kings therefore came together to
fight at a place called Deerhurst, Edmund with his men being on the
west side of the river Severn, and Canute with his men on the east,
both preparing themselves manfully for battle. When both armies were
now on the point of engaging, the wicked Earl Edric called together
the chiefs and addressed them as follows: 'Nobles and warriors, why do
we foolishly so often hazard our lives in battle for our kings, when
not even our deaths secure to them the kingdom, or put an end to their
covetousness? My counsel then is, that they alone should fight who
alone are contending for the kingdom; for what must be the lust of
dominion, when England, which formerly sufficed for eight kings, is
not now enough for two? Let them, therefore, either come to terms, or
fight alone for the kingdom.' This speech pleased them all; and the
determination of the chiefs being communicated to the kings, received
their approbation. There is a small island called Olney, in the mouth
of that river. Thither the kings, clad in splendid armour, crossed
over, and commenced a single combat in the presence of the people.
Parrying the thrust of the spear as well by their own skill as by the
interposition of their strong shields, they fought long and fiercely
hand to hand, his valour protecting Edmund, and his good fortune
Canute. The swords rung on their helmets, and sparks of fire flew from
their collision. The stout heart of Edmund was kindled by the act of
fighting, and as his blood grew warm his strength augmented; he raised
his right hand, brandished his sword, and redoubled his blows on the
head of his antagonist with such vehemence, that he seemed rather to
fulminate than to strike. Feeling his strength failing him, and unable
long to endure such an onset, Canute meditated peace; but as he was
crafty, and afraid lest if the youth perceived his weakness he would
not listen to his words of peace, drawing in all his breath he rushed
on Edmund with wonderful valour, and immediately drawing back a
little, he asked him to pause awhile and give him audience. The latter
was of a courteous soul, and, resting his shield on the ground, he
listened to the words of Canute, who thus proceeded: 'Hitherto I have
coveted thy kingdom, bravest of men; but now I prefer thyself not only
to the kingdom of England, but to all the world. Denmark serves me,
Norway yields me subjection, the King of Sweden has shaken hands with
me; so that, although Fortune promises me victory everywhere, yet thy
wonderful manliness hath so won my favour, that I long beyond measure
to have thee as friend and partner of my kingdom. I would that thou in
like manner wert desirous of me; that I might reign with thee in
England, and thou walk me in Denmark.' Why should I add more? King
Edmund most graciously assented and yielded to his words, though he
could not be forced by arms. The kingdom was therefore, by Edmund's
direction, divided between the two, the crown of the whole kingdom
reverting to King Edmund. The whole of England, therefore, to the
south of the river Thames, was ceded to him, with Essex and East
Anglia, and the city of London, the capital of the kingdom, Canute
retaining the northern parts of the kingdom. Laying aside, therefore,
their splendid armour, the kings embraced each other amidst the
rejoicings of both the armies. They then exchanged their garments and
arms in token of peace, and Edmund became Canute, and Canute
Edmund."--Roger of Wendover, Bohn's Edition.

xviii The Death of Edmund.

This lamentable occurrence is involved in much mystery. Edric Streorn
was generally credited with the deed, although some writers, e.g.
William of Malmesbury, think he used the aid of attendants on the
king, whom he bribed. The Chronicle is silent as to details. Henry of
Huntingdon ascribes the deed to a son of Edric. Roger of Wendover
agrees with him, adding the facts that the place was Oxford, and the
time St. Andrew's night, as in the text. Amidst these conflicting
statements fiction perhaps most legitimately takes its place.

xix The Ordeal.

This ancient custom was observed by Simplicius, Bishop of Autun, so
early as the fourth century, and was very generally in use during the
period of our tale. Although never formally recognised by the Church
of Rome, and forbidden by many edicts on the Continent, it was
administered in England under the direction of the clergy, and its
details prescribed by the canons during a period extending from the
laws of Alfred to the directions given in the ecclesiastical laws of
Edward the Confessor, the year before the Norman Conquest, A.D. 1065.
The first prohibition of its use in England is in the third year of
Henry the Third.

There were three principal modes of its administration. In the first,
the ordeal by water, the accused had to take a heavy piece of iron
from a boiling cauldron placed in the church--in the second, to carry
a bar of heated iron nine feet. The hand or arm was bound in linen,
the bandage sealed by the priest, and on the third day the limb was
uncovered. If the burn or scald had healed the prisoner was pronounced
innocent, otherwise he had to suffer the punishment due to his
offence.

The details given in the text are chiefly taken from the Canons of
Athelstane; but the mode of purgation therein described is similar to
that by which it is said Queen Emma repelled an accusation made by
Robert, Bishop of London, in the year 1046. This mode of
administration was perhaps more frequently used when a prompt appeal
was needed to the judgment of God, or in the case of persons of rank,
were they ever, as was seldom the case, compelled to appeal to its
decision.

xx It was a subject of complaint against Canute in Denmark that he
gave away most of the bishoprics to Englishmen.

xxi Character of Canute.

The great change in Canute's character after his accession to the
throne has been noticed by all writers. Each year he seemed to grow in
self-command and in the practice of virtue, while all men were edified
by his strict attention to his religions duties. Later in life he made
a pilgrimage to Rome, and a letter written thence gives a good idea of
his general affection for his people. It is addressed to the
archbishops and bishops and great men, and to all the English people,
and is written in the familiar style a father might use to his
children, especially telling them all he had seen at Rome, and about
the way in which he spent Easter with Pope John and the Emperor, whom
he persuaded to abolish certain dues exacted from English pilgrims. In
the last portion of the letter he tells them how he has made up his
mind to amend his life in every way, and to atone for all the wrongs
committed in the violence of youth. He forbids any person to use
violence or to make the royal needs an excuse for wrongdoing, saying,
"I have no need of money gathered by unrighteousness." He concludes by
saying that he is sure they will all be glad to hear how he has fared,
and that they know he has not spared himself any trouble, and never
will, to do all that lies in his power for the good of his people.

There is something in the whole tone of the letter which warms one's
heart towards the writer, and one cannot help contrasting the reigns
of the two conquerors, Canute and William: the first, beginning with
violence and bloodshed, grew daily in justice, mercy, and the love of
God, and so passed lamented to his grave; the latter, promising at
first to govern justly, grew worse and worse in oppressive cruelty and
all sorts of wrongdoing, until the sad and hopeless death scene in the
abbey of St. Gervase. But the delineation of the latter period must be
reserved, all being well, for the "Third Chronicle of Aescendune."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Alfgar the Dane or the Second
Chronicle of Aescendune, by A. D. Crake

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALFGAR THE DANE ***

***** This file should be named 13305.txt or 13305.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/3/0/13305/

Produced by Martin Robb

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
