back to the town in safety. Then she smiled at me in silence, and I
walked beside her as we went back.

Then rode forward Cyneward and the steward to deal so with matters
that the women might be terrified as little as possible with sights
of war time, and we followed slowly. Naught said Osritha to me as
we went, for there were too many near, and she knew not what I
might have to tell; yet her hand sought mine, and hand in hand we
came to Ingvar's house, and to the lesser door. There I left her,
and went to seek Thormod.

The large hall was cleared, and little trace beyond the dint of
blows on walls and table showed what fight had raged therein, but
only Thormod and Cyneward and Ingvar were there; and Ingvar slept
heavily in his great chair.

"This is his way of late," said Thormod, looking coldly at him;
"fury, and terror, and then sleep. I fear me that Ingvar the King
goes out of his mind with that of which he raves. Nor do I wonder,
knowing now from Cyneward here what that is. Little help shall we
take back from Ingvar, for he has bestirred himself to gather no
new host since he came back."

"Men said that trouble at home brought him from England. I suppose
he judged it likely that the Jomsburgers might give trouble," I
said.

"The foes that sent him back were--ghosts," said Thormod bitterly.
"Come and let us see to the ship."

So we went down to the wharf, and found the ship but little hurt by
that business. And I stayed on board her that night, for I would
not see Ingvar again just yet.

But in the early morning he sent to beg me to speak with him, and I
came. He sat in his great chair, and I stood before him.

"You have brought me a quiet night, Wulfric," he said. "Tell me how
you came here, for I think it was not that you would wish to see me
again."

So Thormod had told him nothing, and I answered:

"I came with Thormod for more men, for Ethelred the King is growing
strong against you. Have you heard no news?"

"None," he said; "but that is not your errand, but his."

"That will Thormod tell you, therefore," I answered. "As for me, I
came at Halfden's bidding, which Thormod told me."

"What did Halfden bid you come here for?"

"To take Osritha his sister into safety and peace again. Suffer me
to do so," I said, boldly enough, but yet quietly.

Now Ingvar looked fixedly at me from under his brows, and I gave
back his look. Yet there was no silent defiance between us therein.

"Take her," he said at length; "you have saved her from these
Jomsburgers, and you have the right. Take her where you will."

"Do you come back with us, King?" I asked him, giving him no word
of thanks, for I owed him none.

"Tell Guthrum from me that I shall never set foot in England again.
Tell him, if you will, that our shores here need watching against
outland foes, and that I will do it. Let him settle his kingship
with Hubba and Halfden."

Then he paled and looked beyond me, adding in a low voice: "Eadmund
is king in East Anglia yet."

Now I answered him not, fearing lest his terror should come on him
again. And slowly he slipped from his arm the great gold bracelet
that he had so nearly given Eadgyth.

"Tell your people that never should a bridal train cross the Bridge
of the Golden Spurs on the way to the church while the brook flows
to the sea, lest ill should befall both bride and groom, because
thus found I Eadmund the King, whose face is ever before me by
night and day. Take this gold, I pray you, Wulfric, and lay it on
the tomb where his bones are, in token that he has conquered--and
let me fight my shame alone till I die."

Wondering, I took the bracelet, pitying the man again, yet fearing
what he might say and do next, for I thought that maybe he would
slay himself, so hopeless looked he.

"Fain would I have been your friend," he said, "but pride would not
let me. Yet Eadgyth your sister and Egfrid called me so, and maybe
that one deed of ruth may help me. Now go, lest I become weak
again. Lonely shall I be, for you take all that I hold dear--but
even that is well."

So he turned from me, and I went out without a word, for he was
Ingvar. Yet sometimes I wish that I had bidden him farewell, when
the thought of his dark face comes back to me as I saw him for the
last time in his own hall, leaning away from me over his carven
chair, and very still.

I sought Thormod, and told him that he must see the king with his
tidings, for I would not see his face again.

"Nor shall we see Jutland again," he said, pointing to the ship,
which lay now in the same place where the pirate had been,
alongside Ingvar's. And the other ship had come in during the
night, and was at anchor in the haven.

"Shall we sail home at once?" I asked him.

"Aye; no use in waiting. We are wanted at Guthrum's side, and can
take no men, but a few boys back. Yet the other ship will stay
while I send messengers inland, if Ingvar will not. But I shall
return no more."

"Then," said I, "I will speak to the Lady Osritha."

"Go at once," he said, smiling; "bid her come with us to the better
home we have found."

I had not seen Osritha since I left her yesterday, and now I feared
a little, not knowing how she would look on things.

Yet I need not have feared, for when they took me to her bower she
rose up and came to me, falling on my neck and weeping, and I knew
that I had found her again not to part with her.

When she grew calmer, I asked her if she would return with us to
Reedham, telling her how there would be no fear of war there in the
time to come. And she held her peace, so that I thought she would
not, and tried to persuade her, telling her what a welcome would be
to her from all our folk, and also from the Danish people who loved
her so well.

So I went on, until at last she raised her head, smiling at me.

"Surely I will follow you--let me be with you where you will."

So it came to pass that next day we sailed, Osritha taking her four
maidens with her, for they would not leave her; having, moreover,
somewhat to draw them overseas even as I had been drawn to this
place again. And with us went close on a score of women and
children whose menfolk were settled already near to Reedham. These
were the first who came into our land, but they were not to be the
last.

I had seen Ingvar no more, busying myself about fitting the ship
with awnings and the like for these passengers of ours; and what
Thormod did about the men he sought I know not, nor did I care to
know.

There is a dead tree which marks the place where I had been cast
ashore in Lodbrok's boat, and which is the last point of land on
which one looks as the ship passes to the open sea from the haven.
And there we saw Ingvar the king for the last time. All alone he
stood with his hands resting on his sword, looking at our ship as
she passed. Nor did he move from that place all the time we could
see him.

Silently Thormod gave the tiller into my hands, and went to the
flag halliards. Thrice he dipped Halfden's flag in salute, but
Ingvar made no sign, and so he faded from our sight, and after that
we spoke no more of him. But Osritha wept a little, for she had
loved him even while she dreaded him, and now she should see him no
more.

Very quietly passed the voyage, though the light wind was against
us, and we were long on the way, for we were too short handed to
row, and must beat to windward over every mile of our course. Yet I
think of the long days and moonlit evenings on the deck of
Halfden's ship with naught but keenest pleasure, for there I
watched the life and colour come back into Osritha's face, and
strove to make the voyage light to her in every way. And I had
found my heart's desire, and was happy.

Then at last one night we crossed the bar of our own haven, and the
boats came out to meet us, boarding us with rough voices of hearty
welcome; and from her awning crept Osritha, standing beside me as I
took the ship in, and seeing the black outline of hill and church
and hall across the quiet moonlit water. And when the red light
from wharf and open house doors danced in long lines on the ripples
towards us, and voices hailed our ship from shore, and our men
answered back in cheery wise, she drew nearer me, saying:

"Is this home, Wulfric?"

"Aye," I answered. "Your home and mine, Osritha--and peace."

Now have I little more to say, for I have told what I set out to
tell--how Lodbrok the Dane came from over seas, and what befell
thereafter. For now came to us at Reedham long years of peace that
nothing troubled. And those years, since Osritha and I were wedded
at Reedham very soon after we came home, have flown very quickly.

Yet there came to us echoes of war from far-off Wessex, as man
after man crept back to Anglia from the great host where Guthrum
and Hubba warred with Alfred the king. And tired and worn out with
countless battles, these men settled down with us in peace to till
the land they had helped to lay waste and win. Hard it was to see
the farms pass to alien owners at first, but I will not say that
England has altogether lost, for these Danes are surely becoming
English in all love of our land; and they have brought us new
strength, with the old freedom of our forefathers, which some of us
had nigh forgotten.

Now today I know that all the land is at peace, for Alfred is
victor, and Guthrum is Athelstan the Christian king of Eastern
England; and I for one will own him unasked, for he has governed
well, and English is our overlord.

But Hubba is dead in far-off Devon, slain as he landed as Halfden
had landed, to hem Wessex in between Guthrum and himself, and his
dream of taking the Wessex kingdom is over. And the Raven banner
that my Osritha made flaps its magic wings no more, for it hangs in
Alfred's peaceful hall, a trophy of Saxon valour.

Thormod, my comrade, lies in his mound in wild Strathclyde, slain
fighting beside Halfden my brother, the king of Northumbria. Him I
have seen once or twice, and ever does he look for peace that he
may sail to Reedham and bide with us for a while. Well loved is
Halfden, and he is English in every thought.

Many of our old viking crew are here with me, for they would fain
find land in our country, and I gave them the deserted coast lands
that lie to our northward, round the great broads. Good lands they
are, and in giving them I harmed none. Filby and Ormesby and
Rollesby they have called their new homesteads, giving them Danish
names.

Now as to our own folk. My mother is gone, but first she stood for
Osritha at the font, naming her again with the name by which I
learnt to love her, for I would not have it changed.

Gone also has good old Ingild; but before he went he and I were
able without fear of hindrance to build a little church of squared
oaken timbers at Hoxne, for the heathen worship died quickly from
among our Danes. On that church, Cyneward, who was Raud, and is our
well-loved steward, wrought lovingly with his own hands side by
side with the good monk who baptized him. And he has carved a
wondrous oaken shrine for the remains of our martyred king, whereon
lies the bracelet that Ingvar sent in token that Eadmund had
conquered him who was his slayer.

How fared Ingvar I know not, for soon the incoming tide of Danes
slackened, and I heard no news of him; and, as he said, never did
he set foot on English shores again.

Egfrid and Eadgyth are happy in their place at Hoxne, and on them
at least has fallen no shadow of misfortune from that which came of
their passing over the Bridge of the Golden Spurs--the Golden
Bridge as our folk call it now.

Yet it needed no words of Ingvar's to keep the memory of that day's
work alive in the minds of our people. Never so long as the Gold
Brook flows beneath that bridge will a bridal pass churchwards over
its span, for there, but for such a crossing, Eadmund the king
might have bided safely till Ingvar the Dane had passed and gone.

Little use is there in grieving over what might have been, but this
I know, that in days to come forgotten will be Ingvar, and English
will have become his mighty host, but in every English heart will
live the name of Eadmund, who died for faith and country.



NOTES.


i Ran: the sea goddess or witch of the old mythology, by whose
nets drowning men were said to be entangled.

ii The Jarl ranked next to the king, and was often equally
powerful. Our English title "Earl" is derived from this.

iii A small wharf.

iv A lay brother of the monastery of Hackness, near Whitby, who
rendered the Sacred Histories into verse about A.D. 680.

v Now Whitby. The present name was given by the Danish
settlers.

vi As if under the shadow of coming death.

vii The Viking ship of war, or "long ship".

viii The usual Scandinavian and Danish greeting: "Health".

ix After expulsion from his bishopric of York by King Egfrid.

x Mail shirt.

xi The fine allowed as penalty for killing an adversary in a
quarrel, or by mischance. The penalty for wilful murder was death.

xii Nidring, niddering, or nithing, may be beet expressed by
"worthless ". It was the extreme term of reproach to a Saxon.

xiii The "Lodbrokar-Quida", which is still in existence. By
some authorities Ragnar is said to have been the father of Ingvar
and Hubba, but the dates are most uncertain.

xiv "The Fates" of the Northern mythology.

xv St. Ansgar, or Ansgarius, built the first church in Denmark
at Hedeby, now Slesvig, in 840 A.D.

xvi The "twilight of the Gods", when the Asir were to fight
against the powers of evil, and a new order should commence.

xvii The Danes traced their origin back to a great migration
from the East, under Odin. Their priesthood was vested in the head
of the tribe after the ancient patriarchal custom.

xviii The great representative Council from which our
Parliament sprang.

xix Four degrees of kingship are spoken of in the Sagas, the
highest being the overlord, to whom the lesser kings paid tribute.
The "kings of the host" came third in rank, the "sea kings" last,
these being usually sons of under kings, to whom a ship or two had
been given.

xx Now Peterborough.

xxi Tribute.

xxii "The King's Guardian."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WULFRIC THE WEAPON THANE***


******* This file should be named 13752.txt or 13752.zip *******
