"Why," he cried, "half my thanes would have gone wild with joy if I
had promised them either half of what I have said I would give to
you. Are you so fond of the longships and the restless waves that
you will not be bound to the shore?"

"Nay, my king," I said; "but I cannot yet rightly understand all
that you mean for me."

"Well, it means that I must find you a rich wife, as I think I can.
What say you to that fair lady of Exeter town and Taunton--Odda's
daughter, Etheldreda?"

"My king," I answered, somewhat over-gladly maybe, "Ethelnoth of
Somerset, my good comrade, might have some grudge against me if I
cast favouring eyes in that direction. Let this bide for a little
while, I pray you, King Alfred. Yet I would not have you think me
ungrateful, for indeed I know well what kindness is in your thought
for me."

"Nay, but I have it in my mind that you were fond of going to
Taunton not so long since, and one might well think that a maiden's
hair drew you. Well, if Ethelnoth has outdone you there, I am sorry
for your sake, not his. Cheer up, nevertheless. There are more
maidens and well dowered in our broad Wessex coasts, and I am
minded to see how far you will obey your new overlord."

"This is great kindness, King Alfred," I answered; "but we Northmen
are apt to keep some matters wherein to prove our freedom. I pray
you not to press this on me."

"Faith," he said, as if to himself, "this viking might be in love
already, so wrathful grows he--

"Now, Ranald, it is true that I have set my mind on your wedding a
maiden who is rich, and dowered with a coast town, and a good
harbour, moreover, where you might keep all your ships under your
own eye. I would not have you disappoint me so soon."

Then I said plainly,

"King Alfred, I am loth to do so. But from the very first day that
I set foot in England there has been one maiden whose ways have
seemed to be bound up with my own, and I can wed none but her. If
it does not seem good to you that I should do so now, let me wait
till times have grown easier between Saxon and Dane. I think that
you may know well that I shall fight none the worse for you if I
must strive to win your consent."

"That is straightforward," he said, smiling as if he would seem
content. "Let it be so. But it is only fair that before we close
this bargain you should see the well-dowered fair lady of whom I
speak."

"I will do so if this matter is unknown to her," I answered, "else
would be trouble, perhaps, and discomfort. But it is of no use. I
have eyes and heart but for that one. Do I know the lady already,
perhaps?"

"I believe that you may do so," Alfred said, looking grieved, in a
strange way, as if he were half minded to laugh at me for all his
seeming vexation. "Odda says that you do, and so also says
Etheldreda. Her name is Thora, daughter of Jarl Osmund, and she
will have Wareham town and Poole in right of her marriage, as dower
to her and to my sea captain."

So spoke the king quickly, and then he could make pretence no
longer, but laughed joyously, putting his hands on my shoulders and
shaking me a little, while he cried:

"Ay, Ranald; I did but play with you. True lover you are indeed, as
I thought. If you are faithful to the king as to the maiden of your
choice, both she and I are happy, and it is well."

Then I knew not how to thank him; but he said that Etheldreda and
Odda, Heregar and the Lady Alswythe, and maybe Guthrum also, as
Thora's guardian, were to be thanked as well.

"You have found many friends here in England already, Ranald my
cousin," Alfred said. "Wait until you meet some gathering of them
all at Wareham, presently perhaps, where Osmund and Thora are
preparing for a wedding--and then make a great thanking if you
will, and save words. But I wonder that I have never heard of this
matter from you before, for we have been close comrades."

"You must have heard thereof today, my king," I answered; "and you
were but beforehand with me. I could speak of such things now that
peace has come. Yet I feared that you would be against my wedding a
Danish lady."

"It was a natural thought," answered Alfred; "but Thora and Osmund
are ours, surely. Perhaps I should have doubted were your mind set
on any other. But I have no fears for you."

Then he pondered a little, and went on:

"You say that peace has come. So it has--for a time; and had we to
do only with the force that is in England now, I think it would
grow and strengthen. We cannot drive out the Danes, and there is
room in England for both them and us, and in the days to come the
difference of race will be forgotten--not in our time, Ranald, but
hereafter, as long years go by. Some day one of my line, if God
will, shall reign alone over a united England, stronger for the new
blood that has come among us. But it is a great charge that I give
to you, Ranald. What we have to fear are the new hosts that come
from Denmark, and only a strong fleet can stay them from our
shores. I can deal with those who are here, and these in time will
help me against fresh comers to the land. There is that in English
soil that makes every settler an Englishman in heart. But there is
warfare before us yet, and the fleet must break the force of the
storm, if it cannot altogether turn it aside."

Then his grave voice changed, and he laughed.

"Heavy things are these to speak in the ears of a bridegroom, but
you know all I mean. Now go your ways, and seek Odda, who will
rejoice to see you; for word comes from him that his master, Thord
the viking, is saying hard things to him because the men do not
come in readily to man the ships. At the summer's end I shall be in
Winchester, and thence I will come to Wareham to see the fleet, and
your wedding also. Go now, and all good go with you."

So Alfred the king set me forth in brotherly wise, speaking on the
morrow to my men to bid them serve him and England well under me.
And after that all came to pass as the king had planned, and at the
summer's end there was a bright wedding for us in Wareham town,
while in the wide haven rode at anchor the best fleet that England
had ever seen.

So that is how I came to be called "King Alfred's Viking," and made
this land my home. What this Wessex fleet of mine has done since
those days has been written by others in better words than I can
compass; and Harek, whom they call "King Alfred's Scald" nowadays,
has made song of what he has seen at my side in English waters; and
more he may have to make yet, for the North has not yet sent forth
all her hosts. Only I will say this, that if we have not been
altogether able to stay the coming of new Danish fleets to the long
seaboard that must needs lie open to them here and there till our
own fleets are greater, at least they know that the host may no
longer come and go as they will, for Alfred's ships have to be
reckoned with.

Now of ourselves I will add that Thora and I have many friends, but
the best and closest are those whom we made in the days when Hubba
came and fell under the shadow of the Quantock Hills, and they do
not forget us.

Into our house sometimes come Heregar and Ethered, Denewulf the
wise and humble, Odda, and many more, sure of welcome. Only the
loved presence of Neot the holy is wanting, for he died in Cornwall
in that year of the end of the troubles, and I think that in him I
lost more than any save Alfred himself.

Osmund went back to East Anglia for a time, but there he grew
wearied with the wrangling of the Danish chiefs as they shared out
the new land between them; so he bides with us, finding all his
pleasure in the life of farm and field, which is ever near to the
heart of a Dane. With him goes old Thord, grumbling at the thralls
in strange sea language, and yet well loved. Not until he was
wounded sorely in a sea fight we had and won under the Isle of
Wight would he leave the war deck; but even now he is the first on
board when the ships come home, and he is the one who orders all
for winter quarters or for sailing.

Now for long I would that I might look once more on Einar of the
Orkneys, my kind foster father, who still bided there in peace,
hearing of him now and then as some Norse ship, on her way to join
Rolf's fleet in the new land of the Northmen beyond our narrow
seas, put into our haven for repair, perhaps after the long voyage,
or to see if King Alfred would hire her men for a cruise against
the common foe--the Danes. And it was not until the news of his
death came thus to me that the home longing for the old lands
altogether left me; but since that day my thoughts have been, and
will be, for England only. I have no thought or wish that I were
sharer in Rolf's victories, nor have my comrades, Harek and Kolgrim
and Thord; for we have with Alfred more than the viking could have
given us.

I suppose that in days to come out of this long strife shall be
wrought new strength and oneness for England, even as Alfred in his
wisdom foresees; but as yet sword Helmbiter must be kept sharp, and
the ships must be ever ready. But unless the wisdom of Alfred is
forgotten, there will never again be wanting a ship captain of
English race, as when I, a stranger, was called to the charge of
the king's ships in Wessex. The old love of the sea is waking in
the hearts of the sons of Hengist.

Therefore I am content, for here have I found the sweetest wife,
and the noblest master, and the fairest land that man could wish.
And the fear of the old gods is taken from me, and to me has come
honour, and somewhat of the joy of victory in a good cause--the
cause of freedom and of peace.

Now I write these things as springtime grows apace, and at any
time--today, or tomorrow, or next day--into our hall may come
Kolgrim my comrade, his scarred face bright with the light of
coming battle, to say that Danish ships are once more on the
gannet's path; and the sword of Sigurd will rattle in the golden
scabbard, and a great English cheer will come from the haven, for
King Alfred's ships are ready.

The End.



Notes.


i A Norse homestead consisted of several buildings--the great
hall standing alone and apart from the domestic arrangements.

ii The Norse assembly, corresponding to a Saxon "Folkmote," or
representative council for a district.

iii Unearthly. The trolls were the demons of the Northern
mythology.

iv Byrnie, the close-fitting mail shirt.

v The consecrated silver ring kept in the temple of the
district, and worn by the godar, or priest, at all assemblies where
it might be necessary to administer an oath. Odin, Frey, and Niord
were always called to witness an oath on this ring.

vi God-rede = "good counsel," or "God's counsel," as Alfred
means "elves' counsel."

vii Asser's "Life of Alfred." This illness never left the king
from his twentieth year to his death. Probably it was neuralgic, as
it seems to have been violent pain without lasting effect.

viii This was called "prime signing," and was practically the
admission of the heathen as a catechumen.

ix The "Havamal" was the Northern poem which practically
embodied the ancient code of morals and behaviour.

x The use of bells was popular early in England, and not less
so because a freeman who could afford to build a church with a bell
tower became a thane in consequence.

xi The national representative assembly, and origin of our
parliament.

xii Now Normandy, and so called after Rolf's Northmen.

xiii This charm against the "evil eye" was used in the west of
England until quite lately, and may still linger. The charm against
sprains is one yet recorded in the original tongue.

xiv Alfred had Denewulf instructed, and made him Bishop of
Winchester.

xv In 845 A.D. Bishop Eahlstan and the levies of Somerset and
Dorset defeated the first Danes who landed in Wessex, at the mouth
of the Parret.

xvi Trading vessel, more heavily built than the swift
longships.

xvii The "wild hunt" is still believed to pass over Cannington
and the Quantock Hills, the sounds of the migration of flocks of
sea fowl probably keeping the tradition alive.

xviii Athelstan = "noble stone."

xix Confirmation.






End of Project Gutenberg's King Alfred's Viking, by Charles W. Whistler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KING ALFRED'S VIKING ***

***** This file should be named 14034.txt or 14034.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/4/0/3/14034/

Produced by Martin Robb

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).
