it is known to the world. When Marina had served his turn and her wit
was of no more service to him, the conqueror discarded her, leaving her
to wither of a broken heart. She told me all the tale of her anguish
when she learned the truth, and of how she had cried to him that
thenceforth he would never prosper. Nor indeed did he do so.

For two hours or more we talked, and when I had heard her story I told
her mine, and she wept for me, since with all her faults Marina's heart
was ever gentle.

Then we parted never to meet again. Before I went she pressed a gift of
money on me, and I was not ashamed to take it who had none.

This then was the history of Marina, who betrayed her country for her
love's sake, and this the reward of her treason and her love. But I
shall always hold her memory sacred, for she was a good friend to me,
and twice she saved my life, nor would she desert me, even when Otomie
taunted her so cruelly.



CHAPTER XXXIX

THOMAS COMES BACK FROM THE DEAD


Now on the morrow of my visit to Marina, the Captain Diaz came to see me
and told me that a friend of his was in command of a carak which was due
to sail from the port of Vera Cruz for Cadiz within ten days, and
that this friend was willing to give me a passage if I wished to leave
Mexico. I thought for a while and said that I would go, and that very
night, having bid farewell to the Captain Diaz, whom may God prosper,
for he was a good man among many bad ones, I set out from the city for
the last time in the company of some merchants. A week's journey took
us safely down the mountains to Vera Cruz, a hot unhealthy town with an
indifferent anchorage, much exposed to the fierce northerly winds. Here
I presented my letters of recommendation to the commander of the carak,
who gave me passage without question, I laying in a stock of food for
the journey.

Three nights later we set sail with a fair wind, and on the following
morning at daybreak all that was left in sight of the land of Anahuac
was the snowy crest of the volcan Orizaba. Presently that vanished into
the clouds, and thus did I bid farewell to the far country where so many
things had happened to me, and which according to my reckoning I had
first sighted on this very day eighteen years before.

Of my journey to Spain I have nothing of note to tell. It was more
prosperous than such voyages often are, and within ten weeks of the date
of our lifting anchor at Vera Cruz, we let it drop in the harbour of
Cadiz. Here I sojourned but two days, for as it chanced there was an
English ship in the harbour trading to London, and in her I took a
passage, though I was obliged to sell the smallest of the emeralds from
the necklace to find the means to do so, the money that Marina gave me
being spent. This emerald sold for a great sum, however, with part of
which I purchased clothing suitable to a person of rank, taking the rest
of the gold with me. I grieved to part with the stone indeed, though it
was but a pendant to the pendant of the collar, but necessity knows no
law. The pendant stone itself, a fine gem though flawed, I gave in after
years to her gracious majesty Queen Elizabeth.

On board the English ship they thought me a Spanish adventurer who had
made moneys in the Indies, and I did not undeceive them, since I would
be left to my own company for a while that I might prepare my mind to
return to ways of thought and life that it had long forgotten. Therefore
I sat apart like some proud don, saying little but listening much, and
learning all I could of what had chanced in England since I left it some
twenty years before.


At length our voyage came to an end, and on a certain twelfth of June I
found myself in the mighty city of London that I had never yet visited,
and kneeling down in the chamber of my inn, I thanked God that after
enduring so many dangers and hardships, it had pleased Him to preserve
me to set foot again on English soil. Indeed to this hour I count it
nothing short of marvellous that this frail body of a man should survive
all the sorrows and risks of death by sickness, hunger, battle, murder,
drowning, wild beasts, and the cruelty of men, to which mine had been
exposed for many years.

In London I bought a good horse, through the kind offices of the host of
my inn, and on the morrow at daybreak I set out upon the Ipswich road.
That very morning my last adventure befell me, for as I jogged along
musing of the beauty of the English landscape and drinking in the sweet
air of June, a cowardly thief fired a pistol at me from behind a hedge,
purposing to plunder me if I fell. The bullet passed through my hat,
grazing the skull, but before I could do anything the rascal fled,
seeing that he had missed his mark, and I went on my journey, thinking
to myself that it would indeed have been strange, if after passing such
great dangers in safety, I had died at last by the hand of a miserable
foot-pad within five miles of London town.

I rode hard all that day and the next, and my horse being stout and
swift, by half-past seven o'clock of the evening I pulled up upon the
little hill whence I had looked my last on Bungay, when I rode thence
for Yarmouth with my father. Below me lay the red roofs of the town;
there to the right were the oaks of Ditchingham and the beautiful tower
of St. Mary's Church, yonder the stream of Waveney wandered, and before
me stretched the meadow lands, purple and golden with marsh weeds in
bloom. All was as it had been, I could see no change at all, the only
change was in myself. I dismounted, and going to a pool of water near
the roadway I looked at the reflection of my own face. I was changed
indeed, scarcely should I have known it for that of the lad who had
ridden up this hill some twenty years ago. Now, alas! the eyes were
sunken and very sorrowful, the features were sharp, and there was more
grey than black in the beard and hair. I should scarcely have known it
myself, would any others know it, I wondered? Would there be any to know
it indeed? In twenty years many die and others pass out of sight; should
I find a friend at all among the living? Since I read the letters which
Captain Bell of the 'Adventuress' had brought me before I sailed for
Hispaniola, I had heard no tidings from my home, and what tidings
awaited me now? Above all what of Lily, was she dead or married or gone?

Mounting my horse I pushed on again at a canter, taking the road past
Waingford Mills through the fords and Pirnhow town, leaving Bungay upon
my left. In ten minutes I was at the gate of the bridle path that runs
from the Norwich road for half a mile or more beneath the steep and
wooded bank under the shelter of which stands the Lodge at Ditchingham.
By the gate a man loitered in the last rays of the sun. I looked at
him and knew him; it was Billy Minns, that same fool who had loosed de
Garcia when I left him bound that I might run to meet my sweetheart.
He was an old man now and his white hair hung about his withered face,
moreover he was unclean and dressed in rags, but I could have fallen on
his neck and embraced him, so rejoiced was I to look once more on one
whom I had known in youth.

Seeing me come he hobbled on his stick to the gate to open it for me,
whining a prayer for alms.

'Does Mr. Wingfield live here?' I said, pointing up the path, and my
breath came quick as I asked.

'Mr. Wingfield, sir, Mr. Wingfield, which of them?' he answered. 'The
old gentleman he's been dead nigh upon twenty years. I helped to dig
his grave in the chancel of yonder church I did, we laid him by his
wife--her that was murdered. Then there's Mr. Geoffrey.'

'What of him?' I asked.

'He's dead, too, twelve year gone or more; he drank hisself to dead
he did. And Mr. Thomas, he's dead, drowned over seas they say, many
a winter back; they're all dead, all dead! Ah! he was a rare one, Mr.
Thomas was; I mind me well how when I let the furriner go--' and he
rambled off into the tale of how he had set de Garcia on his horse after
I had beaten him, nor could I bring him back from it.

Casting him a piece of money, I set spurs to my weary horse and cantered
up the bridle path, leaving the Mill House on my left, and as I went,
the beat of his hoofs seemed to echo the old man's words, 'All dead, all
dead!' Doubtless Lily was dead also, or if she was not dead, when the
tidings came that I had been drowned at sea, she would have married.
Being so fair and sweet she would surely not have lacked for suitors,
nor could it be believed that she had worn her life away mourning over
the lost love of her youth.

Now the Lodge was before me; it had changed no whit except that the ivy
and creepers on its front had grown higher, to the roof indeed, and
I could see that people lived in the house, for it was well kept, and
smoke hung above the chimneys. The gate was locked, and there were no
serving men about, for night fell fast, and all had ceased from their
labour. Leaving the house on the right I passed round it to the stables
that are at the back near the hillside garden, but here the gate was
locked also, and I dismounted not knowing what to do. Indeed I was so
unmanned with fear and doubt that for a while I seemed bewildered, and
leaving the horse to crop the grass where he stood, I wandered to the
foot of the church path and gazed up the hill as though I waited for the
coming of one whom I should meet.

'What if they were all dead, what if SHE were dead and gone?' I buried
my face in my hands and prayed to the Almighty who had protected me
through so many years, to spare me this last bitterness. I was crushed
with sorrow, and I felt that I could bear no more. If Lily were lost to
me also, then I thought that it would be best that I should die, since
there was nothing left for which I cared to live.

Thus I prayed for some while, trembling like a leaf, and when I looked
up again, ere I turned to seek tidings from those that dwelt in the
house, whoever they might be, the twilight had fallen completely, and
lo! nightingales sang both far and near. I listened to their song, and
as I listened, some troubled memory came back to me that at first I
could not grasp. Then suddenly there rose up in my mind a vision of the
splendid chamber in Montezuma's palace in Tenoctitlan, and of myself
sleeping on a golden bed, and dreaming on that bed. I knew it now, I was
the god Tezcat, and on the morrow I must be sacrificed, and I slept in
misery, and as I slept I dreamed. I dreamed that I stood where I stood
this night, that the scent of the English flowers was in my nostrils as
it was this night, and that the sweet song of the nightingales rang in
my ears as at this present hour. I dreamed that as I mused and listened
the moon came up over the green ash and oaks, and lo! there she shone. I
dreamed that I heard a sound of singing on the hill--

But now I awoke from this vision of the past and of a long lost dream,
for as I stood the sweet voice of a woman began to sing yonder on the
brow of the slope; I was not mad, I heard it clearly, and the sound grew
ever nearer as the singer drew down the steep hillside. It was so near
now that I could catch the very words of that sad song which to this day
I remember.

Now I could see the woman's shape in the moonlight; it was tall and
stately and clad in a white robe. Presently she lifted her head to watch
the flitter of a bat and the moonlight lit upon her face. It was the
face of Lily Bozard, my lost love, beautiful as of yore, though grown
older and stamped with the seal of some great sorrow. I saw, and so
deeply was I stirred at the sight, that had it not been for the low
paling to which I clung, I must have fallen to the earth, and a deep
groan broke from my lips.

She heard the groan and ceased her song, then catching sight of the
figure of a man, she stopped and turned as though to fly. I stood quite
still, and wonder overcoming her fear, she drew nearer and spoke in the
sweet low voice that I remembered well, saying, 'Who wanders here so
late? Is it you, John?'

Now when I heard her speak thus a new fear took me. Doubtless she was
married and 'John' was her husband. I had found her but to lose her more
completely. Of a sudden it came into my mind that I would not discover
myself till I knew the truth. I advanced a pace, but not so far as to
pass from the shadow of the shrubs which grow here, and taking my stand
in such a fashion that the moonlight did not strike upon my face, I
bowed low in the courtly Spanish fashion, and disguising my voice spoke
as a Spaniard might in broken English which I will spare to write down.

'Madam,' I said, 'have I the honour to speak to one who in bygone years
was named the Senora Lily Bozard?'

'That was my name,' she answered. 'What is your errand with me, sir?'

Now I trembled afresh, but spoke on boldly.

'Before I answer, Madam, forgive me if I ask another question. Is this
still your name?'

'It is still my name, I am no married woman,' she answered, and for a
moment the sky seemed to reel above me and the ground to heave beneath
my feet like the lava crust of Xaca. But as yet I did not reveal myself,
for I wished to learn if she still loved my memory.

'Senora,' I said, 'I am a Spaniard who served in the Indian wars of
Cortes, of which perhaps you have heard.'

She bowed her head and I went on. 'In those wars I met a man who was
named Teule, but who had another name in former days, so he told me on
his deathbed some two years ago.'

'What name?' she asked in a low voice.

'Thomas Wingfield.'

Now Lily moaned aloud, and in her turn caught at the pales to save
herself from falling.

'I deemed him dead these eighteen years,' she gasped; 'drowned in the
Indian seas where his vessel foundered.'

'I have heard say that he was shipwrecked in those seas, senora, but he
escaped death and fell among the Indians, who made a god of him and gave
him the daughter of their king in marriage,' and I paused.

She shivered, then said in a hard voice, 'Continue, sir; I listen to
you.'

'My friend Teule took the part of the Indians in the wars, as being
the husband of one of their princesses he must do in honour, and fought
bravely for them for many years. At length the town that he defended was
captured, his one remaining child was murdered, his wife the princess
slew herself for sorrow, and he himself was taken into captivity, where
he languished and died.'

'A sad tale, sir,' she said with a little laugh--a mournful laugh that
was half choked by tears.

'A very sad tale, senora, but one which is not finished. While he lay
dying, my friend told me that in his early life he had plighted troth
with a certain English maid, named--'

'I know the name--continue.'

'He told me that though he had been wedded, and loved his wife the
princess, who was a very royal woman, that many times had risked her
life for his, ay, even to lying at his side upon the stone of sacrifice
and of her own free will, yet the memory of this maiden to whom he was
once betrothed had companioned him through life and was strong upon him
now at its close. Therefore he prayed me for our friendship's sake to
seek her out when I returned to Europe, should she still live, and to
give her a message from him, and to make a prayer to her on his behalf.'

'What message and what prayer?' Lily whispered.

'This: that he loved her at the end of his life as he had loved her
at its beginning; that he humbly prayed her forgiveness because he had
broken the troth which they two swore beneath the beech at Ditchingham.'

'Sir,' she cried, 'what do you know of that?'

'Only what my friend told me, senora.'

'Your friendship must have been close and your memory must be good,' she
murmured.

'Which he had done,' I went on, 'under strange circumstances, so strange
indeed that he dared to hope that his broken troth might be renewed in
some better world than this. His last prayer was that she should say to
me, his messenger, that she forgave him and still loved him, as to his
death he loved her.'

'And how can such forgiveness or such an avowal advantage a dead man?'
Lily asked, watching me keenly through the shadows. 'Have the dead then
eyes to see and ears to hear?'

'How can I know, senora? I do but execute my mission.'

'And how can I know that you are a true messenger. It chanced that I
had sure tidings of the drowning of Thomas Wingfield many years ago, and
this tale of Indians and princesses is wondrous strange, more like those
that happen in romances than in this plain world. Have you no token of
your good faith, sir?'

'I have such a token, senora, but the light is too faint for you to see
it.'

'Then follow me to the house, there we will get light. Stay,' and once
more going to the stable gate, she called 'John.'

An old man answered her, and I knew the voice for that of one of my
father's serving men. To him she spoke in low tones, then led the way by
the garden path to the front door of the house, which she opened with
a key from her girdle, motioning to me to pass in before her. I did so,
and thinking little of such matters at the moment, turned by habit into
the doorway of the sitting-room which I knew so well, lifting my feet
to avoid stumbling on its step, and passing into the room found my way
through the gloom to the wide fireplace where I took my stand. Lily
watched me enter, then following me, she lit a taper at the fire which
smouldered on the hearth, and placed it upon the table in the window in
such fashion that though I was now obliged to take off my hat, my face
was still in shadow.

'Now, sir, your token if it pleases you.'

Then I drew the posy ring from my finger and gave it to her, and she sat
down by the table and examined it in the light of the candle, and as
she sat thus, I saw how beautiful she was still, and how little time had
touched her, except for the sadness of her face, though now she had seen
eight-and-thirty winters. I saw also that though she kept control of her
features as she looked upon the ring, her breast heaved quickly and her
hand shook.

'The token is a true one,' she said at length. 'I know the ring, though
it is somewhat worn since last I saw it, it was my mother's; and many
years ago I gave it as a love gage to a youth to whom I promised myself
in marriage. Doubtless all your tale is true also, sir, and I thank you
for your courtesy in bringing it so far. It is a sad tale, a very sad
tale. And now, sir, as I may not ask you to stay in this house where I
live alone, and there is no inn near, I propose to send serving men to
conduct you to my brother's dwelling that is something more than a mile
away, if indeed,' she added slowly, 'you do not already know the path!
There you will find entertainment, and there the sister of your dead
companion, Mary Bozard, will be glad to learn the story of his strange
adventures from your lips.'

I bowed my head and answered, 'First, senora, I would pray your answer
to my friend's dying prayer and message.'

'It is childish to send answers to the dead.'

'Still I pray for them as I was charged to do.'

'How reads the writing within this ring, sir?'


'Heart to heart, Though far apart,'


I said glibly, and next instant I could have bitten out my tongue.

'Ah! you know that also, but doubtless you have carried the ring for
many months and learned the writing. Well, sir, though we were far
apart, and though perchance I cherished the memory of him who wore this
ring, and for his sake remained unwed, it seems that his heart went a
straying--to the breast indeed of some savage woman whom he married, and
who bore him children. That being so, my answer to the prayer of your
dead friend is that I forgive him indeed, but I must needs take back
the vows which I swore to him for this life and for ever, since he has
broken them, and as best I may, strive to cast out the love I bore him
since he rejected and dishonoured it,' and standing up Lily made as
though she tore at her breast and threw something from her, and at the
same time she let fall the ring upon the floor.

I heard and my heart stood still. So this was the end of it. Well, she
had the right of me, though now I began to wish that I had been
less honest, for sometimes women can forgive a lie sooner than such
frankness. I said nothing, my tongue was tied, but a great misery and
weariness entered into me. Stooping down I found the ring, and replacing
it on my finger, I turned to seek the door with a last glance at the
woman who refused me. Halfway thither I paused for one second, wondering
if I should do well to declare myself, then bethought me that if she
would not abate her anger toward me dead, her pity for me living would
be small. Nay, I was dead to her, and dead I would remain.

Now I was at the door and my foot was on its step, when suddenly a
voice, Lily's voice, sounded in my ears and it was sweet and kind.

'Thomas,' said the voice, 'Thomas, before you go, will you not take
count of the gold and goods and land that you placed in my keeping?'

Now I turned amazed, and lo! Lily came towards me slowly and with
outstretched arms.

'Oh! foolish man,' she whispered low, 'did you think to deceive a
woman's heart thus clumsily? You who talked of the beech in the Hall
garden, you who found your way so well to this dark chamber, and spoke
the writing in the ring with the very voice of one who has been dead so
long. Listen: I forgive that friend of yours his broken troth, for he
was honest in the telling of his fault and it is hard for man to live
alone so many years, and in strange countries come strange adventures;
moreover, I will say it, I still love him as it seems that he loves me,
though in truth I grow somewhat old for love, who have lingered long
waiting to find it beyond my grave.'

Thus Lily spoke, sobbing as she spoke, then my arms closed round her
and she said no more. And yet as our lips met I thought of Otomie,
remembering her words, and remembering also that she had died by her own
hand on this very day a year ago.

Let us pray that the dead have no vision of the living!



CHAPTER XL

AMEN


And now there is little left for me to tell and my tale draws to
its end, for which I am thankful, for I am very old and writing is a
weariness to me, so great a weariness indeed that many a time during the
past winter I have been near to abandoning the task.

For a while Lily and I sat almost silent in this same room where I write
to-day, for our great joy and many another emotion that was mixed with
it, clogged our tongues. Then as though moved by one impulse, we knelt
down and offered our humble thanks to heaven that had preserved us both
to this strange meeting. Scarcely had we risen from our knees when
there was a stir without the house, and presently a buxom dame entered,
followed by a gallant gentleman, a lad, and a maiden. These were my
sister Mary, her husband Wilfred Bozard, Lily's brother, and their two
surviving children, Roger and Joan. When she guessed that it was I come
home again and no other, Lily had sent them tidings by the servant man
John, that one was with her whom she believed they would be glad to see,
and they had hurried hither, not knowing whom they should find. Nor were
they much the wiser at first, for I was much changed and the light in
the room shone dim, but stood perplexed, wondering who this stranger
might be.

'Mary,' I said at length, 'Mary, do you not remember me, my sister?'

Then she cried aloud, and throwing herself into my arms, she wept there
a while, as would any of us were our beloved dead suddenly to appear
before our eyes, alive and well, and her husband clasped me by the hand
and swore heartily in his amazement, as is the fashion of some men when
they are moved. But the children stood staring blankly till I called the
girl to me, who now was much what her mother had been when we parted,
and kissing her, told her that I was that uncle of whom perhaps she had
heard as dead many years ago.

Then my horse, that all this while had been forgotten, having been
caught and stabled, we went to supper and it was a strange meal to me,
and after meat I asked for tidings. Now I learned that the fortune which
my old master Fonseca had left to me came home in safety, and that it
had prospered exceedingly under Lily's care, for she had spent but very
little of it for her maintenance, looking on it always as a trust rather
than as her own. When my death seemed certain my sister Mary had entered
on her share of my possessions, however, and with it had purchased
some outlying lands in Earsham and Hedenham, and the wood and manor of
Tyndale Hall in Ditchingham and Broome. These lands I made haste to say
she might keep as a gift from me, since it seemed that I had greater
riches than I could need without them, and this saying of mine pleased
her husband Wilfred Bozard not a little, seeing that it is hard for a
man to give up what he has held for many years.

Then I heard the rest of the story; of my father's sudden death, of how
the coming of the gold had saved Lily from being forced into marriage
with my brother Geoffrey, who afterwards had taken to evil courses which
ended in his decease at the age of thirty-one; of the end of Squire
Bozard, Lily's father and my old enemy, from an apoplexy which took
him in a sudden fit of anger. After this it seemed, her brother being
married to my sister Mary, Lily had moved down to the Lodge, having paid
off the charges that my brother Geoffrey had heaped upon his heritage,
and bought out my sister's rights to it. And here at the Lodge she had
lived ever since, a sad and lonely woman, and yet not altogether an
unhappy one, for she gave much of her time to good works. Indeed she
