"You hate the Lord's foes only, Captain Leigh."

"No, Jack, I hate my own as well."

"But no one in the fleet, sir?"

"Don't try to put me off with the same Jesuit's quibble which that false
knave Parson Fletcher invented for one of Doughty's men, to drug his
conscience withal when he was plotting against his own admiral. No,
Jack, I hate one of whom you know; and somehow that hatred of him keeps
me from loving any human being. I am in love and charity with no man,
Sir John Brimblecombe--not even with you! Go your ways in God's name,
sir! and leave me and the devil alone together, or you'll find my words
are true."

Jack departed with a sigh, and while the crew were receiving the
Communion on deck, Amyas sate below in the cabin sharpening his sword,
and after it, called for a boat and went on board Drake's ship to ask
news of the Sta. Catharina, and listened scowling to the loud chants and
tinkling bells, which came across the water from the Spanish fleet. At
last, Drake was summoned by the lord admiral, and returned with a secret
commission, which ought to bear fruit that night; and Amyas, who had
gone with him, helped him till nightfall, and then returned to his own
ship as Sir Amyas Leigh, Knight, to the joy and glory of every soul on
board, except his moody self.

So there, the livelong summer Sabbath-day, before the little high-walled
town and the long range of yellow sandhills, lie those two mighty
armaments, scowling at each other, hardly out of gunshot. Messenger
after messenger is hurrying towards Bruges to the Duke of Parma, for
light craft which can follow these nimble English somewhat better than
their own floating castles; and, above all, entreating him to put to sea
at once with all his force. The duke is not with his forces at Dunkirk,
but on the future field of Waterloo, paying his devotions to St. Mary
of Halle in Hainault, in order to make all sure in his Pantheon, and
already sees in visions of the night that gentle-souled and pure-lipped
saint, Cardinal Allen, placing the crown of England on his head. He
returns for answer, first, that his victual is not ready; next, that his
Dutch sailors, who have been kept at their post for many a week at the
sword's point, have run away like water; and thirdly, that over and
above all, he cannot come, so "strangely provided" of great ordnance and
musketeers are those five-and-thirty Dutch ships, in which round-sterned
and stubborn-hearted heretics watch, like terriers at a rat's hole, the
entrance of Nieuwport and Dunkirk. Having ensured the private patronage
of St. Mary of Halle, he will return to-morrow to make experience of its
effects: but only hear across the flats of Dixmude the thunder of the
fleets, and at Dunkirk the open curses of his officers. For while he
has been praying and nothing more, the English have been praying, and
something more; and all that is left for the Prince of Parma is, to
hang a few purveyors, as peace offerings to his sulking army, and then
"chafe," as Drake says of him, "like a bear robbed of her whelps."

For Lord Henry Seymour has brought Lord Howard a letter of command from
Elizabeth's self; and Drake has been carrying it out so busily all that
Sunday long, that by two o'clock on the Monday morning, eight fire-ships
"besmeared with wild-fire, brimstone, pitch, and resin, and all their
ordnance charged with bullets and with stones," are stealing down the
wind straight for the Spanish fleet, guided by two valiant men of Devon,
Young and Prowse. (Let their names live long in the land!) The ships are
fired, the men of Devon steal back, and in a moment more, the heaven is
red with glare from Dover Cliffs to Gravelines Tower; and weary-hearted
Belgian boors far away inland, plundered and dragooned for many a
hideous year, leap from their beds, and fancy (and not so far wrongly
either) that the day of judgment is come at last, to end their woes, and
hurl down vengeance on their tyrants.

And then breaks forth one of those disgraceful panics, which so often
follow overweening presumption; and shrieks, oaths, prayers, and
reproaches, make night hideous. There are those too on board who
recollect well enough Jenebelli's fire-ships at Antwerp three years
before, and the wreck which they made of Parma's bridge across the
Scheldt. If these should be like them! And cutting all cables, hoisting
any sails, the Invincible Armada goes lumbering wildly out to sea, every
ship foul of her neighbor.

The largest of the four galliasses loses her rudder, and drifts helpless
to and fro, hindering and confusing. The duke, having (so the Spaniards
say) weighed his anchor deliberately instead of leaving it behind him,
runs in again after awhile, and fires a signal for return: but his
truant sheep are deaf to the shepherd's pipe, and swearing and praying
by turns, he runs up Channel towards Gravelines picking up stragglers
on his way, who are struggling as they best can among the flats and
shallows: but Drake and Fenner have arrived as soon as he. When Monday's
sun rises on the quaint old castle and muddy dykes of Gravelines town,
the thunder of the cannon recommences, and is not hushed till night.
Drake can hang coolly enough in the rear to plunder when he thinks fit;
but when the battle needs it, none can fight more fiercely, among the
foremost; and there is need now, if ever. That Armada must never be
allowed to re-form. If it does, its left wing may yet keep the English
at bay, while its right drives off the blockading Hollanders from
Dunkirk port, and sets Parma and his flotilla free to join them, and to
sail in doubled strength across to the mouth of Thames.

So Drake has weighed anchor, and away up Channel with all his squadron,
the moment that he saw the Spanish fleet come up; and with him Fenner
burning to redeem the honor which, indeed, he had never lost; and ere
Fenton, Beeston, Crosse, Ryman, and Lord Southwell can join them, the
Devon ships have been worrying the Spaniards for two full hours into
confusion worse confounded.

But what is that heavy firing behind them? Alas for the great galliasse!
She lies, like a huge stranded whale, upon the sands where now stands
Calais pier; and Amyas Preston, the future hero of La Guayra, is
pounding her into submission, while a fleet of hoys and drumblers look
on and help, as jackals might the lion.

Soon, on the south-west horizon, loom up larger and larger two mighty
ships, and behind them sail on sail. As they near a shout greets the
Triumph and the Bear; and on and in the lord high admiral glides stately
into the thickest of the fight.

True, we have still but some three-and-twenty ships which can cope at
all with some ninety of the Spaniards: but we have dash, and daring, and
the inspiration of utter need. Now, or never, must the mighty struggle
be ended. We worried them off Portland; we must rend them in pieces
now; and in rushes ship after ship, to smash her broadsides through and
through the wooden castles, "sometimes not a pike's length asunder,"
and then out again to re-load, and give place meanwhile to another. The
smaller are fighting with all sails set; the few larger, who, once in,
are careless about coming out again, fight with top-sails loose, and
their main and foreyards close down on deck, to prevent being boarded.
The duke, Oquenda, and Recalde, having with much ado got clear of the
shallows, bear the brunt of the fight to seaward; but in vain. The day
goes against them more and more, as it runs on. Seymour and Winter have
battered the great San Philip into a wreck; her masts are gone by the
board; Pimentelli in the San Matthew comes up to take the mastiffs
off the fainting bull, and finds them fasten on him instead; but the
Evangelist, though smaller, is stouter than the Deacon, and of all the
shot poured into him, not twenty "lackt him thorough." His masts are
tottering; but sink or strike he will not.

"Go ahead, and pound his tough hide, Leigh," roars Drake off the poop
of his ship, while he hammers away at one of the great galliasses. "What
right has he to keep us all waiting?"

Amyas slips in as best he can between Drake and Winter; as he passes he
shouts to his ancient enemy,--

"We are with you, sir; all friends to-day!" and slipping round Winter's
bows, he pours his broadside into those of the San Matthew, and then
glides on to re-load; but not to return. For not a pistol shot to
leeward, worried by three or four small craft, lies an immense galleon;
and on her poop--can he believe his eyes for joy?--the maiden and the
wheel which he has sought so long!

"There he is!" shouts Amyas, springing to the starboard side of the
ship. The men, too, have already caught sight of that hated sign; a
cheer of fury bursts from every throat.

"Steady, men!" says Amyas, in a suppressed voice. "Not a shot! Re-load,
and be ready; I must speak with him first;" and silent as the grave,
amid the infernal din, the Vengeance glides up to the Spaniard's
quarter.

"Don Guzman Maria Magdalena Sotomayor de Soto!" shouts Amyas from the
mizzen rigging, loud and clear amid the roar.

He has not called in vain. Fearless and graceful as ever, the tall,
mail-clad figure of his foe leaps up upon the poop-railing, twenty feet
above Amyas's head, and shouts through his vizor,--

"At your service, sir whosoever you may be."

A dozen muskets and arrows are levelled at him; but Amyas frowns them
down. "No man strikes him but I. Spare him, if you kill every other soul
on board. Don Guzman! I am Captain Sir Amyas Leigh; I proclaim you a
traitor and a ravisher, and challenge you once more to single combat,
when and where you will."

"You are welcome to come on board me, sir," answers the Spaniard, in a
clear, quiet tone; "bringing with you this answer, that you lie in your
throat;" and lingering a moment out of bravado, to arrange his scarf, he
steps slowly down again behind the bulwarks.

"Coward!" shouts Amyas at the top of his voice.

The Spaniard re-appears instantly. "Why that name, senor, of all
others?" asks he in a cool, stern voice.

"Because we call men cowards in England, who leave their wives to be
burnt alive by priests."

The moment the words had passed Amyas's lips, he felt that they were
cruel and unjust. But it was too late to recall them. The Spaniard
started, clutched his sword-hilt, and then hissed back through his
closed vizor,--

"For that word, sirrah, you hang at my yardarm, if Saint Mary gives me
grace."

"See that your halter be a silken one, then," laughed Amyas, "for I
am just dubbed knight." And he stepped down as a storm of bullets rang
through the rigging round his head; the Spaniards are not as punctilious
as he.

"Fire!" His ordnance crash through the stern-works of the Spaniard; and
then he sails onward, while her balls go humming harmlessly through his
rigging.

Half-an-hour has passed of wild noise and fury; three times has the
Vengeance, as a dolphin might, sailed clean round and round the Sta.
Catharina, pouring in broadside after broadside, till the guns are
leaping to the deck-beams with their own heat, and the Spaniard's sides
are slit and spotted in a hundred places. And yet, so high has been his
fire in return, and so strong the deck defences of the Vengeance, that a
few spars broken, and two or three men wounded by musketry, are all her
loss. But still the Spaniard endures, magnificent as ever; it is the
battle of the thresher and the whale; the end is certain, but the work
is long.

"Can I help you, Captain Leigh?" asked Lord Henry Seymour, as he passes
within oar's length of him, to attack a ship ahead. "The San Matthew has
had his dinner, and is gone on to Medina to ask for a digestive to it."

"I thank your lordship: but this is my private quarrel, of which I
spoke. But if your lordship could lend me powder--"

"Would that I could! But so, I fear, says every other gentleman in the
fleet."

A puff of wind clears away the sulphurous veil for a moment; the sea is
clear of ships towards the land; the Spanish fleet are moving again up
Channel, Medina bringing up the rear; only some two miles to their right
hand, the vast hull of the San Philip is drifting up the shore with the
tide, and somewhat nearer the San Matthew is hard at work at her pumps.
They can see the white stream of water pouring down her side.

"Go in, my lord, and have the pair," shouts Amyas.

"No, sir! Forward is a Seymour's cry. We will leave them to pay the
Flushingers' expenses." And on went Lord Henry, and on shore went the
San Philip at Ostend, to be plundered by the Flushingers; while the
San Matthew, whose captain, "on a hault courage," had refused to save
himself and his gentlemen on board Medina's ship, went blundering
miserably into the hungry mouths of Captain Peter Vanderduess and four
other valiant Dutchmen, who, like prudent men of Holland, contrived to
keep the galleon afloat till they had emptied her, and then "hung up her
banner in the great church of Leyden, being of such a length, that being
fastened to the roof, it reached unto the very ground."

But in the meanwhile, long ere the sun had set, comes down the darkness
of the thunderstorm, attracted, as to a volcano's mouth, to that vast
mass of sulphur-smoke which cloaks the sea for many a mile; and heaven's
artillery above makes answer to man's below. But still, through smoke
and rain, Amyas clings to his prey. She too has seen the northward
movement of the Spanish fleet, and sets her topsails; Amyas calls to
the men to fire high, and cripple her rigging: but in vain: for three or
four belated galleys, having forced their way at last over the shallows,
come flashing and sputtering up to the combatants, and take his fire
off the galleon. Amyas grinds his teeth, and would fain hustle into the
thick of the press once more, in spite of the galleys' beaks.

"Most heroical captain," says cary, pulling a long face, "if we do, we
are stove and sunk in five minutes; not to mention that Yeo says he has
not twenty rounds of great cartridge left."

So, surely and silent, the Vengeance sheers off, but keeps as near
as she can to the little squadron, all through the night of rain and
thunder which follows. Next morning the sun rises on a clear sky, with
a strong west-north-west breeze, and all hearts are asking what the day
will bring forth.

They are long past Dunkirk now; the German Ocean is opening before them.
The Spaniards, sorely battered, and lessened in numbers, have, during
the night, regained some sort of order. The English hang on their skirts
a mile or two behind. They have no ammunition, and must wait for more.
To Amyas's great disgust, the Sta. Catharina has rejoined her fellows
during the night.

"Never mind," says Cary; "she can neither dive nor fly, and as long as
she is above water, we--What is the admiral about?"

He is signalling Lord Henry Seymour and his squadron. Soon they
tack, and come down the wind for the coast of Flanders. Parma must be
blockaded still; and the Hollanders are likely to be too busy with their
plunder to do it effectually. Suddenly there is a stir in the Spanish
fleet. Medina and the rearmost ships turn upon the English. What can it
mean? Will they offer battle once more? If so, it were best to get
out of their way, for we have nothing wherewith to fight them. So the
English lie close to the wind. They will let them pass, and return to
their old tactic of following and harassing.

"Good-bye to Seymour," says Cary, "if he is caught between them and
Parma's flotilla. They are going to Dunkirk."

"Impossible! They will not have water enough to reach his light craft.
Here comes a big ship right upon us! Give him all you have left, lads;
and if he will fight us, lay him alongside, and die boarding."

They gave him what they had, and hulled him with every shot; but his
huge side stood silent as the grave. He had not wherewithal to return
the compliment.

"As I live, he is cutting loose the foot of his mainsail! the villain
means to run."

"There go the rest of them! Victoria!" shouted Cary, as one after
another, every Spaniard set all the sail he could.

There was silence for a few minutes throughout the English fleet;
and then cheer upon cheer of triumph rent the skies. It was over. The
Spaniard had refused battle, and thinking only of safety, was pressing
downward toward the Straits again. The Invincible Armada had cast away
its name, and England was saved.

"But he will never get there, sir," said old Yeo, who had come upon deck
to murmur his Nunc Domine, and gaze upon that sight beyond all human
faith or hope: "Never, never will he weather the Flanders shore, against
such a breeze as is coming up. Look to the eye of the wind, sir, and see
how the Lord is fighting for His people!"

Yes, down it came, fresher and stiffer every minute out of the gray
north-west, as it does so often after a thunder-storm; and the sea began
to rise high and white under the "Claro Aquilone," till the Spaniards
were fain to take in all spare canvas, and lie-to as best they could;
while the English fleet, lying-to also, awaited an event which was in
God's hands and not in theirs.

"They will be all ashore on Zealand before the afternoon," murmured
Amyas; "and I have lost my labor! Oh, for powder, powder, powder! to go
in and finish it at once!"

"Oh, sir," said Yeo, "don't murmur against the Lord in the very day of
His mercies. It is hard, to be sure; but His will be done."

"Could we not borrow powder from Drake there?"

"Look at the sea, sir!"

And, indeed, the sea was far too rough for any such attempt. The
Spaniards neared and neared the fatal dunes, which fringed the shore for
many a dreary mile; and Amyas had to wait weary hours, growling like a
dog who has had the bone snatched out of his mouth, till the day wore
on; when, behold, the wind began to fall as rapidly as it had risen. A
savage joy rose in Amyas's heart.

"They are safe! safe for us! Who will go and beg us powder? A cartridge
here and a cartridge there?--anything to set to work again!"

Cary volunteered, and returned in a couple of hours with some quantity:
but he was on board again only just in time, for the south-wester had
recovered the mastery of the skies, and Spaniards and English were
moving away; but this time northward. Whither now? To Scotland? Amyas
knew not, and cared not, provided he was in the company of Don Guzman de
Soto.

The Armada was defeated, and England saved. But such great undertakings
seldom end in one grand melodramatic explosion of fireworks, through
which the devil arises in full roar to drag Dr. Faustus forever into the
flaming pit. On the contrary, the devil stands by his servants to the
last, and tries to bring off his shattered forces with drums beating and
colors flying; and, if possible, to lull his enemies into supposing that
the fight is ended, long before it really is half over. All which the
good Lord Howard of Effingham knew well, and knew, too, that Medina had
one last card to play, and that was the filial affection of that dutiful
and chivalrous son, James of Scotland. True, he had promised faith to
Elizabeth: but that was no reason why he should keep it. He had been
hankering and dabbling after Spain for years past, for its absolution
was dear to his inmost soul; and Queen Elizabeth had had to warn him,
scold him, call him a liar, for so doing; so the Armada might still find
shelter and provision in the Firth of Forth. But whether Lord Howard
knew or not, Medina did not know, that Elizabeth had played her card
cunningly, in the shape of one of those appeals to the purse, which, to
James's dying day, overweighed all others save appeals to his vanity.
"The title of a dukedom in England, a yearly pension of 5000 pounds, a
guard at the queen's charge, and other matters" (probably more hounds
and deer), had steeled the heart of the King of Scots, and sealed the
Firth of Forth. Nevertheless, as I say, Lord Howard, like the rest of
Elizabeth's heroes, trusted James just as much as James trusted others;
and therefore thought good to escort the Armada until it was safely past
the domains of that most chivalrous and truthful Solomon. But on the
4th of August, his fears, such as they were, were laid to rest. The
Spaniards left the Scottish coast and sailed away for Norway; and the
game was played out, and the end was come, as the end of such matters
generally comes, by gradual decay, petty disaster, and mistake; till
the snow-mountain, instead of being blown tragically and heroically to
atoms, melts helplessly and pitiably away.



CHAPTER XXXII

HOW AMYAS THREW HIS SWORD INTO THE SEA

     "Full fathom deep thy father lies;
        Of his bones are corals made;
     Those are pearls which were his eyes;
        Nothing of him that doth fade,
     But doth suffer a sea-change
        Into something rich and strange;
     Fairies hourly ring his knell,
     Hark! I hear them.  Ding dong bell."

                           The Tempest.

Yes, it is over; and the great Armada is vanquished. It is lulled for
awhile, the everlasting war which is in heaven, the battle of Iran and
Turan, of the children of light and of darkness, of Michael and his
angels against Satan and his fiends; the battle which slowly and seldom,
once in the course of many centuries, culminates and ripens into a
day of judgment, and becomes palpable and incarnate; no longer a mere
spiritual fight, but one of flesh and blood, wherein simple men may
choose their sides without mistake, and help God's cause not merely with
prayer and pen, but with sharp shot and cold steel. A day of judgment
has come, which has divided the light from the darkness, and the sheep
from the goats, and tried each man's work by the fire; and, behold, the
devil's work, like its maker, is proved to have been, as always, a lie
and a sham, and a windy boast, a bladder which collapses at the merest
pinprick. Byzantine empires, Spanish Armadas, triple-crowned papacies,
Russian despotisms, this is the way of them, and will be to the end of
the world. One brave blow at the big bullying phantom, and it vanishes
in sulphur-stench; while the children of Israel, as of old, see the
Egyptians dead on the sea-shore,--they scarce know how, save that God
has done it, and sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb.

And now, from England and the Netherlands, from Germany and Geneva, and
those poor Vaudois shepherd-saints, whose bones for generations past

     "Lie scattered on the Alpine mountains cold;"

to be, indeed, the seed of the Church, and a germ of new life, liberty,
and civilization, even in these very days returning good for evil to
that Piedmont which has hunted them down like the partridges on the
mountains;--from all of Europe, from all of mankind, I had almost said,
in which lay the seed of future virtue and greatness, of the destinies
of the new-discovered world, and the triumphs of the coming age of
science, arose a shout of holy joy, such as the world had not heard
for many a weary and bloody century; a shout which was the prophetic
birth-paean of North America, Australia, New Zealand, the Pacific
Islands, of free commerce and free colonization over the whole earth.

"There was in England, by the commandment of her majesty," says Van
Meteran, "and likewise in the United Provinces, by the direction of the
States, a solemn festival day publicly appointed, wherein all persons
were solemnly enjoined to resort unto ye Church, and there to render
thanks and praises unto God, and ye preachers were commanded to exhort
ye people thereunto. The aforesaid solemnity was observed upon the 29th
of November: which day was wholly spent in fasting, prayer, and giving
of thanks.

"Likewise the Queen's Majesty herself, imitating ye ancient Romans, rode
into London in triumph, in regard of her own and her subjects' glorious
deliverance. For being attended upon very solemnly by all ye principal
Estates and officers of her Realm, she was carried through her said City
of London in a triumphant Chariot, and in robes of triumph, from her
Palace unto ye said Cathedral Church of St. Paul, out of ye which ye
Ensigns and Colours of ye vanquished Spaniards hung displayed. And
all ye Citizens of London, in their liveries, stood on either side ye
street, by their several Companies, with their ensigns and banners, and
the streets were hanged on both sides with blue Cloth, which, together
with ye foresaid banners, yielded a very stately and gallant prospect.
Her Majestie being entered into ye Church together with her Clergy and
Nobles, gave thanks unto God, and caused a public Sermon to be preached
before her at Paul's Cross; wherein none other argument was handled,
but that praise, honour, and glory might be rendered unto God, and that
God's Name might be extolled by thanksgiving. And with her own princely
voice she most Christianly exhorted ye people to do ye same; whereunto
ye people, with a loud acclamation, wished her a most long and happy
life to ye confusion of her foes."

Yes, as the medals struck on the occasion said, "It came, it saw, and it
fled!" And whither? Away and northward, like a herd of frightened deer,
past the Orkneys and Shetlands, catching up a few hapless fishermen as
guides; past the coast of Norway, there, too, refused water and food by
the brave descendants of the Vikings; and on northward ever towards the
lonely Faroes, and the everlasting dawn which heralds round the Pole the
midnight sun.

Their water is failing; the cattle must go overboard; and the wild
northern sea echoes to the shrieks of drowning horses. They must
homeward at least, somehow, each as best he can. Let them meet again
at Cape Finisterre, if indeed they ever meet. Medina Sidonia, with some
five-and twenty of the soundest and best victualled ships, will lead
the way, and leave the rest to their fate. He is soon out of sight; and
forty more, the only remnant of that mighty host, come wandering wearily
behind, hoping to make the south-west coast of Ireland, and have help,
or, at least, fresh water there, from their fellow Romanists. Alas for
them!--

     "Make Thou their way dark and slippery,
     And follow them up ever with Thy storm."

For now comes up from the Atlantic, gale on gale; and few of that
hapless remnant reached the shores of Spain.

And where are Amyas and the Vengeance all this while?

At the fifty-seventh degree of latitude, the English fleet, finding
themselves growing short of provision, and having been long since out of
powder and ball, turn southward toward home, "thinking it best to leave
the Spaniard to those uncouth and boisterous northern seas." A few
pinnaces are still sent onward to watch their course: and the English
fleet, caught in the same storms which scattered the Spaniards, "with
great danger and industry reached Harwich port, and there provide
themselves of victuals and ammunition," in case the Spaniards should
return; but there is no need for that caution. Parma, indeed, who cannot
believe that the idol at Halle, after all his compliments to it, will
play him so scurvy a trick, will watch for weeks on Dunkirk dunes,
hoping against hope for the Armada's return, casting anchors, and
spinning rigging to repair their losses.

     "But lang, lang may his ladies sit,
     With their fans intill their hand,
     Before they see Sir Patrick Spens
     Come sailing to the land."

The Armada is away on the other side of Scotland, and Amyas is following
in its wake.

For when the lord high admiral determined to return, Amyas asked
leave to follow the Spaniard; and asked, too, of Sir John Hawkins,
who happened to be at hand, such ammunition and provision as could be
afforded him, promising to repay the same like an honest man, out of
his plunder if he lived, out of his estate if he died; lodging for that
purpose bills in the hands of Sir John, who, as a man of business,
took them, and put them in his pocket among the thimbles, string, and
tobacco; after which Amyas, calling his men together, reminded them once
more of the story of the Rose of Torridge and Don Guzman de Soto, and
then asked:

"Men of Bideford, will you follow me? There will be plunder for those
who love plunder; revenge for those who love revenge; and for all of us
(for we all love honor) the honor of having never left the chase as long
as there was a Spanish flag in English seas."

And every soul on board replied, that they would follow Sir Amyas Leigh
around the world.

There is no need for me to detail every incident of that long and weary
chase; how they found the Sta. Catharina, attacked her, and had to sheer
off, she being rescued by the rest; how when Medina's squadron left the
crippled ships behind, they were all but taken or sunk, by thrusting
into the midst of the Spanish fleet to prevent her escaping with Medina;
how they crippled her, so that she could not beat to windward out into
the ocean, but was fain to run south, past the Orkneys, and down through
the Minch, between Cape Wrath and Lewis; how the younger hands were
ready to mutiny, because Amyas, in his stubborn haste, ran past two or
three noble prizes which were all but disabled, among others one of
the great galliasses, and the two great Venetians, La Ratta and La
Belanzara--which were afterwards, with more than thirty other vessels,
wrecked on the west coast of Ireland; how he got fresh water, in spite
of certain "Hebridean Scots" of Skye, who, after reviling him in an
unknown tongue, fought with him awhile, and then embraced him and his
men with howls of affection, and were not much more decently clad, nor
more civilized, than his old friends of California; how he pacified his
men by letting them pick the bones of a great Venetian which was going
on shore upon Islay (by which they got booty enough to repay them for
the whole voyage), and offended them again by refusing to land and
plunder two great Spanish wrecks on the Mull of Cantire (whose crews, by
the by, James tried to smuggle off secretly into Spain in ships of his
own, wishing to play, as usual, both sides of the game at once; but
the Spaniards were stopped at Yarmouth till the council's pleasure was
known--which was, of course, to let the poor wretches go on their way,
and be hanged elsewhere); how they passed a strange island, half black,
half white, which the wild people called Raghary, but Cary christened it
"the drowned magpie;" how the Sta. Catharina was near lost on the Isle
of Man, and then put into Castleton (where the Manx-men slew a whole
boat's-crew with their arrows), and then put out again, when Amyas
fought with her a whole day, and shot away her mainyard; how the
Spaniard blundered down the coast of Wales, not knowing whither he went;
how they were both nearly lost on Holyhead, and again on Bardsey Island;
how they got on a lee shore in Cardigan Bay, before a heavy westerly
gale, and the Sta. Catharina ran aground on Sarn David, one of those
strange subaqueous pebble-dykes which are said to be the remnants of the
lost land of Gwalior, destroyed by the carelessness of Prince Seithenin
the drunkard, at whose name each loyal Welshman spits; how she got off
again at the rising of the tide, and fought with Amyas a fourth time;
how the wind changed, and she got round St. David's Head;--these, and
many more moving incidents of this eventful voyage, I must pass over
without details, and go on to the end; for it is time that the end
should come.

It was now the sixteenth day of the chase. They had seen, the evening
before, St. David's Head, and then the Welsh coast round Milford
Haven, looming out black and sharp before the blaze of the inland
thunder-storm; and it had lightened all round them during the fore part
of the night, upon a light south-western breeze.

In vain they had strained their eyes through the darkness, to catch, by
the fitful glare of the flashes, the tall masts of the Spaniard. Of
one thing at least they were certain, that with the wind as it was, she
could not have gone far to the westward; and to attempt to pass them
again, and go northward, was more than she dare do. She was probably
lying-to ahead of them, perhaps between them and the land; and when, a
little after midnight, the wind chopped up to the west, and blew stiffly
till day break, they felt sure that, unless she had attempted the
desperate expedient of running past them, they had her safe in the mouth
of the Bristol Channel. Slowly and wearily broke the dawn, on such a day
as often follows heavy thunder; a sunless, drizzly day, roofed with low
dingy cloud, barred and netted, and festooned with black, a sign that
the storm is only taking breath awhile before it bursts again; while all
the narrow horizon is dim and spongy with vapor drifting before a chilly
breeze. As the day went on, the breeze died down, and the sea fell to a
long glassy foam-flecked roll, while overhead brooded the inky sky, and
round them the leaden mist shut out alike the shore and the chase.

Amyas paced the sloppy deck fretfully and fiercely. He knew that the
Spaniard could not escape; but he cursed every moment which lingered
between him and that one great revenge which blackened all his soul.
The men sate sulkily about the deck, and whistled for a wind; the sails
flapped idly against the masts; and the ship rolled in the long troughs
of the sea, till her yard-arms almost dipped right and left.

"Take care of those guns. You will have something loose next," growled
Amyas.

"We will take care of the guns, if the Lord will take care of the wind,"
said Yeo.

"We shall have plenty before night," said Cary, "and thunder too."

"So much the better," said Amyas. "It may roar till it splits the
heavens, if it does but let me get my work done."

"He's not far off, I warrant," said Cary. "One lift of the cloud, and we
should see him."

"To windward of us, as likely as not," said Amyas. "The devil fights
for him, I believe. To have been on his heels sixteen days, and not sent
this through him yet!" And he shook his sword impatiently.

So the morning wore away, without a sign of living thing, not even a
passing gull; and the black melancholy of the heaven reflected itself
in the black melancholy of Amyas. Was he to lose his prey after all?
The thought made him shudder with rage and disappointment. It was
intolerable. Anything but that.

"No, God!" he cried, "let me but once feel this in his accursed heart,
and then--strike me dead, if Thou wilt!"

"The Lord have mercy on us," cried John Brimblecombe. "What have you
said?"

"What is that to you, sir? There, they are piping to dinner. Go down. I
shall not come."

And Jack went down, and talked in a half-terrified whisper of Amyas's
ominous words.

All thought that they portended some bad luck, except old Yeo.

"Well, Sir John," said he, "and why not? What better can the Lord do
for a man, than take him home when he has done his work? Our captain is
wilful and spiteful, and must needs kill his man himself; while for me,
I don't care how the Don goes, provided he does go. I owe him no grudge,
nor any man. May the Lord give him repentance, and forgive him all his
sins: but if I could but see him once safe ashore, as he may be ere
nightfall, on the Mortestone or the back of Lundy, I would say, 'Lord,
now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace,' even if it were the
lightning which was sent to fetch me."

"But, master Yeo, a sudden death?"

"And why not a sudden death, Sir John? Even fools long for a short life
and a merry one, and shall not the Lord's people pray for a short death
and a merry one? Let it come as it will to old Yeo. Hark! there's the
captain's voice!"

"Here she is!" thundered Amyas from the deck; and in an instant all were
scrambling up the hatchway as fast as the frantic rolling of the ship
would let them.

Yes. There she was. The cloud had lifted suddenly, and to the south a
ragged bore of blue sky let a long stream of sunshine down on her tall
masts and stately hull, as she lay rolling some four or five miles to
the eastward: but as for land, none was to be seen.

"There she is; and here we are," said Cary; "but where is here? and
where is there? How is the tide, master?"

"Running up Channel by this time, sir."

"What matters the tide?" said Amyas, devouring the ship with terrible
and cold blue eyes. "Can't we get at her?"

"Not unless some one jumps out and shoves behind," said Cary. "I shall
down again and finish that mackerel, if this roll has not chucked it to
the cockroaches under the table."

"Don't jest, Will! I can't stand it," said Amyas, in a voice which
quivered so much that Cary looked at him. His whole frame was trembling
like an aspen. Cary took his arm, and drew him aside.

"Dear old lad," said he, as they leaned over the bulwarks, "what is
this? You are not yourself, and have not been these four days."

"No. I am not Amyas Leigh. I am my brother's avenger. Do not reason
with me, Will: when it is over I shall be merry old Amyas again," and he
passed his hand over his brow.

"Do you believe," said he, after a moment, "that men can be possessed by
devils?"

"The Bible says so."

"If my cause were not a just one, I should fancy I had a devil in me. My
throat and heart are as hot as the pit. Would to God it were done, for
done it must be! Now go."

Cary went away with a shudder. As he passed down the hatchway he looked
back. Amyas had got the hone out of his pocket, and was whetting away
again at his sword-edge, as if there was some dreadful doom on him, to
whet, and whet forever.

The weary day wore on. The strip of blue sky was curtained over again,
and all was dismal as before, though it grew sultrier every moment; and
now and then a distant mutter shook the air to westward. Nothing could
be done to lessen the distance between the ships, for the Vengeance had
had all her boats carried away but one, and that was much too small
to tow her: and while the men went down again to finish dinner, Amyas
worked on at his sword, looking up every now and then suddenly at the
Spaniard, as if to satisfy himself that it was not a vision which had
vanished.

About two Yeo came up to him.

"He is ours safely now, sir. The tide has been running to the eastward
for this two hours."

"Safe as a fox in a trap. Satan himself cannot take him from us!"

"But God may," said Brimblecombe, simply.

"Who spoke to you, sir? If I thought that He--There comes the thunder at
last!"

And as he spoke an angry growl from the westward heavens seemed to
answer his wild words, and rolled and loudened nearer and nearer, till
right over their heads it crashed against some cloud-cliff far above,
and all was still.

Each man looked in the other's face: but Amyas was unmoved.

"The storm is coming," said he, "and the wind in it. It will be
Eastward-ho now, for once, my merry men all!"

"Eastward-ho never brought us luck," said Jack in an undertone to Cary.
But by this time all eyes were turned to the north-west, where a black
line along the horizon began to define the boundary of sea and air, till
now all dim in mist.

"There comes the breeze."

"And there the storm, too."

And with that strangely accelerating pace which some storms seem to
possess, the thunder, which had been growling slow and seldom far away,
now rang peal on peal along the cloudy floor above their heads.

"Here comes the breeze. Round with the yards, or we shall be taken
aback."

The yards creaked round; the sea grew crisp around them; the hot air
swept their cheeks, tightened every rope, filled every sail, bent her
over. A cheer burst from the men as the helm went up, and they staggered
away before the wind, right down upon the Spaniard, who lay still
becalmed.

"There is more behind, Amyas," said Cary. "Shall we not shorten sail a
little?"

"No. Hold on every stitch," said Amyas. "Give me the helm, man.
Boatswain, pipe away to clear for fight."

It was done, and in ten minutes the men were all at quarters, while
the thunder rolled louder and louder overhead, and the breeze freshened
fast.

"The dog has it now. There he goes!" said Cary.

"Right before the wind. He has no liking to face us."

"He is running into the jaws of destruction," said Yeo. "An hour more
will send him either right up the Channel, or smack on shore somewhere."

"There! he has put his helm down. I wonder if he sees land?"

"He is like a March hare beat out of his country," said Cary, "and don't
know whither to run next."

Cary was right. In ten minutes more the Spaniard fell off again, and
went away dead down wind, while the Vengeance gained on him fast.
After two hours more, the four miles had diminished to one, while the
lightning flashed nearer and nearer as the storm came up; and from the
vast mouth of a black cloud-arch poured so fierce a breeze that Amyas
yielded unwillingly to hints which were growing into open murmurs, and
bade shorten sail.

On they rushed with scarcely lessened speed, the black arch following
fast, curtained by the flat gray sheet of pouring rain, before which the
water was boiling in a long white line; while every moment behind the
watery veil, a keen blue spark leapt down into the sea, or darted zigzag
through the rain.

"We shall have it now, and with a vengeance; this will try your tackle,
master," said Cary.

The functionary answered with a shrug, and turned up the collar of his
rough frock, as the first drops flew stinging round his ears. Another
minute and the squall burst full upon them, in rain, which cut like
hail--hail which lashed the sea into froth, and wind which whirled off
the heads of the surges, and swept the waters into one white seething
waste. And above them, and behind them and before them, the lightning
leapt and ran, dazzling and blinding, while the deep roar of the thunder
was changed to sharp ear-piercing cracks.

"Get the arms and ammunition under cover, and then below with you all,"
shouted Amyas from the helm.

"And heat the pokers in the galley fire," said Yeo, "to be ready if the
rain puts our linstocks out. I hope you'll let me stay on deck, sir, in
case--"

"I must have some one, and who better than you? Can you see the chase?"

No; she was wrapped in the gray whirlwind. She might be within half a
mile of them, for aught they could have seen of her.

And now Amyas and his old liegeman were alone. Neither spoke; each knew
the other's thoughts, and knew that they were his own. The squall blew
fiercer and fiercer, the rain poured heavier and heavier. Where was the
Spaniard?

"If he has laid-to, we may overshoot him, sir!"

"If he has tried to lay-to, he will not have a sail left in the
bolt-ropes, or perhaps a mast on deck. I know the stiff-neckedness of
those Spanish tubs. Hurrah! there he is, right on our larboard bow!"

There she was indeed, two musket-shots' off, staggering away with canvas
split and flying.

"He has been trying to hull, sir, and caught a buffet," said Yeo,
rubbing his hands. "What shall we do now?"

"Range alongside, if it blow live imps and witches, and try our luck
once more. Pah! how this lightning dazzles!"

On they swept, gaining fast on the Spaniard. "Call the men up, and to
quarters; the rain will be over in ten minutes."

Yeo ran forward to the gangway; and sprang back again, with a face white
and wild--

"Land right ahead! Port your helm, sir! For the love of God, port your
helm!"

Amyas, with the strength of a bull, jammed the helm down, while Yeo
shouted to the men below.

She swung round. The masts bent like whips; crack went the fore-sail
like a cannon. What matter? Within two hundred yards of them was the
Spaniard; in front of her, and above her, a huge dark bank rose through
the dense hail, and mingled with the clouds; and at its foot, plainer
every moment, pillars and spouts of leaping foam.

"What is it, Morte? Hartland?"

It might be anything for thirty miles.

"Lundy!" said Yeo. "The south end! I see the head of the Shutter in the
breakers! Hard a-port yet, and get her close-hauled as you can, and the
Lord may have mercy on us still! Look at the Spaniard!"

Yes, look at the Spaniard!

On their left hand, as they broached-to, the wall of granite sloped down
from the clouds toward an isolated peak of rock, some two hundred feet
in height. Then a hundred yards of roaring breaker upon a sunken shelf,
across which the race of the tide poured like a cataract; then, amid a
column of salt smoke, the Shutter, like a huge black fang, rose waiting
for its prey; and between the Shutter and the land, the great galleon
loomed dimly through the storm.

He, too, had seen his danger, and tried to broach-to. But his clumsy
mass refused to obey the helm; he struggled a moment, half hid in foam;
fell away again, and rushed upon his doom.

"Lost! lost! lost!" cried Amyas madly, and throwing up his hands, let go
the tiller. Yeo caught it just in time.

"Sir! sir! What are you at? We shall clear the rock yet."

"Yes!" shouted Amyas, in his frenzy; "but he will not!"

Another minute. The galleon gave a sudden jar, and stopped. Then one
long heave and bound, as if to free herself. And then her bows lighted
clean upon the Shutter.

An awful silence fell on every English soul. They heard not the roaring
of wind and surge; they saw not the blinding flashes of the lightning;
but they heard one long ear-piercing wail to every saint in heaven rise
from five hundred human throats; they saw the mighty ship heel over from
the wind, and sweep headlong down the cataract of the race, plunging her
yards into the foam, and showing her whole black side even to her keel,
till she rolled clean over, and vanished for ever and ever.

"Shame!" cried Amyas, hurling his sword far into the sea, "to lose my
right, my right! when it was in my very grasp! Unmerciful!"

A crack which rent the sky, and made the granite ring and quiver; a
bright world of flame, and then a blank of utter darkness, against which
stood out, glowing red-hot every mast, and sail, and rock, and Salvation
Yeo as he stood just in front of Amyas, the tiller in his hand. All
red-hot, transfigured into fire; and behind, the black, black night.

      *    *    *    *    *

A whisper, a rustling close beside him, and Brimblecombe's voice said
softly:

"Give him more wine, Will; his eyes are opening."

"Hey day?" said Amyas, faintly, "not past the Shutter yet! How long she
hangs in the wind!"

"We are long past the Shutter, Sir Amyas," said Brimblecombe.

"Are you mad? Cannot I trust my own eyes?"

There was no answer for awhile.

"We are past the Shutter, indeed," said Cary, very gently, "and lying in
