The following account of the skirmish at Clifton is extracted from
the manuscript Memoirs of Evan Macpherson of Cluny, chief of the clan
Macpherson who had the merit of supporting the principal brunt of that
spirited affair. The Memoirs appear to have been composed about 1755,
only ten years after the action had taken place. They were written in
France, where that gallant Chief resided in exile, which accounts for
some Gallicisms which occur in the narrative.

'In the Prince's return from Derby back towards Scotland, my Lord George
Murray, Lieutenant-General, cheerfully charg'd himself with the command
of the rear; a post, which, altho' honourable, was attended with great
danger, many difficulties, and no small fatigue; for the Prince being
apprehensive that his retreat to Scotland might be cut off by Marischall
Wade, who lay to the northward of him with an armie much superior to
what H. R. H. had, while the Duke of Comberland with his whole cavalrie
followed hard in the rear, was obliged to hasten his marches. It was
not, therefore, possible for the artilirie to march so fast as the
Prince's armie, in the depth of winter, extremely bad weather, and
the worst roads in England; so Lord George Murray was obliged often to
continue his marches long after it was dark almost every night, while at
the same time, he had frequent allarms and disturbances from the Duke of
Comberland's advanc'd parties. Towards the evening of the twentie-eight
December 1745, the Prince entered the town of Penrith, in the Province
of Comberland. But as Lord George Murray could not bring up the
artilirie so fast as he wou'd have wish'd, he was obliged to pass
the night six miles short of that town, together with the regiment of
Mac-Donel of Glengarrie, which that day happened to have the arrear
guard. The Prince, in order to refresh his armie, and to give my Lord
George and the artilirie time to come up, resolved to sejour the 29th at
Penrith; so ordered his little army to appear in the morning under arms,
in order to be reviewed, and to know in what manner the numbers stood
from his haveing entered England. It did not at that time amount to
5000 foot in all, with about 400 cavalrie, composed of the noblesse who
serv'd as volunteers, part of whom form'd a first troop of guards for
the Prince, under the command of My Lord Elchoe, now Comte de Weems,
who, being proscribed, is presently in France. Another part formed a
second troup of guards under the command of My Lord Balmirino, who was
beheaded at the Tower of London. A third part serv'd under My Lord le
Comte de Kilmarnock, who was likewise beheaded at the Tower. A fourth
part serv'd under My Lord Pitsligow, who is also proscribed; which
cavalrie, tho' very few in numbers, being all Noblesse, were very brave,
and of infinite advantage to the foot, not only in the day of battle,
but in serving as advanced guards on the several marches, and in
patroling dureing the night on the different roads which led towards the
towns where the army happened to quarter.

'While this small army was out in a body on the 29th December, upon
a rising ground to the northward of Penrith, passing review, Mons. de
Cluny with his tribe, was ordered to the Bridge of Clifton, about a
mile to southward of Penrith, after having pass'd in review before Mons.
Patullo, who was charged with the inspection of the troops, and was
likewise Quarter Master General of the army, and is now in France. They
remained under arms at the Bridge, waiting the arrival of My Lord George
Murray with the artilirie, whom Mons. de Cluny had orders to cover in
passing the bridge. They arrived about sunsett closely pursued by the
Duke of Comberland with the whole body of his cavalrie, reckoned upwards
of 3000 strong, about a thousand of whom, as near as might be computed,
dismounted, in order to cut off the passage of the artilirie towards the
bridge, while the Duke and the others remained on horseback in order to
attack the arrear. My Lord George Murray advanced, and although he
found Mons. de Cluny and his tribe in good spirits under arms, yet
the circumstance appear'd extremely delicate. The numbers were vastly
unequall, and the attack seem'd very dangerous; so my Lord George
declin'd giving orders to such time as he ask'd Mons. de Cluny's
oppinion. "I will attack them with all my heart," says Mons. de Cluny,
"if you order me." "I do order it then," answered my Lord George, and
immediately went on himself along with Mons. de Cluny, and fought sword
in hand on foot, at the head of the single tribe of Macphersons. They
in a moment made their way through a strong hedge of thorns, under the
cover whereof the cavalrie had taken their station, in the struggle of
passing which hedge My Lord George Murray, being dressed EN MONTAGNARD,
as all the army were, lost his bonnet and wig; so continued to fight
bare-headed during the action, They at first made a brisk discharge of
their firearms on the enemy, then attacked them with their sabres, and
made a great slaughter a considerable time, which obliged Comberland
and his cavalrie to fly with precipitation and in great confusion; in
so much, that if the Prince had been provided in a sufficient number of
cavalrie to have taken advantage of the disorder, it is beyond question
that the Duke of Comberland and the bulk of his cavalrie had been taken
prisoners. By this time it was so dark that it was not possible to view
or number the slain, who filled all the ditches which happened to be on
the ground where they stood. But it was computed that, besides those who
went off wounded upwards of a hundred at least were left on the spot,
among whom was Colonel Honeywood, who commanded the dismounted cavalrie,
whose sabre, of considerable value, Mons. de Cluny brought off and still
preserves; and his tribe lykeways brought off many arms;--the Colonel
was afterwards taken up, and, his wounds being dress'd, with great
difficultie recovered. Mons. de Cluny lost only in the action twelve
men, of whom some haveing been only wounded, fell afterwards into the
hands of the enemy, and were sent as slaves to America, whence several
of them returned, and one of them is now in France, a serjeant in the
Regiment of Royal Scots. How soon the accounts of the enemie's approach
had reached the Prince, H. R. H. had immediately ordered Mi-Lord le
Comte de Nairne, Brigadier, who, being proscribed, is now in France,
with the three batalions of the Duke of Athol, the batalion of the Duke
of Perth, and some other troups under his command, in order to support
Cluny, and to bring off the artilirie. But the action was intirely over
before the Comte de Nairne, with his command, cou'd reach nigh to the
place. They therefore return'd all to Penrith, and the artilirie marched
up in good order. Nor did the Duke of Comberland ever afterwards dare to
come within a day's march of the Prince and his army dureing the course
of all that retreat, which was conducted with great prudence and safety,
when in some manner surrounded by enemies.'


NOTE 33.--THE OATH UPON THE DIRK

As the heathen deities contracted an indelible obligation if they swore
by Styx, the Scottish Highlanders had usually some peculiar solemnity
attached to an oath which they intended should be binding on them. Very
frequently it consisted in laying their hand, as they swore, on their
own drawn dirk; which dagger, becoming a party to the transaction, was
invoked to punish any breach of faith. But, by whatever ritual the oath
was sanctioned, the party was extremely desirous to keep secret what the
especial oath was, which he considered as irrevocable. This was a matter
of great convenience, as he felt no scruple in breaking his asseveration
when made in any other form than that which he accounted as peculiarly
solemn; and therefore readily granted any engagement which bound him
no longer than he inclined. Whereas, if the oath which he accounted
inviolable was once publicly known, no party with whom he might have
occasion to contract, would have rested satisfied with any other. Louis
XI of France practised the same sophistry, for he also had a peculiar
species of oath, the only one which he was ever known to respect, and
which, therefore, he was very unwilling to pledge. The only engagement
which that wily tyrant accounted binding upon him, was an oath by the
Holy Cross of Saint Lo d'Angers, which contained a Portion of the True
Cross. If he prevaricated after taking this oath, Louis believed he
should die within the year. The Constable Saint Paul, being invited to a
personal conference with Louis, refused to meet the king unless he would
agree to ensure him safe conduct under sanction of this oath. But, says
Comines, the king replied, he would never again pledge that engagement
to mortal man, though he was willing to take any other oath which could
be devised. The treaty broke off, therefore, after much chaffering
concerning the nature of the vow which Louis was to take. Such is the
difference between the dictates of superstition and those of conscience.


*****




GLOSSARY

ABIIT, EVASIT, ERUPIT, EFFUGIT, more correctly the quotation is, 'abiit,
excessit, evasit, erupit': varying terms to express the haste, secrecy,
and energy of the flight.

ABOON or ABUNE, above.

ACCOLADE, embrace.

ADSCRIPTI GLEBAE, slaves, transferred with the land to which they are
bound, from one possessor to another.

AHINT, behind.

AITS, oats.

ALERTE A LA MURAILLE, 'Quick to the wall!'

ALEXANDER AB ALEXANDRO, Alexander the son of Alexander.

ALMA = 'alma mater terra', the land, the bounteous mother.

ALTER EGO, his other self.

AMBRY, AWMRY, chest.

ANENT, concerning.

ANILIA, old women's tales.

APOTHEOSIS, deification.

ARIETTE, air.

ASSOILZIED, acquitted, or absolved.

ASSYTHMENT, satisfaction.


BAFF, slap.

BAGGANETS, bayonets.

BARLEY, parley; CRY BARLEY IN A BRUILZIE, call a truce during a
scrimmage.

BARON-BAILIE, steward of the estate.

BAWBEE, halfpenny.

BAXTER, baker.

BEAUFET, buffet, sideboard.

BEFLUMMED, befooled.

BEGUNK, trick.

BEN, within (by, in).

BENEMPT, named.

BENT, open country.

BHAIRD, bard.

BIBLIOPOLIST, seller of books.

BIELDY, sheltered.

BIRLIEMAN, a parish official.

BLIND, hidden, out of the way.

BLOOD-WIT, blood-money, compensation for homicide.

BODACH, spectre.

BODLE, farthing.

BOGLE, bogey.

BON VIVANT, a lover of good fare.

BOUNE, make ready.

BRANDER, broil.

BRAW, fine.

BROGUES, shoes.

BROO', broth.

BRUCKLE, brittle, frail.

BRUIK, possess.

BRUILZIE, broil, scrimmage.

BURGONET, helmet.

BUSK, get ready.


CAILLIACH, crone, old woman.

CAISSE MILITAIRE, military chest.

CALLANT, lad.

CANNY, shrewd; UNCANNY or NO CANNY, eerie.

CANTER, beggar; from the whining or 'canting' tone.

CANTRIPS, tricks.

CATH-DATH, tartan.

C'EST DES DEUX OREILLES, properly, 'c'est d'une oreille,' an expression
appreciative of good wine.

C'EST L'HOMME KI SE BAST ET KI CONSEILLE, it is the man who fights and
gives counsel.

CEAN-KINNE, head of the clan.

CEDANT ARMA TOGAE, let weapons give place to the citizen's robe.

CELA NE TIRE A RIEN, that counts for nothing.

CELA VA SANS DIRE, that goes without saying.

CESS-MONEY, land-tax.

CHANGE-HOUSE, public house.

CHEVAUX-DE-POSTE, post-horses.

CHIEL, person.

CLACHAN, village.

CLAMHEWIT, slash, clout.

CLAW FAVOUR, curry favour.

CLOUR, bump.

COGHLING, blowing.

COM., short for COMITATUS = county.

CONCLAMARE VASA, to give the signal for baggage, i.e. for packing the
baggage.

CONGES, bowing and scraping.

CORONACH, lament.

CORRI, hill-side.

COUP, upset.

COUPE-JARRET, cut-throat (literally, leg-chopper).

COUR PLENIERE, full court, state-reception.

COUTEAU DE CHASSE, hunting-knife.

COW YER CRACKS, stop your chatter.

CRAIG, neck.

CREAGH, foray, raid.

CUITTLE, fickle.

CURRAGH, boat,

CURRANT, running.

CUT-LUGGED, crop-eared.


DANS SON TORT, in the wrong.

DE FACTO, in actual fact.

DE JURE, by legal right.

DEAVING, deafening.

DELIVER, active.

DEMELEE, extrication from a hobble.

DEOCH AN DORUIS, stirrup-cup.

DERN, dark.

DIAOUL, devil.

DIAOUL!--CEADE MILLIA MOLLIGHEART, O the devil! a hundred thousand
curses.

DINMONTS, year-old wethers.

DISPONE, assign.

DIVERTISEMENTS, diversions.

DOER, factor, agent.

DOITED, witless.

DOON, down.

DORLACH, valise, portmanteau.

DOVERING, half-asleep.

DOW, dove.

DOWFF, dull.

DUE DONZELLETTE GARRULE, two garrulous damsels.

DUINHE-WASSEL, gentleman.


EARN, eagle.

ELD, age.

ELISOS OCULOS, ET SICCUM SANGUINE GUTTUR, eyes squeezed out of his head,
and throat drained of blood.

EN ATTENDANT, meanwhile.

EN MOUSQUETAIRE, from a soldier's point of view.

EPULAE AD SENATUM, PRANDIUM VERO AD POPULUM ATTINET, for the senate
feasts are befitting, but for the people a simple meal.

EPULAE LAUTIORES, splendid feasts.

EQUIPONDERATE, equivalent.

ET SINGULA PRAEDANTUR ANNI, the passing years rob us of every thing we
possess, one by one.

ETTER-CAP, A venomous person.

EVITE, evade.

EWEST, nearest.

EXEEMED, exempt.


FAIRE LA CUREE, to give the shin, &c., of a killed stag to the hounds.

FAIRE LA MEILLEURE CHERE, to make good cheer.

FEAL, loyal.

FECK, part.

FENDY, handy.

FEROCIORES IN ASPECTU, MITIORES IN ACTU, fierce in appearance, in
behaviour mild.

FILLE DE CHAMBRE, lady's maid.

FLEMIT, frightened.

FLEYT, scold.

FORIS-FAMILIATED, excluded from the family, out of the jurisdiction of
the head of the family.

FUNGARQUE INANI MUNERE, I shall render a fruitless service.


GABERLUNZIE, beggar.

GAD, bar.

GANE, gone.

GAR, make.

GARCONS APOTHICAIRES, chemists' assistants.

GARDEZ L'EAU, beware of the water.

GARTANED, gartered.

GAUDET EQUIS ET CANIBUS, he finds his pleasure in horses and dogs.

GAUN, going.

GEAR, goods.

GIMMERS, ewes of two years.

GIN, if.

GLED, hawk.

GLEG, quick.

GLISK, glimpse.

GRANING, groaning.

GRAT, cried; GREET, cry, weep.

GREY-BEARD, jug.

GRICE, young pig.

GRIFFIN, a four-legged dragon.

GRIPPLE, greedy.

GUSTO, taste.


HAEC TIBI ERUNT ARTES, &c. 'These be your acts; to impose the rule of
peace; To spare the humbled, crush the arrogant foe.'

HAG, copse.

HAGGIS, a dish composed of the pluck, &c., of a sheep, with oatmeal,
suet, onions, &c., boiled inside the animal's maw.

HAILL, whole.

HALLAN, inner wall.

HANTLE, a lot.

HECK, cattle rack.

HER NAIN SELL, me, myself.

HERSHIP, plunder.

HET, hot.

HIPPOGRIFF, a cross between a horse and a dragon.

HOG, lamb.

HOMAGIUM, the act of homage.

HORNING, outlawry.

HORSE-COUPER, horse-dealer.

HOWE, hollow.

HUMANA PERPESSI SUMUS, we have borne all that man can inflict on us.

HURDLES, buttocks.


ILK, each; OF THAT ILK, having the same title as the surname.

IMPIGER, IRACUNDUS, INEXORABILIS, ACER, untiring, swift to wrath,
unyielding, keen.

IN CARCERE, in prison.

IN ERGASTULO, in a dungeon (a private prison, as opposed to INCARCERE).

IN INTEGNUM, in full.

IN LOCO PARENTIS, in the place of a parent.

IN REBUS BELLICIS MAXIME DOMINATUR FORTUNA, in matters of war, Luck has
most to say.

IN SERVITIO EXUENDI, SEU DETRAHENDI. CALIGAS REGIS POST BATALLIAM, for
the service of undoing or pulling off the king's boots after a battle.

INTROMITTED, interfered with.


JOGUE, jogee, ascetic or conjurer.


KEMPLE, a load of hay (forty 'bottles').

KIPPAGE, rage.

KITTLE, tricky, difficult.

KYLOES, highland cattle.


LA BELLE PASSION, the gentle passion.

LA HOULETTE ET LE CHALLUMEAU, the shepherd's crook and pipe.

LAIRD, (equivalent to) squire.

LAISSEZ FAIRE A DON ANTOINE, Leave that to Don Antonio.

LANG-LEGGIT, long-legged.

LAPIS OFFENSIONIS ET PETRA SCANDALI, a stone of stumbling and a rock of
offence.

LAWING, reckoning.

LE BEAU IDEAL, the perfect conception.

LEGES CONVIVIALES, the rules of the table.

LES COUSTUSMES DE NORMANDIE, C'EST L'HOMME KI SE BAST ET KI CONSEILLE,
[according to] the Norman custom, it is the man who fights and gives
counsel.

LEVY EN MASSE, full muster.

LIBER PATER, Father Liber; an old Italian deity, afterwards identified
with Bacchus.

LIGHTLY, make light of.

LIMMER, hussy, good-for-nothing.

LOON, fellow.

LOUPING-ON STANE, mounting-stone.

LOUR, to frown.

LUCKIE, widow.

LUG, ear.

LUNZIE, wallet.


MA BELLE DEMOISELLE, my fair damsel.

MADAME SON EPOUSE, Madam his wife.

MAILS, rent, dues.

MAIS CELA VIENDRA AVEC LE TEMPS, but that will come with time.

MAIST, most.

MAJOR DOMO, butler, mayor of the house, steward.

MANEGE, the art of training and managing horses.

MART, fatted beasts, slaughtered at Martinmas for winter provision.

MASK, infuse.

MAUGRE, in spite of.

MAUN, must.

MAUVAISE HONTE, false shame.

MAVORTIA PECTORA, warlike breasts.

MEAL-ARK, meal-tub.

MISGUGGLE, mishandle.

MOLDWARP, mole.

MON COEUR, &c. 'My heart so light, quo' she, My lad, is not for
you; 'Tis for a soldier bold, With beard of martial hue. Down, down,
derrydown. 'A feather in his hat, A red heel on his shoe; Who plays upon
the flute, And on the fiddle too. Down, down, derrydown.'

MORNING, morning drink.

MORTIS CAUSA, the cause of death.

MOUSTED, powdered.

MUTEMUS CLYPEOS, &c. 'Change we our shields, and for ourselves assume
the trappings of the Greeks.'


NEB, nose.

NEBULONES NEQUISSIMI, worthless scamps.

NEC NATURALITER IDIOTA, not a born idiot.

NOLT, cattle.

NUNC INSANUS AMOR, &c. 'Love's frenzy keeps me still in war's array
Where bolts fly thick, and foemen compass me.'

NUNCUPATIVE, legally valid nomination of an heir.


OBSIDIONAL CROWN, the reward of a commander who delivered a town from
siege; here used erroneously for the reward of the soldier who first
entered a besieged city.

