perforated by the enemy's shot, as they must inevitably be in action.
But in the course of time, the iron vessel naturally raised the
possibility of protecting warships by armour, and the matter, was forced
to the front when gunmakers followed the lead of the shipbuilders and
engineers, and set themselves to see what could be done in the way of
improving ordnance, that had remained practically unchanged for hundreds
of years, saving for more accurate workmanship.

Up till this time, only solid round-shot had been used on shipboard.  An
attempt had been made to get Napoleon the First to sanction the use of
shells for naval use; fortunately, for some reason or other, he declined
to do so, and thus our great struggle for naval supremacy was carried on
with the solid round-shot that had been in vogue from the earliest
introduction of cannon.  The smooth-bore cannon from which they were
fired, could not be relied on to project them with accuracy to distances
greater than about 1500 yards; beyond this range, their flight became so
erratic, that it was simply a waste of ammunition to fire them.
Whitworth and Armstrong set themselves to solve the problem of how to
make cannon shoot better.

The experiments of Whitworth and Armstrong resulted in the production of
rifled guns, based on a principle that had already been tried with
success in small-arms.  The rifling enabled long conical shot to be
fired with far greater accuracy than the old round-shot, and as these
conical shot were two or three times as heavy as the round-shot that
could be fired from a gun of the same bore, the guns of a given bore had
only to be rifled to be suddenly raised to a much heavier grade,
supposing them to be strong enough to stand the heavier charge of powder
required.  Not only that, but their range would be much greater, and
their shot would pass through both sides of the stoutest ship in
existence.  For, when fired at wooden targets identical in material and
thickness with the side of a ship, the projectiles went through them as
if they had been paper, or, if shells were used, tore them to pieces.
Even strong iron plates failed to withstand their impact.  The thinner
plates they tore open; as the thickness was increased, they first buried
their heads in the metal, but stuck fast; then indented it only; and
finally glanced off, but not until the plate had been made 4 or 5 inches
thick.

Further progress was also made by the invention of breech loaders, which
gave an increased rate of fire to these already formidable weapons, and
to make matters still worse, much larger guns than had ever been made
before could now be constructed without difficulty, and naval men justly
began to feel uncomfortable about the safety of our "wooden walls."

In 1859, the French led the way by constructing the _Gloire_, which was
covered with thick iron plates, and our Admiralty had to face the task
of constructing ironclad ships, and of armouring existing ships, pending
the construction of others.  One thing was very plain; the existing
high-sided ships could not carry the weight of even the thinnest armour
that would be of any service.

In 1861, the _Warrior_ was produced in answer to the French _Gloire_.
She was a frigate-built vessel doing 14 knots, and carried thirty-two
heavy guns, 200 feet only of her length of 310 feet were armoured with
iron plates 4 and a half inches thick--which was proof against any guns
then existing--as it was thought that her seaworthiness would be
impaired if the great weight of the armour were extended to the two
ends.  But to protect the vessel from raking shot--that is, shots fired
at her when bow on, or stern on, to the enemy--armoured partitions, or
"bulkheads", as they are called, were provided.

In 1861, ships of the type of the _Minotaur_ were built, armoured from
stem to stern.  These were considered monster ships at the time, as they
had a displacement of, 10,627 tons and were 400 feet in length.  Their
speed was 14 or 15 knots, attained by engines of 6,700 horse-power.  The
bow was constructed on the ram principle, projecting some distance under
the water, and her sides were covered with iron plates 5 inches thick,
tapering off in thickness, however, as they approached the bow.
Further, she was divided into many compartments below water, with
watertight doors, so that if pierced, either in action or by grounding,
she might still be kept afloat.  She was fitted with five masts, made
partly of iron, while her armament consisted of thirty-four 12-ton and
18-ton guns.  Her cost was, 478,000 pounds but she and her sister ships
the _Agincourt_ and _Northumberland_ did not come up to their
expectations, being found unwieldy on account of their great length,
while in a few years it was found that their armour was not thick enough
to withstand the more powerful guns that were being manufactured.

The next type of design was that of the _Hercules_, the prototype of the
"citadel" design.  This ship was protected from end to end by much
thicker armour than had hitherto been used, but instead of carrying the
armour right up to the upper deck, to save weight it was in the form of
a narrow belt protecting a few feet above and below the water line only,
except amidships, where it was carried up to the upper deck, forming a
"citadel," inside which her ten 18-ton and 12-ton guns were well
protected.  In this way her guns, waterline, and engines--or "vitals,"
as these are known for short--were fully protected at the expense of
less vital parts of the ship.  Though smaller and less expensive than
the _Minotaur_ she was a far more efficient ship.  Her broadside was
1818 pounds.  The _Sultan_, another ship of much the same type, had a
broadside of 1964 pounds.  During the early sixties another type of
vessel came to the front.  Captain Coles had invented the "turret,"
which consisted of a turn-table or revolving platform, round which was a
shield of thick armour, turning with it: the top was also closed in.  In
the shield was a very small port for the gun--which was aimed by
revolving the turret till it pointed at the required object.  The crew
was thus completely protected from the enemy's fire.

In the American Civil War the Federals or Northerners, had provided two
of their wooden frigates with these turrets and sent them to attack the
_Merrimac_, a cut-down wooden frigate which had been armoured and
provided with a ram.  The _Merrimac_ steamed up to the _Congress_,
delivering her fire with awful effect, and then proceeding towards the
_Cumberland_, ran into her near the bow, ripping an enormous rent in her
side, and hung on by her own sharp prow while she fired into the
fractured chasm.  She then backed out and repeated her tremendous
onslaught, suffering little from the fire of her enemy, till the latter
went down.  She next attacked the _Congress_ with shells, which killed
the greater number of the Federal crew, and in half-an-hour the few
survivors hauled down their colours.

Later on the _Merrimac_ was attacked by the armoured _Monitor_.  The two
ships hammered away at one another for many hours without result; only
five men were killed after a five hours action, for the armour beat the
gun.

The result of these actions made it clear that turret-ships to be of any
use must be armoured, and as a first experiment it was decided to
cut-down the _Royal Sovereign_, a ship of the size of the _Duke of
Wellington_.  Her masts and her three upper decks were taken off, her
lower-deck alone remaining, so that she was cut-down almost to the
water's edge.  Massive plates of iron were fastened to her sides and
deck, thus converting her into an ironclad, while four turrets were sunk
into the deck in a line fore and aft, three of them containing one huge
gun each, firing 300-pound shot, while the fourth and foremost turret
contained two guns.  The muzzles of the guns were only a little way
above the deck, and the bulwarks were hinged so that when the guns were
to be fired they could be dropped over the side so as not to be in the
way.

Amidships was a circular armoured box, rather higher than the turrets,
called the "conning-tower."  Here the captain took his stand in time of
action, communicating with the engines, turrets, and other parts of the
ship, by speaking tubes.  In more recent ships the vessel is also
steered from the conning-tower in time of action.  Such was our first
converted ironclad turret-ship.  She was, however, found to be of little
value, drawing too much water to serve for harbour defence, and not
being handy enough at sea in manoeuvring.

Turret-ships, as first constructed, were very heavily, armoured, and in
consequence rather unseaworthy.  Being intended for coast defence only,
they always had a harbour available in bad weather, and sails were not
required as they were never far from a coal supply.

In 1869, however, Sir Edward Reed designed the first sea-going
turret-ships, properly so-called, taking the bold step, as it seemed
then, of providing no sails.  These were the _Devastation_ and
_Thunderer_, which, despite many faults, proved to be serviceable ships
for over thirty years.  These were ships of, 9,330 tons, and 14 knots
speed, and the annexed picture gives their general appearance.  Their
hulls were protected by 12-inch armour, and the turrets by 14-inch
armour, while an important improvement was introduced by providing what
is called a "protective deck," that is, a horizontal deck, of armour
several inches thick, which prevents shot from penetrating to the
engines, etcetera, below.  Their armament consisted of four 35-ton guns
firing 600-pound shot, and as all these guns could fire on either side,
their broadside was, 2,400 pounds.  Their crews were composed of only
300 men, and though they cost about 150,000 pounds less than the
_Minotaur_ they were far more efficient and powerful warships.  They lay
very low in the water, their bows rising only 9 feet above it, while the
stern was even lower, being only 4 and a half feet above the waterline.
Amidships, however, the deck was raised some 6 or 8 feet higher.

Between the two turrets was a large superstructure, the walls of which
curved outwards all over the top.  A passage passed through it from side
to side, in which were the doors leading to the hatchways and to the
hurricane deck above, on which were the conning tower, wheels, etcetera.
The boats were also carried on this deck, high above the water, so that
there was no obstruction to the firing of the guns in the turrets below.

It might have been supposed, that a ship so low in the water could not
venture out to sea in rough weather, but, though her forecastle was
frequently completely submerged in a heavy sea, she has behaved very
well.

Other turret ships, however, had been built a year or two earlier with
masts and sails, and bows of ordinary height.  At first these ships were
over-masted and canvassed, but after one of them, the _Captain_,
capsized during a gale in the Bay of Biscay, this defect was remedied.
This class was represented by the _Monarch_, completed in 1869, a vessel
of 8930 tons, and 15 knots speed.  She carried seven guns, those in the
turrets weighing 25 tons.

The turret-ship reached its highest development in the year 1876, when
the _Inflexible_ was designed.  By this time, guns had so greatly
increased in power, that the thickness of armour required to withstand
their shot was very great, and, as this involved an enormous addition to
the dead weight that had to be carried, some means had to be devised
whereby an efficient protection could be carried.  The "central citadel"
form of design was that finally adopted, in which the armour was
concentrated on a citadel in the centre of the vessel, amply protecting
the engines, turrets, and other "vitals" of the ship, the rest of the
hull being left wholly unprotected, save for a "protective deck," about
the level of the waterline.  This deck being horizontal, would always be
struck by shot at a very oblique angle, hence its thickness afforded a
much greater amount of protection--about double--than if placed
vertically on the sides.

The _Inflexible_ was a ship of 11,800 tons, and was driven at a speed of
nearly 13 knots, by engines of 6,500 horse-power.  The turrets were
arranged one on each side of the ship, and thus enabled to fire both
ahead and astern or on the broadside.  These turrets were protected by
armour 18 inches thick, and each carried two 80-ton guns, firing a
1700-pound shot to a distance of eight miles.  These monster
muzzle-loading guns were loaded from outside the turret, by means of
hydraulic machinery.  The armour on the sides was 2 feet thick, and the
vessel was divided into 135 compartments, so that she would not be
readily sunk.  The _Inflexible_ was the last of the turret-ships
properly so-called.  She was not the success that had been hoped; her
engine power, which gave only 12 and a half knots, had been sacrificed
to obtain heavier armament and protection, and as she was slower than
much older ships, she was laid aside before vessels launched earlier
than she was.  About this time, the combination of several important
factors worked a revolution in warship design.  The Russo-Turkish war of
1878-79, taught that a torpedo was a more important element in naval
warfare than had been imagined.  Launches going at the rate of 18 or 20
miles an hour, covered a mile in about three minutes, and if they
attacked at night, were so small, quick-moving, and indistinguishable,
that they could attack the most powerful battleship with little risk of
being hit by the snap shots of the few slow-firing heavy guns, with
which modern ships were armed.

The machine gun was first introduced to meet this danger; it could send
a continuous shower of rifle bullets at the approaching boat, and riddle
and sink her before she got near enough to do mischief; but when torpedo
boats began to be armoured with iron plates, proof not only against
rifle bullets, but even against the heavier Hotchkiss and Nordenfeldt
half-pounder guns, except at very close ranges, it was seen that an
armament of small guns was desirable to repel torpedo boats, or to be
used against unarmoured cruisers, whose superior speed would soon take
them out of danger from the slow-firing heavy guns.  Another factor was
the introduction of longer guns, and what are termed "slow burning"
powders.  These last do not explode with such sudden violence as the
ordinary powder, so that there is less sudden strain on the gun, while a
steadier pressure on the shot is kept up.  The long gun enables the
pressure of the gases formed by the burning powder to act longer on the
shot, with the result that a higher velocity is given to it, not only
increasing its range, but also its penetrative power.

The result of these improvements was to some extent a repetition of what
had taken place when rifled guns were first introduced.  Guns could be
made lighter, and yet be much more powerful than the old patterns of the
same bore, and it was seen that a ship could with advantage be provided
with a "secondary" armament, as it is called of these smaller yet
powerful guns.  Armour, too, was being improved, so that it could be
made thinner and yet equally effective; higher speeds were also called
for, and it was evident that warships must be designed on different
lines to meet or take advantage of the new conditions.

The first ship designed on the new lines was the _Collingwood_, a vessel
of 9,500 tons, 16 and a half knots speed, and 7,000 horse-power.  She
was the first ship of what was called the "Admiral class,"--several
sister ships named after famous admirals.  The four heavy guns of the
_Devastation_ type of turret-ship were retained, mounted fore and aft,
but instead of placing them in turrets, the turret armour was fixed to
the deck, forming what is known as a "barbette," or breastwork, over the
upper edge of which the gun fired.  Inside the barbette the gun revolved
on its turn-table; its breech, together with the gunners, was protected
by a hood of armour which revolved with the gun.  This arrangement is
probably less liable to be knocked out of action by the enemy's shot
than the turret.

Amidships was the "secondary" armament of six 6-inch breech-loading
guns.  All the guns were mounted well above the water, enabling them to
be used even in a heavy sea, which could not be done in the case of
ships lying low in the water like the _Devastation_.

A further impetus was given to the development of the secondary armament
by the introduction of "smokeless" powder--which, however, gives a
_very_ slight smoke,--and the "quick-firing gun."  By simplifying the
breech mechanism, using metal cartridge cases for the ammunition instead
of silk bags--which necessitated the sponging out of the piece after
each shot to remove the smouldering fragments--arranging the "sights" of
the gun so that it could be aimed while loading was going on, and other
ingenious arrangements, it was found that 6-inch 100-pounder guns could
be fired many times per minute without any mechanical appliances.  About
the same time also, means were found of firing with safety what are
called "high explosives," that is, explosives of far greater destructive
power than the same weight of gunpowder.  Similar improvements were
naturally extended to the larger guns, and thus there has been a
reversion to the type of ships mounting a fair number of guns, the
lighter ones, firing shells of 100 pounds, being intended to wreck the
unarmoured portions of the enemy, and demoralise his crew; the heavier
ones, 200-pounders, 380-pounders, and 850-pounders, being adapted to
pierce the armour and destroy the guns or the machinery.  Some idea of
the terrible power of modern quick-fire guns may be obtained when it is
mentioned that a modern ship, armed with _one_ 6-inch 100-pounder gun
could fire--and hit every time too, at three-quarters-of-a-mile range--a
greater weight of metal per minute than could be kept up by the 52 guns
on the broadside of Nelson's _Victory_, or even by the broadside of the
more modern _Britannia_.

Such are the types of the principal battleships constructed up to nearly
the end of the nineteenth century, and we may now glance at the
cruisers.

The frigate of the olden days, used for scouting and cruising, was the
favourite ship in the great wars, as they bore off the greatest
proportion of prize-money, and afforded their commanders greater
opportunities of gaining promotion and distinction.  As already
mentioned, the French built faster and finer craft of this description
than we did, and Nelson was always complaining that we had not a
sufficient number of swift frigates to keep down whose of the enemy.

The frigates had from 28 to 50 guns, and did not vary much in general
design, although the Americans taught us to build them of larger size
and of thicker planking.  When steam was introduced, engines were fitted
to these cruisers, and they were given a few knots superior speed to the
line-of-battle-ships.  To enable them to keep the sea for long periods
without their bottoms becoming fouled by marine growths--which decrease
the speed--their iron hulls were sheathed wood, which in its turn was
covered by copper.  Ships of this type were not armoured.  The _Shah_,
which fought the _Huascar_ in 1877, was a ship of this description; she
carried 26 heavy guns, and had a speed of 16 knots.

Other vessels were specially designed as rams.  The sinking of the
powerful battleships _Vanguard_, in the Irish sea, and _Victoria_, in
the Mediterranean, after accidental collision with the ram of another
ship in the squadron, shows the terrible effect of this weapon when it
can strike home.  But torpedoes render it highly improbable that the
opportunity of using it will ever arise.  Modern naval battles will
probably be fought and decided, at the _minimum_ range of 2 miles, or
thereby.



CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

MODERN ENGINES OF WAR.

For many centuries after the invention of gunpowder, little change took
place in the weapons used in naval warfare, the chief developments being
in the way of better workmanship and material, and the production of
guns of larger size.

About the end of the eighteenth century, however, the period from which
so many of our modern improvements begin to date, inventors began to
plan new and improved methods of disposing of the enemy.  About the year
1770, the American Bushnell conceived the idea of what his
fellow-countryman Fulton afterwards called the "torpedo."  This weapon
consisted of a case of powder which was to be attached to the bottom of
the enemy's ship by the aid of a submarine boat, leaving it to explode
later on by means of a clock inside.

The submarine boat was actually made in 1775; it was egg-shaped in form,
and held one man.  It was propelled through the water by means of a
screw propeller, worked by manual power; a similar screw, arranged
vertically, enabled the boat to rise or sink at will.  With this boat,
during the War of Independence, he, or some other operator, succeeded in
getting under a British man-of-war lying at anchor near New York.
Without her crew having the slightest suspicion of his presence, he
attempted to screw his torpedo to her bottom, but his auger encountered
what appeared to be a bar of iron.  When shifting to another position he
lost the ship altogether, and being unable to find her again was forced
to cast off the torpedo and make away, as the clock-work inside had been
arranged to explode soon afterwards.  And about an hour later the crew
of the warship were first roused to their danger by the explosion of the
torpedo at no great distance from them, and they were the more alarmed
as they were wholly unable to account for it.

In the beginning of the nineteenth century another American, named
Fulton, having borrowed Bushnell's ideas, came over to Europe and
endeavoured to get the French government to take up his plans for
submarine warfare.  After long delay he was at length given the sum of
10,000 francs, with which he successfully constructed a submarine boat.
In this boat he remained under water for more than four hours, and
having been required to blow up a small vessel had no difficulty in
getting under her and in blowing her to pieces with his torpedo.  The
torpedo in a highly developed form is now one of the most important
weapons in naval tactics.

In spite of the success of Fulton's experiments, his plans were not
adopted, either by Napoleon or by the British Admiralty, to whom Fulton
afterwards offered them.  The great European wars having been brought to
an end by the downfall of Napoleon, the torpedo for a while sunk into
oblivion, although during the Crimean war the Russians used submarine
mines to protect their harbours.  But during the American Civil War the
torpedo was again brought to the front, and the Southerners, or
"Confederates," used vast numbers of them, to the great damage of the
Northerners, or "Federals."

At first these torpedoes proved so harmless--so few exploding out of the
hundreds laid--that the Federal officers paid little attention to them.
But as the war went on, better methods of exploding them were devised,
and vessel after vessel was sunk in a few minutes, often with great loss
of life.  Some of these were sunk by submarine mines fired by
electricity, others by floating torpedoes drifted down by the current or
tide; others again by torpedoes at the end of a long spar carried in a
small launch.  In one instance, a submarine boat was employed, propelled
by a screw worked by eight men.  Instead of running just beneath the
surface, however, her crew insisted on keeping the hatchway just above
water, and open, with the result that the wave caused by the explosion
of her torpedo rushed in and swamped her, so that she went to the bottom
with all on board.

Another night a large frigate was blockading Charleston harbour when a
_David_--as these torpedo boats were then called--was seen approaching.
The frigate, which carried a crew of 700 men, slipped her cable and made
off at full speed, although she was only being attacked by a small
launch, manned by four men, armed with a few pounds of powder extended
on a spar in front of her!  In spite of a fierce fusillade aimed at her,
not a shot struck the _David_, which returned in safety to Charleston.

The Russo-Turkish War afforded several additional examples of the same
kind, which, as already mentioned, had not a little to do with the
alteration in naval design and tactics that took place during the last
two decades of the nineteenth century.

Torpedoes were of three kinds: the first were really submarine mines,
and were placed in a river channel, being fired by electricity when the
vessel came over them.  The second kind was the floating or Harvey's
torpedo, consisting of a long narrow, but deep wooden case from 44 to 60
inches in length, which contained 30 to 80 pounds of gunpowder, inside a
copper lining.  It had two levers projecting on the outside, which, on
striking an object, set off the explosive inside.  This torpedo was used
in two ways: the first by setting it adrift on a river, or where there
was a well-marked current setting towards the enemy's ships, when the
current carried it to its destination; the other way was by towing it at
night, by means of a long line, across the bows of an enemy's ship; it
exploded whenever it came in contact with the ship.

The third kind of torpedo was practically a Harvey's torpedo attached to
a long boom, or pole, about 28 feet long.  This was carried at the
gunwale of a fast steam launch at night; on nearing the enemy's ship
this boom was pushed forward so as to bring the torpedo ten feet below
the surface and well in advance of the boat.  The torpedo exploded when
it struck the ship, and to prevent the torpedo-boat from being sunk by
the huge wave raised by the explosion, it had to be covered in front by
a shield.

The experiences of the two wars already mentioned showed the difficulty
of dealing with torpedo boats at night, and "search lights" are now
installed on all modern warships.  These consist of an electric arc lamp
of 25,000 candle-power, combined with a reflector, which concentrates
the light so that it brilliantly lights up objects at a great distance.
Torpedo boats can be readily discovered when a mile or more distant and,
at the same distance from the light, the rays are so powerful that a
newspaper can be read with the greatest ease.

Torpedo attack, however, has been revolutionised by the invention of
"Whitehead's torpedo," which can be used from a distance.  In shape it
is exactly like a huge cigar, 12 to 18 inches in diameter, and 6 to 10
feet long.  At the head is the explosive; behind this is a reservoir
containing air compressed to an enormous pressure, which drives engines
contained in a third compartment, and which in their turn work a screw
propeller at the back of the torpedo.  There is also mechanism which
automatically adjusts the depth at which the torpedo travels below the
water, and other mechanism which ensures that it will keep going in the
direction in which it was fired.  Such a torpedo is now effective up to
two miles, and it will traverse this distance in about six minutes.

Torpedoes are discharged from what are called "torpedo tubes" by means
of compressed air.  These tubes are to all intents and purposes, guns
made of thin steel, the torpedo being put in at the breech.  Those used
on board torpedo boats or similar light fast craft are mounted on a
swivel on the deck; in larger vessels they are usually placed below the
waterline so as to be free from the serious consequences that would
ensue if the tube were struck by the enemy's shot, while a torpedo was
in it.  Torpedoes have also been invented which are steered by
electricity.

The problem of protecting ships against torpedoes is a difficult one,
and no satisfactory solution has yet been arrived at.  All large
warships, however, are provided with "torpedo nets" of thick iron wire,
which are hung round her at the end of long poles, which, when not in
use, are tied up alongside.  But mechanism has been invented by which
the torpedo will cut through the netting, if it encounters it, so that
at present the torpedo is master of the situation, within its range.  In
fairly shallow water a torpedo will throw a column of water nearly 200
feet into the air, by the impulse of the gases generated by the
explosion, and no ship yet built would be able to withstand its enormous
shock.

Reference has already been made to the huge guns of the _Inflexible_,
and to the improvements in both powder and guns made later on.  The
modern gun is what is called a "wire gun," from its method of
construction.  Round a central tube of steel, several layers of
immensely strong steel wire is tightly wound; a second steel tube is
then slipped on above the wire, and as this tube is hot when first put
on, when it cools it contracts and binds the layers of wire tightly
together, forming a gun of very great strength--as, indeed, it would
need to be, seeing that it has to withstand a pressure of over 16 tons
to the square inch.

The projectiles fired from naval guns are of three kinds, solid shot for
piercing the thickest armour,--as on the conning-tower, or barbettes;
"armour piercing shell," with very thick walls and small bursting
charge, which can only penetrate armour, two-thirds of that piercible by
solid shot; lastly, "common shell," in which the shell walls are much
thinner, and can thus only be used with effect against the lighter
structures of the enemy.  By placing a small "cap" of iron on the points
of ordinary shot, "capped shot" are produced; and thus provided, they
will pierce a much greater thickness of hard-faced armour than the
ordinary ones.  Against soft armour, however, they are not so efficient.

The armour of modern ships has also been greatly improved in resisting
power.  The _Inflexible_ of 1881 was protected by wrought-iron plates 24
inches thick, which weighed 2,400 tons, or a fifth of her total weight,
yet only a third of her length was protected.  Soon after her
completion, "compound" armour plates,--with a hard steel face on a
backing of wrought-iron--were introduced, which enabled a third of the
weight of the armour to be saved, yet leaving the amount of
penetrability unchanged.  Later on, "Harvey" armour, made of steel
alloyed with nickel, still further reduced the weight, and recent
improvements now make the best armour equal in resisting power to three
times its thickness of wrought-iron.  It may be mentioned also that the
coal bunkers are now arranged so as to further protect the engines,
being reckoned equivalent to about three inches of wrought-iron.

Facing page 464 are two "sections" of warships, which will, no doubt,
interest the reader.  The first is of an old steam battleship, such as
the _Marlborough_, the other, that of a modern second-class cruiser,
like the _Minerva_, which could blow the _Marlborough_ to pieces before
the latter could get her within the range of her guns.  Notice the
enormous difference in the space devoted to the engines and boilers.
The modern vessel gives a general idea of the arrangement in all classes
of modern warships.  The conning-tower will be seen below the bridge, in
front of the foremast.  The magazines are at the bottom, right below the
forward and aft guns, which in this type of vessel, are protected by a
shield only, with armoured ammunition hoists going down from it; the
barbettes of the more powerful vessels would simply be iron
breast-works, extending all round these guns.  The curved protective
deck is also seen, about the waterline, and the projecting ram, while at
the stern is the curiously shaped rudder, made in this form, because it
takes less power to work, than that of the ordinary type.

