
"'You name me leopardess. Remember, the leopardess is tameless,' said
she.

"'Tame or fierce, wild or subdued, you are _mine_.'

"'I am glad I know my keeper and am used to him. Only his voice will I
follow; only his hand shall manage me; only at his feet will I repose.'

"I took her back to her seat, and sat down by her side. I wanted to hear
her speak again. I could never have enough of her voice and her words.

"'How much do you love me?' I asked.

"'Ah! you know. I will not gratify you--I will not flatter.'

"'I don't know half enough; my heart craves to be fed. If you knew how
hungry and ferocious it is, you would hasten to stay it with a kind word
or two.'

"'Poor Tartar!' said she, touching and patting my hand--'poor fellow,
stalwart friend, Shirley's pet and favourite, lie down!'

"'But I will not lie down till I am fed with one sweet word.'

"And at last she gave it.

"'Dear Louis, be faithful to me; never leave me. I don't care for life
unless I may pass it at your side.'

"'Something more.'

"She gave me a change; it was not her way to offer the same dish twice.

"'Sir,' she said, starting up, 'at your peril you ever again name such
sordid things as money, or poverty, or inequality. It will be absolutely
dangerous to torment me with these maddening scruples. I defy you to do
it.'

"My face grew hot. I did once more wish I were not so poor or she were
not so rich. She saw the transient misery; and then, indeed, she
caressed me. Blent with torment, I experienced rapture.

"'Mr. Moore,' said she, looking up with a sweet, open, earnest
countenance, 'teach me and help me to be good. I do not ask you to take
off my shoulders all the cares and duties of property, but I ask you to
share the burden, and to show me how to sustain my part well. Your
judgment is well balanced, your heart is kind, your principles are
sound. I know you are wise; I feel you are benevolent; I believe you are
conscientious. Be my companion through life; be my guide where I am
ignorant; be my master where I am faulty; be my friend always!'

"'So help me God, I will!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Yet again a passage from the blank book if you like, reader; if you
don't like it, pass it over:--

"The Sympsons are gone, but not before discovery and explanation. My
manner must have betrayed something, or my looks. I was quiet, but I
forgot to be guarded sometimes. I stayed longer in the room than usual;
I could not bear to be out of her presence; I returned to it, and basked
in it, like Tartar in the sun. If she left the oak parlour,
instinctively I rose and left it too. She chid me for this procedure
more than once. I did it with a vague, blundering idea of getting a word
with her in the hall or elsewhere. Yesterday towards dusk I had her to
myself for five minutes by the hall fire. We stood side by side; she was
railing at me, and I was enjoying the sound of her voice. The young
ladies passed, and looked at us; we did not separate. Ere long they
repassed, and again looked. Mrs. Sympson came; we did not move. Mr.
Sympson opened the dining-room door. Shirley flashed him back full
payment for his spying gaze. She curled her lip and tossed her tresses.
The glance she gave was at once explanatory and defiant. It said: 'I
like Mr. Moore's society, and I dare you to find fault with my taste.'

"I asked, 'Do you mean him to understand how matters are?'

"'I do,' said she; 'but I leave the development to chance. There will be
a scene. I neither invite it nor fear it; only, you must be present, for
I am inexpressibly tired of facing him solus. I don't like to see him in
a rage. He then puts off all his fine proprieties and conventional
disguises, and the real human being below is what you would call
_commun, plat, bas--vilain et un peu mechant_. His ideas are not clean,
Mr. Moore; they want scouring with soft soap and fuller's earth. I
think, if he could add his imagination to the contents of Mrs. Gill's
bucking-basket, and let her boil it in her copper, with rain-water and
bleaching-powder (I hope you think me a tolerable laundress), it would
do him incalculable good.'

"This morning, fancying I heard her descend somewhat early, I was down
instantly. I had not been deceived. There she was, busy at work in the
breakfast-parlour, of which the housemaid was completing the arrangement
and dusting. She had risen betimes to finish some little keepsake she
intended for Henry. I got only a cool reception, which I accepted till
the girl was gone, taking my book to the window-seat very quietly. Even
when we were alone I was slow to disturb her. To sit with her in sight
was happiness, and the proper happiness, for early morning--serene,
incomplete, but progressive. Had I been obtrusive, I knew I should have
encountered rebuff. 'Not at home to suitors' was written on her brow.
Therefore I read on, stole now and then a look, watched her countenance
soften and open as she felt I respected her mood, and enjoyed the gentle
content of the moment.

"The distance between us shrank, and the light hoar-frost thawed
insensibly. Ere an hour elapsed I was at her side, watching her sew,
gathering her sweet smiles and her merry words, which fell for me
abundantly. We sat, as we had a right to sit, side by side; my arm
rested on her chair; I was near enough to count the stitches of her
work, and to discern the eye of her needle. The door suddenly opened.

"I believe, if I had just then started from her, she would have
despised me. Thanks to the phlegm of my nature, I rarely start. When I
am well-off, _bien_, comfortable, I am not soon stirred. _Bien_ I
was--_tres bien_--consequently immutable. No muscle moved. I hardly
looked to the door.

"'Good-morning, uncle,' said she, addressing that personage, who paused
on the threshold in a state of petrifaction.

"'Have you been long downstairs, Miss Keeldar, and alone with Mr.
Moore?'

"'Yes, a very long time. We both came down early; it was scarcely
light.'

"'The proceeding is improper----'

"'It was at first, I was rather cross, and not civil; but you will
perceive that we are now friends.'

"'I perceive more than you would wish me to perceive.'

"'Hardly, sir,' said I; 'we have no disguises. Will you permit me to
intimate that any further observations you have to make may as well be
addressed to me? Henceforward I stand between Miss Keeldar and all
annoyance.'

"'_You!_ What have _you_ to do with Miss Keeldar?'

"'To protect, watch over, serve her.'

"'You, sir--you, the tutor?'

"'Not one word of insult, sir,' interposed she; 'not one syllable of
disrespect to Mr. Moore in this house.'

"'Do you take his part?'

"'_His_ part? oh yes!'

"She turned to me with a sudden fond movement, which I met by circling
her with my arm. She and I both rose.

"'Good Ged!' was the cry from the morning-gown standing quivering at the
door. _Ged_, I think, must be the cognomen of Mr. Sympson's Lares. When
hard pressed he always invokes this idol.

"'Come forward, uncle; you shall hear all.--Tell him all, Louis.'

"'I dare him to speak--the beggar! the knave! the specious hypocrite!
the vile, insinuating, infamous menial!--Stand apart from my niece, sir.
Let her go!'

"She clung to me with energy. 'I am near my future husband,' she said.
'Who dares touch him or me?'

"'Her husband!' He raised and spread his hands. He dropped into a seat.

"'A while ago you wanted much to know whom I meant to marry. My
intention was then formed, but not mature for communication. Now it is
ripe, sun-mellowed, perfect. Take the crimson peach--take Louis Moore!'

"'But' (savagely) 'you _shall not_ have him; he _shall not_ have you.'

"'I would die before I would have another. I would die if I might not
have him.'

"He uttered words with which this page shall never be polluted.

"She turned white as death; she shook all over; she lost her strength. I
laid her down on the sofa; just looked to ascertain that she had not
fainted--of which, with a divine smile, she assured me. I kissed her;
and then, if I were to perish, I cannot give a clear account of what
happened in the course of the next five minutes. She has since--through
tears, laughter, and trembling--told me that I turned terrible, and gave
myself to the demon. She says I left her, made one bound across the
room; that Mr. Sympson vanished through the door as if shot from a
cannon. I also vanished, and she heard Mrs. Gill scream.

"Mrs. Gill was still screaming when I came to my senses. I was then in
another apartment--the oak parlour, I think. I held Sympson before me
crushed into a chair, and my hand was on his cravat. His eyes rolled in
his head; I was strangling him, I think. The housekeeper stood wringing
her hands, entreating me to desist. I desisted that moment, and felt at
once as cool as stone. But I told Mrs. Gill to fetch the Red-House Inn
chaise instantly, and informed Mr. Sympson he must depart from Fieldhead
the instant it came. Though half frightened out of his wits, he declared
he would not. Repeating the former order, I added a commission to fetch
a constable. I said, 'You _shall_ go, by fair means or foul.'

"He threatened prosecution; I cared for nothing. I had stood over him
once before, not quite so fiercely as now, but full as austerely. It was
one night when burglars attempted the house at Sympson Grove, and in his
wretched cowardice he would have given a vain alarm, without daring to
offer defence. I had then been obliged to protect his family and his
abode by mastering himself--and I had succeeded. I now remained with him
till the chaise came. I marshalled him to it, he scolding all the way.
He was terribly bewildered, as well as enraged. He would have resisted
me, but knew not how. He called for his wife and daughters to come. I
said they should follow him as soon as they could prepare. The smoke,
the fume, the fret of his demeanour was inexpressible, but it was a fury
incapable of producing a deed. That man, properly handled, must ever
remain impotent. I know he will never touch me with the law. I know his
wife, over whom he tyrannizes in trifles, guides him in matters of
importance. I have long since earned her undying mother's gratitude by
my devotion to her boy. In some of Henry's ailments I have nursed
him--better, she said, than any woman could nurse. She will never forget
that. She and her daughters quitted me to-day, in mute wrath and
consternation; but she respects me. When Henry clung to my neck as I
lifted him into the carriage and placed him by her side, when I arranged
her own wrapping to make her warm, though she turned her head from me, I
saw the tears start to her eyes. She will but the more zealously
advocate my cause because she has left me in anger. I am glad of
this--not for my own sake, but for that of my life and idol--my
Shirley."

Once again he writes, a week after:--"I am now at Stilbro'. I have taken
up my temporary abode with a friend--a professional man, in whose
business I can be useful. Every day I ride over to Fieldhead. How long
will it be before I can call that place my home, and its mistress mine?
I am not easy, not tranquil; I am tantalized, sometimes tortured. To see
her now, one would think she had never pressed her cheek to my shoulder,
or clung to me with tenderness or trust. I feel unsafe; she renders me
miserable. I am shunned when I visit her; she withdraws from my reach.
Once this day I lifted her face, resolved to get a full look down her
deep, dark eyes. Difficult to describe what I read there! Pantheress!
beautiful forest-born! wily, tameless, peerless nature! She gnaws her
chain; I see the white teeth working at the steel! She has dreams of her
wild woods and pinings after virgin freedom. I wish Sympson would come
again, and oblige her again to entwine her arms about me. I wish there
was danger she should lose me, as there is risk I shall lose her. No;
final loss I do not fear, but long delay----

"It is now night--midnight. I have spent the afternoon and evening at
Fieldhead. Some hours ago she passed me, coming down the oak staircase
to the hall. She did not know I was standing in the twilight, near the
staircase window, looking at the frost-bright constellations. How
closely she glided against the banisters! How shyly shone her large eyes
upon me! How evanescent, fugitive, fitful she looked--slim and swift as
a northern streamer!

"I followed her into the drawing-room. Mrs. Pryor and Caroline Helstone
were both there; she has summoned them to bear her company awhile. In
her white evening dress, with her long hair flowing full and wavy, with
her noiseless step, her pale cheek, her eye full of night and lightning,
she looked, I thought, spirit-like--a thing made of an element, the
child of a breeze and a flame, the daughter of ray and raindrop--a thing
never to be overtaken, arrested, fixed. I wished I could avoid following
her with my gaze as she moved here and there, but it was impossible. I
talked with the other ladies as well as I could, but still I looked at
her. She was very silent; I think she never spoke to me--not even when
she offered me tea. It happened that she was called out a minute by Mrs.
Gill. I passed into the moonlit hall, with the design of getting a word
as she returned; nor in this did I fail.

"'Miss Keeldar, stay one instant,' said I, meeting her.

"'Why? the hall is too cold.'

"'It is not cold for me; at my side it should not be cold for you.'

"'But I shiver.'

"'With fear, I believe. What makes you fear me? You are quiet and
distant. Why?'

"'I may well fear what looks like a great dark goblin meeting me in the
moonlight.'

"'_Do not--do not_ pass! Stay with me awhile. Let us exchange a few
quiet words. It is three days since I spoke to you alone. Such changes
are cruel.'

"'I have no wish to be cruel,' she responded, softly enough. Indeed
there was softness in her whole deportment--in her face, in her voice;
but there was also reserve, and an air fleeting, evanishing, intangible.

"'You certainly give me pain,' said I. 'It is hardly a week since you
called me your future husband and treated me as such. Now I am once more
the tutor for you. I am addressed as Mr. Moore and sir. Your lips have
forgotten Louis.'

"'No, Louis, no. It is an easy, liquid name--not soon forgotten.'

"'Be cordial to Louis, then; approach him--let him approach.'

"'I _am_ cordial,' said she, hovering aloof like a white shadow.

"'Your voice is very sweet and very low,' I answered, quietly advancing.
'You seem subdued, but still startled.'

"'No--quite calm, and afraid of nothing,' she assured me.

"'Of nothing but your votary.'

"I bent a knee to the flags at her feet.

"'You see I am in a new world, Mr. Moore. I don't know myself; I don't
know you. But rise. When you do so I feel troubled and disturbed.'

"I obeyed. It would not have suited me to retain that attitude long. I
courted serenity and confidence for her, and not vainly. She trusted and
clung to me again.

"'Now, Shirley,' I said, 'you can conceive I am far from happy in my
present uncertain, unsettled state.'

"'Oh yes, you _are_ happy!' she cried hastily. 'You don't know how happy
you are. Any change will be for the worse.'

"'Happy or not, I cannot bear to go on so much longer. You are too
generous to require it.'

"'Be reasonable, Louis; be patient! I like you because you are patient.'

"'Like me no longer, then; love me instead. Fix our marriage day; think
of it to-night, and decide.'

"She breathed a murmur, inarticulate yet expressive; darted, or melted,
from my arms--and I lost her."




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE WINDING-UP.


Yes, reader, we must settle accounts now. I have only briefly to narrate
the final fates of some of the personages whose acquaintance we have
made in this narrative, and then you and I must shake hands, and for the
present separate.

Let us turn to the curates--to the much-loved, though long-neglected.
Come forward, modest merit! Malone, I see, promptly answers the
invocation. He knows his own description when he hears it.

No, Peter Augustus; we can have nothing to say to you. It won't do.
Impossible to trust ourselves with the touching tale of your deeds and
destinies. Are you not aware, Peter, that a discriminating public has
its crotchets; that the unvarnished truth does not answer; that plain
facts will not digest? Do you not know that the squeak of the real pig
is no more relished now than it was in days of yore? Were I to give the
catastrophe of your life and conversation, the public would sweep off in
shrieking hysterics, and there would be a wild cry for sal-volatile and
burnt feathers. "Impossible!" would be pronounced here; "untrue!" would
be responded there; "inartistic!" would be solemnly decided. Note well.
Whenever you present the actual, simple truth, it is, somehow, always
denounced as a lie--they disown it, cast it off, throw it on the parish;
whereas the product of your own imagination, the mere figment, the sheer
fiction, is adopted, petted, termed pretty, proper, sweetly natural--the
little, spurious wretch gets all the comfits, the honest, lawful
bantling all the cuffs. Such is the way of the world, Peter; and as you
are the legitimate urchin, rude, unwashed, and naughty, you must stand
down.

Make way for Mr. Sweeting.

Here he comes, with his lady on his arm--the most splendid and the
weightiest woman in Yorkshire--Mrs. Sweeting, formerly Miss Dora Sykes.
They were married under the happiest auspices, Mr. Sweeting having been
just inducted to a comfortable living, and Mr. Sykes being in
circumstances to give Dora a handsome portion. They lived long and
happily together, beloved by their parishioners and by a numerous circle
of friends.

There! I think the varnish has been put on very nicely.

Advance, Mr. Donne.

This gentleman turned out admirably--far better than either you or I
could possibly have expected, reader. He, too, married a most sensible,
quiet, lady-like little woman. The match was the making of him. He
became an exemplary domestic character, and a truly active parish priest
(as a pastor he, to his dying day, conscientiously refused to act). The
outside of the cup and platter he burnished up with the best
polishing-powder; the furniture of the altar and temple he looked after
with the zeal of an upholsterer, the care of a cabinet-maker. His little
school, his little church, his little parsonage, all owed their erection
to him; and they did him credit. Each was a model in its way. If
uniformity and taste in architecture had been the same thing as
consistency and earnestness in religion, what a shepherd of a Christian
flock Mr. Donne would have made! There was one art in the mastery of
which nothing mortal ever surpassed Mr. Donne: it was that of begging.
By his own unassisted efforts he begged all the money for all his
erections. In this matter he had a grasp of plan, a scope of action
quite unique. He begged of high and low--of the shoeless cottage brat
and the coroneted duke. He sent out begging-letters far and wide--to old
Queen Charlotte, to the princesses her daughters, to her sons the royal
dukes, to the Prince Regent, to Lord Castlereagh, to every member of the
ministry then in office; and, what is more remarkable, he screwed
something out of every one of these personages. It is on record that he
got five pounds from the close-fisted old lady Queen Charlotte, and two
guineas from the royal profligate her eldest son. When Mr. Donne set out
on begging expeditions, he armed himself in a complete suit of brazen
mail. That you had given a hundred pounds yesterday was with him no
reason why you should not give two hundred to-day. He would tell you so
to your face, and, ten to one, get the money out of you. People gave to
get rid of him. After all, he did some good with the cash. He was
useful in his day and generation.

Perhaps I ought to remark that on the premature and sudden vanishing of
Mr. Malone from the stage of Briarfield parish (you cannot know how it
happened, reader; your curiosity must be robbed to pay your elegant love
of the pretty and pleasing), there came as his successor another Irish
curate, Mr. Macarthey. I am happy to be able to inform you, _with
truth_, that this gentleman did as much credit to his country as Malone
had done it discredit. He proved himself as decent, decorous, and
conscientious as Peter was rampant, boisterous, and---- This last
epithet I choose to suppress, because it would let the cat out of the
bag. He laboured faithfully in the parish. The schools, both Sunday and
day schools, flourished under his sway like green bay trees. Being
human, of course he had his faults. These, however, were proper,
steady-going, clerical faults--what many would call virtues. The
circumstance of finding himself invited to tea with a Dissenter would
unhinge him for a week. The spectacle of a Quaker wearing his hat in the
church, the thought of an unbaptized fellow-creature being interred with
Christian rites--these things could make strange havoc in Mr.
Macarthey's physical and mental economy. Otherwise he was sane and
rational, diligent and charitable.

I doubt not a justice-loving public will have remarked, ere this, that I
have thus far shown a criminal remissness in pursuing, catching, and
bringing to condign punishment the would-be assassin of Mr. Robert
Moore. Here was a fine opening to lead my willing readers a dance, at
once decorous and exciting--a dance of law and gospel, of the dungeon,
the dock, and the "dead-thraw." You might have liked it, reader, but _I_
should not. I and my subject would presently have quarrelled, and then I
should have broken down. I was happy to find that facts perfectly
exonerated me from the attempt. The murderer was never punished, for the
good reason that he was never caught--the result of the further
circumstance that he was never pursued. The magistrates made a
shuffling, as if they were going to rise and do valiant things; but
since Moore himself, instead of urging and leading them as heretofore,
lay still on his little cottage-couch, laughing in his sleeve, and
sneering with every feature of his pale, foreign face, they considered
better of it, and after fulfilling certain indispensable forms,
prudently resolved to let the matter quietly drop, which they did.

Mr. Moore knew who had shot him, and all Briarfield knew. It was no
other than Michael Hartley, the half-crazed weaver once before alluded
to, a frantic Antinomian in religion, and a mad leveller in politics.
The poor soul died of delirium tremens a year after the attempt on
Moore, and Robert gave his wretched widow a guinea to bury him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The winter is over and gone; spring has followed with beamy and shadowy,
with flowery and showery flight. We are now in the heart of summer--in
mid-June--the June of 1812.

It is burning weather. The air is deep azure and red gold. It fits the
time; it fits the age; it fits the present spirit of the nations. The
nineteenth century wantons in its giant adolescence; the Titan boy
uproots mountains in his game, and hurls rocks in his wild sport. This
summer Bonaparte is in the saddle; he and his host scour Russian
deserts. He has with him Frenchmen and Poles, Italians and children of
the Rhine, six hundred thousand strong. He marches on old Moscow. Under
old Moscow's walls the rude Cossack waits him. Barbarian stoic! he waits
without fear of the boundless ruin rolling on. He puts his trust in a
snow-cloud; the wilderness, the wind, and the hail-storm are his refuge;
his allies are the elements--air, fire, water. And what are these? Three
terrible archangels ever stationed before the throne of Jehovah. They
stand clothed in white, girdled with golden girdles; they uplift vials,
brimming with the wrath of God. Their time is the day of vengeance;
their signal, the word of the Lord of hosts, "thundering with the voice
of His excellency."

"Hast thou entered into the treasures of the snow? or hast thou seen the
treasures of the hail, which I have reserved against the time of
trouble, against the day of battle and war?

"Go your ways. Pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth."

It is done. The earth is scorched with fire; the sea becomes "as the
blood of a dead man;" the islands flee away; the mountains are not
found.

In this year, Lord Wellington assumed the reins in Spain. They made him
generalissimo, for their own salvation's sake. In this year he took
Badajos, he fought the field of Vittoria, he captured Pampeluna, he
stormed San Sebastian; in this year he won Salamanca.

Men of Manchester, I beg your pardon for this slight _resume_ of warlike
facts, but it is of no consequence. Lord Wellington is, for you, only a
decayed old gentleman now. I rather think some of you have called him a
"dotard;" you have taunted him with his age and the loss of his physical
vigour. What fine heroes you are yourselves! Men like you have a right
to trample on what is mortal in a demigod. Scoff at your ease; your
scorn can never break his grand old heart.

But come, friends, whether Quakers or cotton-printers, let us hold a
peace-congress, and let out our venom quietly. We have been talking with
unseemly zeal about bloody battles and butchering generals; we arrive
now at a triumph in your line. On the 18th of June 1812 the Orders in
Council were repealed, and the blockaded ports thrown open. You know
very well--such of you as are old enough to remember--you made Yorkshire
and Lancashire shake with your shout on that occasion. The ringers
cracked a bell in Briarfield belfry; it is dissonant to this day. The
Association of Merchants and Manufacturers dined together at Stilbro',
and one and all went home in such a plight as their wives would never
wish to witness more. Liverpool started and snorted like a river-horse
roused amongst his reeds by thunder. Some of the American merchants felt
threatenings of apoplexy, and had themselves bled--all, like wise men,
at this first moment of prosperity, prepared to rush into the bowels of
speculation, and to delve new difficulties, in whose depths they might
lose themselves at some future day. Stocks which had been accumulating
for years now went off in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.
Warehouses were lightened, ships were laden; work abounded, wages rose;
the good time seemed come. These prospects might be delusive, but they
were brilliant--to some they were even true. At that epoch, in that
single month of June, many a solid fortune was realized.

       *       *       *       *       *

When a whole province rejoices, the humblest of its inhabitants tastes a
festal feeling; the sound of public bells rouses the most secluded
abode, as if with a call to be gay. And so Caroline Helstone thought,
when she dressed herself more carefully than usual on the day of this
trading triumph, and went, attired in her neatest muslin, to spend the
afternoon at Fieldhead, there to superintend certain millinery
preparations for a great event, the last appeal in these matters being
reserved for her unimpeachable taste. She decided on the wreath, the
veil, the dress to be worn at the altar. She chose various robes and
fashions for more ordinary occasions, without much reference to the
bride's opinion--that lady, indeed, being in a somewhat impracticable
mood.

Louis had presaged difficulties, and he had found them--in fact, his
mistress had shown herself exquisitely provoking, putting off her
marriage day by day, week by week, month by month, at first coaxing him
with soft pretences of procrastination, and in the end rousing his whole
deliberate but determined nature to revolt against her tyranny, at once
so sweet and so intolerable.

It had needed a sort of tempest-shock to bring her to the point; but
there she was at last, fettered to a fixed day. There she lay, conquered
by love, and bound with a vow.

Thus vanquished and restricted, she pined, like any other chained
denizen of deserts. Her captor alone could cheer her; his society only
could make amends for the lost privilege of liberty. In his absence she
sat or wandered alone, spoke little, and ate less.

She furthered no preparations for her nuptials; Louis was himself
obliged to direct all arrangements. He was virtually master of Fieldhead
weeks before he became so nominally--the least presumptuous, the kindest
master that ever was, but with his lady absolute. She abdicated without
a word or a struggle. "Go to Mr. Moore, ask Mr. Moore," was her answer
when applied to for orders. Never was wooer of wealthy bride so
thoroughly absolved from the subaltern part, so inevitably compelled to
assume a paramount character.

In all this Miss Keeldar partly yielded to her disposition; but a remark
she made a year afterwards proved that she partly also acted on system.
"Louis," she said, "would never have learned to rule if she had not
ceased to govern. The incapacity of the sovereign had developed the
powers of the premier."

It had been intended that Miss Helstone should act as bridesmaid at the
approaching nuptials, but Fortune had destined her another part.

She came home in time to water her plants. She had performed this little
task. The last flower attended to was a rose-tree, which bloomed in a
quiet green nook at the back of the house. This plant had received the
refreshing shower; she was now resting a minute. Near the wall stood a
fragment of sculptured stone--a monkish relic--once, perhaps, the base
of a cross. She mounted it, that she might better command the view. She
had still the watering pot in one hand; with the other her pretty dress
was held lightly aside, to avoid trickling drops. She gazed over the
wall, along some lonely fields; beyond three dusk trees, rising side by
side against the sky; beyond a solitary thorn at the head of a solitary
lane far off. She surveyed the dusk moors, where bonfires were kindling.
The summer evening was warm; the bell-music was joyous; the blue smoke
of the fires looked soft, their red flame bright. Above them, in the sky
whence the sun had vanished, twinkled a silver point--the star of love.

Caroline was not unhappy that evening--far otherwise; but as she gazed
she sighed, and as she sighed a hand circled her, and rested quietly on
her waist. Caroline thought she knew who had drawn near; she received
the touch unstartled.

"I am looking at Venus, mamma. See, she is beautiful. How white her
lustre is, compared with the deep red of the bonfires!"

The answer was a closer caress; and Caroline turned, and looked, not
into Mrs. Pryor's matron face, but up at a dark manly visage. She
dropped her watering-pot and stepped down from the pedestal.

"I have been sitting with 'mamma' an hour," said the intruder. "I have
had a long conversation with her. Where, meantime, have you been?"

"To Fieldhead. Shirley is as naughty as ever, Robert. She will neither
say Yes nor No to any question put. She sits alone. I cannot tell
whether she is melancholy or nonchalant. If you rouse her or scold her,
she gives you a look, half wistful, half reckless, which sends you away
as queer and crazed as herself. What Louis will make of her, I cannot
tell. For my part, if I were a gentleman, I think I would not dare
undertake her."

"Never mind them. They were cut out for each other. Louis, strange to
say, likes her all the better for these freaks. He will manage her, if
any one can. She tries him, however. He has had a stormy courtship for
such a calm character; but you see it all ends in victory for him.
Caroline, I have sought you to ask an audience. Why are those bells
ringing?"

"For the repeal of your terrible law--the Orders you hate so much. You
are pleased, are you not?"

"Yesterday evening at this time I was packing some books for a
sea-voyage. They were the only possessions, except some clothes, seeds,
roots, and tools, which I felt free to take with me to Canada. I was
going to leave you."

"To leave me? To leave _me_?"

Her little fingers fastened on his arm; she spoke and looked affrighted.

"Not now--not now. Examine my face--yes, look at me well. Is the despair
of parting legible thereon?"

She looked into an illuminated countenance, whose characters were all
beaming, though the page itself was dusk. This face, potent in the
majesty of its traits, shed down on her hope, fondness, delight.

"Will the repeal do you good--_much_ good, _immediate_ good?" she
inquired.

"The repeal of the Orders in Council saves me. Now I shall not turn
bankrupt; now I shall not give up business; now I shall not leave
England; now I shall be no longer poor; now I can pay my debts; now all
the cloth I have in my warehouses will be taken off my hands, and
commissions given me for much more. This day lays for my fortunes a
broad, firm foundation, on which, for the first time in my life, I can
securely build."

Caroline devoured his words; she held his hand in hers; she drew a long
breath.

"You are saved? Your heavy difficulties are lifted?"

"They are lifted. I breathe. I can act."

"At last! Oh, Providence is kind! Thank Him, Robert."

"I do thank Providence."

"And I also, for your sake!" She looked up devoutly.

"Now I can take more workmen, give better wages, lay wiser and more
liberal plans, do some good, be less selfish. _Now_, Caroline, I can
have a house--a home which I can truly call mine--and _now_----"

He paused, for his deep voice was checked.

"And _now_," he resumed--"now I can think of marriage, _now_ I can seek
a wife."

This was no moment for her to speak. She did not speak.

"Will Caroline, who meekly hopes to be forgiven as she forgives--will
she pardon all I have made her suffer, all that long pain I have
wickedly caused her, all that sickness of body and mind she owed to me?
Will she forget what she knows of my poor ambition, my sordid schemes?
Will she let me expiate these things? Will she suffer me to prove that,
as I once deserted cruelly, trifled wantonly, injured basely, I can now
love faithfully, cherish fondly, treasure tenderly?"

His hand was in Caroline's still; a gentle pressure answered him.

"Is Caroline mine?"

"Caroline is yours."

"I will prize her. The sense of her value is here, in my heart; the
necessity for her society is blended with my life. Not more jealous
shall I be of the blood whose flow moves my pulses than of her happiness
and well-being."

"I love you, too, Robert, and will take faithful care of you."

"Will you take faithful care of me? Faithful care! As if that rose
should promise to shelter from tempest this hard gray stone! But she
_will_ care for me, in her way. These hands will be the gentle
ministrants of every comfort I can taste. I know the being I seek to
entwine with my own will bring me a solace, a charity, a purity, to
which, of myself, I am a stranger."

Suddenly Caroline was troubled; her lip quivered.

"What flutters my dove?" asked Moore, as she nestled to and then
uneasily shrank from him.

"Poor mamma! I am all mamma has. Must I leave her?"

"Do you know, I thought of that difficulty. I and 'mamma' have discussed
it."

"Tell me what you wish, what you would like, and I will consider if it
is possible to consent. But I cannot desert her, even for you. I cannot
break her heart, even for your sake."

"She was faithful when I was false--was she not? I never came near your
sick-bed, and she watched it ceaselessly."

"What must I do? Anything but leave her."

"At my wish you never shall leave her."

"She may live very near us?"

"With us--only she will have her own rooms and servant. For this she
stipulates herself."

"You know she has an income, that, with her habits, makes her quite
independent?"

"She told me that, with a gentle pride that reminded me of somebody
else."

"She is not at all interfering, and incapable of gossip."

"I know her, Cary. But if, instead of being the personification of
reserve and discretion, she were something quite opposite, I should not
fear her."

"Yet she will be your mother-in-law?" The speaker gave an arch little
nod. Moore smiled.

"Louis and I are not of the order of men who fear their mothers-in-law,
Cary. Our foes never have been, nor will be, those of our own household.
I doubt not my mother-in-law will make much of me."

"That she will--in her quiet way, you know. She is not demonstrative;
and when you see her silent, or even cool, you must not fancy her
displeased; it is only a manner she has. Be sure to let me interpret for
her whenever she puzzles you; always believe my account of the matter,
Robert."

"Oh, implicitly! Jesting apart, I feel that she and I will suit--_on ne
peut mieux_. Hortense, you know, is exquisitely susceptible--in our
French sense of the word--and not, perhaps, always reasonable in her
requirements; yet, dear, honest girl, I never painfully wounded her
feelings or had a serious quarrel with her in my life."

"No; you are most generously considerate, indeed, most tenderly
indulgent to her; and you will be considerate with mamma. You are a
gentleman all through, Robert, to the bone, and nowhere so perfect a
gentleman as at your own fireside."

"A eulogium I like; it is very sweet. I am well pleased my Caroline
should view me in this light."

"Mamma just thinks of you as I do."

"Not quite, I hope?"

"She does not want to marry you--don't be vain; but she said to me the
other day, 'My dear, Mr. Moore has pleasing manners; he is one of the
few gentlemen I have seen who combine politeness with an air of
sincerity.'"

"'Mamma' is rather a misanthropist, is she not? Not the best opinion of
the sterner sex?"

"She forbears to judge them as a whole, but she has her exceptions whom
she admires--Louis and Mr. Hall, and, of late, yourself. She did not
like you once; I knew that, because she would never speak of you. But,
Robert----"

"Well, what now? What is the new thought?"

"You have not seen my uncle yet?"

"I have. 'Mamma' called him into the room. He consents conditionally. If
I prove that I can keep a wife, I may have her; and I _can_ keep her
better than he thinks--better than I choose to boast."

"If you get rich you will do good with your money, Robert?"

"I _will_ do good; you shall tell me how. Indeed, I have some schemes of
my own, which you and I will talk about on our own hearth one day. I
have seen the necessity of doing good; I have learned the downright
folly of being selfish. Caroline, I foresee what I will now foretell.
This war _must_ ere long draw to a close. Trade is likely to prosper for
some years to come. There may be a brief misunderstanding between
England and America, but that will not last. What would you think if,
one day--perhaps ere another ten years elapse--Louis and I divide
Briarfield parish betwixt us? Louis, at any rate, is certain of power
and property. He will not bury his talents. He is a benevolent fellow,
and has, besides, an intellect of his own of no trifling calibre. His
mind is slow but strong. It must work. It may work deliberately, but it
will work well. He will be made magistrate of the district--Shirley says
he shall. She would proceed impetuously and prematurely to obtain for
him this dignity, if he would let her, but he will not. As usual, he
will be in no haste. Ere he has been master of Fieldhead a year all the
district will feel his quiet influence, and acknowledge his unassuming
superiority. A magistrate is wanted; they will, in time, invest him with
the office voluntarily and unreluctantly. Everybody admires his future
wife, and everybody will, in time, like him. He is of the _pate_
generally approved, _bon comme le pain_--daily bread for the most
fastidious, good for the infant and the aged, nourishing for the poor,
wholesome for the rich. Shirley, in spite of her whims and oddities, her
dodges and delays, has an infatuated fondness for him. She will one day
see him as universally beloved as even _she_ could wish. He will also be
universally esteemed, considered, consulted, depended on--too much so.
His advice will be always judicious, his help always good-natured. Ere
long both will be in inconvenient request. He will have to impose
restrictions. As for me, if I succeed as I intend to do, my success will
add to his and Shirley's income. I can double the value of their mill
property. I can line yonder barren Hollow with lines of cottages and
rows of cottage-gardens----"

"Robert! And root up the copse?"

"The copse shall be firewood ere five years elapse. The beautiful wild
ravine shall be a smooth descent; the green natural terrace shall be a
paved street. There shall be cottages in the dark ravine, and cottages
on the lonely slopes. The rough pebbled track shall be an even, firm,
broad, black, sooty road, bedded with the cinders from my mill; and my
mill, Caroline--my mill shall fill its present yard."

"Horrible! You will change our blue hill-country air into the Stilbro'
smoke atmosphere."

"I will pour the waters of Pactolus through the valley of Briarfield."

"I like the beck a thousand times better."

"I will get an Act for enclosing Nunnely Common, and parcelling it out
into farms."

"Stilbro' Moor, however, defies you, thank Heaven! What can you grow in
Bilberry Moss? What will flourish on Rushedge?"

"Caroline, the houseless, the starving, the unemployed shall come to
Hollow's Mill from far and near; and Joe Scott shall give them work, and
Louis Moore, Esq., shall let them a tenement, and Mrs. Gill shall mete
them a portion till the first pay-day."

She smiled up in his face.

"Such a Sunday school as you will have, Cary! such collections as you
will get! such a day school as you and Shirley and Miss Ainley will have
to manage between you! The mill shall find salaries for a master and
mistress, and the squire or the clothier shall give a treat once a
quarter."

She mutely offered a kiss--an offer taken unfair advantage of, to the
extortion of about a hundred kisses.

