
[Footnote 1801: A mountain peak near Thebes which took its name from the
Sphinx (called in "Theogony" l. 326 PHIX).]

[Footnote 1802: Cyanus was a glass-paste of deep blue colour: the
'zones' were concentric bands in which were the scenes described by the
poet. The figure of Fear (l. 44) occupied the centre of the shield, and
Oceanus (l. 314) enclosed the whole.]

[Footnote 1803: 'She who drives herds,' i.e. 'The Victorious', since
herds were the chief spoil gained by the victor in ancient warfare.]

[Footnote 1804: The cap of darkness which made its wearer invisible.]

[Footnote 1805: The existing text of the vineyard scene is a compound of
two different versions, clumsily adapted, and eked out with some
makeshift additions.]

[Footnote 1806: The conception is similar to that of the sculptured
group at Athens of Two Lions devouring a Bull (Dickens, "Cat. of the
Acropolis Museaum", No. 3).]

[Footnote 1901: A Greek sophist who taught rhetoric at Rome in the time
of Hadrian. He is the author of a collection of proverbs in three
books.]

[Footnote 2001: When Heracles prayed that a son might be born to Telamon
and Eriboea, Zeus sent forth an eagle in token that the prayer would be
granted. Heracles then bade the parents call their son Aias after the
eagle ('aietos').]

[Footnote 2002: Oenomaus, king of Pisa in Elis, warned by an oracle that
he should be killed by his son-in-law, offered his daughter Hippodamia
to the man who could defeat him in a chariot race, on condition that the
defeated suitors should be slain by him. Ultimately Pelops, through the
treachery of the charioteer of Oenomaus, became victorious.]

[Footnote 2003: sc. to Scythia.]

[Footnote 2004: In the Homeric "Hymn to Hermes" Battus almost disappears
from the story, and a somewhat different account of the stealing of the
cattle is given.]

[Footnote 2101: sc. Colophon. Proclus in his abstract of the "Returns"
(sc. of the heroes from Troy) says Calchas and his party were present at
the death of Teiresias at Colophon, perhaps indicating another version
of this story.]

[Footnote 2102: ll. 1-2 are quoted by Athenaeus, ii. p. 40; ll. 3-4 by
Clement of Alexandria, Stromateis vi. 2. 26. Buttman saw that the two
fragments should be joined. (NOTE: These two fragments should be read
together.--DBK)]

[Footnote 2201: sc. the golden fleece of the ram which carried Phrixus
and Helle away from Athamas and Ino. When he reached Colchis Phrixus
sacrificed the ram to Zeus.]

[Footnote 2202: Euboea properly means the 'Island of fine Cattle (or
Cows)'.]

[Footnote 2301: This and the following fragment are meant to be read
together.--DBK]

[Footnote 2302: cp. Hesiod "Theogony" 81 ff. But Theognis 169, 'Whomso
the god honour, even a man inclined to blame praiseth him', is much
nearer.]

[Footnote 2401: Cf. Scholion on Clement, "Protrept." i. p. 302.]

[Footnote 2402: This line may once have been read in the text of "Works
and Days" after l. 771.]

[Footnote 2501: ll. 1-9 are preserved by Diodorus Siculus iii. 66. 3;
ll. 10-21 are extant only in M.]

[Footnote 2502: Dionysus, after his untimely birth from Semele, was sewn
into the thigh of Zeus.]

[Footnote 2503: sc. Semele. Zeus is here speaking.]

[Footnote 2504: The reference is apparently to something in the body of
the hymn, now lost.]

[Footnote 2505: The Greeks feared to name Pluto directly and mentioned
him by one of many descriptive titles, such as 'Host of Many': compare
the Christian use of O DIABOLOS or our 'Evil One'.]

[Footnote 2506: Demeter chooses the lowlier seat, supposedly as being
more suitable to her assumed condition, but really because in her sorrow
she refuses all comforts.]

[Footnote 2507: An act of communion--the drinking of the potion here
described--was one of the most important pieces of ritual in the
Eleusinian mysteries, as commemorating the sorrows of the goddess.]

[Footnote 2508: Undercutter and Woodcutter are probably popular names
(after the style of Hesiod's 'Boneless One') for the worm thought to be
the cause of teething and toothache.]

[Footnote 2509: The list of names is taken--with five additions--from
Hesiod, "Theogony" 349 ff.: for their general significance see note on
that passage.]

[Footnote 2510: Inscriptions show that there was a temple of Apollo
Delphinius (cp. ii. 495-6) at Cnossus and a Cretan month bearing the
same name.]

[Footnote 2511: sc. that the dolphin was really Apollo.]

[Footnote 2512: The epithets are transferred from the god to his altar
'Overlooking' is especially an epithet of Zeus, as in Apollonius Rhodius
ii. 1124.]

[Footnote 2513: Pliny notices the efficacy of the flesh of a tortoise
against withcraft. In "Geoponica" i. 14. 8 the living tortoise is
prescribed as a charm to preserve vineyards from hail.]

[Footnote 2514: Hermes makes the cattle walk backwards way, so that they
seem to be going towards the meadow instead of leaving it (cp. l. 345);
he himself walks in the normal manner, relying on his sandals as a
disguise.]

[Footnote 2515: Such seems to be the meaning indicated by the context,
though the verb is taken by Allen and Sikes to mean, 'to be like
oneself', and so 'to be original'.]

[Footnote 2516: Kuhn points out that there is a lacuna here. In l. 109
the borer is described, but the friction of this upon the fireblock (to
which the phrase 'held firmly' clearly belongs) must also have been
mentioned.]

[Footnote 2517: The cows being on their sides on the ground, Hermes
bends their heads back towards their flanks and so can reach their
backbones.]

[Footnote 2518: O. Muller thinks the 'hides' were a stalactite formation
in the 'Cave of Nestor' near Messenian Pylos,--though the cave of Hermes
is near the Alpheus (l. 139). Others suggest that actual skins were
shown as relics before some cave near Triphylian Pylos.]

[Footnote 2519: Gemoll explains that Hermes, having offered all the meat
as sacrifice to the Twelve Gods, remembers that he himself as one of
them must be content with the savour instead of the substance of the
sacrifice. Can it be that by eating he would have forfeited the position
he claimed as one of the Twelve Gods?]

[Footnote 2520: Lit. 'thorn-plucker'.]

[Footnote 2521: Hermes is ambitious (l. 175), but if he is cast into
Hades he will have to be content with the leadership of mere babies like
himself, since those in Hades retain the state of growth--whether
childhood or manhood--in which they are at the moment of leaving the
upper world.]

[Footnote 2522: Literally, 'you have made him sit on the floor', i.e.
'you have stolen everything down to his last chair.']

[Footnote 2523: The Thriae, who practised divination by means of pebbles
(also called THRIAE). In this hymn they are represented as aged maidens
(ll. 553-4), but are closely associated with bees (ll. 559-563) and
possibly are here conceived as having human heads and breasts with the
bodies and wings of bees. See the edition of Allen and Sikes, Appendix
III.]

[Footnote 2524: Cronos swallowed each of his children the moment that
they were born, but ultimately was forced to disgorge them. Hestia,
being the first to be swallowed, was the last to be disgorged, and so
was at once the first and latest born of the children of Cronos. Cp.
Hesiod "Theogony", ll. 495-7.]

[Footnote 2525: Mr. Evelyn-White prefers a different order for lines
#87-90 than that preserved in the MSS. This translation is based upon
the following sequence: ll. 89,90,87,88.--DBK.]

[Footnote 2526: 'Cattle-earning', because an accepted suitor paid for
his bride in cattle.]

[Footnote 2527: The name Aeneas is here connected with the epithet AIEOS
(awful): similarly the name Odysseus is derived (in "Odyssey" i.62) from
ODYSSMAI (I grieve).]

[Footnote 2528: Aphrodite extenuates her disgrace by claiming that the
race of Anchises is almost divine, as is shown in the persons of
Ganymedes and Tithonus.]

[Footnote 2529: So Christ connecting the word with OMOS. L. and S. give
= OMOIOS, 'common to all'.]

[Footnote 2530: Probably not Etruscans, but the non-Hellenic peoples of
Thrace and (according to Thucydides) of Lemnos and Athens. Cp. Herodotus
i. 57; Thucydides iv. 109.]

[Footnote 2531: This line appears to be an alternative to ll. 10-11.]

[Footnote 2532: The name Pan is here derived from PANTES, 'all'. Cp.
Hesiod, "Works and Days" ll. 80-82, "Hymn to Aphrodite" (v) l. 198. for
the significance of personal names.]

[Footnote 2533: Mr. Evelyn-White prefers to switch l. 10 and 11, reading
11 first then 10.--DBK.]

[Footnote 2534: An extra line is inserted in some MSS. after l. 15.--
DBK.]

[Footnote 2535: The epithet is a usual one for birds, cp. Hesiod, "Works
and Days", l. 210; as applied to Selene it may merely indicate her
passage, like a bird, through the air, or mean 'far flying'.]

[Footnote 2601: "The Epigrams" are preserved in the pseudo-Herodotean
"Life of Homer". Nos. III, XIII, and XVII are also found in the "Contest
of Homer and Hesiod", and No. I is also extant at the end of some MSS.
of the "Homeric Hymns".]

[Footnote 2602: sc. from Smyrna, Homer's reputed birth-place.]

[Footnote 2603: The councillors at Cyme who refused to support Homer at
the public expense.]

[Footnote 2604: The 'better fruit' is apparently the iron smelted out in
fires of pine-wood.]

[Footnote 2605: Hecate: cp. Hesiod, "Theogony", l. 450.]

[Footnote 2606: i.e. in protection.]

[Footnote 2607: This song is called by pseudo-Herodotus EIRESIONE. The
word properly indicates a garland wound with wool which was worn at
harvest-festivals, but came to be applied first to the harvest song and
then to any begging song. The present is akin the Swallow-Song
(XELIDONISMA), sung at the beginning of spring, and answered to the
still surviving English May-Day songs. Cp. Athenaeus, viii. 360 B.]

[Footnote 2608: The lice which they caught in their clothes they left
behind, but carried home in their clothes those which they could not
catch.]

[Footnote 2701: See the cylix reproduced by Gerhard, Abhandlungen, taf.
5,4. Cp. Stesichorus, Frag. 3 (Smyth).]

[Footnote 2801: The haunch was regarded as a dishonourable portion.]

[Footnote 2802: The horse of Adrastus, offspring of Poseidon and
Demeter, who had changed herself into a mare to escape Poseidon.]

[Footnote 2803: Restored from Pindar Ol. vi. 15 who, according to
Asclepiades, derives the passage from the "Thebais".]

[Footnote 2901: So called from Teumessus, a hill in Boeotia. For the
derivation of Teumessus cp. Antimachus "Thebais" fr. 3 (Kinkel).]

[Footnote 3001: The preceding part of the Epic Cycle (?).]

[Footnote 3002: While the Greeks were sacrificing at Aulis, a serpent
appeared and devoured eight young birds from their nest and lastly the
mother of the brood. This was interpreted by Calchas to mean that the
war would swallow up nine full years. Cp. "Iliad" ii, 299 ff.]

[Footnote 3003: i.e. Stasinus (or Hegesias: cp. fr. 6): the phrase
'Cyprian histories' is equivalent to "The Cypria".]

[Footnote 3004: Cp. Allen "C.R." xxvii. 190.]

[Footnote 3005: These two lines possibly belong to the account of the
feast given by Agamemnon at Lemnos.]

[Footnote 3006: sc. the Asiatic Thebes at the foot of Mt. Placius.]

[Footnote 3101: sc. after cremation.]

[Footnote 3102: This fragment comes from a version of the "Contest of
Homer and Hesiod" widely different from that now extant. The words 'as
Lesches gives them (says)' seem to indicate that the verse and a half
assigned to Homer came from the "Little Iliad". It is possible they may
have introduced some unusually striking incident, such as the actual
Fall of Troy.]

[Footnote 3103: i.e. in the paintings by Polygnotus at Delphi.]

[Footnote 3104: i.e. the dead bodies in the picture.]

[Footnote 3105: According to this version Aeneas was taken to Pharsalia.
Better known are the Homeric account (according to which Aeneas founded
a new dynasty at Troy), and the legends which make him seek a new home
in Italy.]

[Footnote 3201: sc. knowledge of both surgery and of drugs.]

[Footnote 3301: Clement attributes this line to Augias: probably Agias
is intended.]

[Footnote 3302: Identical with the "Returns", in which the Sons of
Atreus occupy the most prominent parts.]

[Footnote 3401: This Artemisia, who distinguished herself at the battle
of Salamis (Herodotus, vii. 99) is here confused with the later
Artemisia, the wife of Mausolus, who died 350 B.C.]

[Footnote 3402: i.e. the fox knows many ways to baffle its foes, while
the hedge-hog knows one only which is far more effectual.]

[Footnote 3403: Attributed to Homer by Zenobius, and by Bergk to the
"Margites".]

[Footnote 3501: i.e. 'monkey-men'.]

[Footnote 3601: Lines 42-52 are intrusive; the list of vegetables which
the Mouse cannot eat must follow immediately after the various dishes of
which he does eat.]

[Footnote 3602: lit. 'those unable to swim'.]

[Footnote 3603: This may be a parody of Orion's threat in Hesiod,
"Astronomy", frag. 4.]

[Footnote 3701: sc. the riddle of the fisher-boys which comes at the end
of this work.]

[Footnote 3702: The verses of Hesiod are called doubtful in meaning
because they are, if taken alone, either incomplete or absurd.]

[Footnote 3703: "Works and Days", ll. 383-392.]

[Footnote 3704: "Iliad" xiii, ll. 126-133, 339-344.]

[Footnote 3705: The accepted text of the "Iliad" contains 15,693 verses;
that of the "Odyssey", 12,110.]

[Footnote 3706: "Iliad" ii, ll. 559-568 (with two additional verses).]

[Footnote 3707: "Homeric Hymns", iii.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hesiod, The Homeric Hymns, and Homerica, by 
Homer and Hesiod

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HESIOD, THE HOMERIC HYMNS ***

***** This file should be named 348.txt or 348.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/348/

Produced by Douglas B. Killings

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.
