Joseph Fields Killed and brought in an Anamale Called by the French
Brarow, and by the Ponies Cho car tooch this Anamale Burrows in the
Ground and feeds on Flesh, (Prarie Dogs), Bugs, & vigatables--"His
Shape & Size is like that of a Beaver, his head mouth &c. is like a
Dogs with Short Ears, his Tail and Hair like that of a Ground Hog, and
longer, and lighter. his Interals like the interals of a Hog," his Skin
thick and loose, his Belly is White and the Hair Short--a white Streek
from his nose to his Sholders.

The toe nails of his fore feet is one Inch & 3/4 long, & feet large;
the nails of his hind feet 3/4 of an Inch long, the hind feet Small and
toes Crooked, his legs are Short and when he Moves Just Suffcent to
raise his body above the Ground He is of the Bear Species. we hav his
Skin Stuffed

Jo. & R. Fields did not return this evening, Several men with Verry bad
Boils--Cat fish is Cought in any part of the river Turkeys Gees & a
Beaver Killed & Cought every thing in prime order men in high Spirits.
a fair Still evening Great no. misquitors this evening




[Lewis, July 30, 1804]
July the 30th
this day Joseph Fields killed a Braro as it is called by the French
engages. this is a singular anamal not common to any part of the United
States. it's weight is sixteen pounds.--it is a carniverous anamal. on
both sides of the upper jaw is fexed one long and sharp canine tooth.-
it's eye are small black and piercing.




[Clark, July 31, 1804]
July 31st Tuesday a fair Day 3 hunters out this morning G. Drewyer
Killed a verry fat Buck one Inch fat on the ribs Merdn. altd Latd. is 41 deg.
18' 0" 5/10-North. R & Jo. Fields returned at 10 oClock the Killed 3
Deer, and lost the horses, Cought a Small Beever which is already taim,
Several men out hunting the horses without Sukcess, The Ottoes not yet
arrived, I complete the Copy of the Courses &c. &c. Musqueters verry
troubleson




[Clark, July 31, 1804]
July 31st, Tuesday a fair Day three Hunters out, Took meridian altitude
made the Lattd. 41 deg. 18' 1" 5/10 N. R. & Jo. Fields returned to Camp They
Killed 3 Deer.--The Horses Strayed off last night. Drewyer Killed a
Buck one inch of fat on the ribs, R. & Jo. Fields returned without any
meet haveing been in persuit of the horses--The Indians not yet
arrived. Cought a young Beever alive which is already quit tame-.
Cought a Buffalow fish--The evening verry Cool, The Musqutors are yet
troublesom.-




[Clark, August 1, 1804]
August the 1st 1804 a fair morning, Sent out two men after the horses &
one back to examine if the Indians have been there, ____ Beever Cought
last night, the air is Cool and pleasing

Prepared the Pipe of Peace verry flashey. wind rose at 10 oClock and
blowed from the W. S. W. very pleasent all day Several men geathering
grapes &c. two men after the horses which Strayed the night before
last. those Praries produce the Blue Current Common in the U. S. the
Goose Berry Common in the U. S, two Kind of Honeysuckle, the Bush which
I have Seen in Kentucky, with a paile Pink flower, also one which grow
in Clusters about 4 or 5 feet high bearing a Short flour in clusters of
the like Colour. the leaves Single. 3 Deer & an Elk Killed to day. This
being my birth day I order'd a Saddle of fat Vennison, an Elk fleece &
a Bevertail to be cooked and a Desert of Cheries, Plumbs, Raspberries
Currents and grapes of a Supr. quallity. The Indians not yet arrived. a
Cool fine eveninge Musquetors verry troublesom, the Praries Contain
Cheres, Apple, Grapes, Currents, Rasp burry, Gooseberris Hastlenuts and
a great Variety of Plants & flours not Common to the U S. What a field
for a Botents and a natirless




[Clark, August 1, 1804]
August the 1st 1804 a fair morning Despatched two men after the horses
lost yesterday, one man back to the place from which the messinger was
Sent for the Ottoes to See if any Indians was or had been there Since
our deptr. he return'd and informed that no person had been there Sence
we left it. The Prarie which is Situated below our Camp is above the
high water leavel and rich Covered with Grass from 5 to 8 feet high
intersperced with Copse of Hazel, Plumbs, Currents (like those of the
U.S.) Rasberries & Grapes of Dift. Kinds. also produceing a Variety of
Plants and flowers not Common in the United States, two Kind of honey
Suckle one which grows to a kind of a Srub. Common about Harrods burgh
in Kentucky the other are not So large or tall and bears a flower in
Clusters Short and of a light Pink Colour, the leaves differ from any
of the othe Kind in as much as the Lieves are Distinkd & does not
Surround the Stalk as all the other Kind does one Elk and three Deer
Killed to day also two Beever Cought

The wind rose at 10 oClock from the W. S. W. and blew a Steedy and
agreeable Breeze all Day.

The Musqutors verry troublesom this evening in the bottoms.

Took equal altitudes to day and the azmuth with the Commencement of the
A.M.




[Clark, August 2, 1804]
August 2nd 1804 wind from the SE G. Drewery returned with the horses &
one Doe Elk the countrey thro which he passed is like what we See from
the Bluff above Camp three men out Hunting one Beaver caught this
morning.

at Sunset 6 chiefs and their warries of the Ottos, and Missoures, with
a french man by the name of Far fonge, we Shook hands and gave them
Some Tobacco & Provisions, they Sent us Water Millions Three verry
large & fat Bucks Killed to day the wind Continue hard from the S. E.-
the 4 qtr. of one Buck weigh'd 147 wt 11/2 Inch fat on the ribs




[Clark, August 2, 1804]
August 2nd Thursday 1804
A verry pleasent Breeze from the S. E. The Two men Drewyer & Colter
returned with the horses loaded with Elk, those horses they found about
12 miles in a Southerly Derection from Camp.

The Countrey thro which they passed is Similar to what we See from
Camp. one Beaver & a foot of Beaver caught in trap Cought this morning
at Sunset Mr. Fairfong and a pt. of Otteau & Missourie Nation Came to
Camp, among those Indians 6 were Chiefs, the principal Chiefs Capt.
Lewis & myself met those Indians & informed them we were glad to See
them, and would Speak to them tomorrow, Sent them Som rosted meat Pork
flour & meal, in return they Sent us Water millions. every man on his
Guard & ready for any thing Three fat Bucks Killed this evening the 4
qtrs. of one weighed 147 lbs.




[Lewis, August 2, 1804]
August 2ed 1804.
This day one of our Hunters brought me a white Heron. this bird as an
inhabitant of ponds and Marasses, and feeds upon tadpoles, frogs, small
fish &c--they are common to the Mississipi and the lower part of the
ohio River, (ie) as high as the falls of that river.

this bird weighed two lbs.--it's plumage is perfectly white and very
thin

F        I.
from extremity of beak to the extremity of toe        4         71/4
from tipp to tip of wing on the back                         4        11

it's beak is yellow pointed, flated crosswise and 5 Inches in length
from the upper region of the bill to the eye is one inch in length,
covered with a smoth yellow skin the plumage of the head projecting
towards the upper bill and coming to a point a an Inch beyond the eyes
on the center of the upper bill. The mouth opens to distance of the
eyes--The eye is full and projecting reather, it is 7/10 of half an
inch. four joints in the wing

Inches
1st joint from body in length                                 6
2ed Do.                                                 81/4
3rd Do.                                                 31/2
4th Do.                                                 1
1st joint Number of feathers        7         Length of         3
2nd                                 18                         6
3                                 6                 from 10 to 12
4th                                 5                         12

it's legs are black--the neck and beak occupy 1/2 it's length. it has
four toes on a foot--the outer toe on the right foot is from the
joining of the leg to extremity of toe nale 4 Inch & 1/4 has four
joints exclusive of the nail joint--the next is 43/4 inches has three
joints exclusive of the nale joint. the next is 33/4 and has two
joints, the heel toe has one joint only and is 3 Inches in length. the
nails are long sharp and black--the eye is of a deep seagreen colour,
with a circle of of pale yellow around the sight forming a border to
the outer part of the eye of about half the width of the whole eye. the
tale has 12 feathers of six inches in length.--the wings when folded
are the same length with the tale.

has 2 remarkable tufts of long feathers on each side joining the body
at the upper joint of the wing. these cover the feathers of the 1st
joint of the wings when they are over extended




[Clark, August 3, 1804]
August 3rd Friday prepare a Small preasent for those Indians and hold a
Councul Delivered a Speech & made 8 6 chief... gave a fiew preasents
and, a Smoke a Dram, Some Powder & Ball--the man we Sent not yet come
up, Those people express great Satisfaction at the Speech Delivered
they are no Oreters, big, open Counternances, ottoes large Missor Small

at 4 oClock Set out under a gentle Breeze from the S. E proceeded on N.
5 deg. E 5 Ms. Passed a Pt. on the S. S. and round a large Sand bar on the L.
S. and Camped above, below a great number of Snags quit across the
river, The Musquitors more numerous than I ever Saw them, all in
Spirrits, we had Some rough Convasation G. Dr. about boys.

The Osage & Kansies are the Same language

the Ottoes & Mahars Speek many words of the Osarge language

The Ottos, Aiaways, & Missouries Speake the Same language the Panies &
Recreries Speak the Same language also the Loups & repub. the Mahar, &
Poncarar the Same Language The Cheaun, Mandin & Grovanter the Same The
Probibility is that those defferant tribes have once formed 3 great
nats. Viz: the Missouries, Osarge, Kanzes, Ottoes, Mahars, & Poncaras &
Aiauaies one nation.

The Panies, Loups, Republican, Recrerees the 2nd

The Mandans Cheeons, & Grovanters the 3rd The tribes of the Soux all
retain the name 4th

It is possible that the, Mahar & Poncarear may have been a Distinct
nation, as they only Speek Some words of the osage which have the Same
Signification 25 Days to St Ta fee S. of W. Cross the heads of
Arkansies around the head of Kanzies River after Delivering a Speech
informing thos Children of ours of the Change which had taken place,
the wishes of our government to Cultivate friendship & good
understanding, the method of have good advice & Some Directions, we
made 1 Great Chief to the who was not present, to whom we adresed the
Speech & Sent Some presents or Meadels & flag, we made 2 Second Chiefs
one for the Missouris & another for the Ottos (those two tribes are
nearly equal 1'70 each) and 4 principal men, to thos principal men to
thos we gave a Small Comtn. to each man to whom we gave authority, a
preasn of Br. Ch. Gart. g. Paint & a med. or Contn a Small Corns. was
delivered for the whole each Chief & principal man delivered a Speech
acknowledging ther approbation to what they had heard and promised to
prosue the good advice and Caustion, they were happy w new fathers who
gave good advice & to be Depended on all Concluded by asking a little
Powder & a Drop of Milk.

I answered those Speeches gave them 50 balls one Canister of Powder & a
Dram--after Cap Lewis Shot his air gun a few times which astonished the
nativs, we Set Sail. recved from thos people water millions & The
Cheifs & Principal men of the Ottoes & Missouris made by M L. & W C the
3rd August 1804

         Viz.         Indian Names                 Tribe                 English
Signifiation

         1.         We-ar-ruge-nor         Ottoe                 Little Thief

         2.         Shingo-ton go                 Otto                 Big horse
                  We tha a                 Missourie         Hospatallity

         3.        Wau-pe-ur                 Miss.
                 Au-ho-ning ga         M
                 Ba Za con ja                 Ottoe
                 Au-ho-ne-ga                 Miss.

from this place I am told by Mr. Faufong the interpeter that it will
take a man 25 Days to go to St. a fee pass, the heads of Arkansas,
round the Kansas head, across Some mountains from the top of which the
City may be Seen the Spaniards have envited those Indians & the Panies
to trade with them & Some french & a few indians are gorn from the
Panias to that City this Summer-

The Situation of this place which we Call Council Bluff which is
handsom ellevated a Spot well Calculated for a Tradeing establishment,
the Bank high & leavel on top well Calculated for a fort to Command the
Countrey and river the low bottom above high water & well Situated
under the Command of the Hill for Houses to trade with the Natives a
butifull Plain both abov and below at no other bend on either Side does
the High land touch the river for Some distance up, as I am told.

those Bluffs afford good Clay for Brick, a great quantity on the 3
points one Opsd. one abov &one below.--the Situation I am informed is,
within 1 Days march of the Ottoes, 11/2 of the Panias, 2 of the Mahars,
& 21/2 of the Loups Villages, also Convenient to the roveing Bands of
Soux, Those people are now at war with each other, an establishment
here would bring about peace and be the means of Keeping of it.

Augt. 3d Camped on the upper point of a large Sand bar L. S. Misquters
verry bad. Some place near Conncill Bluff will be the most proper place
for a tradeing establishment, for maney of the nations, the distance is
to the Ottoes one Days, Ponies 11/2 days, to the Mahar, 2 days, to
Loups 2 Days & a half 16 or 1800 men-and convenient for Some bands of
the Sues,




[Clark, August 3, 1804]
August 3rd, Friday 1804
made up a Small preasent for those people in perpotion to their
Consiqunce. also a package with a meadile to accompany a Speech for the
Grand Chief after Brackfast we Collected those Indians under an orning
of our Main Sail, in presence of our Party paraded & Delivered a long
Speech to them expressive of our journey the wirkes of our Government,
Some advice to them and Directions how They were to Conduct themselves,
the princapal Chief for the nation being absente we sent him the Speech
flag Meadel & Some Cloathes. after hering what they had to say
Delivered a medal of Second Grade to one for the Ottos & and one for
the Missourie present and 4 medals of a third Grade to the inferior
Chief two for each tribe. Those two parts of nations, Ottos &
Missouries now residing together is about 250 men are the Ottoes
Composeing 2/3d and Missourie 1/3 part

The names of the Chiefs we acknowledged Made this day are as follows Viz

                 Indian name                 English signftn.

         1st        We ar ruge nor         Ottoe         Called         Little Theif

         2         Shon go ton go         "        "        Big Horse
                 We the a                 Miss.        "        Hospatality

                 Shon Guss Con         Ottoe        "        White horse
                 Wau pe uh                 M.
                 Ah ho ning ga         M.
                 Baza cou ja                 Ottoe
                 Ah ho ne ga                 M.

Those Chiefs all Delivered a Speech acknowledgeing Their approbation to
the Speech and promissing to prosue the advice & Derictions given them
that they wer happy to find that they had fathers which might be
depended on &c.

We gave them a Cannister of Powder and a Bottle of whiskey and
delivered a few presents to the whole after giveing a Br. Cth. Some
Paint guartering & a Meadele to those we made Cheifs after Capt Lewis's
Shooting the air gun a feiw Shots (which astonished those nativs) we
Set out and proceeded on five miles on a Direct line passed a point on
the S. S. & round a large Sand bar on the L. S. & Camped on the upper
point. The Misquitors excessively troublesom this evening Great
appearance of wind and rain to the N. W. we prepare to rec've it--The
man Liberty whome we Sent for the Ottoes has not Come up he left the
Ottoes Town one Day before the Indians. This man has eithered tired his
horse or, lost himself in the Plains Some Indians are to hunt for him,
The Situation of our last Camp Councill Bluff or Handssom Prarie
appears to be a verry proper place for a Tradeing establishment &
fortification The Soil of the Bluff well adapted for Brick, Great deel
of timbers abov in the two Points. many other advantages of a Small
nature. and I am told Senteral to Several nations Viz. one Days march
from the Ottoe Town, one Day & a half from the great Pania village, 2
days from the Mahar Towns, two 1/4 Days from the Loups Village, &
Convenient to the Countrey thro which Bands of the Soux hunt. perhaps
no other Situation is as well Calculated for a Tradeing establishment.
The air is pure and helthy So far as we can judge.-




[Clark, August 4, 1804]
August 4th at 7 oClock the heavens darkened and a violent wind from the
N W. Suckceeded which lasted about an hour, with a little rain.

Set out this morning early thro a narrow part of the, the whole Channel
Confined in Some parts between the (1) Sand on one Side & the bank on
the other (which is washing in) within 200 yards, this Chanl. Crouded
with Snags. at 11/2 m. passed an old tradeing house L. S. where one of
our Crew passed 2 years P. C tradeing with the Mahar; & Ponies-above 1
me. a (3) Creek Coms in opsd. a large bad (2) Sand bar this (3) Creek
is the outlett of 3 ponds, which recved ther water from the Smaller
Streams running from the hills on the L. S, Great qts. of Gees, passed
in the next bend L. S. an out let to the Pond, Butifull bottom Prarie
on both Sides of the river, Pumey Stone is found on the Sides of the
river of various Sizes. Wind a head. Reed the man who went back to the
Camp of last night for his Knife has not Come up this evening-we Camped
at a pt. on the L. S. at a Beaver house. 1 Buck Killed to daye.




[Clark, August 4, 1804]
August 4th Satturdaye
Set out early--(at 7 oClock last night we had a Violent wind from the N
W Som little rain Succeeded, the wind lasted with violence for one hour
after the wind it was clear Sereen and Cool all night.) proceeded on
passed thro betwen Snags which was quit across the Rivr the Channel
Confined within 200 yards one Side a Sand pt. S S. the other a Bend,
the Banks washing away & trees falling in constantly for 1 mile, abov
this place is the remains of an old Tradeing establishment L. S. where
Petr. Crusett one of our hands Stayed two years & traded with the
Mahars a Short distance above is a Creek (3) the out let of Three Ponds
comunicateing with each other, those Ponds or rether Lakes are fed by
Springs & Small runs from the hills. (2) a large Sand Island opposit
this Creek makeing out from the L. Point, from the Camp of last night
to this Creek, the river has latterly Changed its bed incroaching on
the L. Side, in this Sand bar I Saw great Nos. of wild gees--passed a
Small Creek on the L. S about 3 miles above the last both of those
Creek's are out lets from the Small Lake which reive their water from
the Small Streems running from the high land--great many Pamey Stones
on the Shore of various Sises the wind blew hard--Reed a man who went
back to Camp for his knife has not joined us. we camped at a Beaver
house on the L. S.one Buck Killed to day-




[Clark, August 5, 1804]
August 5th Set out early wind from N E. Great appearance of Wind &
rain, (I have remarked that I have not heard much thunder in this
Countrey) a verry large Snake was Killed to day called the Bull Snake,
his Colour Some thing like a rattle Snake Something lighter--the bends
of the river to day is washing away the banks, haveing nothing to
oppose the turbelance of the river when Confined by large hard Sand
Points, forceing this Current against the bends--the Soil of the entire
bottom between the high land, being the mud or Ooze of the river of
Some former period mixed with Sand & Clay easely melts and Slips, or
washies into the river the mud mixes with the water & the Sand collects
on the points Camped on the S. S.--I went on Shore S. S. this evening
Saw Some turkeys and in persueing them Struk the river 12 miles below
the place by water I went out, I think the Peninsuly is about 370 yards
across Subjuct to overflow; & washes into numerous Channels, Great
quantities of Graps ripe & of three Defferent Kind Some large & fine. I
Killed a Turkey, and made Camp in the Night, Musqutors verry
troubleson--Reed the man who went back for his Knife has not yet joined
us




[Clark, August 5, 1804]
5th of August Sunday 1804
Set out early great appearance of wind and rain (I have observed that
Thundor & lightning is not as common in this Countrey as it is in the
atlantic States) Snakes are not plenty, one was killed to day large and
resembling the rattle Snake only Something lighter-. I walked on Shore
this evening S. S. in Pursueing Some Turkeys I struck the river twelve
miles below within 370 yards, the high water passes thro this
Peninsulia; and agreeable to the Customary Changes of the river I
Concld. that in two years the main Current of the river will pass
through. In every bend the banks are falling in from the Current being
thrown against those bends by the Sand points which inlarges and the
Soil I believe from unquestionable appearns. of the entire bottom from
one hill to the other being the mud or ooze of the River at Some former
Period mixed with Sand and Clay easily melts and Slips into the River,
and the mud mixes with the water & the Sand is washed down and lodges
on the points--Great quantites of Grapes on the banks, I observe three
different Kinds at this time ripe, one Of the no. is large & has the
flaver of the Purple grape. camped on the S. S. the Musquitors verry
troubleson. The man who went back after his Knife has not yet come up,
we have Some reasons to believe he has Deserted




[Lewis, August 5, 1804]
August 5th 1804
Killed a serpent on the bank of the river adjoining a large prarie.

F        Inch
Length from nose to tail                 5        2
Circumpherence in largest part--                41/2
Number of scuta on belly--221
Do. on Tale--53

No pison teeth therefore think him perfectly inocent--eyes, center
black with a border of pale brown yellow Colour of skin on head
yellowish green with black specks on the extremity of the scuta which
are pointed or triangular colour of back, transverse stripes of black
and dark brown of an inch in width, succeeded by a yellowish brown of
half that width the end of the tale hard and pointed like a cock's spur
the sides are speckled with yellowish brown and black.--two roes of
black spots on a lite yellow ground pass throughout his whole length on
the upper points of the scuta of the belly and tale 1/2 Inch apart this
snake is vulgarly called the cow or bull snake from a bellowing nois
which it is said sometimes to make resembling that anamal, tho as to
this fact I am unable to attest it never having heard them make that or
any other noise myself.

I have frequently observed an acquatic bird in the cours of asscending
this river but have never been able to procure one before today, this
day I was so fortunate as to kill two of them, they are here more
plenty than on the river below. they lay their eggs on the sand bars
without shelter or nest, and produce their young from the 15th to the
last of June, the young ones of which we caught several are covered
with down of a yellowish white colour and on the back some small specks
of a dark brown. they bear a great resemblance to the young quale of
ten days oald, and apear like them to be able to runabout and peck
their food as soon as they are hatched--this bird, lives on small fish,
worms and bugs which it takes on the virge of the water it is seldom
seen to light on trees an quite as seldom do they lite in the water and
swim tho the foot would indicate that they did it's being webbed I
believe them to be a native of this country and probly a constant
resident.

the weight of the male bird is one ounce and a half, its length from
beak to toe 71/2 inches from tip to tip of wing across the back one
foot seven inches and a half the beak is one 1/8 inch lonong, large
where it joins the head Elated on the sides and tapering to a sharp
point, a little declining and curvated, a fine yellow, with a shade of
black on the extremity of upper beak; the eye is prominent, black and
on a angular scale of 1/2 Inc; occupyse 3 1/3 in width. the upper part
of the head is black from the beak as low as the middle of the eye and
a little below the joining of the neck except however some white which
joins the upper part of the beak which forks and passing over the sides
of the forehead terminate above each eye--the under part of the bird,
that is the throat and cheeks as high as the eye, the neck brest belly
and under part of the wings and tail are of a fine white, the upper
part of the neck, back, and wings are of a fine, quaker colour, or
bright dove colour with reather more of a bluish tint-except however
the three first or larger feathers in the wing which on upper side are
of a deep black. the wing has four joints

No. Joint
Length of joint
No. of feathers
Length of do.
1
11/2
a Clump of feathers not strong but loosly connect with the flesh of the
wing
11/2
2
2
16
2
3
11/2
7
from 21/2 to 41/2
4
3/4
3
51/2

the tail has eleven feathers the outer of which are an inch longer than
those in the center gradually tapering inwards which gives the tale a
forked appearance like that of the swally the largest or outer feather
is 23/4 that of the shortest 13/4--the leg and thye are three inches
long the leg occupying one half this length the thye is covered with
feathers except about 1/4 of an inch above the knee the leg is of a
bright yellow and nails long sharp and black the foot is webbed and has
three toes forward; the heel or back toe is fixed to the leg above the
palm of the foot, and is unconnected by a web to the other toes, it has
no nail. the wings when foalded lap like those of the swallow and
extend at least an inch and a half beyond the tale. this bird is very
noysey when flying which is dose exttreemly swift the motion of the
wing is much like that of kildee it has two notes one like the squaking
of a small pig only on reather a high kee, and the other kit'-tee'-
kit'-tee'--as near as letters can express the sound--the beak of the
female is black and the black and quaker colour of the male in her is
yellowish brown mixed with dove colour




[Clark, August 6, 1804]
August 6th Monday 1804 at 12 oClock last night a Violent Storm of wind
& rain from the N. W. one perogue (Bapteest Le joness Patroon) lost her
Colours Set out early & proceeded on passed a large Island on the S. S.
back of this Island Rivie de Soldiert Come in on the S. S.--the
Solder's River is about the Sise of Nodaway 20 yd. wide at the mouth,
passed two remarkable places, where the River had once Passed--We have
every reason to belive that one man has Deserted Moses B. Reed he has
been absent three Days and one french man we Sent to the Indian Camps
has not joined us, we have reasons to beleve he lost himself in
attempting to join us at the Council Bluff--we are deturmind to Send
back 4 men to take reede Dead or alive, also hunt La Liberty and to
meet us at the Mahar nation as Soon as the order is executed.




[Clark, August 6, 1804]
6th August, Monday 1804
At 12 oClock last nigh a violent Storm of wind from the N W. Some rain
one pr. of Colours lost in the Storm from the bige Perogue. Set out
early and proceeded on passed a large Island on the S. S. back of this
Isd. Soldiers River mouths, I am told by one of the men that this river
is about the Size of Nadawa river 40 yards wide at the mouth. Reed has
not yet come up. neither has La Liberty the frenchman whome we Sent to
the Indian Camps a fiew miles below the Council Bluffs.




[Clark, August 7, 1804]
August 7th Tuesday last night about 8 oClock a Storm of wind from the
N. W. which lasted 3/4 of an hour mosquitors more troublesom last night
than I ever Saw them, Set out late this morning wind N.




[Clark, August 7, 1804]
7th August Tuesday 1804
last night at 8 oClock a Storm from the N W. lasted 3/4 of an hour let
out late this morning wind from the North--at 1 oClock dispatched
George Drewyer, R. Fields, Wm. Bratten & Wm. Labieche back after the
Deserter reid with order if he did not give up Peaceibly to put him to
Death &c. to go to the Ottoes Village & enquire for La Liberty and
bring him to the Mahars Village, also with a Speech on the occasion to
the Ottoes & Missouries--and directing a few of their Chiefs to come to
the Mahars, & we would make a peace between them & the Mahar and Souex,
a String of wompom & a Carrot of Tobacco. proceeded on and Camped on
the S. S.

I walked on Shore with one man Collies,-the bottoms Covered with very
Collin Killed an elk, I fired 4 times at one & have reasons to think I
Kiled him but could not find him, The Misqutors were So troublesom and
Misqutors thick in the Plains that I could not Keep them out of my
eyes, with a bush. in my absens Capt Lewis Killed a Pelican on Pelicans
Island, at which place maney Hundreds had Collected, they left 3 fish
which was. fresh and very good, we camped on the S. S. in a Streght
part of the river-




[Clark, August 8, 1804]
August the 8th 1804 Set out this morning at the usial time at about 2
miles (1) passed a part of the river So choked up with Snags that we
found a little dificult to get thro with Safty, the wind as usial from
the N W. one of the Soldiers Killed a Pilican on the Sand Isd. passed
the mouth of Little (2) River de Cueoux on the S. S. this river is
about 80 yards wide & navagable for Pirogus Some distance & runs
parrelel to the Missourie it corns in from the River from the N E, it
contains great Quantitys offish Common to the Countrey. two Miles above
is (3) an Island the Channel formerly run on the right with Sand.--the
Current runs to the left. many hundreds of Pelicans on this Island--we
call it Pelican Isld. Cap Lewis Killed one This river Soux Called by
the Sueoux Ed-Neah Wau-de-pon i'e Stone R heads in three Leagues of the
river Demoin, and passes thro a Lake about 20 Legues in Sircfs. which
is also within 5 Leagus of the Demoin, this lake at one place is
confined by two rocks within a narrow Space--this lake of Different
widths, with many Small Islands, from the Lake to the Mahars about
distant 4 Days march to the Dog Plains 90 Leagues, one Principal branch
of the Demoin is calld. Cat river, the Lake which this river Litt Souex
heads in is Called Despree




[Clark, August 8, 1804]
8th August Wednesday 1804
Set out this morning at the usial time at two miles passed (1) a bend
to L. S. Choaked up with Snags our boat run on two in turning to pass
through, we got through with Safty the wind from N W. (2) passed the
mouth of a River on the S. Side Called by the Soux Indians Ed-neah Wau
de pon (or Stone river) the French call this river Petite Rivre de
Cuouex it is about 80 yards wide and as (Mr. Durion Says whos been on
the heads of it and the Country abt) is navagable for Perogues Som
Distance runs Parrelel to the Missourie Some Distance, then falls down
from N E thro a roleing Countrey open, the head of this river is 9
miles from the R Demon at which place the Demoin is 80 yd wide, this
Little Cuouex passes thro a lake called Despree which is within 5
Leagues of the Deemoin the Said Lake is about 20 Leagues in
Circumfrance and is divided into 2 by two rocks approaching Verry near
each other, this Lake is of various width, Containing many Islands-
from this Lake to the Maha 4 days march, as is Said to be near the Dog
Plains one princpal branch of the Demoin is Called Cat River The Demoin
is Sholey

Capt. Lewis took Medn. Altitude of the Sun made it 56 deg. 9' 00" Lat 41 deg. 42'
34" and I took one man and went on Shore the man Killed an Elk I fired
4 times at one & did not Kill him, my ball being Small I think was the
reason, the misqutors So bad in the Praries that with the assistance of
a bush I could not Keep them out of my eyes, the boat turned Several
tims to day on Sand bars--in my absenc the boat passed a Island 2 miles
above the litte Scouex R on the upper point of the Isld Some hundreds
of Pelicans were Collected, they left 3 fish on the Sand which was
verry fine, Capt Lewis Killed one & took his dimentions, I joined the
boat and we Camped on the S S.

worthe of remark that Snakes are not plenty in this part of the
Missourie




[Lewis, August 8, 1804]
August 8th 1804
we had seen but a few aquatic fouls of any kind on the river since we
commenced our journey up the Missouri, a few geese accompanied by their
young, the wood duck which is common to every part of this country &
crains of several kinds which will be discribed in their respective
places--this day after we had passed the river Souix as called by Mr.
MacKay (or as is more properly called the stone river,) I saw a great
number of feathers floating down the river those feathers had a very
extraordinary appearance as they appeared in such quantities as to
cover pretty generally sixty or seventy yards of the breadth of the
river. for three miles after I saw those feathers continuing to run in
that manner, we did not percieve from whence they came, at length we
were surprised by the appearance of a flock of Pillican at rest on a
large sand bar attatched to a small Island the number of which would if
estimated appear almost in credible; they apeared to cover several
acres of ground, and were no doubt engaged in procuring their ordinary
food; which is fish, on our approach they flew and left behind them
several small fish of about eight inches in length, none of which I had
seen before--the Pellican rested again on a sand bar above the Island
which we called after them from the number we saw on it. we now
approached them within about three hundred yards before they flew; I
then fired at random among the flock with my rifle and brought one
down; the discription of this bird is as follows.

Habits

They are a bird of clime remain on the coast of Floriday and the
borders of the Gulph of mexico & even the lower portion of the
Mississippi during the winter and in the Spring (see for date my
thermometrical observations at the river Dubois.-) visit this country
and that farther north for the purpose of raising their young--this
duty seems now to have been accomplished from the appearance of a young
Pilacon which was killed by one of our men this morning, and they are
now in large flocks on their return to their winter quarters. they lay
usually two eggs only and chuise for a nest a couple of logs of drift
wood near the water's edge and with out any other preperation but the
thraught formed by the proximity of those two logs which form a trough
they set and hatch their young which after nurture with fish their
common food

Measure

                                                 F        I

         From beak to toe                        5        8
         Tip to tip of wing                      9        4
         Beak Length                             1        3
         Do. Width                          from 2  to    1 1/2
         Neck Length                             1       11
         1st joint of wing                       1        1
         2ed Do.                                 1        4 1/2
         3rd Do.                                 ---      7
         4th do.                                 ---      2 3/4
         Length of leg including foot                     10
         Do. of thy                                       11

Discription of Colour &c

The beak is a whiteish yellow the under part connected to a bladder
like pouch, this pounch is connected to both sides of the lower beak
and extends down on the under side of the neck and terminates in the
stomach--this pouch is uncovered with feathers, and is formed two skins
the one on the inner and the other on the center side a small quantity
of flesh and strings of which the anamal has at pleasure the power of
moving or drawing in such manner as to contract it at pleasure. in the
present subject I measured this pouch and found it's contents 5 gallons
of water

The feet are webbed large and of a yellow colour, it has four toes the
hinder toe is longer than in most aquatic fouls, the nails are black,
not sharp and 1/2 an inch in length

The plumage generally is white, the feathers are thin compared with the
swan goose or most aquatick fouls and has but little or no down on the
body. the upper part of the head is covered with black feathers short,
as far as the back part of the head--the yellow skin unfeathered
extends back from the upper beak and opening of the mouth and comes to
a point just behind the eye

The large feathers of the wings are of a deep black colour--the 1st &
2nd joint of from the body above the same is covered with a second
layer of white feathers which extend quite half the length of those
large feathers of the wing--the thye is covered with feathers within a
quarter of an inch of the knee.

                                                               Inch
  1st joint of wing has feathers  No. 21                 Length 9 Black
  2ed Do.                         No. 17                 Length 13 Inch
  3rd Do.                         No.  5                 Length 18 Inch
  4th Do.                         No.  3                 Length 19 Inch

it has a curious frothy substance which seems to devide its feathers
from the flesh of the body and seems to be composes of globles of air
and perfectly imbraces the part of the feather which extends through
the skin.the wind pipe terminates in the center of the lower part of
the upper and unfeathered part of the pouch and is secured by an
elastic valve commanded at pleasure.

The green insect known in the U States by the name of the sawyer or
chittediddle, was first heard to cry on the 27th of July, we were then
in latitude 41 deg. some minutes.

The prarie hen or grouse, was seen in the praries between the Missouri
and the river platte




[Clark, August 9, 1804]
9th Augt Thursday 1804 The fog of this morning detained us untill 1/2
passed 7 oClock at which time we left our moreing and proceeded on
under a gentle Breeze from the S. E, I went on Shore found the Land the
Same as yesterday Killed a Turkey and Camped on the L. S. great deel of
Beaver Sign to day one Beaver Cought Musquetors worse this evening than
ever I have Seen them.




[Clark, August 9, 1804]
9th August Thursday 1804
The fog being thick detained us untile half pasd. 7 oClock at which
time we Set out and proceeded on under Gentle Breeze from the S E I
walked on Shore, Saw an Elk, crossed a Istmust of 3/4 of a mile to the
river, & returned to the boat Camped on the L. S. above a Beaver Den.
Musqutors verry troubleson.




[Clark, August 11, 1804]
August 11th Satturday 1804 about day this morning a hard wind from the
N. W. followed by rain, we landed at the foot of the hill on which
Black Bird The late King of the mahar who Died 4 years ago & 400 of his
nation with the Small pox was buried (1) and went up and fixed a white
flag bound with Blue white & read on the Grave which was about 12 foot
Base & circueller, on the top of a Penical about 300 foot above the
water of the river, from the top of this hill may be Seen the bends or
meanderings of the river for 60 or 70 miles round & all the County
around the base of this high land is a Soft Sand Stone Bluff of about
40 or 150 foot, the Crooked, passed a Creek Called Wau-Con di peche C
or Bad God Creek of bad Spirits on the L. S above the Bluff on this
Creek the Mahars had the Small pox 4 years ago, Lattitude 42 deg. 1'3" 8/10
taken on the Point above the Creek. the river is verry Crooked, we are
now within 3/4 of a mile of the river at a place we Shall not get
around to untill tomorrow noon--We er 3 Legues from the Mahars by land
and the great deel of Beaver sign induce a belief that those people do
not hunt much.

I have observed a number of places where the river has Changd its Bead
at different times




[Clark, August 11, 1804]
11th August Satturday 1804. about day light this Morning a hard wind
from the N W. with Some rain proceeded on arround the right of the Isld.

a hard wind accompanied with rain from the S. E. after the rain was
over Capt. Lewis myself & 10 men assended the Hill on the L. S. under
which there was Some fine Springs to the top of a high point where the
Mahars King Black Bird was burried 4 years ago. a mound of earth about
12 Diamuter at the base & 6 feet high is raised over him turfed, and a
pole 8 feet high in the Center on this pole we fixed a white flage
bound with red Blue & white; this hill about 300 feet above the water
forming a Bluff between that & the Water of Various hight from 40 to
150 feet in hight yellow Soft Sand Stone from the tops of this Nole the
river may be Seen Meandering for 60 or 70 Miles, we Decended & Set out
N. 24 to W. 1/2 me. passing over a Sand bar on the S. pt. along the
Willows. to the river opposit a Small Beyeau on the L. S. which is the
Conveyance of the high water from a bend which appears near in a
northerly direction, haveing passed a Creek in a Deep bend to the L. S.
Called by the Mahars Wau can di Peeche (Great Spirrit is bad) on this
Creek & Hills near it about 400 of the Mahar Died with the Small Pox-
Took Medn. Altitude & made the Latd. 42 deg. 1' 3" 8/10 N. also the Moons
Distanc from the Sun I have observed a number of places where the River
has onced run and now filled or filling up & growing with willows &
cottonwood




[Clark, August 12, 1804]
12th August Sunday 1804 a South wind We Set out early the river wider
than usial, and Shallow, at 12 we halted in a bend to the left to take
the Meridian altitude, & Dine, & Sent one man across where we took
Dinner yesterday to Step off the Distance across Isthmus, he made it
974 yards, and the bend around is 183/4 miles above this bend about 4
miles, a yellow & Brown Bluff Comnuces and Continus 3 or 4 miles on the
L. S. this Bluff has Some Sand Stone, Some rich Black mole mixed with
yellow Clay, a fiew Red Ceeder on the tope, which is, from 20 to 150
foot high the hill Still riseing back, I think may be estemated at 200
foot on the top is timber, the wind for a few hours this evening was
hard and from the S. E. In the evening about 5 oClock Cap L. & My Self
wen on Shore to Shoot a Prarie wolf which was barking at us as we
passed This Prarie Wolf barked like a large fest and is not much
larger, the Beaver is verry plenty, not with Standing we are almost in
Sight of the Mahar Town--Cought a verry Large Catfish this morniong,
prepared the Indian present which we intend given to the Mahars. P.
Wiser apt. Cook to Serjt. Floyds Squad from to day




[Clark, August 12, 1804]
12th August Sunday 1804
Set out early under a gentle Breeze from the South the river wider than
usial and Shallow (1) at 12 oClock we halted to take a meridian altd.
of the Sun & Sent a man back or I may Say across to the Bind of the
river where Capt. Lewis took the Mdn. altitude yesterday, to Step off
the distance, he made it 974 yards across, the Distance arround the
bend is 183/4 miles--about 4 miles above the bend on the L. S. is the
Commencement of a Bluff which is about 4 miles extending on the river,
of yellow and brown Clay in Some parts in it near the river a Soft Sand
Stone is inbeded on the top (which is from 20 to 150 feet above the
water, & rises back) is Covered with timber, a fiew red Ceider is on
this Bluff, the wind Comes round to the S. E. a Prarie Wolf Come near
the bank and Barked at us this evening, we made an attempt but could
not git him, this Animale Barkes like a large feste Dog. Beever is
verry Plenty on this part of the river. I prepare Some presents for to
give the Indians of the Mahars nation. Wiser apt. Cook & Supentdt. of
the Provisions of Sergt. Floyds Squad. we Camped on a Sand Island in a
bend to the S. S. Musquitors verry troublesom untile the wind rose. at
one or 2 oClock




[Clark, August 13, 1804]
13th of August Munday 1804. Set out this morning at Day light the usial
time and proceeded on under a gentle Breeze from the S. E. passed the
Island.

From this Fish Camp the River is N 55 deg. West as far as Can be Seen, the
Sand bar only changeing the Derection of the Current the Hills leave
the river on the L. Side




[Clark, August 13, 1804]
August 13th Monday 1804
Set out this morning at Light the usial time and proceeded on under a
gentle Breeze from the S E




[Clark, August 14, 1804]
14th of August at 12 oClock the Party Sent yesterday to the Towns
returned, and informed that they Could not find any Indians, they had
not returned from hunting the Buffalow in the Praries, wind Shifted to
the N W. Our party Sent after the Deserter and to the Otteau towns,
have not Came up as yet

The Situation of this Village, now in ruins Siround by enunbl. hosts of
grave the ravages of the Small Pox (4 years ago) they follow the Buf.
and tend no Corn




[Clark, August 14, 1804]
14th August Tuesday 1804
a fine morning wind from the S E The men Sent to the Mahar Town last
evening has not returned we Conclude to Send a Spye to Know the cause
of Their delay at about 12 oClock the Party returned and in-formed. us
that they Could not find the Indians nor any fresh Sign, those people
have not returned from their Buffalow hunt, Those people haveing no
houses no Corn or any thing more than the graves of their ancesters to
attach them to the old Village, Continue in pursuite of the Buffalow
longer than others who had greater attachments to their native
Villagethe ravages of the Small Pox (which Swept off 400 men & women &
Children in perpoposion) has reduced this Nation not exceeding 300 men
and left them to the insults of their weaker neighbours which before
was glad to be on friendly turms with them--I am told whin this fatal
malady was among them they Carried ther franzey to verry extroadinary
length, not only of burning their Village, but they put their wives &
Children to Death with a view of their all going together to Some
better Countrey--They burry their Dead on the tops of high hills and
rais mounds on the top of them,--The cause or way those people took the
Small Pox is uncertain, the most Probable from Some other Nation by
means of a warparty

Observed Time and Distance of the Sun & Moon the Moon East the 13th of
August Monday 1804, three Miles NE of the Mahars old village at Fish
Camp-




[Clark, August 15, 1804]
August 15th Wendesday I took ten men & went out to Beaver Dam across a
Creek about a mile S W from Camp, and with a Brush Drag caught 308
fish, of the following kind (i'e) Pike, Samon, Bass, Pirch, Red horse,
Small Cat, & a kind of Perch Called on the Ohio Silverfish I also
Caught the Srimp which is Common to the Lower part of the Mississippi,
in this Creek & in the Beaver Pond is emince beads of Mustles Verry
large & fat--in my absence Capt Lewis Send the Souex interpr & a party
to a Smoke which appeared to rise at no great distance to the north
with a view to find Some Band of that nation, they returned and
informed that they had been made Some time by Some Small party, and the
hard wind of to day had set the Prarie on fire from Some high trees,
which was left burning all well, Party from Ottoes not come up.

Camp three Miles N. E of the Mahar Village




[Clark, August 15, 1804]
August 15th Wednesday 1804
I went with ten men to a Creek Damed by the Beavers about half way to
the Village, with Some Small willow & Bark we mad a Drag and haulted up
the Creek, and Cought 318 fish of different kind i'e Peke, Bass,
Salmon, perch, red horse, Small Cat, and a kind of perch Called
Silverfish, on the Ohio.--I cought a Srimp prosisely of Shape Size &
flavour of those about N. Orleans & the lower party of the Mississippi
in this Creek which is only the pass or Streight from Beaver Pond to
another, is Crouded with large Mustles Verry fat, Ducks, Pliver of
different Kinds are on those Ponds as well as on the river in My
absence Capt. Lewis Sent Mr. Durioue the Souix interpeter & three men
to examine a fire which threw up an emence Smoke from the Praries on
the N. E. Side of the River and at no great distance from Camp--the
Object of this party was to find Some Bands of Seouex which the inptr.
thought was near the Smoke and get them to Come in--in the evening this
Party returned and infoermed, that the fire arrose from Some trees
which had been left burning by a Small party of Seoux whom had passed
Several Days--the wind Setting from that point, blew the Smoke from
that pt. over our Camp. our party all in health and Sperrits the men
Sent to the Ottoes & in pursute of the Deserter Reed has not yet
returned or joined our party.




[Clark, August 16, 1804]
Aug. 16th 1804
a Verry cool morning the winds as usial from the N W. Capt Lewis with
men went out to the Creek & Pond & Caught about 800 fine fish with a
Bush Drag of the following kind i.e. 79 Pike, 8 Salmon, 1 Rock, 1 flat
Back, 127 Buffalow & readHorse, 4 Bass & 490 Cat, with many Small &
large Silver fish,--I had a mast made & fixed to day The Party Sent to
the Ottoes not yet arrived. the wind Shifted around to the S E. the
night's are Cool & a Breeze rises after generally; Sometimes before
night which Blows off the Musquitors cools the atmospere.




[Clark, August 16, 1804]
16th August Thursday 1804 Fishing Camp 3 ms. N. E. of the Mahars. a
verry cool morning the wind as usial from the N W.

Capt Lewis took 12 men & went to the Pond & Crek between Camp and the
old Village and Cought upwards of Boo fine fish, 79 Pike, 8 Salmon, 1
Rock,flat Back, 127 Buffalow & red horse 4 Bass & 490 Catt. with many
Small Silver fish I had a Mast made &fixed to the Boat to day, the
Party Sent to the Ottoes not yet joined us--the wind Shifted arround to
the S. E. everry evening a Breeze rises which blows off the Musquitors
& Cools the atmispeire.




[Clark, August 17, 1804]
17th August 1804. a fine morning Wind from the S. E. I will here annex
the Latds & Distances of the Different notable placies from the River
Dubois or Mouth up.

The Longitudes are not yet Calculated, We must be at this time about 99 deg.
45' 00" West of Greenwich--I Collected a grass much resembling wheet
with a grain like Rye, much fuller of grain, one like Rye & one like
Barley Grass Small, a Grass like Timothey except the Seed which is on
branches from the main Stalk-

Late this evening one of the party Sent after the deserters returned &
joined us, he left the party 3 miles back, they cought both Deserters,
one of them La liberty, got away from them, the Great Chief & 2nd Chief
of the ottoes accompaned the Party with a view to bring about a Peice
between themselves & the Mahar a great missfortune that the Mahars have
not returned from the hunt--Sent & fiered the Prarie near Camp to bring
in the Mahars & Souex if any are near. a Cool evening, 2 Beever Cought




[Clark, August 17, 1804]
17th August Friday 1804.
a fine Morning the wind from the S. E. I collected a grass much
resembling wheat in its grouth the grain like Rye, also Some resembling
Rye & Barly. a kind of Timothey, the Seed of which branches from the
main Stalk & is more like flax Seed than that of a Timothey

at 6 oClock this evening Labieche one of the Party Sent to the Ottoes
joined, and informed that the Party was behind with one of the
Deserters M B. Reed and the 3 principal Chiefs of the Nations--La
Liberty they cought but he decived them and got away--the object of
those Chiefs comeing forward is to make a peace with the Mahars thro
us-. as the Mahars are not at home this great object cannot be
accomplished at this time Set the Praries on fire to bring the Mahars &
Soues if any were near, this being the usial Signal.

a Cool evining two Beaver Cought to day.




[Clark, August 18, 1804]
18th August 1804 a fine morning, despatched Jo. Fields for the Party
from the Ottoes, whom did not Come up last night Wind from the S. E.
(Panies returned from their hunt, the 12th of August) in the after Part
of the Day the Party arrived, we had a Short talk after which we gave
them Provisions to eate & proceeded to the trial of Reed, he confessed,
& we Sentenced him only to run the Ganelet four times thro the
Detachment & party, and not to be considered in the future as one of
the Permonant Party, after the Punihment of about 500 Lashes, at night
we had Some talk with the Chiefs about the Cause of War between them
and the Mahars. posponed the further consultation untill tomorrow. had
a Dance which lasted untile 11 oClock, the Close of Cap Lewis Birthday.
a fine evening wind S. E

Sent to the Towns, i e Reiubin Fields Will. Brattin G. Drewyer & W
Labieche.




[Clark, August 18, 1804]
18th August Satday 1804
a fine morning. Wind from the S. E. in the after part of the Day the
Party with the Indians arrivd. we meet them under a Shade near the Boat
and after a Short talk we gave them Provisions to eat & proceeded to
the trail of Reed, he Confessed that he "Deserted & Stold a public
Rifle Shot-pouch Powder & Bals" and requested we would be as favourable
with him as we Could consistantly with our Oathes-which we were and
only Sentenced him to run the Gantlet four times through the Party &
that each man with 9 Swichies Should punish him and for him not to be
considered in future as one of the Party

The three principal Chiefs petitioned for Pardin for this man After we
explained the injurey Such men could doe them by false representation,
& explang. the Customs of our Countrey they were all Satisfied with the
propriety of the Sentence & was witness to the punishment. after which
we had Some talk with the Chiefs about the orrigan of the war between
them & the Mahars &c. &c.--it commenced in this way i'e' in two of the
Missouries Tribe resideing with the Ottoes went to the Mahars to Steel
horses, they Killed them both which was a cause of revenge on the part
of the Missouris & Ottoes, they also brought war on themselves Nearly
in the Same way with the Panea Loups and they are greatly in fear of a
just revenge from the Panies for takeing their Corn from the Pania
Towns in their absence hunting this Summer.

the evening was Closed with an extra Gill of Whiskey & a Dance untill
11 oClock.




[Clark, August 19, 1804]
19th of August Sunday 1804 a fine morning wind from the S. E I prepd. a
present from the Chiefs & Warriers, the main Chief Brack fast with us
naked; & beged for a Sun glass.--at 10 oClock we assembled the Cheifs &
Warriers under an Orning and delivered a Speech, explanitary of the One
Sent to this Nation from the Council Bluff, &c. &c.-

Children When we Sent the 4 men to your towns, we expected to See &
Speake with the Mahas by the time you would arrive and to lay the
foundation of a peace between you and them

The Speech of Petieit Villeu Little Thief, If you think right and Can
waite untill all our Warriers Come from the Buffalows hunt, we Can then
tell you who is our men of Consequnce--My fathers always lived with the
father of the B together & we always live with the Big hose-all the men
here are the Suns of Chief and will be glad to get Something from the
hands of their fathers.--My father always directed me to be friendly
with the white people, I have always done So and went often to the
french, give my party pieces of Paper & we will be glad--The names

a Meddel to Car ka pa ha or Crow's head

a Comsi or Cfte. Sar na no ne or Iron Eyes
a Ottoe approves & says he is Brave
Nee Swor un ja Big ax
a Ottoe approves
Star gra hun ja Big blue Eyes
a Ottoe Delivers up his comm
Ne ca sa wa-Black Cat
a Missouris approves the Council & he wants paper for his men at home,
he after wards came & petitioned for his Paper
War-sar sha co-Brave Man
aproves

The Speach of the Big Horse I went to the hunt Buffalow I heard your
word and I returned, I and all my men with me will attend to your
wordsyou want to make peace with all, I want to make peace also, the
young men when they want to go to war where is the goods you give me to
Keep them at home, if you give me Some Whisky to give a Drop to my men
at home.

I came here naked and must return home naked. if I have Something to
give the young men I can prevent their going to war. You want to make
peace with all, It is good we want Something to give my men at home. I
am a pore man, and cant quiet without means, a Spoon ful of your milk
will quiet all.

2nd Speech of the Little Thief I want Mr. Faufon & Mr. La bieche to
make a piece with the Panies Loups. I want William to go & make a piece
with the Loups, he can Speake english & will doe will to go.--refused
that William LaBiech shall accompany Faufon

Those people were not well Satisfied with the Presents given them, they
were much Surprised at the air gun and Several curiosities which were
Shown them none more than the magnet, those people became extreemly
troublesom to us begging Whisky & little articles. Sergt. Floyd was
taken violently bad with the Beliose Cholick and is dangerously ill we
attempt in Vain to releive him, I am much concerned for his Situation-
we could get nothing to Stay on his Stomach a moment nature appear
exosting fast in him every man is attentive to him york prlly




[Clark, August 19, 1804]
19th August Sunday 1804
a find morning wind from the S. E. prepared a Small Present for the
Cheifs and warriers present. the main Cheif Brackfast with us, & beged
for a Sun glass, those People are all naked, Covered only with Breech
Clouts Blankits or Buffalow Roabes, the flesh Side Painted of Differant
Colours & figures. At 10 oClock we assembled the Chiefs & warriers 9 in
number under an orning, and we explained the Speech Sent to the nation
from the Council Bluffs by Mr. Faufon. The 3 Chiefs and all the men or
warriers made Short Speeches approveing the advice & Council their
great father had Sent them, and Concluded by giveing themselves Some
Credit for their acts.

We then brought out the presents and exchanged the Big horses Meadel &
gave him one equal to the one Sent to the Little Thief & gave all Some
Small articls & 8 Carrots of Tobacco, we gave one Small Meadel to one
of the Cheifs & a Sertificate to the others of their good intentions.

     Names

     The Little Theif Grd. Cheif I have mentioned before
     The Big horse
     Crows Head (or) Kar Ka paha--Missory
     Black Cat (or) Ne ma Sa wa--do
     Iron Eyes (or) Sar na no no--Ottoe
     Big ax (or) Nee Swar Un ja--do
     Big Blue Eyes--Star gea Hun ja--do
     Brave Man (or) War Sar Sha co

One of those Indians after reciving his Certificate delivd. it again to
me the Big blue eyes the Chief petitioned for the Ctft. again, we would
not give the Certft. but rebuked them verry roughly for haveing in
object goods and not peace with their neighbours--this language they
did not like at first, but at length all petitioned for us to give back
the Certificate to the Big blu eyes he came forward and made a
plausible excuse, I then gave the Certificate the Great Cheif to bestow
it to the most Worthey, they gave it to him, we then gave them a,Dram
& broke up the Council, the Chiefs requested we would not leave them
this evening. we deturmed to Set out early in the morning we Showed
them many Curiosities and the air gun which they were much asstonished
at. those people beged much for wishey--Serjeant Floyd is taken verry
bad all at one with a Beliose Chorlick we attempt to relieve him
without Success as yet, he gets wordse and we are muc allarmed at his
Situation, all attention to him.




[Clark, August 20, 1804]
20th August Monday after gieving faufon Some goods the Indians a
Canister of whiskey, we Set out under a jentle Breeze from the S. E
Shields went with the horses--I am Dull & heavy been up the greater
Part of last night with Serjt. Floyd, who is as bad as he can be to
live the motion of his bowels having changed &c. &c. is the Cause of
his violent attack &c. &c.

we Came to make a warm bath for Sergt. Floyd hopeing it would brace him
a little, before we could get him in to this bath he expired, with a
great deel of composure, haveing Said to me before his death that he
was going away and wished me to write a letter--we Buried him to the
top of a high round hill over looking the river & Countrey for a great
distance Situated just below a Small river without a name to which we
name & call Floyds river, the Bluffs Sergts. Floyds Bluff-we buried him
with all the honors of War, and fixed a Ceeder post at his head with
his name title & Day of the month and year Capt Lewis read the funeral
Service over him after paying everry respect to the Body of this
desceased man (who had at All times given us proofs of his impatiality
Sincurity to ourselves and good will to Serve his Countrey) we returned
to the Boat & proceeded to the Mouth of the little river 30 yd. wide &
Camped a butifull evening




[Clark, August 20, 1804]
20th August Monday 1804
Sergeant Floyd much weaker and no better. Made Mr. Fauforn the
interpter a fiew presents, and the Indians a Canister of whisky we Set
out under a gentle breeze from the S. E. and proceeded on verry well-
Serjeant Floyd as bad as he can be no pulse & nothing will Stay a
moment on his Stomach or bowels

Passed two Islands on the S. S. and at first Bluff on the S S. Serj.
Floyd Died with a great deel of Composure, before his death he Said to
me, "I am going away. I want you to write me a letter"--We buried him
on the top of the bluff 1/2 Miles below a Small river to which we Gave
his name, he was buried with the Honors of War much lamented; a Seeder
post with the (1) Name Sergt. C. Floyd died here 20th of August 1804
was fixed at the head of his grave--This Man at all times gave us
proofs of his firmness and Deturmined resolution to doe Service to his
Countrey and honor to himself after paying all the honor to our Decesed
brother we Camped in the mouth of floyds river about 30 yards wide, a
butifull evening.-




[Clark, August 21, 1804]
21st August Tuesday we Set out verry early this morning under a Gentle
Breeze from the S. E Course S. 82 deg. E 3 mes to the upper pt. of a Bluff on
the S. S. passed Willow Creek and Some rock below the mouth of the
Seouex river on the Starboard Side those Clifts are about 170 feet
high, this river heads with the St. peters and is navagable 75 Leagues
(by the act. of Mr. Durien) to a fall of near 200 for, 2 large & Som
Small Pitchs below the falls on the right a Creek corns in on which the
red pipe Stone is percured, & in the praries about, a place of Peace
with all nations.




[Clark, August 21, 1804]
21st August Tuesday 1804
We Set out verry early this morning and proceeded on under a gentle
Breeze from the S. E. passed willow creek Small on the S. S. below a
Bluff of about 170 feet high and one 1/2 mes. above Floyds river at
11/2 miles higher & above the Bluff passed the Soues River S. S. this
River is about the Size of Grand river and as Mr. Durrien our Scones
intptr. says "navagable to the falls 70 or 80 Leagues and above these
falls" Still further, those falls are 200 feet or there abouts & has
two princapal pitches, and heads with the St. peters passing the head
of the Demoien, on the right below the falls a Creek Coms in which
passes thro Clifts of red rock which the Indians make pipes of, and
when the different nations Meet at those queries all is piece, passed a
place in a Prarie on the L. S. where the Mahars had a Village formerly.
the Countrey above the Platt R has a great Similarity. Campd. on the L.
Side. Clouds appear to rise in the west & threten wind. I found a verry
excellent froot resembling the read Current, the Scrub on which it
grows resembles Privey & about the Common hight of a wild plumb-

The two men Sent with the horses has not joined us as yet




[Clark, August 22, 1804]
22nd of August Wendesday 1804 Set out early wind from the South. G
Shannon joined the Boat last night. Course this morning is S 47 deg. W. 11/4
on the S. point West 11/4 me. to the Commencement of a Bluff on the L.
S. the High land near the river for Some distance below. This Bluff
contain Pyrites alum, Copperass & a Kind Markesites also a clear Soft
Substance which will mold and become pliant like wax) Capt lewis was
near being Poisened by the Smell in pounding this Substance I belv to
be arsenic or Cabalt. I observe great Quantity of Cops. ans and almin
pure & Straters of white & brown earth of 6 Inch thick. a Creek Corns
in above the Bluffs on which there is great quantities of those
minerals, This Creek I call Roloje a at those Allom banks Shields
joined in with two Deer

Camped on the S. S. a Great Deel of Elk Sign fresh Capt. Lewis took a
Dost of Salts this evening to carry off the effects of (arsenec) or
cobalt which he was trying to find out the real quallity (2) passed a
Clift of Rock much impregnated with alum, Containing also a great
quantity of Cabalt

ordered a Vote of the men for a Sergeant of the three highest numbers a
choice to be made Gass Bratton & Gibson--Gass is worth remark, that my
Ink after Standing in the pot 3 or four days Soaks up & becons thick




[Clark, August 22, 1804]
22nd August Friday 1804
Set out early wind from the South at three miles we landed at a Bluff
where the two men Sent with the horses were waiting with two Deer, by
examonation of this (1) Bluff Contained alum, Copperas, Cobalt,
Pyrites; a alum rock Soft & Sand Stone. Capt. Lewis in proveing the
quality of those minerals was near poisoning himself by the fumes &
tast of the Cabalt which had the appearance of Soft Isonglass--Copperas
& alum is verry pure, Above this Bluff a Small Creek Coms in from the
L. S. passing under the Clifts for Several miles, this Creek I Call
Roloje a name I learned last night in my Sleep. (2) Eight) Seven miles
above is a Clift of Allom Stone of a Dark Brown Colr. Containing also
in crusted in the Crevices & Shelves of the rock great qts. of Cabalt,
Semented Shels & a red earth. from this the (3) river bends to the East
and is within 3 or 4 miles of the River Soues at the place where that
river Coms from the high land into the Low Prarie & passes under the
foot of those Hills to its mouth.

Capt Lewis took a Dost of Salts to work off the effects of the Arsenic,
we Camped on the S. S. Sailed the greater part of this day with a hard
wind from the S. E. great deel of Elk Sign, and great appearance of
wind from the N. W.

ordered a vote for a Serjeant to chuse one of three which may be the
highest number the highest numbers are P. Gass had 19 Votes, Bratten &
Gibson




[Clark, August 23, 1804]
23rd August Thursday 1804 Set out this morning verry early, the two men
R. Fields & Shannon did not Come up last night, I went out and Killed a
fine Buck, J. Fields Killed a Buffaloes, 2 Elk Swam by the boat whilst
I was out and was not Killed, many guns fired at it R. Fields Came up
with the horses & brought two Deer, Collins Killed a Small doe, Several
Prarie wolves Seen Course West 4 Mls. to the mouth of a Small run
between two Bluffs of yellow Clay North 31/4 miles to the upper Pt. of
Some timber in the bend to S. S. near where R. fields Killed the
Buffalow passed the pt. of High Land on S. S at 1/4 of a mile, Capt.
Lewis went out with 8 men & brought the buffalow to the river at this
bend, C. Lewis Killed a Goose, wind blew hard of the flying Sands which
rasies like a Cloud of Smoke from the Bars when the wind Blows, the
Sand being fine and containing a breat perpotion of earth and when it
lights it Sticks to every thing it touches at this time the grass is
white S 48 deg. 3 miles to a point of willows on the S. S. haveing passed the
Sand Island L. S Camped on the L S above the Island Saw an elk Standing
on a Sand bar. Shields Shot it thro the neck 101/4




[Clark, August 23, 1804]
23rd August Thursday 1804
Set out this morning verry early the two men with the horses did not
Come up last night I walked on Shore & Killed a fat Buck--J. Fields
Sent out to hunt Came to the Boat and informed that he had Killed a
Buffalow in the plain a head Cap Lewis took 12 men and had the buffalow
brought to the boat in the next bend to the S S. 2 Elk Swam the river,
and was fired at from the boat R. Fields came up with the Horses and
brought two Deer one Deer Killed from the Boat. Several Prarie Wolves
Seen to day Saw Elk Standing on the Sand bar

The Wind blew hard West and raised the Sands off the bar in Such Clouds
that we Could Scercely See this Sand being fine and verry light Stuck
to every thing it touched, and in the Plain for a half a mile the
distance I was out every Spire of Grass was covered with the Sand or
Dust We Camped on the L. S. above a Sand Island one Beaver Cought




[Clark, August 24, 1804]
24th August Friday 1804. Some rain last night & this morning, we Set
out at the usial time and proceeded on the Same Course of last night
Continued S. 48 deg. W. 21/4 mes. to the Commencement of a Blue Clay Bliff on
LS. about 180 or 190 feet high West under rugged Bluffs 13/4 ms.
passing Several Small Dreens, falling into the river those Bluffs has
been lately on fire and is yet verry Hott, Great appearance of Coal, &
imence quantities of Cabalt in Side of that part oft the Bluff which
Sliped in, on the Sides of the hill great quanities of a kind of
Current or froot resembling the Current in appearance much richer and
finer flavd. grows on a Scrub resembling a Damsen and is now fine and
makes a Delightful) Tart above this Bluff I took my Servent and a
french boy I have and walked on Shore I killed a Deer which york Packed
on his back In the evening I Killed two Buck Elk and wounded two others
which I could not pursue by the Blood as my ball was So Small to bleed
them well, my boys each Shot an elk--it was late and I Crossed a Point
Struck the river above and halted the boat and 12 men went out brought
in the meat all the after part of the day it rained we are all wet.
Capt Lewis and my Self Concluded to visit a High Hill Situated in an
emence Plain three Leagues N. 20 deg. W. from the mouth of White Stone river,
this hill appear to be of a Conic form and by all the different Nations
in this quater is Supposed to be a place of Deavels ors that they are
in human form with remarkable large heads and about 18 inches high;
that they are very watchfull and ar armed with Sharp arrows with which
they can kill at a great distance; they are said to kill all persons
who are so hardy as to attemp to approach the hill; they state that
tradition informs them that many indians have suffered by these little
people and among others that three Maha men fell a sacrefice to their
murceyless fury not meany years since--so much do the Mahas Souix
Ottoes and other neibhbouring nations believe this fable that no
consideration is sufficient to induce them to approach this hill.




[Clark, August 24, 1804]
24th August Friday 1804
Some rain last night, a Continuation this morning; we Set out at the
usial time and proceeded on the Course of last night to the (1)
Commencement of a blue Clay Bluff of 180 or 190 feet high on the L. S.
Those Bluffs appear to have been laterly on fire, and at this time is
too hot for a man to bear his hand in the earth at any debth, gret
appearance of Coal. An emence quantity of Cabalt or a Cristolised
Substance which answers its discription is on the face of the Bluff-
Great quantities of a kind of berry resembling a Current except double
the Sise and Grows on a bush like a Privey, and the Size of a Damsen
deliciously flavoured & makes delitefull Tarts, this froot is now ripe,
I took my Servent and a french boy and Walked on Shore Killed Two Buck
Elks and a faun, and intersepted the Boat and had all the meat
butchered and in by Sun Set at which time it began to rain and rained
hard, Cap Lewis & my Self walk out & got Verry wet, a Cloudey rainey
night,--In my absence the Boat Passed a Small (2) River Called by the
Indians White Stone River. this river is about 30 yards wide and runs
thro a Plain & Prarie in its whole Course In a northerley direction
from the mouth of this Creek in an imence Plain a high Hill is
Situated, and appears of a Conic form and by the different nations of
Indians in this quarter is Suppose to be the residence of Deavels. that
they are in human form with remarkable large heads and about 18 Inches
high, that they are Very watchfull, and are arm'd with Sharp arrows
with which they Can Kill at a great distance; they are Said to Kill all
persons who are So hardy as to attempt to approach the hill; they State
that tradition informs them that many Indians have Suffered by those
little people and among others three Mahar men fell a Sacrefise to
their murceyless fury not many years Since--So much do the Maha, Souis,
Ottoes and other neighbouring nations believe this fable that no
Consideration is Suffecient to induce them to apporach the hill




[Lewis, August 24, 1804]
Friday, August 24th
This day the Chronometer stoped again just after being wound up; I know
not the cause, but fear it procedes from some defect which it is not in
my power to remedy.-




[Clark, August 24, 1804]
(1) About the center of this Sand Island the river of white Stone (as
Called by Mr. Evins Kenvill R.) falls in on the Stard. Side it appear
to be about 25 or 30 yards Wide; at the mouth of this river 10 Indians
had latterly cross Supposed be be Soues, the part of a band which are
at war with the Mahars, This Soues nation are divided into bands Som
100 to 500 men in a band at peace with eath other, ther Interest &
prejudices different, for instance one band the most envetterate enimy
of the mahars, all the other Bands in the greatest harmony with that
nation and even go with thim to War, those Soues, follow the Buffalow,
& Kill them on foot, they pack their Dogs, which carry ther Bedn.




[Clark, August 25, 1804]
Augt. 25th Satturday 1804 This morning Capt Lewis & my Self G D. Sjt.
Ouderway Shields J. Fields colter Bratten Cane Labeeche corp Wovington
Frasure & York Set out to Visit this mountain of evel Spirits, we Set
out from the mouth of the White Stone Creek, at 8 oClock, at 4 miles
Cross the Creek in an open plain, at 7 ms. the dog gave out & we Sent
him back to the Creek at 12 oClock we rose the hill Some time before we
got to the hill we obsevd. great numbers of Birds hovering about the
top of this Mound when I got on the top those Birds flw off. I
discovered that they wer Cetechig a kind of flying ant which were in
great numbers abought the top of this hill, those insects lit on our
hats & necks, Several of them bit me verry Shart on the neck, near the
top of this nole I observed three holes which I Supposed to be Prarie
Wolves or Braroes, which are numerous in those Plains. this hill is
about 70 foot high in an emince Prarie or leavel plain from the top I
could not observe any woods except in the Missourie Points and a few
Scattering trees on the three Rivers in view. i e the Soues River
below, the River Jacque above & the one we have crossed from the top of
this Mound we observed Several large gangus of Buffalow & Elk feeding
upwards of 800 in number Capt Lewis being much fatigued and verry
thursty obliged us to go to the neares water which we Could See, which
was the W Stone Creek at right angles from the Course we came out, and
we got water in three miles in the Creek above whre the beaver had
darned it up after a Delay of about one hour & a half we Set out for
our boat, Cross the Creek three times wast deep, passing down an
ellgent bottom of about a mile in width bordered by a ridge of about 50
feet from the top of which it was leavel to the river, we proceeded on
by a Circular Derection to the place we Crossed this Creek going out
where we delayed for the men to rest themselves about 40 minits in a
small grove here we got Great quantities of the best largest grapes I
ever tasted, Some Blue Currents still on the bushes, and two kind of
Plumbs, one the Common wild Plumb the other a large Yellow Plumb
growing on a Small bush, this blumb is about double the Size of the
Common and Deliscously flavoured--Those plains are leavel without much
water and no timber all the timber on the Stone River would not thickly
timber 100 acres of land--we returned to the boat at Sunset, my Servent
nearly exosted with heat thurst and fatigue, he being fat and un
accustomed to walk as fast as I went was the Cause--we Set fire to the
Praries in two Places to let the Sons know we were on the river and as
a Signal for them to Come to the river above, our Party in the Boat &
one Perogue undr. the Comd of Sergt. Pryor answered us by firing a
prarie near them. we proceeded on to the place we Camped last night,
and as it began to rain and verry dark, we Concluded to Stay all night,
our boys prepared us a Supper of jurked meet and two Prarie Larks
(which are about the Size of a Pigeon and Peculier to this country) and
on a Buffalow roabe we Slept verry well in the morning we proceeded on
and joined the boat at 6 miles, they had camped & were Jurking an Elk &
5 Deer which R. Fields & Shannon had brough in. from the Mound to the
Hill S. S. mo. of R. Soues S 70 deg. E. to the opsd. Hills S. 45 deg. E. and to the
woods near River au Jacque is West




[Clark, August 25, 1804]
Augt. 25th Satturday wind S E The Boat under Serjt Pryor after drying
some goods which got wet in the french Perogue & jurking the meet
killed yesterday Set out at 12 oClock and proceeded on Six miles and
Camped on the L. S. passed a Bluff of blue earth at 3 miles and a large
Sand Island in a bend to the S. S. at 5 miles, R Fields brought in 5
Deer, G Shannon an Elk this eveng. rain at 3 oClock Murcky. 86 abo 0,




[Clark, August 25, 1804]
25th August Satturday 1804
a Cloudy morning Capt Lewis & my Self Concluded to go and See the Mound
which was viewed with Such turrow by all the different Nation in this
quarter, we Selected Shields J. Fields, W Bratten, Sergt. Ordway, J
Colter, Can, and Corp Worbington & Frasure, also G. Drewyer and droped
down to the mouth of White Stone River where we left the Perogue with
two men and at 200 yards we assended a riseing ground of about Sixty
feet, from the top of this High land the Countrey is leavel & open as
far as Can be Seen, except Some few rises at a Great Distance, and the
Mound which the Indians Call Mountain of little people or Spirits this
mound appears of a Conic form & is N. 20 deg. W. from the mouth of the Creek,
we left the river at 8 oClock, at 4 miles we Crossed the Creek 23 yards
wide in an extensive Valley and continued on at two miles further our
Dog was So Heeted & fatigued we was obliged Send him back to the Creek,
at 12 oClock we arrived at the hill Capt Lewis much fatigued from heat
the day it being verry hot & he being in a debilitated State from the
Precautions he was obliged to take to provent the affects of the
Cobalt, & Mini. Substance which had like to have poisoned him two days
ago, his want of water, and Several of the men complaining of Great
thirst, deturmined us to make for the first water which was the Creek
in a bend N. E. from the mound about 3 miles--aftr a Delay of about 1
hour & a half to recrut our party we Set out on our return down the
Creek thro the bottom of about 1 mile in width, Crossed the Creek 3
times to the place we first Struck it, where we geathered Some
delisious froot Such as Grapes Plumbs, & Blue Currents after a Delay of
an hour we Set out on our back trail & arrived at the Perogue at Sun
Set we proceedd on to the place we Campd. last night and Stayed all
night.

This Mound is Situated on an elivated plain in a leavel and extensive
prarie, bearing N. 20 deg. W. from the mouth of White Stone Creek Nine Miles,
the base of the Mound is a regular parallelagram the long Side of which
is about 300 yards in length the Shorter 60 or 70 yards--from the
longer Side of the Base it rises from the North & South with a Steep
assent to the hight of 65 or 70 feet, leaveing a leavel Plain on the
top of 12 feet in width & 90 in length. the North & South part of this
mound is joins by two regular rises, each in Oval forms of half its
hight forming three regular rises from the Plain the assent of each
elivated part is as Suden as the principal mound at the narrower Sides
of its Bass

The reagular form of this hill would in Some measure justify a belief
that it owed its Orrigin to the hand of man; but as the earth and loos
pebbles and other Substances of which it was Composed, bare an exact
resemblance to the Steep Ground which border on the Creek in its
neighbourhood we Concluded it was most probably the production of
nature-.

The only remarkable Charactoristic of this hill admiting it to be a
naturial production is that it is insulated or Seperated a considerable
distance from any other, which is verry unusial in the naturul order or
disposition of the hills.

The Surrounding Plains is open void of Timber and leavel to a great
extent; hence the wind from whatever quarter it may blow, drives with
unusial force over the naked Plains and against this hill; the insects
of various kinds are thus involuntaryly driven to the mound by the
force of the wind, or fly to its Leward Side for Shelter; the Small
Birds whoes food they are, Consequently resort in great numbers to this
place in Surch of them; Perticularly the Small brown Martin of which we
saw a vast number hovering on the Leward Side of the hill, when we
approached it in the act of Catching those insects; they were So gentle
that they did not quit the place untill we had arrivd. within a fiew
feet of them-

One evidence which the Inds Give for believeing this place to be the
residence of Some unusial Spirits is that they frequently discover a
large assemblage of Birds about this mound--is in my opinion a Suffient
proof to produce in the Savage mind a Confident belief of all the
properties which they ascribe it.

from the top of this Mound we beheld a most butifull landscape;
Numerous herds of buffalow were Seen feeding in various directions, the
Plain to North N. W & N E extends without interuption as far as Can be
Seen From the Mound to the mouth of Stone River is S. 20 deg. E 9 miles.

to the woods near the mouth of River Jacque is West

to the High land near the mouth of Souis River is S. 70 E.

to the high land opposit Side or near the Maha Town is S. 45 E.

Some high lands to be Seen from the mound at a Great distance to the N.
E Some Nearer to the N W. no woods except on the Missouris Points

if all the timber which is on the Stone Creek was on 100 acres it would
not be thickly timbered, the Soil of those Plains are delightfull Great
numbers of Birds are Seen in those Plains, Such as black bird, Ren or
Prarie burd a kind of larke about the Sise of a Partridge with a Short
tail &c. &.

25th Augt the Boat under the Comd. of Sergt. Pryor proceeded on in our
absence (after jurking the Elk I Killed yesterday) Six Miles and Camped
on the Larboard Side R Fields brought in five Deer. George Shannon
Killed an Elk Buck Some rain this evening.

we Set the Praries on fire as a Signal for the Soues to Come to the
river.




[Lewis, August 25, 1804]
August the 25th
on our return from the mound of sperits saw the first bats that we had
observed since we began to ascend the Missouri

also saw on our return on the Creek that passes this mound about 2 M.
distant S. a bird of heron kind as large as the Cormorant short tale
long leggs of a colour on the back and wings deep copper brown with a
shade of red. we could not kill it therefore I can not describe it more
particularly.




[Clark, August 26, 1804]
26th August Sunday 1804 arrived at the boat at 9 oClock A.M. Set out at
10 oClock after Jurking the meet & Cutting the Elk Skins for a Toe Roap
and proceeded, leaveing G. Drewyer & Shannon to hunt the horses, the
river verry full of Sand bars and Wide Course S. 66 deg. W. 2 mes. to a Sand
bar Makeing out from the S. S. N. 82 deg. W. 7 mes. to a pt. of willows S S
passd. a Island & large Sand bars on both sides river wide and a Clift
of White earth on the L. S of 2 ms. in length to a point of Willows on
the S. S opposit Arch Creek above the mouth of this Creek a Chief of
the Maha nataton displeased with the Conduct of Black bird the main
Chief came to this place and built a Town which was called by his name
Petite Arch (or Little Bow) this Town was at the foot of a Hill in a
handsom Plain fronting the river and Contained about 100 huts & 200
men, the remains of this tribe Since the Death of Petite arch has
joined the remaining part of the nation This Creek is Small--we apt.
Pat Gass Sergeant Vice Floyd Dicesed, Geathered great quantites of
Grapes & three Kinds of Plumbs, one yellow round, & one ovel, & the
Common wild Plumb. Misquetors bad to night--I have apt. you




[Clark, August 26, 1804]
26th August Sunday 1804
(Joined the Boat at 9 oClock A M) after Jurking the meat Killed
yesterday and prepareing the Elk Skins for a Toe Roape we Set out
Leaveing Drewyer & Shannon to hunt the horses which was lost with
directions to follow us Keeping on the high lands.

proceeded on passed a Clift of White & Blue or Dark earths of 2 miles
in extent on the L. S. and Camped on a Sand bar opposed the old village
Called Pitite Arc a Small Creek falls into the river 15 yds wide below
the Village on the Same Side L. S this village was built by a Indian
Chief of the Maha nation by the name of Pitite arc (or little Bow)
displeasd. with the Great Chief of that nation (Black Bird) Seperated
with 200 men and built a village at this place. after his death the two
villages joined, apt. Pat Gass a Sergt. Vice Floyd Deceased

Great qts. of Grape, Plumbs of three Kinds 2 yellow and large of one of
which is long and a 3rd kind round & red all well flavored.
perticularly the yellow Sort.




[Lewis, August 26, 1804]
Orders August 26th 1804.
The commanding officers have thought it proper to appoint Patric Gass,
a Sergeant in the corps of volunteers for North Western Discovery, he
is therefore to be obeyed and respected accordingly.

Sergt. Gass is directed to take charge of the late Sergt. Floyd's mess,
and immediately to enter on the discharge of such other duties, as by
their previous orders been prescribed for the government of the
Sergeants of this corps.

The Commanding officers have every reason to hope from the previous
faithfull services of Sergt. Gass, that this expression of their
approbation will be still further confirmed, by his vigilent attention
in future to his duties as a Sergeant. the Commanding officers are
still further confirmed in the high opinion they had previously formed
of the capacity, deligence and integrety of Sergt. Gass, from the wish
expresssed by a large majority of his comrades for his appointment as
Sergeant.

Meriwether Lewis
Capt. 1st U.S. Regt Infty.
Wm Clark
Cpt &.




[Clark, August 27, 1804]
27th August Monday, this morning the Morning Star was observed to be
very large, G Drewyer Came up and informed that he Could neither find
Shannon or the horses, he had walked all night--we Sent Shields & J.
Fields back to look for Shannon & the horses and to Come up with us on
the river above at the grand Callemet or River KaCure & we Set out
under a Gentle Breeze from the S. E. proceeded on passed a Bluff at 7
mes. Several mile in extent of white Clay Marl or Chalk, under this
bank we discovered Large Stone resembling lime incrusted with a
Substanc like Glass which I take to be Cabolt, also ore, three mes
above this Bluff we Set the Prarie on fire, to let the Soues Know, we
wished to see them at two oClock an Indian Swam to the Perogue, we
landed & two other Came they were boys, they informed us that the Souex
were Camped near, on the R Jacke one Maha boy informed us his nation
was gorn to make a peace with the Pania's we Send Sjt. Pryor & a
frenchman with the Interptr. Mr. Durion to the Camp to See & invite
their Great Chiefs to Come and Counsel with us at the Callemet Bluffs
____ Mile abov on L. S.--we proceed on 11/2 miles farther & Camped S S.




[Clark, August 27, 1804]
27th August Monday 1804
This morning the Star Calld. the morning Star much larger than Common
G. Drewyer Came up and informed that he Could neither find Shannon nor
horses, we Sent Shields & J Fields, back to hunt Shannon & the horses,
with derections to Keep on the Hills to the Grand Calumet above on
River Ka cure.

We Set Sail under a gentle Breeze from the S. E. at 7 miles passed a
white Clay marl or Chalk Bluff under this Bluff is extensive I
discovered large Stone much like lime incrusted with a Clear Substance
which I believe to be Cabalt, also ore is imbeded in the Dark earth,
resembling Slate much Softer--above this Bluff we had the Prarie Set on
fire to let the Souix See that we were on the river, & as a Signal for
them to Come to it.

at 2 oClock passed the mouth of River Jacque, or Yeankton one Indian at
the mouth of this river Swam to the Perogue, we landed and two others
came to us, those Inds. informed that a large Camp of Soues, were on R.
Jacque near the mouth. we Sent Sergt. Pryor & a Frenchman with Mr.
Durioin the Souls interpeter to the Camp with derections to invite the
Principal Chiefs to councel with us at a Bluff above Called the
Calumet--two of those Indians accompanied them and the third continued
in the Boat Showing an inclination to Continue, this boy is a Mahar,
and inform that his nation, were gorn to the Parnias to make a peace
with that nation.

We proceeded on about one and a half miles and in Camped on a bar
makeing out from the S. S. the wind blew hard from the South. a Cool &
Pleasent evening, The river has fallen verry Slowly and is now low.




[Lewis, August 27, 1804]
Monday August 27th
On the Stard. shore, opposite to the lower point, or commencement of
the white Calk Bluff-




[Clark, August 28, 1804]
28th August Tuesday, 1804 The wind blew hard last night one Indian
Stayed with us all night, Set out under a Stiff Breeze from S and
proceedd on passe a Willow Island at two miles Several Sand bars the
river here is wide & Shallow full of Sand bars--The High land appear to
be getting nearer to each other passed a Bluff containing Some white
earth on the L. S. below this Bluff for Some mile the Plain rises
gradually to the hight of the Bluff which is 70 or 80 foot, here the
Indian boy left us for his Camp--Capt Lewis & my Self much indisposed-
I think from the Homney we Substitute in place of bread, (or Plumbs) we
proceeded on about 3 Miles higher and Camped below the Calumet Bluff in
a Plain on the L. S. to waite the return of Sergt Pryor & Mr. Durioun,
who we Sent to the Soues Camp from the mouth of R. Jacque, before we
landed the French rund a Snag thro their Perogue, and like to have
Sunk, we had her on loaded, from an examonation found that this Perogue
was unfit for Service, & Deturmined to Send her back by the Party
intended to Send back and take their Perogue, accordingly Changed the
loads, Some of the loading was wet wind blows hard from the South. J
Shields & J. Fields joined they did not overtake Shannon with the
horses who is a head of us.




[Clark, August 28, 1804]
28th August Tuesday 1804.
Set out under a Stiff Breeze from the South and proceeded on passd. a
willow Island at 2 miles Several Sand bars, the river wide & Shallow at
4 Miles passed a Short White Bluff of about 70 or 80 feet high, below
this Bluff the Prarie rises gradually from the water back to the Hight
of the Bluff which is on the Larboard Side here the Indian who was in
the boat returned to the Sisouex Camp on the R Jacque, Capt. Lewis & my
Self much indisposed owing to Some Cause for which we cannot account
one of the Perogues run a Snag thro her and was near Sinking in the
opinions of the Crew--we came too below the Calumet Bluff and formed a
camp in a Butifull Plain near the foot of the high land which rises
with a gradual assent near this Bluff I observe more timber in the
valey & on the points than usial--The Perogue which was injurd I had
unloaded and the Loading put into the other Perogue which we intended
to Send back, the Perogue & changed the Crew after examoning her &
finding that She was unfit for Service deturmined to Send her back by
the party Some load which was in the Perogue much inju'd

The wind blew hard this after noon from the South--J. Shields & J.
Fields who was Sent back to look for Shannon & the Horses joined us &
informed that Shannon had the horses a head and that they Could not
over take him This man not being a first rate Hunter, we deturmined to
Send one man in pursute of him with Some Provisions.-




[Lewis, August 28, 1804]
Orders August 28th 1804.
The commanding officers direct that the two messes who form the crews
of the perogues shall scelect each one man from their mess for the
purpose of cooking and that these cooks as well as those previously
appointed to the messes of the Barge crew, shall in future be exempted
from mounting guard, or any detail for that duty; they are therefore no
longer to be held on the royaster.

M. Lewis Capt.
1st US. Regt. Infty.
Win Clark Cpt. &.




[Clark, August 29, 1804]
29th August Wednesday 1804--rained last night and Some this morning
verry cloudy Set Some men to work to make a Toe rope of Elk Skin, and
my Self to write, Sent one man to pursue Shannon a head with Some
provisions, I am much engaged writeing a Speech at 4 oClock Sergt.
Pryor & Mr. Durion the Soues interpeter with about 70 Soues arrived on
the opposit Side of the river we Sent over for them, who came over Mr.
D. & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over Mr. Durion
informed that three Chiefs were of the Party, we Sent over Serjt. Pryor
with young Mr. Durion, Six Kettles for the Indians to Cook the meat
they Killed on the way from their Camp (2 Elk & 6 Deer) a bout a bucket
of Corn & 2 twists of Tobacco to Smoke intending to Speak to them
tomorrow--G. Drewyer Killed a Deer-. Sergt. Pryor informs that when he
approached the Indian Camp they Came to meet them Supposeing Cap Lewis
or my Self to be of the party intending to take us in a roabe to their
Camp-he approached the Camp which was handsum made of Buffalow Skins
Painted different Colour, their Camps formed of a Conic form Containing
about 12 or 15 persons each and 40 in number, on the River Jacque of
100 yds wide & Deep Containing but little wood, They had a fat dog
Cooked as a feest; for them, and a Snug aptmt for them to lodge on
their march they passed thro plains Covd. with game &. &. &.




[Clark, August 29, 1804]
29th August Wednesday 1804
Some rain last night & this morning, Sent on Colter with Provisions in
pursute of Shannon, had a Toe roap made of Elk Skin, I am much engaged
reriteing--at 4 oClock P M. Sergt. Pryor & Mr. Dorion with 5 Chiefs and
about 70 men &c. arrived on the opposite Side we Sent over a Perogue &
Mr. Dorrion & his Son who was tradeing with the Indians Came over with
Serjt Pryer, and informed us that the Chiefs were there we Sent Serjt.
Pryor & yound Mr. Dorion with Som Tobacco, Corn & a few Kitties for
them to Cook in, with directions to inform the Chiefs that we would
Speek to them tomorrow. Those Indians brought with them for their own
use 2 Elk & 6 Deer which the young men Killed on the way from their
Camp 12 miles distant.

Serjt. Pryor informs me that when Came near the Indian Camp they were
met by men with a Buffalow roabe to Carry them, Mr. Dorion informed
"they were not the Owners of the Boats & did not wish to be Carried"-
the Sceouex Camps are handson of a Conic form Covered with Buffalow
Roabs Painted different Colours and all Compact & hand Somly arranged,
covered all round an orpen part in the Center for the fire, with
Buffalow roabs each Lodg has a place for Cooking detached, the lodges
contain 10 to 15 persons--a Fat Dog was presented as a mark of their
Great respect for the party of which they partook hartily and thought
it good & well flavored

The River Jacque is Deep & is navagable for Perogues a long distance up
at the mouth it is Shallow & narrow but above it is 80 or 90 yards wide
passing thro rich Praries with but little timber this river passes the
Souex River and heads with the St Peters and a branch of Red river
which which falls into Lake Winepik to the North




[Clark, August 30, 1804]
30th August Thursday 1804 A Foggeie morning I am much engagd. after
Brackfast we sent Mr. Doroun in a Perogue to the other Side i'e L S.
for the Chiefs and warriers of the Soues, he returned at 10 oClock with
the Chiefs, at 12 oClock I finished and we delivered a Speech to the
Indians expressive of the wishes of our government and explaining of
what would be good for themselves, after delivering the Speech we made
one grand Chief 1 2d Cheif and three third Chiefs and deliverd. to each
a few articles and a Small present to the whole the grand Chief a
Parole, Some wampom & a flag in addition to his present, they with Drew
and we retired to dinner, Mr. Durions Sun much displeased that he could
not dine with Cap Lewis and my Self--the number of Soues present is
about 70 men--Dressed in Buffalow roabes a fiew fusees, Bows and
arrows, and verry much deckerated with porcupine quills, a Society of
which only four remains is present, this Society has made a vow never
to giv back let what will happen, out of 22 only 4 remains, those are
Stout likely men who Stay by them Selves, fond of mirth and assume a
degree of Superiority-, the air gun astonished them verry much after
night a circle was forrm around 3 fires and those Indians danced untill
late, the Chiefs looked on with great dignity much pleased with what
they had, we retired late and went to bead. wind hard from the South.




[Clark, August 30, 1804]
30th of August Thursday 1804
a verry thick fog this morning after Prepareing Some presents for the
Chiefs which we intended make by giving Meadals, and finishing a Speech
what we intend'd to give them, we Sent Mr. Dorion in a Perogue for the
Chiefs & warreirs to a Council under an Oak tree near wher we had a
flag flying on a high flag Staff at 12 OClock we met and Cap L.
Delivered the Speach & thin made one great Chiff by giving him a meadal
& Some Cloathes one 2d. Chief & three third Chiefs in the Same way,
They recvd. those thing with the goods and tobacco with pleasure To the
Grand Chief we gave a Flag and the parole & wampom with a hat & Chiefs
Coat, we Smoked out of the pipe of peace, & the Chiefs retired to a
Bourey made of bushes by their young men to Divide their presents and
Smoke eate and Council Capt Lewis & my Self retired to dinner and
Consult about other measures--Mr. Daurion Jr. much displeased that we
did not invite him to dine with us (which he was Sorry for after
wards)--The Souix is a Stout bold looking people, (the young men hand
Som) & well made, the greater part of them make use of Bows & arrows,
Some fiew fusees I observe among them, not with Standing they live by
the Bow & arrow, they do not Shoot So well as the Northern Indians the
Warriers are Verry much deckerated with Paint Porcupin quils &
feathers, large leagins & mockersons, all with buffalow roabs of
Different Colours. the Squars wore Peticoats & and a white Buffalow
roabes with the black hair turned back over their necks & Sholders

I will here remark a Society which I had never before this day heard
was in any nation of Indians--four of which is at this time present and
all who remain of this Band--Those who become members of this Society
must be brave active young men who take a Vow never to give back let
the danger be what it may; in War Parties they always go foward without
Screening themselves behind trees or any thing else to this Vow they
Strictly adheer dureing their Lives--an instanc which happened not long
Since, on a party in Crossing the R Missourie on the ice, a whole was
in the ice imediately in their Course which might easily have been
avoided by going around, the foremost man went on and was lost the
others wer draged around by the party--in a battle with the Crow
Indians who inhabit the Coul Noir or black mountain out of 22 of this
society 18 was Killed, the remaining four was draged off by their Party
Those men are likely fellows the Sit together Camp & Dance together-
This Society is in imitation of the Societies of the de Curbo or Crow
Indians from whome they imitate-




[Clark, August 31, 1804]
31st of August Friday rose early a fair Day--a curioes Society among
this nation worthey of remark, ie, formed of their active deturmined
young men, with a vow never to give back, let the danger or deficuelty
be what it may, in war parties they always go forward, without
Screening themselves behind trees or anything else, to this vow they
Strictly adheer dureing their Lives, an Instance of it, is last winter
on a march in Crossing the Missourei a hole was in the ice immediately
in their Course which might easily be avoided by going around, the fore
most man went on and was drowned, the others were caught by their party
and draged aroundin a battle with the Crow de Curbo Indians out of 22
of this Society 18 was killed, the remaining four was draged off by
their friends, and are now here--they assocate together Camp together
and are merry fellows, This Custom the Souex learned of the de Carbours
inhabiting the Gout Noie or Black mountain all the Chiefs Delivered a
Speech agreeing to what we Said &. &. & beged which I answered from my
notes. We made or gav a certificate to two Brave men the attendants of
the Great Chief gave them Some tobacco and prepared a Commission for
Mr. Darion to make a peace with all the nations in the neighbourhood,
Mahas, Porncases, Panic, Loups, Ottoes and Missouries--& to take to the
President Some of the Gt Chiefs of each nations who would accompany him
allso to do certain other things, and wrot Instructions--gave him a
flag and Some Cloaths--the Chiefs Sent all their young men home, and
they Stayed for Mr. Dorion--in the evening late we gave the Comsn. &
Instruction to Mr. Durion & he recved them with pleasa, & promised to
do all which was necessary. I took a Vocabulary of the Seouex language,
and a fiew answers to Some queries I put to Mr. Pitte Dorion respecting
the War No. Situation Trad &c. &. of that people which is divided into
20 tribes possessing Sepperate interest they are numerous between 2 &
3000 men, divided into 20 tribes who view their interests as defferent
Some bands at War with Nations which other bands are at peace--This
nation call themselves-Dar co tar. The french call them Souex Their
language is not perculiar to themselves as has been Stated, a great
many words is the Same with the Mahas, Ponckais, Osarge, Kanzies &c.
Clearly proves to me those people had the Same Oregean--this nations
inhabit the red river of Hudson bay St. Peters Missippi, Demoin R.
Jacque & on the Missourie they are at War with 20 nations, and at piece
with 8 only--they recved their trade from the British except a few on
the Missourie they furnish Beaver Martain Loues orter, Pekon Bear and
Deer and have forty Traders at least among them. The names of the
Different bands of this nation are-

1st Che the ree or Bois ruley (the present band) Inhabit the Souex
Jacque & Demoin Rivers

2nd Ho in de bor to or poles. They live on the head of the Suouex River

3rd Me ma car jo (or make fence on the river.) the Country near the Big
bend of the Missouri.

4th Son on to ton (People of the Prarie) they rove North of the
Missourie in the Praries above.

5th Wau pa Coo do (Beeds) they live near the Prarie de Chaine on the
