dislocated his ankle and had several of his ribs broken. His
companions, however, were able to bear him off in safety.

The Highlanders next morning sought for their prisoners with great
activity. An old gentleman told the author he remembered seeing the
commandant Stewart

    Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste,

riding furiously through the country in quest of the fugitives.

NOTE 3, p. 28

To go out, or to have been out, in Scotland was a conventional phrase
similar to that of the Irish respecting a man having been up, both
having reference to an individual who had been engaged in insurrection.
It was accounted ill-breeding in Scotland about forty years since to
use the phrase rebellion or rebel, which might be interpreted by some
of the parties present as a personal insult. It was also esteemed more
polite, even for stanch Whigs, to denominate Charles Edward the
Chevalier than to speak of him as the Pretender; and this kind of
accommodating courtesy was usually observed in society where
individuals of each party mixed on friendly terms.

NOTE 4, p. 38

The Jacobite sentiments were general among the western counties and in
Wales. But although the great families of the Wynnes, the Wyndhams, and
others had come under an actual obligation to join Prince Charles if he
should land, they had done so under the express stipulation that he
should be assisted by an auxiliary army of French, without which they
foresaw the enterprise would be desperate. Wishing well to his cause,
therefore, and watching an opportunity to join him, they did not,
nevertheless, think themselves bound in honour to do so, as he was only
supported by a body of wild mountaineers, speaking an uncouth dialect,
and wearing a singular dress. The race up to Derby struck them with
more dread than admiration. But it is difficult to say what the effect
might have been had either the battle of Preston or Falkirk been fought
and won during the advance into England.

NOTE 5, p. 43

Divisions early showed themselves in the Chevalier's little army, not
only amongst the independent chieftains, who were far too proud to
brook subjection to each other, but betwixt the Scotch and Charles's
governor O'Sullivan, an Irishman by birth, who, with some of his
countrymen bred in the Irish Brigade in the service of the King of
France, had an influence with the Adventurer much resented by the
Highlanders, who were sensible that their own clans made the chief or
rather the only strength of his enterprise. There was a feud, also,
between Lord George Murray and John Murray of Broughton, the Prince's
secretary, whose disunion greatly embarrassed the affairs of the
Adventurer. In general, a thousand different pretensions divided their
little army, and finally contributed in no small degree to its
overthrow.

NOTE 6, p. 78

This circumstance, which is historical, as well as the description that
precedes it, will remind the reader of the war of La Vendee, in which
the royalists, consisting chiefly of insurgent peasantry, attached a
prodigious and even superstitious interest to the possession of a piece
of brass ordnance, which they called Marie Jeanne.

The Highlanders of an early period were afraid of cannon, with the
noise and effect of which they were totally unacquainted. It was by
means of three or four small pieces of artillery that the Earls of
Huntly and Errol, in James VI's time, gained a great victory at
Glenlivat, over a numerous Highland army, commanded by the Earl of
Argyle. At the battle of the Bridge of Dee, General Middleton obtained
by his artillery a similar success, the Highlanders not being able to
stand the discharge of Musket's Mother, which was the name they
bestowed on great guns. In an old ballad on the battle of the Bridge of
Dee these verses occur:--

       The Highlandmen are pretty men
         For handling sword and shield,
       But yet they are but simple men
         To stand a stricken field.

        The Highlandmen are pretty men
          For target and claymore,
        But yet they are but naked men
          To face the cannon's roar.

        For the cannons roar on a summer night
          Like thunder in the air;
        Was never man in Highland garb
          Would face the cannon fair

But the Highlanders of 1745 had got far beyond the simplicity of their
forefathers, and showed throughout the whole war how little they
dreaded artillery, although the common people still attached some
consequence to the possession of the field-piece which led to this
disquisition.

NOTE 7, p. 93

The faithful friend who pointed out the pass by which the Highlanders
moved from Tranent to Seaton was Robert Anderson, junior, of Whitburgh,
a gentleman of property in East Lothian. He had been interrogated by
the Lord George Murray concerning the possibility of crossing the
uncouth and marshy piece of ground which divided the armies, and which
he described as impracticable. When dismissed, he recollected that
there was a circuitous path leading eastward through the marsh into the
plain, by which the Highlanders might turn the flank of Sir John Cope's
position without being exposed to the enemy's fire. Having mentioned
his opinion to Mr. Hepburn of Keith, who instantly saw its importance,
he was encouraged by that gentleman to awake Lord George Murray and
communicate the idea to him. Lord George received the information with
grateful thanks, and instantly awakened Prince Charles, who was
sleeping in the field with a bunch of pease under his head. The
Adventurer received with alacrity the news that there was a possibility
of bringing an excellently provided army to a decisive battle with his
own irregular forces. His joy on the occasion was not very consistent
with the charge of cowardice brought against him by Chevalier
Johnstone, a discontented follower, whose Memoirs possess at least as
much of a romantic as a historical character. Even by the account of
the Chevalier himself, the Prince was at the head of the second line of
the Highland army during the battle, of which he says, 'It was gained
with such rapidity that in the second line, where I was still by the
side of the Prince, we saw no other enemy than those who were lying on
the ground killed and wounded, though we were not more than fifty paces
behind our first line, running always as fast as we could to overtake
them.'

This passage in the Chevalier's Memoirs places the Prince within fifty
paces of the heat of the battle, a position which would never have been
the choice of one unwilling to take a share of its dangers. Indeed,
unless the chiefs had complied with the young Adventurer's proposal to
lead the van in person, it does not appear that he could have been
deeper in the action.

NOTE 8, p. 100

The death of this good Christian and gallant man is thus given by his
affectionate biographer, Doctor Doddridge, from the evidence of
eye-witnesses:--

'He continued all night under arms, wrapped up in his cloak, and
generally sheltered under a rick of barley which happened to be in the
field. About three in the morning he called his domestic servants to
him, of which there were four in waiting. He dismissed three of them
with most affectionate Christian advice, and such solemn charges
relating to the performance of their duty, and the care of their souls,
as seemed plainly to intimate that he apprehended it was at least very
probable he was taking his last farewell of them. There is great reason
to believe that he spent the little remainder of the time, which could
not be much above an hour, in those devout exercises of soul which had
been so long habitual to him, and to which so many circumstances did
then concur to call him. The army was alarmed by break of day by the
noise of the rebels' approach, and the attack was made before sunrise,
yet when it was light enough to discern what passed. As soon as the
enemy came within gun-shot they made a furious fire; and it is said
that the dragoons which constituted the left wing immediately fled. The
Colonel at the beginning of the onset, which in the whole lasted but a
few minutes, received a wound by a bullet in his left breast, which
made him give a sudden spring in his saddle; upon which his servant,
who led the horse, would have persuaded him to retreat, but he said it
was only a wound in the flesh, and fought on, though he presently after
received a shot in his right thigh. In the mean time, it was discerned
that some of the enemy fell by him, and particularly one man who had
made him a treacherous visit but a few days before, with great
professions of zeal for the present establishment.

'Events of this kind pass in less time than the description of them can
be written, or than it can be read. The Colonel was for a few moments
supported by his men, and particularly by that worthy person
Lieutenant-Colonel Whitney, who was shot through the arm here, and a
few months after fell nobly at the battle of Falkirk, and by Lieutenant
West, a man of distinguished bravery, as also by about fifteen
dragoons, who stood by him to the last. But after a faint fire, the
regiment in general was seized with a panic; and though their Colonel
and some other gallant officers did what they could to rally them once
or twice, they at last took a precipitate flight. And just in the
moment when Colonel Gardiner seemed to be making a pause to deliberate
what duty required him to do in such circumstances, an accident
happened, which must, I think, in the judgment of every worthy and
generous man, be allowed a sufficient apology for exposing his life to
so great hazard, when his regiment had left him. He saw a party of the
foot, who were then bravely fighting near him, and whom he was ordered
to support, had no officer to head them; upon which he said eagerly, in
the hearing of the person from whom I had this account, "These brave
fellows will be cut to pieces for want of a commander," or words to
that effect; which while he was speaking he rode up to them and cried
out, "Fire on, my lads, and fear nothing." But just as the words were
out of his mouth, a Highlander advanced towards him with a scythe
fastened to a long pole, with which he gave him so dreadful a wound on
his right arm, that his sword dropped out of his hand; and at the same
time several others coming about him while he was thus dreadfully
entangled with that cruel weapon, he was dragged off from his horse.
The moment he fell, another Highlander, who, if the king's evidence at
Carlisle may be credited (as I know not why they should not, though the
unhappy creature died denying it), was one Mac-Naught, who was executed
about a year after, gave him a stroke either with a broadsword or a
Lochaber-axe (for my informant could not exactly distinguish) on the
hinder part of his head, which was the mortal blow. All that his
faithful attendant saw farther at this time was that, as his hat was
fallen off, he took it in his left hand and waved it as a signal to him
to retreat, and added, what were the last words he ever heard him
speak, "Take care of yourself"; upon which the servant retired.'--Some
Remarkable Passages in the Life of Colonel James Gardiner. By P.
Doddridge, D.D. London, 1747, P.187.

I may remark on this extract, that it confirms the account given in the
text of the resistance offered by some of the English infantry.
Surprised by a force of a peculiar and unusual description, their
opposition could not be long or formidable, especially as they were
deserted by the cavalry, and those who undertook to manage the
artillery. But, although the affair was soon decided, I have always
understood that many of the infantry showed an inclination to do their
duty.

NOTE 9, p. 101

It is scarcely necessary to say that the character of this brutal young
Laird is entirely imaginary. A gentleman, however, who resembled
Balmawhapple in the article of courage only, fell at Preston in the
manner described. A Perthshire gentleman of high honour and
respectability, one of the handful of cavalry who followed the fortunes
of Charles Edward, pursued the fugitive dragoons almost alone till near
Saint Clement's Wells, where the efforts of some of the officers had
prevailed on a few of them to make a momentary stand. Perceiving at
this moment that they were pursued by only one man and a couple of
servants, they turned upon him and cut him down with their swords. I
remember when a child, sitting on his grave, where the grass long grew
rank and green, distinguishing it from the rest of the field. A female
of the family then residing at Saint Clement's Wells used to tell me
the tragedy, of which she had been an eye-witness, and showed me in
evidence one of the silver clasps of the unfortunate gentleman's
waistcoat.

NOTE 10, p. 118

The name of Andrea de Ferrara is inscribed on all the Scottish
broadswords which are accounted of peculiar excellence. Who this artist
was, what were his fortunes, and when he flourished, have hitherto
defied the research of antiquaries; only it is in general believed that
Andrea de Ferrara was a Spanish or Italian artificer, brought over by
James IV or V to instruct the Scots in the manufacture of sword blades.
Most barbarous nations excel in the fabrication of arms; and the Scots
had attained great proficiency in forging swords so early as the field
of Pinkie; at which period the historian Patten describes them as 'all
notably broad and thin, universally made to slice, and of such
exceeding good temper that, as I never saw any so good, so I think it
hard to devise better.'--Account of Somerset's Expedition.

It may be observed that the best and most genuine Andrea Ferraras have
a crown marked on the blade.

NOTE 11, p. 124

The incident here said to have happened to Flora Mac-Ivor actually
befell Miss Nairne, a lady with whom the author had the pleasure of
being acquainted. As the Highland army rushed into Edinburgh, Miss
Nairne, like other ladies who approved of their cause, stood waving her
handkerchief from a balcony, when a ball from a Highlander's musket,
which was discharged by accident, grazed her forehead. 'Thank God,'
said she, the instant she recovered,'that the accident happened to me,
whose principles are known. Had it befallen a Whig, they would have
said it was done on purpose.'

NOTE 12, p. 185

The Author of Waverley has been charged with painting the young
Adventurer in colours more amiable than his character deserved. But
having known many individuals who were near his person, he has been
described according to the light in which those eye-witnesses saw his
temper and qualifications. Something must be allowed, no doubt, to the
natural exaggerations of those who remembered him as the bold and
adventurous Prince in whose cause they had braved death and ruin; but
is their evidence to give place entirely to that of a single malcontent?

I have already noticed the imputations thrown by the Chevalier
Johnstone on the Prince's courage. But some part at least of that
gentleman's tale is purely romantic. It would not, for instance, be
supposed that at the time he is favouring us with the highly wrought
account of his amour with the adorable Peggie, the Chevalier Johnstone
was a married man, whose grandchild is now alive; or that the whole
circumstantial story concerning the outrageous vengeance taken by
Gordon of Abbachie on a Presbyterian clergyman is entirely apocryphal.
At the same time it may be admitted that the Prince, like others of his
family, did not esteem the services done him by his adherents so highly
as he ought. Educated in high ideas of his hereditary right, he has
been supposed to have held every exertion and sacrifice made in his
cause as too much the duty of the person making it to merit extravagant
gratitude on his part. Dr. King's evidence (which his leaving the
Jacobite interest renders somewhat doubtful) goes to strengthen this
opinion.

The ingenious editor of Johnstone's Memoirs has quoted a story said to
be told by Helvetius, stating that Prince Charles Edward, far from
voluntarily embarking on his daring expedition, was, literally bound
hand and foot, and to which he seems disposed to yield credit. Now, it
being a fact as well known as any in his history, and, so far as I
know, entirely undisputed, that the Prince's personal entreaties and
urgency positively forced Boisdale and Lochiel into insurrection, when
they were earnestly desirous that he would put off his attempt until he
could obtain a sufficient force from France, it will be very difficult
to reconcile his alleged reluctance to undertake the expedition with
his desperately insisting upon carrying the rising into effect against
the advice and entreaty of his most powerful and most sage partizans.
Surely a man who had been carried bound on board the vessel which
brought him to so desperate an enterprise would have taken the
opportunity afforded by the reluctance of his partizans to return to
France in safety.

It is averred in Johnstone's Memoirs that Charles Edward left the field
of Culloden without doing the utmost to dispute the victory; and, to
give the evidence on both sides, there is in existence the more
trustworthy testimony of Lord Elcho, who states that he himself
earnestly exhorted the Prince to charge at the head of the left wing,
which was entire, and retrieve the day or die with honour. And on his
counsel being declined, Lord Elcho took leave of him with a bitter
execration, swearing he would never look on his face again, and kept
his word.

On the other hand, it seems to have been the opinion of almost all the
other officers that the day was irretrievably lost, one wing of the
Highlanders being entirely routed, the rest of the army outnumbered,
outflanked, and in a condition totally hopeless. In this situation of
things the Irish officers who surrounded Charles's person interfered to
force him off the field. A cornet who was close to the Prince left a
strong attestation that he had seen Sir Thomas Sheridan seize the
bridle of his horse and turn him round. There is some discrepancy of
evidence; but the opinion of Lord Elcho, a man of fiery temper and
desperate at the ruin which he beheld impending, cannot fairly be taken
in prejudice of a character for courage which is intimated by the
nature of the enterprise itself, by the Prince's eagerness to fight on
all occasions, by his determination to advance from Derby to London,
and by the presence of mind which he manifested during the romantic
perils of his escape. The author is far from claiming for this
unfortunate person the praise due to splendid talents; but he continues
to be of opinion that at the period of his enterprise he had a mind
capable of facing danger and aspiring to fame.

That Charles Edward had the advantages of a graceful presence,
courtesy, and an address and manner becoming his station, the author
never heard disputed by any who approached his person, nor does he
conceive that these qualities are overcharged in the present attempt to
sketch his portrait.

The following extracts corroborative of the general opinion respecting
the Prince's amiable disposition are taken from a manuscript account of
his romantic expedition, by James Maxwell of Kirkconnell, of which I
possess a copy, by the friendship of J. Menzies, Esq., of Pitfoddells.
The author, though partial to the Prince, whom he faithfully followed,
seems to have been a fair and candid man, and well acquainted with the
intrigues among the adventurer's council:--

'Everybody was mightily taken with the Prince's figure and personal
behaviour. There was but one voice about them. Those whom interest or
prejudice made a runaway to his cause could not help acknowledging that
they wished him well in all other respects, and could hardly blame him
for his present undertaking. Sundry things had concurred to raise his
character to the highest pitch, besides the greatness of the enterprise
and the conduct that had hitherto appeared in the execution of it.

'There were several instances of good nature and humanity that had made
a great impression on people's minds. I shall confine myself to two or
three.

'Immediately after the battle, as the Prince was riding along the
ground that Cope's army had occupied a few minutes before, one of the
officers came up to congratulate him, and said, pointing to the killed,
"Sir, there are your enemies at your feet." The Prince, far from
exulting, expressed a great deal of compassion for his father's deluded
subjects, whom he declared he was heartily sorry to see in that posture.

'Next day, while the Prince was at Pinkie House, a citizen of Edinburgh
came to make some representation to Secretary Murray about the tents
that city was ordered to furnish against a certain day. Murray happened
to be out of the way, which the Prince hearing of called to have the
gentleman brought to him, saying, he would rather despatch the
business, whatever it was, himself than have the gentleman wait, which
he did, by granting everything that was asked. So much affability in a
young prince flushed with victory drew encomiums even from his enemies.

'But what gave the people the highest idea of him was the negative he
gave to a thing that very nearly concerned his interest, and upon which
the success of his enterprise perhaps depended. It was proposed to send
one of the prisoners to London to demand of that court a cartel for the
exchange of prisoners taken, and to be taken, during this war, and to
intimate that a refusal would be looked upon as a resolution on their
part to give no quarter. It was visible a cartel would be of great
advantage to the Prince's affairs; his friends would be more ready to
declare for him if they had nothing to fear but the chance of war in
the field; and if the court of London refused to settle a cartel, the
Prince was authorised to treat his prisoners in the same manner the
Elector of Hanover was determined to treat such of the Prince's friends
as might fall into his hands; it was urged that a few examples would
compel the court of London to comply. It was to be presumed that the
officers of the English army would make a point of it. They had never
engaged in the service but upon such terms as are in use among all
civilised nations, and it could be no stain upon their honour to lay
down their commissions if these terms were not observed, and that owing
to the obstinacy of their own Prince. Though this scheme was plausible,
and represented as very important, the Prince could never be brought
into it, it was below him, he said, to make empty threats, and he would
never put such as those into execution; he would never in cold blood
take away lives which he had saved in heat of action at the peril of
his own. These were not the only proofs of good nature the Prince gave
about this time. Every day produced something new of this kind. These
things softened the rigour of a military government which was only
imputed to the necessity of his affairs, and which he endeavoured to
make as gentle and easy as possible.'

It has been said that the Prince sometimes exacted more state and
ceremonial than seemed to suit his condition; but, on the other hand,
some strictness of etiquette was altogether indispensable where he must
otherwise have been exposed to general intrusion. He could also endure,
with a good grace, the retorts which his affectation of ceremony
sometimes exposed him to. It is said, for example, that Grant of
Glenmoriston having made a hasty march to join Charles, at the head of
his clan, rushed into the Prince's presence at Holyrood with
unceremonious haste, without having attended to the duties of the
toilet. The Prince received him kindly, but not without a hint that a
previous interview with the barber might not have been wholly
unnecessary. 'It is not beardless boys,' answered the displeased Chief,
'who are to do your Royal Highness's turn.' The Chevalier took the
rebuke in good part.

On the whole, if Prince Charles had concluded his life soon after his
miraculous escape, his character in history must have stood very high.
As it was, his station is amongst those a certain brilliant portion of
whose life forms a remarkable contrast to all which precedes and all
which follows it.

NOTE 13, p. 195

The following account of the skirmish at Clifton is extracted from the
manuscript Memoirs of Evan Macpherson of Cluny, Chief of the clan
Macpherson, who had the merit of supporting the principal brunt of that
spirited affair. The Memoirs appear to have been composed about 1755,
only ten years after the action had taken place. They were written in
France, where that gallant chief resided in exile, which accounts for
some Gallicisms which occur in the narrative.

'In the Prince's return from Derby back towards Scotland, my Lord
George Murray, Lieutenant-General, cheerfully charg'd himself with the
command of the rear, a post which, altho' honourable, was attended with
great danger, many difficulties, and no small fatigue; for the Prince,
being apprehensive that his retreat to Scotland might be cut off by
Marischall Wade, who lay to the northward of him with an armie much
supperior to what H.R.H. had, while the Duke of Comberland with his
whole cavalrie followed hard in the rear, was obliged to hasten his
marches. It was not, therefore, possible for the artilirie to march so
fast as the Prince's army, in the depth of winter, extremely bad
weather, and the worst roads in England; so Lord George Murray was
obliged often to continue his marches long after it was dark almost
every night, while at the same time he had frequent allarms and
disturbances from the Duke of Comberland's advanc'd parties.

'Towards the evening of the twentie-eight December 1745 the Prince
entered the town of Penrith, in the Province of Comberland. But as Lord
George Murray could not bring up the artilirie so fast as he wou'd have
wish'd, he was oblig'd to pass the night six miles short of that town,
together with the regiment of MacDonel of Glengarrie, which that day
happened to have the arrear guard. The Prince, in order to refresh his
armie, and to give My Lord George and the artilirie time to come up,
resolved to sejour the 29th at Penrith; so ordered his little army to
appear in the morning under arms, in order to be reviewed, and to know
in what manner the numbers stood from his haveing entered England. It
did not at that time amount to 5000 foot in all, with about 400
cavalrie, compos'd of the noblesse who serv'd as volunteers, part of
whom form'd a first troop of guards for the Prince, under the command
of My Lord Elchoe, now Comte de Weems, who, being proscribed, is
presently in France. Another part formed a second troup of guards under
the command of My Lord Balmirino, who was beheaded at the Tower of
London. A third part serv'd under My Lord le Comte de Kilmarnock, who
was likewise beheaded at the Tower. A fourth part serv'd under My Lord
Pitsligow, who is also proscribed; which cavalrie, tho' very few in
numbers, being all noblesse, were very brave, and of infinite advantage
to the foot, not only in the day of battle, but in serving as advanced
guards on the several marches, and in patroling dureing the night on
the different roads which led towards the towns where the army happened
to quarter.

'While this small army was out in a body on the 2Qth December, upon a
riseing ground to the northward of Penrith, passing review, Mons. de
Cluny, with his tribe, was ordered to the Bridge of Clifton, about a
mile to southward of Penrith, after having pass'd in review before
Mons. Pattullo, who was charged with the inspection of the troops, and
was likeways Quarter-Master-General of the army, and is now in France.
They remained under arms at the bridge, waiting the arrival of My Lord
George Murray with the artilirie, whom Mons. de Cluny had orders to
cover in passing the bridge. They arrived about sunsett closly pursued
by the Duke of Comberland with the whole body of his cavalrie, reckoned
upwards of 3000 strong, about a thousand of whom, as near as might be
computed, dismounted, in order to cut off the passage of the artilirie
towards the bridge, while the Duke and the others remained on horseback
in order to attack the rear.

'My Lord George Murray advanced, and although he found Mons. de Cluny
and his tribe in good spirits under arms, yet the circumstance appear'd
extremely delicate. The numbers were vastly unequall, and the attack
seem'd very dangerous; so My Lord George declin'd giving orders to such
time as he ask'd Mons. de Cluny's oppinion. "I will attack them with
all my heart," says Mons. de Cluny, "if you order me." "I do order it
then," answered My Lord George, and immediately went on himself along
with Mons. de Cluny, and fought sword in hand on foot at the head of
the single tribe of Macphersons. They in a moment made their way
through a strong hedge of thorns, under the cover whereof the cavalrie
had taken their station, in the strugle of passing which hedge My Lord
George Murray, being dressed en montagnard, as all the army were, lost
his bonet and wig; so continued to fight bare-headed during the action.
They at first made a brisk discharge of their firearms on the enemy,
then attacked them with their sabres, and made a great slaughter a
considerable time, which obliged Comberland and his cavalrie to fly
with precipitation and in great confusion; in so much that, if the
Prince had been provided in a sufficient number of cavalrie to have
taken advantage of the disorder, it is beyond question that the Duke of
Comberland and the bulk of his cavalrie had been taken prisoners.

'By this time it was so dark that it was not possible to view or number
the slain who filled all the ditches which happened to be on the ground
where they stood. But it was computed that, besides those who went off
wounded, upwards of a hundred at least were left on the spot, among
whom was Colonel Honywood, who commanded the dismounted cavalrie, whose
sabre of considerable value Mons. de Cluny brought off and still
preserves; and his tribe lykeways brought off many arms;--the Colonel
was afterwards taken up, and, his wounds being dress'd, with great
difficultie recovered. Mons. de Cluny lost only in the action twelve
men, of whom some haveing been only wounded, fell afterwards into the
hands of the enemy, and were sent as slaves to America, whence several
of them returned, and one of them is now in France, a sergeant in the
Regiment of Royal Scots. How soon the accounts of the enemies approach
had reached the Prince, H.R.H. had immediately ordered Mi-Lord le Comte
de Nairne, Brigadier, who, being proscribed, is now in France, with the
three batalions of the Duke of Athol, the batalion of the Duke of
Perth, and some other troups under his command, in order to support
Cluny, and to bring off the artilirie. But the action was entirely over
before the Comte de Nairne, with his command, cou'd reach nigh to the
place. They therefore return'd all to Penrith, and the artilirie
marched up in good order.

'Nor did the Duke of Comberland ever afterwards dare to come within a
day's march of the Prince and his army dureing the course of all that
retreat, which was conducted with great prudence and safety when in
some manner surrounded by enemies.'

NOTE 14, p. 215

As the heathen deities contracted an indelible obligation if they swore
by Styx, the Scottish Highlanders had usually some peculiar solemnity
attached to an oath which they intended should be binding on them. Very
frequently it consisted in laying their hand, as they swore, on their
own drawn dirk; which dagger, becoming a party to the transaction, was
invoked to punish any breach of faith. But by whatever ritual the oath
was sanctioned, the party was extremely desirous to keep secret what
the especial oath was which he considered as irrevocable. This was a
matter of great convenience, as he felt no scruple in breaking his
asseveration when made in any other form than that which he accounted
as peculiarly solemn; and therefore readily granted any engagement
which bound him no longer than he inclined. Whereas, if the oath which
he accounted inviolable was once publicly known, no party with whom he
might have occasion to contract would have rested satisfied with any
other.

Louis XI of France practised the same sophistry, for he also had a
peculiar species of oath, the only one which he was ever known to
respect, and which, therefore, he was very unwilling to pledge. The
only engagement which that wily tyrant accounted binding upon him was
an oath by the Holy Cross of Saint Lo d'Angers, which contained a
portion of the True Cross. If he prevaricated after taking this oath
Louis believed he should die within the year. The Constable Saint Paul,
being invited to a personal conference with Louis, refused to meet the
king unless he would agree to ensure him safe conduct under sanction of
this oath. But, says Comines, the king replied, he would never again
pledge that engagement to mortal man, though he was willing to take any
other oath which could be devised. The treaty broke oft, therefore,
after much chaffering concerning the nature of the vow which Louis was
to take. Such is the difference between the dictates of superstition
and those of conscience.





GLOSSARY


A', all.

ABOON, abune, above.

AE, one.

AFF, off.

AFORE, before.

AHINT, behind.

AIN, own.

AITS, oats.

AMAIST, almost.

AMBRY, a cupboard, a pantry.

AN, if.

ANE, one.

ANEUCH, enough.

ARRAY, annoy, trouble.

ASSOILZIED, absolved, acquitted.

ASSYTHMENT, satisfaction,

AULD, old.

BAFF, a blow.

BAGGANET, a bayonet.

BAILIE, a city magistrate in Scotland.

BAIRN, a child.

BAITH, both.

BANES, bones.

BANG-UP, get up quickly, bounce.

BARLEY, a parley, a truce.

BAULD, bold.

BAULDER, bolder.

BAWBEE, a halfpenny.

BAWTY, sly, cunning.

BEES, in the, bewildered, stupefied.

BEFLUMM'D, flattered, cajoled.

BEGUNK, a trick, a cheat.

BEN, within, inside.

BENEMPT, named.

BICKER, a wooden dish.

BIDE, stay, endure.

BIELDY, affording shelter.

BIGGING, building.

BIRLIEMAN, a peace officer.

BLACK-COCK, the black grouse.

BLACK-FISHING, ashing by torchlight, poaching.

BLUDE, bluid, blood.

BODDLE, bodle, a copper coin, worth one third of an English penny.

BOGLE ABOUT THE BUSH, beat about the bush, a children's game.

BONNIE, beautiful, comely, fine,

BOUNE, prepared.

BRA', fine, handsome, showy.

BRANDER, broil.

BREEKS, breeches.

BRENT, smooth, unwrinkled.

BROGUES, Highland shoes.

BROO, brew, broth.

BRUCKLE, brittle, infirm.

BRUIK, enjoy.

BRULZIE, bruilzie, a broil, a fray.

BUCKIE, a perverse or refractory person.

BUTTOCK-MAIL, a fine for fornication.

BYDAND, awaiting.

CA', call.

CADGER, a country carrier.

CAILLIACHS, old women on whom devolved the duty of lamenting for the
dead, which the Irish call keening.

CALLANT, a stripling, a fine fellow.

CANNILY, prudently.

CANNY, cautious, lucky.

CARLE, a churl, an old man.

CATERAN, a freebooter.

CHIEL, a young man.

CLACHAN, a village, a hamlet.

CLAMYHEWIT, a blow, a drubbing.

CLASH, chatter, gossip.

CLATTER, tattle, noisy talk.

CLOSE, a narrow passage.

CLOUR, a bump, a bruise.

COCKY-LEEKY, a soup made of a cock, seasoned with leeks.

COGHLING AND DROGHLING, wheezing and blowing.

CORONACH, a dirge.

CORRIE, a mountain hollow.

COUP, fall.

COW YER CRACKS, cut short your talk, hold your tongues.

CRACK, boast.

CRAIG, the neck, the throat.

CRAMES, merchants' shops, booths.

CUT-LUGGED, crop-eared.

DAFT, foolish, mad, crazy.

DAUR, dare.

DEAVING, deafening.
