of his book:

"When a man dies his various parts go whither they belong. His voice
goes to the fire, his breath to the winds, his eyes to the sun, his
spirit to the moon, his hearing becomes one with space, his body goes to
the earth, his soul is absorbed into ether, his hairs become plants, the
hair of his head goes to crown the trees, his blood returns to water.
Thus, every portion of a man is restored to that portion of the universe
to which it belongs; and of himself, his own essence, nothing remains
but one part what that is called is a great secret."

Caracalla was listening intently. This discourse attracted him.

He, like the other Caesars, must after his death be deified by the
senate; but he felt convinced, for his part, that the Olympians
would never count him as one of themselves. At the same time he was
philosopher enough to understand that no existing thing could ever cease
to exist. The restoration of each part of his body to that portion of
the universe to which it was akin, pleased his fancy. There was no place
in the Indian's creed for the responsibility of the soul at the judgment
of the dead. Caesar was already on the point of asking the slave to
reveal his secret, when Adventus prevented him by exclaiming:

"You may confide to me what will be left of me--unless, indeed, you mean
the worms which shall eat me and so proceed from me. It can not be good
for much, at any rate, and I will tell no one."

To this Arjuna solemnly replied: "There is one thing which persists to
all eternity and can never be lost in all the ages of the universe, and
that is--the deed."

"I know that," replied the old man with an indifferent shrug; but the
word struck Caesar like a thunder-bolt. He listened breathlessly to hear
what more the Indian might say; but Arjuna, who regarded it as sacrilege
to waste the highest lore on one unworthy of it, went on reading to
himself, and Adventus stretched himself out to sleep.

All was silent in and about the sleeping-room, and the fearful words,
"the deed," still rang in the ears of the man who had just committed the
most monstrous of all atrocities. He could not get rid of the haunting
words; all the ill he had done from his childhood returned to him in
fancy, and seemed heaped up to form a mountain which weighed on him like
an incubus.

The deed!

His, too, must live on, and with it his name, cursed and hated to the
latest generations of men. The souls of the slain would have carried
the news of the deeds he had done even to Hades; and if Tarautas were to
come and fetch him away, he would be met below by legions of indignant
shades--a hundred thousand! And at their head his stern father, and the
other worthy men who had ruled Rome with wisdom and honor, would shout
in his face: "A hundred thousand times a murderer! robber of the state!
destroyer of the army!" and drag him before the judgment-seat; and
before judgment could be pronounced the hundred thousand, led by the
noblest of all his victims, the good Papinian, would rush upon him and
tear him limb from limb.

Dozing as he lay, he felt cold, ghostly hands on his shoulder, on his
head, wherever the cold breath of the waning night could fan him through
the open window; and with a loud cry he sprang out of bed as he fancied
he felt a touch of the shadowy hand of Vindex. On hearing his voice,
Adventus and the Indian hurried in, with Epagathos, who had even heard
his shriek in the farther room. They found him bathed in a sweat of
horror, and struggling for breath, his eyes fixed on vacancy; and the
freedman flew off to fetch the physician. When he came Caesar angrily
dismissed him, for he felt no physical disorder. Without dressing, he
went to the window. It was about three hours before sunrise.

However, he gave orders that his bath should be prepared, and desired to
be dressed; then Macrinus and others were to be sent for. Sooner would
he step into boiling water than return to that bed of terror. Day, life,
business must banish his terrors. But then, after the evening would come
another night; and if the sufferings he had just gone through should
repeat themselves then, and in those to follow, he should lose his wits,
and he would bless the spirit of Tarautas if it would but come to lead
him away to death.

But "the deed"! The Indian was right--that would survive him on earth,
and mankind would unite in cursing him.

Was there yet time--was he yet capable of atoning for what was done by
some great and splendid deed? But the hundred thousand--

The number rose before him like a mountain, blotting out every scheme
he tried to form as he went to his bath--taking his lion with him; he
reveled in the warm water, and finally lay down to rest in clean
linen wrappers. No one had dared to speak to him. His aspect was too
threatening.

In a room adjoining the bath-room he had breakfast served him. It was,
as usual, a simple meal, and yet he could only swallow a few mouthfuls,
for everything had a bitter taste. The praetorian prefect was roused,
and Caesar was glad to see him, for it was in attending to affairs that
he most easily forgot what weighed upon him. The more serious they
were, the better, and Macrinus looked as if there was something of grave
importance to be settled.

Caracalla's first question was with reference to the Parthian
ambassadors. They had, in fact, departed; now he must prepare for war.
Caesar was eager to decide at once on the destination of each legion,
and to call the legates together to a council of war; but Macrinus
was not so prompt and ready as usual on such occasions. He had that
to communicate which, as he knew, would to Caesar take the head of all
else. If it should prove true, it must withdraw him altogether from the
affairs of government; and this was what Macrinus aimed at when, before
summoning the legates, he observed with a show of reluctance that Caesar
would be wroth with him if, for the sake of a council of war, he were to
defer a report which had just reached his ears.

"Business first!" cried Caracalla, with decisive prohibition.

"As you will. I thought only of what I was told by an official of this
temple, that the gem-cutter's daughter--you know the girl--is still
alive--"

But he got no further, for Caesar sprang to his feet, and desired to
hear more of this.

Macrinus proceeded to relate that a slaughterer in the court of
sacrifice had told him that Melissa had been seen last evening, and
was somewhere in the Serapeum. More than this the prefect knew not, and
Caesar forthwith dismissed him to make further inquiry before he himself
should take steps to prove the truth of the report.

Then he paced the room with revived energy. His eye sparkled, and,
breathing fast, he strove to reduce the storm of schemes, plans, and
hopes which surged up within him to some sort of order. He must punish
the fugitive--but yet more surely he would never again let her out of
his sight. But if only he could first have her cast to the wild beasts,
and then bring her to life again, crown her with the imperial diadem,
and load her with every gift that power and wealth could procure! He
would read every wish in her eyes, if only she would once more lay
her hand on his forehead, charm away his pain, and bring sleep to his
horror-stricken bed. He had done nothing to vex her; nay, every petition
she had urged--But suddenly the image rose before him of old Vindex and
his nephew, whom he had sent to execution in spite of her intercession;
and again the awful word, "the deed," rang in his inward ear. Were these
hideous thoughts to haunt him even by day?

No, no! In his waking hours there was much to be done which might give
him the strength to dissipate them.

The kitchen-steward was by this time in attendance; but what did
Caracalla care for dainties to tickle his palate now that he had a
hope of seeing Melissa once more? With perfect indifference he left the
catering to the skillful and inventive cook; and hardly had he retired
when Macrinus returned.

The slaughterer had acquired his information through a comrade, who said
that he had twice caught sight of Melissa at the window of the chambers
of mystery in the upper story of the Serapeum, yesterday afternoon. He
had hoped to win the reward which was offered for the recovery of the
fugitive, and had promised his colleague half the money if he would help
him to capture the maiden. But just at sunset, hearing that the massacre
was ended, the man had incautiously gone out into the town, where he had
been slain by a drunken solder of the Scythian legion. The hapless man's
body had been found, but Macrinus's informant had assured him that he
could entirely rely on the report of his unfortunate colleague, who was
a sober and truthful man, as the chief augur would testify.

This was enough for Caracalla. Macrinus was at once to go for the
high-priest, and to take care that he took no further steps to conceal
Melissa. The slaughterer had ever since daybreak kept secret watch on
all the doors of the Serapeum, aided by his comrades, who were to share
in the reward, and especially on the stairway leading from the ground
floor up to the mystic's galleries.

The prefect at once obeyed the despot's command. On the threshold he met
the kitchen-steward returning to submit his list of dishes for Caesar's
approval.

He found Caracalla in an altered mood, rejuvenescent and in the highest
spirits. After hastily agreeing to the day's bill of fare, he asked the
steward in what part of the building the chambers of mystery were; and
when he learned that the stairs leading up to them began close to the
kitchens, which had been arranged for Caesar's convenience under the
temple laboratory, Caracalla declared in a condescending tone that he
would go to look round the scene of the cook's labors. And the lion
should come too, to return thanks for the good meat which was brought to
him so regularly.

The head cook, rejoiced at the unwonted graciousness of a master whose
wrath had often fallen on him, led the way to his kitchen hearth. This
had been constructed in a large hall, originally the largest of the
laboratories, where incense was prepared for the sanctuary and medicines
concocted for the sick in the temple hospital. There were smaller
halls and rooms adjoining, where at this moment some priests were busy
preparing kyphi and mixing drugs.

The steward, proud of Caesar's promised visit, announced to his
subordinates the honor they might expect, and he then went to the door
of the small laboratory to tell the old pastophoros who was employed
there, and who had done him many a good turn, that if he wished to see
the emperor he had only to open the door leading to the staircase. He
was about to visit the mystic chambers with his much-talked-of lion. No
one need be afraid of the beast; it was quite tame, and Caesar loved it
as a son.

At this the old drug-pounder muttered some reply, which sounded more
like a curse than the expected thanks, and the steward regretted having
compared the lion to a son in this man's presence, for the pastophoros
wore a mourning garment, and two promising sons had been snatched from
him, slain yesterday with the other youths in the stadium.

But the cook soon forgot the old man's ill-humor; he had to clear his
subordinates out of the way as quickly as possible and prepare for his
illustrious visitor. As he bustled around, here, there, and everywhere,
the pastophoros entered the kitchen and begged for a piece of mutton.
This was granted him by a hasty sign toward a freshly slaughtered sheep,
and the old man busied himself for some time behind the steward's
back. At last he had cut off what he wanted, and gazed with singular
tenderness at the piece of red, veinless meat. On returning to his
laboratory, he hastily bolted himself in, and when he came out again a
few minutes later his calm, wrinkled old face had a malignant and
evil look. He stood at the bottom of the stairs, looking about him
cautiously; then he flew up the steps with the agility of youth, and at
a turn in the stairs he stuck the piece of meat close to the foot of the
balustrade.

He returned as nimbly as he had gone, cast a sorrowful glance through
the open laboratory window at the arena where all that had graced his
life lay dead, and passed his hand over his tearful face. At last he
returned to his task, but he was less able to do it than before. It was
with a trembling hand that he weighed out the juniper berries and cedar
resin, and he listened all the time with bated breath.

Presently there was a stir on the stairs, and the kitchen slaves shouted
that Caesar was coming. So he went out of the laboratory, which was
behind the stairs, to see what was going forward, and a turnspit at once
made way for the old man so as not to hinder his view.

Was that little young man, mounting the steps so gayly, with the
high-priest at his side and his suite at his heels, the dreadful monster
who had murdered his noble sons? He had pictured the dreadful tyrant
quite differently. Now Caesar was laughing, and the tall man next him
made some light and ready reply--the head cook said it was the Roman
priest of Alexander, who was not on good terms with Timotheus. Could
they be laughing at the high-priest? Never, in all the years he had
known him, had he seen Timotheus so pale and dejected.

The high-priest had indeed good cause for anxiety, for he suspected who
it was that Caesar hoped to find in the mystic rooms, and feared that
his wife might, in fact, have Melissa in hiding in that part of the
building to which he was now leading the way. After Macrinus had come
to fetch him he had had no opportunity of inquiring, for the prefect
had not quitted him for a moment, and Euryale was in the town busy with
other women in seeking out and nursing such of the wounded as had been
found alive among the dead.

Caesar triumphed in the changed, gloomy, and depressed demeanor of a
man usually so self-possessed; for he fancied that it betrayed some
knowledge on the part of Timotheus of Melissa's hiding-place; and he
could jest with the priest of Alexander and his favorite Theokritus and
the other friends who attended him, while he ignored the high-priest's
presence and never even alluded to Melissa.

Hardly had they gone past the old man when, just as the kitchen slaves
were shouting "Hail, Caesar!" the lady Euryale, as pale as death,
hurried in, and with a trembling voice inquired whither her husband was
conducting the emperor.

She had turned back when half way on her road, in obedience to the
impulse of her heart, which prompted her, before she went on her
Samaritan's errand, to visit Melissa in her hiding-place, and let her
see the face of a friend at the beginning of a new, lonely, and anxious
day. On hearing the reply which was readily given, her knees trembled
beneath her, and the steward, who saw her totter, supported her and led
her into the laboratory, where essences and strong waters soon restored
her to consciousness. Euryale had known the old pastophoros a long time,
and, noticing his mourning garb, she asked sympathetically: "And you,
too, are bereft?"

"Of both," was the answer. "You were always so good to them--Slaughtered
like beasts for sacrifice--down there in the stadium," and tears flowed
fast down the old man's furrowed cheeks. The lady uplifted her hands as
though calling on Heaven to avenge this outrageous crime; at the same
instant a loud howl of pain was heard from above, and a great confusion
of men's voices.

Euryale was beside herself with fear. If they had found Melissa in her
room her husband's fate was sealed, and she was guilty of his doom.
But they could scarcely yet have opened the chambers, and the girl was
clever and nimble, and might perhaps escape in time if she heard the men
approaching. She eagerly flew to the window. She could see below her the
stone which Melissa must move to get out; but between the wall and
the stadium the street was crowded, and at every door of the Serapeum
lictors were posted, even at that stone door known only to the
initiated, with the temple slaughterers and other servants who seemed
all to be on guard. If Melissa were to come out now she would be seized,
and it must become known who had shown her the way into the hiding-place
that had sheltered her.

At this moment Theokritus came leaping down the stairs, crying out to
her: "The lion--a physician--where shall I find a leech?"

The matron pointed to the old man, who was one of the medical students
of the sanctuary, and the favorite shouted out to him, "Come up!" and
then rushed on, paying no heed to Euryale's inquiry for Melissa; but
the old man laughed scornfully and shouted after him, "I am no
beast-healer."

Then, turning to the lady, he added:

"I am sorry for the lion. You know me, lady. I could never till
yesterday bear to see a fly hurt. But this brute! It was as a son to
that bloodhound, and he shall feel for once something to grieve him.
The lion has had his portion. No physician in the world can bring him to
life again."

He bent his head and returned to his laboratory; but the matron
understood that this kind, peaceable man, in spite of his white hair,
had become a poisoner, and that the splendid, guiltless beast owed its
death to him. She shuddered. Wherever this unblest man went, good
turned to evil; terror, suffering, and death took the place of peace,
happiness, and life. He had forced her even into the sin of disobedience
to her husband and master. But now her secret hiding of Melissa against
his will would be avenged. He and she alike would probably pay for the
deed with their life; for the murder of his lion would inevitably rouse
Caesar's wildest passions.

Still, she knew that Caracalla respected her; for her sake, perhaps, he
would spare her husband. But Melissa? What would her fate be if she were
dragged out of her hiding-place?--and she must be discovered! He had
threatened to cast her to the beasts; and ought she not to prefer
even that fearful fate to forgiveness and a fresh outburst of Caesar's
passion?

Pale and tearless, but shaken with alarms, she bent over the balustrade
of the stairs and murmured a prayer commending herself, her husband, and
Melissa to God. Then she hastened up the steps. The great doors leading
to the chambers of mystery stood wide open, and the first person she met
was her husband.

"You here?" said he in an undertone. "You may thank the gods that your
kind heart did not betray you into hiding the girl here. I trembled for
her and for ourselves. But there is not a sign of her; neither here nor
on the secret stair. What a morning--and what a day must follow! There
lies Caesar's lion. If his suspicion that it has been poisoned should be
proved true, woe to this luckless city, woe to us all!"

And Caesar's aspect justified the worst anticipations. He had thrown
himself on the floor by the side of his dead favorite, hiding his face
in the lion's noble mane, with strange, quavering wailing. Then he
raised the brute's heavy head and kissed his dead eyes, and as it
slipped from his hand and fell on the floor, he started to his feet,
shaking his fist, and exclaiming:

"Yes, you have poisoned him! Bring the miscreant here, or you shall
follow him!"

Macrinus assured him that if indeed some basest of base wretches had
dared to destroy the life of this splendid and faithful king of beasts,
the murderer should infallibly be found. But Caracalla screamed in his
face:

"Found? Dare you speak of finding? Have you even brought me the girl who
was hidden here? Have you found her? Where is she? She was seen here and
she must be here!"

And he hurried from room to room in undignified haste, like a slave
hunting for some lost treasure of his master's, tearing open closets,
peeping behind curtains and up chimneys, and snatching the clothes,
behind which she might have hidden, from the pegs on which they hung. He
insisted on seeing every secret door, and ran first down and then up the
hidden stairs by which Melissa had in fact escaped.

In the great hall, where by this time physicians and courtiers had
gathered round the carcass of the lion, Caesar sank on to a seat, his
brow damp with heat, and stared at the floor; while the leeches, who, as
Alexandrians for the most part, were anxious not to rouse the despot's
rage, assured him that to all appearance the lion, who had been highly
fed and getting little exercise, had died of a fit. The poison had
indeed worked more rapidly than any the imperial body physician was
acquainted with; and he, not less anxious to mollify the sovereign, bore
them out in this opinion. But their diagnosis, though well meant, had
the contrary effect to that they had intended. The prosecution and
punishment of a murderer would have given occupation to his revengeful
spirit and have diverted his thoughts, and the capture of the criminal
would have pacified him; as it was, he could only regard the death of
the lion as a fresh stroke of fate directed against himself. He sat
absorbed in sullen gloom, muttering frantic curses, and haughtily
desired the high-priest to restore the offering he had wasted on a god
who was so malignant, and as hostile to him as all else in this city of
abomination.

He then rose, desired every one to stand back from where the lion lay,
and gazed down at the beast for many minutes. And as he looked, his
excited imagination showed him Melissa stroking the noble brute, and the
lion lashing the ground with his tail when he heard the light step of
her little feet. He could hear the music of her voice when she spoke
coaxingly to the lion; and then again he started off to search the rooms
once more, shouting her name, heedless of the bystanders, till Macrinus
made so bold as to assure him that the slaughterer's report must have
been false. He must have mistaken some one else for Melissa, for it
was proved beyond a doubt that Melissa had been burned in her father's
house.

At this Caesar looked the prefect in the face with glazed and wandering
eyes, and Macrinus started in horror as he suddenly shrieked, "The deed,
the deed!" and struck his brow with his fist.

From that hour Caracalla had lost forever the power of distinguishing
the illusions which pursued him from reality.




CHAPTER XXXV.

A week later Caracalla quitted Alexandria to make war on the Parthians.
What finally drove the unhappy man to hurry from the hated place was the
torturing fear of sharing his lion's fate, and of being sent after the
murdered Tarautas by the friends who had heard his appeal to fate.

Quite mad he was not, for the illusions which haunted him were often
absent for several hours, when he spoke with perfect lucidity, received
reports, and gave orders. It was with peculiar terror that his soul
avoided every recollection of his mother, of Theokritus, and all
those whose opinion he had formerly valued and whose judgment was not
indifferent to him.

In constant terror of the dagger of an avenger--a dread which, with
many other peculiarities, the leech could hardly ascribe to the diseased
phenomena of his mental state--he only showed himself to his soldiers,
and he might often be seen making a meal off a pottage he himself had
cooked to escape the poison which had been fatal to his lion. He was
never for an instant free from the horrible sense of being hated,
shunned, and persecuted by the whole world.

Sometimes he would remember that once a fair girl had prayed for him;
but when he tried to recall her features he could only see the charred
arm with the golden snake held up before him as he had pictured it that
night after the most hideous of his massacres; and every time, at the
sight of it, that word came back to him which still tortured his soul
above all else--"The deed." But his attendants, who heard him repeating
it day and night, never knew what he meant by it.

When Zminis met his end by the wild beasts in the arena, it was before
half-empty seats, though several legions had been ordered into the
amphitheatre to fill them. The larger number of the citizens were slain,
and the remainder were in mourning for relatives more or less near; and
they also kept away from the scene to avoid the hated despot.

Macrinus now governed the empire almost as a sovereign, for Caesar,
formerly a laborious and autocratic ruler, shrank from all business.
Even before they left Alexandria the plebeian prefect could see that
Serapion's prophecy was fulfilling itself. He remained in close intimacy
with the soothsayer; but only once more, and just before Caesar's
departure, could the magian be induced to raise the spirits of the dead,
for his clever accomplice, Castor, had fallen a victim in the massacre
because, prompted by the high price set on Alexander's head, and his own
fierce hatred of the young painter, he would go out to discover where he
and his sister had concealed themselves.

When at last the unhappy monarch quitted Alexandria one rainy morning,
followed by the curses of innumerable mourners--fathers, mothers,
widows, and orphans--as well as of ruined artisans and craftsmen, the
ill-used city, once so proudly gay, felt itself relieved of a crushing
nightmare. This time it was not to Caesar that the cloudy sky promised
welfare--his life was wrapped in gloom--but to the people he had so
bitterly hated. Thousands looked forward hopefully to life once more, in
spite of their mourning robes and widows' veils, and notwithstanding the
serious hindrances which the malice of their "afflicted" sovereign had
placed in the way of the resuscitation of their town, for Caracalla had
commanded that a wall should be built to divide the great merchant city
into two parts.

Nay, he had intended to strike a death-blow even at the learning to
which Alexandria owed a part of her greatness, by decreeing that the
Museum and schools should be removed and the theatres closed.

Maddening alike to heart and brain was the memory that he left behind
him, and the citizens would shake their fists if only his name were
spoken. But their biting tongues had ceased to mock or jest. Most of the
epigramatists were silenced forever, and the nimble wit of the survivors
was quelled for many a month by bitter curses or tears of sorrow.

But now--it was a fortnight since the dreadful man had left--the shops
and stores, which had been closed against the plunderers, were being
reopened. Life was astir again in the deserted and silent baths and
taverns, for there was no further fear of rapine from insolent soldiers,
or the treacherous ears of spies and delators. Women and girls could
once more venture into the highways, the market was filled with dealers,
and many an one who was conscious of a heedless speech or suspected of
whistling in the circus, or of some other crime, now came out of his
well-watched hiding-place.

Glaukias, the sculptor, among others, reopened his work-rooms in Heron's
garden-plot. In the cellar beneath the floor the gem-cutter had remained
hidden with Polybius and his sister Praxilla, for the easy-going old man
could not be induced to embark in the vessel which Argutis had hired for
them. Sooner would he die than leave Alexandria. He was too much
petted and too infirm to face the discomforts of a sea voyage. And his
obstinacy had served him well, for the ship in which they were to have
sailed, though it got out before the harbor was closed, was overtaken
and brought back by an imperial galley.

Polybius was, however, quite willing to accept Heron's invitation to
share his hiding-place.

Now they could both come out again; but these few weeks had affected
them very differently. The gem-cutter looked like the shadow of himself,
and had lost his upright carriage. He knew, indeed, that Melissa was
alive, and that Alexander, after being wounded, had been carried by
Andreas to the house of Zeno, and was on the way to recovery; but
the death of his favorite son preyed on his mind, and it was a great
grievance that his house should have been wrecked and burned. His hidden
gold, which was safe with him, would have allowed of his building a
far finer one in its stead, but the fact that it should be his
fellow-citizens who had destroyed it was worst of all. It weighed on his
spirits, and made him morose and silent.

Old Dido, who had risked her life more than once, looked at him with
mournful eyes, and besought all the gods she worshiped to restore her
good master's former vigor, that she might once more hear him curse
and storm; for his subdued mood seemed to her unnatural and alarming--a
portent of his approaching end.

Praxilla, too, the comfortable widow, had grown pale and thin, but old
Dido had learned a great deal from her teaching. Polybius only was more
cheerful than ever. He knew that his son and Melissa had escaped the
most imminent dangers. This made him glad; and then his sister had
done wonders that he might not too greatly miss his cook. His meals had
nevertheless been often scanty enough, and this compulsory temperance
had relieved him of his gout and done him so much good that, when
Andreas led him out into daylight once more, the burly old man
exclaimed: "I feel as light as a bird. If I had but wings I could fly
across the lake to see the boy. It is you, my brother, who have helped
to make me so much lighter." He laid his arm on the freedman's shoulder
and kissed him on the cheeks. It was for the first time; and never
before had he called him brother. But that his lips had obeyed the
impulse of his heart might be seen in the tearful glitter of his eyes,
which met those of Andreas, and they, too, were moist.

Polybius knew all that the Christian had done for his son and for
Melissa, for him and his, and his jest in saying that Andreas had helped
to make him lighter referred to his latest achievement. Julianus, the
new governor of the city, who now occupied the residence of the prefect
Titianus, had taken advantage of the oppressed people to extract money,
and Andreas, by the payment of a large sum, had succeeded in persuading
him to sign a document which exonerated Polybius and his son from all
criminality, and protected their person and property against soldiers
and town guards alike. This safe-conduct secured a peaceful future
to the genial old man, and filled the measure of what he owed to the
freedman, even to overflowing. Andreas, on his part, felt that his
former owner's kiss and brotherly greeting had sealed his acceptance as
a free man. He asked no greater reward than this he had just received;
and there was another thing which made his heart leap with gladness. He
knew now that the fullness of time had come in the best sense for the
daughter of the only woman he had ever loved, and that the Good Shepherd
had called her to be one of His flock. He could rejoice over this
without a pang, for he had learned that Diodoros, too, had entered on
the path which hitherto he had pointed out to him in vain.

A calm cheerfulness, which surprised all who knew him, brightened
the grave man; for him the essence of Christian love lay in the
Resurrection, and he saw with astonishment that a wonderful new vitality
was rising out of death. For Alexandria, too, the time was fulfilled.
Men and women crowded to the rite of baptism. Mothers brought their
daughters, and fathers their sons. These days of horror had multiplied
the little Christian congregation to a church of ten thousand members.
Caracalla turned hundreds from heathenism by his bloody sacrifices, his
love of fighting, his passion for revenge, and the blindness which made
him cast away all care for his eternal soul to secure the enjoyment of a
brief existence. That the sword which had slain thousands of their
sons should have been dedicated to Serapis, and accepted by the god,
alienated many of the citizens from the patron divinity of the town.
Then the news that Timotheus the high-priest had abdicated his office
soon after Caesar's departure, and, with his revered wife Euryale, had
been baptized by their friend the learned Clemens, confirmed many in
their desire to be admitted into the Christian community.

After these horrors of bloodshed, these orgies of hatred and vengeance,
every heart longed for love and peace and brotherly communion. Who
of all those that had looked death in the face in these days was not
anxious to know more of the creed which taught that the life beyond the
grave was of greater importance than that on earth?--while those who
already held it went forth to meet, as it were, a bridegroom. They had
seen men trodden down and all their rights trampled on, and now every
ear was open when a doctrine was preached which recognized the supreme
value of humanity, by ascribing, even to the humblest, the dignity of a
child of God. They were accustomed to pray to immortal beings who lived
in privileged supremacy and wild revelry at the golden tables of
the Olympian banquet; and now they were told that the church of the
Christians meant the communion of the faithful with their fatherly God,
and with His Son who had mingled with other mortals in the form of man
and who had done more for them than a brother, inasmuch as He had taken
upon Himself to die on the cross for love of them.

To a highly cultured race like the Alexandrians it had long seemed an
absurdity to try to purchase the favor of the god; by blood-offerings.
Many philosophical sects, and especially the Pythagoreans, had forbidden
such sacrifices, and had enjoined the bringing of offerings not to
purchase good fortune, but only to honor the gods; and now they saw the
Christians not making any offerings at all, but sharing a love-feast.
This, as they declared, was to keep them in remembrance of their
brotherhood and of their crucified Lord, whose blood, once shed, His
heavenly Father had accepted instead of every other sacrifice. The
voluntary and agonizing death of the Redeemer had saved the soul of
every Christian from sin and damnation; and many who in the late scenes
of horror had been inconsolable in anticipation of the grave, felt moved
to share in this divine gift of grace.

Beautiful, wise, and convincing sentences from the Bible went from lip
to lip; and a saying of Clemens, whose immense learning was well known,
was especially effective and popular. He had said that "faith was
knowledge of divine things through revelation, but that learning
must give the proof thereof"; and this speech led many men of high
attainments to study the new doctrines.

The lower classes were no doubt those most strongly attracted, the poor
and the slaves; and with them the sorrowing and oppressed. There were
many of these now in the town; ten thousand had seen those dearest
to them perish, and others, being wounded, had within a few days been
ruined both in health and estate.

As to Melissa in her peril, so to all these the Saviour's call to the
heavy-laden that He would give them rest had come as a promise of new
hope to car and heart. At the sound of these words they saw the buds
of a new spring-time for the soul before their eyes; any one who knew
a Christian improved his intimacy that he might hear more about the
tender-hearted Comforter, the Friend of children, the kind and helpful
Patron of the poor, the sorrowful, and the oppressed.

Assemblies of any kind were prohibited by the new governor; but the law
of Aelius Marcianus allowed gatherings for religious purposes, and the
learned lawyer, Johannes, directed his fellow-Christians to rely on
that. All Alexandria was bidden to these meetings, and the text with
which Andreas opened the first, "Now the fullness of time is come,"
passed from mouth to mouth.

Apart from that period which had preceded the birth of Christ, these
words applied to none better than to the days of death and terror which
they had just gone through. Had a plainer boundary-stone ever been
erected between a past and a future time? Out of the old vain and
careless life, which had ended with such fearful horrors, a new life
would now proceed of peace and love and pious cares.

The greater number of the citizens, and at their head the wealthy and
proud, still crowded the heathen temples to serve the old gods and
purchase their favor with offerings; still, the Christian churches were
too small and few to hold the faithful, and these had risen to higher
consideration, for the community no longer consisted exclusively of the
lower rank of people and slaves. No, men and women of the best families
came streaming in, and this creed--as was proclaimed by Demetrius, the
eloquent bishop; by Origen, who in power and learning--was the superior
of any heathen philosopher; by the zealous Andreas, and many another
chosen spirit--this creed was the religion of the future.

The freedman had never yet lived in such a happy and elevated frame of
mind; as he looked back on his past existence he often remembered with
thankful joy the promise that the last should be first, and that the
lowly should be exalted. If the dead had risen from their graves before
his eyes it would scarcely have surprised him, for in these latter
days he had seen wonder follow on wonder. The utmost his soul had
so fervently desired, for which he had prayed and longed, had found
fulfillment in a way which far surpassed his hopes; and through what
blood and fear had the Lord led His own, to let them reach the highest
goal! He knew from the lady Euryale that his desire to win Melissa's
soul to the true faith had been granted, and that she craved to be
baptized. This had not been confirmed by the girl herself, for, attacked
by a violent fever, she had during nine days hovered between life and
death; and since then Andreas had for more than a week been detained in
the town arranging affairs for Polybius.

The task was now ended which he had set himself to carry through. He
could leave the city and see once more the young people he loved. He
parted from Polybius and his sister at the garden gate, and led Heron
and old Dido to a small cottage which his former master had given him to
live in.

The gem-cutter was not to be allowed to see his children till the
leech should give leave, and the unfortunate man could not get over his
surprise and emotion at finding in his new home not only a work-table,
with tools, wax, and stones, but several cages full of birds, and among
these feathered friends a starling. His faithful and now freed slave,
Argutis, had, by Polybius's orders, supplied everything needful; but
the birds were a thought of the Christian girl Agatha. All this was a
consolation in his grief, and when the gem-cutter was alone with old
Dido he burst into sobs. The slave woman followed his example, but he
stopped her with loud, harsh scolding. At first she was frightened; but
then she exclaimed with delight from the very bottom of her faithful
heart, "The gods be praised!" and from the moment when he could storm,
she always declared, Heron's recovery began.

       ........................

The sun was setting when Andreas made his way to Zeno's house--a long,
white-washed building.

The road led through a palm-grove on the Christian's estate. His anxiety
to see the beloved sufferers urged him forward so quickly that he
presently overtook another man who was walking in the same direction in
the cool of the evening. This was Ptolemaeus, the physician.

He greeted Andreas with cheerful kindness, and the freedman knew what he
meant when, without waiting to be asked, he said:

"We are out of the wood now; the fever has passed away. The delirious
fancies have left her, and since noon she has slept. When I quitted her
an hour ago she was sleeping soundly and quietly. Till now the shaken
soul has been living in a dream; but now that the fever has passed
away, she will soon be herself again. As yet she has recognized no one;
neither Agatha nor the lady Euryale; not even Diodoros, whom I allowed
to look at her yesterday for a moment. We have taken her away from the
large house in the garden, on account of the children, to the little
villa opposite the place of worship. It is quiet there, and the air
blows in on her through the open veranda. The Empress herself could not
wish for a better sick-room. And the care Agatha takes of her! You are
right to hasten. The last glimmer of sunshine is extinct, and divine
service will soon begin. I am satisfied with Diodoros too; youth is a
soil on which the physician reaps easy laurels. What will it not heal
and strengthen! Only when the soul is so deeply shaken, as with Melissa
and her brother, matters go more slowly, even with the young. However,
as I said, we are past the crisis."

"God be praised!" said Andreas. "Such news makes me young again. I could
run like a boy." They now entered the well-kept gardens which lay behind
Zeno's house. Noble clumps of tall old trees rose above the green grass
plots and splendid shrubs. Round a dancing fountain were carefully kept
beds of beautiful flowers. The garden ended at a palm-grove, which
cast its shade on Zeno's little private place of worship--an open
plot inclosed by tamarisk hedges like walls. The little villa in which
Melissa lay was in a bower of verdure, and the veranda with the wide
door through which the bed of the sufferer had been carried in, stood
open in the cool evening to the garden, the palm-grove, and the place of
worship with its garland, as it were, of fragile tamarisk boughs.

Agatha was keeping watch by Melissa; but as the last of the figures,
great and small, who could be seen moving across the garden, all in
