overflowing heart, when a town-watchman came to fetch him to see
Susannah; her last hour was at hand, if not already past. John at once
went with the messenger, and Paula drew a deep breath as she saw him
depart. Then she threw herself on to her nurse's shoulders, crying:

"Now, come what may! Nothing can divide us; not even death!"




CHAPTER XXIV.

The bishop was too late. He found the widow Susannah a corpse;
standing at the head of the bed was little Katharina, as pale as death,
speechless, tearless, utterly annihilated. He kindly tried to cheer her,
and to speak words of comfort; but she pushed him away, tore herself
from him, and before he could stop her, she had fled out of the room.

Poor child! He had seen many a loving daughter mourning for her mother,
but never such grief as this. Here, thought he, were two human souls all
in all to each other, and hence this overwhelming sorrow.

Katharina had escaped to her own room, had thrown herself on the
couch--cowering so close that no one entering the room would have taken
the undistinguishable heap for a human being, a grown up, passionately
suffering girl.

It was very hot, and yet a cold shiver ran through her slender frame.
Was she now attacked by the pestilence? No; it would be too merciful of
Fate to take such pity on her woes.

The mother was dead, dragged to the grave by her own daughter. The
disease had first shown itself on her lips; and how many times had the
physician expressed his surprise at the plague having broken out in this
healthy quarter of the town, and in a house kept so scrupulously clean.
She knew at whose bidding the avenging angel had entered there, and
whose criminal guile had trifled with him. The words "murdered your
mother" haunted her, and she remembered the law of the ancients which
refused to prescribe a punishment for the killing of parents, because
they considered such a monstrous deed impossible.

A scornful smile curled her lip. Laws! Principles! Was there one that
she had not defied? She had contemned God, meddled with magic, borne
false witness, committed murder--and as to the one law with promise,
which, if Philippus was right, was exactly the same in the code of her
forefathers as on the tables of Moses, how had she kept that? Her own
mother was no more, and by her act!

All through this frightful retrospect she had never ceased to shiver
and, as this was becoming unendurable, she took to walking up and down
and seeking excuses for her sinful doings: It was not her mother, but
Heliodora whom she had wished to kill; why had malicious Fate...?

Here she was interrupted, for the young widow, who had heard the sad
news, sought her out to comfort her and offer her services. She spoke
to the girl with real affection; but her sweet, low tones reminded
Katharina of that evening after the old bishop's death; and when
Heliodora put out her arm to draw her to her, she shrank from her,
begging her in a dry, hoarse voice, not to touch her for her clothes
were infected. She wanted no comfort; all she asked was to be left
alone--quite alone--nothing more. The words were hard and unkind, and as
the door closed on the young woman Katharina's eyes glared after her.

Why had this doom passed over Heliodora's head and demanded the
sacrifice of one whose loss she could never cease to mourn?

This brought her mother vividly to her mind. She flew back to her
death-bed and fell on her knees--but even there she could not bear to
stay long, so she wandered into the garden and visited every spot
where she and her mother had been together. But there were such strange
crackings in the shrubs, and the trees and bushes cast such uncanny
shadows that she hailed daybreak as a deliverance.

She was on her way back to the house when her foster-brother Anubis came
limping to meet her. Poor fellow! She had made a cripple of him, too,
and his mother had died through her fault.

The lad spoke to her, giving expression to his sympathy, and she
accepted it; but she said such strange things, and answered him so
utterly at random, that he began to fear that grief had turned her
brain. She went on to ask him point-blank how much money she now had,
and as he happened to know approximately, he could tell her; she clasped
her hands, for how could any one human being who was not a king possess
such enormous wealth! Finally she enquired whether he knew how a will
should be drawn up, and that, too, he answered affirmatively.

She made him describe it all, and then he added that the signature must
be made valid by those of two witnesses; but she, he added, was too
young to be thinking of making her will.

"Why?" said she. "Is Paula much older than I am?"

"And the day after to-morrow," the boy went on, "she is to be cast into
the Nile. All the people call her the Bride of the Nile."

At this that hideous, malignant smile again curled her lips, but she
hastily suppressed it and walked straight on into the house. At the door
he timidly asked her whether he might once more look on his mistress;
but she was obliged to forbid it for fear of infection. However, he
proudly replied: "What you do not fear, has no terrors for me," and he
followed her to the side of the bed where the corpse now lay washed and
in fine array; and when he saw Katharina kiss the dead woman's hand he,
too, as soon as she looked away, pressed his lips on the place hers had
touched. Then he sat down by the bed and remained there till she sent
him away.

Before noon the bishop arrived to perform the last rites. He found the
body surrounded by beautiful flowers. Katharina had been out in the
garden again and had cut all the rarest and finest; and though she had
allowed the gardener to carry the basket for her, she would not have him
help her in gathering them. The feeling that she was doing something for
her mother had been a comfort to her; still, by day everything about her
seemed even more intolerable than by night. Everything looked so large,
so coarse, so insistent, so menacing, and reminded her at every step
of some injustice or some deed of which she was ashamed. Every eye, she
fancied, must see through her; and now and then it seemed as though the
pillars of the great banqueting-hall, where her mother still lay, were
tottering, and the ceiling about to fall in and crush her.

She answered the bishop's questions absently and often quite at random,
and the old man supposed that she was stunned by her great sorrow; so to
give her thoughts a new direction he began telling her about Paula, and
believing that Katharina was fond of her, he confided to her that he
had taken Paula, the day before, to Orion's cell, and consecrated their
betrothal.

At this her face was convulsed in a manner that alarmed the bishop; a
fearful tumult raged in her soul, her bosom rose and fell spasmodically,
and all she could utter was the question: "But they will sacrifice her
all the same?"

The bishop thought he understood. She was horror stricken by the idea
of the sudden, cruel end that hung over the young bride, and he replied
sadly; "I shall not be able to restrain the wretches; still, no means
shall remain untried. The patriarch's rescript, condemning this mad
crime, shall be made public to-day, and I will read and expound it at
the Curia, and try to give it keener emphasis.--Would you like to read
it?"

As she eagerly assented, the prelate signed to the acolyte who had
waited on him with the holy vessels, and he produced from a packet a
written sheet which he handed to Katharina. As soon as she was alone
she read the patriarch's epistle; at first superficially, then more
carefully, and at last in deep attention and growing interest, stirred
by it to strange thoughts, till at length her eyes flashed and her
breath came fast, as though this paper referred to herself, and could
seal her fate for life.

When the bearers came in to fetch away the body she was still sitting
there, gazing as if spell-bound at the papyrus; but she sprang up, shook
herself, and then bid farewell to the cold rigid form of the mother on
whose warm heart she had so often rested, and to whom she had been the
dearest thing on earth--and even then the solace of tears was denied
her.

She no longer suffered the deep remorse that had tormented her; for she
felt now that her intercourse with her last mother had not been put an
end to by death; that after a short parting they would meet again--soon
perhaps, perhaps even to-morrow--meet for a fulness of speech, an
outpouring of the heart, a revelation of all the past more open and
unreserved than could ever be between mortal beings, even between mother
and daughter. And when she who was sleeping there, blind, deaf, and
senseless, should awake again, up there, with eyes clearer than those of
men below, and the ears and senses of a spiritual being to see and hear
and judge all she had known and done, all she had felt and made others
feel--then, she told herself, her mother might perhaps blame her and
punish her more than she had ever done on earth, but she would also
clasp her more closely to her heart and comfort her more earnestly.

She whispered gently in her ear as if she were still alive: "Wait
awhile, only wait: I shall come soon and tell you everything!"

And then she kissed her so passionately and recklessly that the nuns
were shocked and dragged her away, ordering the bearers to close the
coffin. They obeyed, and when the wooden lid fell over the sleeping
form, shutting it in with a slam, and hiding it from the girl's sight,
the barrier gave way which had hitherto restrained her tears and she
began to weep bitterly; now, too, the feeling that she had indeed lost
her mother took complete possession of her--the sense of being an orphan
and alone, quite alone in the wide world.

She saw and heard no more of what took place round the beloved dead; for
when she took her hands from her face streaming with tears, the house
of the rich widow no longer sheltered its mistress; her remains had been
borne away to the nearest mortuary. The law forbade its being any longer
kept within doors, but did not allow of its being buried till night
fell. The child might not follow her own mother to the cemetery.

With a drooping head Katharina withdrew to her room and there stood
looking out into the garden. It all was hers now; she was mistress of it
all and of much besides, as free and unfettered to command as hitherto
she had been over the birds, her little dog, or the jewels that lay on
her toilet-table. She could make hundreds happy with a word, a wave of
the hand--but not herself. She had never felt so grown-up, independent,
womanly, nay powerful, and at the same time so unutterably wretched and
helpless as she felt in this hour.

What did she care for all these vanities? They could not suffice to
check one sigh of disappointed yearning.

She had parted from her mother with a promise; the fervent longing that
filled her soul was never still; and now the patriarch's letter had
given her a hint as to how she might fulfil the one and silence the
other. She hastily took the document up again, and read it through once
more.

Its instructions were precise to stop the proceedings of the misguided
Memphites with stern promptitude. It explained that the death of the
Christ Jesus, who shed His blood to redeem the world, had satisfied
the need for a human victim. Throughout the wide realms which the Cross
overshadowed with blessing human sacrifice must therefore be accounted
a useless and accursed abomination. It went on to point out how the
heathen had devised their gods in the image of weak, sinful, earthly
beings, and chosen victims in accordance with this idea. "But our God,"
it said, "is as high above men as the Spirit is above the flesh, and the
sacrifice He demands is not of the flesh, but of the spirit. Will He
not turn away in wrath and sorrow from the blinded Christians of Memphis
who, in their straits, feel and are about to act like the cruel and
foolish heathen? They take for their victim a heretic and a stranger,
deeming that that will diminish the abomination in the eyes of the Lord;
but it moves Him to loathing all the same, for no human blood may stain
the pure and sacred altars of our mild faith, which gives life and not
death.

"Ask your blind and misguided flock, my brother: Can the Father of
Love feel joy at the sight of one of His children, even an erring
one, suffocated in the waters to the honor of the Most High, while
struggling, and cursing her executioners?

"If, indeed, there were a pure maiden, possessed with the blessed
intoxication of the love of God, who was ready to follow the example
of Him who redeemed man by His death, to fling herself into the waters
while she cried to Heaven with her dying breath: 'Take me and my
innocence as an offering, O Lord! Release my people from their
extremity!'--that would be a victim indeed; and perchance, the Lord
might say: 'I will accept it; but the will alone is enough. No child of
mine may cast away the life that I have lent her as the most sacred and
precious of gifts.'"

The letter ended with pious exhortations to the community.

Then a maiden who should voluntarily sacrifice herself in the river to
save the people in their need would be a victim pleasing in the sight
of the Lord--so said the Man of God, through whose mouth the Most High
spoke. And this opinion, this hint, was to Katharina like a distaff from
which she spun a lengthening thread to warp to the loom and weave from
it a tangible tissue.

She would be the maiden whom the patriarch had imagined--the real,
true Bride of the Nile, inspired to cast off her young life to save her
people in their need. In this there was expiation such as Heaven might
accept; this would release her from the burthen of life that weighed
upon her, and would reunite her to her mother; in this way she could
show her lover and the bishop and all the world the immensity of her
self-sacrifice, which was in nothing behind that of "the other"--the
much-vaunted daughter of Thomas! She would do the great deed before
Paula's eyes, in sight of all the people. But Orion must know whose
image she bore in her heart and for whose sake she made that leap from
blooming life into a watery grave.

Oh! it was wonderful, splendid! Would she not thus compel him inevitably
to remember her whenever he should think of Paula? Yes, she would force
him to allow her image to dwell in his soul, inseparable from that
"other;" and would not such an unparalleled act add such height to
her figure, that it would be equal to that of her Syrian rival in the
estimation of all men--even in his?

She now began to long for the supreme moment. Her vain little heart
laughed in anticipation of the delight of being seen, praised and
admired by all. Tomorrow she, her little self, would tower above all the
world; and the more she felt the oppressive heat of the scorching day,
the more delicious it seemed to look forward to finding rest from the
torments of life in the cool element.

She saw no difficulties in the way of her achievement; she was mistress
now, and her slaves and servants must obey her orders. At the same time
she remembered, too, to protect her large possessions from falling into
the hands of relations for whom she did not care; with a firm hand she
drew up a will in which she bequeathed part of her fortune to her uncle
Chrysippus, small portions to her foster-brother Anubis, and to Rufinus'
widow, to whom she owed reparation for great wrong; then the larger
half, and she owned many millions, she bequeathed to her dear friend
Orion, whom she freely forgave, and who, she hoped, would see that even
in the little "water-wagtail" there had been room for some greatness.
She begged him also to take her house, since she had not been altogether
guiltless of the destruction of the home of his fathers.

The condition she attached to this bequest showed the same keen, alert
spirit that had guided her through life.

She knew that the patriarch's indignation might be fatal to the young
man, so to serve as a mediator, and at the same time to ensure for
herself the prayers of the Church, which she desired, she enjoined Orion
to bestow the greater part of his inheritance on the patriarch for the
Church and for benevolent purposes. But not at once, not for ten
years, and in instalments of which Orion himself was to determine the
proportion. In the event of his dying within the next three years all
his claims were to be transferred to her uncle Chrysippus. She added a
request to the Church, to which she belonged with her whole heart, that
every year on her saint's day and her mother's they should be prayed for
in every church in the land. A chapel was to be erected on the scene
of her self-immolation, and if the patriarch thought her worthy of the
honor, it was to bear the name of the Chapel of Susannah and Katharina.

She gave all her slaves their freedom and devised legacies to all the
officials of her household.

As she sat for long hours of serious meditation, drawing up this last
will, she smiled frequently with satisfaction. Then she copied it out
fair, and finally called the physician and all the free servants in the
house to witness her signature.

Though no one had suspected the "water-wagtail" of such forethought,
it was no matter of surprise that the young heiress, shut up in the
plague-stricken house, should dispose of her estates, and before
night-fall the physician brought Alexander, the chief of the Senate,
to the garden gate by her desire, and there they spoke to each other
without opening it. He was an old friend of her father's, and since the
death of the Mukaukas, had been her guardian; he now agreed to stand as
her Kyrios, and as such he ratified her will and the signature, though
she would not allow him to read the document.

Finally she went to the slaves quarters, from whence a few more
sufferers had been removed to the Necropolis, and desired her boatman to
get the holiday barge in readiness early in the morning, as she purposed
seeing the ceremonial from the river. She gave particular orders to the
gardener as to how it was to be decorated, and what flowers he was to
cut for her personal adornment.

She went to bed far less excited than she had been the night before,
and before she had ended her evening prayer, slumber overtook her weary
brain.

When she awoke at sunrise, the large and splendid boat, which her father
had had built at great cost in Alexandria, was manned and ready to put
out. No one interfered to prevent her embarking with Anubis and a few
female servants, for all the guards who had surrounded the house till
yesterday had been withdrawn to do duty at the great ceremonial of
the marriage and sacrifice, since a popular tumult was not unlikely to
arise.




CHAPTER XXV.

A great number of persons had collected during the night on the quay
near Nesptah's inn. The crowd was increasing every minute, and in spite
of the intense heat, not a Memphite could bear to stop within doors,
Men, women and children were flocking to the scene of the festival; they
came in thousands from the neighboring towns, hamlets and villages,
to witness the unprecedented sacrifice which was to put an end to
the misery of the land. Who had ever heard of such a marriage? What a
privilege, what a happiness, to be so fortunate as to see it!

The senate had not been idle and had done all in their power to surround
it with magnificence and to enable as many as possible to enjoy
the pageant, which had been planned with a lavish hand and liberal
munificence.

Round the cove by Nesptah's inn a semi-circular wooden stand had been
constructed, on which thousands found seats or standing-room. Stalls
furnished with hangings were erected in the middle of the tribune for
the authorities and their families as well as for the leading Arab
officials, and arm-chairs were placed in them for the Vekeel, for the
Kadi, for the head of the senate, for old Horapollo and also for the
Christian priesthood, though it was well known that they would not be
present at the ceremony.

The lower classes, who could not afford to pay for admission to these
seats, had established themselves on the banks of the river; wandering
dealers had followed them, and wherever the crowd was densest they had
displayed their wares--light refreshments or solid food--on two-wheeled
trucks, or on little carpets spread on the ground. In the tribune itself
the cries of the water-sellers were incessant as they offered filtered
Nile water and fruit syrups for sale.

The parched tops of the palms, where turtle doves, lapwings and
sparrow-hawks were wont to perch, were crowded with the vagabond boys of
the town, who whiled away the time by pulling the withered and diseased
dates from the great clumps and flinging them down on the bystanders
below, till the guard took aim at them with their arrows and stopped the
game.

The centre of attraction to all eyes was a wooden platform or pontoon,
built far out into the stream; from thence the bride was to be flung
into the watery embrace of the expectant bridegroom. Here the masters
of the ceremonies had put forth their best efforts, and it was
magnificently decorated with hangings and handkerchiefs, palm-leaves and
flags; with heavy garlands of tamarisk and willow, mingled with bright
blossoms of the lotos and mallow, lilies and roses; with devices
emblematic of the province, and other gilt ornaments. Only the furthest
end of it was unadorned and without even a railing, that there might be
nothing to intercept the view of the "marriage."

Three hours before noon none were absent but those whose places were
secured, and ere long curiosity brought them also to the spot. The
town-watch found it required all their efforts to keep the front ranks
of the people from being pushed into the river by those behind; indeed,
this accident could not be everywhere guarded against; but, thanks to
the shallow state of the water, no one was the worse. But the cries of
those who were in danger nevertheless drowned the music of the bands
performing on raised platforms and the shouts of applause which rose
on all sides to hail Horapollo--who was here, there, everywhere on his
white ass as brisk as a lad--or to greet some leading official.

And now and again loud cries of anguish were heard, or the
closely-packed throng parted with exclamations of horror. A citizen had
had a sunstroke, or had been seized by the plague. Then the fugitives
dragged others away with them; screaming mothers trying to save their
little ones from the crush on one hand and the contagion on the other,
oversetting one dealer's truck, smashing the eggs and cakes of another.
A whole party were pushed into a deep but half-dried up water-course;
the guardians of the peace flourished their staves, yelling and making
their victims yell in their efforts to restore order--but all this
hardly affected the vast body of spectators, and suddenly peace reigned,
the confusion subsided, the shrieks were silenced. Those who were doomed
might fall or die, be crushed or plague-stricken. Trumpet calls and
singing were heard approaching from the town: the procession, the Bridal
procession was coming! Not a man but would have perished rather than be
deprived of seeing a single act of this stupendous drama.

Those Arabs--what fools they were! Besides the Vekeel only three of
their magnates were present, and those men whom no one knew. Even the
Kadi was nowhere to be seen; and he must have forbidden the Moslem women
to come, for not a single veiled beauty of the harem was visible. Not
one Egyptian woman would have failed to appear if the plague had not
kept so many imprisoned in their houses. Such a thing would never
be seen again; this day's doings would be a tale to tell to future
great-grandchildren!

The music and singing came nearer and nearer; and it did not indeed
sound as if it were escorting a hapless creature to a fearful end. Blast
after blast rang out from the trumpets, filling the air with festive
defiance; cheerful bridal songs came nearer and nearer to the listeners,
the shrill chorus of boys and maidens sounding above the deeper and
stronger chant of youths and men of all ages; flutes piped a gay
invitation to gladness; the dull roar of drums muttered like the distant
waves in time to a march, broken by the clang of cymbals and the tinkle
of bells hung around tambourines held high by girlish hands which
struck, rattled and waved them above their flowing curls; lute players
discoursed sweet music on the strings; and as this vast tide of mingled
tones came closer, behind it there was still more music and more song.

To the ear the procession seemed endless, and the eye soon confirmed the
impression.

All were listening, gazing, watching to see the Bride and her escort.
Every eye seemed compelled to turn in the same direction; and presently
there came: first the trumpeters on spirited horses, and these ranged
themselves on each side of the road by the shore leading to the scene of
the "marriage." In front of them the choir of women took their stand
to the left and, on the right, the men who had marched after them.
All alike were arrayed in light sea-green garments, and loaded with
lotos-flowers. The women's hair, twined with white blossoms, flowed over
their shoulders; the men carried bunches of papyrus and reeds;--they
represented river gods that had risen from the stream.

Then came boys and bearded men, in white robes, with panther-skins on
their shoulders, as the heathen priests had been wont to wear them. They
were headed by two old men with long white beards, one holding a silver
cup and the other a golden one, ready to fling them into the waves as
a first offering, according to the practise of their forefathers, as
Horapollo had described and ordered it. These went on to the pontoon,
to its farthest end, and took their place on one side of the platform
whence the Bride was to be cast into the river. Behind them came a large
troop of flute-players and drummers, followed by fifty maidens holding
tambourines, and fifty men all dressed and carrying emblems as followers
of Dionysus, or Osiris-Bacchus, who had been worshipped here in the time
of the Romans; with these came the drunken Silenus, goathoofed Satyrs
and Pan, with his reed-pipes, all riding grey asses strangely bedaubed
with yellow.

Then followed giraffes, elephants, ostriches, antelopes, gazelles; even
some tamed lions and panthers were led past the wondering crowd; for
this had been done in the famous procession in honor of the second
Ptolemy, described by Callixenus of Rhodes.

Next came a large car drawn by twelve black horses, and on it a
symbolical group of Famine and Pestilence overthrown; they were
surrounded by shrieking black children, with pointed wings on their
shoulders and horns on their foreheads, bound to stakes to represent the
hosts of hell--a performance which they tried to make at once ghastly
and droll.

On another car the Goddess of the Inundation was to be seen. She sat
amid sheaves, fruits, and garlands of vine; while round her were groups
of children with apples and corn, pomegranates and bunches of dates,
wine-jars and cups in their hands.

Presently there appeared in a large shell, as though lounging in a bath,
the goddess of health; she was drawn by eight snow-white horses, and
held in one hand a golden goblet and in the other a caduceus. After her
came the river-god Nile, the bridegroom of the marriage, studied from
the famous statue carried away from Alexandria by the Romans: a
splendid and mighty bearded man, resting against an urn. Sixteen naked
children--the sixteen ells that the river must rise for its overflow to
bless the land--played round his herculean form, and a bridal wreath of
lotos-flowers crowned his flowing locks. This car, which was decorated
with crocodiles, sheaves, dates, grapes, and shells, was hailed with
shouts of enthusiasm; it was escorted by old men in the costume of the
heathen priesthood.

Behind this came more music and singers, with a troop of young men
and maidens led by lute-players singing. These too were dressed as the
genie, and nymphs of the river and were the groomsmen and bridesmaids in
attendance on the betrothed.

The longer the procession lasted and the nearer the looked-for victim
approached, the more eagerly attent were the gazing multitude.

When this group of youths and maidens had gone by, there was hardly a
sound to be heard in the tribune and among the crowd. No one felt the
fierce heat of the sun, no one heeded the thirst that parched every
tongue; all eyes were bent in one direction; only the black Vekeel,
whose colossal form towered up where he stood, occasionally sent a
sinister and anxious glance towards the town. He expected to see smoke
rising from the quarter near the prison, and suddenly his lips parted
and he displayed his dazzlingly white teeth in a scornful laugh. That
which he looked for had come to pass; the little grey cloud which he
discerned grew blacker, and then, in the heart of it, rose a crimson
glow which did not take its color from the sun. But of all those
thousands he was the only one who looked behind him and observed it.

The bride's attendants had by this time taken their station on the
pontoon; here came another band of youths with panther skins on their
shoulders; and now--at last, at last--a car came swaying along, drawn
by eight coal-black oxen dressed with green ostrich-feathers and
water-plants.

The car was shaded by a tall canopy, supported by four poles, against
which leaned four men in the robes of the heathen priesthood; this
awning was lavishly decorated with wreaths of lotos and reeds, and
fenced about with papyrus, bulrushes, tall grasses and blossoming
river-weeds. Beneath it sat the queen of the festival--the Bride of the
Nile.

Robed in white and closely veiled, she was quite motionless. Her long,
thick brown hair fell over her shoulders; at her feet lay a wreath, and
rare rose-colored lotos-flowers were strewn on the car.

The bishop had been sitting at her side, the first Christian priest,
certainly, of all the swarms of monks and ecclesiastics in Memphis, who
had ever appeared at such a scene of heathen abomination. He was now
standing, looking down at the crowd with a deeply knit brow and menacing
gaze. What good had come of the penitential sermons in all the
churches, of his and his vicar's warnings and threats? In spite of all
remonstrance he had mounted the car with the condemned victim, after
administering the last consolations to her soul. It might cost him his
life, but he would keep his promise.

In her hand Paula held two roses: one was Orion's last greeting
delivered by Martina; the other Pulcheria had brought her early in the
morning. Yesterday, in a lucid moment, her dying father had given her
his fondest blessing, little knowing what hung over her; to-day he had
not come to himself, and had neither noticed nor returned her parting
kiss. Quite unconscious, he had been moved from the prison out of doors
and to the house of Rufinus. Dame Joanna would not forego the privilege
of giving him a resting-place and taking care of him till the end.

Orion's last note was placed in Paula's hands just before she set out;
it informed her that his task was now successfully ended. He had been
told that it was to-morrow, and not to-day, that the hideous act would
be accomplished; and it was a consolation to her to know that he was
spared the agony of following her in fancy in her fearful progress.

She had allowed the women who came to clothe her in bridal array to
perform their task; among them was Emau, the chief warder's wife,
and her overflowing compassion had done Paula good. But even in the
prison-yard she had felt it unendurable to exhibit herself decked in her
bridal wreaths to the gaping multitude; she had torn them from her and
thrown them on the ground.

How long--how interminably long--had the road to the river appeared; but
she had never raised her eyes to look at the curious crowd, never ceased
lifting up her heart in prayer; and when her proud blood boiled, or
despair had almost taken possession of her, she had grasped the bishop's
hand and he had never wearied of encouraging her and exhorting her to
cling to love and faith, and not even yet abandon all hope.

Thus they at last reached the pontoon at whose further end life would
begin for her in another world. The shouts of the crowd were as loud,
as triumphant, as expectant as ever; music and singing mingled with the
roar of thousands of spectators; she allowed herself to be lifted from
the car as though she were stunned, and followed the young men and
maidens who formed the bridal train, and in alternate choruses sang the
finest nuptial song of Sappho the fair Lesbian.

The bishop now made an attempt to address the people, but he was soon
reduced to silence. So he once more joined Paula, and hand in hand they
went on to the pier.

All she had in her of strength, pride, and heroic courage she summoned
to her aid to enable her to walk these last few paces with her head
erect, and without tottering; she had gone half way along the wooden
structure, with a mien as lofty and majestic as though she were marching
to command the obedience of the mob, when hoofs came thundering after
her on the boards.

Old Horapollo, on his white ass, had overtaken her and stopped her on
her road. Breathless, bathed in perspiration, scornful and triumphant,
he desired her to remove her veil, and ordered the bishop to leave her
and give up his place to the man who represented Father Nile--a gigantic
farrier who followed him, somewhat embarrassed in his costume, but very
ready to perform his part to the end.

The priest and Paula, however, refused to obey. At this the old man tore
the veil from her face and signed to the Nile-God; he stepped forward
and assumed his rights, after bowing respectfully to the prelate--who
was forced to make way--and then led the Bride to the end of the
platform. Here the two elders who had headed the procession in honor
of Bacchus, cast the gold cups as offerings into the river, and then a
lawyer, in the costume of a heathen priest, proceeded to expound, in a
well-set speech, the meaning of this betrothal and sacrifice. He took
Paula's hand to place in that of the farrier, who made ready to cast her
into the river for which he stood proxy.

But an obstacle intervened before he could do so. A large and splendid
barge had drawn up close to the platform, and shouts were heard from
the tribune and from the mob which had till now looked on in breathless
suspense and profound silence:

"Susannah's barge!"

"Look at the Nile, look at the river!"

"It is the water-wagtail--Philammon's rich heiress!"

"A pretty sight!"

"Another Bride--a second Bride!"

And the gaze of the multitude was now, as one eye, fixed on Katharina.

Susannah's handsome barge had been passing up and down near the platform
for the last hour, and the guards on duty had several times desired that
it was to be kept at a distance from the scene of the "marriage;" but
in vain; and they in their little boats were not strong enough to take
active measures against the larger vessel manned by fifty rowers. It
had now steered quite close to the pontoon, and the splendid gilding
and carving, the tall deck-house supported on silver pillars, and the
crimson embroidered sails would have been a gorgeous feast for the eye,
but that the black flag floating from the mast gave it a melancholy and
gloomy aspect.

Within the cabin Katharina had made her waiting-women dress her in
white and deck her with white flowers-myrtle, roses and lotos; but she
vouchsafed no reply to their anxious enquiries.

The maid who fastened the flowers on her bosom could feel her mistress's
heart beating under her hand, and the lotos-blossoms which drooped from
her shoulder rose and fell as though they were already rocking on the
waves of the Nile. Her lips, too, never ceased moving, and her cheeks
were as pale as death.

"What is she going to do?" her attendants asked each other.

Her mother dead only yesterday, and now she chose to be present at this
ceremonial, desiring the steersman to run close to the platform and keep
near to it, where all the world could see her. But she evidently wished
to display herself to the people in all her finery and be admired, for
she presently went up on the roof of the deck-house. And she looked
lovely, as lovely as a guileless angel, as she mounted the steps
with childlike diffidence-timidly, but with wide open eyes, as though
something grand was awaiting her there--something she had long yearned
for with her whole heart.

Anubis had to help her up the last steps, for her knees gave way; but
once at the top she sent him down again to remain below with the others,
as she wished to be alone. The lad was accustomed to obey; and Katharina
now stepped on a seat close to the side of the boat, turned to Paula,
whom she was now rapidly approaching, and held out to her and the bishop
two tall lily-stems covered with splendid blossoms. At the very moment
when the farrier was measuring by eye the distance between the platform
and the barge, and had judged it impossible to cast the Bride into the
stream till the vessel had moved on, Katharina cried out:

"Reverend Father John--and all of you! Take me, me and not the daughter
of Thomas! It is I, not she--I am the true Bride of the Nile. Of my own
free will--hear me, John!--of my own free will I am ready to give my
life for my hapless land and the misery of the people, and the patriarch
said that such a sacrifice as mine would be acceptable to Heaven.
Farewell! Pray for me!--Lord have mercy upon me! Mother, dear Mother, I
am coming to you!"

Then she called to the steersman: "Put out from the platform!" and as
soon as a few strokes of the oars had carried the barge into the deeper
channel she stepped nimbly on to the edge of the bulwark, dropped the
lilies into the river, and then with a smile, her head gracefully bent
on one side and her skirt modestly held round her, she slipped into the
water.

The waves closed over her; but she was a good swimmer and could not help
coming once to the surface. Her expression was that of a bather enjoying
the cool fresh water that laved and gurgled round her. Perhaps the
wild storm of applause, the mingled cries of horror, compassion and
thanksgiving that went up from the assembled thousands once more reached
her ear--but she dived head foremost to rise no more.

The "River-God," a good-hearted man, who in his daily life could never
have let a fellow-creature drown under his very eyes, forgot his part,
released Paula, and sprang after Katharina, as did Anubis and a few
boatmen; but they could not reach her, and the boy, who found swimming
difficult with his crippled leg followed the girl to whom his young
heart was wholly devoted to a watery death.

Her speech had reached no ears but those to whom it was addressed; but
before she was lost in the waters Bishop John turned to the people, took
Paula's hand--and she felt free once more when her terrible bridegroom
had deserted her--and holding up the Crucifix which hung at his girdle
he shouted loudly:

"Behold the desires of our holy Father Benjamin, by whom God himself
speaks to you, have met with fulfilment. A pure and noble Jacobite
maiden, of her own free and beautiful impulse, has sacrificed herself
after the example of the Saviour, for the sufferings of her nation,
before your eyes. This one," and he drew Paula to him, "this one is
free; the Nile has had his victim!"

But almost before he had done speaking--before the people could proclaim
their vote--Horapollo had rushed at him and interrupted him. He had
dismounted from his ass during the earlier part of the proceedings, and,
not to let his prey escape, he now came between Paula and the bishop,
grasped her dress and cried to the chorus of youths:

"Come on--at once! One of you take the part of the Nile-God--into the
river with the Bride!" The bishop however forced himself between the
speaker and the girl to protect her. But Horapollo flew into a fury and
rushed at the prelate to snatch away the image of the Saviour, while
John exclaimed in a voice of ominous thunder: "Anathema!"

This word of fear roused the Christian blood in the Egyptians; the
sacrilegious attempt stirred the zeal which they had proved in many a
struggle, and which had only been kept under by an effort during these
times of trouble: the leader of the choir dragged the old man away and
took part with the bishop. Others followed his example, while several,
on the contrary, sided with old Horapollo who clung tightly to Paula,
preferring to die himself rather than allow her to escape his hatred and
vengeance.

At this moment the clang of bells was heard from the town with a
terrific and unaccountable uproar, and a young man was seen forcing his
way through the throng, a naked sword in his hand, and in spite of his
torn garments, his wild hair, and his blackened face, he was at once
recognized as Orion. Every one made way for him, for he rushed on like a
madman; as he reached the pontoon and took in at a glance what was
going forward there, he sprang past the mummers with mighty leaps to the
platform, pushing aside sundry groups of fighting champions; and before
the principal actors were aware of his presence, he had snatched Paula
from the old man's clutch, and called her by her name. She sank on his
breast half-fainting with terror, surprise and unspeakable rapture, and
he clasped her to him with his left arm, while the flashing sword in his
right hand and his flaming looks warned all bystanders that it would
be as wise to attack a lioness defending her young as to defy this
desperate man, who was prepared to face death with the woman he loved.

His push had sent Horapollo tottering to some distance; and when the
