"Madame," said he, "I have a grace to demand from you, which will,
methinks, not be displeasing. My lieutenants report to me that an alarm
has spread amongst my men,--a religious horror of some fearful bombards
and guns which have been devised by a sorcerer in Lord Warwick's pay.
Your famous Friar Bungey has been piously amongst them, promising,
however, that the mists which now creep over the earth shall last
through the night and the early morrow; and if he deceive us not, we may
post our men so as to elude the hostile artillery. But, sith the friar
is so noted and influential, and sith there is a strong fancy that the
winds which have driven back Margaret obeyed his charm, the soldiers
clamour out for him to attend us, and, on the very field itself,
counteract the spells of the Lancastrian nigromancer. The good friar,
more accustomed to fight with fiends than men, is daunted, and resists.
As much may depend on his showing us good will, and making our fellows
suppose we have the best of the witchcraft, I pray you to command his
attendance, and cheer up his courage. He waits without."

"A most notable, a most wise advice, beloved Richard!" cried the
duchess. "Friar Bungey is, indeed, a potent man. I will win him at once
to your will;" and the duchess hurried from the room.

The friar's bodily fears, quieted at last by assurances that he should
be posted in a place of perfect safety during the battle, and his
avarice excited by promises of the amplest rewards, he consented to
accompany the troops, upon one stipulation,--namely, that the atrocious
wizard, who had so often baffled his best spells,--the very wizard who
had superintended the accursed bombards, and predicted Edward's previous
defeat and flight (together with the diabolical invention, in which all
the malice and strength of his sorcery were centred),--might, according
to Jacquetta's former promise, be delivered forthwith to his mercy, and
accompany him to the very spot where he was to dispel and counteract
the Lancastrian nigromancer's enchantments. The duchess, too glad to
purchase the friar's acquiescence on such cheap terms, and to whose
superstitious horror for Adam's lore in the black art was now added a
purely political motive for desiring him to be made away with,--inasmuch
as in the Sanctuary she had at last extorted from Elizabeth the dark
secret which might make him a very dangerous witness against the
interests and honour of Edward,--readily and joyfully consented to this
proposition.

A strong guard was at once despatched to the Tower with the friar
himself, followed by a covered wagon, which was to serve for conveyance
to Bungey and his victim.

In the mean while, Sibyll, after remaining for some time in the chamber
which Hastings had abandoned to her solitary woe, had passed to the room
in which her father held mute commune with his Eureka.

The machine was now thoroughly completed,--improved and perfected,
to the utmost art the inventor ever could attain. Thinking that the
prejudice against it might have arisen from its uncouth appearance,
the poor philosopher had sought now to give it a gracious and imposing
appearance. He had painted and gilt it with his own hands; it looked
bright and gaudy in its gay hues; its outward form was worthy of the
precious and propitious jewel which lay hidden in its centre.

"See, child, see!" said Adam; "is it not beautiful and comely?"

"My dear father, yes!" answered the poor girl, as still she sought to
smile; then, after a short silence, she continued, "Father, of late,
methinks, I have too much forgotten thee; pardon me, if so. Henceforth,
I have no care in life but thee; henceforth let me ever, when thou
toilest, come and sit by thy side. I would not be alone,--I dare not!
Father, Father! God shield thy harmless life! I have nothing to love
under heaven but thee!"

The good man turned wistfully, and raised, with tremulous hands, the sad
face that had pressed itself on his bosom. Gazing thereon mournfully, he
said, "Some new grief hath chanced to thee, my child. Methought I heard
another voice besides thine in yonder room. Ah, has Lord Hastings--"

"Father, spare me! Thou wert too right; thou didst judge too wisely.
Lord Hastings is wedded to another! But see, I can smile still, I am
calm. My heart will not break so long as it hath thee to love and pray
for!"

She wound her arms round him as she spoke, and he roused himself from
his world out of earth again. Though he could bring no comfort, there
was something, at least, to the forlorn one, in his words of love, in
his tears of pity.

They sat down together, side by side, as the evening darkened,--the
Eureka forgotten in the hour of its perfection! They noted not the
torches which flashed below, reddened at intervals the walls of their
chamber, and gave a glow to the gay gilding and bright hues of the gaudy
model. Yet those torches flickered round the litter that was to convey
Henry the Peaceful to the battlefield, which was to decide the dynasty
of his realm! The torches vanished, and forth from the dark fortress
went the captive king.

Night succeeded to eve, when again the red glare shot upward on the
Eureka, playing with fantastic smile on its quaint aspect. Steps and
voices, and the clatter of arms, sounded in the yard, on the stairs,
in the adjoining chamber; and suddenly the door was flung open, and,
followed by some half score soldiers, strode in the terrible friar.

"Aha, Master Adam! who is the greater nigromancer now? Seize him! Away!
And help you, Master Sergeant, to bear this piece of the foul fiend's
cunning devising. Ho, ho! see you how it is tricked out and furbished
up,--all for the battle, I warrant ye!"

The soldiers had already seized upon Adam, who, stupefied by
astonishment rather than fear, uttered no sound, and attempted no
struggle. But it was in vain they sought to tear from him Sibyll's
clinging and protecting arms. A supernatural strength, inspired by a
kind of superstition that no harm could chance to him while she was
by, animated her slight form; and fierce though the soldiers were, they
shrunk from actual and brutal violence to one thus young and fair. Those
small hands clung so firmly, that it seemed that nothing but the edge of
the sword could sever the child's clasp from the father's neck.

"Harm him not, harm him at your peril, friar!" she cried, with flashing
eyes. "Tear him from me, and if King Edward win the day, Lord Hastings
shall have thy life; if Lord Warwick, thy days are numbered, too.
Beware, and avaunt!"

The friar was startled. He had forgotten Lord Hastings in the zest of
his revenge. He feared that, if Sibyll were left behind, the tale she
might tell would indeed bring on him a powerful foe in the daughter's
lover; on the other hand, should Lord Warwick get the better, what
vengeance would await her appeal to the great protector of her father!
He resolved, therefore, on the instant, to take Sibyll as well as her
father; and if the fortune of the day allowed him to rid himself of
Warner, a good occasion might equally occur to dispose forever of the
testimony of Sibyll. He had already formed a cunning calculation
in desiring Warner's company; for while, should Edward triumph, the
sacrifice of the hated Warner was resolved upon, yet, should the earl
get the better, he could make a merit to Warner that he (the friar) had
not only spared, but saved, his life, in making him his companion. It
was in harmony with this double policy that the friar mildly answered to
Sibyll,--

"Tusk, my daughter! Perhaps if your father be true to King Edward, and
aid my skill instead of obstructing it, he may be none the worse for the
journey he must take; and if thou likest to go with him, there's room in
the vehicle, and the more the merrier. Harm them not, soldiers; no doubt
they will follow quietly."

As he said this, the men, after first crossing themselves, had already
hoisted up the Eureka; and when Adam saw it borne from the room, he
instinctively followed the bearers. Sibyll, relieved by the thought
that, for weal or for woe, she should, at least, share her father's
fate, and scarce foreboding much positive danger from the party which
contained Hastings and Alwyn, attempted no further remonstrance.

The Eureka was placed in the enormous vehicle,--it served as a barrier
between the friar and his prisoners.

The friar himself, as soon as the wagon was in motion, addressed himself
civilly enough to his fellow-travellers, and assured them there was
nothing to fear, unless Adam thought fit to disturb his incantations.
The captives answered not his address, but nestled close to each other,
interchanging, at intervals, words of comfort, and recoiling as far
as possible from the ex-tregetour, who, having taken with him a more
congenial companion in the shape of a great leathern bottle, finally
sunk into the silent and complacent doze which usually rewards the
libations to the Bromian god.

The vehicle, with many other baggage-wagons in the rear of the army in
that memorable night-march, moved mournfully on; the night continued
wrapped in fog and mist, agreeably to the weatherwise predictions of the
friar. The rumbling groan of the vehicle, the tramp of the soldiers, the
dull rattle of their arms, with now and then the neigh of some knight's
steed in the distance, were the only sounds that broke the silence, till
once, as they neared their destination, Sibyll started from her father's
bosom, and shudderingly thought she recognized the hoarse chant and the
tinkling bells of the ominous tymbesteres.




CHAPTER III. A PAUSE.

In the profound darkness of the night and the thick fog, Edward had
stationed his men at a venture upon the heath at Gladsmoor, [Edward "had
the greater number of men."--HALL, p. 296.] and hastily environed
the camp with palisades and trenches. He had intended to have rested
immediately in front of the foe, but, in the darkness, mistook the
extent of the hostile line; and his men were ranged only opposite to
the left side of the earl's force (towards Hadley), leaving the right
unopposed. Most fortunate for Edward was this mistake; for Warwick's
artillery, and the new and deadly bombards he had constructed, were
placed on the right of the earl's army; and the provident earl,
naturally supposing Edward's left was there opposed to him, ordered
his gunners to cannonade all night. Edward, "as the flashes of the
guns illumined by fits the gloom of midnight, saw the advantage of
his unintentional error; and to prevent Warwick from discovering it,
reiterated his orders for the most profound silence." [Sharon Turner.]
Thus even his very blunders favoured Edward more than the wisest
precautions had served his fated foe.

Raw, cold, and dismal dawned the morning of the fourteenth of April, the
Easter Sabbath. In the fortunes of that day were involved those of all
the persons who hitherto, in the course of this narrative, may have
seemed to move in separate orbits from the fiery star of Warwick. Now,
in this crowning hour, the vast and gigantic destiny of the great earl
comprehended all upon which its darkness or its light had fallen: not
only the luxurious Edward, the perjured Clarence, the haughty Margaret,
her gallant son, the gentle Anne, the remorseful Isabel, the dark guile
of Gloucester, the rising fortunes of the gifted Hastings,--but on the
hazard of that die rested the hopes of Hilyard, and the interests of the
trader Alwyn, and the permanence of that frank, chivalric, hardy, still
half Norman race, of which Nicholas Alwyn and his Saxon class were the
rival antagonistic principle, and Marmaduke Nevile the ordinary type.
Dragged inexorably into the whirlpool of that mighty fate were even
the very lives of the simple Scholar, of his obscure and devoted child.
Here, into this gory ocean, all scattered rivulets and streams had
hastened to merge at last.

But grander and more awful than all individual interests were those
assigned to the fortunes of this battle, so memorable in the English
annals,--the ruin or triumph of a dynasty; the fall of that warlike
baronage, of which Richard Nevile was the personation, the crowning
flower, the greatest representative and the last,--associated with
memories of turbulence and excess, it is true, but with the proudest and
grandest achievements in our early history; with all such liberty as had
been yet achieved since the Norman Conquest; with all such glory as had
made the island famous,--here with Runnymede, and there with Cressy; the
rise of a crafty, plotting, imperious Despotism, based upon the growing
sympathy of craftsmen and traders, and ripening on the one hand to the
Tudor tyranny, the Republican reaction under the Stuarts, the slavery,
and the civil war, but on the other hand to the concentration of all
the vigour and life of genius into a single and strong government, the
graces, the arts, the letters of a polished court, the freedom, the
energy, the resources of a commercial population destined to rise above
the tyranny at which it had first connived, and give to the emancipated
Saxon the markets of the world. Upon the victory of that day all these
contending interests, this vast alternative in the future, swayed and
trembled. Out, then, upon that vulgar craving of those who comprehend
neither the vast truths of life nor the grandeur of ideal art, and
who ask from poet or narrator the poor and petty morality of "Poetical
Justice,"--a justice existing not in our work-day world; a justice
existing not in the sombre page of history; a justice existing not
in the loftier conceptions of men whose genius has grappled with the
enigmas which art and poetry only can foreshadow and divine,--unknown
to us in the street and the market, unknown to us on the scaffold of the
patriot or amidst the flames of the martyr, unknown to us in the Lear
and the Hamlet, in the Agamemnon and the Prometheus. Millions upon
millions, ages upon ages, are entered but as items in the vast account
in which the recording angel sums up the unerring justice of God to man.

Raw, cold, and dismal dawned the morning of the fourteenth of April. And
on that very day Margaret and her son, and the wife and daughter of Lord
Warwick, landed, at last, on the shores of England. [Margaret landed at
Weymouth; Lady Warwick, at Portsmouth.] Come they for joy or for woe,
for victory or despair? The issue of this day's fight on the heath of
Gladsmoor will decide. Prank thy halls, O Westminster, for the triumph
of the Lancastrian king,--or open thou, O Grave, to receive the
saint-like Henry and his noble son. The king-maker goes before ye,
saint-like father and noble son, to prepare your thrones amongst the
living or your mansions amongst the dead!




CHAPTER IV. THE BATTLE.

Raw, cold, and dismal dawned the morning of the fourteenth of April. The
heavy mist still covered both armies, but their hum and stir was already
heard through the gloaming,--the neighing of steeds, and the clangour
of mail. Occasionally a movement of either force made dim forms, seeming
gigantic through the vapour, indistinctly visible to the antagonistic
army; and there was something ghastly and unearthlike in these ominous
shapes, suddenly seen, and suddenly vanishing, amidst the sullen
atmosphere. By this time, Warwick had discovered the mistake of his
gunners; for, to the right of the earl, the silence of the Yorkists was
still unbroken, while abruptly, from the thick gloom to the left, broke
the hoarse mutter and low growl of the awakening war. Not a moment was
lost by the earl in repairing the error of the night: his artillery
wheeled rapidly from the right wing, and, sudden as a storm of
lightning, the fire from the cannon flashed through the dun and heavy
vapour, and, not far from the very spot where Hastings was marshalling
the wing intrusted to his command, made a deep chasm in the serried
ranks. Death had begun his feast!

At that moment, however, from the centre of the Yorkist army, arose,
scarcely drowned by the explosion, that deep-toned shout of enthusiasm,
which he who has once heard it, coming, as it were, from the one
heart of an armed multitude, will ever recall as the most kindling
and glorious sound which ever quickened the pulse and thrilled the
blood,--for along that part of the army now rode King Edward. His mail
was polished as a mirror, but otherwise unadorned, resembling that which
now invests his effigies at the Tower, [The suit of armour, however,
which the visitor to the Royal Armoury is expected to believe King
Edward could have worn, is infinitely too small for such credulity.
Edward's height was six feet two inches.] and the housings of his steed
were spangled with silver suns, for the silver sun was the cognizance on
all his banners. His head was bare, and through the hazy atmosphere the
gold of his rich locks seemed literally to shine. Followed by his body
squire, with his helm and lance, and the lords in his immediate staff,
his truncheon in his hand, he passed slowly along the steady line, till,
halting where he deemed his voice could be farthest heard, he reined
in, and lifting his hand, the shout of the soldiery was hushed; though
still, while he spoke, from Warwick's archers came the arrowy shower,
and still the gloom was pierced and the hush interrupted by the flash
and the roar of the bombards.

"Englishmen and friends," said the martial chief, "to bold deeds go
but few words. Before you is the foe! From Ravenspur to London I have
marched, treason flying from my sword, loyalty gathering to my standard.
With but two thousand men, on the fourteenth of March, I entered
England; on the fourteenth of April, fifty thousand is my muster roll.
Who shall say, then, that I am not king, when one month mans a monarch's
army from his subjects' love? And well know ye, now, that my cause is
yours and England's! Those against us are men who would rule in despite
of law,--barons whom I gorged with favours, and who would reduce this
fair realm of King, Lords, and Commons to be the appanage and property
of one man's measureless ambition,--the park, forsooth, the homestead to
Lord Warwick's private house! Ye gentlemen and knights of England, let
them and their rabble prosper, and your properties will be despoiled,
your lives insecure, all law struck dead. What differs Richard of
Warwick from Jack Cade, save that if his name is nobler, so is his
treason greater? Commoners and soldiers of England, freemen, however
humble, what do these rebel lords (who would rule in the name of
Lancaster) desire? To reduce you to villeins and to bondsmen, as your
forefathers were to them. Ye owe freedom from the barons to the just
laws of my sires, your kings. Gentlemen and knights, commoners and
soldiers, Edward IV. upon his throne will not profit by a victory more
than you. This is no war of dainty chivalry,--it is a war of true men
against false. No quarter! Spare not either knight or hilding. Warwick,
forsooth, will not smite the Commons. Truly not,--the rabble are his
friends! I say to you--" and Edward, pausing in the excitement and
sanguinary fury of his tiger nature,--the soldiers, heated like himself
to the thirst of blood, saw his eyes sparkle, and his teeth gnash, as he
added in a deeper and lower, but not less audible voice, "I say to you,
SLAY ALL! [Hall.] What heel spares the viper's brood?"

"We will! we will!" was the horrid answer, which came hissing and
muttered forth from morion and cap of steel.

"Hark! to their bombards!" resumed Edward. "The enemy would fight from
afar, for they excel us in their archers and gunners. Upon them, then,
hand to hand, and man to man! Advance banners, sound trumpets! Sir
Oliver, my bassinet! Soldiers, if my standard falls, look for the plume
upon your king's helmet! Charge!"

Then, with a shout wilder and louder than before, on through the hail
of the arrows, on through the glare of the bombards, rather with a rush
than in a march, advanced Edward's centre against the array of Somerset;
but from a part of the encampment where the circumvallation seemed
strongest, a small body of men moved not with the general body.

To the left of the churchyard of Hadley, at this day, the visitor may
notice a low wall; on the other side of that wall is a garden, then but
a rude eminence on Gladsmoor Heath. On that spot a troop in complete
armour, upon destriers pawing impatiently, surrounded a man upon a sorry
palfrey, and in a gown of blue,--the colour of royalty and of servitude;
that man was Henry the Sixth. In the same space stood Friar Bungey,
his foot on the Eureka, muttering incantations, that the mists he had
foretold, [Lest the reader should suppose that the importance of Friar
Bungey upon this bloody day has been exaggerated by the narrator, we
must cite the testimony of sober Allerman Fabyan: "Of the mists and
other impediments which fell upon the lords' party, by reason of the
incantations wrought by Friar Bungey, as the fame went, me list not to
write."] and which had protected the Yorkists from the midnight guns,
might yet last, to the confusion of the foe. And near him, under a
gaunt, leafless tree, a rope round his neck, was Adam Warner, Sibyl
still faithful to his side, nor shuddering at the arrows and the guns,
her whole fear concentrated upon the sole life for which her own was
prized. Upon this eminence, then, these lookers-on stood aloof. And
the meek ears of Henry heard through the fog the inexplicable, sullen,
jarring clash,--steel had met steel.

"Holy Father!" exclaimed the kingly saint, "and this is the Easter
Sabbath, Thy most solemn day of peace!"

"Be silent," thundered the friar; "thou disturbest my spells.
Barabbarara, Santhinoa, Foggibus increscebo, confusio inimicis,
Garabbora, vapor et mistes!"

We must now rapidly survey the dispositions of the army under Warwick.
In the right wing, the command was entrusted to the Earl of Oxford
and the Marquis of Montagu. The former, who led the cavalry of that
division, was stationed in the van; the latter, according to his usual
habit--surrounded by a strong body-guard of knights and a prodigious
number of squires as aides-de-camp--remained at the rear, and directed
thence by his orders the general movement. In this wing the greater
number were Lancastrian, jealous of Warwick, and only consenting to the
generalship of Montagu because shared by their favourite hero, Oxford.
In the mid-space lay the chief strength of the bowmen, with a goodly
number of pikes and bills, under the Duke of Somerset; and this division
also was principally Lancastrian, and shared the jealousy of Oxford's
soldiery. The left wing, composed for the most part of Warwick's
yeomanry and retainers, was commanded by the Duke of Exeter, conjointly
with the earl himself. Both armies kept a considerable body in reserve,
and Warwick, besides this resource, had selected from his own retainers
a band of picked archers, whom he had skilfully placed in the outskirts
of a wood that then stretched from Wrotham Park to the column that now
commemorates the battle of Barnet, on the high northern road. He had
guarded these last-mentioned archers (where exposed in front to Edward's
horsemen) by strong tall barricades, leaving only such an opening
as would allow one horseman at a time to pass, and defending by a
formidable line of pikes this narrow opening left for communication, and
to admit to a place of refuge in case of need. These dispositions made,
and ere yet Edward had advanced on Somerset, the earl rode to the front
of the wing under his special command, and, agreeably to the custom of
the time, observed by his royal foe, harangued the troops. Here were
placed those who loved him as a father, and venerated him as something
superior to mortal man; here the retainers who had grown up with him
from his childhood, who had followed him to his first fields of war, who
had lived under the shelter of his many castles, and fed, in that rude
equality of a more primeval age which he loved still to maintain, at his
lavish board. And now Lord Warwick's coal-black steed halted, motionless
in the van. His squire behind bore his helmet, overshadowed by the eagle
of Monthermer, the outstretched wings of which spread wide into sable
plumes; and as the earl's noble face turned full and calm upon the
bristling lines, there arose not the vulgar uproar that greeted the
aspect of the young Edward. By one of those strange sympathies which
pass through multitudes, and seize them with a common feeling, the whole
body of those adoring vassals became suddenly aware of the change which
a year had made in the face of their chief and father. They saw the
gray flakes in his Jove-like curls, the furrows in that lofty brow, the
hollows in that bronzed and manly visage, which had seemed to their rude
admiration to wear the stamp of the twofold Divinity,--Beneficence and
Valour. A thrill of tenderness and awe shot through the veins of every
one, tears of devotion rushed into many a hardy eye. No! there was not
the ruthless captain addressing his hireling butchers; it was the chief
and father rallying gratitude and love and reverence to the crisis of
his stormy fate.

"My friends, my followers, and my children," said the earl, "the field
we have entered is one from which there is no retreat; here must your
leader conquer or here die. It is not a parchment pedigree, it is not a
name derived from the ashes of dead men, that make the only charter of a
king. We Englishmen were but slaves, if, in giving crown and sceptre
to a mortal like ourselves, we asked not in return the kingly virtues.
Beset of old by evil counsellors, the reign of Henry VI. was obscured,
and the weal of the realm endangered. Mine own wrongs seemed to me
great, but the disasters of my country not less. I deemed that in the
race of York, England would know a wiser and happier rule. What was, in
this, mine error, ye partly know. A prince dissolved in luxurious vices,
a nobility degraded by minions and blood-suckers, a people plundered by
purveyors, and a land disturbed by brawl and riot. But ye know not all:
God makes man's hearth man's altar: our hearths were polluted, our wives
and daughters were viewed as harlots, and lechery ruled the realm. A
king's word should be fast as the pillars of the world. What man ever
trusted Edward and was not deceived? Even now the unknightly liar stands
in arms with the weight of perjury on his soul. In his father's town
of York, ye know that he took, three short weeks since, solemn oath
of fealty to King Henry. And now King Henry is his captive, and King
Henry's holy crown upon his traitor's head. 'Traitors' calls he Us? What
name, then, rank enough for him? Edward gave the promise of a brave man,
and I served him. He proved a base, a false, a licentious, and a cruel
king, and I forsook him; may all free hearts in all free lands so serve
kings when they become tyrants! Ye fight against a cruel and atrocious
usurper, whose bold hand cannot sanctify a black heart; ye fight not
only for King Henry, the meek and the godly,--ye fight not for him
alone, but for his young and princely son, the grandchild of Henry of
Agincourt, who, old men tell me, has that hero's face, and who, I know,
has that hero's frank and royal and noble soul; ye fight for the freedom
of your land, for the honour of your women, for what is better than any
king's cause,--for justice and mercy, for truth and manhood's virtues
against corruption in the laws, slaughter by the scaffold, falsehood
in a ruler's lips, and shameless harlotry in the councils of ruthless
power. The order I have ever given in war I give now; we war against
the leaders of evil, not against the hapless tools; we war against our
oppressors, not against our misguided brethren. Strike down every plumed
crest, but when the strife is over, spare every common man! Hark! while
I speak, I hear the march of your foe! Up standards!--blow trumpets! And
now, as I brace my bassinet, may God grant us all a glorious victory,
or a glorious grave! On, my merry men! show these London loons the stout
hearts of Warwickshire and Yorkshire. On, my merry men! A Warwick! A
Warwick!"

As he ended, he swung lightly over his head the terrible battle-axe
which had smitten down, as the grass before the reaper, the chivalry of
many a field; and ere the last blast of the trumpets died, the troops of
Warwick and of Gloucester met, and mingled hand to hand.

Although the earl had, on discovering the position of the enemy, moved
some of his artillery from his right wing, yet there still lay the great
number and strength of his force. And there, therefore, Montagu, rolling
troop on troop to the aid of Oxford, pressed so overpoweringly upon
the soldiers under Hastings, that the battle very soon wore a most
unfavourable aspect for the Yorkists. It seemed, indeed, that the
success which had always hitherto attended the military movements of
Montagu was destined for a crowning triumph. Stationed, as we have said,
in the rear, with his light-armed squires, upon fleet steeds, around
him, he moved the springs of the battle with the calm sagacity which at
that moment no chief in either army possessed. Hastings was thoroughly
outflanked, and though his men fought with great valour, they could not
resist the weight of superior numbers.

In the midst of the carnage in the centre, Edward reined in his steed as
he heard the cry of victory in the gale.

"By Heaven!" he exclaimed, "our men at the left are cravens! they fly!
they fly!--Ride to Lord Hastings, Sir Humphrey Bourchier, bid him defile
hither what men are left him; and now, ere our fellows are well
aware what hath chanced yonder, charge we, knights and gentlemen, on,
on!--break Somerset's line; on, on, to the heart of the rebel earl!"

Then, visor closed, lance in rest, Edward and his cavalry dashed through
the archers and billmen of Somerset; clad in complete mail, impervious
to the weapons of the infantry, they slaughtered as they rode, and their
way was marked by corpses and streams of blood. Fiercest and fellest of
all was Edward himself; when his lance shivered, and he drew his knotty
mace from its sling by his saddlebow, woe to all who attempted to stop
his path. Vain alike steel helmet or leathern cap, jerkin or coat of
mail. In vain Somerset threw himself into the melee. The instant Edward
and his cavalry had made a path through the lines for his foot-soldiery,
the fortunes of the day were half retrieved. It was no rapid passage,
pierced and reclosed, that he desired to effect,--it was the wedge in
the oak of war. There, rooted in the very midst of Somerset's troops,
doubling on each side, passing on but to return again, where helm could
be crashed and man overthrown, the mighty strength of Edward widened the
breach more and more, till faster and faster poured in his bands,
and the centre of Warwick's army seemed to reel and whirl round the
broadening gap through its ranks, as the waves round some chasm in a
maelstrom.

But in the interval, the hard-pressed troops commanded by Hastings were
scattered and dispersed; driven from the field, they fled in numbers
through the town of Barnet; many halted not till they reached London,
where they spread the news of the earl's victory and Edward's ruin.
[Sharon Turner.]

Through the mist, Friar Bungey discerned the fugitive Yorkists under
Hastings, and heard their cries of despair; through the mist, Sibyll
saw, close beneath the intrenchments which protected the space on which
they stood, an armed horseman with the well-known crest of Hastings on
his helmet, and, with lifted visor, calling his men to the return, in
the loud voice of rage and scorn. And then she herself sprang forwards,
and forgetting his past cruelty in his present danger, cried his
name,--weak cry, lost in the roar of war! But the friar, now fearing he
had taken the wrong side, began to turn from his spells, to address the
most abject apologies to Adam, to assure him that he would have been
slaughtered at the Tower but for the friar's interruption; and that
the rope round his neck was but an insignificant ceremony due to the
prejudices of the soldiers. "Alas, Great Man," he concluded, "I see
still that thou art mightier than I am; thy charms, though silent, are
more potent than mine, though my lungs crack beneath them! Confusio
Inimicis Taralorolu, I mean no harm to the earl. Garrabora, mistes et
nubes!--Lord, what will become of me!"

Meanwhile, Hastings--with a small body of horse, who being composed of
knights and squires, specially singled out for the sword, fought
with the pride of disdainful gentlemen, and the fury of desperate
soldiers--finding it impossible to lure back the fugitives, hewed their
own way through Oxford's ranks to the centre, where they brought fresh
aid to the terrible arm of Edward.




CHAPTER V. THE BATTLE.

The mist still continued so thick that Montagu was unable to discern
the general prospects of the field; but, calm and resolute in his post,
amidst the arrows which whirled round him, and often struck, blunted,
against his Milan mail, the marquis received the reports of his
aides-de-camp (may that modern word be pardoned?) as one after one they
emerged through the fog to his side.

"Well," he said, as one of these messengers now spurred to the spot, "we
have beaten off Hastings and his hirelings; but I see not 'the Silver
Star' of Lord Oxford's banner." [The Silver Star of the De Veres had its
origin in a tradition that one of their ancestors, when fighting in
the Holy Land, saw a falling star descend upon his shield. Fatal to men
nobler even than the De Veres was that silver falling star.]

"Lord Oxford, my lord, has followed the enemy he routed to the farthest
verge of the heath."

"Saints help us! Is Oxford thus headstrong? He will ruin all if he be
decoyed from the field! Ride back, sir! Yet hold!"--as another of the
aides-de-camp appeared. "What news from Lord Warwick's wing?"

"Sore beset, bold marquis. Gloucester's line seems countless; it already
outflanks the earl. The duke himself seems inspired by hell! Twice has
his slight arm braved even the earl's battle-axe, which spared the boy
but smote to the dust his comrades!"

"Well, and what of the centre, sir?" as a third form now arrived.

"There rages Edward in person. He hath pierced into the midst. But
Somerset still holds on gallantly!" Montagu turned to the first
aide-de-camp.

"Ride, sir! Quick! This to Oxford--No pursuit! Bid him haste, with all
his men, to the left wing, and smite Gloucester in the rear. Ride, ride,
for life and victory! If he come but in time the day is ours!" [Fabyan.]

The aide-de-camp darted off, and the mist swallowed up horse and
horseman.

"Sound trumpets to the return!" said the marquis. Then, after a moment's
musing, "Though Oxford hath drawn off our main force of cavalry, we have
still some stout lances left; and Warwick must be strengthened. On to
the earl! Laissez aller! A Montagu! a Montagu!" And lance in rest,
the marquis and the knights immediately around him, and hitherto not
personally engaged, descended the hillock at a hand-gallop, and were met
by a troop outnumbering their own, and commanded by the Lords D'Eyncourt
and Say.

At this time Warwick was indeed in the same danger that had routed the
troops of Hastings; for, by a similar position, the strength of the
hostile numbers being arrayed with Gloucester, the duke's troops had
almost entirely surrounded him [Sharon Turner]; and Gloucester himself
wondrously approved the trust that had consigned to his stripling
arm the flower of the Yorkist army. Through the mists the blood-red
manteline he wore over his mail, the grinning teeth of the boar's head
which crested his helmet, flashed and gleamed wherever his presence was
most needed to encourage the flagging or spur on the fierce. And there
seemed to both armies something ghastly and preternatural in the savage
strength of this small slight figure thus startlingly caparisoned, and
which was heard evermore uttering its sharp war-cry, "Gloucester to the
onslaught! Down with the rebels, down!"

Nor did this daring personage disdain, in the midst of his fury, to
increase the effect of valour by the art of a brain that never ceased
to scheme on the follies of mankind. "See, see!" he cried, as he shot
meteor-like from rank to rank, "see, these are no natural vapours!
Yonder the mighty friar, who delayed the sails of Margaret, chants his
spells to the Powers that ride the gale. Fear not the bombards,--their
enchanted balls swerve from the brave! The dark legions of Air fight
for us! For the hour is come when the fiend shall rend his prey!" And
fiendlike seemed the form thus screeching forth its predictions from
under the grim head-gear; and then darting and disappearing amidst the
sea of pikes, cleaving its path of blood!

But still the untiring might of Warwick defied the press of numbers
that swept round him tide upon tide. Through the mist, his black armour,
black plume, black steed, gloomed forth like one thundercloud in the
midst of a dismal heaven. The noble charger bore along that mighty
rider, animating, guiding all, with as much ease and lightness as the
racer bears its puny weight; the steed itself was scarce less terrible
to encounter than the sweep of the rider's axe. Protected from arrow and
lance by a coat of steel, the long chaffron, or pike, which projected
from its barbed frontal dropped with gore as it scoured along. No line
of men, however serried, could resist the charge of that horse and
horseman. And vain even Gloucester's dauntless presence and thrilling
battle-cry, when the stout earl was seen looming through the vapour, and
his cheerful shout was heard, "My merry men, fight on!"

For a third time, Gloucester, spurring forth from his recoiling and
shrinking followers, bending low over his saddle-bow, covered by his
shield, and with the tenth lance (his favourite weapon, because the one
in which skill best supplied strength) he had borne that day, launched
himself upon the vast bulk of his tremendous foe. With that dogged
energy, that rapid calculation, which made the basis of his character,
and which ever clove through all obstacles at the one that, if
destroyed, destroyed the rest,--in that, his first great battle, as in
his last at Bosworth, he singled out the leader, and rushed upon the
giant as the mastiff on the horns and dewlap of the bull. Warwick, in
the broad space which his arm had made around him in the carnage, reined
in as he saw the foe and recognized the grisly cognizance and scarlet
mantle of his godson. And even in that moment, with all his heated blood
and his remembered wrong and his imminent peril, his generous and lion
heart felt a glow of admiration at the valour of the boy he had trained
to arms,--of the son of the beloved York. "His father little thought,"
muttered the earl, "that that arm should win glory against his old
friend's life!" And as the half-uttered word died on his lips, the
well-poised lance of Gloucester struck full upon his bassinet, and,
despite the earl's horsemanship and his strength, made him reel in his
saddle, while the prince shot by, and suddenly wheeling round, cast away
the shivered lance, and assailed him sword in hand.

"Back, Richard! boy, back!" said the earl, in a voice that sounded
hollow through his helmet; "it is not against thee that my wrongs call
for blood,--pass on!"

"Not so, Lord Warwick," answered Richard, in a sobered and almost solemn
voice, dropping for the moment the point of his sword, and raising his
visor, that he might be the better heard,--"on the field of battle all
memories sweet in peace must die! Saint Paul be my judge, that even in
this hour I love you well; but I love renown and glory more. On the
edge of my sword sit power and royalty, and what high souls prize
most,--ambition; these would nerve me against my own brother's breast,
were that breast my barrier to an illustrious future. Thou hast given
thy daughter to another! I smite the father to regain my bride. Lay on,
and spare not!--for he who hates thee most would prove not so fell a foe
as the man who sees his fortunes made or marred, his love crushed or yet
crowned, as this day's battle closes in triumph or defeat. REBEL, DEFEND
THYSELF!"

No time was left for further speech; for as Richard's sword descended,
two of Gloucester's followers, Parr and Milwater by name, dashed from
the halting lines at the distance, and bore down to their young prince's
aid. At the same moment, Sir Marmaduke Nevile and the Lord Fitzhugh
spurred from the opposite line; and thus encouraged, the band on either
side came boldly forward, and the melee grew fierce and general. But
still Richard's sword singled out the earl, and still the earl, parrying
his blows, dealt his own upon meaner heads. Crushed by one sweep of the
axe fell Milwater to the earth; down, as again it swung on high, fell
Sir Humphrey Bourchier, who had just arrived to Gloucester with messages
from Edward, never uttered in the world below. Before Marmaduke's lance
fell Sir Thomas Parr; and these three corpses making a barrier between
Gloucester and the earl, the duke turned fiercely upon Marmaduke, while
the earl, wheeling round, charged into the midst of the hostile line,
which scattered to the right and left.

"On! my merry men, on!" rang once more through the heavy air. "They give
way, the London tailors,--on!" and on dashed, with their joyous cry, the
merry men of Yorkshire and Warwick, the warrior yeomen! Separated thus
from his great foe, Gloucester, after unhorsing Marmaduke, galloped off
to sustain that part of his following which began to waver and retreat
before the rush of Warwick and his chivalry.

This, in truth, was the regiment recruited from the loyalty of London;
and little accustomed, we trow, were the worthy heroes of Cockaigne to
the discipline of arms, nor trained to that stubborn resistance which
makes, under skilful leaders, the English peasants the most enduring
soldiery that the world has known since the day when the Roman sentinel
perished amidst the falling columns and lava floods [at Pompeii], rather
than, though society itself dissolved, forsake his post unbidden. "Saint
Thomas defend us!" muttered a worthy tailor, who in the flush of his
valour, when safe in the Chepe, had consented to bear the rank of
lieutenant; "it is not reasonable to expect men of pith and substance
to be crushed into jellies and carved into subtleties by horse-hoofs
and pole-axes. Right about face! Fly!"--and throwing down his sword and
shield, the lieutenant fairly took to his heels as he saw the charging
column, headed by the raven steed of Warwick, come giant-like through
the fog. The terror of one man is contagious, and the Londoners actually
turned their backs, when Nicholas Alwyn cried, in his shrill voice and
northern accent, "Out on you! What will the girls say of us in East-gate
and the Chepe? Hurrah for the bold hearts of London! Round me, stout
'prentices! let the boys shame the men! This shaft for Cockaigne!" And
as the troop turned irresolute, and Alwyn's arrow left his bow, they saw
a horseman by the side of Warwick reel in his saddle and fall at once
to the earth; and so great evidently was the rank of the fallen man that
even Warwick reined in, and the charge halted midway in its career.
It was no less a person than the Duke of Exeter whom Alwyn's shaft had
disabled for the field. This incident, coupled with the hearty
address of the stout goldsmith, served to reanimate the flaggers, and
Gloucester, by a circuitous route, reaching their line a moment after,
they dressed their ranks, and a flight of arrows followed their loud
"Hurrah for London Town!"

But the charge of Warwick had only halted, and (while the wounded Exeter
was borne back by his squires to the rear) it dashed into the midst of
the Londoners, threw their whole line into confusion, and drove them,
despite all the efforts of Gloucester, far back along the plain. This
well-timed exploit served to extricate the earl from the main danger of
his position; and, hastening to improve his advantage, he sent forthwith
to command the reserved forces under Lord St. John, the Knight of
Lytton, Sir John Coniers, Dymoke, and Robert Hilyard, to bear down to
his aid.

At this time Edward had succeeded, after a most stubborn fight, in
effecting a terrible breach through Somerset's wing; and the fog
continued still so dense and mirk, that his foe itself--for Somerset had
prudently drawn back to re-form his disordered squadron--seemed vanished
from the field. Halting now, as through the dim atmosphere came from
different quarters the many battle-cries of that feudal-day, by which
alone he could well estimate the strength or weakness of those in
the distance, his calmer genius as a general cooled, for a time, his
individual ferocity of knight and soldier. He took his helmet from his
brow to listen with greater certainty; and the lords and riders round
him were well content to take breath and pause from the weary slaughter.

The cry of "Gloucester to the onslaught!" was heard no more. Feebler
and feebler, scatteringly as it were, and here and there, the note had
changed into "Gloucester to the rescue!"

Farther off rose, mingled and blent together, the opposing shouts, "A
Montagu! a Montagu! Strike for D'Eyncourt and King Edward!"--"A Say! A
Say!"

"Ha!" said Edward, thoughtfully, "bold Gloucester fails, Montagu is
bearing on to Warwick's aid, Say and D'Eyncourt stop his path. Our doom
looks dark! Ride, Hastings,--ride; retrieve thy laurels, and bring up
the reserve under Clarence. But hark ye, leave not his side,--he may
desert again! Ho! ho! Again, 'Gloucester to the rescue!' Ah, how lustily
sounds the cry of 'Warwick!' By the flaming sword of Saint Michael, we
will slacken that haughty shout, or be evermore dumb ourself, ere the
day be an hour nearer to the eternal judgment!"

Deliberately Edward rebraced his helm, and settled himself in his
saddle, and with his knights riding close each to each, that they might
not lose themselves in the darkness, regained his infantry, and led
them on to the quarter where the war now raged fiercest, round the black
steed of Warwick and the blood-red manteline of the fiery Richard.




CHAPTER VI. THE BATTLE.

It was now scarcely eight in the morning, though the battle had endured
three hours; and, as yet, victory so inclined to the earl that nought
but some dire mischance could turn the scale. Montagu had cut his way to
Warwick; Somerset had re-established his array. The fresh vigour
brought by the earl's reserve had well-nigh completed his advantage
over Gloucester's wing. The new infantry under Hilyard, the unexhausted
riders under Sir John Coniers and his knightly compeers, were dealing
fearful havoc, as they cleared the plain; and Gloucester, fighting inch
by inch, no longer outnumbering but outnumbered, was driven nearer and
nearer towards the town, when suddenly a pale, sickly, and ghostlike ray
of sunshine, rather resembling the watery gleam of a waning moon than
the radiance of the Lord of Light, broke through the mists, and showed
to the earl's eager troops the banner and badges of a new array hurrying
to the spot. "Behold," cried the young Lord Fitzhugh, "the standard and
the badge of the Usurper,--a silver sun! Edward himself is delivered
into our hands! Upon them, bill and pike, lance and brand, shaft and
bolt! Upon them, and crown the day!"

The same fatal error was shared by Hilyard, as he caught sight of the
advancing troop, with their silvery cognizance. He gave the word, and
every arrow left its string. At the same moment, as both horse and foot
assailed the fancied foe, the momentary beam vanished from the heaven,
the two forces mingled in the sullen mists, when, after a brief
conflict, a sudden and horrible cry of "Treason! Treason!" resounded
from either band. The shining star of Oxford, returning from the
pursuit, had been mistaken for Edward's cognizance of the sun.
[Cont. Croyl., 555; Fabyan, Habington, Hume, S. Turner.] Friend was
slaughtering friend, and when the error was detected, each believed the
other had deserted to the foe. In vain, here Montagu and Warwick, and
there Oxford and his captains, sought to dispel the confusion, and unite
those whose blood had been fired against each other. While yet in
doubt, confusion, and dismay, rushed full into the centre Edward of York
himself, with his knights and riders; and his tossing banners, scarcely
even yet distinguished from Oxford's starry ensigns, added to the
general incertitude and panic. Loud in the midst rose Edward's trumpet
voice, while through the midst, like one crest of foam upon a roaring
sea, danced his plume of snow. Hark! again, again--near and nearer--the
tramp of steeds, the clash of steel, the whiz and hiss of arrows, the
shout of "Hastings to the onslaught!" Fresh, and panting for glory and
for blood, came on King Edward's large reserve; from all the scattered
parts of the field spurred the Yorkist knights, where the uproar, so
much mightier than before, told them that the crisis of the war was
come. Thither, as vultures to the carcass, they flocked and wheeled;
thither D'Eyncourt and Lovell, and Cromwell's bloody sword, and
Say's knotted mace; and thither, again rallying his late half-beaten
myrmidons, the grim Gloucester, his helmet bruised and dinted, but the
boar's teeth still gnashing wrath and horror from the grisly crest. But
direst and most hateful of all in the eyes of the yet undaunted earl,
thither, plainly visible, riding scarcely a yard before him, with the
cognizance of Clare wrought on his gay mantle, and in all the pomp and
bravery of a holiday suit, came the perjured Clarence. Conflict now it
could scarce be called: as well might the Dane have rolled back the sea
from his footstool, as Warwick and his disordered troop (often and aye,
dazzled here by Oxford's star, there by Edward's sun, dealing random
blows against each other) have resisted the general whirl and torrent
of the surrounding foe. To add to the rout, Somerset and the on-guard
of his wing had been marching towards the earl at the very time that the
cry of "treason" had struck their ears, and Edward's charge was made;
these men, nearly all Lancastrians, and ever doubting Montagu, if not
Warwick, with the example of Clarence and the Archbishop of York fresh
before them, lost heart at once,--Somerset himself headed the flight of
his force.

"All is lost!" said Montagu, as side by side with Warwick the brothers
fronted the foe, and for one moment stayed the rush.

"Not yet," returned the earl; "a band of my northern archers still guard
yon wood; I know them,--they will fight to the last gasp! Thither, then,
with what men we may. You so marshal our soldiers, and I will make good
the retreat. Where is Sir Marmaduke Nevile?"

"Here!"

"Horsed again, young cousin! I give thee a perilous commission. Take the
path down the hill; the mists thicken in the hollows, and may hide thee.
Overtake Somerset; he hath fled westward, and tell him, from me, if
he can yet rally but one troop of horse--but one--and charge Edward
suddenly in the rear, he will yet redeem all. If he refuse, the ruin of
his king and the slaughter of the brave men he deserts be on his head!
Swift, a tout bride, Marmaduke. Yet one word," added the earl, in
a whisper,--"if you fail with Somerset, come not back, make to the
Sanctuary. You are too young to die, cousin! Away! keep to the hollows
of the chase."

As the knight vanished, Warwick turned to his comrades "Bold nephew
Fitzhugh, and ye brave riders round me,--so we are fifty knights! Haste
thou, Montagu, to the wood! the wood!"

So noble in that hero age was the Individual MAN, even amidst the
multitudes massed by war, that history vies with romance in showing how
far a single sword could redress the scale of war. While Montagu,
with rapid dexterity, and a voice yet promising victory, drew back the
remnant of the lines, and in serried order retreated to the outskirts
of the wood, Warwick and his band of knights protected the movement
from the countless horsemen who darted forth from Edward's swarming
and momently thickening ranks. Now dividing and charging singly, now
rejoining, and breast to breast, they served to divert and perplex and
harass the eager enemy. And never in all his wars, in all the former
might of his indomitable arm, had Warwick so excelled the martial
chivalry of his age, as in that eventful and crowning hour. Thrice
almost alone he penetrated into the very centre of Edward's body-guard,
literally felling to the earth all before him. Then perished by his
battle-axe Lord Cromwell and the redoubted Lord of Say; then, no longer
sparing even the old affection, Gloucester was hurled to the ground. The
last time he penetrated even to Edward himself, smiting down the king's
standard-bearer, unhorsing Hastings, who threw himself on his path;
and Edward, setting his teeth in stern joy as he saw him, rose in his
stirrups, and for a moment the mace of the king, the axe of the earl,
met as thunder encounters thunder; but then a hundred knights rushed
into the rescue, and robbed the baffled avenger of his prey. Thus
charging and retreating, driving back with each charge farther and
farther the mighty multitude hounding on to the lion's death, this
great chief and his devoted knights, though terribly reduced in number,
succeeded at last in covering Montagu's skilful retreat; and when they
gained the outskirts of the wood, and dashed through the narrow opening
between the barricades, the Yorkshire archers approved their lord's
trust, and, shouting, as to a marriage feast, hailed his coming.

But few, alas! of his fellow-horsemen had survived that marvellous
enterprise of valour and despair. Of the fifty knights who had shared
its perils, eleven only gained the wood; and, though in this number
the most eminent (save Sir John Coniers, either slain or fled) might
be found, their horses, more exposed than themselves, were for the most
part wounded and unfit for further service. At this time the sun again,
and suddenly as before, broke forth,--not now with a feeble glimmer, but
a broad and almost a cheerful beam, which sufficed to give a fuller view
than the day had yet afforded of the state and prospects of the field.

To the right and to the left, what remained of the cavalry of Warwick
were seen flying fast,--gone the lances of Oxford, the bills of
Somerset. Exeter, pierced by the shaft of Alwyn, was lying cold and
insensible, remote from the contest, and deserted even by his squires.

In front of the archers and such men as Montagu had saved from the
sword, halted the immense and murmuring multitude of Edward, their
thousand banners glittering in the sudden sun; for, as Edward beheld
