Whereupon Dick judged it prudent to withdraw; but he was not yet clear of
the refectory, when a man, but newly alighted at the gate, came running
four stairs at a bound, and, brushing through the abbey servants, threw
himself on one knee before the duke.

"Victory, my lord," he cried.

And before Dick had got to the chamber set apart for him as Lord Foxham's
guest, the troops in the holm were cheering around their fires; for upon
that same day, not twenty miles away, a second crushing blow had been
dealt to the power of Lancaster.



CHAPTER VII--DICK'S REVENGE


The next morning Dick was afoot before the sun, and having dressed
himself to the best advantage with the aid of the Lord Foxham's baggage,
and got good reports of Joan, he set forth on foot to walk away his
impatience.

For some while he made rounds among the soldiery, who were getting to
arms in the wintry twilight of the dawn and by the red glow of torches;
but gradually he strolled further afield, and at length passed clean
beyond the outposts, and walked alone in the frozen forest, waiting for
the sun.

His thoughts were both quiet and happy.  His brief favour with the Duke
he could not find it in his heart to mourn; with Joan to wife, and my
Lord Foxham for a faithful patron, he looked most happily upon the
future; and in the past he found but little to regret.

As he thus strolled and pondered, the solemn light of the morning grew
more clear, the east was already coloured by the sun, and a little
scathing wind blew up the frozen snow.  He turned to go home; but even as
he turned, his eye lit upon a figure behind, a tree.

"Stand!" he cried.  "Who goes?"

The figure stepped forth and waved its hand like a dumb person.  It was
arrayed like a pilgrim, the hood lowered over the face, but Dick, in an
instant, recognised Sir Daniel.

He strode up to him, drawing his sword; and the knight, putting his hand
in his bosom, as if to seize a hidden weapon, steadfastly awaited his
approach.

"Well, Dickon," said Sir Daniel, "how is it to be?  Do ye make war upon
the fallen?"

"I made no war upon your life," replied the lad; "I was your true friend
until ye sought for mine; but ye have sought for it greedily."

"Nay--self-defence," replied the knight.  "And now, boy, the news of this
battle, and the presence of yon crooked devil here in mine own wood, have
broken me beyond all help.  I go to Holywood for sanctuary; thence
overseas, with what I can carry, and to begin life again in Burgundy or
France."

"Ye may not go to Holywood," said Dick.

"How!  May not?" asked the knight.

"Look ye, Sir Daniel, this is my marriage morn," said Dick; "and yon sun
that is to rise will make the brightest day that ever shone for me.  Your
life is forfeit--doubly forfeit, for my father's death and your own
practices to meward.  But I myself have done amiss; I have brought about
men's deaths; and upon this glad day I will be neither judge nor hangman.
An ye were the devil, I would not lay a hand on you.  An ye were the
devil, ye might go where ye will for me.  Seek God's forgiveness; mine ye
have freely.  But to go on to Holywood is different.  I carry arms for
York, and I will suffer no spy within their lines.  Hold it, then, for
certain, if ye set one foot before another, I will uplift my voice and
call the nearest post to seize you."

"Ye mock me," said Sir Daniel.  "I have no safety out of Holywood."

"I care no more," returned Richard.  "I let you go east, west, or south;
north I will not.  Holywood is shut against you.  Go, and seek not to
return.  For, once ye are gone, I will warn every post about this army,
and there will be so shrewd a watch upon all pilgrims that, once again,
were ye the very devil, ye would find it ruin to make the essay."

"Ye doom me," said Sir Daniel, gloomily.

"I doom you not," returned Richard.  "If it so please you to set your
valour against mine, come on; and though I fear it be disloyal to my
party, I will take the challenge openly and fully, fight you with mine
own single strength, and call for none to help me.  So shall I avenge my
father, with a perfect conscience."

"Ay," said Sir Daniel, "y' have a long sword against my dagger."

"I rely upon Heaven only," answered Dick, casting his sword some way
behind him on the snow.  "Now, if your ill-fate bids you, come; and,
under the pleasure of the Almighty, I make myself bold to feed your bones
to foxes."

"I did but try you, Dickon," returned the knight, with an uneasy
semblance of a laugh.  "I would not spill your blood."

"Go, then, ere it be too late," replied Shelton.  "In five minutes I will
call the post.  I do perceive that I am too long-suffering.  Had but our
places been reversed, I should have been bound hand and foot some minutes
past."

"Well, Dickon, I will go," replied Sir Daniel.  "When we next meet, it
shall repent you that ye were so harsh."

And with these words, the knight turned and began to move off under the
trees.  Dick watched him with strangely-mingled feelings, as he went,
swiftly and warily, and ever and again turning a wicked eye upon the lad
who had spared him, and whom he still suspected.

There was upon one side of where he went a thicket, strongly matted with
green ivy, and, even in its winter state, impervious to the eye.  Herein,
all of a sudden, a bow sounded like a note of music.  An arrow flew, and
with a great, choked cry of agony and anger, the Knight of Tunstall threw
up his hands and fell forward in the snow.

Dick bounded to his side and raised him.  His face desperately worked;
his whole body was shaken by contorting spasms.

"Is the arrow black?" he gasped.

"It is black," replied Dick, gravely.

And then, before he could add one word, a desperate seizure of pain shook
the wounded man from head to foot, so that his body leaped in Dick's
supporting arms, and with the extremity of that pang his spirit fled in
silence.

The young man laid him back gently on the snow and prayed for that
unprepared and guilty spirit, and as he prayed the sun came up at a
bound, and the robins began chirping in the ivy.

When he rose to his feet, he found another man upon his knees but a few
steps behind him, and, still with uncovered head, he waited until that
prayer also should be over.  It took long; the man, with his head bowed
and his face covered with his hands, prayed like one in a great disorder
or distress of mind; and by the bow that lay beside him, Dick judged that
he was no other than the archer who had laid Sir Daniel low.

At length he, also, rose, and showed the countenance of Ellis Duckworth.

"Richard," he said, very gravely, "I heard you.  Ye took the better part
and pardoned; I took the worse, and there lies the clay of mine enemy.
Pray for me."

And he wrung him by the hand.

"Sir," said Richard, "I will pray for you, indeed; though how I may
prevail I wot not.  But if ye have so long pursued revenge, and find it
now of such a sorry flavour, bethink ye, were it not well to pardon
others?  Hatch--he is dead, poor shrew!  I would have spared a better;
and for Sir Daniel, here lies his body.  But for the priest, if I might
anywise prevail, I would have you let him go."

A flash came into the eyes of Ellis Duckworth.

"Nay," he said, "the devil is still strong within me.  But be at rest;
the Black Arrow flieth nevermore--the fellowship is broken.  They that
still live shall come to their quiet and ripe end, in Heaven's good time,
for me; and for yourself, go where your better fortune calls you, and
think no more of Ellis."



CHAPTER VIII--CONCLUSION


About nine in the morning, Lord Foxham was leading his ward, once more
dressed as befitted her sex, and followed by Alicia Risingham, to the
church of Holywood, when Richard Crookback, his brow already heavy with
cares, crossed their path and paused.

"Is this the maid?" he asked; and when Lord Foxham had replied in the
affirmative, "Minion," he added, "hold up your face until I see its
favour."

He looked upon her sourly for a little.

"Ye are fair," he said at last, "and, as they tell me, dowered.  How if I
offered you a brave marriage, as became your face and parentage?"

"My lord duke," replied Joanna, "may it please your grace, I had rather
wed with Sir Richard."

"How so?" he asked, harshly.  "Marry but the man I name to you, and he
shall be my lord, and you my lady, before night.  For Sir Richard, let me
tell you plainly, he will die Sir Richard."

"I ask no more of Heaven, my lord, than but to die Sir Richard's wife,"
returned Joanna.

"Look ye at that, my lord," said Gloucester, turning to Lord Foxham.
"Here be a pair for you.  The lad, when for good services I gave him his
choice of my favour, chose but the grace of an old, drunken shipman.  I
did warn him freely, but he was stout in his besottedness.  'Here dieth
your favour,' said I; and he, my lord, with a most assured impertinence,
'Mine be the loss,' quoth he.  It shall be so, by the rood!"

"Said he so?" cried Alicia.  "Then well said, lion-driver!"

"Who is this?" asked the duke.

"A prisoner of Sir Richard's," answered Lord Foxham; "Mistress Alicia
Risingham."

"See that she be married to a sure man," said the duke.

"I had thought of my kinsman, Hamley, an it like your grace," returned
Lord Foxham.  "He hath well served the cause."

"It likes me well," said Richard.  "Let them be wedded speedily.  Say,
fair maid, will you wed?"

"My lord duke," said Alicia, "so as the man is straight"--And there, in a
perfect consternation, the voice died on her tongue.

"He is straight, my mistress," replied Richard, calmly.  "I am the only
crookback of my party; we are else passably well shapen.  Ladies, and
you, my lord," he added, with a sudden change to grave courtesy, "judge
me not too churlish if I leave you.  A captain, in the time of war, hath
not the ordering of his hours."

And with a very handsome salutation he passed on, followed by his
officers.

"Alack," cried Alicia, "I am shent!"

"Ye know him not," replied Lord Foxham.  "It is but a trifle; he hath
already clean forgot your words."

"He is, then, the very flower of knighthood," said Alicia.

"Nay, he but mindeth other things," returned Lord Foxham.  "Tarry we no
more."

In the chancel they found Dick waiting, attended by a few young men; and
there were he and Joan united.  When they came forth again, happy and yet
serious, into the frosty air and sunlight, the long files of the army
were already winding forward up the road; already the Duke of
Gloucester's banner was unfolded and began to move from before the abbey
in a clump of spears; and behind it, girt by steel-clad knights, the
bold, black-hearted, and ambitious hunchback moved on towards his brief
kingdom and his lasting infamy.  But the wedding party turned upon the
other side, and sat down, with sober merriment, to breakfast.  The father
cellarer attended on their wants, and sat with them at table.  Hamley,
all jealousy forgotten, began to ply the nowise loth Alicia with
courtship.  And there, amid the sounding of tuckets and the clash of
armoured soldiery and horses continually moving forth, Dick and Joan sat
side by side, tenderly held hands, and looked, with ever growing
affection, in each other's eyes.

Thenceforth the dust and blood of that unruly epoch passed them by.  They
dwelt apart from alarms in the green forest where their love began.

Two old men in the meanwhile enjoyed pensions in great prosperity and
peace, and with perhaps a superfluity of ale and wine, in Tunstall
hamlet.  One had been all his life a shipman, and continued to the last
to lament his man Tom.  The other, who had been a bit of everything,
turned in the end towards piety, and made a most religious death under
the name of Brother Honestus in the neighbouring abbey.  So Lawless had
his will, and died a friar.




Footnotes:


{1}  At the date of this story, Richard Crookback could not have been
created Duke of Gloucester; but for clearness, with the reader's leave,
he shall so be called.

{2}  Richard Crookback would have been really far younger at this date.

{3}  Technically, the term "lance" included a not quite certain number of
foot soldiers attached to the man-at-arms.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLACK ARROW***


******* This file should be named 848.txt or 848.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/8/4/848



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

