
"I think, Nigel," said Sir Oliver, striding across to the little knight,
"that we should all acquit ourselves better had we our none-meat, for
the sun is high in the heaven."

"By Saint Paul!" quoth Sir Nigel, plucking the patch from his eye,
"I think that I am now clear of my vow, for this Spanish knight was a
person from whom much honor might be won. Indeed, he was a very worthy
gentleman, of good courage, and great hardiness, and it grieves me that
he should have come by such a hurt. As to what you say of food, Oliver,
it is not to be thought of, for we have nothing with us upon the hill."

"Nigel!" cried Sir Simon Burley, hurrying up with consternation upon his
face, "Aylward tells me that there are not ten-score arrows left in all
their sheaves. See! they are springing from their horses, and cutting
their sollerets that they may rush upon us. Might we not even now make a
retreat?"

"My soul will retreat from my body first!" cried the little knight.
"Here I am, and here I bide, while God gives me strength to lift a
sword."

"And so say I!" shouted Sir Oliver, throwing his mace high into the air
and catching it again by the handle.

"To your arms, men!" roared Sir Nigel. "Shoot while you may, and then
out sword, and let us live or die together!"



CHAPTER XXXVII. HOW THE WHITE COMPANY CAME TO BE DISBANDED.


Then up rose from the hill in the rugged Cantabrian valley a sound such
as had not been heard in those parts before, nor was again, until
the streams which rippled amid the rocks had been frozen by over four
hundred winters and thawed by as many returning springs. Deep and full
and strong it thundered down the ravine, the fierce battle-call of a
warrior race, the last stern welcome to whoso should join with them in
that world-old game where the stake is death. Thrice it swelled forth
and thrice it sank away, echoing and reverberating amidst the crags.
Then, with set faces, the Company rose up among the storm of stones,
and looked down upon the thousands who sped swiftly up the slope against
them. Horse and spear had been set aside, but on foot, with sword and
battle-axe, their broad shields slung in front of them, the chivalry of
Spain rushed to the attack.

And now arose a struggle so fell, so long, so evenly sustained,
that even now the memory of it is handed down amongst the Cantabrian
mountaineers and the ill-omened knoll is still pointed out by fathers
to their children as the "Altura de los Inglesos," where the men from
across the sea fought the great fight with the knights of the south. The
last arrow was quickly shot, nor could the slingers hurl their stones,
so close were friend and foe. From side to side stretched the thin line
of the English, lightly armed and quick-footed, while against it stormed
and raged the pressing throng of fiery Spaniards and of gallant Bretons.
The clink of crossing sword-blades, the dull thudding of heavy blows,
the panting and gasping of weary and wounded men, all rose together in
a wild, long-drawn note, which swelled upwards to the ears of the
wondering peasants who looked down from the edges of the cliffs upon the
swaying turmoil of the battle beneath them. Back and forward reeled the
leopard banner, now borne up the slope by the rush and weight of the
onslaught, now pushing downwards again as Sir Nigel, Burley, and Black
Simon with their veteran men-at arms, flung themselves madly into the
fray. Alleyne, at his lord's right hand, found himself swept hither and
thither in the desperate struggle, exchanging savage thrusts one instant
with a Spanish cavalier, and the next torn away by the whirl of men and
dashed up against some new antagonist. To the right Sir Oliver, Aylward,
Hordle John, and the bowmen of the Company fought furiously against the
monkish Knights of Santiago, who were led up the hill by their prior--a
great, deep-chested man, who wore a brown monastic habit over his suit
of mail. Three archers he slew in three giant strokes, but Sir Oliver
flung his arms round him, and the two, staggering and straining, reeled
backwards and fell, locked in each other's grasp, over the edge of the
steep cliff which flanked the hill. In vain his knights stormed and
raved against the thin line which barred their path: the sword of
Aylward and the great axe of John gleamed in the forefront of the battle
and huge jagged pieces of rock, hurled by the strong arms of the bowmen,
crashed and hurtled amid their ranks. Slowly they gave back down the
hill, the archers still hanging upon their skirts, with a long litter of
writhing and twisted figures to mark the course which they had taken. At
the same instant the Welshmen upon the left, led on by the Scotch earl,
had charged out from among the rocks which sheltered them, and by the
fury of their outfall had driven the Spaniards in front of them in
headlong flight down the hill. In the centre only things seemed to be
going ill with the defenders. Black Simon was down--dying, as he would
wish to have died, like a grim old wolf in its lair with a ring of his
slain around him. Twice Sir Nigel had been overborne, and twice Alleyne
had fought over him until he had staggered to his feet once more.
Burley lay senseless, stunned by a blow from a mace, and half of the
men-at-arms lay littered upon the ground around him. Sir Nigel's shield
was broken, his crest shorn, his armor cut and smashed, and the vizor
torn from his helmet; yet he sprang hither and thither with light
foot and ready hand, engaging two Bretons and a Spaniard at the same
instant--thrusting, stooping, dashing in, springing out--while Alleyne
still fought by his side, stemming with a handful of men the fierce tide
which surged up against them. Yet it would have fared ill with them
had not the archers from either side closed in upon the flanks of the
attackers, and pressed them very slowly and foot by foot down the long
slope, until they were on the plain once more, where their fellows were
already rallying for a fresh assault.

But terrible indeed was the cost at which the last had been repelled.
Of the three hundred and seventy men who had held the crest, one hundred
and seventy-two were left standing, many of whom were sorely wounded and
weak from loss of blood. Sir Oliver Buttesthorn, Sir Richard Causton,
Sir Simon Burley, Black Simon, Johnston, a hundred and fifty archers,
and forty-seven men-at-arms had fallen, while the pitiless hail of
stones was already whizzing and piping once more about their ears,
threatening every instant to further reduce their numbers.

Sir Nigel looked about him at his shattered ranks, and his face flushed
with a soldier's pride.

"By St. Paul!" he cried, "I have fought in many a little bickering, but
never one that I would be more loth to have missed than this. But you
are wounded, Alleyne?"

"It is nought," answered his squire, stanching the blood which dripped
from a sword-cut across his forehead.

"These gentlemen of Spain seem to be most courteous and worthy people. I
see that they are already forming to continue this debate with us. Form
up the bowmen two deep instead of four. By my faith! some very brave men
have gone from among us. Aylward, you are a trusty soldier, for all
that your shoulder has never felt accolade, nor your heels worn the gold
spurs. Do you take charge of the right; I will hold the centre, and you,
my Lord of Angus, the left."

"Ho! for Sir Samkin Aylward!" cried a rough voice among the archers, and
a roar of laughter greeted their new leader.

"By my hilt!" said the old bowman, "I never thought to lead a wing in a
stricken field. Stand close, camarades, for, by these finger-bones! we
must play the man this day."

"Come hither, Alleyne," said Sir Nigel, walking back to the edge of the
cliff which formed the rear of their position. "And you, Norbury," he
continued, beckoning to the squire of Sir Oliver, "do you also come
here."

The two squires hurried across to him, and the three stood looking down
into the rocky ravine which lay a hundred and fifty feet beneath them.

"The prince must hear of how things are with us," said the knight.
"Another onfall we may withstand, but they are many and we are few, so
that the time must come when we can no longer form line across the hill.
Yet if help were brought us we might hold the crest until it comes. See
yonder horses which stray among the rocks beneath us?"

"I see them, my fair lord."

"And see yonder path which winds along the hill upon the further end of
the valley?"

"I see it."

"Were you on those horses, and riding up yonder track, steep and rough
as it is, I think that ye might gain the valley beyond. Then on to the
prince, and tell him how we fare."

"But, my fair lord, how can we hope to reach the horses?" asked Norbury.

"Ye cannot go round to them, for they would be upon ye ere ye could come
to them. Think ye that ye have heart enough to clamber down this cliff?"

"Had we but a rope."

"There is one here. It is but one hundred feet long, and for the rest ye
must trust to God and to your fingers. Can you try it, Alleyne?"

"With all my heart, my dear lord, but how can I leave you in such a
strait?"

"Nay, it is to serve me that ye go. And you, Norbury?"

The silent squire said nothing, but he took up the rope, and, having
examined it, he tied one end firmly round a projecting rock. Then he
cast off his breast-plate, thigh pieces, and greaves, while Alleyne
followed his example.

"Tell Chandos, or Calverley, or Knolles, should the prince have gone
forward," cried Sir Nigel. "Now may God speed ye, for ye are brave and
worthy men."

It was, indeed, a task which might make the heart of the bravest sink
within him. The thin cord dangling down the face of the brown cliff
seemed from above to reach little more than half-way down it. Beyond
stretched the rugged rock, wet and shining, with a green tuft here and
there thrusting out from it, but little sign of ridge or foothold. Far
below the jagged points of the boulders bristled up, dark and menacing.
Norbury tugged thrice with all his strength upon the cord, and then
lowered himself over the edge, while a hundred anxious faces peered over
at him as he slowly clambered downwards to the end of the rope. Twice he
stretched out his foot, and twice he failed to reach the point at which
he aimed, but even as he swung himself for a third effort a stone from
a sling buzzed like a wasp from amid the rocks and struck him full upon
the side of his head. His grasp relaxed, his feet slipped, and in
an instant he was a crushed and mangled corpse upon the sharp ridges
beneath him.

"If I have no better fortune," said Alleyne, leading Sir Nigel aside. "I
pray you, my dear lord, that you will give my humble service to the Lady
Maude, and say to her that I was ever her true servant and most unworthy
cavalier."

The old knight said no word, but he put a hand on either shoulder, and
kissed his squire, with the tears shining in his eyes. Alleyne sprang to
the rope, and sliding swiftly down, soon found himself at its extremity.
From above it seemed as though rope and cliff were well-nigh touching,
but now, when swinging a hundred feet down, the squire found that he
could scarce reach the face of the rock with his foot, and that it was
as smooth as glass, with no resting-place where a mouse could stand.
Some three feet lower, however, his eye lit upon a long jagged crack
which slanted downwards, and this he must reach if he would save not
only his own poor life, but that of the eight-score men above him. Yet
it were madness to spring for that narrow slit with nought but the wet,
smooth rock to cling to. He swung for a moment, full of thought, and
even as he hung there another of the hellish stones sang through his
curls, and struck a chip from the face of the cliff. Up he clambered
a few feet, drew up the loose end after him, unslung his belt, held on
with knee and with elbow while he spliced the long, tough leathern belt
to the end of the cord: then lowering himself as far as he could go, he
swung backwards and forwards until his hand reached the crack, when he
left the rope and clung to the face of the cliff. Another stone struck
him on the side, and he heard a sound like a breaking stick, with a keen
stabbing pain which shot through his chest. Yet it was no time now to
think of pain or ache. There was his lord and his eight-score comrades,
and they must be plucked from the jaws of death. On he clambered, with
his hand shuffling down the long sloping crack, sometimes bearing all
his weight upon his arms, at others finding some small shelf or tuft
on which to rest his foot. Would he never pass over that fifty feet? He
dared not look down and could but grope slowly onwards, his face to
the cliff, his fingers clutching, his feet scraping and feeling for a
support. Every vein and crack and mottling of that face of rock remained
forever stamped upon his memory. At last, however, his foot came upon
a broad resting-place and he ventured to cast a glance downwards. Thank
God! he had reached the highest of those fatal pinnacles upon which his
comrade had fallen. Quickly now he sprang from rock to rock until his
feet were on the ground, and he had his hand stretched out for the
horse's rein, when a sling-stone struck him on the head, and he dropped
senseless upon the ground.

An evil blow it was for Alleyne, but a worse one still for him who
struck it. The Spanish slinger, seeing the youth lie slain, and judging
from his dress that he was no common man, rushed forward to plunder him,
knowing well that the bowmen above him had expended their last shaft.
He was still three paces, however, from his victim's side when John
upon the cliff above plucked up a huge boulder, and, poising it for
an instant, dropped it with fatal aim upon the slinger beneath him. It
struck upon his shoulder, and hurled him, crushed and screaming, to the
ground, while Alleyne, recalled to his senses by these shrill cries in
his very ear, staggered on to his feet, and gazed wildly about him. His
eyes fell upon the horses, grazing upon the scanty pasture, and in an
instant all had come back to him--his mission, his comrades, the need
for haste. He was dizzy, sick, faint, but he must not die, and he must
not tarry, for his life meant many lives that day. In an instant he
was in his saddle and spurring down the valley. Loud rang the swift
charger's hoofs over rock and reef, while the fire flew from the stroke
of iron, and the loose stones showered up behind him. But his head was
whirling round, the blood was gushing from his brow, his temple, his
mouth. Ever keener and sharper was the deadly pain which shot like a
red-hot arrow through his side. He felt that his eye was glazing, his
senses slipping from him, his grasp upon the reins relaxing. Then with
one mighty effort, he called up all his strength for a single minute.
Stooping down, he loosened the stirrup-straps, bound his knees tightly
to his saddle-flaps, twisted his hands in the bridle, and then, putting
the gallant horse's head for the mountain path, he dashed the spurs
in and fell forward fainting with his face buried in the coarse, black
mane.

Little could he ever remember of that wild ride. Half conscious, but
ever with the one thought beating in his mind, he goaded the horse
onwards, rushing swiftly down steep ravines over huge boulders, along
the edges of black abysses. Dim memories he had of beetling cliffs, of a
group of huts with wondering faces at the doors, of foaming, clattering
water, and of a bristle of mountain beeches. Once, ere he had ridden
far, he heard behind him three deep, sullen shouts, which told him that
his comrades had set their faces to the foe once more. Then all was
blank, until he woke to find kindly blue English eyes peering down upon
him and to hear the blessed sound of his country's speech. They were but
a foraging party--a hundred archers and as many men-at-arms--but their
leader was Sir Hugh Calverley, and he was not a man to bide idle when
good blows were to be had not three leagues from him. A scout was sent
flying with a message to the camp, and Sir Hugh, with his two hundred
men, thundered off to the rescue. With them went Alleyne, still bound to
his saddle, still dripping with blood, and swooning and recovering, and
swooning once again. On they rode, and on, until, at last, topping a
ridge, they looked down upon the fateful valley. Alas! and alas! for the
sight that met their eyes.

There, beneath them, was the blood-bathed hill, and from the highest
pinnacle there flaunted the yellow and white banner with the lions and
the towers of the royal house of Castile. Up the long slope rushed ranks
and ranks of men exultant, shouting, with waving pennons and brandished
arms. Over the whole summit were dense throngs of knights, with no enemy
that could be seen to face them, save only that at one corner of the
plateau an eddy and swirl amid the crowded mass seemed to show that all
resistance was not yet at an end. At the sight a deep groan of rage and
of despair went up from the baffled rescuers, and, spurring on their
horses, they clattered down the long and winding path which led to the
valley beneath.

But they were too late to avenge, as they had been too late to save.
Long ere they could gain the level ground, the Spaniards, seeing them
riding swiftly amid the rocks, and being ignorant of their numbers, drew
off from the captured hill, and, having secured their few prisoners,
rode slowly in a long column, with drum-beating and cymbal-clashing, out
of the valley. Their rear ranks were already passing out of sight ere
the new-comers were urging their panting, foaming horses up the slope
which had been the scene of that long drawn and bloody fight.

And a fearsome sight it was that met their eyes! Across the lower end
lay the dense heap of men and horses where the first arrow-storm had
burst. Above, the bodies of the dead and the dying--French, Spanish, and
Aragonese--lay thick and thicker, until they covered the whole ground
two and three deep in one dreadful tangle of slaughter. Above them lay
the Englishmen in their lines, even as they had stood, and higher yet
upon the plateau a wild medley of the dead of all nations, where the
last deadly grapple had left them. In the further corner, under the
shadow of a great rock, there crouched seven bowmen, with great John
in the centre of them--all wounded, weary, and in sorry case, but still
unconquered, with their blood-stained weapons waving and their voices
ringing a welcome to their countrymen. Alleyne rode across to John,
while Sir Hugh Calverley followed close behind him.

"By Saint George!" cried Sir Hugh, "I have never seen signs of so stern
a fight, and I am right glad that we have been in time to save you."

"You have saved more than us," said John, pointing to the banner which
leaned against the rock behind him.

"You have done nobly," cried the old free companion, gazing with a
soldier's admiration at the huge frame and bold face of the archer. "But
why is it, my good fellow, that you sit upon this man."

"By the rood! I had forgot him," John answered, rising and dragging
from under him no less a person than the Spanish caballero, Don Diego
Alvarez. "This man, my fair lord, means to me a new house, ten cows,
one bull--if it be but a little one--a grindstone, and I know not what
besides; so that I thought it well to sit upon him, lest he should take
a fancy to leave me."

"Tell me, John," cried Alleyne faintly: "where is my dear lord, Sir
Nigel Loring?"

"He is dead, I fear. I saw them throw his body across a horse and ride
away with it, but I fear the life had gone from him."

"Now woe worth me! And where is Aylward?"

"He sprang upon a riderless horse and rode after Sir Nigel to save him.
I saw them throng around him, and he is either taken or slain."

"Blow the bugles!" cried Sir Hugh, with a scowling brow. "We must back
to camp, and ere three days I trust that we may see these Spaniards
again. I would fain have ye all in my company."

"We are of the White Company, my fair lord," said John.

"Nay, the White Company is here disbanded," answered Sir Hugh solemnly,
looking round him at the lines of silent figures. "Look to the brave
squire, for I fear that he will never see the sun rise again."



CHAPTER XXXVIII. OF THE HOME-COMING TO HAMPSHIRE.


It was a bright July morning four months after that fatal fight in the
Spanish barranca. A blue heaven stretched above, a green rolling plain
undulated below, intersected with hedge-rows and flecked with grazing
sheep. The sun was yet low in the heaven, and the red cows stood in the
long shadow of the elms, chewing the cud and gazing with great vacant
eyes at two horsemen who were spurring it down the long white road which
dipped and curved away back to where the towers and pinnacles beneath
the flat-topped hill marked the old town of Winchester.

Of the riders one was young, graceful, and fair, clad in plain doublet
and hosen of blue Brussels cloth, which served to show his active and
well-knit figure. A flat velvet cap was drawn forward to keep the glare
from his eyes, and he rode with lips compressed and anxious face, as one
who has much care upon his mind. Young as he was, and peaceful as
was his dress, the dainty golden spurs which twinkled upon his heels
proclaimed his knighthood, while a long seam upon his brow and a
scar upon his temple gave a manly grace to his refined and delicate
countenance. His comrade was a large, red-headed man upon a great black
horse, with a huge canvas bag slung from his saddle-bow, which jingled
and clinked with every movement of his steed. His broad, brown face was
lighted up by a continual smile, and he looked slowly from side to
side with eyes which twinkled and shone with delight. Well might John
rejoice, for was he not back in his native Hampshire, had he not Don
Diego's five thousand crowns rasping against his knee, and above all was
he not himself squire now to Sir Alleyne Edricson, the young Socman of
Minstead lately knighted by the sword of the Black Prince himself, and
esteemed by the whole army as one of the most rising of the soldiers of
England.

For the last stand of the Company had been told throughout Christendom
wherever a brave deed of arms was loved, and honors had flowed in upon
the few who had survived it. For two months Alleyne had wavered betwixt
death and life, with a broken rib and a shattered head; yet youth and
strength and a cleanly life were all upon his side, and he awoke from
his long delirium to find that the war was over, that the Spaniards
and their allies had been crushed at Navaretta, and that the prince had
himself heard the tale of his ride for succor and had come in person to
his bedside to touch his shoulder with his sword and to insure that so
brave and true a man should die, if he could not live, within the order
of chivalry. The instant that he could set foot to ground Alleyne had
started in search of his lord, but no word could he hear of him, dead
or alive, and he had come home now sad-hearted, in the hope of raising
money upon his estates and so starting upon his quest once more. Landing
at London, he had hurried on with a mind full of care, for he had heard
no word from Hampshire since the short note which had announced his
brother's death.

"By the rood!" cried John, looking around him exultantly, "where have we
seen since we left such noble cows, such fleecy sheep, grass so green,
or a man so drunk as yonder rogue who lies in the gap of the hedge?"

"Ah, John," Alleyne answered wearily, "it is well for you, but I never
thought that my home-coming would be so sad a one. My heart is heavy for
my dear lord and for Aylward, and I know not how I may break the news to
the Lady Mary and to the Lady Maude, if they have not yet had tidings of
it."

John gave a groan which made the horses shy. "It is indeed a black
business," said he. "But be not sad, for I shall give half these crowns
to my old mother, and half will I add to the money which you may have,
and so we shall buy that yellow cog wherein we sailed to Bordeaux, and
in it we shall go forth and seek Sir Nigel."

Alleyne smiled, but shook his head. "Were he alive we should have had
word of him ere now," said he. "But what is this town before us?"

"Why, it is Romsey!" cried John. "See the tower of the old gray church,
and the long stretch of the nunnery. But here sits a very holy man, and
I shall give him a crown for his prayers."

Three large stones formed a rough cot by the roadside, and beside it,
basking in the sun, sat the hermit, with clay-colored face, dull eyes,
and long withered hands. With crossed ankles and sunken head, he sat
as though all his life had passed out of him, with the beads slipping
slowly through his thin, yellow fingers. Behind him lay the narrow cell,
clay-floored and damp, comfortless, profitless and sordid. Beyond it
there lay amid the trees the wattle-and-daub hut of a laborer, the
door open, and the single room exposed to the view. The man ruddy and
yellow-haired, stood leaning upon the spade wherewith he had been at
work upon the garden patch. From behind him came the ripple of a happy
woman's laughter, and two young urchins darted forth from the hut,
bare-legged and towsy, while the mother, stepping out, laid her hand
upon her husband's arm and watched the gambols of the children. The
hermit frowned at the untoward noise which broke upon his prayers, but
his brow relaxed as he looked upon the broad silver piece which John
held out to him.

"There lies the image of our past and of our future," cried Alleyne, as
they rode on upon their way. "Now, which is better, to till God's earth,
to have happy faces round one's knee, and to love and be loved, or
to sit forever moaning over one's own soul, like a mother over a sick
babe?"

"I know not about that," said John, "for it casts a great cloud over me
when I think of such matters. But I know that my crown was well spent,
for the man had the look of a very holy person. As to the other, there
was nought holy about him that I could see, and it would be cheaper for
me to pray for myself than to give a crown to one who spent his days in
digging for lettuces."

Ere Alleyne could answer there swung round the curve of the road a
lady's carriage drawn by three horses abreast with a postilion upon
the outer one. Very fine and rich it was, with beams painted and gilt,
wheels and spokes carved in strange figures, and over all an arched
cover of red and white tapestry. Beneath its shade there sat a stout
and elderly lady in a pink cote-hardie, leaning back among a pile of
cushions, and plucking out her eyebrows with a small pair of silver
tweezers. None could seem more safe and secure and at her ease than this
lady, yet here also was a symbol of human life, for in an instant, even
as Alleyne reined aside to let the carriage pass, a wheel flew out
from among its fellows, and over it all toppled--carving, tapestry
and gilt--in one wild heap, with the horses plunging, the postilion
shouting, and the lady screaming from within. In an instant Alleyne and
John were on foot, and had lifted her forth all in a shake with fear,
but little the worse for her mischance.

"Now woe worth me!" she cried, "and ill fall on Michael Easover of
Romsey! for I told him that the pin was loose, and yet he must needs
gainsay me, like the foolish daffe that he is."

"I trust that you have taken no hurt, my fair lady," said Alleyne,
conducting her to the bank, upon which John had already placed a
cushion.

"Nay, I have had no scath, though I have lost my silver tweezers. Now,
lack-a-day! did God ever put breath into such a fool as Michael Easover
of Romsey? But I am much beholden to you, gentle sirs. Soldiers ye are,
as one may readily see. I am myself a soldier's daughter," she added,
casting a somewhat languishing glance at John, "and my heart ever goes
out to a brave man."

"We are indeed fresh from Spain," quoth Alleyne.

"From Spain, say you? Ah! it was an ill and sorry thing that so many
should throw away the lives that Heaven gave them. In sooth, it is bad
for those who fall, but worse for those who bide behind. I have but now
bid farewell to one who hath lost all in this cruel war."

"And how that, lady?"

"She is a young damsel of these parts, and she goes now into a nunnery.
Alack! it is not a year since she was the fairest maid from Avon to
Itchen, and now it was more than I could abide to wait at Romsey Nunnery
to see her put the white veil upon her face, for she was made for a wife
and not for the cloister. Did you ever, gentle sir, hear of a body of
men called 'The White Company' over yonder?"

"Surely so," cried both the comrades.

"Her father was the leader of it, and her lover served under him as
squire. News hath come that not one of the Company was left alive, and
so, poor lamb, she hath----"

"Lady!" cried Alleyne, with catching breath, "is it the Lady Maude
Loring of whom you speak?"
