deck.  Far and wide, borne by the winds, those showers descended upon
the remotest climes, startling even the swarthy African; and whirled
along the antique soil of Syria and of Egypt (Dion Cassius).



Chapter X

THE NEXT MORNING.  THE FATE OF NYDIA.

AND meekly, softly, beautifully, dawned at last the light over the
trembling deep!--the winds were sinking into rest--the foam died from
the glowing azure of that delicious sea.  Around the east, thin mists
caught gradually the rosy hues that heralded the morning; Light was
about to resume her reign.  Yet, still, dark and massive in the
distance, lay the broken fragments of the destroying cloud, from which
red streaks, burning dimlier and more dim, betrayed the yet rolling
fires of the mountain of the 'Scorched Fields'.  The white walls and
gleaming columns that had adorned the lovely coasts were no more.
Sullen and dull were the shores so lately crested by the cities of
Herculaneum and Pompeii.  The darlings of the deep were snatched from
her embrace!  Century after century shall the mighty Mother stretch
forth her azure arms, and know them not--moaning round the sepulchres of
the Lost!

There was no shout from the mariners at the dawning light--it had come
too gradually, and they were too wearied for such sudden bursts of
joy--but there was a low, deep murmur of thankfulness amidst those
watchers of the long night.  They looked at each other and smiled--they
took heart--they felt once more that there was a world around, and a God
above them!  And in the feeling that the worst was passed, the
overwearied ones turned round, and fell placidly to sleep. In the
growing light of the skies there came the silence which night had
wanted: and the bark drifted calmly onward to its port.  A few other
vessels, bearing similar fugitives, might be seen in the expanse,
apparently motionless, yet gliding also on.  There was a sense of
security, of companionship, and of hope, in the sight of their slender
masts and white sails.  What beloved friends, lost and missed in the
gloom, might they not bear to safety and to shelter!

In the silence of the general sleep, Nydia rose gently.  She bent over
the face of Glaucus--she inhaled the deep breath of his heavy
slumber--timidly and sadly she kissed his brow--his lips; she felt for
his hand--it was locked in that of Ione; she sighed deeply, and her face
darkened. Again she kissed his brow, and with her hair wiped from it the
damps of night.  'May the gods bless you, Athenian!' she murmured: 'may
you be happy with your beloved one!--may you sometimes remember Nydia!
Alas! she is of no further use on earth!'

With these words she turned away.  Slowly she crept along by the fori,
or platforms, to the farther side of the vessel, and, pausing, bent low
over the deep; the cool spray dashed upward on her feverish brow.  'It
is the kiss of death,' she said 'it is welcome.' The balmy air played
through her waving tresses--she put them from her face, and raised those
eyes--so tender, though so lightless--to the sky, whose soft face she
had never seen!

'No, no!' she said, half aloud, and in a musing and thoughtful tone, 'I
cannot endure it; this jealous, exacting love--it shatters my whole soul
in madness!  I might harm him again--wretch that I was!  I have saved
him--twice saved him--happy, happy thought: why not die happy?--it is
the last glad thought I can ever know.  Oh! sacred Sea!  I hear thy
voice invitingly--it hath a freshening and joyous call. They say that in
thy embrace is dishonour--that thy victims cross not the fatal Styx--be
it so!--I would not meet him in the Shades, for I should meet him still
with her!  Rest--rest--rest! there is no other Elysium for a heart like
mine!'

A sailor, half dozing on the deck, heard a slight splash on the waters.
Drowsily he looked up, and behind, as the vessel merrily bounded on, he
fancied he saw something white above the waves; but it vanished in an
instant.  He turned round again, and dreamed of his home and children.

When the lovers awoke, their first thought was of each other--their next
of Nydia!  She was not to be found--none had seen her since the night.
Every crevice of the vessel was searched--there was no trace of her.
Mysterious from first to last, the blind Thessalian had vanished for
ever from the living world!  They guessed her fate in silence: and
Glaucus and Ione, while they drew nearer to each other (feeling each
other the world itself), forgot their deliverance, and wept as for a
departed sister.



Chapter The Last

WHEREIN ALL THINGS CEASE LETTER FROM GLAUCUS TO SALLUST, TEN YEARS AFTER
THE DESTRUCTION OF POMPEII.

'Athens.

GLAUCUS to his beloved Sallust--greeting and health!--You request me to
visit you at Rome--no, Sallust, come rather to me at Athens!  I have
forsworn the Imperial City, its mighty tumult and hollow joys.  In my
own land henceforth I dwell for ever.  The ghost of our departed
greatness is dearer to me than the gaudy life of your loud prosperity.
There is a charm to me which no other spot can supply, in the porticoes
hallowed still by holy and venerable shades.  In the olive-groves of
Ilyssus I still hear the voice of poetry--on the heights of Phyle, the
clouds of twilight seem yet the shrouds of departed freedom--the
heralds--the heralds--of the morrow that shall come!  You smile at my
enthusiasm, Sallust!--better be hopeful in chains than resigned to their
glitter.  You tell me you are sure that I cannot enjoy life in these
melancholy haunts of a fallen majesty.  You dwell with rapture on the
Roman splendors, and the luxuries of the imperial court. My
Sallust--"non sum qualis eram"--I am not what I was!  The events of my
life have sobered the bounding blood of my youth.  My health has never
quite recovered its wonted elasticity ere it felt the pangs of disease,
and languished in the damps of a criminal's dungeon.  My mind has never
shaken off the dark shadow of the Last Day of Pompeii--the horror and
the desolation of that awful ruin!--Our beloved, our remembered Nydia! I
have reared a tomb to her shade, and I see it every day from the window
of my study. It keeps alive in me a tender recollection--a not
unpleasing sadness--which are but a fitting homage to her fidelity, and
the mysteriousness of her early death.  Ione gathers the flowers, but my
own hand wreathes them daily around the tomb.  She was worthy of a tomb
in Athens!

'You speak of the growing sect of the Christians in Rome.  Sallust, to
you I may confide my secret; I have pondered much over that faith--I
have adopted it.  After the destruction of Pompeii, I met once more with
Olinthus--saved, alas! only for a day, and falling afterwards a martyr
to the indomitable energy of his zeal.  In my preservation from the lion
and the earthquake he taught me to behold the hand of the unknown God!
I listened--believed--adored!  My own, my more than ever beloved Ione,
has also embraced the creed!--a creed, Sallust, which, shedding light
over this world, gathers its concentrated glory, like a sunset, over the
next!  We know that we are united in the soul, as in the flesh, for ever
and for ever! Ages may roll on, our very dust be dissolved, the earth
shrivelled like a scroll; but round and round the circle of eternity
rolls the wheel of life--imperishable--unceasing!  And as the earth from
the sun, so immortality drinks happiness from virtue, which is the smile
upon the face of God!  Visit me, then, Sallust; bring with you the
learned scrolls of Epicurus, Pythagoras, Diogenes; arm yourself for
defeat; and let us, amidst the groves of Academus, dispute, under a
surer guide than any granted to our fathers, on the mighty problem of
the true ends of life and the nature of the soul.

'Ione--at that name my heart yet beats!--Ione is by my side as I write:
I lift my eyes, and meet her smile.  The sunlight quivers over Hymettus:
and along my garden I hear the hum of the summer bees.  Am I happy, ask
you? Oh, what can Rome give me equal to what I possess at Athens?  Here,
everything awakens the soul and inspires the affections--the trees, the
waters, the hills, the skies, are those of Athens!--fair, though
mourning-mother of the Poetry and the Wisdom of the World.  In my hall I
see the marble faces of my ancestors.  In the Ceramicus, I survey their
tombs! In the streets, I behold the hand of Phidias and the soul of
Pericles. Harmodius, Aristogiton--they are everywhere--but in our
hearts!--in mine, at least, they shall not perish!  If anything can make
me forget that I am an Athenian and not free, it is partly the
soothing--the love--watchful, vivid, sleepless--of Ione--a love that has
taken a new sentiment in our new creed--a love which none of our poets,
beautiful though they be, had shadowed forth in description; for mingled
with religion, it partakes of religion; it is blended with pure and
unworldly thoughts; it is that which we may hope to carry through
eternity, and keep, therefore, white and unsullied, that we may not
blush to confess it to our God!  This is the true type of the dark fable
of our Grecian Eros and Psyche--it is, in truth, the soul asleep in the
arms of love.  And if this, our love, support me partly against the
fever of the desire for freedom, my religion supports me more; for
whenever I would grasp the sword and sound the shell, and rush to a new
Marathon (but Marathon without victory), I feel my despair at the
chilling thought of my country's impotence--the crushing weight of the
Roman yoke, comforted, at least, by the thought that earth is but the
beginning of life--that the glory of a few years matters little in the
vast space of eternity--that there is no perfect freedom till the chains
of clay fall from the soul, and all space, all time, become its heritage
and domain.  Yet, Sallust, some mixture of the soft Greek blood still
mingles with my faith. I can share not the zeal of those who see crime
and eternal wrath in men who cannot believe as they.  I shudder not at
the creed of others.  I dare not curse them--I pray the Great Father to
convert.  This lukewarmness exposes me to some suspicion amongst the
Christians: but I forgive it; and, not offending openly the prejudices
of the crowd, I am thus enabled to protect my brethren from the danger
of the law, and the consequences of their own zeal.  If moderation seem
to me the natural creature of benevolence, it gives, also, the greatest
scope to beneficence.

'Such, then, O Sallust! is my life--such my opinions.  In this manner I
greet existence and await death.  And thou, glad-hearted and kindly
pupil of Epicurus, thou...  But come hither, and see what enjoyments,
what hopes are ours--and not the splendor of imperial banquets, nor the
shouts of the crowded circus, nor the noisy forum, nor the glittering
theatre, nor the luxuriant gardens, nor the voluptuous baths of
Rome--shall seem to thee to constitute a life of more vivid and
uninterrupted happiness than that which thou so unreasonably pitiest as
the career of Glaucus the Athenian!--Farewell!'

Nearly Seventeen Centuries had rolled away when the City of Pompeii was
disinterred from its silent tomb, all vivid with undimmed hues; its
walls fresh as if painted yesterday--not a hue faded on the rich mosaic
of its floors--in its forum the half-finished columns as left by the
workman's hand--in its gardens the sacrificial tripod--in its halls the
chest of treasure--in its baths the strigil--in its theatres the counter
of admission--in its saloons the furniture and the lamp--in its
triclinia the fragments of the last feast--in its cubicula the perfumes
and the rouge of faded beauty--and everywhere the bones and skeletons of
those who once moved the springs of that minute yet gorgeous machine of
luxury and of life! In the house of Diomed, in the subterranean vaults,
twenty skeletons (one of a babe) were discovered in one spot by the
door, covered by a fine ashen dust, that had evidently been wafted
slowly through the apertures, until it had filled the whole space.
There were jewels and coins, candelabra for unavailing light, and wine
hardened in the amphorae for a prolongation of agonized life.  The sand,
consolidated by damps, had taken the forms of the skeletons as in a
cast; and the traveler may yet see the impression of a female neck and
bosom of young and round proportions--the trace of the fated Julia!  It
seems to the inquirer as if the air had been gradually changed into a
sulphurous vapor; the inmates of the vaults had rushed to the door, to
find it closed and blocked up by the scoria without, and in their
attempts to force it, had been suffocated with the atmosphere.

In the garden was found a skeleton with a key by its bony hand, and near
it a bag of coins.  This is believed to have been the master of the
house--the unfortunate Diomed, who had probably sought to escape by the
garden, and been destroyed either by the vapors or some fragment of
stone.  Beside some silver vases lay another skeleton, probably of a
slave.

The houses of Sallust and of Pansa, the Temple of Isis, with the
juggling concealments behind the statues--the lurking-place of its holy
oracles--are now bared to the gaze of the curious.  In one of the
chambers of that temple was found a huge skeleton with an axe beside it:
two walls had been pierced by the axe--the victim could penetrate no
farther.  In the midst of the city was found another skeleton, by the
side of which was a heap of coins, and many of the mystic ornaments of
the fane of Isis.  Death had fallen upon him in his avarice, and Calenus
perished simultaneously with Burbo!  As the excavators cleared on
through the mass of ruin, they found the skeleton of a man literally
severed in two by a prostrate column; the skull was of so striking a
conformation, so boldly marked in its intellectual as well as its worse
physical developments, that it has excited the constant speculation of
every itinerant believer in the theories of Spurzheim who has gazed upon
that ruined palace of the mind.  Still, after the lapse of ages, the
traveler may survey that airy hall within whose cunning galleries and
elaborate chambers once thought, reasoned, dreamed, and sinned, the soul
of Arbaces the Egyptian.

Viewing the various witnesses of a social system which has passed from
the world for ever--a stranger, from that remote and barbarian Isle
which the Imperial Roman shivered when he named, paused amidst the
delights of the soft Campania and composed this history!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Last Days of Pompeii, by 
Edward George Bulwer-Lytton

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST DAYS OF POMPEII ***

***** This file should be named 1565.txt or 1565.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/6/1565/

Produced by John T. Horner and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate

