And, as she spoke, the Cistertian monk stood before them.

"Hence!" he cried with an imperious gesture to the demon. "She is no
longer in thy power. Hence!"

And with a howl of rage and disappointment the familiar vanished.

"Alice Nutter," continued the monk, "thy safety has been purchased at
the price of thy daughter's life. But it is of little moment, for she
could not live long. Her gentle heart was broken, and, when the demon
stopped it for ever, he performed unintentionally a merciful act. She
must rest in the same grave with him she loved so well during life. This
tell to those who will come to thee anon. Thou art delivered from the
yoke of Satan. Full expiation has been made. But earthly justice must be
satisfied. Thou must pay the penalty for crimes committed in the flesh,
but what thou sufferest here shall avail thee hereafter."

"I am content," she replied.

"Pass the rest of thy life in penitence and prayer," pursued the monk,
"and let nothing divert thee from it; for, though free now, thou wilt be
subject to evil influence and temptations to the last. Remember this."

"I will--I will," she rejoined.

"And now," he said, "kneel beside thy daughter's body and pray. I will
return to thee ere many minutes be passed. One task more, and then my
mission is ended."




CHAPTER XIII.--THE MASQUE OF DEATH.


Short time as he had to await, James was unable to control his
impatience. At last he arose, and, completely sobered by the recent
strange events, descended the steps of the platform, and walked on
without assistance.

"Let the yeomen of the guard keep back the crowd," he said to an
officer, "and let none follow me but Sir Ralph Assheton, Master Nicholas
Assheton, and Master Roger Nowell. When I call, let the prisoners be
brought forward."

"Your Majesty shall be obeyed," replied the baronet, giving the
necessary directions.

James then moved slowly forward in the direction of the pavilion; and,
as he went, called Nicholas Assheton to him.

"Wha was that officer?" he asked.

"Your pardon, my liege, but I cannot answer the question," replied
Nicholas.

"And why not, sir?" demanded the monarch, sharply.

"For reasons I will hereafter render to your Majesty, and which I am
persuaded you will find satisfactory," rejoined the squire.

"Weel, weel, I dare say you are right," said the King. "But do you think
he will keep his word?"

"I am sure of it," returned Nicholas.

"The time is come, then!" exclaimed James impatiently, and looking up at
the pavilion.

"The time is come!" echoed a sepulchral voice.

"Did you speak?" inquired the monarch.

"No, sire," replied Nicholas; "but some one seemed to give you
intimation that all is ready. Will it please you to go on?"

"Enter!" cried the voice.

"Wha speaks?" demanded the King. And, as no answer was returned, he
continued--"I will not set foot in the structure. It may be a snare of
Satan."

At this moment, the shutters of the windows flew open, showing that the
pavilion was lighted up by many tapers within, while solemn strains of
music issued from it.

"Enter!" repeated the voice.

"Have no fear, sire," said Nicholas.

"That canna be the wark o' the deil," cried James. "He does not delight
in holy hymns and sweet music."

"That is a solemn dirge for the dead," observed Nicholas, as melodious
voices mingled with the music.

"Weel, weel, I will go on at a' hazards," said James.

The doors flew open as the King and his attendants approached, and, as
soon as they had passed through them, the valves swung back to their
places.

A strange sad spectacle met their gaze. In the midst of the chamber
stood a bier, covered with a velvet pall, and on it the bodies of a
youth and maiden were deposited. Pale and beautiful were they as
sculptured marble, and a smile sat upon their features. Side by side
they were lying, with their arms enfolded, as if they had died in each
other's embrace. A wreath of yew and cypress was placed above their
heads, and flowers were scattered round them.

They were Richard and Alizon.

It was a deeply touching sight, and for some time none spake. The solemn
dirge continued, interrupted only by the stifled sobs of the listeners.

"Both gone!" exclaimed Nicholas, in accents broken by emotion; "and so
young--so good--so beautiful! Alas! alas!"

"She could not have bewitched him," said the King.

"Alizon was all purity and goodness," cried Nicholas, "and is now
numbered with the angels."

"The guilty one is in thy hands, O King!" said the voice. "It is for
thee to punish."

"And I will not hold my hand," said James. "The Devices shall assuredly
perish. When I go from this chamber, I will have them conveyed under a
strong escort to Lancaster Castle. They shall die by the hands of the
common executioner."

"My mission, then, is complete," replied the voice. "I can rest in
peace.".

"Who art thou?" demanded the King.

"One who sinned deeply, but is now pardoned," replied the voice.

The King was for a moment lost in reflection, and then turned to depart.
At this moment a kneeling figure, whom no one had hitherto noticed,
arose from behind the bier. It was a lady, robed in mourning. So ghastly
pale were her features, and so skeleton-like her attenuated frame, that
James thought he beheld a spectre, and recoiled in terror. The figure
advanced slowly towards him.

"Who, and what art thou, in Heaven's name?" he exclaimed.

"I am Alice Nutter, sire," replied the lady, prostrating herself before
him.

"Alice Nutter, the witch!" cried the King. "Why--ay, I recollect thou
wert here. I sent for thee, but recent terrible events had put thee
clean out of my head. But expect no grace from me, evil woman. I will
show thee none."

"I ask none, sire," replied the penitent. "I came to place myself in
your hands, that justice may be done upon me."

"Ah!" exclaimed James. "Dost thou, indeed, repent thee of thy
iniquities? Dost thou abjure the devil and all his works?"

"I do," replied the lady, fervently. "My compact with the Evil One has
been broken by the prayers of my devoted daughter, who sacrificed
herself for me, and thereby saved my soul alive. But human justice
requires an expiation, and I am anxious to make it."

"Arise, ill-fated woman," said the king, much moved. "You must go to
Lancaster, but, in consideration of your penitence, no indignity shall
be shown you. You must be strictly guarded, but you shall not be taken
with the other prisoners."

"I humbly thank your Majesty," replied the lady. "May I take a last
farewell of my child?"

"Do so," replied James.

Alice Nutter then approached the bier, and, after gazing for a moment
with deepest fondness upon the features of her daughter, imprinted a
kiss upon her marble brow. In doing this her tears fell fast.

"You can weep, I see," observed the King. "You are a witch no longer."

"Ay, Heaven be praised! I can weep," she replied; "and so ease my
over-burthened heart. Oh! sire, none but those who have experienced it
can tell the agony of being denied this relief of nature. Farewell for
ever, my blessed child!" she exclaimed, kissing her brow again; "and
you, too, her beloved. Nicholas Assheton--it was her wish to be buried
in the same grave with Richard. You will see it done, Nicholas?"

"I will--I will!" replied the squire, in a voice of deepest emotion.

"And I likewise promise it," said Sir Ralph Assheton. "They shall rest
together in Whalley churchyard. It is well that Sir Richard and Dorothy
are gone," he observed to Nicholas.

"It is indeed," said the squire, "or we should have had another funeral
to perform. Pray Heaven it be not so now!"

"Have you any other request to prefer?" demanded the King.

"None whatever, sire," replied the lady, "except that I wish to make
full restitution of all the land I have robbed him of, to Master Roger
Nowell; and, as some compensation, I would fain add certain lands
adjoining, which have been conveyed over to Sir Ralph and Nicholas
Assheton, only annexing the condition that a small sum annually be given
in dole to the poor of the parish, that I may be remembered in their
prayers."

"We will see it done," said Sir Ralph and Nicholas.

"And I will see my part fulfilled," said Nowell. "For any wrong you have
done me I now freely and fully forgive you, and may Heaven in its
infinite mercy forgive you likewise!"

"Amen!" ejaculated the monarch. And all the others joined in the
ejaculation.

The King then moved to the door, which was opened for him by the two
Asshetons. At the foot of the steps stood Master Potts, attended by an
officer of the guard and a party of halberdiers. In the midst of them,
with their hands tied behind their backs, were Jem Device, his mother,
Jennet, and poor Nance Redferne. Jem looked dogged and sullen, Elizabeth
downcast, but Jennet retained her accustomed malignant expression. Poor
Nance was the only one who excited any sympathy. Jennet's malice seemed
now directed against Master Potts, whom she charged with having betrayed
and deceived her.

"If Tib had na deserted me he should tear thee i' pieces, thou
ill-favourt little monster," she cried.

"Monster in your own face, you hideous little wretch," exclaimed the
indignant attorney. "If you use such opprobrious epithets I will have
you gagged. You will be taken to Lancaster Castle, and hanged."

"Yo are os bad as ey am, and warse," replied Jennet, "and deserve
hanging os weel, and the King shan knoa of your tricks," she
vociferated, as James appeared at the door of the pavilion. "Yo wished
to ensnare Alizon. Yo wished me to kill her. Ey was only your
instrument."

"Stop her mouth--gag her!" cried Potts.

"Nah, nah!--they shanna stap my mouth--they shanna gag me," cried
Jennet. "Ey win speak out. The King shan hear me. You are as bad os me."

"All malice, your Majesty--all malice," cried the attorney.

"Malice, nae doubt, in great pairt," replied James; "but some truth as
weel, I fear, sir. And in any case it will prevent my doing any thing
for you."

"There, you have ruined my hopes, you little wretch!" cried Potts,
furiously.

"Ey'm reet glad on't," said Jennet. "Yo may tay me to Lonkester Castle,
boh yo conna hong me. Ey knoa that fu' weel. Ey shan get out, and then
look to yersel, lad; for, os sure os ey'm Mother Demdike's grandowter,
ey'n plague the life out o' ye."

"Take the prisoners away, and let them be conveyed under a strict escort
to Lancaster Castle," said James.

"And, as the assizes commence next week, quick work will be made with
them, your Majesty," observed Potts. "Their guilt can be incontestably
proved, so they are sure to be found guilty, sure to be hanged, sire."

As the prisoners were removed, Nance Redferne looked round her, and,
catching the eye of Nicholas, made a slight motion with her head, as if
bidding him farewell.

The squire returned the mute valediction.

"Poor Nance!" he exclaimed, compassionately, "I sincerely pity her.
Would there was any means of saving her!"

"There is none," observed Sir Ralph Assheton. "And you may be thankful
you are not brought in as her accomplice."

As Jennet was taken away, she continued to hurl threats and imprecations
against Potts.

Another officer of the guard was then summoned, and when he came, James
said, "One other prisoner remains within the pavilion. She likewise must
be conveyed to Lancaster Castle but in a litter, and not with the other
prisoners."

Attended by Sir Richard Hoghton, the monarch then proceeded to his
lodgings in the Tower.




CHAPTER XIV.--"ONE GRAVE."


Notwithstanding the sad occurrences above detailed, James remained for
two more days the guest of Sir Richard Hoghton, enjoying his princely
hospitality, hunting in the park, carousing in the great hall, and
witnessing all kinds of sports.

Nothing, indeed, was left to remind him of the sad events that had
occurred. The prisoners were taken that night to Lancaster Castle, and
Master Potts accompanied the escort, to be ready for the assizes. The
three judges proceeded thither at the end of the week. The attendance of
Roger Nowell, Nicholas, and Sir Ralph Assheton, was also required as
witnesses at the trial of the witches.

Sir Richard Assheton and Dorothy had returned, as already stated, to
Middleton; and, though the intelligence of the death of Richard and
Alizon was communicated to them with infinite caution, the shock to both
was very great, especially to Dorothy, who was long--very long--in
recovering from it.

Nicholas's vivacity of temperament made him feel the loss of his cousin
at first very keenly, but it soon wore off. He vowed amendment and
reformation on the model of John Bruen, whose life offered so striking a
contrast to his own, that it has very properly been placed in opposition
by a reverend moralist; but I regret to say that he did not carry out
his praiseworthy intentions. He was apt to make a joke of John Bruen,
instead of imitating his example. He professed to devote himself to his
excellent wife--but his old habits would break out; and, I am sorry to
say, he was often to be found in the alehouse, and was just as fond of
horse-racing, cock-fighting, hunting, fishing, and all other sports, as
ever. Occasionally he occupied a leisure or a rainy day with a
Journal,[6] parts of which have been preserved; but he set down in it
few of the terrible events here related, probably because they were of
too painful a nature to be recorded. He died in 1625--at the early age
of thirty-five.

But to go back. A few days after the tragical events at Hoghton Tower,
the whole village of Whalley was astir. But it was no festive
occasion--no merry-making--that called forth the inhabitants, for grief
sat upon every countenance. The day, too, was gloomy. The feathered
summits of Whalley Nab were wreathed in mist, and a fine rain descended
in the valley. The Calder looked dull and discoloured as it flowed past
the walls of the ancient Abbey. The church bell tolled mournfully, and a
large concourse was gathered in the churchyard. Not far from one of the
three crosses of Paulinus, which stood nearest the church porch, a grave
had been digged, and almost every one looked into it. The grave, it was
said, was intended to hold two coffins. Soon after this, a train of
mourners issued from the ancient Abbey gateway, and sure enough there
were two coffins on the shoulders of the bearers; They were met at the
gate by Doctor Ormerod, who was so deeply affected as scarcely to be
able to perform the needful offices for the dead. The principal mourners
were Sir Richard Assheton of Middleton, Sir Ralph Assheton, and
Nicholas. Amid the tears and sobs of all the bystanders, the bodies of
Richard and Alizon were committed to the earth--laid together in one
grave.

Thus was their latest wish fulfilled. Flowers grew upon the turf that
covered them, and there was the earliest primrose seen, and the latest
violet. Many a fond youth and trusting maiden have visited their lowly
tomb, and many a tear, fresh from the heart, has dropped upon the sod
covering the ill-fated lovers.




CHAPTER XV.--LANCASTER CASTLE.


Behold the grim and giant fabric, rebuilt and strengthened by

          "Old John of Gaunt, time-honour'd Lancaster!"

Within one of its turrets called John of Gaunt's Chair, and at eventide,
stands a lady under the care of a jailer. It is the last sunset she will
ever see--the last time she will look upon the beauties of earth; for
she is a prisoner, condemned to die an ignominious and terrible death,
and her execution will take place on the morrow. Leaving her alone
within the turret, the jailer locks the door and stands outside it. The
lady casts a long, lingering look around. All nature seems so
beautiful--so attractive. The sunset upon the broad watery sands of
Morecambe Bay is exquisite in varied tints. The fells of Furness look
black and bold, and the windings of the Lune are clearly traced out. But
she casts a wistful glance towards the mountainous ridges of Lancashire,
and fancies she can detect amongst the heights the rounded summit of
Pendle Hill. Then her gaze settles upon the grey old town beneath her,
and, as her glance wanders over it, certain terrible objects arrest it.
In the area before the Castle she sees a ring of tall stakes. She knows
well their purpose, and counts them. They are thirteen in number.
Thirteen wretched beings are to be burned on the morrow. Not far from
the stakes are an enormous pile of fagots. All is prepared. Fascinated
by the sight, she remains gazing at the place of execution for some
time, and when she turns, she beholds a tall dark man standing beside
her. At first she thinks it is the jailer, and is about to tell the man
she is ready to descend to her cell, when she recognises him, and
recoils in terror.

"Thou here--again!" she cried.

"I can save thee from the stake, if thou wilt, Alice Nutter," he said.

"Hence!" she exclaimed. "Thou temptest me in vain. Hence!"

And with a howl of rage the demon disappeared.

Conveyed back to her cell, situated within the dread Dungeon Tower,
Alice Nutter passed the whole of that night in prayer. Towards four
o'clock, wearied out, she dropped into a slumber; and when the
clergyman, from whom she had received spiritual consolation, came to her
cell, he found her still sleeping, but with a sweet smile upon her
lips--the first he had ever beheld there.

Unwilling to disturb her, he knelt down and prayed by her side. At
length the jailer came, and the executioner's aids. The divine then laid
his hand upon her shoulder, and she instantly arose.

"I am ready," she said, cheerfully.

"You have had a happy dream, daughter," he observed.

"A blessed dream, reverend sir," she replied. "I thought I saw my
children, Richard and Alizon, in a fair garden--oh! how angelic they
looked--and they told me I should be with them soon."

"And I doubt not the vision will be realised," replied the clergyman.
"Your redemption is fully worked out, and your salvation, I trust,
secured. And now you must prepare for your last trial."

"I am fully prepared," she replied; "but will you not go to the others?"

"Alas! my dear daughter," he replied, "they all, excepting Nance
Redferne, refuse my services, and will perish in their iniquities."

"Then go to her, sir, I entreat of you," she said; "she may yet be
saved. But what of Jennet? Is she, too, to die?"

"No," replied the divine; "being evidence against her relatives, her
life is spared."

"Heaven grant she do no more mischief!" exclaimed Alice Nutter.

She then submitted herself to the executioner's assistants, and was led
forth. On issuing into the open air a change came over her, and such an
exceeding faintness that she had to be supported. She was led towards
the stake in this state; but she grew fainter and fainter, and at last
fell back in the arms of the men that supported her. Still they carried
her on. When the executioner put out his hand to receive her from his
aids, she was found to be quite dead. Nevertheless, he tied her to the
stake, and her body was consumed. Hundreds of spectators beheld those
terrible fires, and exulted in the torments of the miserable sufferers.
Their shrieks and blasphemies were terrific, and the place resembled a
hell upon earth.

Jennet escaped, to the dismay of Master Potts, who feared she would
wreak her threatened vengeance upon him. And, indeed, he did suffer from
aches and cramps, which he attributed to her; but which were more
reasonably supposed to be owing to rheum caught in the marshes of Pendle
Forest. He had, however, the pleasure of assisting at her execution,
when some years afterwards retributive justice overtook her.

Jennet was the last of the Lancashire Witches. Ever since then
witchcraft has taken a new form with the ladies of the county--though
their fascination and spells are as potent as ever. Few can now escape
them,--few desire to do so. But to all who are afraid of a bright eye
and a blooming cheek, and who desire to adhere to a bachelor's
condition--to such I should say, "BEWARE OF THE LANCASHIRE WITCHES!"


THE END.


M'CORQUODALE AND CO., PRINTERS, LONDON--WORKS, NEWTON.




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: A similar eruption occurred at Pendle Hill in August, 1669,
and has been described by Mr. Charles Townley, in a letter cited by Dr.
Whitaker in his excellent "History of Whalley." Other and more
formidable eruptions had taken place previously, occasioning much damage
to the country. The cause of the phenomenon is thus explained by Mr.
Townley: "The colour of the water, its coming down to the place where it
breaks forth between the rock and the earth, with that other particular
of its bringing nothing along but stones and earth, are evident signs
that it hath not its origin from the very bowels of the mountain; but
that it is only rain water coloured first in the moss-pits, of which the
top of the hill, being a great and considerable plain, is full, shrunk
down into some receptacle fit to contain it, until at last by its
weight, or some other cause, it finds a passage to the sides of the
hill, and then away between the rock and swarth, until it break the
latter and violently rush out."]

[Footnote 2: Locus Benedictus de Whalley.]

[Footnote 3: This speech is in substance the monarch's actual
Declaration concerning Lawful Sports, promulgated in 1618, in a little
Tractate, generally known as the "Book of Sports;" by which he would
have conferred a great boon on the lower orders, if his kindly purpose
had not been misapprehended by some, and ultimately defeated by bigots
and fanatics. King James deserves to be remembered with gratitude, if
only for this manifestation of sympathy with the enjoyments of the
people. He had himself discovered that the restrictions imposed upon
them had "setup filthy tipplings and drunkenness, and bred a number of
idle and discontented speeches in the alehouses."]

[Footnote 4: "There is a laughable tradition," says Nichols, "still
generally current in Lancashire, that our knight-making monarch knighted
at the banquet in Hoghton Tower a loin of beef; the part ever since
called the sir-loin." And it is added by the same authority, "If the
King did not give the sir-loin its name, he might, notwithstanding, have
indulged in a pun on the already coined word, the etymology of which was
then, as now, as little regarded as the thing signified is well
approved."--_Nichols's Progresses of James I._, vol. iii.]

[Footnote 5: These speeches, given by _Nichols_ as derived from the
family records of Sir Henry Philip Hoghton, Bart., were actually
delivered at a masque represented on occasion of King James's visit to
Hoghton Tower.]

[Footnote 6: Published by the Chetham Society, and admirably edited,
with notes, exhibiting an extraordinary amount of research and
information, by the Rev. F.R. Raines, M.A., F.S.A., of Milnrow
Parsonage, near Rochdale.]













End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Lancashire Witches
by William Harrison Ainsworth

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LANCASHIRE WITCHES ***

***** This file should be named 15493.txt or 15493.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/5/4/9/15493/

Produced by Clare Boothby, Jon King and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.
