thou hast suffered another misfortune."

   [Footnote 795: This Epicurean sentiment is illustrated with great
   learning by Duport, pp. 140, sqq.]

   [Footnote 796: See Duport, pp. 142, sqq.]

   [Footnote 797: Catullus, lxii. 25: "Teque adeo eximie taedis
   felicibus aucte Thessaliae columen Peleu, quoi Juppiter ipse, Ipse
   suos divum genitor concessit amores."]

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then, answered:

"Do not at all place me on a seat, O Jove-nurtured, whilst Hector lies
unburied in thy tents; but redeem him as soon as possible, that I may
behold him with mine eyes; and do thou receive the many ransoms which we
bring thee; and mayest thou enjoy them, and reach thy father-land, since
thou hast suffered me in the first place to live, and to behold the
light of the sun."

But him swift-footed Achilles, sternly regarding, then addressed:

"Do not irritate me further, old man, for I also myself meditate
ransoming Hector to thee; for the mother who bore me, the daughter of
the marine old man, came as a messenger from Jove to me. And I perceive
thee also, O Priam, in my mind, nor do thou deceive me, that some one of
the gods has led thee to the swift ships of the Greeks; for a mortal
would not have dared to come into the camp, not even in very blooming
youth, for he could not have escaped the guards, nor indeed pushed back
the bars of our gates. Wherefore do not move my mind more to sorrows,
lest I leave thee not unharmed, old man, in my tents, though being a
suppliant, and violate the commands of Jove."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and obeyed. But the son of Peleus
leaped forth, like a lion, from the door of the house, not alone; for
two attendants accompanied him, the hero Automedon, and Alcimus, whom
Achilles honoured most of his companions next after the deceased
Patroclus. These then unharnessed the horses and mules from the yoke,
and led in the clear-voiced herald of the old man, and placed him upon a
seat. They also took down from the well-polished car the countless
ransoms of Hector's head. But they left two cloaks and a well-woven
tunic, in order that, having covered the body, he might give it to be
borne home. But having called his female attendants, he ordered them to
wash and anoint all round, taking it apart, that Priam might not see his
son; lest, seeing his son, he might not restrain the wrath in his
grieving heart, and might arouse the soul of Achilles, and he might slay
him, and violate the commands of Jove. But when the servants had washed
and anointed it with oil, they then threw over him a beautiful cloak,
and a tunic; then Achilles himself, having raised him up, placed him
upon a litter, and his companions, together with [him], lifted him upon
the well-polished chariot. But he moaned, and called upon his dear
companion by name:

"O Patroclus, be not wrathful with me, if thou shouldst hear, although
being in Hades, that I have ransomed noble Hector to his beloved father,
since he has not given me unworthy ransoms. Besides even of these will I
give thee a share, whatever is just."

Noble Achilles spoke, and returned into the tent, and sat down upon a
well-made couch, whence he had risen, at the opposite wall, and
addressed Priam:

"Thy son is indeed redeemed to thee, as thou didst desire, and lies upon
a bier; and with the early dawn thou shalt behold him, conveying [him
away]: but now let us be mindful of the feast; for even fair-haired
Niobe was mindful of food, although twelve children perished in her
palaces, six daughters and six youthful sons; these indeed Apollo slew
with his silver bow, enraged with Niobe; but those, arrow-rejoicing
Diana, because, forsooth, she had compared herself with fair-cheeked
Latona. She said that [Latona] had borne [only] two, whereas she had
borne many; yet those, though being only two, destroyed all [her own].
Nine days indeed they lay in blood, nor was there any one to bury them,
for the son of Saturn had made the people stones; but upon the tenth day
the heavenly gods interred them. Still was she mindful of food, when she
was fatigued with weeping. Now, indeed, ever amidst the rocks, in the
desert mountains, in Sipylus, where, they say, the beds of the goddess
Nymphs are, who lead the dance around Acheloues, there, although being a
stone, she broods over the sorrows [sent] from the gods. But come now, O
noble old man, let us likewise attend to food, but afterwards thou
mayest lament thy beloved son, conveying him into Troy; and he will be
bewailed by thee with many tears."

Swift Achilles spoke, and leaping up, slew a white sheep, and his
companions flayed it well, and fitly dressed it; then they skilfully cut
it in pieces, pierced them with spits, roasted them diligently, and drew
them all off. Then Automedon, taking bread, distributed it over the
table in beautiful baskets; whilst Achilles helped the meat, and they
stretched out their hands to the prepared victuals lying before them.
But when they had dismissed the desire of food and drink, Dardanian
Priam indeed marvelled at Achilles, such and so great; for he was like
unto the gods; but Achilles marvelled at Dardanian Priam, seeing his
amiable countenance, and hearing his conversation. When, however, they
were satisfied with gazing at each other, him Priam, the godlike old
man, first addressed:

"Send me now to rest as soon as possible, O Jove-nurtured, that we,
reclining, may take our fill of sweet sleep; for never have these eyes
been closed beneath my eyelids from the time when my son lost his life
by thy hands; but I ever lament and cherish many woes, rolling in the
dust within the enclosures of my palaces. But now I have tasted food,
and poured sweet wine down my throat; for before indeed I had not tasted
it."

He spoke; but Achilles ordered his companions, servants, and maids, to
place couches beneath the porch, and to spread beautiful purple mats on
them, and to strew embroidered carpets over them, and to lay on them
well-napped cloaks, to be drawn over all. But they went out of the hall,
having a torch in their hands, and hastening, they quickly spread two
couches. But the swift-footed Achilles, jocularly addressing him,[798]
said:

   [Footnote 798: "Achilles, in a mood partly jocular and partly
   serious, reminds Priam of the real circumstances of his
   situation, not for the sake of alarming him, but of accounting
   for his choosing the place he did for the couch of the aged
   king."--Kennedy.]

"Do you lie without, O revered old man, lest some counsellor of the
Greeks come hither, who, sitting with me, constantly meditate plans, as
is just. If any of these should see thee in the dark and dangerous
night, he would forthwith tell Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people,
and perchance there would be a delay of the redemption of the body. But
come, tell me this, and tell it accurately: How many days dost thou
desire to perform the funeral rites of noble Hector, that I may myself
remain quiet so long, and restrain the people?"

But him Priam, the godlike old man, then answered:

"If indeed thou desirest me to celebrate the funeral of noble Hector,
thus doing, O Achilles, thou dost surely gratify me. For thou knowest
how we are hemmed in within the city, and it is far to carry wood from
the mountain; and the Trojans greatly dread [to do so]. Nine days indeed
we would lament him in our halls, but on the tenth would bury him, and
the people should feast; but upon the eleventh we would make a tomb to
him, and on the twelfth we will fight, if necessary." But him
swift-footed Achilles again addressed:

"These things shall be to thee, O aged Priam, as thou desirest; for I
will prevent the fight as long a time as thou desirest."

Thus having spoken, he grasped the right hand of the old man near the
wrist, lest he should fear in his mind. They indeed, the herald and
Priam, slept there in the porch of the house, having prudent counsels in
their mind; while Achilles slept in the interior of the well-built tent;
and beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

The other gods indeed and chariot-fighting men slept all night, subdued
by gentle slumber; but sleep seized not Mercury, the author of good,
revolving in his mind how he should convey away king Priam from the
ships, having escaped the notice of the sacred gate-keeper. Accordingly
he stood over his head, and addressed him:

"O aged man, certainly evil is not at all a care to thee, that thou
sleepest thus amongst hostile men, after Achilles has suffered thee. Now
indeed thou hast ransomed thy beloved son, and hast given much; but the
sons left behind by thee would give three times as many ransoms for thee
alive, if Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, should know of thy being here,
and all the Greeks should know of it."

Thus he spoke; but the old man feared, and awoke the herald. Then for
them Mercury yoked the horses and mules, and quickly drove them himself
through the camp, nor did any one perceive. But when they reached the
course of the fair-flowing river, eddying Xanthus, which immortal Jove
begat, then indeed Mercury went away to lofty Olympus; and saffron-robed
Morn was diffused over the whole earth. They indeed drove the horses
towards the city with wailing and lamentation, and the mules bore the
body; nor did any other of the men and well-girdled women previously
perceive it; but Cassandra, like unto golden Venus, ascending Pergamus,
discovered her dear father standing in the driving-seat, and the
city-summoning herald. She beheld him also upon the mules, lying on the
litter; then indeed she shrieked, and cried aloud throughout the whole
city:

"O Trojans and Trojan women, going forth, behold Hector, if ever ye
rejoiced at his returning alive from battle; for he was a great joy to
the city, and to the whole people."

Thus she spoke; nor was there any man left in the city, nor woman; for
insupportable grief came upon them all, and they met him near the gates
bringing in the body. But his wife and venerable mother first rushing to
the well-wheeled chariot, plucked out their hair, touching his head; and
the crowd stood around, weeping. And they indeed would have wept the
whole day till sunset before the gates, lamenting Hector, had not the
old man addressed the people from his chariot:

"Give way to me, to pass through with the mules; but afterwards shall ye
be satiated with weeping, after I shall carry him home." Thus he spoke;
but they stood off. and made way for the chariot. But when they had
brought him into the illustrious palace, they laid him upon perforated
beds, and placed singers beside him, leaders of the dirges, who indeed
sang a mournful ditty, while the women also uttered responsive groans.
And amongst them white-armed Andromache began the lamentation, holding
the head of man-slaughtering Hector between her hands:

"O husband, young in years hast thou died, and hast left me a widow in
the palace. And besides, thy son is thus an infant, to whom thou and I,
ill-fated, gave birth; nor do I think he will attain to puberty; for
before that, this city will be overthrown from its summit. Certainly
thou, the protector, art dead, who didst defend its very self, and didst
protect its venerable wives and infant children; who will soon be
carried away in the hollow ships, and I indeed amongst them. But thou, O
my son, wilt either accompany me, where thou shalt labour unworthy
tasks, toiling for a merciless lord; or some one of the Greeks, enraged,
seizing thee by the hand, will hurl thee from a tower, to sad
destruction; to whom doubtless Hector has slain a brother, or a father,
or even a son; for by the hands of Hector very many Greeks have grasped
the immense earth with their teeth. For thy father was not gentle in the
sad conflict; wherefore indeed the people lament him throughout the
city. But thou hast caused unutterable grief and sorrow to thy parents,
O Hector, but chiefly to me are bitter sorrows left. For thou didst not
stretch out thy hands to me from the couch when dying; nor speak any
prudent word [of solace], which I might for ever remember, shedding
tears night and day."

Thus she spoke, bewailing; but the women also lamented; and to them in
turn Hecuba began her vehement lamentation:

"O Hector, far of all my sons dearest to my soul, certainly being alive
to me, thou wert beloved by the gods, who truly have had a care of thee,
even in the destiny of death. For swift-footed Achilles sold[799] all my
other sons, whomsoever he seized, beyond the unfruitful sea, at Samos,
Imbrus, and Lemnos without a harbour. But when he had taken away thy
life with his long-bladed spear, he often dragged thee round the tomb of
his comrade Patroclus, whom thou slewest; but he did not thus raise him
up. But now thou liest, to my sorrow, in the palaces, fresh[800] and
lately slain like him whom silver-bowed Apollo, attacking, has slain
with his mild weapons."

   [Footnote 799: See Grote, vol. i. p. 399.]

   [Footnote 800: See on ver. 419.]

Thus she spoke, weeping; and aroused a vehement lamentation. But to them
Helen then, the third, began her lamentation:

"O Hector, far dearest to my soul of all my brothers-in-law, for godlike
Alexander is my husband, he who brought me to Troy:--would that I had
perished first. But now already this is the twentieth year to me from
the time when I came from thence, and quitted my native land; yet have I
never heard from thee a harsh or reproachful word; but if any other of
my brothers-in-law, or sisters-in-law, or well-attired husband's
brothers' wives, reproached me in the palaces, or my mother-in-law (for
my father-in-law was ever gentle as a father), then thou, admonishing
him with words, didst restrain him, both by thy gentleness and thy
gentle words. So that, grieved at heart, I bewail at the same time thee
and myself, unhappy; for there is not any other in wide Troy kind and
friendly to me; but all abhor me."

Thus she spoke, weeping; and again the countless throng groaned. And
aged Priam spoke [this] speech amongst the people:

"O Trojans, now bring wood to the city, nor at all fear in your mind a
close ambuscade of the Greeks; for Achilles, dismissing me from the dark
ships, thus promised me, that he would not commence hostilities, before
the twelfth morning should arrive."

Thus he spoke; and they yoked both oxen and mules beneath the waggons;
and then assembled before the city. For nine days indeed they brought
together an immense quantity of wood; but when now the tenth morn,
bearing light to mortals, had appeared, then indeed, weeping, they
carried out noble Hector, and placed the body on the lofty pile, and
cast in the fire.

But when the mother of dawn, rosy-fingered Morn, appeared, then were the
people assembled round the pile of illustrious Hector. But after they
were assembled, and collected together, first indeed they extinguished
all the pyre with dark wine, as much as the force of the fire had
possessed; but then his brothers and companions collected his white
bones, weeping, and the abundant tear streamed down their cheeks. And,
taking them, they placed them in a golden urn, covering them with soft
purple robes, and forthwith deposited it in a hollow grave; and then
strewed it above with numerous great stones. But they built up the tomb
in haste, and watches sat around on every side, lest the well-greaved
Greeks should make an attack too soon. And having heaped up the tomb,
they returned; and then being assembled together in order, they feasted
on a splendid banquet in the palaces of Priam, the Jove-nurtured king.

Thus indeed they performed the funeral of steed-breaking Hector.



END OF THE ILIAD.


PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET, AND CHARING CROSS.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer (1873), by Homer

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER (1873) ***

***** This file should be named 22382.txt or 22382.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/8/22382/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Renald Levesque and the
Online Distributed Proofreaders Europe at
http://dp.rastko.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

