"Extravagant day-dreams," said Moore, with a sigh and smile, "yet
perhaps we may realize some of them. Meantime, the dew is falling. Mrs.
Moore, I shall take you in."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is August. The bells clash out again, not only through Yorkshire, but
through England. From Spain the voice of a trumpet has sounded long; it
now waxes louder and louder; it proclaims Salamanca won. This night is
Briarfield to be illuminated. On this day the Fieldhead tenantry dine
together; the Hollow's Mill workpeople will be assembled for a like
festal purpose; the schools have a grand treat. This morning there were
two marriages solemnized in Briarfield church--Louis Gerard Moore, Esq.,
late of Antwerp, to Shirley, daughter of the late Charles Cave Keeldar,
Esq., of Fieldhead; Robert Gerard Moore, Esq., of Hollow's Mill, to
Caroline, niece of the Rev. Matthewson Helstone, M.A., rector of
Briarfield.

The ceremony, in the first instance, was performed by Mr. Helstone,
Hiram Yorke, Esq., of Briarmains, giving the bride away. In the second
instance, Mr. Hall, vicar of Nunnely, officiated. Amongst the bridal
train the two most noticeable personages were the youthful bridesmen,
Henry Sympson and Martin Yorke.

I suppose Robert Moore's prophecies were, partially at least, fulfilled.
The other day I passed up the Hollow, which tradition says was once
green, and lone, and wild; and there I saw the manufacturer's day-dreams
embodied in substantial stone and brick and ashes--the cinder-black
highway, the cottages, and the cottage gardens; there I saw a mighty
mill, and a chimney ambitious as the tower of Babel. I told my old
housekeeper when I came home where I had been.

"Ay," said she, "this world has queer changes. I can remember the old
mill being built--the very first it was in all the district; and then I
can remember it being pulled down, and going with my lake-lasses
[companions] to see the foundation-stone of the new one laid. The two
Mr. Moores made a great stir about it. They were there, and a deal of
fine folk besides, and both their ladies; very bonny and grand they
looked. But Mrs. Louis was the grandest; she always wore such handsome
dresses. Mrs. Robert was quieter like. Mrs. Louis smiled when she
talked. She had a real, happy, glad, good-natured look; but she had een
that pierced a body through. There is no such ladies nowadays."

"What was the Hollow like then, Martha?"

"Different to what it is now; but I can tell of it clean different
again, when there was neither mill, nor cot, nor hall, except Fieldhead,
within two miles of it. I can tell, one summer evening, fifty years
syne, my mother coming running in just at the edge of dark, almost
fleyed out of her wits, saying she had seen a fairish [fairy] in
Fieldhead Hollow; and that was the last fairish that ever was seen on
this countryside (though they've been heard within these forty years). A
lonesome spot it was, and a bonny spot, full of oak trees and nut trees.
It is altered now."

The story is told. I think I now see the judicious reader putting on his
spectacles to look for the moral. It would be an insult to his sagacity
to offer directions. I only say, God speed him in the quest!


THE END.




ESTABLISHED 1798

[Illustration]

T. NELSON AND SONS

PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS




THE NELSON CLASSICS.

_Uniform with this Volume and Same Price._


=Jack Sheppard.= HARRISON AINSWORTH.


=Masterman Ready.= CAPTAIN MARRYAT.


=Michael Strogoff.= JULES VERNE.


=The Wide Wide World.= ELIZ. WETHERELL.

This famous American novel has for many years been a classic in every
home. It is a masterpiece of the best type of domestic fiction.


=Hereward the Wake.= CHARLES KINGSLEY.

This brilliant romance tells of the last stand of the great English
leader, Hereward, against the advance of the Normans. The scene is
largely laid in the Fen country, and every page is a record of fierce
strife. The fall of Hereward is one of the greatest death scenes in
literature.


=David Copperfield--I.= CHARLES DICKENS.


=David Copperfield--II.= CHARLES DICKENS.

"David Copperfield" is, by general consent, Dickens's masterpiece,
showing, as it does, all his peculiar merits in their highest form. It
is the most autobiographical of his novels, and the one into which he
put most of his philosophy of life.


=Jane Eyre.= CHARLOTTE BRONTE.

"Jane Eyre" is Charlotte Bronte's first and most famous work. It was the
first realistic novel, in the modern sense of the word, in English
literature, and its influence has been beyond reckoning. It ranks as one
of the great novels of the nineteenth century.


=Verdant Green.= CUTHBERT BEDE.

This is the humorous classic of Oxford life. Published more than half a
century ago, its humour is as fresh to-day as ever.


=Pickwick Papers--I.= CHARLES DICKENS.


=Pickwick Papers--II.= CHARLES DICKENS.

Every year sees a new edition of "Pickwick," and the world still asks
for more. It is one of the world's greatest romances of the road, where
adventures fall to those who seek them. It is also a faithful and loving
picture of an older England, from which we have travelled far to-day. We
may become a wiser people, but we shall never again be so humorous.


=Windsor Castle.= HARRISON AINSWORTH.

The romances of Harrison Ainsworth need no advertisement. In this, as in
his "Tower of London" and "Old St. Paul's," he has taken one of
England's great historical sites, and woven around it an appropriate
romance.


=Peg Woffington.= CHARLES READE.

"Peg Woffington" was the first of Charles Reade's romances, and was
founded upon his comedy, "Masks and Faces." The story of the famous
Irish actress who dazzled London in the eighteenth century, and with
whom Garrick was in love, has been made the foundation of a charming
romance.


=Reminiscences of Scottish Life and Character.= Dean RAMSAY.

The only book of jests that has ever attained an honourable place in
literature. Its wealth of genuine humour is a perpetual refutation of
the old slander that Scots joke "wi' deeficulty."


=Parables from Nature.= Mrs. GATTY.

This is one of the great children's books of the world. It was a classic
in our grandmothers' time, and possesses that imperishable charm which
makes it as attractive to-day as when it was first written.


=Lavengro.= GEORGE BORROW.

The greatest romance of the road in English literature, telling of all
the byways and humours of that older England which is fast disappearing.


=Little Women.= LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

This delightful book has become a possession of childhood and youth. It
has captured the affections of millions of young people in two
continents, and is certainly the finest piece of work in the whole range
of Miss Alcott's breezy, hopeful, genial, and tender writings.


=Pride and Prejudice.= JANE AUSTEN.

=Sense and Sensibility.= JANE AUSTEN.

Sir Walter Scott was among the earliest to detect the merits of Miss
Austen's work, and of recent years her humour and her keen insight into
human nature have been abundantly recognized, so that to-day she is
probably the most read novelist of her period. In Sir Walter Scott's
phrase she possesses "the exquisite touch which renders ordinary
commonplace things and characters interesting."


=Toilers of the Sea.= VICTOR HUGO.

=The Laughing Man.= VICTOR HUGO.

=Les Miserables--I.= VICTOR HUGO.

=Les Miserables--II.= VICTOR HUGO.


='Ninety-Three.= VICTOR HUGO.

Victor Hugo took the romantic novel as invented by Sir Walter Scott and
gave it a new and philosophic interest. All his great romances have a
purpose. "Les Miserables" exposes the tyranny of human laws; "The
Toilers of the Sea" shows the conflict of man with nature; "The Laughing
Man" expounds the tyranny of the aristocratic ideal as exemplified in
England. But being a great artist as well as a great thinker, he never
turned his romances into pamphlets. Drama is always his aim, and no
novelist has attained more often the supreme dramatic moment.


=The Heir of Redclyffe.= C. M. YONGE.

This is a reprint of Miss Yonge's most famous tale. It has been said of
her that she domesticated the historical romance, which owed its origin
to Sir Walter Scott, and her characters were for long the ideal figures
of most English households.


=Wild Wales.= GEORGE BORROW.

This book was the result of Borrow's wanderings after the publication of
"Lavengro" and "The Romany Rye." He tramped on foot throughout the
country, and the work is a classic of description, both of the scenery
and people.


=The Cloister and the Hearth.= CHARLES READE.

There are many who think this the greatest of all historical novels, and
it is certain that there are few better. It is not a story so much as a
vast and varied transcript of life. It is also a delightful romance, and
Gerard and Margaret are among the immortals of fiction.


=Romola.= GEORGE ELIOT.

This is the only novel of George Eliot's in which the scene is laid
outside her own country. It is a story of Florence during the time of
the Renaissance, a marvellous picture of the intellectual and moral
ferment which the New Learning created. With amazing learning and
insight the author portrays the souls of men and women, and her study of
a weak man and a strong woman has rarely been surpassed in English
literature for dramatic power and moral truth.


=Silas Marner.= GEORGE ELIOT.

This, the shortest and the most exquisite of George Eliot's tales,
represents her great powers at their best. In the picture of the hero
she shows a profound understanding of human nature, and the feelings
which were then moving rural and industrial England.


=The Abbot.= Sir WALTER SCOTT.

One of the Waverley novels which has always been deservedly popular.


=Bride of Lammermoor.= Sir WALTER SCOTT.

The story is a tragedy on the lines of Greek drama, and the ending has
been pronounced by great critics to be the most moving in prose
literature. In the Master of Ravenswood, Scott has drawn perhaps his
greatest tragic figure, and in Caleb Balderstone one of his most
humorous creations.


=The Black Tulip.= ALEXANDRE DUMAS.

This was the last of Dumas' great stories. It is a veritable _tour de
force_, for in it the reader follows with consuming interest the
vicissitudes of a tulip, and the human element in the story is quite
subsidiary. Nevertheless, it contains such strongly-drawn characters as
Cornelius van Baerle, the guardian of the tulip, and Rosa, the jailer's
daughter.


=Tom Cringle's Log.= MICHAEL SCOTT.

A brilliant story of West Indian life by an author who combined abundant
personal experience with keen observation, sprightly temper, and
delightful humour. "Tom Cringle's Log" has been many times reprinted,
and has lost nothing of its popularity and power to please.


=Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.=

Tens of thousands of readers have been led to Shakespeare by the
charmingly told stories which Charles and Mary Lamb, about a hundred
years ago, extracted from the plays of the greatest dramatist of all
time. Though produced by Lamb at the very outset of his literary career,
these stories betray that unique and finished art, that delightful
freshness and rare sympathy, which are the characteristics of his mature
work.


=The Scarlet Letter.= NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

This is one of the most powerful and affecting stories ever conceived.
On its first appearance, in 1850, it immediately leaped high into public
favour, and attained the distinction of an unmistakable classic. The
tragedy of Hester Prynne and Arthur Dimmesdale is wrought out in the
midst of an austere Puritan community, which exacts the bitterest
expiation for sin.




THE NELSON CLASSICS.


_Uniform with this Volume and Same Price_.

CONDENSED LIST.

     1. A Tale of Two Cities.
     2. Tom Brown's Schooldays.
     3. The Deerslayer.
     4. Henry Esmond.
     5. Hypatia.
     6. The Mill on the Floss.
     7. Uncle Tom's Cabin.
     8. The Last of the Mohicans.
     9. Adam Bede.
    10. The Old Curiosity Shop.
    11. Oliver Twist.
    12. Kenilworth.
    13. Robinson Crusoe.
    14. The Last Days of Pompeii.
    15. Cloister and the Hearth.
    16. Ivanhoe.
    17. East Lynne.
    18. Cranford.
    19. John Halifax, Gentleman.
    20. The Pathfinder.
    21. Westward Ho!
    22. The Three Musketeers.
    23. The Channings.
    24. The Pilgrim's Progress.
    25. Pride and Prejudice.
    26. Quentin Durward.
    27. Villette.
    28. Hard Times.
    29. Child's History of England.
    30. The Bible in Spain.
    31. Gulliver's Travels.
    32. Sense and Sensibility.
    33. Kate Coventry.
    34. Silas Marner.
    35. Notre Dame.
    36. Old St. Paul's.
    37. Waverley.
    38. 'Ninety-Three.
    39. Eothen.
    40. Toilers of the Sea.
    41. Children of the New Forest.
    42. The Laughing Man.
    43. A Book of Golden Deeds.
    44. Great Expectations.
    45. Guy Mannering.
    46. Modern Painters (Selections)
    47. Les Miserables--I.
    48. Les Miserables--II.
    49. The Monastery.
    50. Romola.
    51. The Vicar of Wakefield.
    52. Emma.
    53. Lavengro.
    54. Emerson's Essays.
    55. The Bride of Lammermoor.
    56. The Abbot.
    57. Tom Cringle's Log.
    58. Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare.
    59. The Scarlet Letter.
    60. Old Mortality.
    61. The Romany Rye.
    62. Hans Andersen.
    63. The Black Tulip.
    64. Little Women.
    65. The Talisman.
    66. Scottish Life and Character.
    67. The Woman in White.
    68. Tales of Mystery.
    69. Fair Maid of Perth.
    70. Parables from Nature.
    71. Peg Woffington.
    72. Windsor Castle.
    73. Edmund Burke.
    74. Ingoldsby Legends.
    75. Pickwick Papers.--I.
    76. Pickwick Papers.--II.
    77. Verdant Green.
    78. The Heir of Redclyffe.
    79. Wild Wales.
    80. Two Years Before the Mast.
    81. Jane Eyre.
    82. David Copperfield.--I.
    83. David Copperfield.--II.
    84. Hereward the Wake.
    85. Wide Wide World.
    86. Michael Strogoff.

THOMAS NELSON AND SONS.




    Transcriber's Note:

    Variations in hyphenated words have been retained as
    they appear in the original publication.

    Changes have been made as follows:

    Page 30
    with some inpatience _changed to_
    with some impatience

    Page 48
    very bravely mantained _changed to_
    very bravely maintained

    Page 120
    Sudgen, his staff; and Sudgen arrest him _changed to_
    Sugden, his staff; and Sugden arrest him

    Page 166
    The old atticed _changed to_
    The old latticed

    Page 175
    Let as have _changed to_
    Let us have

    Page 185
    Mrs. Gill, my houskeeper _changed to_
    Mrs. Gill, my housekeeper

    Page 224
    by a downward gave _changed to_
    by a downward gaze

    Page 242
    gently invired him _changed to_
    gently invited him

    Page 245
    a smiling Melancthon _changed to_
    a smiling Melanchthon

    Page 255
    Sentinels of Nunwood _changed to_
    Sentinels of Nunnwood

    Page 260
    only the profiters _changed to_
    only the profiteers

    Page 274
    dark gray irids _changed to_
    dark gray irides

    Page 297
    alight and alow _changed to_
    alight and aglow

    Page 380
    my old accupation _changed to_
    my old occupation

    Page 492
    not without approbrium _changed to_
    not without opprobrium

    Punctuation has been changed as follows:

    Page 119
    Mr Moore, we lived _changed to_
    Mr. Moore, we lived

    Page 145
    stones on the road? _changed to_
    stones on the road.

    Page 393
    "Shirley, my woman _changed to_
    'Shirley, my woman

    Page 540
    _reward_ her!" _changed to_
    _reward_ her!'"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Shirley, by Charlotte Bronte

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SHIRLEY ***

***** This file should be named 30486.txt or 30486.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/4/8/30486/

Produced by Brenda Lewis, Fox in the Stars and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Canada Team at
http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

