under the category of bad news. Consequently, Bourrienne woke him up at
three o'clock in the morning and translated the despatch. Bonaparte's
first words were as follows:

"Pooh! Bourrienne, you don't understand German."

But Bourrienne repeated the translation word for word. After this
reading the general rose, had everybody waked up, gave his orders, and
then went back to bed and to sleep.

That same day he left Milan and established his headquarters at
Stradella; there he remained until June 12th, left on the 13th, and
marched to the Scrivia through Montebello, where he saw the field
of-battle, still torn and bleeding after Lannes' victory. The traces of
death were everywhere; the church was still overflowing with the dead
and wounded.

"The devil!" said the First Consul to the victor, "you must have made it
pretty hot here."

"So hot, general, that the bones in my division were cracking and
rattling like hail on a skylight."

Desaix joined the First Consul on the 11th of June, while he was still
at Stradella. Released by the capitulation of El-Arish, he had reached
Toulon the 6th of May, the very day on which Bonaparte left Paris. At
the foot of the Mont Saint-Bernard Bonaparte received a letter from him,
asking whether he should march to Paris or rejoin the army.

"Start for Paris, indeed!" exclaimed Bonaparte; "write him to rejoin the
army at headquarters, wherever that may be."

Bourrienne had written, and, as we have seen, Desaix joined the army the
11th of June, at Stradella. The First Consul received him with twofold
joy. In the first place, he regained a man without ambition, an
intelligent officer and a devoted friend. In the second place, Desaix
arrived just in the nick of time to take charge of the division lately
under Boudet, who had been killed. Through a false report, received
through General Gardannes, the First Consul was led to believe that the
enemy refused to give battle and was retiring to Genoa. He sent Desaix
and his division on the road to Novi to cut them off.

The night of the 13th passed tranquilly. In spite of a heavy storm, an
engagement had taken place the preceding evening in which the Austrians
had been defeated. It seemed as though men and nature were wearied
alike, for all was still during the night. Bonaparte was easy in his
mind; there was but one bridge over the Bormida, and he had been assured
that that was down. Pickets were stationed as far as possible along the
Bormida, each with four scouts.

The whole of the night was occupied by the enemy in crossing the river.
At two in the morning two parties of scouts were captured; seven of the
eight men were killed, the eighth made his way back to camp crying: "To
arms!"

A courier was instantly despatched to the First Consul, who was sleeping
at Torre di Galifo. Meanwhile, till orders could be received, the drums
beat to arms all along the line. A man must have shared in such a scene
to understand the effect produced on a sleeping army by the roll of
drums calling to arms at three in the morning. The bravest shuddered.
The troops were sleeping in their clothes; every man sprang up, ran to
the stacked arms, and seized his weapons.

The lines formed on the vast plains of Marengo. The noise of the drums
swept on like a train of lighted powder. In the dim half-light the hasty
movements of the pickets could be seen. When the day broke, the French
troops were stationed as follows:

The division Gardannes and the division Chamberlhac, forming the extreme
advance, were encamped around a little country-place called Petra Bona,
at the angle formed by the highroad from Marengo to Tortona, and the
Bormida, which crosses the road on its way to the Tanaro.

The corps of General Lannes was before the village of San Giuliano, the
place which Bonaparte had pointed out to Roland three months earlier,
telling him that on that spot the fate of the campaign would be decided.

The Consular guard was stationed some five hundred yards or so in the
rear of Lannes.

The cavalry brigade, under General Kellermann, and a few squadrons of
chasseurs and hussars, forming the left, filled up, along the advanced
line, the gap between the divisions of Gardannes and Chamberlhac.

A second brigade, under General Champeaux, filled up the gap on the
right between General Lannes' cavalry.

And finally the twelfth regiment of hussars, and the twenty-first
chasseurs, detached by Murat under the orders of General Rivaud,
occupied the opening of the Valley of Salo and the extreme right of the
position.

These forces amounted to about twenty-five or six thousand men, not
counting the divisions Monnet and Boudet, ten thousand men in all,
commanded by Desaix, and now, as we have said, detached from the main
army to cut off the retreat of the enemy to Genoa. Only, instead of
making that retreat, the enemy were now attacking.

During the day of the 13th of June, General Melas, commander-in-chief of
the Austrian army, having succeeded in reuniting the troops of Generals
Haddich, Kaim and Ott, crossed the Tanaro, and was now encamped before
Alessandria with thirty-six thousand infantry, seven thousand cavalry,
and a numerous well-served and well-horsed artillery.

At four o'clock in the morning the firing began and General Victor
assigned all to their line of battle. At five Bonaparte was awakened
by the sound of cannon. While he was dressing, General Victor's
aide-de-camp rode up to tell him that the enemy had crossed the Bormida
and was attacking all along the line of battle.

The First Consul called for his horse, and, springing upon it, galloped
off toward the spot where the fighting was going on. From the summit of
the hill he could overlook the position of both armies.

The enemy was formed in three columns; that on the left, comprising all
the cavalry and light infantry, was moving toward Castel-Ceriolo by the
Salo road, while the columns of the right and centre, resting upon each
other and comprising the infantry regiments under Generals Haddich, Kaim
and O'Reilly, and the reserve of grenadiers under command of General
Ott, were advancing along the Tortona road and up the Bormida.

The moment they crossed the river the latter columns came in contact
with the troops of General Gardannes, posted, as we have said, at
the farmhouse and the ravine of Petra Bona. It was the noise of the
artillery advancing in this direction that had brought Bonaparte to the
scene of battle. He arrived just as Gardannes' division, crushed under
the fire of that artillery, was beginning to fall back, and General
Victor was sending forward Chamberlhac's division to its support.
Protected by this move, Gardannes' troops retreated in good order, and
covered the village of Marengo.

The situation was critical; all the plans of the commander-in-chief
were overthrown. Instead of attacking, as was his wont, with troops
judiciously massed, he was attacked himself before he could concentrate
his forces. The Austrians, profiting by the sweep of land that lay
before them, ceased to march in columns, and deployed in lines parallel
to those of Gardannes and Chamberlhac--with this difference, that
they were two to the French army's one. The first of these lines was
commanded by General Haddich, the second by General Melas, the third by
General Ott.

At a short distance from the Bormida flows a stream called the
Fontanone, which passes through a deep ravine forming a semicircle round
the village of Marengo, and protecting it. General Victor had already
divined the advantages to be derived from this natural intrenchment, and
he used it to rally the divisions of Gardannes and Chamberlhac.

Bonaparte, approving Victor's arrangements, sent him word to defend
Marengo to the very last extremity. He himself needed time to prepare
his game on this great chess-board inclosed between the Bormida, the
Fontanone, and Marengo.

His first step was to recall Desaix, then marching, as we have said,
to cut the retreat to Genoa. General Bonaparte sent off two or three
aides-de-camp with orders not to stop until they had reached that corps.
Then he waited, seeing clearly that there was nothing to do but to fall
back in as orderly a manner as possible, until he could gather a compact
mass that would enable him, not only to stop the retrograde movement,
but to assume the offensive.

But this waiting was horrible.

Presently the action was renewed along the whole line. The Austrians
had reached one bank of the Fontanone, of which the French occupied
the other. Each was firing on the other from either side of the ravine;
grape-shot flew from side to side within pistol range. Protected by its
terrible artillery, the enemy had only to extend himself a little more
to overwhelm Bonaparte's forces. General Rivaud, of Gardannes' division,
saw the Austrians preparing for this manoeuvre. He marched out from
Marengo, and placed a battalion in the open with orders to die there
rather than retreat, then, while that battalion drew the enemy's fire,
he formed his cavalry in column, came round the flank of the battalion,
fell upon three thousand Austrians advancing to the charge, repulsed
them, threw them into disorder, and, all wounded as he was by a
splintered ball, forced them back behind their own lines. After that
he took up a position to the right of the battalion, which had not
retreated a step.

But during this time Gardannes' division, which had been struggling with
the enemy from early morning, was driven back upon Marengo, followed by
the first Austrian line, which forced Chamberlhac's division to retreat
in like manner. There an aide-de-camp sent by Bonaparte ordered the two
divisions to rally and retake Marengo at any cost.

General Victor reformed them, put himself at their head, forced his way
through the streets, which the Austrians had not had time to barricade,
retook the village, lost it again, took it a third time, and then,
overwhelmed by numbers, lost it for the third time.

It was then eleven o'clock. Desaix, overtaken by Bonaparte's
aide-de-camp, ought at that hour to be on his way to the battle.

Meanwhile, Lannes with his two divisions came to the help of his
struggling comrades. This reinforcement enabled Gardannes and
Chamberlhac to reform their lines parallel to the enemy, who had now
debouched, through Marengo, to the right and also to the left of the
village.

The Austrians were on the point of overwhelming the French.

Lannes, forming his centre with the divisions rallied by Victor,
deployed with his two least exhausted divisions for the purpose of
opposing them to the Austrian wings. The two corps--the one excited
by the prospect of victory, the other refreshed by a long rest--flung
themselves with fury into the fight, which was now renewed along the
whole line.

After struggling an hour, hand to hand, bayonet to bayonet, General
Kaim's corps fell back; General Champeaux, at the head of the first and
eighth regiments of dragoons, charged upon him, increasing his disorder.
General Watrin, with the sixth light infantry and the twenty-second and
fortieth of the line, started in pursuit and drove him nearly a thousand
rods beyond the rivulet. But this movement separated the French from
their own corps; the centre divisions were endangered by the victory on
the right, and Generals Watrin and Champeaux were forced to fall back to
the lines they had left uncovered.

At the same time Kellermann was doing on the left wing what Champeaux
and Watrin had done on the right. Two cavalry charges made an opening
through the enemy's line; but behind that first line was a second. Not
daring to go further forward, because of superior numbers, Kellermann
lost the fruits of that momentary victory.

It was now noon. The French army, which undulated like a flaming serpent
along a front of some three miles, was broken in the centre. The centre,
retreating, abandoned the wings. The wings were therefore forced to
follow the retrograde movement. Kellermann to the left, Watrin to the
right, had given their men the order to fall back. The retreat was made
in squares, under the fire of eighty pieces of artillery which preceded
the main body of the Austrian army. The French ranks shrank visibly; men
were borne to the ambulances by men who did not return.

One division retreated through a field of ripe wheat; a shell burst and
fired the straw, and two or three thousand men were caught in the midst
of a terrible conflagration; cartridge-boxes exploded, and fearful
disorder reigned in the ranks.

It was then that Bonaparte sent forward the Consular guard.

Up they went at a charge, deployed in line of battle, and stopped the
enemy's advance. Meantime the mounted grenadiers dashed forward at a
gallop and overthrew the Austrian cavalry.

Meanwhile the division which had escaped from the conflagration received
fresh cartridges and reformed in line. But this movement had no other
result than to prevent the retreat from becoming a rout.

It was two o'clock.

Bonaparte watched the battle, sitting on the bank of a ditch beside the
highroad to Alessandria. He was alone. His left arm was slipped through
his horse's bridle; with the other he flicked the pebbles in the road
with the tip of his riding-whip. Cannon-balls were plowing the earth
about him. He seemed indifferent to this great drama on which hung all
his hopes. Never had he played so desperate a game--six years of victory
against the crown of France!

Suddenly he roused from his revery. Amid the dreadful roar of cannon and
musketry his ear caught the hoof-beats of a galloping horse. He raised
his head. A rider, dashing along at full speed, his horse covered with
white froth, came from the direction of Novi. When he was within fifty
feet, Bonaparte gave one cry:

"Roland!"

The latter dashed on, crying: "Desaix! Desaix! Desaix!"

Bonaparte opened his arms; Roland sprang from his horse, and flung
himself upon the First Consul's neck.

There was a double joy for Bonaparte in this arrival--that of again
seeing a man whom he knew would be devoted to him unto death, and
because of the news he brought.

"And Desaix?" he questioned.

"Is within three miles; one of your aides met him retracing his steps
toward the cannon."

"Then," said Bonaparte, "he may yet come in time."

"How? In time?"

"Look!"

Roland glanced at the battlefield and grasped the situation in an
instant.

During the few moments that had elapsed while they were conversing,
matters had gone from bad to worse. The first Austrian column, the one
which had marched on Castel-Ceriolo and had not yet been engaged, was
about to fall on the right of the French army. If it broke the line the
retreat would be flight--Desaix would come too late.

"Take my last two regiments of grenadiers," said Bonaparte. "Rally
the Consular guard, and carry it with you to the extreme right--you
understand? in a square, Roland!--and stop that column like a stone
redoubt."

There was not an instant to lose. Roland sprang upon his horse, took the
two regiments of grenadiers, rallied the Consular guard, and dashed to
the right. When he was within fifty feet of General Elsnitz's column, he
called out: "In square! The First Consul is looking at us!"

The square formed. Each man seemed to take root in his place.

General Elsnitz, instead of continuing his way in the movement to
support Generals Melas and Kaim--instead of despising the nine
hundred men who present no cause for fear in the rear of a victorious
army--General Elsnitz paused and turned upon them with fury.

Those nine hundred men were indeed the stone redoubt that General
Bonaparte had ordered them to be. Artillery, musketry, bayonets, all
were turned upon them, but they yielded not an inch.

Bonaparte was watching them with admiration, when, turning in the
direction of Novi, he caught the gleam of Desaix's bayonets. Standing on
a knoll raised above the plain, he could see what was invisible to the
enemy.

He signed to a group of officers who were near him, awaiting orders;
behind stood orderlies holding their horses. The officers advanced.
Bonaparte pointed to the forest of bayonets, now glistening in the
sunlight, and said to one of the officers: "Gallop to those bayonets and
tell them to hasten. As for Desaix, tell him I am waiting for him here."

The officer galloped off. Bonaparte again turned his eyes to the
battlefield. The retreat continued; but Roland and his nine hundred
had stopped General Elsnitz and his column. The stone redoubt was
transformed into a volcano; it was belching fire from all four sides.
Then Bonaparte, addressing three officers, cried out: "One of you to the
centre; the other two to the wings! Say everywhere that the reserves are
at hand, and that we resume the offensive."

The three officers departed like arrows shot from a bow, their ways
parting in direct lines to their different destinations. Bonaparte
watched them for a few moments, and when he turned round he saw a rider
in a general's uniform approaching.

It was Desaix--Desaix, whom he had left in Egypt, and who that very
morning had said, laughing: "The bullets of Europe don't recognize me;
some ill-luck is surely impending over me."

One grasp of the hand was all that these two friends needed to reveal
their hearts.

Then Bonaparte stretched out his arm toward the battlefield.

A single glance told more than all the words in the world.

Twenty thousand men had gone into the fight that morning, and now
scarcely more than ten thousand were left within a radius of six
miles--only nine thousand infantry, one thousand cavalry, and ten cannon
still in condition for use. One quarter of the army was either dead or
wounded, another quarter was employed in removing the wounded; for the
First Consul would not suffer them to be abandoned. All of these forces,
save and excepting Roland and his nine hundred men, were retreating.

The vast space between the Bormida and the ground over which the army
was now retreating was covered with the dead bodies of men and horses,
dismounted cannon and shattered ammunition wagons. Here and there rose
columns of flame and smoke from the burning fields of grain.

Desaix took in these details at a glance.

"What do you think of the battle?" asked Bonaparte.

"I think that this one is lost," answered Desaix; "but as it is only
three o'clock in the afternoon, we have time to gain another."

"Only," said a voice, "we need cannon!"

This voice belonged to Marmont, commanding the artillery.

"True, Marmont; but where are we to get them?"

"I have five pieces still intact from the battlefield; we left five more
at Scrivia, which are just coming up."

"And the eight pieces I have with me," said Desaix.

"Eighteen pieces!" said Marmont; "that is all I need." An aide-de-camp
was sent to hasten the arrival of Desaix's guns. His troops were
advancing rapidly, and were scarcely half a mile from the field of
battle. Their line of approach seemed formed for the purpose at hand; on
the left of the road was a gigantic perpendicular hedge protected by a
bank. The infantry was made to file in a narrow line along it, and it
even hid the cavalry from view.

During this time Marmont had collected his guns and stationed them
in battery on the right front of the army. Suddenly they burst forth,
vomiting a deluge of grapeshot and canister upon the Austrians. For an
instant the enemy wavered.

Bonaparte profited by that instant of hesitation to send forward the
whole front of the French army.

"Comrades!" he cried, "we have made steps enough backward; remember, it
is my custom to sleep on the battlefield!"

At the same moment, and as if in reply to Marmont's cannonade, volleys
of musketry burst forth to the left, taking the Austrians in flank.
It was Desaix and his division, come down upon them at short range and
enfilading the enemy with the fire of his guns.

The whole army knew that this was the reserve, and that it behooved them
to aid this reserve by a supreme effort.

"Forward!" rang from right to left. The drums beat the charge. The
Austrians, who had not seen the reserves, and were marching with their
guns on their shoulders, as if at parade, felt that something strange
was happening within the French lines; they struggled to retain the
victory they now felt to be slipping from their grasp.

But everywhere the French army had resumed the offensive. On all sides
the ominous roll of the charge and the victorious Marseillaise were
heard above the din. Marmont's battery belched fire; Kellermann dashed
forward with his cuirassiers and cut his way through both lines of the
enemy.

Desaix jumped ditches, leaped hedges, and, reaching a little eminence,
turned to see if his division were still following him. There he fell;
but his death, instead of diminishing the ardor of his men, redoubled
it, and they charged with their bayonets upon the column of General
Zach.

At that moment Kellermann, who had broken through both of the enemy's
lines, saw Desaix's division struggling with a compact, immovable mass.
He charged in flank, forced his way into a gap, widened it, broke the
square, quartered it, and in less than fifteen minutes the five thousand
Austrian grenadiers who formed the mass were overthrown, dispersed,
crushed, annihilated. They disappeared like smoke. General Zach and his
staff, all that was left, were taken prisoners.

Then, in turn, the enemy endeavored to make use of his immense cavalry
corps; but the incessant volleys of musketry, the blasting canister, the
terrible bayonets, stopped short the charge. Murat was manoeuvring on
the flank with two light-battery guns and a howitzer, which dealt death
to the foe.

He paused for an instant to succor Roland and his nine hundred men. A
shell from the howitzer fell and burst in the Austrian ranks; it opened
a gulf of flame. Roland sprang into it, a pistol in one hand, his sword
in the other. The whole Consular guard followed him, opening the enemy's
ranks as a wedge opens the trunk of an oak. Onward he dashed, till
he reached an ammunition wagon surrounded by the enemy; then, without
pausing an instant, he thrust the hand holding the pistol through
the opening of the wagon and fired. A frightful explosion followed, a
volcano had burst its crater and annihilated those around it.

General Elsnitz's corps was in full flight; the rest of the Austrian
army swayed, retreated, and broke. The generals tried in vain to stop
the torrent and form up for a retreat. In thirty minutes the French army
had crossed the plain it had defended foot by foot for eight hours.

The enemy did not stop until Marengo was reached. There they made a
vain attempt to reform under fire of the artillery of Carra-Saint-Cyr
(forgotten at Castel-Ceriolo, and not recovered until the day was over);
but the Desaix, Gardannes, and Chamberlhac divisions, coming up at a
run, pursued the flying Austrians through the streets.

Marengo was carried. The enemy retired on Petra Bona, and that too was
taken. Then the Austrians rushed toward the bridge of the Bormida; but
Carra-Saint-Cyr was there before them. The flying multitudes sought the
fords, or plunged into the Bormida under a devastating fire, which did
not slacken before ten that night.

The remains of the Austrian army regained their camp at Alessandria. The
French army bivouacked near the bridge. The day had cost the Austrian
army four thousand five hundred men killed, six thousand wounded, five
thousand prisoners, besides twelve flags and thirty cannon.

Never did fortune show herself under two such opposite aspects as
on that day. At two in the afternoon, the day spelt defeat and its
disastrous consequences to Bonaparte; at five, it was Italy reconquered
and the throne of France in prospect.

That night the First Consul wrote the following letter to Madame de
Montrevel:

  MADAME--I have to-day won my greatest victory; but
  it has cost me the two halves of my heart, Desaix and
  Roland.

  Do not grieve, madame; your son did not care to live,
  and he could not have died more gloriously.

  BONAPARTE.

Many futile efforts were made to recover the body of the young
aide-de-camp: like Romulus, he had vanished in a whirlwind.

None ever knew why he had pursued death with such eager longing.


THE END





End of Project Gutenberg's The Companions of Jehu, by Alexandre Dumas, pere

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPANIONS OF JEHU ***

***** This file should be named 7079.txt or 7079.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/0/7/7079/

Produced by Robert J. Hall

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
