cloven foot of the tempter."

"Tush, father, the tempter would have been more wise than to reckon upon
a faith which no ink and no parchment can render valid, if the Church
absolve the compact.  Thou understandest me, father?"

"I do.  I know your pious heart and well-judging mind."

"Thou wert right," resumed the king, musingly, "when thou didst tell us
that these caitiff Jews were waxing strong in the fatness of their
substance.  They would have equal laws--the insolent blasphemers!"

"Son!" said the Dominican, with earnest adjuration, "God, who has
prospered your arms and councils, will require at your hands an account
of the power intrusted to you.  Shall there be no difference between His
friends and His foes--His disciples and His crucifiers?"

"Priest," said the king, laying his hand on the monk's shoulder, and with
a saturnine smile upon his countenance, "were religion silent in this
matter, policy has a voice loud enough to make itself heard.  The Jews
demand equal rights; when men demand equality with their masters, treason
is at work, and justice sharpens her sword.  Equality! these wealthy
usurers!  Sacred Virgin! they would be soon buying up our kingdoms."

The Dominican gazed hard on the king.  "Son, I trust thee," he said, in a
low voice, and glided from the tent.




CHAPTER II.

THE AMBUSH, THE STRIFE, AND THE CAPTURE.

The dawn was slowly breaking over the wide valley of Granada, as Almamen
pursued his circuitous and solitary path back to the city.  He was now in
a dark and entangled hollow, covered with brakes and bushes, from amidst
which tall forest trees rose in frequent intervals, gloomy and breathless
in the still morning air.  As, emerging from this jungle, if so it may be
called, the towers of Granada gleamed upon him, a human countenance
peered from the shade; and Almamen started to see two dark eyes fixed
upon his own.

He halted abruptly, and put his hand on his dagger, when a low sharp
whistle from the apparition before him was answered around--behind; and,
ere he could draw breath, the Israelite was begirt by a group of Moors,
in the garb of peasants.

"Well, my masters," said Almamen, calmly, as he encountered the wild
savage countenances that glared upon him, "think you there is aught to
fear from the solitary santon?"

"It is the magician," whispered one man to his neighbour--"let him pass."

"Nay," was the answer, "take him before the captain; we have orders to
seize upon all we meet."

This counsel prevailed; and gnashing his teeth with secret rage, Almamen
found himself hurried along by the peasants through the thickest part of
the copse.  At length, the procession stopped in a semicircular patch of
rank sward, in which several head of cattle were quietly grazing, and a
yet more numerous troop of peasants reclined around upon the grass.

"Whom have we here?" asked a voice which startled back the dark blood
from Almamen's cheek; and a Moor of commanding presence rose from the
midst of his brethren.  "By the beard of the prophet, it is the false
santon! What dost thou from Granada at this hour?"

"Noble Muza," returned Almamen--who, though indeed amazed that one whom
he had imagined his victim was thus unaccountably become his judge,
retained, at least, the semblance of composure--"my answer is to be given
only to my lord the king; it is his commands that I obey."

"Thou art aware," said Muza, frowning, "that thy life is forfeited
without appeal?  Whatsoever inmate of Granada is found without the walls
between sunrise and sunset, dies the death of a traitor and deserter."

"The servants of the Alhambra are excepted," answered the Israelite,
without changing countenance.

"Ah!" muttered Muza, as a painful and sudden thought seemed to cross him,
"can it be possible that the rumour of the city has truth, and that the
monarch of Granada is in treaty with the foe?" He mused a little; and
then, motioning the Moors to withdraw, he continued aloud, "Almamen,
answer me truly: hast thou sought the Christian camp with any message
from the king?"

"I have not."

"Art thou without the walls on the mission of the king?"

"If I be so, I am a traitor to the king should I reveal his secret."

"I doubt thee much, santon," said Muza, after a pause; "I know thee for
my enemy, and I do believe thy counsels have poisoned the king's ear
against me, his people and his duties.  But no matter, thy life is spared
a while; thou remainest with us, and with us shalt thou return to the
king."

"But, noble Muza----"

"I have said!  Guard the santon; mount him upon one of our chargers; he
shall abide with us in our ambush."  While Almamen chafed in vain at his
arrest, all in the Christian camp was yet still.  At length, as the sun
began to lift himself above the mountains, first a murmur, and then a
din, betokened warlike preparations.  Several parties of horse, under
gallant and experienced leaders, formed themselves in different quarters,
and departed in different ways, on expeditions of forage, or in the hope
of skirmish with the straggling detachments of the enemy.  Of these, the
best equipped, was conducted by the Marquess de Villena, and his gallant
brother Don Alonzo de Pacheco.  In this troop, too, rode many of the best
blood of Spain; for in that chivalric army, the officers vied with each
other who should most eclipse the meaner soldiery in feats of personal
valour; and the name of Villena drew around him the eager and ardent
spirits that pined at the general inactivity of Ferdinand's politic
campaign.

The sun, now high in heaven, glittered on the splendid arms and gorgeous
pennons of Villena's company, as, leaving the camp behind, it entered a
rich and wooded district that skirts the mountain barrier of the Vega.
The brilliancy of the day, the beauty of the scene, the hope and
excitement of enterprise, animated the spirits of the whole party.
In these expeditions strict discipline was often abandoned, from the
certainty that it could be resumed at need.  Conversation, gay and loud,
interspersed at times with snatches of song, was heard amongst the
soldiery; and in the nobler group that rode with Villena, there was even
less of the proverbial gravity of Spaniards.

"Now, marquess," said Don Estevon de Suzon, "what wager shall be between
us as to which lance this day robs Moorish beauty of the greatest number
of its worshippers?"

"My falchion against your jennet," said Don Alonzo de Pacheco, taking up
the challenge.

"Agreed.  But, talking of beauty, were you in the queen's pavilion last
night, noble marquess? it was enriched by a new maiden, whose strange and
sudden apparition none can account for.  Her eyes would have eclipsed the
fatal glance of Cava; and had I been Rodrigo, I might have lost a crown
for her smile."

"Ay," said Villena, "I heard of her beauty; some hostage from one of the
traitor Moors, with whom the king (the saints bless him!) bargains for
the city.  They tell me the prince incurred the queen's grave rebuke for
his attentions to the maiden."

"And this morning I saw that fearful Father Tomas steal into the prince's
tent.  I wish Don Juan well through the lecture.  The monk's advice is
like the algarroba;--[The algarroba is a sort of leguminous plant common
in Spain]--when it is laid up to dry it may be reasonably wholesome, but
it is harsh and bitter enough when taken fresh."

At this moment one of the subaltern officers rode up to the marquess, and
whispered in his ear.

"Ha!" said Villena, "the Virgin be praised!  Sir knights, booty is at
hand.  Silence! close the ranks."  With that, mounting a little eminence,
and shading his eyes with his hand, the marquess surveyed the plain
below; and, at some distance, he beheld a horde of Moorish peasants
driving some cattle into a thick copse.  The word was hastily given, the
troop dashed on, every voice was hushed, and the clatter of mail, and the
sound of hoofs, alone broke the delicious silence of the noon-day
landscape.

Ere they reached the copse, the peasants had disappeared within it.  The
marquess marshalled his men in a semicircle round the trees, and sent on
a detachment to the rear, to cut off every egress from the wood.  This
done the troop dashed within.  For the first few yards the space was more
open than they had anticipated: but the ground soon grew uneven, rugged,
and almost precipitous, and the soil, and the interlaced trees, alike
forbade any rapid motion to the horse.  Don Alonzo de Pacheco, mounted on
a charger whose agile and docile limbs had been tutored to every
description of warfare, and himself of light weight and incomparable
horsemanship--dashed on before the rest.  The trees hid him for a moment;
when suddenly, a wild yell was heard, and as it ceased uprose the
solitary voice of the Spaniard, shouting, "_Santiago, y cierra_, Espana;
St. Jago, and charge, Spain!"

Each cavalier spurred forward; when suddenly, a shower of darts and
arrows rattled on their armour; and upsprung from bush and reeds, and
rocky clift, a number of Moors, and with wild shouts swarmed around the
Spaniards.

"Back for your lives!" cried Villena; "we are beset--make for the level
ground!"

He turned-spurred from the thicket, and saw the Paynim foe emerging
through the glen, line after line of man and horse; each Moor leading his
slight and fiery steed by the bridle, and leaping on it as he issued from
the wood into the plain.  Cased in complete mail, his visor down, his
lance in its rest, Villena (accompanied by such of his knights as could
disentangle themselves from the Moorish foot) charged upon the foe.  A
moment of fierce shock passed: on the ground lay many a Moor, pierced
through by the Christian lance; and on the other side of the foe was
heard the voice of Villena--"St. Jago to the rescue!"  But the brave
marquess stood almost alone, save his faithful chamberlain, Solier.
Several of his knights were dismounted, and swarms of Moors, with lifted
knives, gathered round them as they lay, searching for the joints of the
armour, which might admit a mortal wound.  Gradually, one by one, many of
Villena's comrades joined their leader, and now the green mantle of Don
Alonzo de Pacheco was seen waving without the copse, and Villena
congratulated himself on the safety of his brother.  Just at that moment,
a Moorish cavalier spurred from his troop, and met Pacheco in full
career.  The Moor was not clad, as was the common custom of the Paynim
nobles, in the heavy Christian armour.  He wore the light flexile mail of
the ancient heroes of Araby or Fez.  His turban, which was protected by
chains of the finest steel interwoven with the folds, was of the most
dazzling white--white, also, were his tunic and short mantle; on his left
arm hung a short circular shield, in his right hand was poised a long and
slender lance.  As this Moor, mounted on a charger in whose raven hue not
a white hair could be detected, dashed forward against Pacheco, both
Christian and Moor breathed hard, and remained passive.  Either nation
felt it as a sacrilege to thwart the encounter of champions so renowned.

"God save my brave brother!" muttered Villena, anxiously.  "Amen," said
those around him; for all who had ever witnessed the wildest valour in
that war, trembled as they recognised the dazzling robe and coal-black
charger of Muza Ben Abil Gazan.  Nor was that renowned infidel mated with
an unworthy foe.  "Pride of the tournament, and terror of the war," was
the favourite title which the knights and ladies of Castile had bestowed
on Don Alonzo de Pacheco.

When the Spaniard saw the redoubted Moor approach, he halted abruptly for
a moment, and then, wheeling his horse around, took a wider circuit, to
give additional impetus to his charge.  The Moor, aware of his purpose,
