drawn weapon? But oh, Albany! my friend--my brother--my bosom
counsellor--how--how camest thou by the heart to do this?"

Albany, seeing that the King's mood was softening, replied with more
firmness than before: "My castle has no barrier against the power of
death. I have not deserved the foul suspicions which your Majesty's
words imply. I pardon them, from the distraction of a bereaved father.
But I am willing to swear by cross and altar, by my share in salvation,
by the souls of our royal parents--"

"Be silent, Robert!" said the King: "add not perjury to murder. And was
this all done to gain a step nearer to a crown and sceptre? Take them
to thee at once, man; and mayst thou feel as I have done, that they are
both of red hot iron! Oh, Rothsay--Rothsay! thou hast at least escaped
being a king!"

"My liege," said MacLouis, "let me remind you that the crown and sceptre
of Scotland are, when your Majesty ceases to bear them, the right of
Prince James, who succeeds to his brother's rights."

"True, MacLouis," said the King, eagerly, "and will succeed, poor child,
to his brother's perils! Thanks, MacLouis--thanks. You have reminded
me that I have still work upon earth. Get thy Brandanes under arms with
what speed thou canst. Let no man go with us whose truth is not known to
thee. None in especial who has trafficked with the Duke of Albany--that
man, I mean, who calls himself my brother--and order my litter to
be instantly prepared. We will to Dunbarton, MacLouis, or to Bute.
Precipices, and tides, and my Brandanes' hearts shall defend the child
till we can put oceans betwixt him and his cruel uncle's ambition.
Farewell, Robert of Albany--farewell for ever, thou hard hearted, bloody
man! Enjoy such share of power as the Douglas may permit thee. But seek
not to see my face again, far less to approach my remaining child; for,
that hour thou dost, my guards shall have orders to stab thee down with
their partizans! MacLouis, look it be so directed."

The Duke of Albany left the presence without attempting further
justification or reply.

What followed is matter of history. In the ensuing Parliament, the Duke
of Albany prevailed on that body to declare him innocent of the death
of Rothsay, while, at the same time, he showed his own sense of guilt by
taking out a remission or pardon for the offence. The unhappy and aged
monarch secluded himself in his Castle of Rothsay, in Bute, to mourn
over the son he had lost, and watch with feverish anxiety over the life
of him who remained. As the best step for the youthful James's security,
he sent him to France to receive his education at the court of the
reigning sovereign. But the vessel in which the Prince of Scotland
sailed was taken by an English cruiser, and, although there was a truce
for the moment betwixt the kingdoms, Henry IV ungenerously detained him
a prisoner. This last blow completely broke the heart of the unhappy
King Robert III. Vengeance followed, though with a slow pace, the
treachery and cruelty of his brother. Robert of Albany's own grey hairs
went, indeed, in peace to the grave, and he transferred the regency
which he had so foully acquired to his son Murdoch. But, nineteen years
after the death of the old King, James I returned to Scotland, and
Duke Murdoch of Albany, with his sons, was brought to the scaffold, in
expiation of his father's guilt and his own.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

     The honest heart that's free frae a'
     Intended fraud or guile,
     However Fortune kick the ba',
     Has aye some cause to smile.

     BURNS.


We now return to the Fair Maid of Perth, who had been sent from the
horrible scene at Falkland by order of the Douglas, to be placed under
the protection of his daughter, the now widowed Duchess of Rothsay. That
lady's temporary residence was a religious house called Campsie, the
ruins of which still occupy a striking situation on the Tay. It arose on
the summit of a precipitous rock, which descends on the princely river,
there rendered peculiarly remarkable by the cataract called Campsie
Linn, where its waters rush tumultuously over a range of basaltic
rock, which intercepts the current, like a dike erected by human hands.
Delighted with a site so romantic, the monks of the abbey of Cupar
reared a structure there, dedicated to an obscure saint, named St.
Hunnand, and hither they were wont themselves to retire for pleasure or
devotion. It had readily opened its gates to admit the noble lady who
was its present inmate, as the country was under the influence of
the powerful Lord Drummond, the ally of the Douglas. There the Earl's
letters were presented to the Duchess by the leader of the escort which
conducted Catharine and the glee maiden to Campsie. Whatever reason
she might have to complain of Rothsay, his horrible and unexpected end
greatly shocked the noble lady, and she spent the greater part of the
night in indulging her grief and in devotional exercises.

On the next morning, which was that of the memorable Palm Sunday, she
ordered Catharine Glover and the minstrel into her presence. The spirits
of both the young women had been much sunk and shaken by the dreadful
scenes in which they had so lately been engaged; and the outward
appearance of the Duchess Marjory was, like that of her father, more
calculated to inspire awe than confidence. She spoke with kindness,
however, though apparently in deep affliction, and learned from them
all which they had to tell concerning the fate of her erring and
inconsiderate husband. She appeared grateful for the efforts which
Catharine and the glee maiden had made, at their own extreme peril, to
save Rothsay from his horrible fate. She invited them to join in her
devotions; and at the hour of dinner gave them her hand to kiss, and
dismissed them to their own refection, assuring both, and Catharine in
particular, of her efficient protection, which should include, she said,
her father's, and be a wall around them both, so long as she herself
lived.

They retired from the presence of the widowed Princess, and partook of
a repast with her duennas and ladies, all of whom, amid their profound
sorrow, showed a character of stateliness which chilled the light heart
of the Frenchwoman, and imposed restraint even on the more serious
character of Catharine Glover. The friends, for so we may now term them,
were fain, therefore, to escape from the society of these persons, all
of them born gentlewomen, who thought themselves but ill assorted with
a burgher's daughter and a strolling glee maiden, and saw them with
pleasure go out to walk in the neighbourhood of the convent. A little
garden, with its bushes and fruit trees, advanced on one side of the
convent, so as to skirt the precipice, from which it was only separated
by a parapet built on the ledge of the rock, so low that the eye might
easily measure the depth of the crag, and gaze on the conflicting waters
which foamed, struggled, and chafed over the reef below.

The Fair Maiden of Perth and her companion walked slowly on a path that
ran within this parapet, looked at the romantic prospect, and judged
what it must be when the advancing summer should clothe the grove with
leaves. They observed for some time a deep silence. At length the gay
and bold spirit of the glee maiden rose above the circumstances in which
she had been and was now placed.

"Do the horrors of Falkland, fair May, still weigh down your spirits?
Strive to forget them as I do: we cannot tread life's path lightly, if
we shake not from our mantles the raindrops as they fall."

"These horrors are not to be forgotten," answered Catharine. "Yet my
mind is at present anxious respecting my father's safety; and I cannot
but think how many brave men may be at this instant leaving the world,
even within six miles of us, or little farther."

"You mean the combat betwixt sixty champions, of which the Douglas's
equerry told us yesterday? It were a sight for a minstrel to witness.
But out upon these womanish eyes of mine--they could never see swords
cross each other without being dazzled. But see--look yonder, May
Catharine--look yonder! That flying messenger certainly brings news of
the battle."

"Methinks I should know him who runs so wildly," said Catharine. "But if
it be he I think of, some wild thoughts are urging his speed."

As she spoke, the runner directed his course to the garden. Louise's
little dog ran to meet him, barking furiously, but came back, to
cower, creep, and growl behind its mistress; for even dumb animals can
distinguish when men are driven on by the furious energy of irresistible
passion, and dread to cross or encounter them in their career. The
fugitive rushed into the garden at the same reckless pace. His head was
bare, his hair dishevelled, his rich acton and all his other vestments
looked as if they had been lately drenched in water. His leathern
buskins were cut and torn, and his feet marked the sod with blood. His
countenance was wild, haggard, and highly excited, or, as the Scottish
phrase expresses it, much "raised."

"Conachar!" said Catharine, as he advanced, apparently without seeing
what was before him, as hares are said to do when severely pressed by
the greyhounds. But he stopped short when he heard his own name.

"Conachar," said Catharine, "or rather Eachin MacIan, what means all
this? Have the Clan Quhele sustained a defeat?"

"I have borne such names as this maiden gives me," said the fugitive,
after a moment's recollection. "Yes, I was called Conachar when I was
happy, and Eachin when I was powerful. But now I have no name, and there
is no such clan as thou speak'st of; and thou art a foolish maid to
speak of that which is not to one who has no existence."

"Alas! unfortunate--"

"And why unfortunate, I pray you?" exclaimed the youth. "If I am coward
and villain, have not villainy and cowardice command over the elements?
Have I not braved the water without its choking me, and trod the firm
earth without its opening to devour me? And shall a mortal oppose my
purpose?"

"He raves, alas!" said Catharine. "Haste to call some help. He will not
harm me; but I fear he will do evil to himself. See how he stares down
on the roaring waterfall!"

The glee woman hastened to do as she was ordered, and Conachar's half
frenzied spirit seemed relieved by her absence.

"Catharine," he said, "now she is gone, I will say I know thee--I know
thy love of peace and hatred of war. But hearken; I have, rather than
strike a blow at my enemy, given up all that a man calls dearest: I have
lost honour, fame, and friends, and such friends! (he placed his hands
before his face). Oh! their love surpassed the love of woman! Why should
I hide my tears? All know my shame; all should see my sorrow. Yes, all
might see, but who would pity it? Catharine, as I ran like a madman down
the strath, man and woman called 'shame' on me! The beggar to whom I
flung an alms, that I might purchase one blessing, threw it back in
disgust, and with a curse upon the coward! Each bell that tolled rung
out, 'Shame on the recreant caitiff!' The brute beasts in their lowing
and bleating, the wild winds in their rustling and howling, the hoarse
waters in their dash and roar, cried, 'Out upon the dastard!' The
faithful nine are still pursuing me; they cry with feeble voice, 'Strike
but one blow in our revenge, we all died for you!'"

While the unhappy youth thus raved, a rustling was heard in the bushes.

"There is but one way!" he exclaimed, springing upon the parapet, but
with a terrified glance towards the thicket, through which one or two
attendants were stealing, with the purpose of surprising him. But the
instant he saw a human form emerge from the cover of the bushes, he
waved his hands wildly over his head, and shrieking out, "Bas air
Eachin!" plunged down the precipice into the raging cataract beneath.

It is needless to say, that aught save thistledown must have been dashed
to pieces in such a fall. But the river was swelled, and the remains of
the unhappy youth were never seen. A varying tradition has assigned more
than one supplement to the history. It is said by one account, that the
young captain of Clan Quhele swam safe to shore, far below the Linns of
Campsie; and that, wandering disconsolately in the deserts of Rannoch,
he met with Father Clement, who had taken up his abode in the wilderness
as a hermit, on the principle of the old Culdees. He converted, it is
said, the heart broken and penitent Conachar, who lived with him in his
cell, sharing his devotion and privations, till death removed them in
succession.

Another wilder legend supposes that he was snatched from death by the
daione shie, or fairy folk, and that he continues to wander through wood
and wild, armed like an ancient Highlander, but carrying his sword in
his left hand. The phantom appears always in deep grief. Sometimes he
seems about to attack the traveller, but, when resisted with courage,
always flies. These legends are founded on two peculiar points in his
story--his evincing timidity and his committing suicide--both of them
circumstances almost unexampled in the history of a mountain chief.

When Simon Glover, having seen his friend Henry duly taken care of in
his own house in Curfew Street, arrived that evening at the Place of
Campsie, he found his daughter extremely ill of a fever, in consequence
of the scenes to which she had lately been a witness, and particularly
the catastrophe of her late playmate. The affection of the glee maiden
rendered her so attentive and careful a nurse, that the glover said it
should not be his fault if she ever touched lute again, save for her own
amusement.

It was some time ere Simon ventured to tell his daughter of Henry's late
exploits, and his severe wounds; and he took care to make the most of
the encouraging circumstance, that her faithful lover had refused both
honour and wealth rather than become a professed soldier and follow the
Douglas. Catharine sighed deeply and shook her head at the history of
bloody Palm Sunday on the North Inch. But apparently she had reflected
that men rarely advance in civilisation or refinement beyond the ideas
of their own age, and that a headlong and exuberant courage, like that
of Henry Smith, was, in the iron days in which they lived, preferable to
the deficiency which had led to Conachar's catastrophe. If she had
any doubts on the subject, they were removed in due time by Henry's
protestations, so soon as restored health enabled him to plead his own
cause.

"I should blush to say, Catharine, that I am even sick of the thoughts
of doing battle. Yonder last field showed carnage enough to glut a
tiger. I am therefore resolved to hang up my broadsword, never to be
drawn more unless against the enemies of Scotland."

"And should Scotland call for it," said Catharine, "I will buckle it
round you."

"And, Catharine," said the joyful glover, "we will pay largely for soul
masses for those who have fallen by Henry's sword; and that will not
only cure spiritual flaws, but make us friends with the church again."

"For that purpose, father," said Catharine, "the hoards of the wretched
Dwining may be applied. He bequeathed them to me; but I think you would
not mix his base blood money with your honest gains?"

"I would bring the plague into my house as soon," said the resolute
glover.

The treasures of the wicked apothecary were distributed accordingly
among the four monasteries; nor was there ever after a breath of
suspicion concerning the orthodoxy of old Simon or his daughter.

Henry and Catharine were married within four months after the battle
of the North Inch, and never did the corporations of the glovers and
hammermen trip their sword dance so featly as at the wedding of the
boldest burgess and brightest maiden in Perth. Ten months after, a
gallant infant filled the well spread cradle, and was rocked by Louise
to the tune of--

     Bold and true,
     In bonnet blue.

The names of the boy's sponsors are recorded, as "Ane Hie and Michty
Lord, Archibald Erl of Douglas, ane Honorabil and gude Knicht, Schir
Patrick Charteris of Kinfauns, and ane Gracious Princess, Marjory
Dowaire of his Serene Highness David, umquhile Duke of Rothsay."

Under such patronage a family rises fast; and several of the most
respected houses in Scotland, but especially in Perthshire, and many
individuals distinguished both in arts and arms, record with pride their
descent from the Gow Chrom and the Fair Maid of Perth.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Fair Maid of Perth, by Sir Walter Scott

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FAIR MAID OF PERTH ***

***** This file should be named 7987.txt or 7987.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/9/8/7987/

Produced by Martin Robb

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

