Then the old priest took off the vestments which were over his brown
hermit garb, and giving them to the youths who had acted as his acolytes
bade them depart also, having given them some directions, and so we
three, the hermit, collier, and myself, were left alone by the hut.

The hermit bade the collier leave us, and he, evidently holding the old
man in high veneration, bowed awkwardly, and went to fill and relight
his kiln fires.

And then the old priest spoke to me.

"Sir, I was brought here, as you see, to drive away an evil spirit,
which this poor thrall said had appeared to him last night, and from
which he fled. Now all men know that these fens are haunted by fiends,
even as holy Guthlac found in the land of the Gyrwa's, [v] being sorely
troubled by them. But I have seen none, though I dwell in this fen much
as he dwelt, though none so worthy, or maybe worth troubling as he.
Know you what he saw? for I seem to see that your coming has to do with
this--" and the old man smiled a little.

Then I told him how I had come unexpectedly into the firelight, and that
the man had fled, adding that I was nigh worn out, and so, finding a
resting place, slept without heeding him; and then how little Turkil had
called me "Grendel", bidding me "spit fire for him to see".

At that the old man laughed a hearty laugh, looking sidewise to see that
Dudda was at work and unheeding.

"Verily," he said, "it is as I deemed, but with more reason for the
collier to fly than I had thought--for truly mail-clad men are never
seen here, and thy face, my son, is of the grimmest, for all you are so
young. I marvel Turkil feared you not--but children see below the
outward mask of a man's face."

Now as he said that, the old man looked kindly, but searchingly, at me,
and I rebelled against it: but he was so saintly looking that I might
not be angry, so tried to turn it off.

"Turkil the Valiant called me Grendel, Father. Also I think you came out
to exorcise the same by name, for I heard it in the Latin. But that was
a heathen fiend."

The hermit sighed a little and answered me.

"They sing the song of Beowulf and love it, heathen though it be, better
than aught else, and will till one rises up who will turn Holy Writ into
their mother tongue, as Caedmon did for Northumbria. Howbeit, doubtless
those who were fiends in the days of the false gods are fiends yet, and
if Grendel then, so also Grendel now, though he may have many other
names. And knowing that name from their songs, small wonder that the
terror that came from the marsh must needs be he. And, no doubt," went
on the good priest, though with a little twinkle in his eye, "he knew
well enough whom I came to exorcise, even if the name were wrong, had he
indeed been visibly here."

So he spoke: but my mind was wandering away to my own trouble; and when
I spoke of Sherborne just now, the thought of Bishop Ealhstan and his
words had come to me, and I wondered if I would tell my troubles to this
old man as he bade me. But, though to think of it showed that I was
again more myself, something of yesterday's bitterness rose up again as
the scene at the Moot came back, and I would not.

The priest was silent for a while, and must have watched my face as
these thoughts hardened it again.

"Be not wroth with an old man, my son," he said, very gently; "but there
is some trouble on your mind, as one who has watched the faces of men as
long as I may well see. And it is bitter trouble, I fear. Sometimes
these troubles pass a little, by being told."

The kind words softened me somewhat, and I answered him quietly:

"Aye, Father--there is trouble, but not to be told. I will take myself
and it away in the morning, and so bear it by myself."

He looked wistfully at me as one who fain would help another, saying:

"Other men's troubles press lightly on such as I, my son, save that they
add to my prayers."

And I was half-minded to tell him all and seek his counsel: but I would
not. Still, I would answer him, and so feigning cheerfulness, said:

"One trouble, Father, I fear you cannot help me in. I have nought
wherewith to reward this honest man for lodging and guidance--nor for
playing Grendel on him, and eating his food to boot."

"Surely you have honest hands by whom to send him somewhat? or he will
lead you to friends who will willingly lend to you?"

And I had neither. I, who but a few weeks ago could have commanded both
by scores--and now none might aid me. None might call me friend--I
was alone. These words brought it home to me more clearly than before,
and the loneliness of it sank into my heart, and my pride fled, and I
told the good man all, looking to see him shrink from me.

But he did not, hearing me patiently to the end. I think if he had
shrunk from me, the telling had left me worse than when I kept it hid
from him.

When I ended, he laid his hand on my shoulder--even as the bishop had
laid his, and said:

"Vengeance is mine. I will repay, saith the Lord."

And I, who had never heard those words before, thought them a promise
sent by the mouth of this prophet, as it were, to me, and wondered. Then
he went on:

"Surely, my son, I believe you to be true, and that you suffer
wrongfully, for never one who would lie told the evil of himself as you
have told me. Foolish you have been, indeed, as is the way of youth, but
disloyal you were not."

I was silent, and waited for him to speak such words again. And he, too,
was silent for a little, looking out over the marsh, and rocking himself
to and fro as he sat on the tree trunk beside me.

"Watching and praying and fasting alone, there has been given me some
little gift of prophecy, my son; now and then it comes, but never with
light cause. And now I will say what is given me to say. Cast out you
are from the Wessex land, but before long Wessex shall be beholden to
you. Not long shall Matelgar, the treacherous, hold your place--but
you shall be in honour again of all men. Only must you forego your
vengeance and leave that to the hand of the Lord, who repays."

"What must I do now, Father?" I asked, in a low voice.

"Go your own way, my son, and, as you were bidden, depart from this
kingdom as you will and whither; and what shall be, shall be. Fighting
there is for you, both within and without: but the battle within will be
the sorest: for I know that the longing for revenge will abide with you,
and that is hard to overcome. Yet remember the message of forbearance."

Then I cried out that I must surely be revenged and the good man strove
with me with many and sweet words, till he had quieted the thought
within me again. Yet I longed for it.

So we talked till the sun sank, and he must go ere darkness fell. But at
last he bade me kneel, and I knelt, who had thought in my pride never to
humble myself before mortal man again, till one dealt me my death blow
and I needs must fall before him.

So he blessed me and departed, bidding me remember that at sunrise and
midday and sunset, Leofwine, the priest, and Turkil, the child, should
remember me in their prayers. And, for he was very thoughtful, he told
me that he would take such order with the collier that he would ask
nought from me, nor must I offer him anything, save thanks. And he spoke
to him in going.

I watched him go till I could see him no more, and then, calling my
host, supped with him, and slept peacefully till the first morning light.



CHAPTER IV. THE SECRET MEETING.


I woke before the collier, who slept across the doorway on some skins,
and lay in his sleeping place for half an hour, thinking of what should
be before me, and whither I would go this day.

And, thinking quietly enough now, I made the resolve to leave at all
events my revenge that I had so longed for to sleep for a while--for
the words of the good priest had bided with me, and moreover, I had some
hope from his words of prophecy. So I would see how that turned out, and
then, if nought came of it, I would turn to my revenge again.

So having got thus far, the advice of the gray-haired warrior seemed as
good as any, for it was easy to me to get into West Wales, and then take
service with the under-king until such time as Danish or Norse vikings
put in thither, as they would at times for provender, or to buy copper
and tin from the miners.

But then a great longing came over me to see Alswythe once more, and
learn the truth of her faith or falseness. The man I had bound seemed to
speak truth, though she was the daughter of Matelgar. Yet if she were
child of that false man, I had known her mother well, and loved her
until she died a year ago. And she was a noble lady, and full of honesty.

Now as safe a way as any into the Westland would be over the Quantocks,
and so into the wilds of Dartmoor and beyond, where no man would know or
care for my outlawry--if, indeed, I found not more proscribed men
there than anywhere, who had fled, as I must fly, but with a price on
them. And if I fled that way, it was but a step aside to pass close to
Matelgar's hall.

It was the least safe path for me, it is true--for I had had a taste
of what sort of reception I should meet with at his hands did he catch
me or meet with me. But love drew me, and I would venture and see at
least the place where the one I loved dwelt.

Having made up my mind to that, I was all impatience to be going, and
woke the collier, saying that I must be afoot. He, poor man, started up
in affright, dreaming doubtless that the fiend had returned, but
recovered himself, making a low obeisance to me, quickly.

Then he brought out bread of the coarsest and cheese of the best,
grumbling that the fiend had devoured his better cheer. And I, being
light hearted, having made up my mind, and being young enough not to
look trouble in the face too long, asked him if he had none of the roe
deer left over?

Whereat he started, and looked terrified at me. Then I laughed, and said
that Grendel had told me what was in the pot, and the man, seeing that I
was not angry, began to grin also, wondering. Then the meaning of the
whole business seemed to come to him, and he sat down and began to
laugh, looking at me from under his brows now and then, lest I should be
wroth with him for the freedom. But I laughed also, and so in the end we
two sat and laughed till the tears came, opposite one another, and that
was a thing that I had never thought to do again. At last I stopped, and
then he made haste to compose himself.

"Master," he said, "forgive me. But if you were Grendel, as I think now,
there is a great fear off my mind."

"I was Grendel, Dudda," said I; "but you must have a sorely evil
conscience to be so easily frighted."

"Nay, master; but from week to week I see none, least of all at
midnight, and mail-clad men never at all. I think I am the only man who
fears not this marsh and what may haunt it."

"That you may never boast again," said I; "for scared you were, and that
badly!"

"It is between you and me, master," said he, with much cunning in his
look; "as I pray the matter of what was in the cauldron may be also--"

"Well, as for that," I answered, "I ate it, and was glad of it, so I
will not inquire how it came there."

But I was glad to have this secret as a sort of hold over this man, for
thralls are not to be trusted far, nor was I in a mood to put much faith
in any.

After that we ate in silence, and when we had finished, he put a loaf
and a half cheese into a wallet, and took a staff, and asked me to
command him. I knew not what the hermit had told him, so asked how much
he had learned of my errand.

"That you are on king's business, master, and in haste. Moreover that
your errand is secret, so that you would not be seen in town or village
on your way."

"That is right," I said, thanking in my mind the good hermit, whose
ready wit had made things so easy for me; moreover it was truthful
enough, for outlawry is king's business in all earnest, though not the
honour this poor thrall doubtless thought was put on me.

Then I told him that I need ask him but to guide me beyond Parret river,
on this side of Bridgwater, for after that the long line of the
Quantocks would guide me well enough. It was all I needed, for once out
of this fenland I knew the country well--aye, every furlong of it--
but I was willing enough to let him guide me through land I knew, that
if ever he were questioned--as he might well be when my outlawry was
known--his tale of my little knowledge of the country would make men
think me some stranger, and so no blame would come on him for harbouring
me.

So we started in the bright early morning, and he guided me well. There
is little to say of that journey, but finding from the man's talk that
the Moot rose not until the next day, I thought, with a lifting of my
heart, how Matelgar would likely enough be yet there, and that I might
almost in safety, unless he had sent word back concerning me to his men,
go and try to gain speech of Alswythe.

Now it chanced presently that, looking about me, I seemed to know the
lie of a woodland through which we passed, and in a little was sure we
were in that glade where I fought my fight. And next, I saw my
quarterstaff still resting against the tree where I had left it. The
collier saw it too, and said that some forester was doubtless resting
close by, seeming uneasy about the same. But I said that no question
should be made of his presence in the wood, if it were so, and we came
up to it. Then he started, and cried to me to look around.

My billhook, covered with new rust from the dew, lay where I had thrown
it in stripping off my own garments to arm myself; but of the man I had
slain only scattered bones were left. The wolves had devoured him.

When I saw that, I thought that this dead man might as well pass for
myself--Heregar, the outlaw. So I examined billhook and quarterstaff,
and at last said I knew them. They had been given to one Heregar, who
had been outlawed and driven from the Moot even as I stood to watch the
gathering as I passed by.

"Then his outlawry has ended here," said the collier. "The wolves have
devoured him."

"Just as well," I said carelessly. "Shall you take his staff and bill?
They are good enough."

"Not I," said the man. "It is ill meddling with strange men's weapons,
most of all an outlaw's."

"Mayhap you are wise," I said, and, casting down the things alongside
the bones, went on.

Now I had looked all round, and saw that my old garments were gone, so
that the man I had let go had at all events started away with them. But
now I knew that the news of my death would soon spread, hard on the
publishing of the sentence of outlawry, for the doings of an outlaw are
of the first interest to those among whom he may wander. As it was,
indeed, to my guide, who spoke so much thereof that I knew he would be
full of it, and tell it to all whom he met. And when he told me he
should go back through the town I was glad, for so Matelgar would have
news of the same, confirming the tale of his man, though not accounting
for his captain. Whereby he would be puzzled, and his life would be none
the easier, for I knew he would dread my vengeance, though it might be
hard for me to compass.

At last we crossed the river, and went a little way together into the
woods beyond, till we came to the road which should lead the collier
back to Bridgwater town. And there I made him give me directions for
crossing the Quantocks, as though I would go by Triscombe--which I
feigned to know not, save by name given for my guidance on my way.

I looked for him to ask reward, but he did not, and what the hermit had
told him I could not say, unless he had promised him reward on his
return. He made a low salutation before me, cap in hand, and I thanked
him for his pains, saying that I would not forget him, as I was sure he
would not forget "Grendel". And so we laughed, and he went away pleased
enough, giving me the wallet of food.

Then was I left alone in the woodlands that had been mine to hunt
through, for, holding our land from the king himself, I had many rights
that stretched far and wide, which doubtless that Matelgar coveted for
himself, and would now enjoy. And hard it was, and bitter exceedingly,
not to turn my steps straight through the town, where men had saluted me
reverently, to my own hall where it nestles under the great rock that
looks out over my low meadows, and away towards Brent across the wide
river. But that might not be. So I tried to stay myself with the thought
of the hermit's prophecy, and plunging deep into the woods, crossed far
back of my own place, until I could circle round towards Matelgar's hall.

And there I must go carefully, lest I should be seen and known by any;
but the woods were thick, and none knew them better than I. These things
come by nature to a man, and so I should not be proud that the very
woodmen would own that I was their master in all the craft of the
forest, as my father had been before me.

Now Matelgar's hall, smaller than mine, though as well built, or better,
lay in that glen which runs down towards the level meadows of Stert
point between Severn and Parret, north of the little hills of Combwich
and Stockland, and almost under that last. And there the forest came
down the valley--for it is not enough for me to call a combe--almost
to the rear of the hall and the quickset inclosure around it.

It was afternoon and towards evening when I came here, and I bided in
the woods a mile from the hall, in a safe place where none ever came,
until I heard the horn which called all men in to sup. Then, when I
judged that they had gathered, I struck towards the path that leads down
to the hall, keeping yet under cover. One ran in haste towards his
supper as I neared it, so I knew that perhaps he was the last to take
his place, and that for an hour or two I was secure.

Now in this wood, and not so far from where I was, is a little nook with
a fallen tree, and here Alswythe and her mother were wont to come in the
warm evenings, and sit while the feeding in hall went on, so soon as
they could leave the board. And there, too, I had met Alswythe often
lately, sitting and taking pleasure in her company, till she knew that I
would want no better companion for all my life.

This was just such an evening as might tempt her there, and I would at
least have the sorrow of biding there alone for the last time. So I
crept to that place very softly, and sat me down to think.

Maybe I had sat there a quarter of an hour when I heard a step coming,
and that step set my heart beating fast, for it was the one I longed
for. Then I feared to frighten her with sight of an armed man in her
retreat, but before I could move, she came round the bend of the path
that made the place private, and saw me.

She gave a little scream, and half turned to fly, for she was alarmed,
not knowing me in my arms. And all I could do was to take off my helm
and hold out my hands to her, for I could not speak her name in my joy.

Then she laid her hand to her heart, and paused and looked; and before I
