tore that letter up and wrote another to the Chevalier at Bologna,
telling him that the Princess Clementina would venture herself gladly if
he could secure the consent of Prince Sobieski, her father. And the next
morning he drove out in a carriage towards Ohlau in Silesia.

It was as the Chevalier Warner that he had first journeyed thither to
solicit for his King the Princess Clementina's hand. Consequently he
used the name again. Winter came upon him as he went; the snow gathered
thick upon the hills and crept down into the valleys, encumbering his
path. The cold nipped his bones; he drove beneath great clouds and
through a stinging air, but of these discomforts he was not sensible.
For the mission he was set upon filled his thoughts and ran like a fever
in his blood. He lay awake at nights inventing schemes of evasion, and
each morning showed a flaw, and the schemes crumbled. Not that his faith
faltered. At some one moment he felt sure the perfect plan, swift and
secret, would be revealed to him, and he lived to seize the moment. The
people with whom he spoke became as shadows; the inns where he rested
were confused into a common semblance. He was like a man in a trance,
seeing ever before his eyes the guarded villa at Innspruck, and behind
the walls, patient and watchful, the face of the chosen woman; so that
it was almost with surprise that he looked down one afternoon from the
brim of a pass in the hills and saw beneath him, hooded with snow, the
roofs and towers of Ohlau.

At Ohlau Wogan came to the end of his luck. From the moment when he
presented his letter he was aware of it. The Prince was broken by his
humiliation and the sufferings of his wife and daughter. He was even
inclined to resent them at the expense of the Chevalier, for in his
welcome to Wogan there was a measure of embarrassment. His shoulders,
which had before been erect, now stooped, his eyes were veiled, the fire
had burnt out in him; he was an old man visibly ageing to his grave. He
read the letter and re-read it.

"No," said he, impatiently; "I must now think of my daughter. Her
dignity and her birth forbid that she should run like a criminal in fear
of capture, and at the peril very likely of her life, to a king who,
after all, is as yet without a crown." And then seeing Wogan flush at
the words, he softened them. "I frankly say to you, Mr. Warner, that I
know no one to whom I would sooner entrust my daughter than yourself,
were I persuaded to this project. But it is doomed to fail. It would
make us the laughing-stock of Europe, and I ask you to forget it. Do you
fancy the Emperor guards my daughter so ill that you, single-handed, can
take her from beneath his hand?"

"Your Highness, I shall choose some tried friends to help me."

"There is no single chance of success. I ask you to forget it and to
pass your Christmas here as my very good friend. The sight is longer in
age, Mr. Warner, than in youth, and I see far enough now to know that
the days of Don Quixote are dead. Here is a matter where all Europe is
ranged and alert on one side or the other. You cannot practise secrecy.
At Ohlau your face is known, your incognito too. Mr. Warner came to
Ohlau once before, and the business on which he came is common
knowledge. The motive of your visit now, which I tell you openly is very
grateful to me, will surely be suspected."

Wogan had reason that night to acknowledge the justice of the Prince's
argument. He accepted his hospitality, thinking that with time he would
persuade him to allow the attempt; and after supper, while making
riddles in verse to amuse some of the ladies of the court, one of them,
the Countess of Berg, came forward from a corner where she had been busy
with pencil and paper and said, "It is our turn now. Here, Mr. Warner,
is an acrostic which I ask you to solve for me." And with a smile which
held a spice of malice she handed him the paper. Upon it there were ten
rhymed couplets. Wogan solved the first four, and found that the initial
letters of the words were C, L, E, M. The answer to the acrostic was
"Clementina." Wogan gave the paper back.

"I can make neither head nor tail of it," said he. "The attempt is
beyond my powers."

"Ah," said she, drily, "you own as much? I would never have believed you
would have owned it."

"But what is the answer?" asked a voice at which Wogan started.

"The answer," replied the Countess, "is Mary, Queen of Scots, who was
most unjustly imprisoned in Fotheringay," and she tore the paper into
tiny pieces.

Wogan turned towards the voice which had so startled him and saw the
gossamer lady whom he had befriended on the road from Florence. At once
he rose and bowed to her.

"I should have presented you before to my friend, Lady Featherstone,"
said the Countess, "but it seems you are already acquainted."

"Indeed, Mr. Warner did me a great service at a pinch," said Lady
Featherstone. "He was my postillion, though I never paid him, as I do
now in thanks."

"Your postillion!" cried one or two of the ladies, and they gathered
about the great stove as Lady Featherstone told the story of Wogan's
charioting.

"I bade him hurry," said she, "and he outsped my bidding. Never was
there a postillion so considerately inconsiderate. I was tossed like a
tennis ball, I was one black bruise, I bounced from cushion to cushion;
and then he drew up with a jerk, sprang off his horse, vanished into a
house and left me, panting and dishevelled, a twist of torn ribbons and
lace, alone in my carriage in the streets of Bologna."

"Bologna. Ah!" said the Countess, with a smile of significance at Wogan.

Wogan was looking at Lady Featherstone. His curiosity, thrust into the
back of his mind by the more important matter of his mission now
revived. What had been this lady's business who travelled alone to
Bologna and in such desperate haste?

"Your Ladyship, I remember," he said, "gave me to understand that you
were sorely put to it to reach Bologna."

Her Ladyship turned her blue eyes frankly upon Wogan. Then she lowered
them.

"My brother," she explained, "lay at death's door in Venice. I had just
landed at Leghorn, where I left my maid to recover from the sea, and
hurrying across Italy as I did, I still feared that I should not see him
alive."

The explanation was made readily in a low voice natural to one
remembering a great distress, but without any affectation of gesture or
so much as a glance sideways to note whether Wogan received it
trustfully or not. Wogan, indeed, was reassured in a great measure.
True, the Countess of Berg was now his declared enemy, but he need not
join all her friends in that hostility.

"I was able, most happily," continued Lady Featherstone, "to send my
brother homewards in a ship a fortnight back, and so to stay with my
friend here on my way to Vienna, for we English are all bitten with the
madness of travel. Mr. Warner will bear me out?"

"To be sure I will," said Wogan, stoutly. "For here am I in the depths
of winter journeying to the carnival in Italy."

The Countess smiled, all disbelief and amusement, and Lady Featherstone
turned quickly towards him.

"For my frankness I claim a like frankness in return," said she, with a
pretty imperiousness.

Wogan was a little startled. He suddenly remembered that he had
pretended to know no English on the road to Bologna, nor had he given
any reason for his haste. But it was upon neither of these matters that
she desired to question him.

"You spoke in parables," said she, "which are detestable things. You
said you would not lose your black horse for the world because the lady
you were to marry would ride upon it into your city of dreams. There's a
saying that has a provoking prettiness. I claim a frank answer."

Wogan was silent, and his face took on the look of a dreamer.

"Come," said one. It was the Princess Charlotte, the second daughter of
the Prince Sobieski, who spoke. "We shall not let you off," said she.

Wogan knew that she would not. She was a girl who was never checked by
any inconvenience her speech might cause. Her tongue was a watchman's
rattle, and she never spoke but she laughed to point the speech.

"Be frank," said the Countess; "it is a matter of the heart, and so
proper food for women."

"True," answered Wogan, lightly, "it is a matter of the heart, and in
such matters can one be frank--even to oneself?"

Wogan was immediately puzzled by the curious look Lady Featherstone
gave him. The words were a mere excuse, yet she seemed to take them very
seriously. Her eyes sounded him.

"Yes," she said slowly; "are you frank, even to yourself?" and she spoke
as though a knowledge of the answer would make a task easier to her.

Wogan's speculations, however, were interrupted by the entrance of
Princess Casimira, Sobieski's eldest daughter. Wogan welcomed her coming
for the first time in all his life, for she was a kill-joy, a person of
an extraordinary decorum. According to Wogan, she was "that black care
upon the horseman's back which the poets write about." Her first
question if she was spoken to was whether the speaker was from top to
toe fitly attired; her second, whether the words spoken were well-bred.
At this moment, however, her mere presence put an end to the demands for
an explanation of Wogan's saying about his horse, and in a grateful mood
to her he slipped from the room.

This evening was but one of many during that Christmastide. Wogan must
wear an easy countenance, though his heart grew heavy as lead. The
Countess of Berg was the Prince Constantine's favourite; and Wogan was
not slow to discover that her smiling face and quiet eyes hid the most
masterful woman at that court. He made himself her assiduous servant,
whether in hunting amid the snow or in the entertainments at the palace,
but a quizzical deliberate word would now and again show him that she
was still his enemy. With the Princess Casimira he was a profound
critic of observances: he invented a new cravat and was most careful
that there should never be a wrinkle in his stockings; with the Princess
Charlotte he laughed till his head sang. He played all manner of parts;
the palace might have been the stage of a pantomime and himself the
harlequin. But for all his efforts it did not seem that he advanced his
cause; and if he made headway one evening with the Prince, the next
morning he had lost it, and so Christmas came and passed.

But two days after Christmas a courier brought a letter to the castle.
He came in the evening, and the letter was carried to Wogan while he was
at table. He noticed at once that it was in his King's hand, and he
slipped it quickly into his pocket. It may have been something
precipitate in his manner, or it may have been merely that all were on
the alert to mark his actions, but at once curiosity was aroused. No
plain words were said; but here and there heads nodded together and
whispered, and while some eyed Wogan suspiciously, a few women whose
hearts were tuned to a sympathy with the Princess in her imprisonment,
or touched with the notion of a romantic attachment, smiled upon him
their encouragement. The Countess of Berg for once was unobservant,
however.

Wogan made his escape from the company as soon as he could, and going up
to his apartments read the letter. The moon was at its full, and what
with the clear, frosty air, and the snow stretched over the world like
a white counterpane, he was able to read the letter by the window
without the light of a candle. It was written in the Chevalier's own
cipher and hand; it asked anxiously for news and gave some. Wogan had
had occasion before to learn that cipher by heart. He stood by the
window and spelled the meaning. Then he turned to go down; but at the
door his foot slipped upon the polished boards, and he stumbled onto his
knee. He picked himself up, and thinking no more of the matter rejoined
the company in a room where the Countess of Berg was playing upon a
harp.

"The King," said Wogan, drawing the Prince apart, "leaves Bologna for
Rome."

"So the letter came from him?" asked the Prince, with an eagerness which
could not but seem hopeful to his companion.

"And in his own hand," replied Wogan.

The Prince shuffled and hesitated as though he was curious to hear
particulars. Wogan thought it wise to provoke his curiosity by
disregarding it. It seemed that there was wisdom in his reticence, for a
little later the Prince took him aside while the Countess of Berg was
still playing upon her harp, and said,--

"Single-handed you could do nothing. You would need friends."

Wogan took a slip of paper from his pocket and gave it to the Prince.

"On that slip," said he, "I wrote down the names of all the friends
whom I could trust, and by the side of the names the places where I
could lay my hands upon them. One after the other I erased the names
until only three remained."

The Prince nodded and read out the names.

"Gaydon, Misset, O'Toole. They are good men?"

"The flower of Ireland. Those three names have been my comfort these
last three weeks."

"And all the three at Schlestadt. How comes that about?"

"Your Highness, they are all three officers in Dillon's Irish regiment,
and so have that further advantage."

"Advantage?"

"Your Highness," said Wogan, "Schlestadt is near to Strasbourg, which
again is not far from Innspruck, and being in French territory would be
the most convenient place to set off from."

There was a sound of a door shutting; the Prince started, looked at
Wogan, and laughed. He had been upon the verge of yielding; but for that
door Wogan felt sure he would have yielded. Now, however, he merely
walked away to the Countess of Berg, and sitting beside her asked her to
play a particular tune. But he still held the slip of paper in his hand
and paid but a scanty heed to the music, now and then looking doubtfully
towards Wogan, now and then scanning that long list of names. His lips,
too, moved as though he was framing the three selected names, Gaydon,
Misset, O'Toole, and "Schlestadt" as a bracket uniting them. Then he
suddenly rose up and crossed the room to Wogan.

"My daughter wrote that a woman must attend her. It is a necessary
provision."

"Your Highness, Misset has a wife, and the wife matches him."

"They are warned to be ready?"

"At your Highness's first word that slip of paper travels to Schlestadt.
It is unsigned, it imperils no one, it betrays nothing. But it will tell
its story none the less surely to those three men, for Gaydon knows my
hand."

The Prince smiled in approval.

"You have prudence, Mr. Warner, as well as audacity," said he. He gave
the paper back, listened for a little to the Countess, who was bending
over her harp-strings, and then remarked, "The Prince's letter was in
his own hand too?"

"But in cipher."

"Ah!"

The Prince was silent for a while. He balanced himself first on one
foot, then on the other.

"Ciphers," said he, "are curious things, compelling to the imagination
and a provocation to the intellect."

Mr. Wogan kept a grave face and he replied with unconcern, though his
heart beat quick; for if the Prince had so much desire to see the
Chevalier's letter, he must be well upon his way to consenting to
Wogan's plan.

"If your Highness will do me the honour to look at this cipher. It has
baffled the most expert."

His Highness condescended to be pleased with Wogan's suggestion. Wogan
crossed the room towards the door; but before he reached it, the
Countess of Berg suddenly took her fingers from her harp-strings with a
gesture of annoyance.

"Mr. Warner," she said, "will you do me the favour to screw this wire
tighter?" And once or twice she struck it with her fingers.

"May I claim that privilege?" said the Prince.

"Your Highness does me too much honour," said the Countess, but the
Prince was already at her side. At once she pointed out to him the
particular string. Wogan went from the room and up the great staircase.
He was lodged in a wing of the palace. From the head of the staircase he
proceeded down a long passage. Towards the end of this passage another
short passage branched off at a right angle on the left-hand side. At
the corner of the two passages stood a table with a lamp and some
candlesticks. This time Wogan took a candle, and lighting it at the lamp
turned into the short passage. It was dark but for the light of Wogan's
candle, and at the end of it facing him were two doors side by side.
Both doors were closed, and of these the one on the left gave onto his
room.

Wogan had walked perhaps halfway from the corner to his door before he
stopped. He stopped suddenly and held his breath. Then he shaded his
candle with the palm of his hand and looked forward. Immediately he
turned, and walking on tiptoe came silently back into the big passage.
Even this was not well lighted; it stretched away upon his right and
left, full of shadows. But it was silent. The only sounds which reached
Wogan as he stood there and listened were the sounds of people moving
and speaking at a great distance. He blew out his candle, cautiously
replaced it on the table, and crept down again towards his room. There
was no window in this small passage, there was no light there at all
except a gleam of silver in front of him and close to the ground. That
