waist being in the prison, his legs outside. Then holding the inside
rope with both hands, he felt anxiously with his feet for the outside
rope, and when he had got it, he worked it in between the palms of his
feet, and kept it there tight: then he uttered a short prayer, and, all
the calmer for it, put his left hand on the sill and gradually wriggled
out. Then he seized the iron bar, and for one fearful moment hung
outside from it by his right hand, while his left hand felt for the rope
down at his knees; it was too tight against the wall for his fingers to
get round it higher up. The moment he had fairly grasped it, he left the
bar, and swiftly seized the rope with the right hand too; but in this
manoeuvre his body necessarily fell about a yard. A stifled cry came up
from below. Gerard hung in mid-air. He clenched his teeth, and nipped
the rope tight with his feet and gripped it with his hands, and went
down slowly hand below hand. He passed by one huge rough stone after
another. He saw there was green moss on one. He looked up and he looked
down. The moon shone into his prison window: it seemed very near. The
fluttering figures below seemed an awful distance. It made him dizzy to
look down: so he fixed his eyes steadily on the wall close to him, and
went slowly down, down, down.

He passed a rusty, slimy streak on the wall: it was some ten feet long.
The rope made his hands very hot. He stole another look up.

The prison window was a good way off now.

Down--down--down--down.

The rope made his hands sore.

He looked up. The window was so distant, he ventured now to turn his
eyes downward again; and there, not more than thirty feet below him,
were Margaret and Martin, their faithful hands upstretched to catch him
should he fall. He could see their eyes and their teeth shine in the
moonlight. For their mouths were open, and they were breathing hard.

"Take care, Gerard oh, take care! Look not down."

"Fear me not," cried Gerard joyfully, and eyed the wall, but came down
faster.

In another minute his feet were at their hands. They seized him ere he
touched the ground, and all three clung together in one embrace.

"Hush! away in silence, dear one."

They stole along the shadow of the wall.

Now, ere they had gone many yards, suddenly a stream of light shot from
an angle of the building, and lay across their path like a barrier of
fire, and they heard whispers and footsteps close at hand.

"Back!" hissed Martin. "Keep in the shade."

They hurried back, passed the dangling rope, and made for a little
square projecting tower. They had barely rounded it when the light shot
trembling past them, and flickered uncertainly into the distance.

"A lantern!" groaned Martin in a whisper. "They are after us."

"Give me my knife," whispered Gerard. "I'll never be taken alive."

"No, no!" murmured Margaret; "is there no way out where we are?"

"None! none! But I carry six lives at my shoulder;" and with the word,
Martin strung his bow, and fitted an arrow to the string: "in war never
wait to be struck: I will kill one or two ere they shall know where
their death comes from:" then, motioning his companions to be quiet he
began to draw his bow, and, ere the arrow was quite drawn to the head,
he glided round the corner ready to loose the string the moment the
enemy should offer a mark.

Gerard and Margaret held their breath in horrible expectation: they had
never seen a human being killed.

And now a wild hope, but half repressed, thrilled through Gerard, that
this watchful enemy might be the burgomaster in person. The soldier, he
knew, would send an arrow through a burgher or burgomaster, as he would
through a boar in a wood.

But who may foretell the future, however near? The bow, instead of
remaining firm, and loosing the deadly shaft, was seen to waver first,
then shake violently, and the stout soldier staggered back to them, his
knees knocking and his cheeks blanched with fear. He let his arrow fall,
and clutched Gerard's shoulder.

"Let me feel flesh and blood," he gasped. "The haunted tower! the
haunted tower!"

His terror communicated itself to Margaret and Gerard. They gasped
rather than uttered an inquiry.

"Hush!" he cried, "it will hear you up the wall! it is going up the
wall! Its head is on fire. Up the wall, as mortal creatures walk upon
green sward. If you know a prayer, say it, for hell is loose to-night."

"I have power to exorcise spirits," said Gerard, trembling. "I will
venture forth."

"Go alone then," said Martin; "I have looked on't once, and live."



CHAPTER XI

The strange glance of hatred the burgomaster had cast on Gerard, coupled
with his imprisonment, had filled the young man with a persuasion that
Ghysbrecht was his enemy to the death, and he glided round the angle of
the tower, fully expecting to see no supernatural appearance, but some
cruel and treacherous contrivance of a bad man to do him a mischief in
that prison, his escape from which could hardly be known.

As he stole forth, a soft but brave hand crept into his; and Margaret
was by his side, to share this new peril.

No sooner was the haunted tower visible, than a sight struck their eyes
that benumbed them as they stood. More than halfway up the tower, a
creature with a fiery head, like an enormous glowworm, was steadily
mounting the wall: the body was dark, but its outline visible through
the glare from the head, and the whole creature not much less than four
feet long.

At the foot of the tower stood a thing in white, that looked exactly
like the figure of a female. Gerard and Margaret palpitated with awe.

"The rope! the rope! It is going up the rope," gasped Gerard.

As they gazed, the glowworm disappeared in Gerard's late prison, but
its light illuminated the cell inside and reddened the window. The white
figure stood motionless below.

Such as can retain their senses after the first prostrating effect of
the supernatural are apt to experience terror in one of its strangest
forms, a wild desire to fling themselves upon the terrible object. It
fascinates them as the snake the bird. The great tragedian Macready
used to render this finely in Macbeth, at Banquo's second appearance.
He flung himself with averted head at the horrible shadow. This strange
impulse now seized Margaret. She put down Gerard's hand quietly, and
stood bewildered; then, all in a moment, with a wild cry, darted towards
the spectre. Gerard, not aware of the natural impulse I have spoken of,
never doubted the evil one was drawing her to her perdition. He fell on
his knees.

"Exorcizo vos. In nomine beatae Mariae, exorcizo vos."

While the exorcist was shrieking his incantations in extremity of
terror, to his infinite relief he heard the spectre utter a feeble
cry of fear. To find that hell had also its little weaknesses was
encouraging. He redoubled his exorcisms, and presently he saw the
ghastly shape kneeling at Margaret's knees, and heard it praying
piteously for mercy.


Kate and Giles soon reached the haunted tower. Judge their surprise when
they found a new rope dangling from the prisoner's window to the ground.

"I see how it is," said the inferior intelligence, taking facts as they
came. "Our Gerard has come down this rope. He has got clear. Up I go,
and see."

"No, Giles, no!" said the superior intelligence, blinded by prejudice.
"See you not this is glamour? This rope is a line the evil one casts out
to wile thee to destruction. He knows the weaknesses of all our hearts;
he has seen how fond you are of going up things. Where should our Gerard
procure a rope? how fasten it in the sky like this? It is not in nature.
Holy saints protect us this night, for hell is abroad."

"Stuff!" said the dwarf; "the way to hell is down, and this rope leads
up. I never had the luck to go up such a long rope. It may be years ere
I fall in with such a long rope all ready for me. As well be knocked on
the head at once as never know happiness."

And he sprung on to the rope with a cry of delight, as a cat jumps with
a mew on to a table where fish is. All the gymnast was on fire; and the
only concession Kate could gain from him was permission to fasten the
lantern on his neck first.

"A light scares the ill spirits," said she.

And so, with his huge arms, and his legs like feathers, Giles went up
the rope faster than his brother came down it. The light at the nape of
his neck made a glowworm of him. His sister watched his progress, with
trembling anxiety. Suddenly a female figure started out of the solid
masonry, and came flying at her with more than mortal velocity.

Kate uttered a feeble cry. It was all she could, for her tongue clove to
her palate with terror. Then she dropped her crutches, and sank upon her
knees, hiding her face and moaning:

"Take my body, but spare my soul!"

Margaret (panting). "Why, it is a woman!"

Kate (quivering). "Why, it is a woman!"

Margaret. "How you scared me!"

Kate. "I am scared enough myself. Oh! oh! oh!"

"This is strange! But the fiery-headed thing? Yet it was with you, and
you are harmless! But why are you here at this time of night?"

"Nay, why are YOU?"

"Perhaps we are on the same errand? Ah! you are his good sister, Kate!"

"And you are Margaret Brandt."

"Yes.

"All the better. You love him; you are here. Then Giles was right. He
has won free."

Gerard came forward, and put the question at rest. But all further
explanation was cut short by a horrible unearthly noise, like a
sepulchre ventriloquizing:

"PARCHMENT!--PARCHMENT!--PARCHMENT!"

At each repetition, it rose in intensity. They looked up, and there was
the dwarf, with his hands full of parchments, and his face lighted with
fiendish joy and lurid with diabolical fire. The light being at his
neck, a more infernal "transparency" never startled mortal eye. With the
word, the awful imp hurled parchment at the astonished heads below.
Down came records, like wounded wild-ducks; some collapsed, others
fluttering, and others spread out and wheeling slowly down in airy
circles. They had hardly settled, when again the sepulchral roar was
heard--"Parchment--parchment!" and down pattered and sailed another
flock of documents: another followed: they whitened the grass. Finally,
the fire-headed imp, with his light body and horny hands, slid down the
rope like a falling star, and (business before sentiment) proposed to
his rescued brother an immediate settlement for the merchandise he had
just delivered.

"Hush!" said Gerard; "you speak too loud. Gather them up, and follow us
to a safer place than this."

"Will you come home with me, Gerard?" said little Kate.

"I have no home."

"You shall not say so. Who is more welcome than you will be, after this
cruel wrong, to your father's house?

"Father! I have no father," said Gerard sternly. "He that was my father
is turned my gaoler. I have escaped from his hands; I will never come
within their reach again."

"An enemy did this, and not our father."

And she told him what she had overheard Cornelis and Sybrandt say. But
the injury was too recent to be soothed. Gerard showed a bitterness of
indignation he had hitherto seemed incapable of.

"Cornelis and Sybrandt are two ill curs that have shown me their teeth
and their heart a long while; but they could do no more. My father it is
that gave the burgomaster authority, or he durst not have laid a finger
on me, that am a free burgher of this town. So be it, then. I was his
son. I am his prisoner. He has played his part. I shall play mine.
Farewell the burgh where I was born, and lived honestly and was put in
prison. While there is another town left in creation, I'll never trouble
you again, Tergou."

"Oh! Gerard! Gerard!"

Margaret whispered her: "Do not gainsay him now. Give his choler time to
cool!"

Kate turned quickly towards her. "Let me look at your face?" The
inspection was favourable, it seemed, for she whispered: "It is a comely
face, and no mischief-maker's."

"Fear me not," said Margaret, in the same tone. "I could not be happy
without your love, as well as Gerard's."

"These are comfortable words," sobbed Kate. Then, looking up, she said,
"I little thought to like you so well. My heart is willing, but my
infirmity will not let me embrace you."

At this hint, Margaret wound gently round Gerard's sister, and kissed
her lovingly.

"Often he has spoken of you to me, Kate; and often I longed for this."

"You, too, Gerard," said Kate; "kiss me ere you go; for my heart lies
heavy at parting with you this night."

Gerard kissed her, and she went on her crutches home. The last thing
they heard of her was a little patient sigh. Then the tears came and
stood thick in Margaret's eyes. But Gerard was a man, and noticed not
his sister's sigh.

As they turned to go to Sevenbergen, the dwarf nudged Gerard with his
bundle of parchments and held out a concave claw.

Margaret dissuaded Gerard. "Why take what is not ours?"

"Oh, spoil an enemy how you can."

"But may they not make this a handle for fresh violence?"

"How can they? Think you I shall stay in Tergou after this? The
burgomaster robbed me of my liberty; I doubt I should take his life for
it, if I could."

"Oh, fie! Gerard."

"What! Is life worth more than liberty? Well, I can't take his life, so
I take the first thing that comes to hand."

He gave Giles a few small coins, with which the urchin was gladdened,
and shuffled after his sister. Margaret and Gerard were speedily joined
by Martin, and away to Sevenbergen.



CHAPTER XII

Ghysbrecht Van Swieten kept the key of Gerard's prison in his pouch. He
waited till ten of the clock ere he visited for he said to himself, "A
little hunger sometimes does well it breaks 'em." At ten he crept up
the stairs with a loaf and pitcher, followed by his trusty servant well
armed. Ghysbrecht listened at the door. There was no sound inside.
A grim smile stole over his features. "By this time he will be as
down-hearted as Albert Koestein was," thought he. He opened the door.

No Gerard.

Ghysbrecht stood stupefied.

Although his face was not visible, his body seemed to lose all motion
in so peculiar a way, and then after a little he fell trembling so, that
the servant behind him saw there was something amiss, and crept close
to him and peeped over his shoulder. At sight of the empty cell, and
the rope, and iron bar, he uttered a loud exclamation of wonder; but his
surprise doubled when his master, disregarding all else, suddenly flung
himself on his knees before the empty chest, and felt wildly all over it
with quivering hands, as if unwilling to trust his eyes in a matter so
important.

The servant gazed at him in utter bewilderment.

"Why, master, what is the matter?"

Ghysbrecht's pale lips worked as if he was going to answer; but they
uttered no sound: his hands fell by his side, and he stared into the
chest.

"Why, master, what avails glaring into that empty box? The lad is not
there. See here! note the cunning of the young rogue; he hath taken out
the bar, and--"

"GONE! GONE! GONE!"

"Gone! What is gone, Holy saints! he is planet-struck!"

"STOP THIEF!" shrieked Ghysbrecht, and suddenly turned, on his servant
and collared him, and shook him with rage. "D'ye stand there, knave, and
see your master robbed? Run! fly! A hundred crowns to him that finds
it me again. No, no! 'tis in vain. Oh, fool! fool! to leave that in the
same room with him. But none ever found the secret spring before. None
ever would but he. It was to be. It is to be. Lost! lost!" and his years
and infirmity now gained the better of his short-lived frenzy, and he
sank on the chest muttering "Lost! lost!"

"What is lost, master?" asked the servant kindly.

"House and lands and good name," groaned Ghysbrecht, and wrung his hands
feebly.

"WHAT?" cried the servant.

This emphatic word, and the tone of eager curiosity, struck on
Ghysbrecht's ear and revived his natural cunning.

"I have lost the town records," stammered he, and he looked askant at
the man like a fox caught near a hen-roost.

"Oh, is that all?"

"Is't not enough? What will the burghers say to me? What will the burghs
do?" Then he suddenly burst out again, "A hundred crowns to him who
shall recover them; all, mind, all that were in this box. If one be
missing, I give nothing."

"'Tis a bargain, master: the hundred crowns are in my pouch. See you not
that where Gerard Eliassoen is, there are the pieces of sheepskin you
rate so high?"

"That is true; that is true, good Dierich: good faithful Dierich. All,
mind, all that were in the chest."

"Master, I will take the constables to Gerard's house, and seize him for
the theft."

"The theft? ay! good; very good. It is theft. I forgot that. So, as he
is a thief now, we will put him in the dungeons below, where the toads
are and the rats. Dierich, that man must never see daylight again. 'Tis
his own fault; he must be prying. Quick, quick! ere he has time to talk,
you know, time to talk."

In less than half an hour Dierich Brower and four constables entered
the hosier's house, and demanded young Gerard of the panic-stricken
Catherine.

"Alas! what has he done now?" cried she; "that boy will break my heart."

"Nay, dame, but a trick of youth," said Dierich. "He hath but made
off with certain skins of parchment, in a frolic doubtless but the
burgomaster is answerable to the burgh for their safe keeping, so he is
in care about them; as for the youth, he will doubtless be quit for a
reprimand."

This smooth speech completely imposed on Catherine; but her daughter
was more suspicious, and that suspicion was strengthened by the
disproportionate anger and disappointment Dierich showed the moment he
learned Gerard was not at home, had not been at home that night.

"Come away then," said he roughly. "We are wasting time." He added
vehemently, "I'll find him if he is above ground."

Affection sharpens the wits, and often it has made an innocent person
more than a match for the wily. As Dierich was going out, Kate made him
a signal she would speak with him privately. He bade his men go on, and
waited outside the door. She joined him.

"Hush!" said she; "my mother knows not. Gerard has left Tergou."

"How?"

"I saw him last night."

"Ay! Where?" cried Dierich eagerly.

"At the foot of the haunted tower."

"How did he get the rope?"

"I know not; but this I know; my brother Gerard bade me there farewell,
and he is many leagues from Tergou ere this. The town, you know, was
always unworthy of him, and when it imprisoned him, he vowed never
to set foot in it again. Let the burgomaster be content, then. He has
imprisoned him, and he has driven him from his birthplace and from his
native land. What need now to rob him and us of our good name?"

This might at another moment have struck Dierich as good sense; but he
was too mortified at this escape of Gerard and the loss of a hundred
crowns.

"What need had he to steal?" retorted he bitterly.

"Gerard stole not the trash; he but took it to spite the burgomaster,
who stole his liberty; but he shall answer to the Duke for it, he shall.
As for these skins of parchment you keep such a coil about, look in the
nearest brook or stye, and 'tis odds but you find them."

"Think ye so, mistress?--think ye so?" And Dierich's eyes flashed.
"Mayhap you know 'tis so."

"This I know, that Gerard is too good to steal, and too wise to load
himself with rubbish, going a journey."

"Give you good day, then," said Dierich sharply. "The sheepskin you
scorn, I value it more than the skin of any in Tergou."

And he went off hastily on a false scent.

Kate returned into the house and drew Giles aside.

"Giles, my heart misgives me; breathe not to a soul what I say to you. I
have told Dirk Brower that Gerard is out of Holland, but much I doubt he
is not a league from Tergou."

"Why, where is he, then?"

"Where should he be, but with her he loves? But if so, he must not
loiter. These be deep and dark and wicked men that seek him. Giles, I
see that in Dirk Brower's eye makes me tremble. Oh, why cannot I fly to
Sevenbergen and bid him away? Why am I not lusty and active like other
girls? God forgive me for fretting at His will; but I never felt till
now what it is to be lame and weak and useless. But you are strong, dear
Giles," added she coaxingly; "you are very strong."

"Yes, I am strong," thundered Perpusillus; then, catching sight of her
meaning, "but I hate to go on foot," he added sulkily.

"Alas! alas! who will help me if you will not? Dear Giles, do you not
love Gerard?"

"Yes, I like him best of the lot. I'll go to Sevenbergen on Peter
Buyskens his mule. Ask you him, for he won't lend her me."

Kate remonstrated. The whole town would follow him. It would be known
whither he was gone, and Gerard be in worse danger than before.

Giles parried this by promising to ride out of the town the opposite
way, and not turn the mule's head towards Sevenbergen till he had got
rid of the curious.

Kate then assented and borrowed the mule. She charged Giles with a short
but meaning message, and made him repeat it after her over and over,
till he could say it word for word.

Giles started on the mule, and little Kate retired, and did the last
thing now in her power for her beloved brother--prayed on her knees long
and earnestly for his safety.



CHAPTER XIII

Gerard and Margaret went gaily to Sevenbergen in the first flush of
recovered liberty and successful adventure. But these soon yielded
to sadder thoughts. Gerard was an escaped prisoner, and liable to be
retaken and perhaps punished; and therefore he and Margaret would have
to part for a time. Moreover, he had conceived a hatred to his native
place. Margaret wished him to leave the country for a while, but at
the thought of his going to Italy her heart fainted. Gerard, on the
contrary, was reconciled to leaving Margaret only by his desire to visit
Italy, and his strong conviction that there he should earn money and
reputation, and remove every obstacle to their marriage. He had already
told her all that the demoiselle Van Eyck had said to him. He repeated
it, and reminded Margaret that the gold pieces were only given him to go
to Italy with. The journey was clearly for Gerard's interest. He was a
craftsman and an artist, lost in this boorish place. In Italy they would
know how to value him. On this ground above all the unselfish girl gave
her consent; but many tender tears came with it, and at that Gerard,
young and loving as herself, cried bitterly with her, and often they
asked one another what they had done, that so many different persons
should be their enemies, and combine, as it seemed, to part them.

They sat hand in hand till midnight, now deploring their hard fate, now
drawing bright and hopeful pictures of the future, in the midst of which
Margaret's tears would suddenly flow, and then poor Gerard's eloquence
would die away in a sigh.

The morning found them resigned to part, but neither had the courage to
say when; and much I doubt whether the hour of parting ever would have
struck.

But about three in the afternoon, Giles, who had made a circuit of many
miles to avoid suspicion, rode up to the door. They both ran out to him,
eager with curiosity.

"Brother Gerard," cried he, in his tremendous tones, "Kate bids you run
for your life. They charge you with theft; you have given them a handle.
Think not to explain. Hope not for justice in Tergou. The parchments you
took, they are but a blind. She hath seen your death in the men's eyes;
a price is on your head. Fly! For Margaret's sake and all who love you,
loiter not life away, but fly!"

It was a thunder-clap, and left two white faces looking at one another,
and at the terrible messenger.

Then Giles, who had hitherto but uttered by rote what Catherine bade
him, put in a word of his own.

"All the constables were at our house after you, and so was Dirk Brower.
Kate is wise, Gerard. Best give ear to her rede, and fly!"

"Oh, yes, Gerard," cried Margaret wildly. "Fly on the instant. Ah! those
parchments; my mind misgave me: why did I let you take them?"

"Margaret, they are but a blind: Giles says so. No matter: the old
caitiff shall never see them again; I will not go till I have hidden
his treasure where he shall never find it." Gerard then, after thanking
Giles warmly, bade him farewell, and told him to go back and tell Kate
he was gone. "For I shall be gone ere you reach home," said he. He then
shouted for Martin; and told him what had happened, and begged him to go
a little way towards Tergou, and watch the road.

"Ay!" said Martin, "and if I see Dirk Brower or any of his men, I will
shoot an arrow into the oak-tree that is in our garden; and on that
you must run into the forest hard by, and meet me at the weird hunter's
spring. Then I will guide you through the wood."

Surprise thus provided against, Gerard breathed again. He went with
Margaret, and while she watched the oak-tree tremblingly, fearing every
moment to see an arrow strike among the branches, Gerard dug a deep hole
to bury the parchments in.

He threw them in, one by one. They were nearly all charters and records
of the burgh; but one appeared to be a private deed between Floris
Brandt, father of Peter, and Ghysbrecht.

"Why, this is as much yours as his," said Gerard. "I will read this."

"Oh, not now, Gerard, not now," cried Margaret. "Every moment you lose
fills me with fear; and see, large drops of rain are beginning to fall,
and the clouds lower."

Gerard yielded to this remonstrance; but he put the deed into his bosom,
and threw the earth in over the others, and stamped it down. While thus
employed there came a flash of lightning followed by a peal of distant
thunder, and the rain came down heavily. Margaret and Gerard ran into
the house, whither they were speedily followed by Martin.

"The road is clear," said he, "and a heavy storm coming on."

His words proved true. The thunder came nearer and nearer till it
crashed overhead: the flashes followed one another close, like the
strokes of a whip, and the rain fell in torrents. Margaret hid her face
not to see the lightning. On this, Gerard put up the rough shutter and
lighted a candle. The lovers consulted together, and Gerard blessed
the storm that gave him a few hours more with Margaret. The sun set
unperceived, and still the thunder pealed, and the lightning flashed,
and the rain poured. Supper was set; but Gerard and Margaret could not
eat: the thought that this was the last time they should sup together
choked them. The storm lulled a little. Peter retired to rest. But
Gerard was to go at peep of day, and neither he nor Margaret could
afford to lose an hour in sleep. Martin sat a while, too; for he was
fitting a new string to his bow, a matter in which he was very nice.

The lovers murmured their sorrows and their love beside him.

Suddenly the old man held up his hand to them to be silent.

They were quiet and listened, and heard nothing. But the next moment a
footstep crackled faintly upon the autumn leaves that lay strewn in the
garden at the back door of the house. To those who had nothing to fear
such a step would have said nothing; but to those who had enemies it was
terrible. For it was a foot trying to be noiseless.

Martin fitted an arrow to his string and hastily blew out the candle. At
this moment, to their horror, they heard more than one footstep approach
the other door of the cottage, not quite so noiselessly as the other,
but very stealthily--and then a dead pause.

Their blood froze in their veins.

"Oh, Kate, oh, Kate! You said fly on the instant." And Margaret moaned
and wrung her hands in anguish and terror and wild remorse for having
kept Gerard.

"Hush, girl!" said Martin, in a stern whisper.

A heavy knock fell on the door.

And on the hearts within.



CHAPTER XIV

As if this had been a concerted signal, the back door was struck as
rudely the next instant. They were hemmed in. But at these alarming
sounds Margaret seemed to recover some share of self-possession. She
whispered, "Say he was here, but is gone." And with this she seized
Gerard and almost dragged him up the rude steps that led to her father's
sleeping-room. Her own lay next beyond it.

The blows on the door were repeated.

"Who knocks at this hour?"

"Open, and you will see!"

"I open not to thieves--honest men are all abed now."

"Open to the law, Martin Wittenhaagen, or you shall rue it."

"Why, that is Dirk Brower's voice, I trow. What make you so far from
Tergou?"

"Open, and you will know."

Martin drew the bolt very slowly, and in rushed Dierich and four more.
They let in their companion who was at the back door.

"Now, Martin, where is Gerard Eliassoen?"

"Gerard Eliassoen? Why, he was here but now!"

"Was here?" Dierich's countenance fell. "And where is he now?"

"They say he has gone to Italy. Why, what is to do?"

"No matter. When did he go? Tell me not that he went in such a storm as
this!"

"Here is a coil about Gerard Eliassoen," said Martin contemptuously.
Then he lighted the candle, and seating himself coolly by the fire,
proceeded to whip some fine silk round his bow-string at the place where
the nick of the arrow frets it.

"I'll tell you," said he carelessly. "Know you his brother Giles?--a
little misbegotten imp, all head and arms? Well, he came tearing over
here on a mule, and bawled out something, I was too far off to hear the
creature's words, but only its noise. Any way, he started Gerard. For as
soon as he was gone, there was such crying and kissing, and then Gerard
went away. They do tell me he has gone to Italy--mayhap you know where
that is, for I don't."

Dierich's countenance fell lower and lower at this account. There was
no flaw in it, A cunninger man than Martin would perhaps have told a
lie too many and raised suspicion. But Martin did his task well. He only
told the one falsehood he was bade to tell, and of his own head invented
nothing.

"Mates," said Dierich, "I doubt he speaks sooth. I told the burgomaster
how 'twould be. He met the dwarf galloping Peter Buyskens's mule from
Sevenbergen. 'They have sent that imp to Gerard,' says he, 'so, then,
Gerard is at Sevenbergen.' 'Ah, master!' says I, ''tis too late now. We
should have thought of Sevenbergen before, instead of wasting our time
hunting all the odd corners of Tergou for those cursed parchments that
we shall never find till we find the man that took 'em. If he was at
Sevenbergen,' quoth I, 'and they sent the dwarf to him, it must have
been to warn him we are after him. He is leagues away by now,' quoth I.
Confound that chalk-faced girl! she has outwitted us bearded men; and
so I told the burgomaster, but he would not hear reason. A wet jerkin
apiece, that is all we shall get, mates, by this job."

Martin grinned coolly in Dierich's face.

"However," added the latter, "to content the burgomaster, we will search
the house."

Martin turned grave directly.

This change of countenance did not escape Dierich. He reflected a
moment.

"Watch outside two of you, one on each side of the house, that no one
jump from the upper windows. The rest come with me."

And he took the candle and mounted the stairs, followed by three of his
comrades.

Martin was left alone.

The stout soldier hung his head. All had gone so well at first; and now
this fatal turn! Suddenly it occurred to him that all was not yet lost.
Gerard must be either in Peter's room or Margaret's; they were not so
very high from the ground. Gerard would leap out. Dierich had left a man
below; but what then? For half a minute Gerard and he would be two to
one, and in that brief space, what might not be done?

Martin then held the back door ajar and watched. The light shone in
Peter's room. "Curse the fool!" said he, "is he going to let them take
him like a girl?"

The light now passed into Margaret's bedroom. Still no window was
opened. Had Gerard intended to escape that way, he would not have waited
till the men were in the room. Martin saw that at once, and left the
door, and came to the foot-stair and listened.

He began to think Gerard must have escaped by the window while all the
men were in the house. The longer the silence continued, the stronger
grew this conviction. But it was suddenly and rudely dissipated.

Faint cries issued from the inner bedroom--Margaret's.

"They have taken him," groaned Martin; "they have got him."

It now flashed across Martin's mind that if they took Gerard away, his
life was not worth a button; and that, if evil befell him, Margaret's
heart would break. He cast his eyes wildly round like some savage beast
seeking an escape, and in a twinkling formed a resolution terribly
characteristic of those iron times and of a soldier driven to bay. He
stepped to each door in turn, and imitating Dierich Brower's voice,
said sharply, "Watch the window!" He then quietly closed and bolted
both doors. He then took up his bow and six arrows; one he fitted to his
string, the others he put into his quiver. His knife he placed upon a
chair behind him, the hilt towards him; and there he waited at the foot
of the stair with the calm determination to slay those four men, or be
slain by them. Two, he knew, he could dispose of by his arrows, ere
they could get near him, and Gerard and he must take their chance
hand-to-hand with the remaining pair. Besides, he had seen men
panic-stricken by a sudden attack of this sort. Should Brower and his
men hesitate but an instant before closing with him, he should shoot
three instead of two, and then the odds would be on the right side.

He had not long to wait. The heavy steps sounded in Margaret's room, and
came nearer and nearer.

The light also approached, and voices.

Martin's heart, stout as it was, beat hard, to hear men coming thus to
their death, and perhaps to his; more likely so than not: for four is
long odds in a battlefield of ten feet square, and Gerard might be bound
perhaps, and powerless to help. But this man, whom we have seen shake in
his shoes at a Giles-o'-lanthorn, never wavered in this awful moment of
real danger, but stood there, his body all braced for combat, and his
eye glowing, equally ready to take life and lose it. Desperate game! to
win which was exile instant and for life, and to lose it was to die that
moment upon that floor he stood on.


Dierich Brower and his men found Peter in his first sleep. They opened
his cupboards, they ran their knives into an alligator he had nailed to
his wall; they looked under his bed: it was a large room, and apparently
full of hiding-places, but they found no Gerard.

Then they went on to Margaret's room, and the very sight of it was
discouraging--it was small and bare, and not a cupboard in it; there
was, however, a large fireplace and chimney. Dierich's eye fell on these
directly. Here they found the beauty of Sevenbergen sleeping on an old
chest not a foot high, and no attempt made to cover it; but the sheets
were snowy white, and so was Margaret's own linen. And there she lay,
looking like a lily fallen into a rut.

Presently she awoke, and sat up in the bed, like one amazed; then,
seeing the men, began to scream faintly, and pray for mercy.

She made Dierich Brower ashamed of his errand.

"Here is a to-do," said he, a little confused. "We are not going to hurt
you, my pretty maid. Lie you still, and shut your eyes, and think of
your wedding-night, while I look up this chimney to see if Master Gerard
is there."

"Gerard! in my room?"

"Why not? They say that you and he--"

"Cruel! you know they have driven him away from me--driven him from his
native place. This is a blind. You are thieves; you are wicked men; you
are not men of Sevenbergen, or you would know Margaret Brandt better
than to look for her lover in this room of all others in the world. Oh,
brave! Four great hulking men to come, armed to the teeth, to insult one
poor honest girl! The women that live in your own houses must be naught,
or you would respect them too much to insult a girl of good character."

"There! come away, before we hear worse," said Dierich hastily. "He
is not in the chimney. Plaster will mend what a cudgel breaks; but a
woman's tongue is a double-edged dagger, and a girl is a woman with her
mother's milk still in her." And he beat a hasty retreat. "I told the
burgomaster how 'twould be."



CHAPTER XV

Where is the woman that cannot act a part? Where is she who will not
do it, and do it well, to save the man she loves? Nature on these great
occasions comes to the aid of the simplest of the sex, and teaches her
to throw dust in Solomon's eyes. The men had no sooner retired than
Margaret stepped out of bed, and opened the long chest on which she had
been lying down in her skirt and petticoat and stockings, and nightdress
over all; and put the lid, bed-clothes and all, against the wall: then
glided to the door and listened. The footsteps died away through her
father's room and down the stairs.

Now in that chest there was a peculiarity that it was almost impossible
for a stranger to detect. A part of the boarding of the room had been
broken, and Gerard being applied to to make it look neater, and being
short of materials, had ingeniously sawed away a space sufficient just
to admit Margaret's soi-disant bed, and with the materials thus acquired
he had repaired the whole room. As for the bed or chest, it really
rested on the rafters a foot below the boards. Consequently it was full
two feet deep, though it looked scarce one.

All was quiet. Margaret kneeled and gave thanks to Heaven. Then she
glided from the door and leaned over the chest, and whispered tenderly,
"Gerard!"

Gerard did not reply.

She then whispered a little louder, "Gerard, all is safe, thank Heaven!
You may rise; but oh! be cautious!"

Gerard made no reply.

She laid her hand upon his shoulder--"Gerard!"

No reply.

"Oh, what is this?" she cried, and her hands ran wildly over his face
and his bosom. She took him by the shoulders; she shook him; she lifted
him; but he escaped from her trembling hands, and fell back, not like a
man, but like a body. A great dread fell on her. The lid had been down.
She had lain upon it. The men had been some time in the room. With all
the strength of frenzy she tore him out of the chest. She bore him in
her arms to the window. She dashed the window open. The sweet air came
in. She laid him in it and in the moonlight. His face was the colour of
ashes; his body was all limp and motionless. She felt his heart. Horror!
it was as still as the rest! Horror of horrors! she had stifled him with
her own body.

The mind cannot all at once believe so great and sudden and strange a
calamity. Gerard, who had got alive into that chest scarce five minutes
ago, how could he be dead?

She called him by all the endearing names that heart could think or
tongue could frame. She kissed him and fondled him and coaxed him and
implored him to speak to her.

No answer to words of love, such as she had never uttered to him before,
nor thought she could utter. Then the poor creature, trembling all over,
began to say over that ashy face little foolish things that were at once
terrible and pitiable.

"Oh, Gerard! I am very sorry you are dead. I am very sorry I have killed
you. Forgive me for not letting the men take you; it would have been
better than this. Oh, Gerard! I am very, very sorry for what I have
done." Then she began suddenly to rave.

"No! no! such things can't be, or there is no God. It is monstrous. How
can my Gerard be dead? How can I have killed my Gerard? I love him. Oh,
God! you know how I love him. He does not. I never told him. If he knew
my heart, he would speak to me, he would not be so deaf to his poor
Margaret. It is all a trick to make me cry out and betray him; but no!
I love him too well for that. I'll choke first." And she seized her own
throat, to check her wild desire to scream in her terror and anguish.

"If he would but say one word. Oh, Gerard! don't die without a word.
Have mercy on me and scold me, but speak to me: if you are angry with
me, scold me! curse me! I deserve it: the idiot that killed the man she
loved better than herself. Ah I am a murderess. The worst in all the
world. Help! help! I have murdered him. Ah! ah! ah! ah! ah!"

She tore her hair, and uttered shriek after shriek, so wild, so
piercing, they fell like a knell upon the ears of Dierich Brower and his
men. All started to their feet and looked at one another.



CHAPTER XVI

Martin Wittenhaagen, standing at the foot of the stairs with his arrow
drawn nearly to the head and his knife behind him, was struck with
amazement to see the men come back without Gerard: he lowered his bow
and looked open-mouthed at them. They, for their part, were equally
puzzled at the attitude they had caught him in.

"Why, mates, was the old fellow making ready to shoot at us?"

"Stuff!" said Martin, recovering his stolid composure; "I was but trying
my new string. There! I'll unstring my bow, if you think that."

"Humph!" said Dierich suspiciously, "there is something more in you than
I understand: put a log on, and let us dry our hides a bit ere we go."

A blazing fire was soon made, and the men gathered round it, and their
clothes and long hair were soon smoking from the cheerful blaze. Then it
was that the shrieks were heard in Margaret's room. They all started up,
and one of them seized the candle and ran up the steps that led to the
bedrooms.

Martin rose hastily too, and being confused by these sudden screams, and
apprehending danger from the man's curiosity, tried to prevent him from
going there.

At this Dierich threw his arms round him from behind, and called on the
others to keep him. The man that had the candle got clear away, and all
the rest fell upon Martin, and after a long and fierce struggle, in the
course of which they were more than once all rolling on the floor, with
Martin in the middle, they succeeded in mastering the old Samson, and
binding him hand and foot with a rope they had brought for Gerard.

Martin groaned aloud. He saw the man had made his way to Margaret's room
during the struggle, and here was he powerless.

"Ay, grind your teeth, you old rogue," said Dierich, panting with the
struggle. "You shan't use them."

"It is my belief, mates, that our lives were scarce safe while this old
fellow's bones were free."

"He makes me think this Gerard is not far off," put in another.

"No such luck," replied Dierich. "Hallo, mates. Jorian Ketel is a long
time in that girl's bedroom. Best go and see after him, some of us."

The rude laugh caused by this remark had hardly subsided, when hasty
footsteps were heard running along over head.

"Oh, here he comes, at last. Well, Jorian, what is to do now up there?"



CHAPTER XVII

Jorian Ketel went straight to Margaret's room, and there, to his
infinite surprise, he found the man he had been in search of, pale and
motionless, his head in Margaret's lap, and she kneeling over him, mute
now, and stricken to stone. Her eyes were dilated yet glazed, and she
neither saw the light nor heard the man, nor cared for anything on
earth, but the white face in her lap.

Jorian stood awe-struck, the candle shaking in his hand.

"Why, where was he, then, all the time?"

Margaret heeded him not. Jorian went to the empty chest and inspected
it. He began to comprehend. The girl's dumb and frozen despair moved
him.

"This is a sorry sight," said he; "it is a black night's work: all for
a few skins! Better have gone with us than so. She is past answering me,
poor wench. Stop! let us try whether--"

He took down a little round mirror, no bigger than his hand, and put it
to Gerard's mouth and nostrils, and held it there. When he withdrew it,
it was dull.

"THERE IS LIFE IN HIM!" said Jorian Ketel to himself.

Margaret caught the words instantly, though only muttered, and it was if
a statue should start into life and passion. She rose and flung her arms
round Jorian's neck.

"Oh, bless the tongue that tells me so!" and she clasped the great rough
fellow again and again, eagerly, almost fiercely.

"There, there! let us lay him warm, said Jorian; and in a moment he
raised Gerard and laid him on the bed-clothes. Then he took out a flask
he carried, and filled his hand twice with Schiedamze, and flung it
sharply each time in Gerard's face. The pungent liquor co-operated with
his recovery--he gave a faint sigh. Oh, never was sound so joyful to
human ear! She flew towards him, but then stopped, quivering for fear
she should hurt him. She had lost all confidence in herself.

"That is right--let him alone," said Jorian; "don't go cuddling him as
you did me, or you'll drive his breath back again. Let him alone: he is
sure to come to. 'Tisn't like as if he was an old man."

Gerard sighed deeply, and a faint streak of colour stole to his lips.
Jorian made for the door. He had hardly reached it, when he found his
legs seized from behind.

It was Margaret! She curled round his knees like a serpent, and kissed
his hand, and fawned on him. "You won't tell? You have saved his life;
you have not the heart to thrust him back into his grave, to undo your
own good work?"

"No, no! It is not the first time I have done you two a good turn; 'twas
I told you in the church whither we had to take him. Besides, what is
Dierich Brower to me? I'll see him hanged ere I'll tell him. But I
wish you'd tell me where the parchments are! There are a hundred crowns
offered for them. That would be a good windfall for my Joan and the
children, you know."

"Ah! they shall have those hundred crowns.

"What! are the things in the house?" asked Jorian eagerly.

"No; but I know where they are; and by God and St. Bavon I swear you
shall have them to-morrow. Come to me for them when you will, but come
alone."

"I were made else. What! share the hundred crowns with Dirk Brower? And
now may my bones rot in my skin if I let a soul know the poor boy is
here."

He then ran off, lest by staying longer he should excite suspicion,
and have them all after him. And Margaret knelt, quivering from head to
foot, and prayed beside Gerard and for Gerard.


"What is to do?" replied Jorian to Dierich Brower's query; "why, we have
scared the girl out of her wits. She was in a kind of fit."

"We had better all go and doctor her, then."

"Oh, yes! and frighten her into the churchyard. Her father is a doctor,
and I have roused him, and set him to bring her round. Let us see the
fire, will ye?"

His off-hand way disarmed all suspicion. And soon after the party agreed
that the kitchen of the "Three Kings" was much warmer than Peter's
house, and they departed, having first untied Martin.

"Take note, mate, that I was right, and the burgomaster wrong," said
Dierich Brower at the door; "I said we should be too late to catch him,
and we were too late."


Thus Gerard, in one terrible night, grazed the prison and the grave.

And how did he get clear at last? Not by his cunningly contrived
hiding-place, nor by Margaret's ready wit; but by a good impulse in
one of his captors, by the bit of humanity left in a somewhat reckless
fellow's heart, aided by his desire of gain. So mixed and seemingly
incongruous are human motives, so shortsighted our shrewdest counsels.

They whose moderate natures or gentle fates keep them, in life's
passage, from the fierce extremes of joy and anguish our nature is
capable of, are perhaps the best, and certainly the happiest of
mankind. But to such readers I should try in vain to convey what bliss
unspeakable settled now upon these persecuted lovers, Even to those who
have joyed greatly and greatly suffered, my feeble art can present but a
pale reflection of Margaret's and Gerard's ecstasy.

To sit and see a beloved face come back from the grave to the world, to
health and beauty, by swift gradations; to see the roses return to the
loved cheek, love's glance to the loved eye, and his words to the loved
mouth--this was Margaret's--a joy to balance years of sorrow. It
was Gerard's to awake from a trance, and find his head pillowed on
Margaret's arm; to hear the woman he adored murmur new words of eloquent
love, and shower tears and tender kisses and caresses on him. He never
knew, till this sweet moment, how ardently, how tenderly, she loved
him. He thanked his enemies. They wreathed their arms sweetly round each
other, and trouble and danger seemed a world, an age behind them. They
called each other husband and wife. Were they not solemnly betrothed?
And had they not stood before the altar together? Was not the blessing
of Holy Church upon their union?--her curse on all who would part them?

But as no woman's nerves can bear with impunity so terrible a strain.
presently Margaret turned faint, and sank on Gerard's shoulder, smiling
feebly, but quite, quite unstrung. Then Gerard was anxious, and would
seek assistance. But she held him with a gentle grasp, and implored him
not to leave her for a moment.
