changed the subject by adding, "And is bravery so much esteemed amongst
the Christian princes that thou, thus void of means and of men, canst
offer, as thou didst of late, to be my protector and security in the
camp of thy brethren?"

"Know, Saracen," said the Christian, "since such is thy style, that the
name of a knight, and the blood of a gentleman, entitle him to place
himself on the same rank with sovereigns even of the first degree, in
so far as regards all but regal authority and dominion. Were Richard
of England himself to wound the honour of a knight as poor as I am, he
could not, by the law of chivalry, deny him the combat."

"Methinks I should like to look upon so strange a scene," said the Emir,
"in which a leathern belt and a pair of spurs put the poorest on a level
with the most powerful."

"You must add free blood and a fearless heart," said the Christian;
"then, perhaps, you will not have spoken untruly of the dignity of
knighthood."

"And mix you as boldly amongst the females of your chiefs and leaders?"
asked the Saracen.

"God forbid," said the Knight of the Leopard, "that the poorest knight
in Christendom should not be free, in all honourable service, to devote
his hand and sword, the fame of his actions, and the fixed devotion of
his heart, to the fairest princess who ever wore coronet on her brow!"

"But a little while since," said the Saracen, "and you described love as
the highest treasure of the heart--thine hath undoubtedly been high and
nobly bestowed?"

"Stranger," answered the Christian, blushing deeply as he spoke, "we
tell not rashly where it is we have bestowed our choicest treasures. It
is enough for thee to know that, as thou sayest, my love is highly and
nobly bestowed--most highly--most nobly; but if thou wouldst hear of
love and broken lances, venture thyself, as thou sayest, to the camp of
the Crusaders, and thou wilt find exercise for thine ears, and, if thou
wilt, for thy hands too."

The Eastern warrior, raising himself in his stirrups, and shaking aloft
his lance, replied, "Hardly, I fear, shall I find one with a crossed
shoulder who will exchange with me the cast of the jerrid."

"I will not promise for that," replied the Knight; "though there be in
the camp certain Spaniards, who have right good skill in your Eastern
game of hurling the javelin."

"Dogs, and sons of dogs!" ejaculated the Saracen; "what have these
Spaniards to do to come hither to combat the true believers, who, in
their own land, are their lords and taskmasters? with them I would mix
in no warlike pastime."

"Let not the knights of Leon or Asturias hear you speak thus of them,"
said the Knight of the Leopard. "But," added he, smiling at the
recollection of the morning's combat, "if, instead of a reed, you were
inclined to stand the cast of a battle-axe, there are enough of Western
warriors who would gratify your longing."

"By the beard of my father, sir," said the Saracen, with an approach to
laughter, "the game is too rough for mere sport. I will never shun them
in battle, but my head" (pressing his hand to his brow) "will not, for a
while, permit me to seek them in sport."

"I would you saw the axe of King Richard," answered the Western warrior,
"to which that which hangs at my saddle-bow weighs but as a feather."

"We hear much of that island sovereign," said the Saracen. "Art thou one
of his subjects?"

"One of his followers I am, for this expedition," answered the Knight,
"and honoured in the service; but not born his subject, although a
native of the island in which he reigns."

"How mean you? " said the Eastern soldier; "have you then two kings in
one poor island?"

"As thou sayest," said the Scot, for such was Sir Kenneth by birth. "It
is even so; and yet, although the inhabitants of the two extremities of
that island are engaged in frequent war, the country can, as thou seest,
furnish forth such a body of men-at-arms as may go far to shake the
unholy hold which your master hath laid on the cities of Zion."

"By the beard of Saladin, Nazarene, but that it is a thoughtless and
boyish folly, I could laugh at the simplicity of your great Sultan, who
comes hither to make conquests of deserts and rocks, and dispute the
possession of them with those who have tenfold numbers at command, while
he leaves a part of his narrow islet, in which he was born a sovereign,
to the dominion of another sceptre than his. Surely, Sir Kenneth, you
and the other good men of your country should have submitted yourselves
to the dominion of this King Richard ere you left your native land,
divided against itself, to set forth on this expedition?"

Hasty and fierce was Kenneth's answer. "No, by the bright light of
Heaven! If the King of England had not set forth to the Crusade till
he was sovereign of Scotland, the Crescent might, for me, and all
true-hearted Scots, glimmer for ever on the walls of Zion."

Thus far he had proceeded, when, suddenly recollecting himself, he
muttered, "MEA CULPA! MEA CULPA! what have I, a soldier of the Cross, to
do with recollection of war betwixt Christian nations!"

The rapid expression of feeling corrected by the dictates of duty did
not escape the Moslem, who, if he did not entirely understand all
which it conveyed, saw enough to convince him with the assurance that
Christians, as well as Moslemah, had private feelings of personal pique,
and national quarrels, which were not entirely reconcilable. But the
Saracens were a race, polished, perhaps, to the utmost extent which
their religion permitted, and particularly capable of entertaining high
ideas of courtesy and politeness; and such sentiments prevented his
taking any notice of the inconsistency of Sir Kenneth's feelings in the
opposite characters of a Scot and a Crusader.

Meanwhile, as they advanced, the scene began to change around them. They
were now turning to the eastward, and had reached the range of steep and
barren hills which binds in that quarter the naked plain, and varies the
surface of the country, without changing its sterile character. Sharp,
rocky eminences began to rise around them, and, in a short time, deep
declivities and ascents, both formidable in height and difficult from
the narrowness of the path, offered to the travellers obstacles of a
different kind from those with which they had recently contended.

Dark caverns and chasms amongst the rocks--those grottoes so often
alluded to in Scripture--yawned fearfully on either side as they
proceeded, and the Scottish knight was informed by the Emir that these
were often the refuge of beasts of prey, or of men still more ferocious,
who, driven to desperation by the constant war, and the oppression
exercised by the soldiery, as well of the Cross as of the Crescent, had
become robbers, and spared neither rank nor religion, neither sex nor
age, in their depredations.

The Scottish knight listened with indifference to the accounts of
ravages committed by wild beasts or wicked men, secure as he felt
himself in his own valour and personal strength; but he was struck
with mysterious dread when he recollected that he was now in the awful
wilderness of the forty days' fast, and the scene of the actual personal
temptation, wherewith the Evil Principle was permitted to assail the Son
of Man. He withdrew his attention gradually from the light and worldly
conversation of the infidel warrior beside him, and, however acceptable
his gay and gallant bravery would have rendered him as a companion
elsewhere, Sir Kenneth felt as if, in those wildernesses the waste and
dry places in which the foul spirits were wont to wander when expelled
the mortals whose forms they possessed, a bare-footed friar would have
been a better associate than the gay but unbelieving paynim.

These feelings embarrassed him the rather that the Saracen's spirits
appeared to rise with the journey, and because the farther he penetrated
into the gloomy recesses of the mountains, the lighter became his
conversation, and when he found that unanswered, the louder grew his
song. Sir Kenneth knew enough of the Eastern languages to be assured
that he chanted sonnets of love, containing all the glowing praises
of beauty in which the Oriental poets are so fond of luxuriating, and
which, therefore, were peculiarly unfitted for a serious or devotional
strain of thought, the feeling best becoming the Wilderness of the
Temptation. With inconsistency enough, the Saracen also sung lays in
praise of wine, the liquid ruby of the Persian poets; and his gaiety at
length became so unsuitable to the Christian knight's contrary train of
sentiments, as, but for the promise of amity which they had exchanged,
would most likely have made Sir Kenneth take measures to change his
note. As it was, the Crusader felt as if he had by his side some gay,
licentious fiend, who endeavoured to ensnare his soul, and endanger his
immortal salvation, by inspiring loose thoughts of earthly pleasure, and
thus polluting his devotion, at a time when his faith as a Christian and
his vow as a pilgrim called on him for a serious and penitential state
of mind. He was thus greatly perplexed, and undecided how to act; and it
was in a tone of hasty displeasure that, at length breaking silence, he
interrupted the lay of the celebrated Rudpiki, in which he prefers the
mole on his mistress's bosom to all the wealth of Bokhara and Samarcand.

"Saracen," said the Crusader sternly, "blinded as thou art, and plunged
amidst the errors of a false law, thou shouldst yet comprehend that
there are some places more holy than others, and that there are some
scenes also in which the Evil One hath more than ordinary power
over sinful mortals. I will not tell thee for what awful reason this
place--these rocks--these caverns with their gloomy arches, leading as
it were to the central abyss--are held an especial haunt of Satan and
his angels. It is enough that I have been long warned to beware of this
place by wise and holy men, to whom the qualities of the unholy region
are well known. Wherefore, Saracen, forbear thy foolish and
ill-timed levity, and turn thy thoughts to things more suited to the
spot--although, alas for thee! thy best prayers are but as blasphemy and
sin."

The Saracen listened with some surprise, and then replied, with
good-humour and gaiety, only so far repressed as courtesy required,
"Good Sir Kenneth, methinks you deal unequally by your companion, or
else ceremony is but indifferently taught amongst your Western tribes.
I took no offence when I saw you gorge hog's flesh and drink wine, and
permitted you to enjoy a treat which you called your Christian liberty,
only pitying in my heart your foul pastimes. Wherefore, then, shouldst
thou take scandal, because I cheer, to the best of my power, a gloomy
road with a cheerful verse? What saith the poet, 'Song is like the
dews of heaven on the bosom of the desert; it cools the path of the
traveller.'"

"Friend Saracen," said the Christian, "I blame not the love of
minstrelsy and of the GAI SCIENCE; albeit, we yield unto it even too
much room in our thoughts when they should be bent on better things.
But prayers and holy psalms are better fitting than LAIS of love, or of
wine-cups, when men walk in this Valley of the Shadow of Death, full of
fiends and demons, whom the prayers of holy men have driven forth
from the haunts of humanity to wander amidst scenes as accursed as
themselves."

"Speak not thus of the Genii, Christian," answered the Saracen, "for
know thou speakest to one whose line and nation drew their origin from
the immortal race which your sect fear and blaspheme."

"I well thought," answered the Crusader, "that your blinded race had
their descent from the foul fiend, without whose aid you would never
have been able to maintain this blessed land of Palestine against so
many valiant soldiers of God. I speak not thus of thee in particular,
Saracen, but generally of thy people and religion. Strange is it to me,
however, not that you should have the descent from the Evil One, but
that you should boast of it."

"From whom should the bravest boast of descending, saving from him that
is bravest?" said the Saracen; "from whom should the proudest trace
their line so well as from the Dark Spirit, which would rather fall
headlong by force than bend the knee by his will? Eblis may be hated,
stranger, but he must be feared; and such as Eblis are his descendants
of Kurdistan."

Tales of magic and of necromancy were the learning of the period, and
Sir Kenneth heard his companion's confession of diabolical descent
without any disbelief, and without much wonder; yet not without a secret
shudder at finding himself in this fearful place, in the company of
one who avouched himself to belong to such a lineage. Naturally
insusceptible, however, of fear, he crossed himself, and stoutly
demanded of the Saracen an account of the pedigree which he had boasted.
The latter readily complied.

"Know, brave stranger," he said, "that when the cruel Zohauk, one of the
descendants of Giamschid, held the throne of Persia, he formed a league
with the Powers of Darkness, amidst the secret vaults of Istakhar,
vaults which the hands of the elementary spirits had hewn out of the
living rock long before Adam himself had an existence. Here he fed,
with daily oblations of human blood, two devouring serpents, which had
become, according to the poets, a part of himself, and to sustain whom
he levied a tax of daily human sacrifices, till the exhausted patience
of his subjects caused some to raise up the scimitar of resistance, like
the valiant Blacksmith and the victorious Feridoun, by whom the tyrant
was at length dethroned, and imprisoned for ever in the dismal caverns
of the mountain Damavend. But ere that deliverance had taken place, and
whilst the power of the bloodthirsty tyrant was at its height, the band
of ravening slaves whom he had sent forth to purvey victims for his
daily sacrifice brought to the vaults of the palace of Istakhar seven
sisters so beautiful that they seemed seven houris. These seven maidens
were the daughters of a sage, who had no treasures save those beauties
and his own wisdom. The last was not sufficient to foresee this
misfortune, the former seemed ineffectual to prevent it. The eldest
exceeded not her twentieth year, the youngest had scarce attained her
thirteenth; and so like were they to each other that they could not
have been distinguished but for the difference of height, in which they
gradually rose in easy gradation above each other, like the ascent which
leads to the gates of Paradise. So lovely were these seven sisters when
they stood in the darksome vault, disrobed of all clothing saving a
cymar of white silk, that their charms moved the hearts of those who
were not mortal. Thunder muttered, the earth shook, the wall of the
vault was rent, and at the chasm entered one dressed like a hunter, with
bow and shafts, and followed by six others, his brethren. They were tall
men, and, though dark, yet comely to behold; but their eyes had more the
glare of those of the dead than the light which lives under the eyelids
of the living. 'Zeineb,' said the leader of the band--and as he spoke
he took the eldest sister by the hand, and his voice was soft, low, and
melancholy--'I am Cothrob, king of the subterranean world, and supreme
chief of Ginnistan. I and my brethren are of those who, created out of
the pure elementary fire, disdained, even at the command of Omnipotence,
to do homage to a clod of earth, because it was called Man. Thou mayest
have heard of us as cruel, unrelenting, and persecuting. It is false. We
are by nature kind and generous; only vengeful when insulted, only cruel
when affronted. We are true to those who trust us; and we have heard the
invocations of thy father, the sage Mithrasp, who wisely worships not
alone the Origin of Good, but that which is called the Source of Evil.
You and your sisters are on the eve of death; but let each give to us
one hair from your fair tresses, in token of fealty, and we will carry
you many miles from hence to a place of safety, where you may bid
defiance to Zohauk and his ministers.' The fear of instant death, saith
the poet, is like the rod of the prophet Haroun, which devoured all
other rods when transformed into snakes before the King of Pharaoh; and
the daughters of the Persian sage were less apt than others to be
afraid of the addresses of a spirit. They gave the tribute which Cothrob
demanded, and in an instant the sisters were transported to an enchanted
castle on the mountains of Tugrut, in Kurdistan, and were never again
seen by mortal eye. But in process of time seven youths, distinguished
in the war and in the chase, appeared in the environs of the castle of
the demons. They were darker, taller, fiercer, and more resolute than
any of the scattered inhabitants of the valleys of Kurdistan; and they
took to themselves wives, and became fathers of the seven tribes of the
Kurdmans, whose valour is known throughout the universe."

The Christian knight heard with wonder the wild tale, of which Kurdistan
still possesses the traces, and, after a moment's thought, replied,
"Verily, Sir Knight, you have spoken well--your genealogy may be dreaded
and hated, but it cannot be contemned. Neither do I any longer wonder
at your obstinacy in a false faith, since, doubtless, it is part of the
fiendish disposition which hath descended from your ancestors, those
infernal huntsmen, as you have described them, to love falsehood rather
than truth; and I no longer marvel that your spirits become high and
exalted, and vent themselves in verse and in tunes, when you approach to
the places encumbered by the haunting of evil spirits, which must excite
in you that joyous feeling which others experience when approaching the
land of their human ancestry."

"By my father's beard, I think thou hast the right," said the Saracen,
rather amused than offended by the freedom with which the Christian had
uttered his reflections; "for, though the Prophet (blessed be his name!)
hath sown amongst us the seed of a better faith than our ancestors
learned in the ghostly halls of Tugrut, yet we are not willing, like
other Moslemah, to pass hasty doom on the lofty and powerful elementary
spirits from whom we claim our origin. These Genii, according to our
belief and hope, are not altogether reprobate, but are still in the way
of probation, and may hereafter be punished or rewarded. Leave we this
to the mollahs and the imauns. Enough that with us the reverence for
these spirits is not altogether effaced by what we have learned from the
Koran, and that many of us still sing, in memorial of our fathers' more
ancient faith, such verses as these."

So saying, he proceeded to chant verses, very ancient in the language
and structure, which some have thought derive their source from the
worshippers of Arimanes, the Evil Principle.


                AHRIMAN.

     Dark Ahriman, whom Irak still
     Holds origin of woe and ill!
     When, bending at thy shrine,
     We view the world with troubled eye,
     Where see we 'neath the extended sky,
     An empire matching thine!

     If the Benigner Power can yield
     A fountain in the desert field,
     Where weary pilgrims drink;
     Thine are the waves that lash the rock,
     Thine the tornado's deadly shock,
     Where countless navies sink!

     Or if he bid the soil dispense
     Balsams to cheer the sinking sense,
     How few can they deliver
     From lingering pains, or pang intense,
     Red Fever, spotted Pestilence,
     The arrows of thy quiver!

     Chief in Man's bosom sits thy sway,
     And frequent, while in words we pray
     Before another throne,
     Whate'er of specious form be there,
     The secret meaning of the prayer
     Is, Ahriman, thine own.

     Say, hast thou feeling, sense, and form,
     Thunder thy voice, thy garments storm,
     As Eastern Magi say;
     With sentient soul of hate and wrath,
     And wings to sweep thy deadly path,
     And fangs to tear thy prey?

     Or art thou mix'd in Nature's source,
     An ever-operating force,
     Converting good to ill;
     An evil principle innate,
     Contending with our better fate,
     And, oh!  victorious still?

     Howe'er it be, dispute is vain.
     On all without thou hold'st thy reign,
     Nor less on all within;
     Each mortal passion's fierce career,
     Love, hate, ambition, joy, and fear,
     Thou goadest into sin.

     Whene'er a sunny gleam appears,
     To brighten up our vale of tears,
     Thou art not distant far;
     'Mid such brief solace of our lives,
     Thou whett'st our very banquet-knives
     To tools of death and war.

     Thus, from the moment of our birth,
     Long as we linger on the earth,
     Thou rulest the fate of men;
     Thine are the pangs of life's last hour,
     And--who dare answer?--is thy power,
     Dark Spirit!  ended THEN?

     [The worthy and learned clergyman by whom this species of
     hymn has been translated desires, that, for fear of
     misconception, we should warn the reader to recollect that
     it is composed by a heathen, to whom the real causes of
     moral and physical evil are unknown, and who views their
     predominance in the system of the universe as all must view
     that appalling fact who have not the benefit of the
     Christian revelation.  On our own part, we beg to add, that
     we understand the style of the translator is more
     paraphrastic than can be approved by those who are
     acquainted with the singularly curious original.  The
     translator seems to have despaired of rendering into English
     verse the flights of Oriental poetry; and, possibly, like
     many learned and ingenious men, finding it impossible to
     discover the sense of the original, he may have tacitly
     substituted his own.]

These verses may perhaps have been the not unnatural effusion of some
half-enlightened philosopher, who, in the fabled deity, Arimanes, saw
but the prevalence of moral and physical evil; but in the ears of Sir
Kenneth of the Leopard they had a different effect, and, sung as they
were by one who had just boasted himself a descendant of demons, sounded
very like an address of worship to the arch-fiend himself. He weighed
within himself whether, on hearing such blasphemy in the very desert
where Satan had stood rebuked for demanding homage, taking an abrupt
leave of the Saracen was sufficient to testify his abhorrence; or
whether he was not rather constrained by his vow as a Crusader to defy
the infidel to combat on the spot, and leave him food for the beasts of
the wilderness, when his attention was suddenly caught by an unexpected
apparition.

The light was now verging low, yet served the knight still to discern
that they two were no longer alone in the desert, but were closely
watched by a figure of great height and very thin, which skipped over
rocks and bushes with so much agility as, added to the wild and hirsute
appearance of the individual, reminded him of the fauns and silvans,
whose images he had seen in the ancient temples of Rome. As the
single-hearted Scottishman had never for a moment doubted these gods of
the ancient Gentiles to be actually devils, so he now hesitated not
to believe that the blasphemous hymn of the Saracen had raised up an
infernal spirit.

"But what recks it?" said stout Sir Kenneth to himself; "down with the
fiend and his worshippers!"

He did not, however, think it necessary to give the same warning of
defiance to two enemies as he would unquestionably have afforded to one.
His hand was upon his mace, and perhaps the unwary Saracen would have
been paid for his Persian poetry by having his brains dashed out on the
spot, without any reason assigned for it; but the Scottish Knight was
spared from committing what would have been a sore blot in his shield
of arms. The apparition, on which his eyes had been fixed for some time,
had at first appeared to dog their path by concealing itself behind
rocks and shrubs, using those advantages of the ground with great
address, and surmounting its irregularities with surprising agility. At
length, just as the Saracen paused in his song, the figure, which was
that of a tall man clothed in goat-skins, sprung into the midst of
the path, and seized a rein of the Saracen's bridle in either hand,
confronting thus and bearing back the noble horse, which, unable to
endure the manner in which this sudden assailant pressed the long-armed
bit, and the severe curb, which, according to the Eastern fashion, was
a solid ring of iron, reared upright, and finally fell backwards on his
master, who, however, avoided the peril of the fall by lightly throwing
himself to one side.

The assailant then shifted his grasp from the bridle of the horse to the
throat of the rider, flung himself above the struggling Saracen, and,
despite of his youth and activity kept him undermost, wreathing his
long arms above those of his prisoner, who called out angrily, and yet
half-laughing at the same time--"Hamako--fool--unloose me--this passes
thy privilege--unloose me, or I will use my dagger."

"Thy dagger!--infidel dog!" said the figure in the goat-skins, "hold it
in thy gripe if thou canst!" and in an instant he wrenched the Saracen's
