for Mabel Withers. We used to ride out or go for walks together every
day. She was a capital walker, and very jolly--almost as good as a
boy. She said several times that she wished she had been a boy, and I
wished so too. Still, of course, mother, I am very glad I am back.
There is no place like home, you know; and then there are the fellows
at school, and the games, and the sea, and all sorts of things; and
it's a horrid nuisance to think that I have got to go down there
regularly for my holidays. Still, of course, as you wish it, I will do
so; and now that I know what it is like it won't be so bad another
time. Anyhow, I am glad I have got another ten days before school
begins."

The following morning Ralph went down to the beach. "Why, Master
Conway," an old fisherman said, "you are a downright stranger. I have
missed you rarely."

"I told you I was going away, Joe, and that I shouldn't get back until
the holidays were nearly over."

"I know you did," the fisherman replied. "Still it does seem strange
without you. Every time as I goes out I says to Bill, 'If Master Conway
was at home he would be with us to-day, Bill. It don't seem no ways
natural without him.' And there's been good fishing, too, this season,
first rate; and the weather has been just what it should be."

"Well, I am back now, Joe, anyhow; and I have got ten days before
school begins again, and I mean to make the most of it. Are you going
out to-day?"

"At four o'clock," the fisherman said. "Daylight fishing ain't much
good just now; we take twice as many at night."

"No trouble with the Frenchies?"

"Lord bless you I ain't seen a French sail for months. Our cruisers
are too sharp for them; though they say a good many privateers run in
and out of their ports in spite of all we can do, and a lot of our
ships get snapped up. But we don't trouble about them. Why, bless your
heart, if one of them was to run across us they would only just take
our fish, and as likely as not pay us for them with a cask or two of
spirits. Fish is a treat to them Frenchies; for their fishing boats
have to keep so close over to their own shores that they can't take
much. Besides, all their best fishermen are away in the privateers,
and the lads have to go to fight Boney's battles with the Austrians or
Russians, or Spanish or our chaps, or else to go on board their ships
of war and spend all their time cooped up in harbor, for they scarce
show now beyond the range of the guns in their forts. Well, will you
come this evening?"

"Yes, I think so, Joe. My mother doesn't much care about my being out
at night, you know; but as I have been away all this time to please
her, I expect she will let me do what I like for the rest of the
holidays."

"Don't you come if your mother don't like it, Master Conway; there is
never no good comes of boys vexing their mothers. I have known
misfortune to follow it over and over again. Boys think as they know
best what's good for them; but they don't, and sooner or later they
are sure to own it to themselves."

"I shouldn't do it if I knew she really didn't like it, Joe; but I
don't think she does mind my going out with you at any time. She knows
she can trust you. Beside, what harm could come of it? You never go
out in very rough weather."

"Pretty roughish sometimes, Master Conway."

"Oh, yes, pretty rough; but not in a gale, you know. Beside, the
Heartsease could stand a goodish gale. She is not very fast, you know,
but she is as safe as a house."

"She is fast enough," the old fisherman said in an injured tone. "But
you young gentlemen is never content unless a boat is heeling over,
gunnel under, and passing everything she comes across. What's the good
of that ere to a fisherman? He goes out to catch fish, not to strain
his craft all over by running races against another. Now an hour
faster or slower makes no difference, and the Heartsease is fast
enough for me, anyhow."

"No, she isn't, Joe. I have heard you use bad language enough when
anything overhauls and passes her on the way back to port."

"Ay, that may be," the fisherman admitted; "and on the way home I
grant you that a little more speed might be an advantage, for the
first comer is sure to get the best market. No, the Heartsease ain't
very fast, I own up to that; but she is safe and steady, and she has
plenty of storage room and a good roomy cabin as you can stand upright
in, and needn't break your back by stooping as you have to do on board
some craft I could name."

"That's true enough, Joe," the boy said.

"But what's more, she's a lucky boat; for it's seldom that she goes
out without getting a good catch."

"I think that's more judgment than luck, Joe; though there may be some
luck in it too."

"I don't know about that, Master Conway. Of course one wants a sharp
eye to see where the shoals are moving; but I believes in luck. Well,
sir, shall I see you again before the afternoon?"

"I don't much expect so, Joe. I have got to call at some other places,
and I don't suppose I shall have time to get down before. If I am
coming I shall be sure to be punctual; so if I am not here by four, go
off without me."

Mrs. Conway made no objection when Ralph proffered his request. He had
sacrificed the greater part of his holidays to carrying out her
wishes, and paying a visit to Mr. Penfold; and although she did not
like his being out all night fishing, she could not refuse his
request; and, indeed, as she knew that Joe Knight was a steady man and
not fond of the bottle, there was no good reason why she should
object. She, therefore, cheerfully assented, saying at the same time,
"I will pack a basket for you before you start, Ralph. There is a nice
piece of cold meat in the house, and I will have that and a loaf of
bread and some cheese put up for you. I know what these fishing
excursions are; you intend to be back at a certain time, and then the
wind falls, or the tide turns, or something of that sort, and you
can't make the harbor. You know what a fright you gave me the very
first time you went out fishing with Joe Knight. You were to have been
back at five o'clock in the afternoon, and you did not get in until
three o'clock the next morning."

"I remember, mother; and there you were on the quay when we came in. I
was awfully sorry about it."

"Well, I have learned better since, Ralph; and I know now that there
is not necessarily any danger, even if you don't come back by the time
I expect you. And of course each time I have fidgeted and you have
come back safe, I have learned a certain amount of sea-knowledge, and
have come to know that sailors and fishermen are not accountable for
time; and that if the wind drops or tide turns they are helpless in
the matter, and have only to wait till a breeze comes up again."

"I think, mother, you ought to like my going out at night better than
in the daytime."

"Why, Ralph?"

"Because, mother, if I go out in the daytime and don't get back until
after dark, you worry yourself, and having no one to talk to, sit here
wondering and wondering until you fancy all sorts of things. Now, if I
go out in the evening, and I don't come back in the morning at the
hour you expect, you see that it is fine and bright, and that there is
nothing to make you uneasy; or if you do feel fidgety, you can walk
down to the beach and talk to the boatmen and fishermen, and of course
they can tell you at once that there's nothing to worry about, and
very likely point the boat out to you in the distance."

"Well, Ralph, perhaps that is so, although I own I never looked at it
in that light before."




CHAPTER III.

RUN DOWN.


"There's a nice breeze," Ralph said as he joined the fisherman at the
appointed hour.

"Yes, it's just right; neither too light nor too heavy. It's rather
thick, and I shouldn't be surprised if we get it thicker; but that
again don't matter." For in those days not one ship plowed the waters
of our coast for every fifty that now make their way along it. There
were no steamers, and the fear of collision was not ever in the minds
of those at sea.

"Where's Bill, Joe?"

"The young scamp!" the fisherman said angrily. "Nothing will do for
him but to go a-climbing up the cliffs this morning; and just after
you left us, news comes that the young varmint had fallen down and
twisted his foot, and doctor says it will be a fortnight afore he can
put a boot on. Then the old woman began a-crying over him; while, as I
told her, if any one ought to cry it would be me, who's got to hire
another boy in his place to do his work. A touch of the strap would be
the best thing for him, the young rascal!"

"You are not going to take another boy out to-night are you, Joe?"

"No, Master Conway, I knows you like a-doing things. You have been out
enough with me to know as much about it as Bill, and after all there
ain't a very great deal to do. The trawl ain't a heavy one, and as I
am accustomed to work it with Bill I can do it with you."

The Heartsease was a good-sized half-decked boat of some twenty-six
feet long and eight feet beam. She was very deep, and carried three
tons of stone ballast in her bottom. She drew about six feet of water.
She had a lot of freeboard, and carried two lug-sails and a small
mizzen.

They got in the small boat and rowed off to her.

"There was no call for you to bring that basket, Master Conway. I know
you are fond of a fish fried just when it is taken out of the water;
and I have got bread and a keg of beer, to say nothing of a mouthful
of spirits in case we get wet. Not that it looks likely we shall, for
I doubts if there will be any rain to-night I think there will be more
wind perhaps, and that it will get thicker; that's my view of the
weather."

They sailed straight out to sea. Joe had fitted his boat to be worked
with the aid of a boy only. He had a handy winch, by which he hoisted
his heavy lug-sails, and when the weather was rough hauled up his
trawls. Of these he carried two, each fourteen feet long, and fished
with them one out on each quarter. When he reached the fishing ground
six miles out, Joe lowered the mizzen lug and reefed the main, for
there was plenty of wind to keep the boat going at the pace required
for trawling under the reduced sail. Then the trawls were got
overboard, each being fastened to the end of a stout spar lashed
across the deck, and projecting some eight feet on either side, by
which arrangement the trawls were kept well apart. They were hauled
alternately once an hour, two hours being allowed after they were put
down before the first was examined.

By the time the first net came up the sun had set. The wind had
freshened a bit since they had started, but there was no sea to speak
of. The night had set in thick, and the stars could only occasionally
be seen. Joe had picked out two or three fine fish from the first
haul, and these he took down and soon had frizzling in a frying-pan
over the fire, which he had lighted as soon as the boat was under
sail.

"These are for you, Master Conway," he said. "With your permission I
shall stick to that ere piece of beef your mother was good enough to
send. Fish ain't no treat to me, and I don't often get meat. Keep your
eye lifting while I am down below. There ain't many craft about in
these days, still we might tumble against one."

"I should not see a light far in this mist, Joe."

"No, you couldn't; and what's worse, many of them don't carry no
lights at all."

"It would be a good thing, Joe, if there was a law to make all vessels
carry lights."

"Ay, ay, lad; but you see in war times it ain't always convenient. A
peaceful merchantman don't want to show her lights to any privateers
that may happen to be cruising about, and you may be sure that the
privateer don't want to attract the attention of peaceful traders
until she is close upon them, or to come under the eye of any of our
cruisers. No, no; there ain't many lights shown now, not in these
waters. Folks prefer to risk the chance of running into each other
rather than that of being caught by a French privateer."

Now that the trawls were out there was no occasion for any one to
attend to the helm, consequently when Joe announced that the fish were
ready Ralph went down and joined him in the cabin. The first hours of
the night passed quietly. Once an hour a trawl was hauled in and got
on board, and as the catches were satisfactory Joe was in capital
spirit.

"You have brought good luck, Master Conway; and I notices I generally
do well when you are out with me. I am getting more fish to-night than
I have any night for weeks, and if it goes on like this till morning I
shall make a good thing of it. I wants it bad enough, for I am in
arrears a bit with my rent. The war has made everything so terrible
dear that it is as much as a poor man can do to keep his head above
water.

"What time is it now, Joe, do you think?"

"About two o'clock, I reckon. It will begin to get light in a couple
of hours, and at five we will up nets and make our way back."

He had scarcely spoken when he shouted "Ship ahoy! Look out for
yourself, lad!" Startled by the suddenness of the cry Ralph looked
round. He saw a crest of white foam a few yards away in the darkness.
A moment later something dark passed over his head and a rope brushed
his cheek, and as it did so a black mass struck the boat. There was a
crash, a shock, and the Heartsease, after first heeling deeply over
under the pressure, suddenly sank down like a stone. Ralph had
staggered under the force of the collision, and would have fallen back
as the boat heeled over, but instinctively he threw up his arms and
his hand came in contact with the rope that had an instant before
touched his cheek. He seized it with both hands, and threw his legs
round it as the boat went down from under his feet, the whole thing
being so sudden that it was nearly a minute before he could realize
what had happened. Then he heard voices talking close by and, as it
seemed, above him.

"Hullo!" he shouted. "Help!" A few seconds later the light of a
lantern was flashed down upon him. Then a figure crawled out on the
spar projecting above his head, seized him by the collar, and lifted
him from the bobstay to which he was clinging on to the bowsprit. A
minute later he was standing on the deck.

"Thank you!" he exclaimed. "Have you seen anything of the man who was
with me? There were two of us on board. If not, please look for him at
once."

"I am afraid it's no use," one of the men said, with a strong foreign
accent; "he has gone down and will never come up again. You come along
with me to the captain."

An uneasy feeling seized Ralph as he listened. He could see nothing,
for the lantern had been placed in a bucket the moment that he touched
the deck. At this moment a hail came from the stern of the vessel, and
Ralph's fears were at once realized, for it was in French. The reply
was in the same tongue, and he was led aft. "Take him down below,
Jacques, and let's see what he is like. We have suffered no damage, I
hope?"

"Not as far as I could see by the light of the lantern, but the
carpenter has gone below to see if she is making water."

The captain led the way down into the cabin. This was comfortably
furnished and lighted by a swinging lamp. "Do you come, down Jacques,
I shall want you to interpret."

The captain was surprised when he saw by the light of the lamp that
the person they had rescued was a lad, well dressed, and evidently
above the condition of fishermen.

"Now, young sir, who are you," he asked, "and what have you to say for
yourself?" The question was translated by Jacques.

"I like that," the lad said indignantly. "What have I to say for
myself! I think it's what have you to say for yourselves? We were
quietly fishing when you ran over us and sank the boat and drowned my
friend Joe, and haven't even stopped for a moment to see if you could
pick him up. I call it shameful and inhuman!"

The French captain laughed as Jacques translated the speech, the
purport of which he had, indeed, made out for himself, for although he
did not speak English he understood it to some extent.

"Tell him it was his fault as much as ours. We did not see him till we
struck him. And as for his companion, what chance was there of finding
him on such a dark night as this? Why, by the time we had hove round
and got back again we might not have hit it within a quarter of a
mile. Besides, if he had been alive he would have shouted."

Ralph saw, when he understood what the captain said, that there was
truth in his words, and that the chances of discovering Joe would
indeed have been slight even had the vessel headed round.

"May I ask," he said, "what ship this is, and what you are going to do
with me?"

"The ship is La Belle Marie of Dunkirk; as to what we are going to do
with you it is not so easy to say. Of course you can jump overboard
again if you like, but if not you can stay on board until we have an
opportunity of putting you ashore somewhere. How did you come to be on
board a fishing smack? For I suppose it was a smack that we run down."

"I live at Dover," Ralph replied, "and had only come out for a night's
fishing."

"Well, you are out of luck," the captain said. "That will do, Jacques.
Take him forward and sling a hammock for him. Hang up his clothes in
the cook's galley, they will be dry by the time he wakes."

Ralph asked no questions, as he was taken forward, as to the character
of La Belle Marie. Six guns were ranged along on each side of her
decks, and this, and the appearance of the captain's cabin, was
sufficient to inform him that he had fallen into the hands of a French
privateer. The craft had, indeed, left Dunkirk soon after nightfall,
and was making her way down channel with every sail set when she had
run down the unfortunate fishing boat.

Jacques, as he hung up the hammock, explained to the sailors who
crowded round the character of the passenger who had so unexpectedly
come on board.

"Poor lad," one of the sailors said good-naturedly, "he will be some
time before he sees his mother again. He hasn't got a very bright
lookout before him--a long voyage, and then a prison. I will go and
see if the cook has got some water hot. A glass of spirits will do him
good."

A few minutes later Ralph was wrapped up in a blanket and the warm
glow produced by that and the glass of strong grog soon sufficed to
send him soundly to sleep, in spite of the painful uncertainty of his
position and of his sorrowful thought of his mother, who would in the
morning be inquiring for him in vain. It was nearly midday before he
woke. Looking round he saw that he had the forecastle to himself. His
clothes were lying on a chest close by, and in a few minutes he was on
deck. A sense of disappointment stole over him. He had, while he was
dressing, entertained the hope that on going on deck he should see an
English cruiser in pursuit; but the wind had dropped and it was still
thick, and his vision was confined to a circle a quarter of a mile in
diameter. Jacques nodded to him good-temperedly, for all on board the
privateer were in high spirits. Their voyage had begun propitiously;
the darkness of the preceding night had enabled them to run the
gantlet of the British cruisers in the narrow part of the channel,
they were now well down the coast of France, and the fog reduced their
chances of being seen by an enemy to a minimum.

"Where about are we?" Ralph asked.

"We are somewhere off the mouth of the Seine, and I guess some fifteen
miles from land."

"Oh, we are working down the channel then," Ralph said. "And where are
we going to?"

"Ah! that question is for the captain to answer if he chooses,"
Jacques said.

"Are we going to touch at the next French port?" Ralph asked
anxiously.

"Not that I know of, unless we have the luck to pick up one of your
merchantmen, and we might then escort her into port. But unless we do
that we do not touch anywhere, luckily for you; because, after all, it
is a good deal pleasanter cruising in the Belle Marie than kicking
your heels inside a prison. I know pretty well, for I was for four
years a prisoner in your English town of Dorchester. That is how I
came to speak your language. It was a weary time of it; though we were
not badly treated, not half so bad as I have heard that the men in
some other prisons were. So I owe you English no ill-will on that
account, and from what I have heard some of our prisons are worse than
any of yours. I used to knit stockings and wraps for the neck. My old
mother taught me when I was a boy. And as we were allowed to sell the
things we made I got on pretty comfortable. Beside, what's the use of
making yourself unhappy? I had neither wife nor children to be
fretting about me at home, so I kept up my spirits."

"How did you get back?" Ralph asked. "Were you exchanged?"

"No," Jacques answered. "I might have waited long enough before that.
I can't make out myself why the two governments don't agree to
exchange prisoners more quickly. I suppose they take about an equal
