tandem re fretus sibi tam audaciter obsisteret respondisse dicitur
'senectute.' Sed vivendi est finis optimus, cum integra mente certisque
sensibus opus ipsa suum eadem quae coagmentavit natura dissolvit. Ut navem,
ut aedificium idem destruit facillime qui construxit, sic hominem eadem
optime quae conglutinavit natura dissolvit. Iam omnis conglutinatio recens
aegre, inveterata facile divellitur. Ita fit ut illud breve vitae reliquum
nec avide appetendum senibus nec sine causa deserendum sit; vetatque
Pythagoras iniussu imperatoris, id est dei, de praesidio et statione vitae
decedere. 73 Solonis quidem sapientis est elogium, quo se negat velle suam
mortem dolore amicorum et lamentis vacare. Volt, credo, se esse carum suis.
Sed haud scio an melius Ennius:

  _nemo me lacrumis decoret, neque funera fletu_
  _faxit_

74 Non censet lugendam esse mortem, quam immortalitas consequatur. Iam
sensus moriendi aliquis esse potest, isque ad exiguum tempus, praesertim
seni: post mortem quidem sensus aut optandus aut nullus est. Sed hoc
meditatum ab adulescentia debet esse, mortem ut neglegamus; sine qua
meditatione tranquillo animo esse nemo potest. Moriendum enim certe est, et
incertum an hoc ipso die. Mortem igitur omnibus horis impendentem timens
qui poterit animo consistere? 75 De qua non ita longa disputatione opus
esse videtur, cum recorder non L. Brutum, qui in liberanda patria est
interfectus, non duos Decios, qui ad voluntariam mortem cursum equorum
incitaverunt, non M. Atilium, qui ad supplicium est profectus ut fidem
hosti datam conservaret non duos Scipiones, qui iter Poenis vel corporibus
suis obstruere voluerunt, non avum tuum L. Paulum, qui morte luit collegae
in Cannensi ignominia temeritatem, non M. Marcellum, cuius interitum ne
crudelissimus quidem hostis honore sepulturae carere passus est, sed
legiones nostras, quod scripsi in Originibus, in eum locum saepe profectas
alacri animo et erecto, unde se redituras numquam arbitrarentur. Quod
igitur adulescentes, et ei quidem non solum indocti sed etiam rustici
contemnunt, id docti senes extimescent? 76 Omnino, ut mihi quidem videtur,
rerum omnium satietas vitae facit satietatem. Sunt pueritiae studia certa:
num igitur ea desiderant adulescentes? Sunt ineuntis adulescentiae: num ea
constans iam requirit aetas, quae media dicitur? Sunt etiam eius aetatis:
ne ea quidem quaeruntur in senectute. Sunt extrema quaedam studia
senectutis: ergo, ut superiorum aetatum studia occidunt, sic occidunt etiam
senectutis; quod cum evenit, satietas vitae tempus maturum mortis affert.

XXI. 77 Non enim video, cur, quid ipse sentiam de morte, non audeam vobis
dicere, quod eo cernere mihi melius videor, quo ab ea propius absum. Ego
vestros patres, P. Scipio tuque, C. Laeli, viros clarissimos mihique
amicissimos, vivere arbitror et eam quidem vitam, quae est sola vita
nominanda. Nam dum sumus inclusi in his compagibus corporis, munere quodam
necessitatis et gravi opere perfungimur; est enim animus caelestis ex
altissimo domicilio depressus et quasi demersus in terram, locum divinae
naturae eternitatique contrarium. Sed credo deos immortalis sparsisse
animos in corpora humana, ut essent qui terras tuerentur quique caelestium
ordinem contemplantes imitarentur eum vitae modo atque constantia. Nec me
solum ratio ac disputatio impulit ut ita crederem, sed nobilitas etiam
summorum philosophorum et auctoritas.

78 Audiebam Pythagoran Pythagoriosque, incolas paene nostros, qui essent
Italici philosophi quondam nominati numquam dubitasse quin ex universa
mente divina delibatos animos haberemus. Demonstrabantur mihi praeterea
quae Socrates supremo vitae die de immortalitate animorum disseruisset, is
qui esset omnium sapientissimus oraculo Apollinis iudicatus. Quid multa?
Sic mihi persuasi, sic sentio, cum tanta celeritas animorum sit, tanta
memoria praeteritorum futurorumque prudentia, tot artes tantae scientiae,
tot inventa, non posse eam naturam, quae res eas contineat, esse mortalem;
cumque semper agitetur animus nec principium motus habeat, quia se ipse
moveat, ne finem quidem habiturum esse motus, quia numquam se ipse sit
relicturus; et cum simplex animi natura esset neque haberet in se quicquam
admixtum dispar sui atque dissimile, non posse eum dividi, quod si non
posset, non posse interire; magnoque esse argumento homines scire pleraque
ante quam nati sint, quod iam pueri, cum artis difficilis discant, ita
celeriter res innumerabilis arripiant, ut eas non tum primum accipere
videantur, sed reminisci et recordari. Haec Platonis fere. XXII. 79 Apud
Xenophontem autem moriens Cyrus maior haec dicit: 'nolite arbitrari, o mihi
carissimi filii, me, cum a vobis discessero, nusquam aut nullum fore. Nec
enim, dum eram vobiscum, animum meum videbatis, sed eum esse in hoc corpora
ex eis rebus quas gerebam intellegebatis. Eundem igitur esse creditote,
etiam si nullum videbitis. 80 Nec vero clarorum virorum post mortem honores
permanerent, si nihil eorum ipsorum animi efficerent, quo diutius memoriam
sui teneremus. Mihi quidem numquam persuaderi potuit animos dum in
corporibus essent mortalibus vivere, cum excessissent ex eis emori; nec
vero tum animum esse insipientem cum ex insipienti corpore evasisset, sed
cum omni admixtione corporis liberatus purus et integer esse coepisset, tum
esse sapientem. Atque etiam, cum hominis natura morte dissolvitur,
ceterarum rerum perspicuum est quo quaeque discedat, abeunt enim illuc
omnia, unde orta sunt; animus autem solus nec cum adest nec cum discessit
apparet. Iam vero videtis nihil esse morti tam simile quam somnum. 81 Atqui
dormientium animi maxime declarant divinitatem suam; multa enim, cum
remissi et liberi sunt, futura prospiciunt; ex quo intellegitur quales
futuri sint, cum se plane corporis vinculis relaxaverint. Qua re, si haec
ita sunt, sic me colitote,' inquit, 'ut deum, sin una est interiturus
animus cum corpore, vos tamen, deos verentes, qui hanc omnem pulchritudinem
tuentur et regunt, memoriam nostri pie inviolateque servabitis.'

XXIII. 82 Cyrus quidem haec moriens; nos, si placet, nostra videamus. Nemo
umquam mihi, Scipio, persuadebit aut patrem tuum Paulum, aut duos avos
Paulum et Africanum, aut Africani patrem aut patruum, aut multos
praestantis viros, quos enumerare non est necesse, tanta esse conatos quae
ad posteritatis memoriam pertinerent, nisi animo cernerent posteritatem ad
ipsos pertinere. Anne censes, ut de me ipse aliquid more senum glorier, me
tantos labores diurnos nocturnosque domi militiaeque suscepturum fuisse, si
isdem finibus gloriam meam quibus vitam essem terminaturus? Nonne melius
multo fuisset otiosam et quietam aetatem sine ullo labore et contentione
traducere? Sed nescio quo modo animus erigens se posteritatem ita semper
prospiciebat, quasi, cum excessisset e vita, tum denique victurus esset.
Quod quidem ni ita se haberet ut animi immortales essent, haud optimi
cuiusque animus maxime ad immortalitatis gloriam niteretur. 83 Quid quod
sapientissimus quisque aequissimo animo moritur, stultissimus iniquissimo,
nonne vobis videtur is animus, qui plus cernat et longius, videre se ad
meliora proficisci, ille autem, cuius obtusior sit acies, non videre?
Equidem efferor studio patres vestros quos colui et dilexi videndi, neque
vero eos solum convenire aveo, quos ipse cognovi, sed illos etiam, de
quibus audivi et legi et ipse conscripsi; quo quidem me proficiscentem haud
sane quid facile retraxerit, nec tamquam Pelian recoxerit. Et si quis deus
mihi largiatur ut ex hac aetate repuerascam et in cunis vagiam, valde
recusem, nec vero velim quasi decurso spatio ad carceres a calce revocari.
84 Quid habet enim vita commodi? Quid non potius laboris? Sed habeat sane;
habet certe tamen aut satietatem aut modum. Non libet enim mihi deplorare
vitam, quod multi et ei docti saepe fecerunt, neque me vixisse paenitet,
quoniam ita vixi, ut non frustra me natum existimem, et ex vita ita discedo
tamquam ex hospitio, non tamquam e domo; commorandi enim natura divorsorium
nobis, non habitandi dedit. O praeclarum diem cum in illud divinum animorum
concilium coetumque proficiscar cumque ex hac turba et colluvione discedam!
Proficiscar enim non ad eos solum viros, de quibus ante dixi, verum etiam
ad Catonem meum, quo nemo vir melior natus est, nemo pietate praestantior,
cuius a me corpus est crematum, quod contra decuit ab illo meum, animus
vero non me deserens sed respectans, in ea profecto loca discessit quo mihi
ipsi cernebat esse veniendum. Quem ego meum casum fortiter ferre visus sum,
non quo aequo animo ferrem, sed me ipse consolabar existimans non
longinquum inter nos digressum et discessum fore.

85 His mihi rebus, Scipio, id enim te cum Laelio admirari solere dixisti,
levis est senectus, nec solum non molesta, sed etiam iucunda. Quod si in
hoc erro, qui animos hominum immortalis esse credam, libenter erro nec mihi
hunc errorem, quo delector, dum vivo, extorqueri volo; sin mortuus, ut
quidam minuti philosophi censent, nihil sentiam, non vereor ne hunc errorem
meum philosophi mortui irrideant. Quod si non sumus immortales futuri,
tamen exstingui homini suo tempore optabile est. Nam habet natura, ut
aliarum omnium rerum, sic vivendi modum. Senectus autem aetatis est
peractio tamquam fabulae, cuius defetigationem fugere debemus, praesertim
adiuncta satietate.

Haec habui de senectute quae dicerem, ad quam utinam veniatis, ut ea, quae
ex me audistis, re experti probare possitis!

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTES TO CATO MAIOR.

       *       *       *       *       *

CATO MAIOR DE SENECTUTE (CATO THE ELDER ON OLD AGE). CATO MAIOR was
probably intended by Cicero as the principal title. He twice gives the work
this name, in Laelius 4 and Att. 14, 21, 1. In the former passage he adds
the descriptive words, addressed to Atticus, _qui est scriptus ad te de
senectute._ In a third notice, De Div. 2, 3, he gives the description
without the title, _liber is quem ad nostrum Atticum de senectute misimus._
It is likely that Cicero intended the essay to be known as the CATO MAIOR
DE SENECTUTE, the full title corresponding with LAELIUS DE AMICITIA. The
word _maior_ was necessary to distinguish the book from Cicero's eulogy of
the younger Cato (Uticensis), which seems to have gone by the name of CATO
simply.

P. 1. -- 1. O TITE etc.: the lines are a quotation from the _Annales_ of Q.
Ennius (born at Rudiae in Calabria 239 B.C., died 169), an epic poem in
hexameter verse, the first great Latin poem in that metre, celebrating the
achievements of the Roman nation from the time of Aeneas to the poet's own
days. The incident alluded to in Ennius' verses is evidently the same as
that narrated by Livy 32, cc. 9, 10. Titus Quinctius Flamininus, who
commanded in 198 B.C. the Roman army opposed to Philip of Macedon, found
the king strongly posted on the mountains between Epirus and Thessaly. For
forty days Flamininus lingered, hoping to find some path which would give
him access to the enemy's quarters. A shepherd who knew every nook of the
mountains came before the general, and promised to lead the Roman soldiers
to the ground above Philip's camp. This was done, and Flamininus drove the
Macedonians into Thessaly. It is the shepherd who in the first line
addresses Flamininus by his first name Titus. Cicero here cleverly applies
the lines to his life-long friend Titus Pomponius Atticus. He several times
takes the two words _'O Tite'_ to designate the whole treatise; cf. Att.
16, 11, 3 _'O Tite' tibi prodesse laetor_. -- QUID: accusative of respect
or extent; so _nihil_ in 30, _aliquid_ in 82. A.[56] 240, _a_; G. 331, 3;
H. 378, 2. -- ADI[)U]ERO: for _adi[=u]vero,_ the long vowel having become
short after the falling out of the _v_ between the two vowels. Catullus 66,
18 has _i[)u]erint_ at the end of a pentameter verse, and the same scanning
is found in Plautus and Terence. A. 128, _a_; G. 151, 1; H. 235. --
LEVASSO: a form of _levavero,_ which was originally _levaveso_. For the
formation of this class of future-perfects see Peile, _Introduction to
Greek and Latin Etymology,_ p. 295, ed. 3; also Roby, _Gram._ 1, p. 199,
who has a list of examples; he supports a different view from that given
above; cf. A. 128, _e_, 3; G. 191, 5; H. 240, 4. -- COQUIT: 'vexes.' This
metaphorical use of _coquere_ occurs in poetry and late prose; cf. Plaut.
Trin. 225 _egomet me coquo et macero et defetigo_; Verg. Aen. 7, 345 _quam
... femineae ardentem curaeque iraeque coquebant_; Quint. 12, 10, 77
_sollititudo oratorem macerat et coquit_. -- VERS[=A]T: we have here the
original quantity of the vowel preserved, as in _poneb[=a]t_ below, 10; the
_a_ in _versat_ was originally as long as the _a_ in _vers[=a]s_. Plautus
has some parallels to this scanning (see Corssen, Aussprache 11 squared, 488), but
it is rarely imitated by poets of the best period. Horace, however, has
_ar[=a]t_, Odes 3, 16, 26. A. 375, _g_, 5; H. 580, III n. 2. -- PRAEMI: the
genitive in _i-i_ from nouns in _ium_ only began to come into use at the
end of the Republic. A. 40, _b_; G. 29, Rem. 1; H. 51, 5. -- ISDEM: Cicero
may have written _isdem_ or _eisdem_ (two syllables), but he probably did
not write the form most commonly found in our texts, _iisdem._ H. p. 74,
foot-note 2. -- FLAMININUM: T. Quinctius Flamininus first served against
Hannibal during the Second Punic War. He was present at the capture of
Tarentum in 209 B. c., and in 208 was military tribune under Marcellus.
After being employed on minor business of state, he became quaestor in 199,
and, immediately after his year of office, consul, passing over the
aedileship and praetorship, and attaining the consulship at the
extraordinarily early age of 30. In 197 he won the victory of Cynoscephalae
over the Macedonians, which ended the war. At the Isthmian games in the
spring of 196 Flamininus made his famous proclamation of freedom to all the
Greeks. He returned to Rome in 194 to enjoy a splendid triumph. For the
rest of his life was employed chiefly on diplomatic business concerning
Greece and the East. One of his embassies was to Prusias, king of Bithynia,
call on him to surrender Hannibal, who was living at his court in advanced
old age; this led to Hannibal's suicide. Flamininus was censor in 189 (see
below, 42), and lived on till some time after 167, in which year he became
augur; but the date of his death is unknown. He was a man of brilliant
ability both as general and as diplomat, and also possessed much culture
and was a great admirer of Greek literature. -- ILLE VIR etc.: _i.e._ the
shepherd mentioned in n. on line 1. Livy 32, II, 4 says that Flamininus
sent to the master of the shepherd, Charopus, an Epirote prince, to ask how
far he might be trusted. Charopus replied that Flamininus might trust him,
but had better keep a close watch on the operations himself. -- HAUD MAGNA
CUM RE: 'of no great property'; _re_ = _re familiari_, as is often the case
elsewhere in both verse and prose. Cf. pro Caelio 78 _hominem sine re. Cum_
is literally 'attended by'; it is almost superfluous here, since _vir haud
magna re_ would have had just the same meaning. Madvig, Gram. Sec. 258 has
similar examples. -- PLENUS: final _s_ was so lightly pronounced that the
older poets felt justified in neglecting it in their scanning. It was
probably scarcely pronounced at all by the less educated Romans, since it
is often wholly omitted in inscriptions, and has been lost in modern
Italian. Cicero, Orator 161, says that the neglect to pronounce final _s_
is 'somewhat boorish' (_subrusticum_), though formerly thought 'very
refined' (_politius_). Even Lucretius sometimes disregards it in his
scanning. In the ordinary literary Latin a large number of words has lost
an original _s_; _e.g._ all the nouns of the _-a_ declension. A. 375, _a_;
G. 722; H. 608, 1, n. 3. -- FIDEI: this form of the genitive of _fides_ is
found also in Plautus, Aulularia 575, and Lucretius 5, 102. _Fidei_ as
genitive seems only to occur in late poets, but as dative it is found in a
fragment of Ennius. _Fide_ as genitive occurs in Horace and Ovid. H. 585,
III. 1; Roby, 357, (c). -- QUAMQUAM: see n. on 2 _etsi_. -- SOLLICITARI
etc.: Cicero probably has not quoted the line as Ennius wrote it. The word
_sic_, at least, is evidently inserted on purpose to correspond with _ut_
before _Flamininum_, -- NOCTESQUE DIESQUE: the use of _que ... que_ for _et
... et_ is almost entirely poetical, Sallust being the only prose writer of
the best period in whose works the usage is beyond doubt. _Noctes_ is put
before _dies_ here, as in _noctes diesque_ (Verr. 5, 112), _noctes et dies_
(Brut. 308 _etc._), _nodes ac dies_ (Arch. 29); cf. also Verg. Aen. 6, 127;
and [Greek: nuktas te kai emar] in Iliad 5, 490; but the collocations _dies
noctesque_, _dies et noctes_ are far commoner in Cicero. Madvig (Emend.
Liv. p. 487 n., ed 2) says that in writers of Livy's time and earlier, when
an action is mentioned which continues throughout a number of days and
nights, either _dies et noctes_ and the like phrases are used, or _die et
nocte_ and the like, but not _diem noctemque_ or _diem et noctem,_ which
expression, he says, would imply that the action continued only throughout
_one_ day and _one_ night. But Madvig has overlooked De Or. 2, 162 _eandem
incu dem diem noctemque tundentibus;_ also three passages of Caesar: viz
Bell. Gall. 7, 42, 6 and 7, 77, 11; Bell. Civ. 1, 62, 1; to which add a
passage in the Bell. Hisp. 38. Though _diem noctemque_ does often mean
'throughout _one_ day and _one_ night' (as _e.g._ in Nep. Them. 8, 7), yet
it would seem that the other sense cannot be excluded. -- MODERATIONEM ...
AEQUITATEM: 'the self-control and even balance of your mind'. _Moderatio_
is in Cic. a common translation of [Greek: sophrosyne]. _Aequitas_ is not
used here in its commonest sense of 'reasonableness' or 'equity', but as
the noun corresponding to _aequus_ in the ordinary phrase _aequus animus_
(Horace, '_aequam memento rebus in arduis servare mentem_'), cf. Tusc. 1,
97 _hanc maximi animi aequitatem in ipsa morte._ said of Theramenes'
undisturbed composure before his execution. -- ANIMI TUI: for the position
of these words between _moderationem_ and _aequitatem_, to both of which
nouns they refer (a form of speech called by the Latin grammarians
_coniunctio_), see note on Laelius 8 _cum summi viri tum amicissimi_. --
COGNOMEN: _i.e._ the name _Atticus_, which Cicero's friend did not inherit,
but adopted. For the word _cognomen_ cf. n. on 5. -- DEPORTASSE: it should
be noted that the verb _deportare_ is nearly always in the best writers
used of bringing things from the provinces to Italy or Rome, and not _vice
versa_, the Romans using 'down' (_de_) of motion towards the capital.
_Italia deportare_ occurs in Tacitus and late writers, but only in the
sense of banishing a person (cf. Ann 14, 45). So _decedere de provincia_ is
common, but not _Roma decedere_. As to the form _deportasse_, it may be
remarked that Cic. in the vast majority of instances uses the contracted
and not the full forms of the infinitives corresponding to perfects in
-_avi_. So _putassent_ in 4. An extensive collection of examples of this
and similar contractions may be found in Frohwein, Die Perfectbildungen auf
-vi bei Cicero; Gera, 1874. -- HUMANITATEM: 'culture', _i.e._ learning
resulting in gentleness and refinement of character. -- PRUDENTIAM: [Greek:
phronesin] or practical wisdom. Corn. Nepos (or his imitator) in his life
of Atticus 17, 3 says of him _principum philosophorum ita percepta habuit
praecepta ut his ad vitam agendam non ad ostentationem uteretur_. -- ISDEM
REBUS: _i.e._ the state of public affairs at the time, see Introd. --
QUIBUS ME IPSUM: strictly speaking the construction is inaccurate, since
_suspicor commoveri_ must be supplied, and Cicero does not really mean to
say that he merely _conjectures_ himself to be seriously affected by the
state of public affairs; _ego ipse commoveor_ would have accurately
expressed his meaning. The accusative is due to the attraction of _te_
above. -- MAIOR: = _difficilior_ as often; _e.g._ Lael. 29 _quod maius
est_. -- VISUM EST MIHI CONSCRIBERE: = _placuit mihi_, 'I have determined
to write'. The best writers rarely use the impersonal _videtur etc._
followed by an infinitive. When the usage occurs _videtur mihi etc._
generally have the meaning (as here) of [Greek: dokei moi k.t.l.] = 'I have
made up my mind'. Cf. Tusc. 5, 12 _Non mihi videtur ad beate vivendum satis
posse virtutem_; ib. 5, 22 (a curious passage) _mihi enim non videbatur
quisquam esse beatus posse cum esset in malis; in malis autem sapientem
esse posse_; Off. 3, 71 _malitia quae volt illa quidem videri se esse
prudentiam_ ('craft which desires that people should believe it to be
wisdom'); Liv. 1, 10, 7 _dis visum nec irritam conditoris templi vocem
esse_ ... ('the gods decided that the word of the founder of the shrine
should not remain of no effect'). It would be difficult, if not impossible,
to find a passage in a writer before silver Latin times where the best
texts still exhibit anything like _videtur eum facere_ for _is videtur
facere_. H 534, 1, n. 1; Roby, 1353. -- ALIQUID AD TE: 'some work dedicated
to you'; so below, 3; cf. also Lael. 4 _ut de amicitia scriberem aliquid_;
ib. _Catone maiore qui est scriptus ad te de senectute_; Div. 2, 3 _liber
is quem ad nostrum Atticum de senectute misimus._

2. AUT ... AUT CERTE: so often in Cic.; _certe_, 'at any rate'. --
SENECTUTIS: at the time the words were written Cic. was 62 years old,
Atticus three years older. For the meaning of _senectus_ see n. on 4. --
LEVARI VOLO: the best Latin writers frequently use the passive infinitive
after verbs expressing desire, where moderns would incline to the active;
here Cic. instead of saying 'I wish to relieve yourself and me of the
burden' says 'I wish yourself and me to be relieved'. -- ETSI: = [Greek:
kaitoi] 'and yet'. This use of _etsi_ to introduce a clause correcting the
preceding clause, though not uncommon (_e.g._ below 29; Tusc. 1, 99; 3, 17;
4, 63; 5, 55), is far less common than that of _quamquam_, which we have in
1, 9, 10, 24, 47, 67, 69. -- TE QUIDEM: 'you at all events', 'you for one'.
-- MODICE AC SAPIENTER: _modice_ recalls _moderationem_ above (_modice_ and
_moderate_ are used with exactly the same sense by Cic.), while _sapienter_
recalls _aequitatem_, since _sapientia_ produces stability and an even
balance of the mind. In De Or. 1, 132 we have _modice et scienter_. --
SICUT OMNIA: cf. Fin. 1, 7 _facete is quidem sicut alia_; also below, 65
_sicut alia_. -- ET FERRE ET LATURUM ESSE: Tischer rightly remarks that
when a verb is repeated thus with a variation of tense Cic. very nearly
always uses _et ... et_, and not a single _et_ merely. The contrast between
the two tenses is thus made more pointed. Cf. 3 _et diximus et dicemus_. --
CERTO SCIO: one of the best MSS., followed by some editors, has here _certe
scio_. The latter phrase would mean 'I am sure that I know' (a sense which
seems out of place here); the former 'I have certain or sure knowledge'.
Observe that _certe_ may be used with all verbs, while _certo_ is only used
with _scire_. A. 151, c. -- SED: the idea implied is, 'but though I well
know you do not need such consolation, I have yet resolved to address my
book to you'. -- OCCURREBAS DIGNUS: a condensed construction for
_occurrebat te digmim esse_.

P. 2. -- MUNERE ... UTERETUR: 'a gift such as we both might make use of in
company'. -- MIHI QUIDEM: this forms a correction upon _uterque nostrum_
above: 'whatever you may think of the work, _I at least_ have found the
writing of it pleasant'. -- CONFECTIO: 'composition'; 'completion'; a word
scarcely found in the classical Latin except in Cicero's writings. Cf. De
Or. 2, 52 _annalium confectio;_ pro. Font. 3 _confectio tabularum_
('account-books'). -- FUIT UT ABSTERSERIT: the sequence of tenses _fuit ut
abstergeret_ would have been equally admissible, but the meaning would have
been slightly different. With the perfect the sense is 'was so pleasant
that it _has_ wiped away'; with the imperfect 'was so pleasant that it
_did_ (while I was writing) wipe away'. The metaphor in _absterserit_ is
common: _e.g._ Tusc. 3, 43 _luctum omnem absterseris_. With this statement
of Cicero's concerning the effect the work had on himself contrast Att. 14,
21, 3 _legendus mihi saepius est Cato maior ad te missus. Amariorem enim me
senectus facit. Stomachor omnia_. -- OMNIS: acc. pl. A. 55, _c_; G. 60, 1;
H. 67. -- EFFECERIT MOLLEM: so 56 _poteratne tantus animus efficere non
iucundam senectutem_; but 56 _conditiora facit haec aucupium_. _Efficio_
gives more emphatically than _facio_ the idea of the completion of the
action. Cf. Lael. 73 _efficere aliquem consulem_, 'to carry through a man's
election as consul'; _facere aliquem consulem_ being merely 'to vote for a
man's election to the consulship'. -- SATIS DIGNE: 'as she deserves', lit.
'in a sufficiently worthy manner.' Some editors have thought _digne_
superfluous and wished to cast it out but we have _satis digne_ elsewhere,
as in Verr. Act. II. 1, 82; cf. also Sex. Rosc. 33 _pro dignitate laudare
satis commode_. -- QUI PAREAT ... DEGERE: a conditional sentence of
irregular form (_qui_ = _siquis_; _cui_ simply connective, = _et ei_). Cf.
Div. 1, 127 _qui enim teneat causas rerum futurarum, idem necesse est omnia
teneat quae futura sint_; also the examples in Roby's Grammar, 1558. A.
310, _a_, 307, _b_; G. 594, 1, 598; H. 507, II. and III. 2. Some, however,
make _possit_ a subjunctive of characteristic or of cause with _cui_, and
_pareat_ a subjunctive by attraction. -- OMNE TEMPUS AETATIS: 'every season
of life'; so in 55 _extremum tempus aetatis_; 70 _breve tempus aetatis._
The opposite phrase _aetas temporis_ is very rare; it occurs in Propertius
1, 4, 7.

3. CETERIS: neuter adjective used as a noun, equivalent to _ceteris rebus_
'the other matters'; _i.e._ the political troubles hinted at above. The
best writers do not often use the neuter adjective as noun in the _oblique_
cases unless there is something in the context to show the gender clearly,
as in 24 _aliis ... eis quae_; we have, however, below in 8, _isto_ = _ista
re_; 72, _reliquum_; 77, _caelestium_ = _rerum caelestium_; and in 78,
_praeteritorum futurorumque_; see other instances in n. on Lael. 50
_similium_. The proleptic or anticipatory use of _ceteris_ should also be
noticed; its sense is not fully seen till we come to _hunc librum_; the
same use occurs below in 4, 5, 59, 60; so _aliis_ in 24; cf. also n. on
Lael. 7 _reliqua_. -- DIXIMUS ... DICEMUS: when a clause or phrase consists
of four parts, which go in pairs (as here _diximus_, _dicemus_ on one side,
and _multa_, _saepe_ on the other), the Latins frequently arrange the words
so as to put one pair between the two members of the other pair, as here.
This usage is called by grammarians _chiasmus_. Thus if we denote the four
parts by _AA' BB', chiasmus_ requires the order _ABB'A'_ or _BAA'B'_. See
examples in 8, 20, 22, 38, 44, 71. For the more complicated forms of
chiasmus consult Naegelsbach, Stil. Sec.Sec. 167, 169. A. 344, _f_; G. 684; H.
562. -- LIBRUM ... MISIMUS: observe the omission of a particle at the
beginning of the clause; the contrast between _ceteris_ and _hunc librum_
is made stronger by the omission. For this _asyndeton adversativum_ see n.
on Lael. 5 _Laelium ... putes_. For tense of _misimus_, 'I send' see A.
282; G. 244, H. 472, 1. -- OMNEM: see n. on 62. -- TRIBUIMUS: perfect tense
like _misimus_. -- TITHONO ... ARISTO: see Introd. -- CIUS: Greek [Greek:
Keios] (a native of Ceos), not to be confused with [Greek: Chios] (a native
of Chios), or [Greek: Koos] (a native of Cos). Cicero generally denotes the
Greek diphthong [Greek: ei] by _i_ not e. This Aristo was a Peripatetic. --
PARUM ... AUCTORITATIS: observe how often Cicero takes trouble to separate
words which are, grammatically, closely connected. So above, _omnis ...
molestias_; 7 _multorum ... senectutem_; 9 _mirificos ... fructus_; 21
_civium ... nomina_; 33 _minus ... virium_; 53 _multo ... fecundior_; etc.
etc. See also n. on 15 _quam sit iusta_. A. 344, _c_, _d_, _e_; H. 561,
III. -- ESSET: condition omitted. A. 311; G. 602; H. 510. -- MAIOREM
AUCTORITATEM: cf. Lael. 4. -- APUD QUEM: 'at whose house'; so 55 _a me_,
'from my house'. A. 153; G. 417; H. 446, n. 4. -- LAELIUM ... SCIPIONEM:
see Introd. -- FACIMUS ADMIRANTIS: 'we represent as expressing
astonishment'. For _facere_, in this sense, Cic. more often uses _inducere_
'to bring on the stage', as in Lael. 4 _Catonem induxi senem disputantem_.
Cf. however 54 _Homerus Laerten colentem agrum facit_; also Brut. 218;
Orat. 85. Instead of _facimus_ we might have expected either _fecimus_ to
correspond with _misimus_ and _tribuimus_ above, or _faciemus_ to
correspond with _videbitur_ below. On the use of the participle see A. 292,
_q_; G. 536; H 535, I. 4. -- ERUDITIUS DISPUTARE: Cic. not infrequently in
his dialogues makes people talk with more learning than they really
possessed. He several times confesses this as regards Lucullus and Catulus
in the Academica, and as regards Antonius in the De Oratore. -- FERAT:
subjunctive because embodying the sentiment of Laelius and Scipio. Roby,
1744; Madvig, 357; H. 516, II. -- SUIS LIBRIS etc.: for the allusions here
to Cato's life, works, and opinions see Introd. -- QUID OPUS EST PLURA?
_sc. dicere_. cf. the elliptic phrases _quid multa? sc. dicam_ in 78; also
below, 10 _praeclare_. A 206, _c_; H. 368, 3, n. 2.

4. SAEPE NUMERO SOLEO: 'it is my frequent custom'. _Numero_ is literally
'by the count or reckoning', and in _saepe numero_ had originally the same
force as in _quadraginta numero_ and the like; but the phrase came to be
used merely as a slight strengthening of _saepe_. -- CUM HOC ... CUM
CETERARUM: the use of _cum_ in different senses in the same clause, which
seems awkward, is not uncommon; cf. below, 67. The spelling _quum_ was
certainly not used by Cicero, and probably by no other Latin writer of the
best period. H. 311, foot-note 4. It is worth remarking that _cum_ the
conjunction and _cum_ the preposition, though spelt alike, are by origin
quite distinct. The former is derived from the pronominal stem _ka_ or
_kva_, and is cognate with _qui_; the latter comes from the root _sak_ 'to
follow', and is cognate with Gk. [Greek: syn], Lat _sequor_, etc. See
Vanicek, Etymologisches Worterbuch, pp. 96, 984. -- RERUM ... SAPIENTIAM:
'wisdom _in_ affairs'; the objective genitive -- EXCELLENTEM: in sense much
stronger than our 'excellent'; _excellentem perfectamque_ 'pre-eminent and
indeed faultless'. -- QUOD ... SENSERIM: this clause takes the place of an
object to _admirari_. The subjunctive is used because the speaker reports
his own reason for the wonder, formerly felt, as if according to the views
of another person, and without affirming his holding the same view at the
time of speaking. Madvig, 357, _a_, Obs. 1. A 341, _d_, Rem. -- ODIOSA:
this word is not so strong as our 'hateful', but rather means 'wearisome',
'annoying'. In Plautus the frequent expression _odiosus es_ means, in
colloquial English, 'you bore me'. Cf. 47 _odiosum et molestum_; 65 _odiosa
offensio_. -- ONUS AETNA GRAVIUS: a proverbial expression with an allusion
to Enceladus, who, after the defeat of the Giants by Juppiter, was said to
have been imprisoned under Mt. Aetna. Cf. Eurip. Hercules Furens, 637; also
Longfellow's poem, Enceladus. -- HAUD SANE DIFFICILEM: 'surely far from
difficult'; cf. 83 _haud sane facile_. -- QUIBUS: a _dativus commodi_,
'those for whom there is no aid in themselves'. Cf. Lael. 79 _quibus in
ipsis_. -- BENE BEATEQUE VIVENDUM: 'a virtuous and happy life'; 'virtue and
happiness'; so _bene honesteque_ below, 70. -- QUI ... PETUNT: these are
the [Greek: autarkeis], men sufficient for themselves, '_in se toti teretes
atque rotundi_'. We have here a reminiscence of the Stoic doctrine about
the wise man, whose happiness is quite independent of everything outside
himself, and is caused solely by his own virtue. Cicero represents the same
Stoic theory in Lael. 7. Cf. Juv. Sat. 10, 357-362; also Seneca, De Cons.
Sap. VIII, De Prov. I. 5. -- A SE IPSI: 'themselves from themselves,' so in
78 _se ipse moveat ... se ipse relucturus sit_; 84 _me ipse consolabar_.
Expressions like _a se ipsis_ are quite uncommon in Cicero. Cf. n. on Lael.
5 _te ipse cognosces_; also see below, 38 _se ipsa_ 78 _se ipse_. --
NATURAE NECESSITAS: 'the inevitable conditions of nature.' Cf. 71 _quid est
tam secundum naturam quam senibus emori?_ -- AFFERAT: subjunctive because
_nihil quod_ = _nihil tale ut_. A 320, _a_; G. 633, 634; H. 503, I. -- QUO
IN GENERE: _sc. rerum_; with this phrase the defining genitive is commonly
omitted by Cicero. So below, 45 _in eo genere_. -- UT ... ADEPTAM: notice
the chiasmus. -- EANDEM: _idem_ is used in the same way, to mark an
emphatic contrast in 24, 52, 68, 71. -- ADEPTAM: this is probably the only
example in Cicero of the passive use of _adeptus_, which occurs in Sallust,
Ovid, Tacitus, etc.; and in this passage the use cannot be looked on as
certain, since one of the very best and several of the inferior MSS. read
_adepti_. Cicero, however, uses a good many deponent participles in a
passive sense (cf. below, 59 _dimensa_; 74 _meditatum_; see also a list,
Roby, 734), and some of them occur very rarely. Thus _periclitatus,
arbitratus, depastus_ as passives are found each in only one passage. --
INCONSTANTIA: 'instability', 'inconsistency'. _Constantia_, unwavering
firmness and consistency, is the characteristic of the wise man; cf. Acad.
2, 23 _sapientia ... quae ex sese habeat constantiam_; also Lael. 8 and 64.

P. 3. -- AIUNT: _sc. stulti_. -- PUTASSENT: the subjunctive is due to the
indirect discourse. Where we say 'I should not have thought,' the Latins
say, in direct narration, '_non putaram_,' _i.e._ 'I never had thought' (so
Off. 1, 81 and often in Cicero's letters). Translate, 'more quickly than
they had ever expected'. Cf. Att. 6, 1, 6 _accipiam equidem dolorem mihi
ilium irasci sed multo maiorem non esse eum talem qualem putassem_. See
Zumpt, Gram., 518. -- FALSUM PUTARE: 'to form a mistaken judgment'. For
_falsum_ as noun equivalent to [Greek: pseudos], cf. 6 _gratissimum_; also
n. on 3 _ceteris_. -- QUI CITIUS: lit. 'in what way quicker'; cf. Tusc. 5,
89 _qui melius_. H. 188, II. 2. -- ADULESCENTIA ... SENECTUS ... PUERITIA:
babyhood was generally at Rome supposed to last till the 17th year (the
time for assuming the _toga virilis_ and for beginning military service).
_Iuventus_ is usually the age from 17 to 45, during which men were liable
to be called on for active service. Ordinarily, in colloquial language,
_adulescentia_ is the earlier portion of _iuventus_, say the years from 17
to 30 (cf. 33), but Cicero seems here to make _adulescentia_ co-extensive
with _iuventus_. From 45 to 60 is the _aetas seniorum_, the period during
which citizens in early Rome might be called out for the defence of the
city, but not for active service. _Senectus_ was commonly reckoned as
beginning at 60; but in Sec. 60 Cicero includes in _senectus_ the _aetas
seniorum_, and probably intended to include it here. In Tusc. 1, 34 Cic.
reckons three ages _pueritia adulescentia senectus_ as here; below in 74,
four periods, or five. -- QUAMVIS: = _quantumvis_. -- EFFLUXISSET:
subjunctive because the mood of _posset_, to which it stands in subordinate
relation _Cum_ here is purely temporal. See Roby, 1778; A. 342; G. 666; H.
529, II. -- POSSET: see n. on _esset_ above, 3.

5. SI ... SOLETIS ... SUMUS: the apodosis and protasis do not exactly
correspond; the sense really required is 'if that wisdom for which you
admire me does exist, it lies in this', etc. -- UTINAM ... ESSET: _esset_
here gives a greater appearance of modesty than would been expressed by
_sit_: 'would it were, as it certainly is not'. A. 267; G. 253; H. 483, 2.
-- COGNOMINE: Cato bore the title _sapiens_, even in his lifetime; see
Introd. _Cognomen_ is used in good Latin to denote both the family name and
the acquired by-name; in late Latin this latter is denoted by _agnomen_. --
IN HOC SAPIENTES: but above, 4 _rerum sapientiam_, not _in rebus_. The
genitive construction is not found with _sapiens_ used as noun or adjective
till late Latin times. -- NATURAM DUCEM etc.: Cato's claim to the title of
_sapiens_ does not rest on any deep knowledge of philosophy, but on
practical wisdom or common sense and experience in affairs. Cf. Lael. 6 and
19. In this passage Cicero has put into Cato's mouth phrases borrowed from
the Stoic philosophy, which declared the life of virtue to be life in
accordance with nature (_naturae convenienter vivere_ or [Greek:
homologoumenos te physei zen]). Cf. 71, n. on _secundum naturam_. --
TAMQUAM DEUM: observe _deum_ not _deam_, because nature is compared with,
and not identified with, a divine being. Cf. Fin. 5, 43 _eam (rationem)
quasi deum ducem subsequens_. -- AETATIS: here = _vitae_, life as a whole.
Cf. 2 _omne tempus aetatis_ and n.; also 13 _aetatis ... senectus_; 33, 64,
82. -- DESCRIPTAE: 'composed'; literally 'written out'. The reading
_discriptae_, which many editions give, does not so well suit the passage.
_Discribere_ is to map out, plan, arrange, put in order (see 59 _discripta_
and _discriptio_); the point here lies, however, not in the due arrangement
of the different scenes of a play, but in the careful working out of each
scene. _Ab ea_ must be supplied after _descriptae_ from _a qua_ above. --
ACTUM: the common comparison of life with a drama is also found in 64, 70,
85. -- INERTI: the sense of 'ignorant' 'inartistic' (_in, ars_), has been
given to this by some editors (cf. Hor. Ep. 2, 2, 126 _praetulerim scriptor
delirus inersque videri_, and Cic. Fin. 2, 115 _artes, quibus qui carebant,
