"I know not. It seems scarce like; and yet I can never answer for
my father's moods, they are so wild and strange. But there is yet
one thing more I would ask. You spoke awhile ago of gipsies--of a
hatred they bore to our house. Tell me of that, I pray. Might it
have somewhat to do with the stealing of the treasure?"

"That is what some have thought, though with what truth none can
say. The story of that is soon told. Many long years agone now, the
Trevlyn whose portrait hangs below in the hall--our great
grandfather--gave sentence upon an old gipsy woman that she should
be burnt as a witch. Men said of her that she had overlooked their
children and their cattle: that the former had become sick or
silly, and that the latter had incontinently died of diseases none
had heard of before. There was such a hue and cry about her, and so
many witnesses to testify the harm she had done, that all men held
the case proven, and she was burnt in the sight of all the village
out upon the common yonder by order of our forefather, whose office
it was to see the law enforced. There were then many of these gipsy
folk scattered about the common and forest, and this old witch
belonged to them. They mustered strong upon the heath, and it was
said that if the villagers had not been too strong for them they
would have rescued the witch as she was led out to die. But the
Trevlyns, when a thing has to be done, are wont to carry it
through; and your grandfather, Cuthbert, was prepared against any
such attempt, and the thing was done as had been decreed. The old
woman went bravely to her death, but she turned as she passed Sir
Richard and cursed him with a terrible curse. Later on some rude
verses were found fastened to the wall of the church, and it was
said by those who had heard the curse that these verses contained
the same words. The paper was burnt by the haughty knight; but my
grandam remembered some of the lines--she had got a sight of the
paper--and used to tell them to us. I cannot recall them to memory
now, but there was something about loss of gold and coming woe,
years of strife and vengeful foe. And when years after the Trevlyn
treasure was lost, there were many who vowed that it had been the
work of the gipsy tribe, who had never forgotten or forgiven, and
who had been waiting their turn to take vengeance upon the
descendants of their old enemy."

"It seems not unlike," said Cuthbert, thoughtfully; "and if that be
so, the treasure will most like be dissipated to the four winds by
now. It would be divided amongst the tribe, and never be seen
within the walls of Trevlyn again."

"That I know not," answered Kate, and she drew a little nearer to
her cousin. "Cuthbert, dost thou believe in old saws? Dost thou
believe those predictions which run in old families, and which men
say work themselves out sometimes--in after generations?"

"I scarce know," answered Cuthbert, "I hear so little and see so
little. I know not why they should not be true. Men of old used to
look into the future, and why not now? But why speakest thou thus,
sweet cousin?"

"Marry that will I tell thee, Cuthbert; but my mother chides me for
such talk, and says it befits not a discreet and godly maiden. Yet
I had it from mine own grandam, my father's mother, and she was a
godly woman, too."

"And what did she tell thee?"

"My grandam was a Wyvern," said Kate, "as perchance thou knowest,
since the match pleased not thy father. And she was not the first
Wyvern who had married a Trevlyn. It was Isabel Wyvern, her aunt,
who had wedded with the redoubtable Sir Richard who had burnt the
old witch, and I trow had he been married when the old beldam was
brought before him he would have dealt more mercifully with her;
for the Wyverns ever protected and helped the gipsy folk, and
thought better of them than the rest of the world. Well, be that as
it may, my grandam had many stories about them and their strange
ways, their fashion of fortune telling and divining, and the
wonderful things they could foretell. Many a time had a Wyvern been
saved from danger and perhaps from death by a timely warning from
one of the gipsy folk; and from a child she went fearlessly amongst
them, though all men else shunned and hated them."

"But the prediction--the prediction?" demanded Cuthbert eagerly.

"I am coming to that," answered Kate. "It is a prediction about the
descendants of the Wyverns. My grandam knew it by heart--she had a
wondrous memory--but my mother would never let me write down such
things. She loved them not, and said they had better be forgotten.
But though I cannot recall the words, the meaning stays still with
me. It was that though death might thin the ranks of the Wyverns,
and their name even die out amongst men, yet in the future they
should bring good hap to those who wed with them, and that some
great treasure trove should come to the descendants in another
generation. Now, Cuthbert, though the name of Wyvern has died
out--for the sons went to the Spanish main, and were killed
fighting for the honour of England and the Queen in the days of
Elizabeth; and the daughters are married, and have lost their title
to the old name--yet thou and I have their blood in our veins. Your
grandam and mine were alike of the house of Wyvern. Wherefore it
seems to me that if this treasure is to be the treasure trove of
the old saw, it behoves some of us to find it, and why not thou as
well as another? Philip is like to our mother, who loves not and
believes not such saws. Our father says that if stolen the treasure
must long since have been scattered and lost. Of all our house
methinks I am the only one who believes it will yet be found, as I
know my grandam did. And so I say to thee, 'Go forth, and good hap
attend thee.' Thou art as much a Wyvern as I, and we will have
faith that all will be yet restored."

Cuthbert rose to his feet and shook back his hair. His dark eyes
flashed with the fixity of his purpose.

"I will never despair till the treasure is found. Prithee, good
cousin, show me the spot where it was buried first."

Cuthbert never stirred outside the house till after dark. He was
still in hiding from his father, who knew not his whereabouts, and
was still on the watch for the truant, believing him to be lurking
about in the forest around his home. Philip had once contrived to
see Petronella and soothe her fears, telling her that her brother
was safe, and would be sent forth to their kinsfolk in London so
soon as he was fit for the long ride. But many evening rambles had
been taken by the youth, who panted for the freedom of the forest,
to which he was so well used; and Kate delighted in any excuse for
a moonlight stroll.

The place was soon found. Kate had visited it so often that the
tangled path which led thither was as familiar to her as if it had
been a well-beaten road. It lay right away in the very heart of the
forest, and save for the majestic size of the oak beneath which the
chests had been buried, had nothing to mark the spot. Now there
were traces of much digging. The ground all around had been
disturbed again and yet again by eager searchers, each hopeful to
come upon some clue missed by all the rest. But nothing, save the
remains of a few iron-bound chests, served to show that anything
had once been secreted there; and the moonlight shone steadily and
peacefully down upon the scene of so many heart-burnings and
grievous disappointments, as though such things did not and could
not exist in such a still and lovely place.

"Ah, if she would but tell us all she has seen!" said Kate, looking
up towards the silver Queen of Night. But the moon kept her own
secret, and presently the pair turned away.

"Shall we go back by the chantry?" asked Cuthbert, with some
hesitation; "I should like to see it once again."

"Let us," answered Kate; "we are not like to meet thy father. He
has given up by now his watch around the house. Moreover, I have
eyes and ears like a wildcat. None can approach unawares upon us. I
can feel a human presence ere I see it."

Cuthbert did not lack courage, and was quite willing to chance the
small risk there was of an encounter with his father. He felt that
he could slip away unseen were that stern man to be on the watch.
Each day that had passed beneath his uncle's roof had helped him to
realize more of the freedom of the subject; and very soon he would
be beyond the reach of pursuit, and on his way to London.

As they approached the chantry Kate laid a hand upon his arm.

"Hist!" she said softly. "Pause a moment; I hear voices!"

He stopped instantly; and making a sign of caution to him, Kate
glided a few steps onward. Then she paused again, and made a sign
to him to come.

"It is all well--there is no fear. It is Philip and Petronella."

"Petronella, my sister! Nay, but this is a happy chance!" cried
Cuthbert, springing eagerly forward; and the next moment
Petronella, with a little cry of mingled joy and fear, had flung
herself into her brother's arms.

"Cuthbert, dear Cuthbert! How I have longed to see thee once again!
Hast thou come to say farewell?"

"In truth, methinks it must be farewell," answered Cuthbert,
holding her tenderly to him, whilst he caressed her hair and her
soft cheek with his hand. "I may not linger too long in my kind
uncle's house, lest the matter should come to my father's ears, and
a worse breach be made that might cause thee to suffer more, sweet
sister. And now, since I may be faring forth tomorrow, tell me of
thyself. How go matters at the Gate House? What said our father to
my flight?"

"He is right furious thereat, and raged for two days like a madman,
so that I durst not venture near him."

"He laid no hand on thee?" asked Cuthbert quickly clinching his
hand in the darkness.

"Nay, he did but threaten; but as I told him all I knew, he could
do no more. I said that thou hadst fled--that thou couldst brook
such a life no longer, and had told him so many times thyself. I
did not know myself where thou hadst gone when first he spoke, and
he has asked me no question since. Tell me not too much, lest I
have to tell it to him."

"Nay, once in London and I fear him not," answered Cuthbert. "There
the law would protect me, since my father's only complaint against
me is that I conform to that. I go first to our mother's relatives,
sweet sister, They will give me food and shelter and a home, I
trow, during the inclement months of the winter now before us.
Later on "--he bent his head and whispered in her ear--"later on,
if kind fortune befriend me, I shall return to these parts and
commence that search of which we have spoken before now. My sister,
if thou canst glean anything from our father anent the treasure,
when his less gloomy moods be upon him, store up in thine heart
every word, for some think even yet that he knows more than others.
I am sad at heart to leave thee in such a home! I would fain take
thee with me."

"Nay, that may not be. I should be but a stay and a burden; and I
can help thee better here at home by my prayers. I will pray each
hour of the day that the Holy Virgin will watch over thee and bless
thee, and give us a happy meeting in the days to come."

"And I will charge myself to watch over Petronella," said Philip,
stepping forward out of the shadow. "I will be a protector--a
brother--to her whilst thou art away. She shall not feel too
heavily her harsh father's rule. Amongst us we will find a way to
ease her of a part of that burden."

The glance turned upon Philip by those big shadowy eyes told a tale
of trustful confidence that set the young man's heart beating in
glad response. He took in his the little hand trustingly held out,
and drew Petronella towards him.

"You will trust her to me, good Cuthbert?"

"Gladly, thankfully, confidently!" answered the lad, with great
earnestness; and he thought within himself that if he had the whole
of the Trevlyn treasure to lay at the feet of these kinsmen, it
could hardly be enough to express his gratitude to them for their
timely and generous help in his hour of sore need.

"I will win it back--I will, I will!" he said in his heart, as he
walked up the hill with Kate tripping lightly beside him, Philip
having lingered to watch Petronella safely within the shelter of
the gloomy walls of the Gate House. "She shall have her dower, that
she may wed this gay Lord Culverhouse. My sweet sister shall be
dowered, too, and in no danger of spending all her youth and
sweetness shut up between those gloomy walls. Fortune will smile
once more upon all those who have the blood of the Trevlyns and
Wyverns in their veins. I believe in the old prediction. I believe
that the treasure trove will come, and that it will prove to be the
lost treasure of the house of Trevlyn!"



Chapter 4: A Night On Hammerton Heath.


"Farewell, Cuthbert, farewell, farewell! Heaven speed you on your
way! We shall look for tidings of you some day. And when the long
summer days come upon the green world, perchance you may even make
shift to ride or walk the twenty miles that separates us from
London to tell of your own well being and ask of ours."

These and many like words were showered on Cuthbert as he sat his
steed at the door of Trevlyn Chase, as the dusk was beginning to
gather, and his uncle and cousins stood clustered together on the
steps to see him ride forth to seek his fortune, as Kate insisted
on calling it, though her father spoke of it rather as a visit to
his mother's kinsfolks.

Cuthbert had been very loath to go. He had found himself happier
beneath his uncle's roof than ever he had been before (Sir Richard
was in point of fact his cousin, but the lad had given him the
title of uncle out of respect, and now never thought of him as
anything else), but he knew that to linger long would be neither
safe nor possible.

Only his strange and savage life had prevented the news of his
son's present quarters from coming to the knowledge of the angry
Nicholas, and all were feeling it better for the young man to take
his departure. Now the moment of parting had really come, and
already the hope of a flying visit to the Chase in the summer next
to follow was the brightest thought to lighten the regrets of the
present.

"Ay, that will I gladly do!" cried the lad, with kindling eyes.
"Why, twenty miles is naught of a journey when one can rise with
the midsummer sun. I trow I shall pine after the forest tracks
again. I shall have had enough and to spare of houses and cities by
the time the summer solstice is upon us."

"We shall look for you, we shall wait for you!" cried Kate, waving
her hand; and as it was fast growing dark, Sir Richard made a sign
of dismissal and farewell, and Cuthbert moved slowly along the dark
avenue, Philip walking beside his bridle rein for a few last words.

Cuthbert would have liked his sister to have seen him go forth, but
that was not thought advisable. He wore an old riding suit of
Philip's, which had fitted the latter before his shoulders had
grown so broad and his figure assumed its present manly
proportions. It suited Cuthbert well, and in spite of its having
seen some service from its former owner, was a far better and
handsomer dress than anything he had ever worn before, His own
meagre wardrobe and few possessions were packed in the saddlebag
across the saddle. His uncle had made no attempt to send him out
equipped as a relative of the house of Trevlyn, and Cuthbert was
glad that there should be no false seeming as to his condition when
he appeared at Martin Holt's door. Sir Richard had given him at
parting a small purse containing a couple of gold pieces and a few
silver crowns, and had told him that he might in London sell the
nag he bestrode and keep the price himself. He was not an animal of
any value, and had already seen his best days, but he would carry
Cuthbert soberly and safely to London town; and as the lad was
still somewhat weak from his father's savage treatment, he was not
sorry to be spared the long tramp over the deep mud of winter
roads.

"I would not have you travel far tonight," said Philip, as he paced
beside the sure-footed beast, who leisurely picked his way along
the familiar road. "The moon will be up, to be sure, ere long; but
it is ill travelling in the night. It is well to get clear of this
neighbourhood in the dark, for fear your father might chance to
espy you and make your going difficult. Yet I would have you ask
shelter for your steed and yourself tonight at the little hostelry
you will find just this side Hammerton Heath. The heath is an ill
place for travellers, as you doubtless know. If you should lose the
road, as is like enough, it being as evil and rough a track as well
may be, you will like enough plunge into some bog or morass from
which you may think yourself lucky to escape with life. And if you
do contrive to keep to the track, the light-heeled gentlemen of the
road may swoop down upon you like birds of prey, and rob you of the
little worldly wealth that you possess. Wherefore I counsel you to
pause ere you reach that ill-omened waste, and pass the night at
the hostel there. The beds may be something poor, but they will be
better than the wet bog, and you will be less like to be robbed
there than on the road."

"I will take your good counsel, cousin," said Cuthbert. "I have not
much to lose, but that little is my all. I will stop at the place
you bid me, and only journey forth across the heath when the
morrow's sun be up."

"You will do well. And now farewell, for I must return. I will do
all that in me lies to watch over and guard Petronella. She shall
be to me as a sister, and I will act a brother's part by her, until
I may have won a right to call her something more. Have no fears
for her. I will die sooner than she shall suffer. Her father shall
not visit on her his wrath at your escape."

The cousins parted on excellent terms, and Cuthbert turned, with a
strange smile on his brave young face, for a last look at the old
Gate House, the gray masonry of which gleamed out between the dark
masses of the leafless trees, a single light flickering faintly in
an upper casement.

"Petronella's light!" murmured Cuthbert to himself. "I trow well
she is thinking of me and praying for me before the little shrine
in the turret. May the Holy Saints and Blessed Virgin watch over
and protect her! I trust the day may come ere long when I may have
power to rescue her from that evil home, and give to her a dower
that shall make her not unworthy of being Philip's wife."

By which it may be seen that Cuthbert's thoughts were still running
on the lost treasure, and that he had by no means relinquished his
dream of discovery through hearing how others had sought and
failed.

"If I may but win a little gold in these winter days when the
forest is too inhospitable to be scoured and searched, I can give
the whole of the summer to the quest. I will find these gipsies or
their descendants and live amongst them as one of them. I will
learn their ways, win their trust, and gradually discover all that
they themselves know. Who dare say that I may not yet be the one to
bring back the lost luck to the house of Trevlyn? Has it always
been the prosperous and rich that have won the greatest prize? A
humble youth such as I may do far more in the wild forest than
those who have been bred to ease and luxury, and have to keep state
and dignity."

Thus musing, Cuthbert rode slowly along in the light of the rising
moon, his thoughts less occupied with the things he was leaving
behind than with thoughts of the future and what it was to bring
forth. The lad had all the pride of his house latent within him,
and it delighted him to picture the day when he might return all
Sir Richard's benefits a thousandfold by coming to him with the
news of the lost treasure, and bidding him take the elder brother's
share before ever his own father even knew that it had been found
at last. His heart beat high as he pictured that day, and thought
how he should watch the light coming into Kate's bright eyes, as
the obstacle to her nuptials should be thus removed. Sure she could
coax her father to remove his veto and overlook the cousinship if
she had dower to satisfy Lord Andover. And if the Trevlyn treasure
were but half what men believed, there would be ample to dower all
three daughters and fill the family coffers, too.

"In truth it is a thing well worth living for!" cried the eager
lad, as he pushed his way out of the wood and upon the highroad,
where for a time travelling was somewhat better. "And why should I
not succeed even though others have failed? My proud kinsmen have
never lived in the forest themselves, learning its every secret
winding track, making friends of its wild sons and daughters,
learning the strange lore that only the children of the forest
gather. What chance had they of learning secrets which but few may
know? I trow none. I will not believe that great treasure has been
cast away to the four winds. I verily believe it is still hidden
away beneath the earth in some strange resting place known but to a
few living souls. What do these wild gipsy folks want with gold and
silver and jewels? They have all they need with the heavens above
them and the earth beneath. They may love to have a buried hoard;
they may love to feel that they have treasure at command if they
desire it; but I can better believe they would keep it safe hidden
in their forest or moorland home than that they would scatter it
abroad by dividing it amongst their tribe. Moreover, any such
sudden wealth would draw upon them suspicion and contumely. They
would be hunted down and persecuted like the Jews in old days. No:
they may well have stolen it out of revenge, but I believe they
have hidden it away as they took it. It shall be my part to learn
where it lies; and may the Holy Saints aid and bless me in the
search!"

Cuthbert crossed himself as he invoked the Saints, for at heart he
was a Romanist still, albeit he had had the wit to see that the
same cardinal doctrines were taught by the Established Church of
the land, whose services he had several times attended. And even as
he made the gesture he became suddenly aware that he was not alone
on the road. A solitary traveller mounted on a strong horse was
standing beneath the shadow of a tree hard by, and regarding his
approach with some curiosity, though the lad had not been aware of
his close proximity until his horse paused and snorted.

"Good even, young man," said this traveller, in a pleasant voice
that bespoke gentle birth. "I was waiting to see if I had an enemy
to deal with in the shape of one of those rogues of the road,
cutpurses or highwaymen, of whom one bears so many a long tale. But
these travel in companies, and it behoves wise travellers to do
likewise. How comes it that a stripling like you are out alone in
this lone place? Is it a hardy courage or stern necessity?"

"I know not that it is one or the other," answered Cuthbert. "But I
have not far to go this night, and I have not much to lose, though
as that little is my all I shall make a fight ere I part with it.
But by what I hear there is little danger of molestation till one
reaches Hammerton Heath. And I propose to halt on the edge of that
place, and sleep at the hostelry there."

"If you follow my counsel, my young friend," said the stranger as
he paced along beside Cuthbert, "you will not adventure yourself in
that den of thieves. Not long ago it was a safe place for a
traveller, but now it is more perilous to enter those doors than to
spend the darkest night upon the road. The new landlord is in
league with the worst of the rogues and foot pads who frequent the
heath, and no traveller who dares to ask a night's shelter there is
allowed to depart without suffering injury either in person or
pocket. Whither are you bound, my young friend, if I may ask the
question?"

"For London, sir. I have an uncle there whom I am about to seek.
But the way is something strange to me when the heath be passed,
and I know not if I can find it in the dark."

"I also am bound for London," answered the stranger, "and in these
days it is better to travel two than one, and four than two. But
being no more than two, we must e'en hope for the best if we fall
not in with other belated travellers. My business brooked not
delay; wherefore I came alone. I mislike the fetter of a retinue of
servants, and I have had wonderful good hap on the roads; but there
be others who tell a different tale, and I often join company when
I find a traveller to my liking going my way."

Cuthbert was glad enough to have a companion. This man was many
years his senior, so that he was somewhat flattered by the
proposition of riding in his company; moreover, he was plainly a
gentleman of some condition, whose fancy it was (not his necessity)
to travel thus unattended. Also he was speedily conscious of a
strange sense of fascination which this stranger exercised upon
him, for which he could not in the least account; and he quickly
found himself answering the questions carelessly addressed to him
with a freedom that surprised himself; for why should there be such
pleasure in talking of himself and his prospects to one whose name
he did not even know?

When first he had pronounced his name, he observed that the
stranger gave him a quick, keen glance; and after they had been
some time in conversation, he spoke with a sudden gravity and
earnestness that was decidedly impressive.

"Young man, I trust that you are loyal and true to the faith of
those forefathers of yours who have been one of England's brightest
ornaments. In these latter days there has been a falling away. Men
have let slip the ancient truths. Love of the world has been
stronger within them than love of the truth. They have let
themselves be corrupted by heresy; they have lost their first love.
I trust it is not so with you. I trust you are one of the faithful
who are yet looking for brighter days for England, when she shall
be gathered again to the arms of the true Church. But a few minutes
ago I saw you make the holy sign, and my heart went out to you as
to a brother. These Protestants deny and contemn that symbol, as
they despise and contemn in their wantonness the ordinances of God
and the authority of His Vicar. I trust you have not fallen into
like error; I trust that you are a true son of the old stock of
Trevlyn?"

"I know little of such disputed matters," answered Cuthbert, made a
little nervous by the ardent glance bent upon him from the bright
eyes of the speaker. He had a dark, narrow face, pale and eager, a
small, pointed beard trimmed after the fashion of the times, and
the wide-brimmed sugar-loaf hat drawn down upon his brows cast a
deep shadow over his features. But his voice was peculiarly
melodious and persuasive, and there was a nameless attraction about
him that Cuthbert was quick to feel. Others in the days to follow
felt it to their own undoing, but of that the lad knew nothing. He
only wished to retain the good opinion this stranger seemed to have
formed of him.

"I have led but a hermit's life, as I have told you. I have been
bred up in the faith of my forefathers, and that faith I believe.
What perplexes me is that those who hold the Established or
Reformed faith, as men term it, have the same creeds, the same
doctrines as we ourselves. I have from time to time conformed to
the law, and gone to the services, and I have not heard aught
spoken within their walls that our good priest in old days used not
to tell me was sound doctrine. There be things he taught me that
these men say naught about; but no man may in one discourse touch
upon every point of doctrine. I freely own that I have been sorely
perplexed to know whence comes all this strife, all these heart
burnings."

"Thou wilt know and understand full soon, when once thou hast seen
the life of the great city and the strife of faction there,"
answered his companion, lapsing into the familiar "thou" as he
spoke with increased earnestness. "In thy hermit's life thou hast
had no knowledge of the robbery, the desecration, the pollution
which our Holy Mother Church has undergone from these pestilent
heretics, who have thought to denude her of her beauty and her
glory, whilst striving to retain such things as jump with their
crabbed humours, and may be pared down to please their poisoned and
vicious minds. Ah! it makes the blood boil in the veins of the true
sons of the Church, as thou wilt find, my youthful friend, when
thou gettest amongst them. But it will not always last. The day of
reckoning will come--nay, is already coming when men shall find
that the Blessed and Holy Church may not be defiled and downtrodden
with impunity for ever. Ah yes! the day will come--it is even at
the door--when God shall arise and his enemies be scattered.
Scattered--scattered! verily that is the word. And the sons of the
true faith throughout the length and breadth of the land shall
