hell for cowards.

95. What Christianity did.

Christianity, on the contrary, laid emphasis on the virtues of
self-sacrifice and sympathy.  It took the side of the weak and the
helpless.  The Church itself held slaves, yet it labored for
emancipation.  It built monasteries and encouraged industry and
education.  The church edifice was a kind of open Bible.

Very few who entered the sacred building then could have spelled out a
single word of either the Old or New Testament, even if they had then
been translated from Latin into English; but all, from the poorest
peasant or the meanest slave up to the greatest noble, could read the
meaning of the Scripture histories painted in brilliant colors on wall
and window.

The church, furthermore, was a peculiarly sacred place.  It was
powerful to shield those who were in danger.  If a criminal, or a
person fleeing from vengeance, took refuge in it, he could not be
seized until forty days had expired, during which time he had the
privilege of leaving the kingdom and going into exile.

This "right of sanctuary" was often a needful protection in an age of
violence.  In time, however, the system became an intolerable abuse,
since it enabled robbers and desperadoes of all kinds to defy the
law.  The right was modified at different times, but was not wholly
abolished until 1624, in the reign of James I.

III. Military Affairs

96. The Army.

The army consisted of a national militia, or "fyrd," and a feudal
militia.  From the earliest times all freemen were obliged to fight in
the defense of the country.  Under the feudal system, every large
landholder had to furnish the King a stipulated number of men, fully
equipped with armor and weapons.  As this method was found more
effective than the first, it gradually superseded it.

The Saxons always fought on foot.  They wore helmets and rude,
flexible armor, formed of iron rings, or of stout leather covered with
small plates of iron and other substances.  They carried oval-shaped
shields.  Their chief weapons were the spear, javelin, battle-ax, and
sword.  The wars of this period were those of the different tribes
seeking to get the advantage over each other, or of the English with
the Danes.

97. The Navy.

Until Alfred's reign the English had no navy.  From that period they
maintained a fleet of small warships to protect the coast from
invasion.  Most of these vessels appear to have been furnished by
certain ports on the south coast.

IV. Literature, Learning, and Art

98. Runes.

The language of the Saxons was of Low-German origin.  Many of the
words resemble the German of the present day.  When written, the
characters were called runes, mysteries or secrets.  The chief use of
these runes was to mark a sword hilt, or some article of value, or to
form a charm against evil and witchcraft.

It is supposed that one of the earliest runic inscriptions is the
following, which dates from about 400 A.D.  It is cut on a drinking
horn,[1] and (reproduced in English characters) stands thus:

        EK HLEWAGASTIR - HOLTINGAR - HORNA - TAWIDO

        I, Hlewagastir, son of Holta, made the horn

[1] The golden horn of Gallehas, found on the Danish-German frontier.

With the introduction of Christianity the Latin alphabet, from which
our modern English alphabet is derived, took the place of the runic
characters, which bore some resemblance to Greek, and English
literature began with the coming of the monks.

99. The First Books.

One of the first English books of great value was the "Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle," a history covering a period beginning 1 A.D. and ending in
1154.  The work was probably written by the monks in Canterbury,
Peterborough, and other monasteries.  It may be considered as an
annual register of iportant events.  Thorpe says of it, "No other
nation can produce any history written in its own vernacular, at all
approaching the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" either in antiquity,
truthfulness, or extent, the historical books of the Bible alone
excepted."

Though written in prose, it countains various fragments of poetry, of
which the following (rendered into modern English), on the death of
Edward the Confessor (1066), may be quoted as an example:

"Then suddenly came                     On Harold's self,
 Death the bitter                       A noble Earl!
 And that dear prince seized.           Who in all times
 Angels bore                            Faithfully hearkened
 His steadfast soul                     Unto his lord
 Into heaven's light.                   In word and deed,
 But the wise King                      Nor ever failed
 Bestowed his realm                     In aught the King
 On one grown great,                    Had needed of him!"

Other early books were Caedmon's poem of the Creation, also in
English, and Bede's "Church History" of Britain, written in Latin, a
work giving a full and most interesting account of the coming of
Augustine and his first preaching in Kent.  All of these books were
written by the monks in different monasteries.

100. Art.

The English were skillful workers in metal, especially in gold and
silver, and also in the illumination of manuscripts.[1]  Alfred's
Jewel, a fine specimen of the blue-enameled gold of the ninth century,
is preseved in the Ashmolean Museum, Oxford.  It bears the
inscription: "Alfred me heht gewurcan," Alfred caused me to be worked
[or made].

[1] These illuminations get their name from the gold, silver, and
bright colors used in the pictures, borders, and decorated letters
with which the monks ornamented these books.  For beautiful specimens
of he work, see Silvestre's "Pale'ographie."

The women of that period excelled in weaving fine linen and woolen
cloth and in embroidering tapestry.

101. Architecture.

In architecture no advance took place until very late.  The small
ancient church at Bradford-on-Avon in the south of England belongs to
the Saxon period.  The Saxon stonework exhibited in a few buildings
like the church tower of Earl's Barton, Northamptonshire, is an
attempt to imitate timber with stone, and has been called "stone
carpentry."[2]  Edward the Confessor's work in Westminster Abbey was
not Saxon, but Norman, he having obtained his plans, and probably his
builders, from Normandy.

[2] See Parker's "Introduction to Gothic Architecture" for
illustrations of this work.

V. General Industry and Commerce

102. Farms; Slave Trade.

The farming of this period, except on the Church lands, was of the
rudest description.  Grain was ground by the women and slaves in stone
hand mills.  Late, the mills were driven by wind or water power.  The
pricipal commerce was in wool, lead, tin, and slaves.  A writer of
that time says he used to see long trains of young men and women tied
together, offered for sale, "for men were not ashamed," he adds, "to
sell their nearest relatives, and even their own children."

VI. Mode of Life, Manners, and Customs

103. The Town.

The first Saxon settlements were quite generally on the line of the
old Roman roads.  They were surrounded by a rampart of earth set with
a thick hedge or with rows of sharp stakes.  Outside this was a deep
ditch.  These places were called towns,[1] from "tun," meaning a fence
or hedge.  The chief fortified towns were called "burghs" or
boroughs.  Later on, this class of towns generally had a corporate
form of government, and eventually they sent representatives to
Parliament (S213).

[1] One or more houses might constitute a town.  A single farmhouse is
still so called in Scotland.

104. The Hall.

The buildings in these towns were of wood.  Those of the lords or
chief men were called "halls," from the fact that they consisted
mainly of a hall, or large room, used as a sitting, eating, and often
as a sleeping room,--a bundle of straw or some skins thrown on the
floor serving for beds.  There were no chimneys, but a hole in the
roof let out the smoke.  If the owner was rich, the walls would be
decorated with bright-colored tapestry, and with suits of armor and
shields hanging from pegs.

105. Life in the Hall.

Here in the evening the master supped on a raised platform at one end
of the "hall," while his followers ate at a lower table.

The Saxons were hard drinkers as well as hard fighters.  After the
meal, while horns of ale and mead were circulating, the minstrels,
taking their harps, would sing songs of battle and ballads of wild
adventure.

Outside the "hall" were the "bowers," or chambers for the master and
his family, and, perhaps, an upper chamber for a guest, called later
by the Normans a sollar, or sunny room.

If a stranger approached a town, he was obliged to blow a horn;
otherwise he might be slain as an outlaw.

Here in the midst of rude plenty the Saxons, or Early English, lived a
life of sturdy independence.  They were rough, strong, outspoken, and
fearless.  Theirs was not the nimble brain, for that was to come with
another people (the Normans), though a people originally of the same
race.  The mission of the Saxons was to lay the foundation; or, in
other words, to furnish the muscle, grit, and endurance, without which
the nimble brain is of little permanent value.

106. Guilds.

The inhabitants of the towns and cities had various associations
called guilds (from gild, a payment or contribution).  The object of
these was mutual assistance.  The most important were the Frith guilds
or Peace guilds and the Merchant guilds.  The former constituted a
voluntary police force to preserve order and bring thieves to
punishment.

Each member contributed a small sum to form a common fund which was
useed to make good any losses incurred by robbery or fire.  The
association held itself responsible for the good behavior of its
members, and kept a sharp eye on strangers and stragglers, who had to
give an account of themselves or leave the country.

The Merchant guilds were organized, apparantly at a late period, to
protect and extend trade.  After the Norman Conquest they came to be
very wealthy and influential.  In addition to the above, there were
social and religious guilds, which made provision for feasts, for
maintenance of religious services, and for the relief of the poor and
the sick.


FIFTH PERIOD[1]

"In other countries the struggle has been to gain liberty; in England,
to preserve it." -- Alison

THE NORMAN CONQUEST

THE KING AGAINST THE BARONS

Building the Norman Superstructure -- The Age of Feudalism

Norman Sovereigns

William I, 1066-1087
William II, 1087-1100
Henry I, 1100-1135
Stephen (House of Blois), 1135-1154

[1] Reference Books on this Period will be found in the Classified
List of Books in the Appendix.  The pronunciation will be found in the
Index.  The Leading Dates stand unenclosed; all others are in
parentheses.

107. William marches on London; he grants a Charter to the City.

Soon after the great and decisive battle of Hastings (S74), WIlliam
the Conqueror advanced on London and set fire to the Southwark
suburbs.  The Londoners, terrified by the flames, and later cut off
from help from the north by the Conqueror's besieging army, opened
their gates and surrendered without striking a blow.  In return,
William, shortly after his coronation, granted the city a charter, by
which he guaranteed to the inhabitants the liberties which they had
enjoyed under Edward the Confessor (S65).

That document may still be seen among the records in the Guildhall, in
London.[2]  It is a narrow strip of parchment not the length of a
man's hand.  It contains a few lines in English, to which William's
royal seal was appended.  It has indeed been said on high authority
that the King also signed the charter with a cross; but no trace of it
appears on the parchment.  The truth seems to be that he who wielded
the sword with such terrible efficiency disdained handling the pen
(S154).

[2] See Constitutional Documents in the Appendix, p. xxxiii.

108. The Coronation; William returns to Normandy.

On the following Christmas Day (1066) William was anointed and crowned
in Westminster Abbey.  His accession to the throne marked the union of
England and Normandy (S191).  (See map facing p. 54).  He assumed the
title of "King of the English," which had been used by Edward the
Confessor and by Harold.  The title "King of England" did not fully
and finally come into use until John's accession, more than a hundred
and thirty years later.  William did not remain in London, but made
Winchester, in the south of England, his capital.  In the spring
(1067) he sailed for Normandy, where he had left his queen, Matilda,
to govern in his absence.

While on the Continent he intrusted England to the hands of two
regents, one his half-brother Odo, Bishop of Bayeux, the other his
friend William Fitz-Osbern; the former he had made Earl of Kent, the
latter Earl of Hereford.

During the next three years there were outbreaks and uprisings in the
lowlands of Cambridgeshire and the moors of Yorkshire, besides
incursions of both Danes and Scots.

109. William quells Rebellion in the North (1068).

The oppresive rule of the regents (S108) soon caused a rebellion, and
in December William returned to England to put it down.  He found the
task a hard one.  The King of Denmark made it all the harder by
sending over a powerful fleet to held the English.  William bribed the
Danish commanders and they "sailed away without striking a blow."
Then, little by little, he brought the land to obedience.  By forced
marches in midwinter, by roads cast up through bogs, and by sudden
night attacks William accomplished the end he sought.

But (1068) news came of a fresh revolt in the north, accompanied by
another invasion of foreign barbarians.  Then William, roused by
terrible anger, swore by the "splendor of God" that he would lay waste
the land.

He made good his oath.  For a hundred miles beyond the river Humber in
Yorkshire he ravaged the country, burning villages, destroying houses,
crops, and cattle, and reduced the wretched people to such destitution
that many sold themselves for slaves to escape starvation.  Having
finished his work in the north, he turned toward the ancient Roman
city of Chester, in the west, and captured it.  (See map facing
p. 38.)

110. Hereward (1091).

Every part of the land was now in William's power except an island in
the swamps of Ely, in the east of England.  There the Englishman
Hereward, with his resolute little band of fellow countrymen,
continued to defy the power of the Conqueror.  (See map facing p. 38.)
"Had there been three more men like him in the island," said one of
William's own soldiers, "the Normans would never have entered it."
But as there were not three more, the Conquest was at length
completed.

111. Necessity of William's Severity.

The work of death had been fearful.  But it was better that England
should suffer from these pitiless measures than that it should sink
into anarchy, or into subjection to hordes of Northmen (S53).  For
those fierce barbarians destroyed not because they desired to build
something better, but because they hated civilization and all its
works.

Whatever William's faults may have been, his great object was to build
up a government better than any England had yet seen.  Hence his
severity, hence his castles and forts, by which he made sure of
retaining his hold upon whatever he had gained.

112. William builds the Tower of London.

We have seen that William gave London a charter (S107); but
overlooking the place in which the charter was kept, he built the
Tower of London to hold the turbulent city in wholesome restraint.
That tower, as fortress, palace, and prison, stands as the dark
background of most events in English history.

It was the forerunner of a multitude of Norman castles.  They rose on
the banks of every river, and on the summit of every rocky height,
from the west hill of Hastings to the peak of Derbyshire, and from the
banks of the Thames to those of the Tweed.  Side by side with these
strongholds there also rose a great number of monasteries, churches,
and cathedrals.

113. William confiscates the Land; Classes of Society.

Hand in hand with the progress of conquest, the confiscation of land
went on.  William had seized the lands belonging to Harold (S67) and
those of the chief men associated with him, and had given them to his
own followers in England.  In this way, all the greatest estates and
the most important offices passed into the hands of the Normans.  The
King made these royal grants on the express condition that those who
received them should furnish him a certain number of armed men
whenever he should demand them.

Two great classes of society now existed in England.  First, the
leading Norman conquerors, who, as chief tenants or landholders under
the Crown, and as peers of the realm, had the title of barons.  They
numbered about fifteen hundred, and, as we have just seen, they were
all pledged to draw their swordss in behalf of the King.  Secondly,
the English who had been reduced to a subordinate state; most of these
now held their land as grants from the Norman barons on condition of
some kind of service.  A majority of these men were no longer entirely
free, while some were actual slaves.  The greater part of this servile
class were villeins or farm laborers (S150).  They were bound to the
soil, and could be sold with it, but not, like the slaves, separately
from it.  They could be compelled to perform any menial labor, but
usually held their plots of land and humble cottages on condition of
plowing a certain number of acres or doing a certain number of days'
work in each year.  In time the villeins generally obtained the
privilege of paying a fixed money rent, in place of labor, and their
condition gradually improved.

114. How William distributed his Gifts.

Yet it is noticeable that when William granted estates to his Norman
followers (S113), he was careful not to give any baron too much land
in any one county or shire.  His experience in Normandy had taught him
that it was better to divide than to concentrate the power of the
great nobles, who were often only too ready to plot to get the crown
for themselves.

Thus William developed and extended the feudal system of land
tenure,[1] already in existence in outline among the Saxons (S86),
until it covered every part of the realm.  He, however, kept this
system strictly subordinate to himself, and we shall see that before
the close of his reign he held a great meeting by which he got
absolute control over it (S121).

[1] See, too, the Constitutional Summary in the Appendix, p. v, S6.

115. The Three Counties Palatine.

The only exceptions which William made in these carefully restricted
grants were the three Counties Palatine,[1] which he created.  They
bordered on Wales in the west, Scotland in the north, and the English
Channel in the southeast.  To the earls of these counties of Chester,
Durham, and Kent, which were especially liable to attack from Wales,
Scotland, or France, William thought it expedient to give almost royal
power, which descended in their families, thus making the title
hereditary.  (See map facing p. 436.)

[1] Palatine (from palatium, palace): having rights equal with the
King in his palace.  The county of Chester is now Cheshire.  Durham
bordered on Northumberland, then opposed to William.  Shropshire was
practically a fourth County Palatine until Henry I.  Later, Lancaster
was added to the list.

116. How William stopped Assassination; the Law of Englishry; Gregory
VII.

The hard rule of the Norman nobles caused many secret assassinations.
To put a stop to these crimes, William enacted the Law of Englishry.
It compelled the people of the district where a murder was perpetrated
to pay a heavy fine for every Norman so slain; for it was assumed that
every man found murdered was a Norman, unless proof could be brought
to the contrary.

While these events were taking place in England, Hildebrand, the
archdeacon who had urged the Pope to favor William's expedition
against England (S68), ascended the papal throne, under the title of
Gregory VII.  He was the ablest, the most ambitious, and, in some
respects, he most farsighted man who had been elected supreme head of
the Catholic Church.

117. State of Europe; Gregory's Scheme of Reform.

Europe was at that time in a condition little better than anarchy.  A
perpetual quarrel was going on between the feudal barons.  The Church,
too, as we have seen (SS53, 60), had temporarily lost much of its
power for good.  Pope Gregory conceived a scheme of reform which he
intended should be both wide and deep.

Like Dunstan (S60), he determined to correct the abuses which had
crept into the monasteries.  He resolved to have a priesthood who
should devote themselves body and soul to the interests of the Church;
he resolved to bring all society into submission to that priesthood;
finally, he resolved to make the priesthood itself acknowledge him as
its sole master.  His purpose in this gigantic scheme was a noble one;
it was to establish the unity and peace of Europe.

118. The Pope and the Conqueror, 1076.

Pope Gregory looked to William for help in this matter.  The
Conqueror, who was a zealous Catholic, was ready to give that help,
but with limitations.  He pledged himself to aid in reforming the
English Church, which had enjoyed "an insular and barbaric
independence."  He undertook to remove inefficient men from its high
places.  The King also agreed to do something that had never been done
before in England, namely, to establish separate courts (S151) for the
trial of Church cases (SS164, 165).  Finally, he agreed to pay the
customary yearly tax to Rome, called "Peter's pence."

But Pope Gregory was not satisfied.  He demanded that the Conqueror
should do him homage for his crown, and should swear "to become his
man" (S86).  This William respectfully, but decidedly, refused to do,
saying that as no "King of the English before him had ever become the
Pope's man, so neither would he."  In taking this action the King
declared himself to be an obedient and affectionate son of the "Holy
Catholic Church."  But at the same time he laid down these three rules
to show that he would not tolerate any interference with his power as
an independent English sovereign:

1. That no Pope should be acknowledged in England, or letters from the
Pope received there, without his sanction.
2. That no national synod or meeting of churchmen (S48) should enact
any decrees binding the English Church, without his confirmation.
3. That no baron or officer of his should be expelled from the Church
without his permission.[1]

[1] Taswell-Langmead's "English Constitutional History," p. 59;
Professor W. Stubb's "Constitutional History of England," I, 286.

It is noticeable that Pope Gregory never seems to have censured
William for the position he took,--perhaps because one brave man
always understands and respects another.

Yet a little later than this (1077), when Henry IV, Emperor of
Germany, refused to comply with certain demand made by Gregory VII,
the German monarch had to submit.  More than this, he was compelled to
stand barefooted in the snow before the Pope's palace, waiting three
days for permission to enter and beg forgiveness.

119. William a Stern but Just Ruler; the Jews; the New Forest.

Considering his love of power and strength of will, the reign of
William was conspicuous for its justice.  He was harsh, but generally
fair.  He protected the Jewish traders who came over to England in his
reign, for he saw that their commercial enterprise and their financial
skill would be of immense value in developing the country.  Then too,
if the royal treasury should happen to run dry, he thought it might be
convenient to coax or compel the Jews to lend him a round sum.

On the other had, the King seized a tract of over sixty thousand acres
in Hampshire for a hunting ground, which he named the New Forest.[1]
It was said that William destroyed many churches and estates in order
to form this forest, but these accounts appear to have been greatly
exaggerated.  The real grievance was not so much the appropriation of
the land, which was sterile and of little value, but it was the
enactment of the savage Forest Laws.  These ordinances made he life of
a stag of more value than that of a man, and decreed that anyone found
hunting the royal deer should have both eyes torn out (S205).

[1] Forest: As here used, this does not mean a region covered with
woods, but simply a section of country, partially wooded and suitable
for game, set apart as a royal park or hunting ground.  As William
made his residence at Winchester, in Hampshire, in the south of
England (see map facing p. 38), he naturally took land in that
vicinity for the chase.

120. The Great Survey; Domesday Book, 1086.

Not quite twenty years after his coronation William ordered a survey
and valuation to be made of the whole realm outside of London.  The
only exceptions were certain border counties on the north were war had
left little to record save heaps of ruins and ridges of grass-grown
graves (S109).

The returns of that survey were known as Domesday or Doomsday Book.
The English people said this name was given to it, because, like the
Day of Doom, it spared no one.  It recorded every piece of property
and every particular concerning it.  As the "Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"
(S46) indignantly declared, "not a rood of land, not a peasant's hut,
not an ox, cow, pig, or even a hive of bees escaped."

While the report showed the wealth of the country, it also showed thje
suffering it had passed through in the revolts against William.  Many
towns had fallen into decay.  Some were nearly depopulated.  IN Edward
the Confessor's reign (S65) York had 1607 houses; at the date of the
survey it had but 967, while Oxford, which had had 721 houses, had
then only 243.

The census and assessment proved of the highest importance to William
and his successors.  The people indeed said bitterly that the King
kept to book constantly by him, in order "that he might be able to see
at any time of how much more wool the English flock would bear
fleecing."  The object of the work, however, was not to extort money,
but to present a full and exact report of the financial and military
resources of the kingdom which might be directly available for revenue
and defense.

121. The Great Meeting; the Oath of Allegiance to William, 1086.

In the midsummer following the completion of Domesday Book, William
summoned all the barons and chief landholders of the realm, with their
principal vassals or tenants, to meet him on Salisbury Plain,
Wiltshire.[1]  It is said that the entire assemblage numbered sixty
thousand.  There was a logical connection between that summons and the
great survey (S120).  Each man's possesions and each man's
responsibility were now known.  Thus Domesday Book prepared the way
for the action that was to be taken there.

[1] See map of England facing p. 436.  Wiltshire is in the south of
England.  Alfred had established the seat of government at Winchester
in Hampshire, but under Edward the Confessor and Harold it was
transferred to Westminster (London); the honor was again restored to
Winchester by William, who made it his principal residence.  This was
perhaps the reason why he chose Salisbury Plain (the nearest open
region) for the great meeting.  It was held where the modern city of
Salisbury stands.

The place chosen was historic ground.  On that field William had once
reviewed his victorious troops.  Toward the north of the widespread
plain rose the rugged columns of Stonehenge (S3), surrounded by the
burial mounds of prehistoric peoples.  On the south rose the fortified
hill of Old Sarum, scarred by British and by Roman entrenchments.
William probably made his headquarters in the Norman castle then
standing on that hill.  On the plain below were the encampments of all
the chief landholders of England.

122. The Oath of Allegiance.

There William the Conqueror finished his work.  There not only every
baron, but every baron's free vassal or tenant, from Cornwall to the
Scottish borders, bowed before the King and swore to be "his man"
(S86).  By that act England was made one.  By it, it was settled that
every landholder in the realm, of whatever condition, was bound first
of all to fight in behalf of the Crown, even if in so doing he had to
fight against his own lord.[1]  The barons broke this oath in the next
reign (S130), but the moral obligation to keep it still remained
binding.

[1] See SS86, 150; see also the Constitutional Summary in the
Appendix, p. v, S6.  Even if the men should disregard this oath of
allegiance, they could not help feeling that the principle it
represented had been acknowledged by them.

123. What William had done.

A score of years before, William had landed, seeking a throne to which
no law had given him any claim whatever (S67).[2]  But Nature had
elected him to it when she endowed him with power to take, power to
use, and power to hold.  Under Harold, England was a kingdom divided
against itself (S71).  It was fortunate for the country that William
came; for out of chaos, or affairs fast drifting to chaos, his strong
hand, clear brain, and resolute purpose brought order, beauty, safety,
and stability.  We may say, therefore, with an eminent Fernch
historian, that "England owes her liberties to her having been
conquered by the Normans."[3]

[2] "William, in short, had no king of right to the crown, whether by
birth, bequest, or election." (E. A. Freeman's "Short History of the
Norman Conquest," p. 65.)
[3] Guizot; see also note 1 on page 64.

124. William's Death (1087).

In less than a year from that time, William went to Normandy to quell
an invasion led by his eldest son, Robert.  As he rode down a steep
street in Mantes, his horse stumbled and he received a fatal injury.
He was carried to the priory of St. Gervase, just outside the city of
Rouen.

Early in the morning he was awakened by the great cathedral bell.  "It
is an hour of praise," his attendant said to him, "when the priests
give thanks for the new day."  William lifted up his hands in prayer
and expired.

125. His Burial (1087).

His remains were taken for interment to St. Stephen's church, which he
had built in the city of Caen, Normandy.  As they were preparing to
let down the body into the grave, a man suddenly stepped forward and
forbade the burial.  William, he said, had taken the land, on which
the church stood, from his father by violence.  He demanded payment.
The corpse was left on the bier, and inquiry instituted, and not until
the debt was discharged was the body lowered to its last resting
place.

"Thus," says the old chronicle, "he who had been a powerful king, and
the lord of so many territories, possessed not then of all his lands
more than seven feet of earth," and not even that unttil the cash was
paid for it.  But William's bones were not to rest when finally laid
in the grave, for less than five centuries later (1532) the French
Protestants dug them up and scattered them.

126. Summary (1066-1087).

The results of the Norman Conquest may be thus summed up:

1. The Conquest was not the subjugation of the English by a different
race, but rather a victory won for their advantage by a branch of
their own race.[1]
2. It found England a divided country (S71); it made it a united
kingdom.  It also united England and Normandy (SS108, 191), and
brought the new English kingdom into closer contact with the higher
civilization of the Continent.  This introduced fresh intellectual
stimulus, and gave to the Anglo-Saxon a more progressive spirit.
3. It modified the English language by the influence of the
Norman-French element, thus giving it greater flexibility, refinement,
and elegance of expression.
4. It substituted for the fragile and decaying structures of wood
generally built by the Saxons, Norman castles, abbeys, and cathedrals
of stone.
5. It hastened influences, which were already at work, for the
consolidation of the nation.  It developed and completed the feudal
form of land tenure, but it made that tenure strictly subordinate to
the Crown, and so freed it, in great measure, from the evils of
Continental feudalism (SS86, 150).
6. It reorganized the English Church and defined the relation of the
Crown to that Church and to the Pope (S118).
7. It abolished the four great earldoms (S64), which had been a
constant source of weakness, danger, and division; it put an end to
the Danish invasions; it brought the whole of England under a strong
monarchical government, to which not only all the great nobles, but
also their vassals or tenants, were compelled to swear allegiance
(SS121, 122).
8. It made no radical changes in the English laws, but enforced
impartial obedience to them among all classes.[2]

[1] It has already been shown that Norman, Saxon, and Dane were
originally branches of the Teutonic or German race. (SS36, 62).
[2] Professor E. A. Freeman, who is the highest authority on this
subject (see especially his "Short History of the Norman Conquest"),
holds the view that the coming of William was, on the whole, the
greatest advantage to England.  Nearly all leading historians agree
with him; for a different view consult Professor C. Oman's "England
before the Norman Conquest," pp. 648-651.

William Rufus[3]--1087-1100

[3] William Rufus: William the Red, a nickname probably derived from
his red face.

127. William the Conqueror's Bequest (1087).

William the Conqueror left three sons,--Robert, William Rufus, and
Henry.  He also left a daughter, Adela, who married a powerful French
nobleman, Stephen, Count of Blois.  On his deathbed (S124) William
bequeathed Normandy to Robert.  He expressed a wish that William Rufus
should become ruler over England, while to Henry he left five thousand
pounds of silver, with the prediction that he would ultimately be the
greatest of them all.

Before his eyes were closed, the two sons, who were with him, hurried
away,--William Rufus to seize the realm of England, Henry to get
possession of his treasure.  Robert was not present.  His recent
rebellion (S124) would alone have been sufficient reason for alloting
to him the lesser portion; but even had he deserved the scepter,
William knew it required a firmer hand than his to hold it.

128. Condition of England.

France was simple an aggregation of independent and mutually hostile
dukedoms.  The ambition of the Norman leaders threatened to bring
England into the same condition.  During the twenty-one years of
William the Conqueror's reign, the Norman barons on the Continent had
