
"He is not dead," he said, after a moment. "Ralph, saddle a horse,
and ride with all speed to Derby for a doctor."

"Ay," Sir William said, "and tell the chief magistrate that he is
wanted here, with one of his constables, for that murder has been
done."

"You will do nothing of the sort," Colonel Holliday said.

"Sir William Brownlow, I make every excuse for you in your grief,
but even from you I will permit no such word to be used. Your son
has been wounded in fair fight, and whether he dies or not, alters
the circumstances no whit. My grandson found him engaged in
offering a gross insult to a young lady in the garden of my house.
He did what I should have done had I so found him--he knocked him
down. They fought, and your son was worsted. I think, sir, that for
the credit of your house you had best be quiet over the matter.

"Hush, sir," he went on sternly, seeing that the baronet was about
to answer furiously. "I am an old man, but I will put up with
bluster from no man."

Colonel Holliday's repute as a swordsman was well known, and Sir
William Brownlow swallowed his passion in silence. A door was taken
off its hinges, and the insensible young man was carried into the
house. There he was received by Mistress Holliday, who was vehement
in her reproaches against Rupert, and even against Colonel
Holliday, who had, as she said, encouraged him in brawling.

The colonel bent quietly before the storm; and leaving the wounded
man in the care of his daughter-in-law and the attendants, made his
way to the stables, to inquire what had become of Rupert. There he
found that a few minutes before, Rupert, accompanied by Hugh
Parsons, had ridden off at full speed, having placed valises and a
brace of pistols in the holsters on their saddles. The colonel was
glad to hear that Rupert had his humble friend with him, and
doubted not that he had made for London. With a somewhat lightened
heart he went back to the house.

After galloping fast for the first two miles, Rupert drew rein, for
he had now time to think, and was assured that even should Sir
William at once send into Derby for a warrant for his apprehension,
he would be across the borders of the county long before he could
be overtaken.

"Have you any money with you, Hugh?" he asked, suddenly; "for I
have not a penny with me."

"I have only two shillings, Master Rupert. I got that yesterday in
Derby for a nest of young owlets I found in the copse."

Rupert reined up his horse in dismay.

"Two shillings between us, Hugh! And it is 126 miles to London.
What are we to do?"

Hugh thought a moment. "We can't go on with that, sir. Do you take
these two shillings and ride on to the Red Dragon. You will be
outside the county there. I will ride back to father's. It's under
two miles, and I shall be back here in half-an-hour again. He will
give me any money he may have in the house. I may as well fill my
valise too, while I am about it; and he's got a pair of pistols,
too, that he will give me."

It was clearly the best course to take, and Rupert trotted forward
on his way, while Hugh galloped back at full speed. In a quarter of
an hour the latter drew rein at his father's door.

"Hullo, Hugh, lad," the farmer, a hearty man of some fifty years of age,
said, as he came to the door, "be'est thou? What art doing on the
squire's horse? He looks as if thou had ridden him unmercifully, surely?"

In a few words Hugh related what had taken place, and told him of
his own offer to go to the wars with Rupert.

"That's right, lad; that's right and proper. It's according to the
nature of things that when a Holliday rides to the war a Parsons
should ride behind him. It's always been so, and will always be so,
I hope. Mother will grieve, no doubt; but she won't want to fly in
the face of nature.

"Here, mother, come out. Master Rupert's killed Sir William
Brownlow's son, and is off to the wars, and so our Hugh's,
natural-like, going with him."

Mrs. Parsons after her first ejaculation of surprise burst into
tears, but, as her husband had predicted, offered no objection
whatever to what seemed to her, as to him, a matter of plain duty
on the part of her son. Hugh now explained the reason of his
return.

"Ay, ay, lad; thou shalt have the money. I've got fifty pounds for
next quarter's rent. Colonel Holliday will be glad enough for some
of it to go to his grandson. I'll gin ye half o't, Hugh, and take
my chance of the colonel agreeing to it. I'll give'e as much more
out of my old stocking upstairs. Put it carefully by, lad. Money is
as useful in war as at other times, and pay ain't always regular;
maybe the time may come when the young master may be short of
money, and it may come in useful. Now put on thy riding coat; and
mother will put thy best clothes in a valise.

"Bustle up, mother, there bain't no time to lose."

Thus addressed, Mrs. Parsons dried her tears and hurried away.
Hugh, hitching the bridle over a hook, made his way to his room to
change his clothes. When he came down, all was ready.

"Thy clothes are in the valise, Hugh. I have put on the holsters,
and the pistols are in them. They are loaded, boy. In the bottom of
one are the master's twenty-five pounds. Thy own money is in the
valise. Here, boy, is my father's sword; it hasn't been used since
Naseby, but it's a good blade. Thou art a deft hand at quarterstaff
and singlestick, though, and I doubt not that thy hands can guard
thy head. I need not say, Hugh Parsons, you will, if need be, die
for thy master, for I know thou will do it, lad. Now kiss thy
mother, boy; and God speed you."

A long embrace with his father and mother, and then Hugh, blinded
by his tears, mounted his horse, and rode off in the track of
Rupert.

After an hour's sharp riding he overtook him, at a wayside inn,
just across the boundary between Derby and Leicestershire.

"Is it all right, Hugh?" he asked, as Hugh drew up at the door.

"All right, Master Rupert. Father has sent thee twenty-five pounds
out of the rent that will be due at Lady day; and he doubts not
that the colonel will approve of what he has done. H ow long have
you been here?"

"Only some five minutes, Hugh. We had best let the horses feed, and
then ride quietly into Leicester, it's only fifteen miles away. I
see you've got a sword."

"A sword and pistols, Master Rupert; and as you have the same,
methinks any highwayman chaps we might meet would think twice ere
they venture to cry 'Stand and deliver.'"

"You heard no word of whether James Brownlow was alive or dead,
Hugh? I should be very glad to hear that he is not killed."

"No word of the matter had come to the farm when I came away," Hugh
said; "but I should not worry about it one way or the other, Master
Rupert. You'll kill lots more when you get to the wars; and the
country won't grieve over James Brownlow. Young as he was, he was a
bad one; I've heard more than one dark story whispered of him.
Folks say he took after his father, who was as wild and as bad as
any man in Derbyshire when he was young."



Chapter 4: The Sedan Chair.

"This is our last stage, Hugh, and tonight we shall be in London,"
Rupert said, as they rode out of Watford. "Methinks we shall find
it very strange in that great city. I am glad I thought of asking
our host the name of an inn at which to put up. The Bell in
Bishopsgate Street, he said. It will seem less strange asking the
way there than it would be to be wandering about gazing for a place
at which to alight."

"Ay, truly, Master Rupert; and I've heard say those London folk are
main fond of making game of strangers."

"So I have heard, Hugh; any reasonable jest we had best put up with
with good temper. If they push it too far, we shall be able, I
doubt not, to hold our own. The first thing to do will be to get
clothes of the cut in vogue, for I have come away just as I stood;
and I fear that even your clothes will have a marvellously country
air about them in the eyes of the city folk.

"There is London," he said, as they passed over the crest of
Hampstead Hill. "That great round dome that stands up so high must
be Saint Paul's; and look how many other church towers and spires
there are. And there, away to the right, those must be the towers
of Westminster."

"It is a big place, surely, Master Rupert. How many people do you
think live there?"

"I believe there are near 300,000 souls there, Hugh. It seems
wonderful, does it not?"

"It's too big to think of, Master Rupert," Hugh said, and they
continued their journey southward.

They entered the city at Aldersgate, but they had ridden some
distance through houses before they arrived at the boundary, for
the city was already spreading beyond its ancient limits. Once
inside the walls, the lads were astonished at the bustle and noise.

Hugh inquired the way to Bishopsgate Street of a respectable
citizen, who directed them to follow the road until they came to a
broad turning to their left. This would be Chepeside, and they were
to follow this until they came to the Exchange, a large building
straight in front of them. Passing this, they would find themselves
in Bishopsgate Street.

If Aldersgate Street had surprised them, much more were they
astonished at the din and turmoil of Chepeside, and Hugh, having
twice narrowly escaped riding over a citizen, and being soundly
rated for a country gawk, Rupert turned to him.

"Look at your horse's head, Hugh, and pay no attention to aught
else. When we have reached our destination, we shall have plenty of
time to look at all these wonders."

The advice was good, and without mischance they reached the Bell in
Bishopsgate Street, and rode into the yard. The host at once came
out, and after a momentary look of surprise at the youth of the new
arrivals, he asked Rupert courteously if he needed a room.

"Two rooms if it please you," Rupert said, "and together."

The host called a hostler, who at once took charge of the horses,
and led them to the stable, the lads first removing the valises and
holsters, which a servant carried up to their rooms.

"We would have supper," Rupert said; "and while that is preparing
we would, if it is not too late, order some clothes more in the
mode than these. Can you direct us to a tailor?"

"You cannot do better," the landlord said, "than visit my
neighbour, Master John Haliford. His shop is just opposite, and he
makes for many of our best city folk, and for more than one of the
gentry of the Court."

Rupert thanked him, and they crossed the street to the shop
indicated.

The landlord looked after them with a puzzled air.

"It is not often that Joe Miles cannot guess the quality and errand
of his guests, but this time he is floored. Has that young spark
run away from home? I hardly think so, for he speaks gravely, and
without haste; lads who have run away may generally be known by
their speaking in a hurry, and as if anxious. They are both well
mounted; the younger is clearly of the higher estate, although but
meanly dressed; nor does the other seem like his lackey. What are
they talking about outside neighbour Haliford's shop, I wonder? I
would give a silver penny to know. I will walk over presently, and
smoke a pipe with him, and hear what he thinks of them."

The conversation which the host of the Bell had wished he could
overhear was as follows:

Hugh began it.

"Look, Master Rupert, before we go into the shop, let us talk over
what you are going to order."

"I am going to order a walking suit, Hugh, and a court suit for
myself, and a suit for you."

"Yes, but what sort of a suit, Master Rupert?"

"I should say a walking suit, Hugh, such as would become a modest
citizen."

"That's just it, Master Rupert. So far you have treated me as a
friend; but now, sir, it must be different, for to do so any longer
would not be seemly. You are going to be an officer. I am going to
follow you as a trooper; but till we go to the war I must be
dressed as your retainer. Not a lackey, perhaps, but a sort of
confidential retainer. That will be best, Master Rupert, in every
way."

Rupert was silent for a moment.

"Well, Hugh, perhaps that would be best; but you must remember that
whatever we are before others, we are always friends when we are
alone."

"Very well," Hugh said, "that is understood; but you know that
alone or before others, I shall always be your faithful servant."

"What can I make you, sir?" the tailor asked, as the lads entered
his shop.

Master Haliford was a small man; neat in his dress; a little fussy
in manner. He was very upright, and seemed to look under rather
than through the pair of horn spectacles which he wore. His look
changed from affability to doubt as he took a nearer look at his
intending customers.

"I need a suit such as a gentleman might wear at court," Rupert
said, quietly, "and a walking or ordinary suit for myself; and a
suit such as would be worn by a trusted retainer for my friend
here."

The tailor put his head on one side, and rubbed his chin
thoughtfully.

"Have I had the honour of being recommended to you by the
honourable gentleman your father?" he asked.

"No, indeed," Rupert said. "It was mine host at the Bell, who
advised me that I could not do better than come to your shop."

"Ah, you are known to him, beyond doubt," John Haliford said,
brightening.

"No, indeed," Rupert answered. "He was a stranger to me to within
five minutes back."

"You must excuse my caution, young sir," John Haliford said, after
another minute's reflection; "but it is the custom of us London
tradesmen with those gentlemen who may honour us with their custom,
and whom we have not the honour of knowing, to require payment, or
at least a portion of payment, at the time of giving the order, and
the rest at the time of delivery of the goods. In your case, sir, I
am sure, an unnecessary piece of caution, but a rule from which I
never venture to go."

"That is only fair and right," Rupert said. "I will pay half now,
and the other half when the garments are completed; or if it please
you, will pay the whole in advance."

"By no means, by no means," the tailor said with alacrity; "one
third in advance is my rule, sir. And now, sir, what colour and
material do you affect?"

"As sober both in hue and in material as may be," Rupert said, "and
yet sufficiently in the fashion for me to wear in calling upon a
nobleman of the court."

"Pardon me," the tailor said, "but perhaps you would condescend to
take me into your confidence. There are noblemen, and noblemen. A
tory lord, for instance, is generally a little richer in his colour
than a whig nobleman, for these affect a certain sobriety of air.
With some again, a certain military cut is permitted, while with
others this would be altogether out of place."

"I am going to the Earl of Marlborough," Rupert said briefly.

"Dear me, dear me! Indeed now!" the little tailor said with an
instant and great accession of deference, for the Earl of
Marlborough was the greatest man in the realm. "Had your honour
mentioned that at first, I should not have ventured to hint at the
need for previous payment."

"What!" Rupert said, with a smile. "You would have broken your
fixed rule! Surely not, Master Haliford."

The tailor looked sharply at his young customer. Whoever he might
be, he was clearly no fool; and without more ado he brought forward
his patterns and bent himself to the work in hand.

Having chosen the colours and stuffs for the suits of clothes, the
lads returned to the Bell, where a supper of cold chicken and the
remains of a fine sirloin awaited them, with two tankards of
home-brewed ale. The next morning, before sallying out to see the
town, Rupert wrote to his grandfather, asking his pardon for
running away, expressing his intention of applying to the Earl of
Marlborough for a cornetcy of horse, and giving his address at the
Bell; asking him also to make his humble excuse to his lady mother,
and to assure her of his devotion and respect, although
circumstances had caused his apparent disobedience to her wishes.

Although there was a much greater amount of filial respect and
obedience expressed in those days than now, human nature has
differed but slightly in different ages of the world; and it is
probable that sons went their own way quite as much as they do now,
when there is very little talk either of obedience or respect.
Indeed, the implicit obedience, and almost servile respect, which
our forefathers expected from their sons, could not but in a great
number of cases drive the sons to be hypocrites as well as
undutiful; and our modern system of making our boys companions and
friends, of taking an interest in all they do, and in teaching them
to regard us as their natural advisers, has produced a generation
of boys less outwardly respectful, no doubt, but as dutiful, and
far more frank and truthful than those of the bygone times.

Rupert, finding that few of the citizens wore swords, and feeling
that in his present attire he would attract attention by so doing,
left his sword at the inn, and bought for Hugh and himself a couple
of stout sticks--Hugh's a cudgel which would be useful in a hand
well accustomed to singlestick, his own a cane of a wood such as he
had never before seen--light, strong, and stiff. He chose it
because it was well balanced in the hand. Then they sallied out
into Cornhill, past the Exchange, erected by the worshipful citizen
Sir Thomas Gresham, and then into Chepeside, where they were
astonished at the wealth and variety of the wares displayed in the
shops. Gazing into the windows, they frequently got into the way,
and were saluted many times with the query, "Where are you going,
stupids?" a question which Hugh was largely inclined to resent, and
would have done so had not Rupert told him that evidently they did
get into the way of the hurrying citizens, and that it was more
wise to put up with rudeness than to embark in a series of
quarrels, in which, moreover, as strangers they were likely to get
the worst of the dispute. Saint Paul's Cathedral, then but newly
finished, astonished them vastly with its size and magnificence,
and they returned to the midday dinner at the Bell delighted with
all that they had seen.

Asking the landlord how he would recommend them to pass the
afternoon, he said that they could do no better than take a boat at
London Bridge, and be rowed up to the village of Chelsea, where
many of the nobility did dwell, and then coming back to Westminster
might get out there, see the Abbey and the great Hall, and then
walk back along the Strand.

The lads followed the advice, and were soon delighted and surprised
with the great river, then pure and limpid, and covered with boats
proceeding rapidly in all directions, for it was at that time the
great highway of London. Tide was flowing and the river nearly
full, and having given their waterman the intimation that time did
not press, he rowed them very gently along in the centre of the
