'Spare to curse me, father, who am accursed by my own conscience. Turn
your horses rather and ride for Yarmouth, for there his ship lies and
thither he has gone with two hours' start. Perhaps you may still trap
him before he sets sail.'

Without another word my father and brother wheeled their horses round
and departed at full gallop into the gloom of the gathering night.

They rode so fiercely that, their horses being good, they came to the
gates of Yarmouth in little more than an hour and a half, and that is
fast riding. But the bird was flown. They tracked him to the quay and
found that he had shipped a while before in a boat which was in waiting
for him, and passed to his vessel that lay in the Roads at anchor but
with the most of her canvas set. Instantly she sailed, and now was lost
in the night. Then my father caused notice to be given that he would pay
reward of two hundred pieces in gold to any ship that should capture the
Spaniard, and two started on the quest, but they did not find her that
before morning was far on her way across the sea.

So soon as they had galloped away I called together the grooms and other
serving men and told them what had chanced. Then we went with lanterns,
for by now it was dark, and came to the thick brushwood where lay the
body of my mother. I drew near the first, for the men were afraid, and
so indeed was I, though why I should fear her lying dead who living had
loved me tenderly, I do not know. Yet I know this, that when I came to
the spot and saw two eyes glowering at me and heard the crash of bushes
as something broke them, I could almost have fallen with fear, although
I knew well that it was but a fox or wandering hound haunting the place
of death.

Still I went on, calling the others to follow, and the end of it was
that we laid my mother's body upon a door which had been lifted from
its hinges, and bore her home for the last time. And to me that path is
still a haunted place. It is seventy years and more since my mother died
by the hand of Juan de Garcia her cousin, yet old as I am and hardened
to such sad scenes, I do not love to walk that path alone at night.

Doubtless it was fancy which plays us strange tricks, still but a year
ago, having gone to set a springe for a woodcock, I chanced to pass by
yonder big oak upon a November eve, and I could have sworn that I saw
it all again. I saw myself a lad, my wounded arm still bound with Lily's
kerchief, climbing slowly down the hill-side, while behind me, groaning
beneath their burden, were the forms of the four serving men. I heard
the murmur of the river and the wind that seventy years ago whispered
in the reeds. I saw the clouded sky flawed here and there with blue,
and the broken light that gleamed on the white burden stretched upon the
door, and the red stain at its breast. Ay, I heard myself talk as I
went forward with the lantern, bidding the men pass to the right of some
steep and rotten ground, and it was strange to me to listen to my own
voice as it had been in youth. Well, well, it was but a dream, yet such
slaves are we to the fears of fancy, that because of the dead, I, who am
almost of their number, do not love to pass that path at night.

At length we came home with our burden, and the women took it weeping
and set about their task with it. And now I must not only fight my own
sorrows but must strive to soothe those of my sister Mary, who as I
feared would go mad with grief and horror. At last she sobbed herself
into a torpor, and I went and questioned the men who sat round the
fire in the kitchen, for none sought their beds that night. From them I
learned that an hour or more before I met the Spaniard, a richly-dressed
stranger had been seen walking along the church-path, and that he had
tied his horse among some gorse and brambles on the top of the hill,
where he stood as though in doubt, till my mother came out, when he
descended and followed her. Also I learned that one of the men at work
in the garden, which is not more than three hundred paces from where
the deed was done, heard cries, but had taken no note of them, thinking
forsooth that it was but the play of some lover from Bungay and his
lass chasing each other through the woods, as to this hour it is their
fashion to do. Truly it seemed to me that day as though this parish of
Ditchingham were the very nursery of fools, of whom I was the first and
biggest, and indeed this same thought has struck me since concerning
other matters.

At length the morning came, and with it my father and brother, who
returned from Yarmouth on hired horses, for their own were spent. In the
afternoon also news followed them that the ships which had put to sea
on the track of the Spaniard had been driven back by bad weather, having
seen nothing of him.

Now I told all the story of my dealings with the murderer of my mother,
keeping nothing back, and I must bear my father's bitter anger because
knowing that my mother was in dread of a Spaniard, I had suffered my
reason to be led astray by my desire to win speech with my love. Nor did
I meet with any comfort from my brother Geoffrey, who was fierce against
me because he learned that I had not pleaded in vain with the maid whom
he desired for himself. But he said nothing of this reason. Also that no
drop might be lacking in my cup, Squire Bozard, who came with many other
neighbours to view the corpse and offer sympathy with my father in his
loss, told him at the same time that he took it ill that I should woo
his daughter against his wish, and that if I continued in this course it
would strain their ancient friendship. Thus I was hit on every side; by
sorrow for my mother whom I had loved tenderly, by longing for my dear
whom I might not see, by self-reproach because I had let the Spaniard
go when I held him fast, and by the anger of my father and my brother.
Indeed those days were so dark and bitter, for I was at the age when
shame and sorrow sting their sharpest, that I wished that I were dead
beside my mother. One comfort reached me indeed, a message from Lily
sent by a servant girl whom she trusted, giving me her dear love and
bidding me to be of good cheer.

At length came the day of burial, and my mother, wrapped in fair white
robes, was laid to her rest in the chancel of the church at Ditchingham,
where my father has long been set beside her, hard by the brass effigies
that mark the burying place of Lily's forefather, his wife, and many
of their children. This funeral was the saddest of sights, for the
bitterness of my father's grief broke from him in sobs and my sister
Mary swooned away in my arms. Indeed there were few dry eyes in all that
church, for my mother, notwithstanding her foreign birth, was much loved
because of her gentle ways and the goodness of her heart. But it came to
an end, and the noble Spanish lady and English wife was left to her long
sleep in the ancient church, where she shall rest on when her tragic
story and her very name are forgotten among men. Indeed this is likely
to be soon, for I am the last of the Wingfields alive in these parts,
though my sister Mary has left descendants of another name to whom my
lands and fortune go except for certain gifts to the poor of Bungay and
of Ditchingham.

When it was over I went back home. My father was sitting in the front
room well nigh beside himself with grief, and by him was my brother.
Presently he began to assail me with bitter words because I had let the
murderer go when God gave him into my hand.

'You forget, father,' sneered Geoffrey, 'Thomas woos a maid, and it was
more to him to hold her in his arms than to keep his mother's murderer
safely. But by this it seems he has killed two birds with one stone, he
has suffered the Spanish devil to escape when he knew that our mother
feared the coming of a Spaniard, and he has made enmity between us and
Squire Bozard, our good neighbour, who strangely enough does not favour
his wooing.'

'It is so,' said my father. 'Thomas, your mother's blood is on your
hands.'

I listened and could bear this goading injustice no longer.

'It is false,' I said, 'I say it even to my father. The man had killed
my mother before I met him riding back to seek his ship at Yarmouth
and having lost his way; how then is her blood upon my hands? As for my
wooing of Lily Bozard, that is my matter, brother, and not yours, though
perhaps you wish that it was yours and not mine. Why, father, did you
not tell me what you feared of this Spaniard? I heard some loose talk
only and gave little thought to it, my mind being full of other things.
And now I will say something. You called down God's curse upon me,
father, till such time as I should find this murderer and finish what I
had begun. So be it! Let God's curse rest upon me till I do find him. I
am young, but I am quick and strong, and so soon as may be I start for
Spain to hunt him there till I shall run him down or know him to be
dead. If you will give me money to help me on my quest, so be it--if not
I go without. I swear before God and by my mother's spirit that I will
neither rest nor stay till with the very sword that slew her, I have
avenged her blood upon her murderer or know him dead, and if I suffer
myself to be led astray from the purpose of this oath by aught that is,
then may a worse end than hers overtake me, may my soul be rejected in
heaven, and my name be shameful for ever upon the earth!'

Thus I swore in my rage and anguish, holding up my hand to heaven that I
called upon to witness the oath.

My father looked at me keenly. 'If that is your mind, son Thomas, you
shall not lack for money. I would go myself, for blood must be wiped out
with blood, but I am too broken in my health; also I am known in Spain
and the Holy Office would claim me there. Go, and my blessing go with
you. It is right that you should go, for it is through your folly that
our enemy has escaped us.'

'Yes, it is right that he should go,' said Geoffrey.

'You say that because you wish to be rid of me, Geoffrey,' I answered
hotly, 'and you would be rid of me because you desire to take my place
at the side of a certain maid. Follow your nature and do as you will,
but if you would outwit an absent man no good shall come to you of it.'

'The girl is to him who can win her,' he said.

'The girl's heart is won already, Geoffrey. You may buy her from her
father but you can never win her heart, and without a heart she will be
but a poor prize.'

'Peace! now is no time for such talk of love and maids,' said my father,
'and listen. This is the tale of the Spanish murderer and your mother.
I have said nothing of it heretofore, but now it must out. When I was a
lad it happened that I also went to Spain because my father willed it. I
went to a monastery at Seville, but I had no liking for monks and their
ways, and I broke out from the monastery. For a year or more I made my
living as I best might, for I feared to return to England as a runaway.
Still I made a living and not a bad one, now in this way and now in
that, but though I am ashamed to say it, mostly by gaming, at which I
had great luck. One night I met this man Juan de Garcia--for in his hate
he gave you his true name when he would have stabbed you--at play. Even
then he had an evil fame, though he was scarcely more than a lad, but he
was handsome in person, set high in birth, and of a pleasing manner. It
chanced that he won of me at the dice, and being in a good humour, he
took me to visit at the house of his aunt, his uncle's widow, a lady of
Seville. This aunt had one child, a daughter, and that daughter was your
mother. Now your mother, Luisa de Garcia, was affianced to her cousin
Juan de Garcia, not with her own will indeed, for the contract had been
signed when she was only eight years old. Still it was binding, more
binding indeed than in this country, being a marriage in all except
in fact. But those women who are thus bound for the most part bear no
wife's love in their hearts, and so it was with your mother. Indeed she
both hated and feared her cousin Juan, though I think that he loved
her more than anything on earth, and by one pretext and another she
contrived to bring him to an agreement that no marriage should be
celebrated till she was full twenty years of age. But the colder she
was to him, the more was he inflamed with desire to win her and also
her possessions, which were not small, for like all Spaniards he was
passionate, and like most gamesters and men of evil life, much in want
of money.

'Now to be brief, from the first moment that your mother and I set eyes
on each other we loved one another, and it was our one desire to meet
as often as might be; and in this we had no great difficulty, for her
mother also feared and hated Juan de Garcia, her nephew by marriage, and
would have seen her daughter clear of him if possible. The end of it was
that I told my love, and a plot was made between us that we should fly
to England. But all this had not escaped the ears of Juan, who had spies
in the household, and was jealous and revengeful as only a Spaniard can
be. First he tried to be rid of me by challenging me to a duel, but we
were parted before we could draw swords. Then he hired bravos to murder
me as I walked the streets at night, but I wore a chain shirt beneath my
doublet and their daggers broke upon it, and in place of being slain I
slew one of them. Twice baffled, de Garcia was not defeated. Fight and
murder had failed, but another and surer means remained. I know not how,
but he had won some clue to the history of my life, and of how I
had broken out from the monastery. It was left to him, therefore, to
denounce me to the Holy Office as a renegade and an infidel, and this he
did one night; it was the night before the day when we should have taken
ship. I was sitting with your mother and her mother in their house at
Seville, when six cowled men entered and seized me without a word. When
I prayed to know their purpose they gave no other answer than to hold
a crucifix before my eyes. Then I knew why I was taken, and the women
ceased clinging to me and fell back sobbing. Secretly and silently I was
hurried away to the dungeons of the Holy Office, but of all that befell
me there I will not stop to tell.

'Twice I was racked, once I was seared with hot irons, thrice I was
flogged with wire whips, and all this while I was fed on food such as we
should scarcely offer to a dog here in England. At length my offence of
having escaped from a monastery and sundry blasphemies, so-called, being
proved against me, I was condemned to death by fire.

'Then at last, when after a long year of torment and of horror, I had
abandoned hope and resigned myself to die, help came. On the eve of the
day upon which I was to be consumed by flame, the chief of my tormentors
entered the dungeon where I lay on straw, and embracing me bade me be
of good cheer, for the church had taken pity on my youth and given me
my freedom. At first I laughed wildly, for I thought that this was but
another torment, and not till I was freed of my fetters, clothed in
decent garments, and set at midnight without the prison gates, would I
believe that so good a thing had befallen me through the hand of God.
I stood weak and wondering outside the gates, not knowing where to fly,
and as I stood a woman glided up to me wrapped in a dark cloak, who
whispered "Come." That woman was your mother. She had learned of my fate
from the boasting of de Garcia and set herself to save me. Thrice her
plans failed, but at length through the help of some cunning agent, gold
won what was denied to justice and to mercy, and my life and liberty
were bought with a very great sum.

'That same night we were married and fled for Cadiz, your mother and I,
but not her mother, who was bedridden with a sickness. For my sake your
beloved mother abandoned her people, what remained to her of her fortune
after paying the price of my life, and her country, so strong is the
love of woman. All had been made ready, for at Cadiz lay an English
ship, the "Mary" of Bristol, in which passage was taken for us. But the
"Mary" was delayed in port by a contrary wind which blew so strongly
that notwithstanding his desire to save us, her master dared not take
the sea. Two days and a night we lay in the harbour, fearing all things
not without cause, and yet most happy in each other's love. Now those
who had charge of me in the dungeon had given out that I had escaped by
the help of my master the Devil, and I was searched for throughout the
country side. De Garcia also, finding that his cousin and affianced wife
was missing, guessed that we two were not far apart. It was his cunning,
sharpened by jealousy and hate, that dogged us down step by step till at
length he found us.

'On the morning of the third day, the gale having abated, the anchor of
the "Mary" was got home and she swung out into the tideway. As she came
round and while the seamen were making ready to hoist the sails, a
boat carrying some twenty soldiers, and followed by two others, shot
alongside and summoned the captain to heave to, that his ship might be
boarded and searched under warrant from the Holy Office. It chanced that
I was on deck at the time, and suddenly, as I prepared to hide myself
below, a man, in whom I knew de Garcia himself, stood up and called out
that I was the escaped heretic whom they sought. Fearing lest his ship
should be boarded and he himself thrown into prison with the rest of his
crew, the captain would then have surrendered me. But I, desperate
with fear, tore my clothes from my body and showed the cruel scars that
marked it.

'"You are Englishmen," I cried to the sailors, "and will you deliver me
to these foreign devils, who am of your blood? Look at their handiwork,"
and I pointed to the half-healed scars left by the red-hot pincers; "if
you give me up, you send me back to more of this torment and to death
by burning. Pity my wife if you will not pity me, or if you will pity
neither, then lend me a sword that by death I may save myself from
torture."

'Then one of the seamen, a Southwold man who had known my father, called
out: "By God! I for one will stand by you, Thomas Wingfield. If they
want you and your sweet lady they must kill me first," and seizing a bow
from the rack he drew it out of its case and strung it, and setting an
arrow on the string he pointed it at the Spaniards in the boat.

'Then the others broke into shouts of:

'"If you want any man from among us, come aboard and take him, you
torturing devils," and the like.

'Seeing where the heart of the crew lay, the captain found courage in
his turn. He made no answer to the Spaniards, but bade half of the men
hoist the sails with all speed, and the rest make ready to keep off the
soldiers should they seek to board us.

'By now the other two boats had come up and fastened on to us with their
hooks. One man climbed into the chains and thence to the deck, and I
knew him for a priest of the Holy Office, one of those who had stood by
while I was tormented. Then I grew mad at the thought of all that I had
suffered, while that devil watched, bidding them lay on for the love of
God. Snatching the bow from the hand of the Southwold seaman, I drew the
arrow to its head and loosed. It did not miss its mark, for like you,
Thomas, I was skilled with the bow, and he dived back into the sea with
an English yard shaft in his heart.

'After that they tried to board us no more, though they shot at us with
arrows, wounding one man. The captain called to us to lay down our bows
and take cover behind the bulwarks, for by now the sails began to draw.
Then de Garcia stood up in the boat and cursed me and my wife.

'"I will find you yet," he screamed, with many Spanish oaths and foul
words. "If I must wait for twenty years I will be avenged upon you and
all you love. Be assured of this, Luisa de Garcia, hide where you will,
I shall find you, and when we meet, you shall come with me for so long
as I will keep you or that shall be the hour of your death."

'Then we sailed away for England, and the boats fell astern.


'My sons, this is the story of my youth, and of how I came to wed your
mother whom I have buried to-day. Juan de Garcia has kept his word.'

'Yet it seems strange,' said my brother, 'that after all these years he
should have murdered her thus, whom you say he loved. Surely even the
evilest of men had shrunk from such a deed!'

'There is little that is strange about it,' answered my father. 'How
can we know what words were spoken between them before he stabbed her?
Doubtless he told of some of them when he cried to Thomas that now they
would see what truth there was in prophecies. What did de Garcia swear
years since?--that she should come with him or he would kill her. Your
mother was still beautiful, Geoffrey, and he may have given her choice
between flight and death. Seek to know no more, son'--and suddenly my
father hid his face in his hands and broke into sobs that were dreadful
to hear.

'Would that you had told us this tale before, father,' I said so soon
as I could speak. 'Then there would have lived a devil the less in the
world to-day, and I should have been spared a long journey.'


Little did I know how long that journey would be!



CHAPTER VI

GOOD-BYE, SWEETHEART


Within twelve days of the burial of my mother and the telling of the
story of his marriage to her by my father, I was ready to start upon my
search. As it chanced a vessel was about to sail from Yarmouth to Cadiz.
She was named the 'Adventuress,' of one hundred tons burden, and carried
wool and other goods outwards, purposing to return with a cargo of wine
and yew staves for bows. In this vessel my father bought me a passage.
Moreover, he gave me fifty pounds in gold, which was as much as I would
risk upon my person, and obtained letters from the Yarmouth firm of
merchants to their agents in Cadiz, in which they were advised to
advance me such sums as I might need up to a total of one hundred and
fifty English pounds, and further to assist me in any way that was
possible.

Now the ship 'Adventuress' was to sail on the third day of June.
Already it was the first of that month, and that evening I must ride to
Yarmouth, whither my baggage had gone already. Except one my farewells
were made, and yet that was the one I most wished to make. Since the day
when we had sworn our troth I had gained no sight of Lily except once
at my mother's burial, and then we had not spoken. Now it seemed that I
must go without any parting word, for her father had sent me notice that
if I came near the Hall his serving men had orders to thrust me from the
door, and this was a shame that I would not risk. Yet it was hard that I
must go upon so long a journey, whence it well might chance I should not
return, and bid her no goodbye. In my grief and perplexity I spoke to my
father, telling him how the matter stood and asking his help.

'I go hence,' I said, 'to avenge our common loss, and if need be to give
my life for the honour of our name. Aid me then in this.'

'My neighbour Bozard means his daughter for your brother Geoffrey, and
not for you, Thomas,' he answered; 'and a man may do what he wills with
his own. Still I will help you if I can, at the least he cannot drive me
from his door. Bid them bring horses, and we will ride to the Hall.'

Within the half of an hour we were there, and my father asked for speech
with its master. The serving man looked at me askance, remembering his
orders, still he ushered us into the justice room where the Squire sat
drinking ale.

'Good morrow to you, neighbour,' said the Squire; 'you are welcome here,
but you bring one with you who is not welcome, though he be your son.'

'I bring him for the last time, friend Bozard. Listen to his request,
then grant it or refuse it as you will; but if you refuse it, it will
not bind us closer. The lad rides to-night to take ship for Spain to
seek that man who murdered his mother. He goes of his own free will
because after the doing of the deed it was he who unwittingly suffered
the murderer to escape, and it is well that he should go.'

'He is a young hound to run such a quarry to earth, and in a strange
country,' said the Squire. 'Still I like his spirit and wish him well.
What would he of me?'

'Leave to bid farewell to your daughter. I know that his suit does not
please you and cannot wonder at it, and for my own part I think it too
early for him to set his fancy in the way of marriage. But if he would
see the maid it can do no harm, for such harm as there is has been done
already. Now for your answer.'

Squire Bozard thought a while, then said:

'The lad is a brave lad though he shall be no son-in-law of mine. He
is going far, and mayhap will return no more, and I do not wish that
he should think unkindly of me when I am dead. Go without, Thomas
Wingfield, and stand under yonder beech--Lily shall join you there and
you may speak with her for the half of an hour--no more. See to it that
you keep within sight of the window. Nay, no thanks; go before I change
my mind.'

So I went and waited under the beech with a beating heart, and presently
Lily glided up to me, a more welcome sight to my eyes than any angel out
of heaven. And, indeed, I doubt if an angel could have been more fair
than she, or more good and gentle.

'Oh! Thomas,' she whispered, when I had greeted her, 'is this true that
you sail oversea to seek the Spaniard?'

'I sail to seek the Spaniard, and to find him and to kill him when he
is found. It was to come to you, Lily, that I let him go, now I must let
you go to come to him. Nay, do not weep, I have sworn to do it, and were
I to break my oath I should be dishonoured.'

'And because of this oath of yours I must be widowed, Thomas, before I
am a wife? You go and I shall never see you more.'

'Who can say, my sweet? My father went over seas and came back safe,
having passed through many perils.'

'Yes, he came back and--not alone. You are young, Thomas, and in far
countries there are ladies great and fair, and how shall I hold my own
in your heart against them, I being so far away?'

'I swear to you, Lily--'

'Nay, Thomas, swear no oaths lest you should add to your sins by
breaking them. Yet, love, forget me not, who shall forget you never.
Perhaps--oh! it wrings my heart to say it--this is our last meeting on
the earth. If so, then we must hope to meet in heaven. At the least
be sure of this, while I live I will be true to you, and father or
no father, I will die before I break my troth. I am young to speak so
largely, but it shall be as I say. Oh! this parting is more cruel than
death. Would that we were asleep and forgotten among men. Yet it is best
that you should go, for if you stayed what could we be to each other
while my father lives, and may he live long!'

'Sleep and forgetfulness will come soon enough, Lily; none must await
them for very long. Meanwhile we have our lives to live. Let us pray
that we may live them to each other. I go to seek fortune as well as
foes, and I will win it for your sake that we may marry.'

She shook her head sadly. 'It were too much happiness, Thomas. Men and
women may seldom wed their true loves, or if they do, it is but to lose
them. At the least we love, and let us be thankful that we have learned
what love can be, for having loved here, perchance at the worst we may
love otherwhere when there are none to say us nay.'

Then we talked on awhile, babbling broken words of love and hope and
sorrow, as young folks so placed are wont to do, till at length Lily
looked up with a sad sweet smile and said:

'It is time to go, sweetheart. My father beckons me from the lattice.
All is finished.'
