ground of Ceres, and Iton the mother of sheep, maritime Antron, and
grassy Ptelon. These warlike Protesilaus, whilst he lived, commanded;
but him the black earth then possessed. His wife, lacerated all around,
had been left at Phylace, and his palace half finished. For a Trojan man
slew him, as he leaped ashore from his ship much the first of the
Greeks. Nor were they, however, without a leader, although they longed
for their own leader; for gallant Podarces marshalled them, Podarces,
son of sheep-abounding Iphiclus, the son of Phylacis, own brother of
magnanimous Protesilaus, younger by birth; but the warlike hero
Protesilaus was older and braver. His troops wanted not a leader, but
lamented him, being brave; with him forty dark ships followed.

Those who inhabited Phaere by the lake Boebeis, Boebe, and Glaphyrae, and
well-built Iaolcus; these Eumeles, the beloved son of Admetus, commanded
in eleven ships, whom Alcestis, divine amongst women, most beautiful in
form of the daughters of Pelias, brought forth by Admetus.

Those who inhabited Methone and Thaumacia, and possessed Meliboea, and
rugged Olizon; these Philoctetes, well skilled in archery, commanded in
seven ships. Fifty sailors, well skilled in archery, went on board each
to fight valiantly. But he lay in an island enduring bitter pangs, in
divine Lemnos, where the sons of the Greeks had left him suffering with
the evil sting of a deadly serpent. There he lay grieving; but soon were
the Argives at the ships destined to remember their king Philoctetes.
Nor were they however without a leader, though they longed for their own
leader; but Medon, the bastard son of Oileus, whom Rhina brought forth
by city-wasting Oileus, marshalled them.

Those who possessed Tricca, and hilly Ithome, and those who possessed
oechalia, the city of oechalian Eurytus; Podalirius and Machaon, two
excellent physicians,[133] both sons of AEsculapius, led these. With them
thirty hollow ships went in order.

   [Footnote 133: Grote, vol. i. p. 348, remarks that the "renown of
   Podalirius and Machaon was further prolonged in the subsequent
   poem of Arctinus, the Iliu-Persis, wherein the one was
   represented as unrivalled in surgical operations, the other as
   sagacious in detecting and appreciating morbid symptoms. It was
   Podalirius who first noticed the glaring eyes and disturbed
   deportment which preceded the suicide of Ajax."]

Those who possessed Ormenium, and the fountain Hyperia, and those who
possessed Asterium and the white tops of Titanus; these Eurypylus, the
brave son of Evaemon, commanded. With him forty dark ships followed.

Those who possessed Argissa, and inhabited Gyrtone, and Orthe, and
Elone, and the white city Oloosson: these the stout warrior Polypoetes,
son of Pirithous, whom immortal Jove begat, commanded. Him renowned
Hippodamia brought forth by Pirithous, on the day when he took vengeance
on the shaggy Centaurs, and drove them from Mount Pelion, and chased
them to the AEthiceans. He was not the only leader; with him commanded
warlike Leonteus, son of magnamimous Coronus, the son of Coeneus. With
these forty dark ships followed.

But Gyneus led two-and-twenty ships from Cyphus. Him the Enienes
followed, and the Peraebi, stout warriors, who placed their habitations
by chilly Dodona, and those who tilled the fields about delightful
Titaresius, which pours its fair-flowing stream into the Peneus; nor is
it mingled with silver-eddied Peneus, but flows on the surface of it
like oil. For it is a streamlet of the Stygian wave, the dreadful
[pledge of] oath.

Prothoues, son of Tenthredon, commanded the Magnetes, who dwell about the
Peneus, and leaf-quivering Pelion: these swift Prothoues led; and with
him forty dark ships followed.

These then were the leaders and chieftains of the Greeks. Do thou, then,
O muse, tell me who was the most excellent of these, of the kings and
their steeds, who followed the son of Atreus to Troy. The steeds of the
descendant of Pheres were indeed by far the most excellent, which
Eumelus drove, swift as birds, like in hair, like in age, and level in
[height of] back by the plumb-line.[134] These, bearing with them the
terror of Mars, both mares, silver-bowed Apollo fed in Pieria.[135] Of
the heroes Telamonian Ajax was by far the best, whilst Achilles
continued wrathful, for he was by far the bravest; and the steeds which
bore the irreproachable son of Peleus surpassed those of Eumelus. But he
on his part lay in his dark sea-traversing ships, breathing wrath
against the son of Atreus, Agamemnon, the shepherd of the people. But
his forces meantime amused themselves with quoits and javelins, hurling
[them,] and with their bows; and their steeds stood, each near his
chariot, feeding on lotus and lake-fed parsley. And the well-fastened
chariots lay in the tents of their lords. But they, longing for their
warlike chief, wandered hither and thither through the camp, and did not
fight.

But they went along, as if the whole earth was being fed upon by
fire,[136] and the earth groaned beneath, as in honour of
thunder-rejoicing Jove when angry,[137] when he strikes the earth around
Typhoeus in Arimae,[138] where they say is the tomb of Typhoeus; thus
indeed beneath their feet the earth groaned mightily, as they went, and
very swift they passed over the plain.

   [Footnote 134: I. e. exactly equal in height, as if they had been
   measured.]

   [Footnote 135: This degradation of Apollo used to be commemorated
   in the theoria in honour of the god. See Mueller Dor. vol. i. p.
   233.]

   [Footnote 136: Such was the glitter of their arms.]

   [Footnote 137: See Arnold.]

   [Footnote 138: A volcanic district of Mysia.]

But swift-footed Iris came from aegis-bearing Jove, a messenger to the
Trojans, with a woeful announcement. They all, collected together, both
young and old, were holding councils at the gates of Priam. But
swift-footed Iris standing near, accosted them: and she likened herself
in voice to Polites, son of Priam, who, trusting to the swiftness of his
feet, sat at watch for the Trojans on the top of the tomb[139] of old
AEsyetus, watching when the Greeks should set forth from the ships. To
him having likened herself, swift-footed Iris addressed them:

"Old man, ever are injudicious words pleasing to thee, as formerly in
time of peace: but now has an inevitable war arisen. Truly I have
already very often been present at the conflicts of heroes, but never
have I beheld such brave and numerous forces. For very like unto the
leaves or the sand proceed they through the plain, about to fight for
the city. Hector, for it is to thee in particular I give advice: and do
thou act thus; for many are the allies through the great city of Priam;
and different are the languages[140] of the widely-spread men. Let then
each hero command those of whom he is the chief: but do thou,
marshalling the citizens, be leader of them."

Thus she said. But Hector was not ignorant of the voice of the goddess;
and he instantly dismissed the council, and they rushed to arms. And the
portals were opened, and the troops rushed out, both foot and horse; and
much tumult arose.

Now there is a certain lofty mound before the city, far in the plain,
that may be run round,[141] which men indeed call Batiea, but the
immortals, the tomb of nimbly-springing Myrinna. There the Trojans and
their allies were then marshalled separately.

   [Footnote 139: On the height of the ancient tombs, see my note on
   Odyss. ii. p. 21, n. 35, ed. Bohn.]

   [Footnote 140: Cf. iv. 437, where this variety of dialects is
   again mentioned, and Mueller, Greek Lit. i. Sec. 4.]

   [Footnote 141: _I. e._ standing clear on all sides.]

The Trojans, in the first place, great helmet-nodding Hector, son of
Priam, commanded. With him far the most numerous and the bravest troops
were armed, ardent with their spears.

The Dardanians, in the next place, AEneas, the gallant son of Anchises,
commanded (him to Anchises the divine goddess Venus bore, couched with
him a mortal on the tops of Ida): not alone, but with him the two sons
of Antenor, Archelochus and Acamas, skilled in every kind of fight.

But the Trojans who inhabited Zeleia,[142] beneath the lowest foot of
Ida, wealthy and drinking the dark water of AEsepus, these Pandarus, the
valiant son of Lycaon, commanded, to whom even Apollo himself gave his
bow.

   [Footnote 142: Cf. iv. 119. "The inhabitants of Zeleia worshipped
   Apollo, and Zeleia was also called Lycia; facts which show that
   there was a real connection between the name of Lycia and the
   worship of Apollo, and that it was the worship of Apollo which
   gave the name to this district of Troy, as it had done to the
   country of the Solymi."--Mueller, Dor. vol. i. p. 248.]

Those who possessed Adrestae, and the city of Apaesus, and possessed
Pityea, and the lofty mountain Tercia; these Adrastus and linen-mailed
Amphius commanded, the two sons of Percosian Merops, who was skilled in
prophecy above all others; nor was he willing to suffer his sons to go
into the man-destroying fight. But they did not obey him, for the fates
of sable death impelled them.

Those who dwelt around Percote and Practius, and possessed Sestos and
Abydos, and divine Arisbe; these Asius, son of Hyrtacus, prince of
heroes, commanded: Asius, son of Hyrtacus, whom large and fiery steeds
bore from Arisbe, from the river Selleis.

Hippothoues led the tribes of the spear-skilled Pelasgians, of those who
inhabited fertile Larissa; Hippothoues and Pylaeus of the line of Mars,
the two sons of Pelasgian Lethus, son of Teutamus, commanded these.

But Acamus and the hero Piroues led the Thracians, all that the rapidly
flowing Hellespont confines within.

Euphemus, son of heaven-descended Troezenus, son of Ceas, was commander
of the warlike Cicones.

But Pyraechmes led the Paeonians, who use darts fastened by a thong, far
from Amydon, from wide-flowing Axius, from Axius, whose stream is
diffused the fairest over the earth.

But the sturdy heart of Pylaemenes from the Eneti, whence is the race of
wild mules, led the Paphlagonians, those who possessed Cytorus, and
dwelt around Sesamus, and inhabited the famous dwellings around the
river Parthenius, and Cromna, AEgialus, and the lofty Erythine hills.

But Hodius and Epistrophus, far from Alybe, whence is a rich product of
silver, commanded the Halizonians. Chromis and the augur Ennomus
commanded the Mysians, but he avoided not sable death through his skill
in augury, for he was laid low by the hands of Achilles in the river,
where he made havoc of the other Trojans also.

Phorcys and godlike Ascanius far from Ascania, led the Phrygians, and
they eagerly desired to engage in battle.

But Mesthles and Antiphus led the Maeonians, both sons of Talaemeneus,
whom the lake Gygaea bore; these led the Maeonians, born beneath Mount
Tmolus.

Nastes commanded the barbarous-voiced Carians, who possessed Miletus,
and the leaf-topped mountain of Pethiri, and the streams of Maeander, and
the lofty tops of Mycale. These indeed Amphimachus and Nastes commanded,
Nastes and Amphimachus the famous sons of Nomion, who foolish went to
battle decked with gold like a young girl[143]; nor did this by any
means ward off bitter death; but he was laid low by the hands of the
swift-footed son of AEacus at the river, and warlike Achilles took away
the gold.

   [Footnote 143: It was customary for virgins to wear golden
   ornaments in great profusion. See Porson on Eur. Hec. 153.]

But Sarpedon and gallant Glaucus from Lycia afar, from
the eddying Xanthus, led the Lycians.




                             BOOK THE THIRD


                                ARGUMENT.

Just as the armies are on the point of engaging, Paris proposes a single
combat, but, on Menelaus advancing, retires in affright. Being rebuked
by Hector, he consents to engage Menelaus, and a treaty is arranged.
Paris is vanquished, but is brought back safe to Ilium by Venus, who
appeases the anger of Helen. Menelaus, as conqueror, calls upon the
Trojans to fulfil the conditions of the challenge.


But after they had each been marshalled along with their leaders, the
Trojans, on the one hand, moved along with both clamour and
battle-shout, like birds; just as is the noise of cranes forth under
heaven, which, after they have escaped the winter and immeasurable[144]
shower, with a clamour do these wing their way towards the streams of
the ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pygmaean men; and they then
at early dawn bring fatal strife. But the Greeks, on the other hand,
breathing might,[145] advanced in silence, anxious in mind to aid one
another.

   [Footnote 144: See Alberti on Hesych. s. v., t. i. p. 126; lit.
   "what even a god would not say."--Buttm. Lexil. p. 359.]

   [Footnote 145: Par. Lost, i. 559:

                              "----thus they,
            Breathing united force with fixed thought,
            Moved on in silence."]

As when the south wind sheds a mist over the top of a mountain, by no
means friendly to the shepherds, but more serviceable even than night
to the robber, and one can see [only] so far as he hurls a stone. So
under the feet of them proceeding an eddying dust kept rising: and very
speedily they traversed the plain.

But when they now were near, approaching each other, godlike Alexander
advanced in front of the Trojans, having a panther's skin on his
shoulders, and his crooked bow, and a sword; but he brandishing two
spears tipped with brass, challenged all the bravest of the Greeks to
fight against him in grievous conflict.

But when Mars-beloved Menelaus perceived him advancing before the host,
taking long strides, as a hungering lion exults, when happening on a
carcase of large size, having found either a horned stag or a wild goat.
For he greedily devours it, although swift hounds and vigorous youths
pursue him. Thus Menelaus rejoiced, having beheld with his eyes godlike
Alexander. For he thought he would be revenged upon the guilty wretch:
forthwith, therefore, with his arms he leaped from his chariot to the
earth.

But when, therefore, godlike Alexander perceived him appearing among the
foremost warriors, he was smitten in his heart, and gave way back into
the band of his companions, avoiding death. And as when any one having
seen a serpent in the thickets of a mountain, has started back, and
tremor has seized his limbs under him, and he has retired backwards, and
paleness seizes his cheeks: thus godlike Alexander shrank back into the
band of the haughty Trojans, dreading the son of Atreus.

But Hector having seen him, upbraided him with opprobrious words:
"Cursed Paris,[146] most excellent in form, thou woman-raving seducer,
would that thou hadst either not been born, or that thou hadst perished
unmarried. This, indeed, I would wish, and indeed it would be much
better, than that thou shouldst thus be a disgrace and scandal to
others. In truth the long-haired Achaeans may laugh, having suspected
that thou wast a noble champion, because a fine person belongs [to
thee]; but there is not strength in thy soul, nor any nerve. Didst thou,
being such a one, having sailed over the ocean in sea-traversing ships,
having collected congenial associates, and mingled with foreigners, take
away a beauteous lady, from the Apian land, the spouse of martial men, a
great detriment to thy father, to the city, and to all the people; a joy
indeed to our enemies, but a disgrace to thyself? Couldst thou not have
awaited warlike Menelaus? Then shouldst thou have known of how brave a
man thou dost possess the blooming spouse. Nor will thy harp, and the
gifts of Venus, and thy hair, and thy figure avail thee, when thou shalt
be mingled with the dust.[147] But the Trojans are very pusillanimous;
else wouldst thou have been arrayed in a garment of stone, on account of
the evils which thou hast done." [148]

Him then godlike Alexander in turn addressed: "Hector, since thou hast
reproached me justly, and not unjustly, [I will submit]. Ever is thy
spirit unwearied, like an axe, which penetrates the wood, [driven] by
the man who with art cuts out the naval plank, and it increases the
force of the man: so in thy breast is there an intrepid heart. Reproach
me not with the lovely gifts of golden Venus: the distinguished gifts of
the gods are by no means to be rejected, whatever indeed they give; for
no one can choose them at his own pleasure. Now, however, if thou
desirest me to wage war and to fight, cause the other Trojans and all
the Greeks to sit down, but match me and Mars-beloved Menelaus to
contend in the midst for Helen and all the treasures. And whichever of
us shall conquer, and shall be superior, having received all the
treasures without reserve, and the woman, let him conduct them home. But
let the rest of you, striking a friendship and faithful league, inhabit
fertile Troy; and let them return to the steed-nourishing Argos, and
fair-damed Achaia."

   [Footnote 146: [Greek: Dys] here denotes the evils which fatally
   resulted to Paris and his friends (so [Greek: dyselenas],
   "baleful Helen," Eur. Or. 1388. Cf. AEsch. Ag. 689, sqq.) in
   consequence of his having been preserved, despite the omens
   attending his birth. See Hygin. Fab. xci. Hence the Schol. on Il.
   x. i. 96, derive his name of Paris, [Greek: oti ton monon pao
   paoelthen].]

   [Footnote 147: Cf. Hor. Od. i. 15, 13:--

            "Nequicquam, Veneris praesidio ferox,
            Pectes caesariem, grataque feminis
            Imbelli cithara carmina divides: . . .
            . . . tamen, heu! sorus adulteros
            Crines pulvere collines."]

   [Footnote 148: _I. e._ thou wouldst have been stoned to death.]

Thus he spoke, but Hector on the other hand rejoiced greatly, having
heard his speech; and having advanced into the centre, holding his spear
by the middle, he restrained the phalanxes of the Trojans, and they all
sat down. Against him the waving-haired Achaeans were directing their
bows, and taking aim, were going to hurl with shafts and with stones.
But Agamemnon, he,[149] the king of men, exclaimed aloud:

   [Footnote 149: Mark the force of the pronoun.]

"Withhold, Argives! cast not, ye sons of the Aenaeans; for helm-nodding
Hector stands as if intending to propose something."

Thus he spoke; but they abstained from battle, and instantly became
silent. But Hector between both [armies] spoke thus:

"Hear from me, ye Trojans, and well-greaved Greeks, the proposal of
Alexander, on whose account this strife has arisen. He advises that the
other Trojans and all the Greeks should lay down their beauteous arms
upon the bounteous earth; but that he and Mars-beloved Menelaus alone
should fight in the midst for Helen and all the treasures; and whichever
shall conquer, and shall be superior, having received all the treasures
without reserve, and the woman, let him conduct them home: but let the
rest of us strike a friendship and faithful league."

Thus he said, and all became mute in silence. But amidst them Menelaus,
valiant in the din of war, thus spoke:

"Now hear me also; for anguish has invaded my soul most: but I purpose
that the Greeks and Trojans should now be separated, since ye have
suffered many evils on account of my quarrel and the beginning of [this
strife through] Alexander. And to whichever of us death and fate has
been ordained, let him die; but do the rest of you be very speedily
separated. And bring lambs--one white, the other black--to the Earth and
to the Sun; and we will bring another to Jove. Moreover ye shall bring
the might of Priam, that he may strike the league himself, for his sons
are overbearing and faithless; lest any one, by transgression, violate
the covenant of Jove. For the minds of younger men are ever fluctuating;
but for those among whom a senior is present, he looks at the same time
both backward and forward, in order that the best results may accrue to
both parties."

Thus he spoke. But both Greeks and Trojans rejoiced, hoping to have
respite from grievous war. And they accordingly reined back their horses
to the ranks [of the foot], but dismounted themselves, and put off
their arms, and laid them down on the ground near each other; and around
[each pile of arms] there was a little space.

But Hector despatched two heralds to the city with speed, to bring the
lambs, and to call Priam. While, on the other hand, king Agamemnon sent
Talthybius to go to the hollow ships, and ordered him to bring a lamb.
And he did not disobey noble Agamemnon.

And meantime came Iris a messenger to white-armed Helen, likening
herself to her husband's sister, the wife of Antenor's son, most
excelling in beauty of the daughters of Priam, Laodice, whom the son of
Antenor, king Helicaon, possessed. But she found her in her palace, and
she was weaving an ample web, a double [mantle],[150] resplendent, and
on it was working many labours both of the horse-taming Trojans and the
brazen-mailed Greeks, which on her account they suffered at the hands of
Mars. Standing near, the swift-footed Iris accosted her thus:

"Come hither, dear lady,[151] that thou mayest view the wondrous deeds
of the horse-taming Trojans, and of the brazen-mailed Greeks, who
formerly against each other waged tearful war in the plain, eager for
destructive battle. Now, however, they sit in silence (and the war has
ceased), leaning on their shields, and near them their long spears are
fixed. But Alexander and Mars-beloved Menelaus are about to fight for
thy sake with their long spears, and thou shalt be called the dear wife
of him who conquers."

Thus having spoken, the goddess infused a tender desire into her mind
both of her former husband, and of her city, and her parents. And
instantly veiling herself in white linen robes,[152] she rushed from her
chamber, shedding a tender tear: not alone, for two domestics
accompanied her, oethra, daughter of Pittheus, and large-eyed Clymene.
Then they quickly came to where the Scaean gates were. But Priam and
Panthous, and Thymoetes, Lampus, Clytius, Hicetaon, an offshoot of Mars,
Ucalegon, and Antenor, both prudent, elders of the people, sat at the
Scaean gates, long since desisting from war, through old age: but good
orators, like unto the Cicadae,[153] which, in the woods, sitting on a
tree, send forth a delicate voice; such leaders of the Trojans at that
time were sitting on the tower. But when they saw Helen coming to the
tower, in low tone they addressed to each other winged words:

   [Footnote 150: By [Greek: chlainan] is understood a mantle which
   could be worn doubled. Others suppose it means cloth of double
   tissue.]

   [Footnote 151: An affectionate use of the word [Greek: vympha],
   which properly means a bride or young wife.]

   [Footnote 152: The plural is used to denote a long, flowing
   robe.]

   [Footnote 153: some the cicada or [Greek: tettix], this is to be
   considered to be the balm-cricket.]

"It is not a subject for indignation, that Trojans and well-greaved
Greeks endure hardships for a long time on account of such a woman. In
countenance she is wondrous like unto the immortal goddess, but even so,
although being such, let her return in the ships, nor be left a
destruction to us and to our children hereafter."

Thus they spoke. But Priam called Helen,--"Coming hither before us, dear
daughter, sit by me, that thou mayest see thy former husband, thy
kindred, and thy friends--(thou art not at all in fault towards me; the
gods, in truth, are in fault towards me, who have sent against me the
lamentable war of the Greeks)--that thou mayest name for me this mighty
man, who is this gallant and tall Grecian hero. Certainly there are
others taller in height; but so graceful a man have I never yet beheld
with my eyes, nor so venerable; for he is like unto a kingly man."

But him Helen, one of the divine women, answered in [these] words:
"Revered art thou and feared by me, dear father-in-law; would that an
evil death had pleased me, when I followed thy son hither, having left
my marriage-bed, my brothers, my darling[154] daughter, and the
congenial company of my equals. But these things were not done:
therefore I pine away with weeping. But this will I tell thee, which
thou seekest of me and inquirest. This is wide-ruling Agamemnon, son of
Atreus, in both characters,[155] a good king and a brave warrior. He was
the brother-in-law, moreover, of shameless me, if ever indeed he
was." [156]

   [Footnote 154: See Buttm. Lexil. s. v. and Arnold.]

   [Footnote 155: Observe the force of the neuter.]

   [Footnote 156: "_Si unquam fuit, quod nunc non est ampleus_. i.e.
   _si recte dici potest fuisse, quod ita sui factum est dissimile,
   ut fuisse unquam vix credas_."--Herm. on Vig. p. 946, quoted by
   Anthon.]

Thus she spoke. But him the old man admired, and said "O blessed son of
Atreus, happy-born, fortunate, truly indeed were many Achaean youths made
subject to thee. Before now I entered vine-bearing Phrygia, where I
beheld many Phrygians, heroes on fleet horses, the forces of Otreus and
godlike Mygdon, who encamped there near the banks of the Sangarius. For
I also, being an ally, was numbered with them on that day, when the
man-opposing Amazons came. But not even these were so numerous as the
black-eyed Greeks."

But next perceiving[157] Ulysses, the old man asked her: "Come, tell me
of this one also, dear daughter, who he is? he is less indeed in
height[158] than Agamemnon, the son of Atreus, but is broader to behold
in shoulders and breast. His arms lie up on the fertile earth, but he
himself, like a ram, goes round the ranks of the men. I for my part
compare him to a thick-fleeced ram, which wanders through a great flock
of snowy sheep."

   [Footnote 157: This whole passage may be compared with the
   similar enumeration and description of the seven Argive
   chieftains in Eurip. Phoen. 119, sqq.]

   [Footnote 158: Not "a head less" in height; for line 169 would
   then mean that Agamemnon was a head less than others, and
   consequently Ulysses would be two heads under the ordinary size.
   Anthon has adopted this common mistake, although Wolf had pointed
   it out.]

But him Helen, sprung from Jove, answered: "Now, this one again is the
son of Laertes, much-scheming Ulysses, who was bred in the country of
Ithaca, rugged though it be, skilled in all kinds of stratagems and
prudent counsels."

Her then the sage Antenor addressed in reply: "O lady, assuredly hast
thou spoken this word very truly: for already in former times divine
Ulysses came hither also, on an embassy concerning thee, with
Mars-beloved Menelaus. I received them as guests, and entertained them
in my palace, and became acquainted with the genius of both, and their
prudent counsels; but when they were mingled with the assembled Trojans,
Menelaus indeed overtopped him, as they stood by his broad shoulders;
but when both were sitting, Ulysses was more majestic.[159] But when
they began to weave words and counsels for all, Menelaus, on his part,
would harangue very fluently; a few [words] indeed, but very sweetly,
since he was not loquacious, nor a random talker, though he was younger
in age. But when much-counselling Ulysses arose, he stood and looked
down, fixing his eyes on the earth, but he neither moved his sceptre
backwards nor forwards, but held it unmoved like an unskilful man: you
would say indeed that he was a very irritable man, as well as devoid of
reason. But when he did send forth the mighty voice from his breast, and
words like unto wintry flakes of snow, no longer then would another
mortal contend with Ulysses. And beholding, we then marvelled not so
much at the aspect of Ulysses, [as at his words]."

   [Footnote 159: Observe the Attic construction, where the genitive
   would have been expected. So Od. M. 73. Il. ii 317. Compared by
   Lesbonax, [Greek: peri schem]. p. 183, sq. ed. Valck. See, also,
   my note on AEsch. Prom, p. 8, ed. Bohn; intpp. on Theocrit. i.
   48.]

Then in the third place, having beheld Ajax, the old man asked: "Who is
that other Achaean hero, valiant and great, out-topping the Argives by
his head and broad shoulders?"

But him long-robed Helen answered, divine of women: "This indeed is
mighty Ajax, the bulwark of the Achaeans: on the other side, amongst the
Cretans, stands Idomeneus like unto a god: but around him the leaders of
the Cretans are collected. Often did Mars-beloved Menelaus entertain him
in our palace, when he would come from Crete. But now I behold all the
other rolling-eyed Greeks, whom I could easily recognize, and pronounce
their names; but two leaders of the people I cannot see: horse-taming
Castor, and Pollux skilled in boxing, twin brothers, whom the same
mother brought forth with me. Either they have not followed from
pleasant Lacedaemon, or they indeed have followed hither in the
sea-traversing ships, but now are reluctant to enter the fight of the
heroes, fearing the disgrace, and the many reproaches which are mine."

Thus she spoke; but them the life-bestowing earth already possessed:
there in Lacedaemon, in their dear native land.[160]

   [Footnote 160: They had fallen in combat with Lynceus and Idas,
   whilst besieging Sparta.--Hygin. Poet. Ast. ii. 22. According,
   however, to other mythologists, they shared immortality in turns.
   See Od. xi. 302. Virg. AEu. vi. 121; with Servius, and Apollodor.
   iii. ll. 2.]

But heralds through the city were bearing the firm pledges of the gods,
two lambs and joyous wine, the fruit of the earth, in a goat-skin
flagon. But the herald Idaeus also brought a splendid goblet, and golden
cups; and standing by him, incited the old man in these words:

"Arise, son of Laomedon; the chiefs of the horse-breaking Trojans, and
of the brazen-mailed Greeks, call thee to descend into the plain, that
thou mayest ratify a faithful league. For Alexander and Mars-beloved
Menelaus are about to fight with long spears for the woman. But let the
woman and the effects attend the conqueror; but let the rest of us,
having struck a friendship and faithful league, inhabit fruitful Troy,
and they shall return to horse-feeding Argos, and to Achaia, famed for
fair dames."

Thus he said, but the old man shuddered, and ordered his attendants to
yoke his horses; and they briskly obeyed. Priam then mounted his
chariot, and drew back the reins: and beside him Antenor mounted the
beautiful chariot. So they guided their fleet steeds through the Scaean
gates, towards the plain.

But when they had now come between the Trojans and the Greeks,
descending from their steeds to the fruitful earth, they advanced into
the midst of the Trojans and Greeks. Then Agamemnon, king of heroes,
immediately arose, and much-counselling Ulysses arose. But the
illustrious heralds collected together the faithful pledges of the gods,
and mixed wine in a bowl, and poured water upon the hands of the kings.
And the son of Atreus, drawing with his hands his dagger, which was
always suspended at the huge sheath of his sword, cut off hairs from the
heads of the lambs: and then the heralds distributed them to the chiefs
of the Trojans and the Greeks. Amongst them the son of Atreus prayed
earnestly, having stretched forth his hands:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most mighty,--and thou,
O sun, who beholdest all things, and nearest all things--and ye rivers,
and thou earth, and ye below who punish men deceased, whosoever swears
with perjury, be ye witnesses and preserve the faithful league. If, on
the one hand, Alexander should slay Menelaus, let him thenceforth retain
Helen and all her possessions; but let us return in our sea-traversing
ships. But if, on the contrary, yellow-haired Menelaus slay Alexander,
let the Trojans then restore Helen and all her treasures, and pay a fine
to the Argives such as is just, and which may be [recorded] amongst
posterity. But if Priam and the sons of Priam will not pay me the fine,
on Alexander falling, then will I afterwards fight on account of the
fine, remaining here till I find an end of the war."

He spoke, and cut the throats of the lambs with the cruel steel, and he
laid them on the earth panting, wanting life; for the brass had taken
away their [vital] strength. Then having drawn wine from the goblet,
they poured it into the cups, and prayed to the immortal gods. But thus
some one of the Greeks and Trojans said:

"O Jove, most glorious, most mighty, and ye other immortal gods, whoever
first shall offend against the leagues, so let the brain of themselves
and of their children stream upon the ground like this wine, and let
their wives be mingled with other men."

Thus they said, nor yet did the son of Saturn ratify [their vows]. Then
Priam, the son of Dardanus, addressed them:

"Hear me, ye Trojans, and ye well-greaved Greeks: I, indeed, return
again to wind-swept Ilion, since I can by no means endure to behold with
these eyes my dear son fighting with Mars-beloved Menelaus. Jove,
certainly, knows this, and the other immortal gods, to which of them the
event of death is destined."

He spoke, and the godlike man placed the lambs in the chariot, and
ascended himself, and drew back the reins; and beside him Antenor
mounted the very beautiful chariot. They on their part returning went
back towards Ilion.

But Hector on the other hand, the son of Priam, and divine Ulysses,
first measured the ground; then taking the lots, they shook them in the
brazen helmet, [to decide] which should hurl the brazen spear first. But
the people meantime supplicated, and stretched forth their hands to the
gods; and thus some one of the Greeks and Trojans said:

"O father Jove, ruling from Ida, most glorious, most mighty, whichever
has caused these evil works to both sides, grant that he, being slain,
may enter the house of Pluto, but that to us, on the other hand, there
may be friendship and a faithful league."

Thus then they spoke, and now mighty helm-quivering Hector shook the
