Montemar stood before him.  "I did not mean to listen, but I could not
help hearing you.  I cannot fight for the Duke yet, but I could carry a
message."

"How would that be?" said Osmond, eagerly.  "Once out of the Castle, and
in Rouen, he could easily find means of sending to the Count.  He might
go either to the Convent of St. Ouen, or, which would be better, to the
trusty armourer, Thibault, who would soon find man and horse to send
after the Count."

"Ha! let me see," said Sir Eric.  "It might be.  But how is he to get
out?"

"I know a way," said Alberic.  "I scrambled down that wide buttress by
the east wall last week, when our ball was caught in a branch of the ivy,
and the drawbridge is down."

"If Bernard knew, it would be off my mind, at least!" said Sir Eric.
"Well, my young Frenchman, you may do good service."

"Osmond," whispered Alberic, as he began hastily to dress himself, "only
ask one thing of Sir Eric--never to call me young Frenchman again!"

Sir Eric smiled, saying, "Prove yourself Norman, my boy."

"Then," added Osmond, "if it were possible to get the Duke himself out of
the castle to-morrow morning.  If I could take him forth by the postern,
and once bring him into the town, he would be safe.  It would be only to
raise the burghers, or else to take refuge in the Church of Our Lady till
the Count came up, and then Louis would find his prey out of his hands
when he awoke and sought him."

"That might be," replied Sir Eric; "but I doubt your success.  The French
are too eager to hold him fast, to let him slip out of their hands.  You
will find every door guarded."

"Yes, but all the French have not seen the Duke, and the sight of a
squire and a little page going forth, will scarcely excite their
suspicion."

"Ay, if the Duke would bear himself like a little page; but that you need
not hope for.  Besides, he is so taken with this King's flatteries, that
I doubt whether he would consent to leave him for the sake of Count
Bernard.  Poor child, he is like to be soon taught to know his true
friends."

"I am ready," said Alberic, coming forward.

The Baron de Centeville repeated his instructions, and then undertook to
guard the door, while his son saw Alberic set off on his expedition.
Osmond went with him softly down the stairs, then avoiding the hall,
which was filled with French, they crept silently to a narrow window,
guarded by iron bars, placed at such short intervals apart that only so
small and slim a form as Alberic's could have squeezed out between them.
The distance to the ground was not much more than twice his own height,
and the wall was so covered with ivy, that it was not a very dangerous
feat for an active boy, so that Alberic was soon safe on the ground, then
looking up to wave his cap, he ran on along the side of the moat, and was
soon lost to Osmond's sight in the darkness.

Osmond returned to the Duke's chamber, and relieved his father's guard,
while Richard slept soundly on, little guessing at the plots of his
enemies, or at the schemes of his faithful subjects for his protection.

Osmond thought this all the better, for he had small trust in Richard's
patience and self-command, and thought there was much more chance of
getting him unnoticed out of the Castle, if he did not know how much
depended on it, and how dangerous his situation was.

When Richard awoke, he was much surprised at missing Alberic, but Osmond
said he was gone into the town to Thibault the armourer, and this was a
message on which he was so likely to be employed that Richard's suspicion
was not excited.  All the time he was dressing he talked about the King,
and everything he meant to show him that day; then, when he was ready,
the first thing was as usual to go to attend morning mass.

"Not by that way, to-day, my Lord," said Osmond, as Richard was about to
enter the great hall.  "It is crowded with the French who have been
sleeping there all night; come to the postern."

Osmond turned, as he spoke, along the passage, walking fast, and not
sorry that Richard was lingering a little, as it was safer for him to be
first.  The postern was, as he expected, guarded by two tall steel-cased
figures, who immediately held their lances across the door-way, saying,
"None passes without warrant."

"You will surely let us of the Castle attend to our daily business," said
Osmond.  "You will hardly break your fast this morning if you stop all
communication with the town."

"You must bring warrant," repeated one of the men-at-arms.  Osmond was
beginning to say that he was the son of the Seneschal of the Castle, when
Richard came hastily up.  "What?  Do these men want to stop us?" he
exclaimed in the imperious manner he had begun to take up since his
accession.  "Let us go on, sirs."

The men-at-arms looked at each other, and guarded the door more closely.
Osmond saw it was hopeless, and only wanted to draw his young charge back
without being recognised, but Richard exclaimed loudly, "What means
this?"

"The King has given orders that none should pass without warrant," was
Osmond's answer.  "We must wait."

"I will pass!" said Richard, impatient at opposition, to which he was
little accustomed.  "What mean you, Osmond?  This is my Castle, and no
one has a right to stop me.  Do you hear, grooms? let me go.  I am the
Duke!"

The sentinels bowed, but all they said was, "Our orders are express."

"I tell you I am Duke of Normandy, and I will go where I please in my own
city!" exclaimed Richard, passionately pressing against the crossed
staves of the weapons, to force his way between them, but he was caught
and held fast in the powerful gauntlet of one of the men-at-arms.  "Let
me go, villain!" cried he, struggling with all his might.  "Osmond,
Osmond, help!"

Even as he spoke Osmond had disengaged him from the grasp of the
Frenchman, and putting his hand on his arm, said, "Nay, my Lord, it is
not for you to strive with such as these."

"I will strive!" cried the boy.  "I will not have my way barred in my own
Castle.  I will tell the King how these rogues of his use me.  I will
have them in the dungeon.  Sir Eric! where is Sir Eric?"

Away he rushed to the stairs, Osmond hurrying after him, lest he should
throw himself into some fresh danger, or by his loud calls attract the
French, who might then easily make him prisoner.  However, on the very
first step of the stairs stood Sir Eric, who was too anxious for the
success of the attempt to escape, to be very far off.  Richard, too angry
to heed where he was going, dashed up against him without seeing him, and
as the old Baron took hold of him, began, "Sir Eric, Sir Eric, those
French are villains! they will not let me pass--"

"Hush, hush! my Lord," said Sir Eric.  "Silence! come here."

However imperious with others, Richard from force of habit always obeyed
Sir Eric, and now allowed himself to be dragged hastily and silently by
him, Osmond following closely, up the stairs, up a second and a third
winding flight, still narrower, and with broken steps, to a small round,
thick-walled turret chamber, with an extremely small door, and loop-holes
of windows high up in the tower.  Here, to his great surprise, he found
Dame Astrida, kneeling and telling her beads, two or three of her
maidens, and about four of the Norman Squires and men-at-arms.

"So you have failed, Osmond?" said the Baron.

"But what is all this?  How did Fru Astrida come up here?  May I not go
to the King and have those insolent Franks punished?"

"Listen to me, Lord Richard," said Sir Eric: "that smooth-spoken King
whose words so charmed you last night is an ungrateful deceiver.  The
Franks have always hated and feared the Normans, and not being able to
conquer us fairly, they now take to foul means.  Louis came hither from
Flanders, he has brought this great troop of French to surprise us, claim
you as a ward of the crown, and carry you away with him to some prison of
his own."

"You will not let me go?" said Richard.

"Not while I live," said Sir Eric.  "Alberic is gone to warn the Count of
Harcourt, to call the Normans together, and here we are ready to defend
this chamber to our last breath, but we are few, the French are many, and
succour may be far off."

"Then you meant to have taken me out of their reach this morning,
Osmond?"

"Yes, my Lord."

"And if I had not flown into a passion and told who I was, I might have
been safe!  O Sir Eric!  Sir Eric! you will not let me be carried off to
a French prison!"

"Here, my child," said Dame Astrida, holding out her arms, "Sir Eric will
do all he can for you, but we are in God's hands!"

Richard came and leant against her.  "I wish I had not been in a
passion!" said he, sadly, after a silence; then looking at her in
wonder--"But how came you up all this way?"

"It is a long way for my old limbs," said Fru Astrida, smiling, "but my
son helped me, and he deems it the only safe place in the Castle."

"The safest," said Sir Eric, "and that is not saying much for it."

"Hark!" said Osmond, "what a tramping the Franks are making.  They are
beginning to wonder where the Duke is."

"To the stairs, Osmond," said Sir Eric.  "On that narrow step one man may
keep them at bay a long time.  You can speak their jargon too, and hold
parley with them."

"Perhaps they will think I am gone," whispered Richard, "if they cannot
find me, and go away."

Osmond and two of the Normans were, as he spoke, taking their stand on
the narrow spiral stair, where there was just room for one man on the
step.  Osmond was the lowest, the other two above him, and it would have
been very hard for an enemy to force his way past them.

Osmond could plainly hear the sounds of the steps and voices of the
French as they consulted together, and sought for the Duke.  A man at
length was heard clanking up these very stairs, till winding round, he
suddenly found himself close upon young de Centeville.

"Ha!  Norman!" he cried, starting back in amazement, "what are you doing
here?"

"My duty," answered Osmond, shortly.  "I am here to guard this stair;"
and his drawn sword expressed the same intention.

The Frenchman drew back, and presently a whispering below was heard, and
soon after a voice came up the stairs, saying, "Norman--good Norman--"

"What would you say?" replied Osmond, and the head of another Frank
appeared.  "What means all this, my friend?" was the address.  "Our King
comes as a guest to you, and you received him last evening as loyal
vassals.  Wherefore have you now drawn out of the way, and striven to
bear off your young Duke into secret places?  Truly it looks not well
that you should thus strive to keep him apart, and therefore the King
requires to see him instantly."

"Sir Frenchman," replied Osmond, "your King claims the Duke as his ward.
How that may be my father knows not, but as he was committed to his
charge by the states of Normandy, he holds himself bound to keep him in
his own hands until further orders from them."

"That means, insolent Norman, that you intend to shut the boy up and keep
him in your own rebel hands.  You had best yield--it will be the better
for you and for him.  The child is the King's ward, and he shall not be
left to be nurtured in rebellion by northern pirates."

At this moment a cry from without arose, so loud as almost to drown the
voices of the speakers on the turret stair, a cry welcome to the ears of
Osmond, repeated by a multitude of voices, "Haro!  Haro! our little
Duke!"

It was well known as a Norman shout.  So just and so ready to redress all
grievances had the old Duke Rollo been, that his very name was an appeal
against injustice, and whenever wrong was done, the Norman outcry against
the injury was always "Ha Rollo!" or as it had become shortened, "Haro."
And now Osmond knew that those whose affection had been won by the
uprightness of Rollo, were gathering to protect his helpless grandchild.

The cry was likewise heard by the little garrison in the turret chamber,
bringing hope and joy.  Richard thought himself already rescued, and
springing from Fru Astrida, danced about in ecstasy, only longing to see
the faithful Normans, whose voices he heard ringing out again and again,
in calls for their little Duke, and outcries against the Franks.  The
windows were, however, so high, that nothing could be seen from them but
the sky; and, like Richard, the old Baron de Centeville was almost beside
himself with anxiety to know what force was gathered together, and what
measures were being taken.  He opened the door, called to his son, and
asked if he could tell what was passing, but Osmond knew as little--he
could see nothing but the black, cobwebbed, dusty steps winding above his
head, while the clamours outside, waxing fiercer and louder, drowned all
the sounds which might otherwise have come up to him from the French
within the Castle.  At last, however, Osmond called out to his father, in
Norse, "There is a Frank Baron come to entreat, and this time very
humbly, that the Duke may come to the King."

"Tell him," replied Sir Eric, "that save with consent of the council of
Normandy, the child leaves not my hands."

"He says," called back Osmond, after a moment, "that you shall guard him
yourself, with as many as you choose to bring with you.  He declares on
the faith of a free Baron, that the King has no thought of ill--he wants
to show him to the Rouennais without, who are calling for him, and
threaten to tear down the tower rather than not see their little Duke.
Shall I bid him send a hostage?"

"Answer him," returned the Baron, "that the Duke leaves not this chamber
unless a pledge is put into our hands for his safety.  There was an
oily-tongued Count, who sat next the King at supper--let him come hither,
and then perchance I may trust the Duke among them."

Osmond gave the desired reply, which was carried to the King.  Meantime
the uproar outside grew louder than ever, and there were new sounds, a
horn was winded, and there was a shout of "_Dieu aide_!" the Norman
war-cry, joined with "Notre Dame de Harcourt!"

"There, there!" cried Sir Eric, with a long breath, as if relieved of
half his anxieties, "the boy has sped well.  Bernard is here at last!
Now his head and hand are there, I doubt no longer."

"Here comes the Count," said Osmond, opening the door, and admitting a
stout, burly man, who seemed sorely out of breath with the ascent of the
steep, broken stair, and very little pleased to find himself in such a
situation.  The Baron de Centeville augured well from the speed with
which he had been sent, thinking it proved great perplexity and distress
on the part of Louis.  Without waiting to hear his hostage speak, he
pointed to a chest on which he had been sitting, and bade two of his
men-at-arms stand on each side of the Count, saying at the same time to
Fru Astrida, "Now, mother, if aught of evil befalls the child, you know
your part.  Come, Lord Richard."

Richard moved forward.  Sir Eric held his hand.  Osmond kept close behind
him, and with as many of the men-at-arms as could be spared from guarding
Fru Astrida and her hostage, he descended the stairs, not by any means
sorry to go, for he was weary of being besieged in that turret chamber,
whence he could see nothing, and with those friendly cries in his ears,
he could not be afraid.

He was conducted to the large council-room which was above the hall.
There, the King was walking up and down anxiously, looking paler than his
wont, and no wonder, for the uproar sounded tremendous there--and now and
then a stone dashed against the sides of the deep window.

Nearly at the same moment as Richard entered by one door, Count Bernard
de Harcourt came in from the other, and there was a slight lull in the
tumult.

"What means this, my Lords?" exclaimed the King.  "Here am I come in all
good will, in memory of my warm friendship with Duke William, to take on
me the care of his orphan, and hold council with you for avenging his
death, and is this the greeting you afford me?  You steal away the child,
and stir up the rascaille of Rouen against me.  Is this the reception for
your King?"

"Sir King," replied Bernard, "what your intentions may be, I know not.
All I do know is, that the burghers of Rouen are fiercely incensed
against you--so much so, that they were almost ready to tear me to pieces
for being absent at this juncture.  They say that you are keeping the
child prisoner in his own Castle and that they will have him restored if
they tear it down to the foundations."

"You are a true man, a loyal man--you understand my good intentions,"
said Louis, trembling, for the Normans were extremely dreaded.  "You
would not bring the shame of rebellion on your town and people.  Advise
me--I will do just as you counsel me--how shall I appease them?"

"Take the child, lead him to the window, swear that you mean him no evil,
that you will not take him from us," said Bernard.  "Swear it on the
faith of a King."

"As a King--as a Christian, it is true!" said Louis.  "Here, my boy!
Wherefore shrink from me?  What have I done, that you should fear me?
You have been listening to evil tales of me, my child.  Come hither."

At a sign from the Count de Harcourt, Sir Eric led Richard forward, and
put his hand into the King's.  Louis took him to the window, lifted him
upon the sill, and stood there with his arm round him, upon which the
shout, "Long live Richard, our little Duke!" arose again.  Meantime, the
two Centevilles looked in wonder at the old Harcourt, who shook his head
and muttered in his own tongue, "I will do all I may, but our force is
small, and the King has the best of it.  We must not yet bring a war on
ourselves."

"Hark! he is going to speak," said Osmond.

"Fair Sirs!--excellent burgesses!" began the King, as the cries lulled a
little. {11}  "I rejoice to see the love ye bear to our young Prince!  I
would all my subjects were equally loyal!  But wherefore dread me, as if
I were come to injure him?  I, who came but to take counsel how to avenge
the death of his father, who brought me back from England when I was a
friendless exile.  Know ye not how deep is the debt of gratitude I owe to
Duke William?  He it was who made me King--it was he who gained me the
love of the King of Germany; he stood godfather for my son--to him I owe
all my wealth and state, and all my care is to render guerdon for it to
his child, since, alas!  I may not to himself.  Duke William rests in his
bloody grave!  It is for me to call his murderers to account, and to
cherish his son, even as mine own!"

So saying, Louis tenderly embraced the little boy, and the Rouennais
below broke out into another cry, in which "Long live King Louis," was
joined with "Long live Richard!"

"You will not let the child go?" said Eric, meanwhile, to Harcourt.

"Not without provision for his safety, but we are not fit for war as yet,
and to let him go is the only means of warding it off."

Eric groaned and shook his head; but the Count de Harcourt's judgment was
of such weight with him, that he never dreamt of disputing it.

"Bring me here," said the King, "all that you deem most holy, and you
shall see me pledge myself to be your Duke's most faithful friend."

There was some delay, during which the Norman Nobles had time for further
counsel together, and Richard looked wistfully at them, wondering what
was to happen to him, and wishing he could venture to ask for Alberic.

Several of the Clergy of the Cathedral presently appeared in procession,
bringing with them the book of the Gospels on which Richard had taken his
installation oath, with others of the sacred treasures of the Church,
preserved in gold cases.  The Priests were followed by a few of the
Norman Knights and Nobles, some of the burgesses of Rouen, and, to
Richard's great joy, by Alberic de Montemar himself.  The two boys stood
looking eagerly at each other, while preparation was made for the
ceremony of the King's oath.

The stone table in the middle of the room was cleared, and arranged so as
in some degree to resemble the Altar in the Cathedral; then the Count de
Harcourt, standing before it, and holding the King's hand, demanded of
him whether he would undertake to be the friend, protector, and good Lord
of Richard, Duke of Normandy, guarding him from all his enemies, and ever
seeking his welfare.  Louis, with his hand on the Gospels, "swore that so
he would."

"Amen!" returned Bernard the Dane, solemnly, "and as thou keepest that
oath to the fatherless child, so may the Lord do unto thine house!"

Then followed the ceremony, which had been interrupted the night before,
of the homage and oath of allegiance which Richard owed to the King, and,
on the other hand, the King's formal reception of him as a vassal,
holding, under him, the two dukedoms of Normandy and Brittany.  "And,"
said the King, raising him in his arms and kissing him, "no dearer vassal
do I hold in all my realm than this fair child, son of my murdered friend
and benefactor--precious to me as my own children, as so on my Queen and
I hope to testify."

Richard did not much like all this embracing; but he was sure the King
really meant him no ill, and he wondered at all the distrust the
Centevilles had shown.

"Now, brave Normans," said the King, "be ye ready speedily, for an onset
on the traitor Fleming.  The cause of my ward is my own cause.  Soon
shall the trumpet be sounded, the ban and arriere ban of the realm be
called forth, and Arnulf, in the flames of his cities, and the blood of
his vassals, shall learn to rue the day when his foot trod the Isle of
Pecquigny!  How many Normans can you bring to the muster, Sir Count?"

"I cannot say, within a few hundreds of lances," replied the old Dane,
cautiously; "it depends on the numbers that may be engaged in the Italian
war with the Saracens, but of this be sure, Sir King, that every man in
Normandy and Brittany who can draw a sword or bend a bow, will stand
forth in the cause of our little Duke; ay, and that his blessed father's
memory is held so dear in our northern home, that it needs but a message
to King Harold Blue-tooth to bring a fleet of long keels into the Seine,
with stout Danes enough to carry fire and sword, not merely through
Flanders, but through all France.  We of the North are not apt to forget
old friendships and favours, Sir King."

"Yes, yes, I know the Norman faith of old," returned Louis, uneasily,
"but we should scarcely need such wild allies as you propose; the Count
of Paris, and Hubert of Senlis may be reckoned on, I suppose."

"No truer friend to Normandy than gallant and wise old Hugh the White!"
said Bernard, "and as to Senlis, he is uncle to the boy, and doubly bound
to us."

"I rejoice to see your confidence," said Louis.  "You shall soon hear
from me.  In the meantime I must return to gather my force together, and
summon my great vassals, and I will, with your leave, brave Normans, take
with me my dear young ward.  His presence will plead better in his cause
than the finest words; moreover, he will grow up in love and friendship
with my two boys, and shall be nurtured with them in all good learning
and chivalry, nor shall he ever be reminded that he is an orphan while
under the care of Queen Gerberge and myself."

"Let the child come to me, so please you, my Lord the King," answered
Harcourt, bluntly.  "I must hold some converse with him, ere I can
reply."

"Go then, Richard," said Louis, "go to your trusty vassal--happy are you
in possessing such a friend; I hope you know his value."

"Here then, young Sir," said the Count, in his native tongue, when
Richard had crossed from the King's side, and stood beside him, "what say
you to this proposal?"

"The King is very kind," said Richard.  "I am sure he is kind; but I do
not like to go from Rouen, or from Dame Astrida."

"Listen, my Lord," said the Dane, stooping down and speaking low.  "The
King is resolved to have you away; he has with him the best of his
Franks, and has so taken us at unawares, that though I might yet rescue
you from his hands, it would not be without a fierce struggle, wherein
you might be harmed, and this castle and town certainly burnt, and
wrested from us.  A few weeks or months, and we shall have time to draw
our force together, so that Normandy need fear no man, and for that time
you must tarry with him."

"Must I--and all alone?"

"No, not alone, not without the most trusty guardian that can be found
for you.  Friend Eric, what say you?" and he laid his hand on the old
