
It was a rather large lute, made of gold and ivory, and as he handed it
to Sappho, he said, with a smile: "The inventor of this glorious
instrument, the divine Anakreon, had it made expressly for me, at my own
wish.  He calls it a Barbiton, and brings wonderful tones from its
chords--tones that must echo on even into the land of shadows.  I have
told this poet, who offers his life as one great sacrifice to the Muses,
Eros and Dionysus, a great deal about you, and he made me promise to
bring you this song, which he wrote on purpose for you, as a gift from
himself.

"Now, what do you say to this song?  But by Hercules, child, how pale you
are!  Have the verses affected you so much, or are you frightened at this
likeness of your own longing heart?  Calm yourself, girl.  Who knows what
may have happened to your lover?"

"Nothing has happened,--nothing," cried a gay, manly voice, and in a few
seconds Sappho was in the arms of him she loved.

Kallias looked on quietly, smiling at the wonderful beauty of these two
young lovers.

"But now," said the prince, after Sappho had made him acquainted with
Kallias, "I must go at once to your grandmother.  We dare not wait four
days for our wedding.  It must be to-day!  There is danger in every hour
of delay.  Is Theopompus here?"

"I think he must be," said Sappho.  "I know of nothing else, that could
keep my grandmother so long in the house.  But tell me, what is this
about our marriage?  It seems to me .  .  ."

"Let us go in first, love.  I fancy a thunder-storm must be coming on.
The sky is so dark, and it's so intolerably sultry."

"As you like, only make haste, unless you mean me to die of impatience.
There is not the slightest reason to be afraid of a storm.  Since I was a
child there has not been either lightning or thunder in Egypt at this
time of year."

"Then you will see something new to-day," said Kallias, laughing; for a
large drop of rain has just fallen on my bald head, "the Nile-swallows
were flying close to the water as I came here, and you see there is a
cloud coming over the moon already.  Come in quickly, or you will get
wet.  Ho, slave, see that a black lamb is offered to the gods of the
lower world."

They found Theopompus sitting in Rhodopis' own apartment, as Sappho had
supposed.  He had finished telling her the story of Zopyrus' arrest, and
of the journey which Bartja and his friends had taken on his behalf.

Their anxiety on the matter was beginning to be so serious, that Bartja's
unexpected appearance was a great relief.  His words flew as he repeated
the events of the last few hours, and begged Theopompus to look out at
once for a ship in sailing order, to convey himself and his friends from
Egypt.

"That suits famously," exclaimed Kallias.  "My own trireme brought me
from Naukratis to-day; it is lying now, fully equipped for sea, in the
port, and is quite at your service.  I have only to send orders to the
steersman to keep the crew together and everything in sailing order.--You
are under no obligations to me; on the contrary it is I who have to thank
you for the honor you will confer on me.  Ho, Knakias!--tell my slave
Philomelus, he's waiting in the hall,--to take a boat to the port, and
order my steersman Nausarchus to keep the ship in readiness for starting.
Give him this seal; it empowers him to do all that is necessary."

"And my slaves?"  said Bartja.

"Knakias can tell my old steward to take them to Kallias' ship," answered
Theopompus.

"And when they see this," said Bartja, giving the old servant his ring,
"they will obey without a question."

Knakias went away with many a deep obeisance, and the prince went on:
"Now, my mother, I have a great petition to ask of you."

"I guess what it is," said Rhodopis, with a smile.  "You wish your
marriage to be hastened, and I see that I dare not oppose your wish."

"If I'm not mistaken," said Kallias, "we have a remarkable case here.
Two people are in great peril, and find that very peril a matter of
rejoicing."

"Perhaps you are right there," said Bartja, pressing Sappho's hand
unperceived.  And then, turning to Rhodopis again, he begged her to delay
no longer in trusting her dearest treasure to his care,--a treasure whose
worth he knew so well.

Rhodopis rose, she laid her right hand on Sappho's head and her left on
Bartja's, and said: "There is a myth which tells of a blue lake in the
land of roses; its waves are sometimes calm and gentle, but at others
they rise into a stormy flood; the taste of its waters is partly sweet as
honey, partly bitter as gall.  Ye will learn the meaning of this legend
in the marriage-land of roses.  Ye will pass calm and stormy-sweet and
bitter hours there.  So long as thou wert a child, Sappho, thy life
passed on like a cloudless spring morning, but when thou becam'st a
maiden, and hadst learnt to love, thine heart was opened to admit pain;
and during the long months of separation pain was a frequent guest there.
This guest will seek admission as long as life lasts.  Bartja, it will be
your duty to keep this intruder away from Sappho, as far as it lies in
your power.  I know the world.  I could perceive,--even before Croesus
told me of your generous nature,--that you were worthy of my Sappho.
This justified me in allowing you to eat the quince with her; this
induces me now to entrust to you, without fear, what I have always looked
upon as a sacred pledge committed to my keeping.  Look upon her too only
as a loan.  Nothing is more dangerous to love, than a comfortable
assurance of exclusive possession--I have been blamed for allowing such
an inexperienced child to go forth into your distant country, where
custom is so unfavorable to women; but I know what love is;--I know that
a girl who loves, knows no home but the heart of her husband;--the woman
whose heart has been touched by Eros no misfortune but that of separation
from him whom she has chosen.  And besides, I would ask you, Kallias and
Theopompus, is the position of your own wives so superior to that of the
Persian women?  Are not the women of Ionia and Attica forced to pass
their lives in their own apartments, thankful if they are allowed to
cross the street accompanied by suspicious and distrustful slaves?  As to
the custom which prevails in Persia of taking many wives, I have no fear
either for Bartja or Sappho.  He will be more faithful to his wife than
are many Greeks, for he will find in her what you are obliged to seek, on
the one hand in marriage, on the other in the houses of the cultivated
Hetaere:--in the former, housewives and mothers, in the latter, animated
and enlivening intellectual society.  Take her, my son.  I give her to
you as an old warrior gives his sword, his best possession, to his
stalwart son:--he gives it gladly and with confidence.  Whithersoever she
may go she will always remain a Greek, and it comforts me to think that
in her new home she will bring honor to the Greek name and friends to our
nation, Child, I thank thee for those tears.  I can command my own, but
fate has made me pay an immeasurable price for the power of doing so.
The gods have heard your oath, my noble Bartja.  Never forget it, but
take her as your own, your friend, your wife.  Take her away as soon as
your friends return; it is not the will of the gods that the Hymenaeus
should be sung at Sappho's nuptial rites."

As she said these words she laid Sappho's hand in Bartja's, embraced her
with passionate tenderness, and breathed a light kiss on the forehead of
the young Persian.  Then turning to her Greek friends, who stood by, much
affected:

"That was a quiet nuptial ceremony," she said; "no songs, no torch-light!
May their union be so much the happier.  Melitta, bring the bride's
marriage-ornaments, the bracelets and necklaces which lie in the bronze
casket on my dressing-table, that our darling may give her hand to her
lord attired as beseems a future princess."

"Yes, and do not linger on the way," cried Kallias, whose old
cheerfulness had now returned.  "Neither can we allow the niece of the
greatest of Hymen's poets to be married without the sound of song and
music.  The young husband's house is, to be sure, too far off for our
purpose, so we will suppose that the andronitis is his dwelling.

     [The Hymenaeus was the wedding-song, so called because of its
     refrain "Hymen O!  Hymenae' O!"  The god of marriage, Hymen, took
     his origin and name from the hymn, was afterwards decked out richly
     with myths, and finally, according to Catullus, received a seat on
     Mount Helikon with the Muses.]

     [A Greek bride was beautifully adorned for her marriage, and her
     bridesmaids received holiday garments.  Homer, Odyss.  VI.  27.
     Besides which, after the bath, which both bride and bridegroom were
     obliged to take, she was anointed with sweet-smelling essences.
     Thucyd. II. 15.  Xenoph.  Symp. II. 3.]

"We will conduct the maiden thither by the centre door, and there we will
enjoy a merry wedding-feast by the family hearth.  Here, slavegirls, come
and form yourselves into two choruses.  Half of your number take the part
of the youths; the other half that of the maidens, and sing us Sappho's
Hymenaeus.  I will be the torch-bearer; that dignity is mine by right.
You must know, Bartja, that my family has an hereditary right to carry
the torches at the Eleusinian mysteries and we are therefore called
Daduchi or torch-bearers.  Ho, slave!  see that the door of the
andronitis is hung with flowers, and tell your comrades to meet us with a
shower of sweetmeats as we enter.  That's right, Melitta; why, how did
you manage to get those lovely violet and myrtle marriage-crowns made so
quickly?  The rain is streaming through the opening above.  You see,
Hymen has persuaded Zeus to help him; so that not a single marriage-rite
shall be omitted.  You could not take the bath, which ancient custom
prescribes for the bride and bridegroom on the morning of their wedding-
day, so you have only to stand here a moment and take the rain of Zeus as
an equivalent for the waters of the sacred spring.  Now, girls, begin
your song.  Let the maidens bewail the rosy days of childhood, and the
youths praise the lot of those who marry young."

Five well-practised treble voices now began to sing the chorus of virgins
in a sad and plaintive tone.

Suddenly the song was hushed, for a flash of lightning had shone down
through the aperture beneath which Kallias had stationed the bride and
bridegroom, followed by a loud peal of thunder.  "See!"  cried the
Daduchus, raising his hand to heaven, "Zeus himself has taken the
nuptial-torch, and sings the Hymenaeus for his favorites."

At dawn the next morning, Sappho and Bartja left the house and went into
the garden.  After the violent storm which had raged all night, the
garden was looking as fresh and cheerful in the morning light as the
faces of the newly-married pair.

Bartja's anxiety for his friends, whom he had almost forgotten in the
excitement of his marriage, had roused them so early.

The garden had been laid out on an artificial hill, which overlooked the
inundated plain.  Blue and white lotus-blossoms floated on the smooth
surface of the water, and vast numbers of water-birds hovered along the
shores or over the flood.  Flocks of white, herons appeared on the banks,
their plumage gleaming like glaciers on distant mountain peaks; a
solitary eagle circled upward on its broad pinions through the pure
