Amasis is a usurper, but the throne of Egypt is the lawful birthright of
Hophra and his descendants.  Psamtik forfeits every right to the crown
the moment that a brother, son, daughter or son-in-law of Hophra appears.
I can, therefore, salute my present sovereign as the future monarch of my
own beautiful native land."

Cambyses smiled self-complacently, and Onuphis went on: "I have read in
the stars too, that Psamtik's ruin and your own accession to the throne
of Egypt have been fore-ordained."

"We'll show that the stars were right," cried the king, "and as for you,
you liberal old fellow, I command you to ask me any wish you like."

"Give me a conveyance, and let me follow your army to Egypt.  I long to
close my eyes on the Nile."

"Your wish is granted.  Now, my friends, leave me, and see that all those
who usually eat at my table are present at this evening's revel.  We will
hold a council of war over the luscious wine.  Methinks a campaign in
Egypt will pay better than a contest with the Massagetae."

He was answered by a joyful shout of "Victory to the king!"  They all
then left the hall, and Cambyses, summoning his dressers, proceeded for
the first time to exchange his mourning garments for the splendid royal
robes.

Croesus and Phanes went into the green and pleasant garden lying on the
eastern side of the royal palace, which abounded in groves of trees,
shrubberies, fountains and flower-beds.  Phanes was radiant with delight;
Croesus full of care and thought.

"Have you duly reflected," said the latter, "on the burning brand that
you have just flung out into the world?"

"It is only children and fools that act without reflection," was the
answer.

"You forget those who are deluded by passion."

"I do not belong to that number."

"And yet revenge is the most fearful of all the passions."

"Only when it is practised in the heat of feeling.  My revenge is as cool
as this piece of iron; but I know my duty."

"The highest duty of a good man, is to subordinate his own welfare to
that of his country."

"That I know."

"You seem to forget, however, that with Egypt you are delivering your own
country over to the Persians."

"I do not agree with you there."

"Do you believe, that when all the rest of the Mediterranean coasts
belong to Persia, she will leave your beautiful Greece untouched?"

"Certainly not, but I know my own countrymen; I believe them fully
capable of a victorious resistance to the hosts of the barbarians, and am
confident that their courage and greatness will rise with the nearness of
the danger.  It will unite our divided tribes into one great nation, and
be the ruin of the tyrants."

"I cannot argue with you, for I am no longer acquainted with the state of
things in your native country, and besides, I believe you to be a wise
man--not one who would plunge a nation into ruin merely for the
gratification of his own ambition.  It is a fearful thing that entire
nations should have to suffer for the guilt of one man, if that man be
one who wears a crown.  And now, if my opinion is of any importance to
you, tell me what the deed was which has roused your desire of
vengeance."

"Listen then, and never try again to turn me from my purpose.  You know
the heir to the Egyptian throne, and you know Rhodopis too.  The former
was, for many reasons, my mortal enemy, the latter the friend of every
Greek, but mine especially.  When I was obliged to leave Egypt, Psamtik
threatened me with his vengeance; your son Gyges saved my life.  A few
weeks later my two children came to Naukratis, in order to follow me out
to Sigeum.  Rhodopis took them kindly under her protection, but some
wretch had discovered the secret and betrayed it to the prince.  The very
next night her house was surrounded and searched,--my children found and
taken captive.  Amasis had meanwhile become blind, and allowed his
miserable son to do what he liked; the wretch dared to .  .  ."

"Kill your only son?"

"You have said it."

"And your other child?"

"The girl is still in their hands."

"They will do her an injury when they hear .  .  ."

"Let her die.  Better go to one's grave childless, than unrevenged."

"I understand.  I cannot blame you any longer.  The boy's blood must be
revenged."

And so saying, the old man pressed the Athenian's right hand.  The latter
dried his tears, mastered his emotion, and cried: "Let us go to the
council of war now.  No one can be so thankful for Psamtik's infamous
deeds as Cambyses.  That man with his hasty passions was never made to be
a prince of peace."

"And yet it seems to me the highest duty of a king is to work for the
inner welfare of his kingdom.  But human beings are strange creatures;
they praise their butchers more than their benefactors.  How many poems
have been written on Achilles!  but did any one ever dream of writing
songs on the wise government of Pittakus?"

"More courage is required to shed blood, than to plant trees."

"But much more kindness and wisdom to heal wounds, than to make them.--
I have still one question which I should very much like to ask you,
before we go into the hall.  Will Bartja be able to stay at Naukratis
when Amasis is aware of the king's intentions?"

"Certainly not.  I have prepared him for this, and advised his assuming a
disguise and a false name."

"Did he agree?"

"He seemed willing to follow my advice."

"But at all events it would be well to send a messenger to put him on his
guard."

"We will ask the king's permission."

"Now we must go.  I see the wagons containing the viands of the royal
household just driving away from the kitchen."

"How many people are maintained from the king's table daily?"

"About fifteen thousand."

"Then the Persians may thank the gods, that their king only takes one meal
a day."

     [This immense royal household is said to have cost 400 talents, that
     is (L90,000.) daily.  Athenaus, Deipn.  p. 607.]




CHAPTER IX.

Six weeks after these events a little troop of horsemen might have been
seen riding towards the gates of Sardis.  The horses and their riders
were covered with sweat and dust.  The former knew that they were drawing
near a town, where there would be stables and mangers, and exerted all
their remaining powers; but yet their pace did not seem nearly fast
enough to satisfy the impatience of two men, dressed in Persian costume,
who rode at the head of the troop.

The well-kept royal road ran through fields of good black, arable land,
planted with trees of many different kinds.  It crossed the outlying
spurs of the Tmolus range of mountains.  At their foot stretched rows of
olive, citron and plane-trees, plantations of mulberries and vines; at a
higher level grew firs, cypresses and nut-tree copses.  Fig-trees and
date-palms, covered with fruit, stood sprinkled over the fields; and the
woods and meadows were carpeted with brightly-colored and sweetly-scented
flowers.  The road led over ravines and brooks, now half dried up by the
heat of summer, and here and there the traveller came upon a well at the
side of the road, carefully enclosed, with seats for the weary,
and sheltering shrubs.  Oleanders bloomed in the more damp and shady
places; slender palms waved wherever the sun was hottest.  Over this rich
landscape hung a deep blue, perfectly cloudless sky, bounded on its
southern horizon by the snowy peaks of the Tmolus mountains, and on the
west by the Sipylus range of hills, which gave a bluish shimmer in the
distance.

The road went down into the valley, passing through a little wood of
birches, the stems of which, up to the very tree-top, were twined with
vines covered with bunches of grapes.

The horsemen stopped at a bend in the road, for there, before them, in
the celebrated valley of the Hermus, lay the golden Sardis, formerly the
capital of the Lydian kingdom and residence of its king, Croesus.

Above the reed-thatched roofs of its numerous houses rose a black, steep
rock; the white marble buildings on its summit could be seen from a great
distance.  These buildings formed the citadel, round the threefold walls
of which, many centuries before, King Meles had carried a lion in order
to render them impregnable.  On its southern side the citadel-rock was
not so steep, and houses had been built upon it.  Croesus' former palace
lay to the north, on the golden-sanded Pactolus.  This reddish-colored
river flowed above the market-place, (which, to our admiring travellers,
looked like a barren spot in the midst of a blooming meadow), ran on in a
westerly direction, and then entered a narrow mountain valley, where it
washed the walls of the temple of Cybele.

Large gardens stretched away towards the east, and in the midst of them
lay the lake Gygaeus, covered with gay boats and snowy swans, and
sparkling like a mirror.

A short distance from the lake were a great number of artificial mounds,
three of which were especially noticeable from their size and height.

     [See also Hamilton's Asia Minor, I.  P. 145. Herodotus (I. 93.)
     calls the tombs of the Lydian kings the largest works of human
     hands, next to the Egyptian and Babylonian.  These cone-shaped hills
     can be seen to this day, standing near the ruins of Sardis, not far
     from the lake of Gygaea.  Hamilton (Asia Minor, I.  p. i) counted
     some sixty of them, and could not ride round the hill of Alayattes
     in less than ten minutes.  Prokesch saw l00 such tumuli. The
     largest, tomb of Alyattes, still measures 3400 feet in
     circumference, and the length of its slope is 650 feet.  According
     to Prokesch, gigantic Phallus columns lie on some of these graves.]

"What can those strange-looking earth-heaps mean?"  said Darius, the
leader of the troop, to Prexaspes, Cambyses' envoy, who rode at his side.

"They are the graves of former Lydian kings," was the answer.  "The
middle one is in memory of the princely pair Panthea and Abradatas, and
the largest, that one to the left, was erected to the father of Croesus,
Alyattes.  It was raised by the tradesmen, mechanics, and girls, to their
late king, and on the five columns, which stand on its summit, you can
read how much each of these classes contributed to the work.  The girls
were the most industrious.  Gyges' grandfather is said to have been their
especial friend."

"Then the grandson must have degenerated very much from the old stock."

"Yes, and that seems the more remarkable, because Croesus himself in his
youth was by no means averse to women, and the Lydians generally are
devoted to such pleasures.  You see the white walls of that temple yonder
in the midst of its sacred grove.  That is the temple of the goddess of
Sardis, Cybele or Ma, as they call her.  In that grove there is many a
sheltered spot where the young people of Sardis meet, as they say, in
honor of their goddess."

"Just as in Babylon, at the festival of Mylitta."

"There is the same custom too on the coast of Cyprus.  When I landed
there on the way back from Egypt, I was met by a troop of lovely girls,
who, with songs, dances, and the clang of cymbals, conducted me to the
sacred grove of their goddess."

"Well, Zopyrus will not grumble at Bartja's illness."

"He will spend more of his time in the grove of Cybele, than at his
patient's bedside.  How glad I shall be to see that jolly fellow again!"

"Yes, he'll keep you from falling into those melancholy fits that you
have been so subject to lately."  "You are quite right to blame me for
those fits, and I must not yield to them, but they are not without
ground.  Croesus says we only get low-spirited, when we are either too
lazy or too weak to struggle against annoyances, and I believe he is
right.  But no one shall dare to accuse Darius of weakness or idleness.
If I can't rule the world, at least I will be my own master."  And as he
said these words, the handsome youth drew himself up, and sat erect in
his saddle.  His companion gazed in wonder at him.
