adviser, for all your goodness?  Oh, forsake me not in the days to come!
and if the path of my life should lead through grief and care, be near to
help and guide me as you did on the mountain-passes of this long and
dangerous journey.  A thousand times I thank thee, O my father!"

And, as she said these words, the young girl threw her arms around the
old man's neck and kissed him tenderly.

On entering the court-yard, a tall stout man, followed by a train of
Asiatic serving-maidens, came forward to meet them.  This was Boges, the
chief of the eunuchs, an important official at the Persian court.  His
beardless face wore a smile of fulsome sweetness; in his ears hung costly
jewelled pendents; his neck, arms, legs and his effeminately long
garments glittered all over with gold chains and rings, and his crisp,
stiff curls, bound round by a purple fillet, streamed with powerful and
penetrating perfumes.

Making a low and reverential obeisance before Nitetis, and holding, the
while, his fat hands overloaded with rings before his mouth, he thus
addressed her: "Cambyses, lord of the world, hath sent me to thee, O
Queen, that I may refresh thy heart with the dew of his salutations.  He
sendeth thee likewise by me, even by me the lowest of his servants,
Persian raiment, that thou, as befitteth the consort of the mightiest of
all rulers, mayest approach the gates of the Achaemenidae in Median
garments.  These women whom thou seest are thy handmaidens, and only
await thy bidding to transform thee from an Egyptian jewel into a Persian
pearl."

The master of the caravansary then appeared, bearing, in token of
welcome, a basket of fruits arranged with great taste.

Nitetis returned her thanks to both these men in kind and friendly words;
then entering the house laid aside the dress and ornaments of her native
land, weeping as she did so, allowed the strangers to unloose the plait
of hair which hung down at the left side of her head, and was the
distinctive mark of an Egyptian princess, and to array her in Median
garments.

     [In almost all the Egyptian pictures, the daughters and sons of the
     Pharaohs are represented with these locks of hair, plaited and
     reaching from the forehead to the neck.  Rosellini, Mon. stor. II.
     123.  Lepsius, Denkmaler.  The daughter of Rameses II. is drawn
     thus, and we have examples of the same in many other pictures.]

In the meantime, a repast had been commanded by the princes who
accompanied her.  Eager and agile attendants rushed to the baggage-
waggons, fetching thence, in a few moments, seats, tables, and golden
utensils of all kinds.  The cooks vied with them and with each other, and
as if by magic, in a short space of time a richly-adorned banquet for the
hungry guests appeared, at which even the flowers were not wanting.

During the entire journey our travellers had lived in a similar luxury,
as their beasts of burden carried every imaginable convenience, from
tents of water-proof materials inwrought with gold, down to silver foot-
stools; and in the vehicles which composed their train were not only
bakers, cooks, cup-bearers and carvers, but perfumers, hair-dressers and
weavers of garlands.  Beside these conveniences, a well-fitted up
caravansary, or inn, was to be found about every eighteen miles along the
whole route, where disabled horses could be replaced, the plantations
around which afforded a refreshing shelter from the noonday heat, or
their hearths a refuge from the snow and cold on the mountain-passes.

The kingdom of Persia was indebted for these inns (similar to the post-
stations of modern days) to Cyrus, who had endeavored to connect the
widely-distant provinces of his immense dominions by a system of well-
kept roads, and a regular postal service.  At each of these stations the
horseman carrying the letter-bag was relieved by a fresh man on a fresh
steed, to whom the letters were transferred, and who, in his turn, darted
off like the wind, to be again replaced at a similar distance by another
rider.  These couriers, called Angari, were considered the swiftest
horsemen in the world.

     [Herodotus V. 14. 49-52.  Persian milestones are still to be found
     among the ruins of the old king's road, which led from Nineveh to
     Ecbatana.  The Kurds call them keli-Shin (blue pillars).]

Just as the banqueters, amongst whom Boges had taken his seat, were
rising from table, the door opened, and a vision appeared, which drew
prolonged exclamation of surprise from all the Persians present.
Nitetis, clad in the glorious apparel of a Median princess, proud in the
consciousness of her triumphant beauty, and yet blushing like a young
girl at the wondering admiration of her friends, stood before them.

The attendants involuntarily fell on their faces before her, according to
the custom of the Asiatics, and the noble Achaemenidae bowed low and
reverentially; for it seemed as if Nitetis has laid aside all her former
bashfulness and timidity with her simple Egyptian dress, and with the
splendid silken garments of a Persian princess, flashing as they were
with gold and jewels, had clothed herself in the majesty of a queen.

The deep reverence paid by all present seemed agreeable to her, and
thanking her admiring friends by a gracious wave of the hand, she turned
to the chief of the eunuchs and said in a kind tone but mingled with a
touch of pride; "Thou hast performed thy mission well; I am content with
the raiment and the slaves that thou hast provided and shall commend thy
circumspection to the king, my husband.  Receive this gold chain in the
meanwhile, as a token of my gratitude."

The eunuch kissed the hem of her garment, and accepted the gift in
silence.  This man, hitherto omnipotent in his office, had never before
encountered such pride in any of the women committed to his charge.  Up
to the present time all Cambyses' wives had been Asiatics, and, well
aware of the unlimited power of the chief of the eunuchs, had used every
means within their reach to secure his favor by flattery and submission.

Boges now made a second obeisance before Nitetis, of which, however, she
took no notice, and turning to Croesus said: "Neither words nor  gifts
could ever suffice to express my gratitude to you, kindest of friends,
for, if my future life at the court of Persia prove, I will not venture
to say a happy, but even a peaceful one, it is to you alone that I shall
owe it.  Still, take this ring.  It has never left my finger since I
quitted Egypt, and it has a significance far beyond its outward worth.
Pythagoras, the noblest of the Greeks, gave it to my mother, when he was
tarrying in Egypt to learn the wisdom of our priests, and it was her
parting gift to me.  The number seven is engraved upon the simple stone.
This indivisible number represents perfect health, both to soul and body
for health is likewise one and indivisible.

     [Seven, the "motherless" number, which has no factor below ten.]

The sickness of one member is the sickness of all; one evil thought,
allowed to take up its abode within our heart, destroys the entire
harmony of the soul.  When you see this seven therefore, let it recall my
heart's wish that you may ever enjoy undisturbed bodily health, and long
retain that loving gentleness which has made you the most virtuous, and
therefore the healthiest of men.  No thanks, my father, for even if I
could restore to Croesus all the treasures that he once possessed, I
should still retrain his debtor.  Gyges, to you I give this Lydian lyre;
let its tones recall the giver to your memory.  For you, Zopyrus, I have
a golden chain; I have witnessed that you are the most faithful of
friends; and we Egyptians are accustomed to place cords and bands in the
hands of our lovely Hathor, the goddess of love and friendship, as
symbols of her captivating and enchaining attributes.  As Darius has
studied the wisdom of Egypt and the signs of the starry heavens, I beg
him to take this circlet of gold, on which a skilful hand has traced the
signs of the Zodiac.

     [Diodorus (I. 49.) tells, that in the tomb of Osymandyas (palace of
     Rameses II. at Thebes) there lay a circle of gold, one ell thick and
     365 ells in circumference, containing a complete astronomical
     calendar.  The circle of the zodiac from Dendera, which is now in
     Paris,--an astronomical ceiling painting, which was believed at the
     time of its discovery to be of great age, is not nearly so ancient
     as was supposed, dating only from the end of the Ptolemaic dynasty.
     Letronne was the first to estimate it correctly.  See Lepsius,
     Chron.  p.63. and Lauth, 'les zodiaques de Dendera'.  Munich 1865.]

And lastly, to my dear brother-in-law Bartja I commit the most precious
jewel in my possession--this amulet of blue stone.  My sister Tachot hung
it round my neck as I kissed her on the last night before we parted; she
told me it could bring to its wearer the sweet bliss of love.  And then,
Bartja, she wept!  I do not know of whom she was thinking in that moment,
but I hope I am acting according to her wishes in giving you her precious
jewel.  Take it as a gift from Tachot, and sometimes call to mind our
games in the Sais gardens."

Thus far she had been speaking Greek, but now, addressing the attendants
who remained standing in an attitude of deep reverence, she began in
broken Persian:  "Accept my thanks also.  In Babylon you shall receive a
thousand gold staters."  Then turning to Boges, she added: "Let this sum
be distributed among the attendants at latest by the day after to-morrow.
Take me to my carriage, Croesus."

The old king hastened to do her bidding, and as he was leading her
thither she pressed his arm and whispered gently, "Are you pleased with
me, my father?"

"I tell you, girl," the old man answered, "that no one but the king's
mother can ever be your equal at this court, for a true and queenly pride
reigns on your brow, and you have the power of using small means to
effect great ends.  Believe me, the smallest gift, chosen and bestowed as
you can choose and bestow, gives more pleasure to a noble mind than heaps
of treasure merely cast down at his feet.  The Persians are accustomed to
present and receive costly gifts.  They understand already how to enrich
their friends, but you can teach them to impart a joy with every gift.
How beautiful you are to-day!  Are your cushions to your mind, or would
you like a higher seat?  But what is that?  There are clouds of dust in
the direction of the city.  Cambyses is surely coming to meet you!
Courage, my daughter.  Above all try to meet his gaze and respond to it.
Very few can bear the lightning glance of those eyes, but, if you can
return it freely and fearlessly, you have conquered.  Fear nothing, my
child, and may Aphrodite adorn you with her most glorious beauty!  My
friends, we must start, I think the king himself is coming."  Nitetis sat
erect in her splendid, gilded carriage; her hands were pressed on her
throbbing heart.  The clouds of dust came nearer and nearer, her eye
caught the flash of weapons like lightning across a stormy sky.  The
clouds parted, she could see single figures for a moment, but soon lost
them as the road wound behind some thickets and shrubs.  Suddenly the
troop of horsemen appeared in full gallop only a hundred paces before
her, and distinctly visible.

Her first impression was of a motley mass of steeds and men, glittering
in purple, gold, silver and jewels.  It consisted in reality of a troop
of more than two hundred horsemen mounted on pure white Nicaean horses,
whose bridles and saddle-cloths were covered with bells and bosses,
feathers, fringes, and embroidery.  Their leader rode a powerful coal-
black charger, which even the strong will and hand of his rider could not
always curb, though in the end his enormous strength proved him the man
to tame even this fiery animal.  This rider, beneath whose weight the
powerful steed trembled and panted, wore a vesture of scarlet and white,
thickly embroidered with eagles and falcons in silver.

     [Curtius III. 3.  Xenoph.  Cyrap, VIII. 3. 7.  Aeschylus, Persians
     835. 836.  The king's dress and ornaments were worth 12,000 talents,
     or L2,250,000 (estimate of 1880) according to Plutarch, Artaxerxes
     24.]

The lower part of his dress was purple, and his boots of yellow leather.
He wore a golden girdle; in this hung a short dagger-like sword, the hilt
and scabbard of which were thickly studded with jewels.  The remaining
ornaments of his dress resembled those we have described as worn by
Bartja, and the blue and white fillet of the Achaemenidae was bound
around the tiara, which surmounted a mass of thick curls, black as ebony.
The lower part of his face was concealed by an immense beard.  His
features were pale and immovable, but the eyes, (more intensely black, if
possible, than either hair or beard), glowed with a fire that was rather
scorching than warming.  A deep, fiery-red scar, given by the sword of a
Massagetan warrior, crossed his high forehead, arched nose and thin upper
lip.  His whole demeanor expressed great power and unbounded pride.

Nitetis' gaze was at once riveted by this man.  She had never seen any
one like him before, and he exercised a strange fascination over her.
The expression of indomitable pride, worn by his features, seemed to her
to represent a manly nature which the whole world, but she herself above
all others, was created to serve.  She felt afraid, and yet her true
woman's heart longed to lean upon his strength as the vine upon the elm.
She could not be quite sure whether she had thus pictured to herself the
father of all evil, the fearful Seth, or the great god Ammon, the giver
of light.

The deepest pallor and the brightest color flitted by turns across her
lovely face, like the light and shadow when clouds pass swiftly over a
sunny noonday sky.  She had quite forgotten the advice of her fatherly
old friend, and yet, when Cambyses brought his unruly, chafing steed to a
stand by the side of her carriage, she gazed breathless into the fiery
eyes of this man and felt at once that he was the king, though no one had
told her so.

The stern face of this ruler of half the known world relaxed, as Nitetis,
moved by an unaccountable impulse, continued to bear his piercing gaze.
At last he waved his hand to her in token of welcome, and then rode on to
her escort, who had alighted from their horses and were awaiting him,
some having cast themselves down in the dust, and others, after the
Persian manner, standing in an attitude of deep reverence, their hands
concealed in the wide sleeves of their robes.

He sprang from his horse, an example which was followed at once by his
entire suite.  The attendants, with the speed of thought, spread a rich
purple carpet on the highway, lest the foot of the king should come in
contact with the dust of the earth, and then Cambyses proceeded to salute
his friends and relations by offering them his mouth to kiss.

He shook Croesus by the right hand, commanding him to remount and
