"I do not choose that my messengers should allow themselves to be
detained, be it by whom it may--do you hear!  Leave Me this instant and
go to your room, and stay there till I want you to undress me this
evening.  Andromeda--do you hear, old woman?--you can bring my brother to
me, and he will let you return quicker than Thais, I fancy.  You need not
leer at yourself in the glass, you cannot do anything to alter your
wrinkles.  My head-dress is already done.  Give me that linen wrapper,
Olympias, and then he may come!  Why, there he is already!  First you ask
permission, brother, and then disdain to wait till it is given you."

"Longing and waiting," replied Euergetes, "are but an ill-assorted
couple.  I wasted this evening with common soldiers and fawning
flatterers; then, in order to see a few noble countenances, I went into
the prison, after that I hastily took a bath, for the residence of your
convicts spoils one's complexion more, and in a less pleasant manner,
than this little shrine, where everything looks and smells like
Aphrodite's tiring-room; and now I have a longing to hear a few good
words before supper-time comes."

"From my lips?"  asked Cleopatra.

"There are none that can speak better, whether by the Nile or the
Ilissus."

"What do you want of me?"

"I--of you?"

"Certainly, for you do not speak so prettily unless you want something."

"But I have already told you!  I want to hear you say something wise,
something witty, something soul-stirring."

"We cannot call up wit as we would a maid-servant.  It comes unbidden,
and the more urgently we press it to appear the more certainly it remains
away."

"That may be true of others, but not of you who, even while you declare
that you have no store of Attic salt, are seasoning your speech with it.
All yield obedience to grace and beauty, even wit and the sharp-tongued
Momus who mocks even at the gods."

"You are mistaken, for not even my own waiting-maids return in proper
time when I commission them with a message to you."

"And may we not to be allowed to sacrifice to the Charites on the way to
the temple of Aphrodite?"

"If I were indeed the goddess, those worshippers who regarded my hand-
maidens as my equals would find small acceptance with me."

"Your reproof is perfectly just, for you are justified in requiring that
all who know you should worship but one goddess, as the Jews do but one
god.  But I entreat you do not again compare yourself to the brainless
Cyprian dame.  You may be allowed to do so, so far as your grace is
concerned; but who ever saw an Aphrodite philosophizing and reading
serious books?  I have disturbed you in grave studies no doubt; what is
the book you are rolling up, fair Zoe?"

"The sacred book of the Jews, Sire," replied Zoe; "one that I know you do
not love."

And you--who read Homer, Pindar, Sophocles, and Plato--do you like it?"
asked Euergetes.

"I find passages in it which show a profound knowledge of life, and
others of which no one can dispute the high poetic flight," replied
Cleopatra.  "Much of it has no doubt a thoroughly barbarian twang, and it
is particularly in the Psalms--which we have now been reading, and which
might be ranked with the finest hymns--that I miss the number and rhythm
of the syllables, the observance of a fixed metre--in short, severity of
form.  David, the royal poet, was no less possessed by the divinity when
he sang to his lyre than other poets have been, but he does not seem to
have known that delight felt by our poets in overcoming the difficulties
they have raised for themselves.  The poet should slavishly obey the laws
he lays down for himself of his own free-will, and subordinate to them
every word, and yet his matter and his song should seem to float on a
free and soaring wing.  Now, even the original Hebrew text of the Psalms
has no metrical laws."

"I could well dispense with them," replied Euergetes; "Plato too
disdained to measure syllables, and I know passages in his works which
are nevertheless full of the highest poetic beauty.  Besides, it has been
pointed out to me that even the Hebrew poems, like the Egyptian, follow
certain rules, which however I might certainly call rhetorical rather
than poetical.  The first member in a series of ideas stands in
antithesis to the next, which either re-states the former one in a new
form or sets it in a clearer light by suggesting some contrast.  Thus
they avail themselves of the art of the orator--or indeed of the painter
--who brings a light color into juxtaposition with a dark one, in order
to increase its luminous effect.  This method and style are indeed not
amiss, and that was the least of all the things that filled me with
aversion for this book, in which besides, there is many a proverb which
may be pleasing to kings who desire to have submissive subjects, and to
fathers who would bring up their sons in obedience to themselves and to
the laws.  Even mothers must be greatly comforted by them,--who ask no
more than that their children may get through the world without being
jostled or pushed, and unmolested if possible, that they may live longer
than the oaks or ravens, and be blessed with the greatest possible number
of descendants.  Aye! these ordinances are indeed precious to those who
accept them, for they save them the trouble of thinking for themselves.
Besides, the great god of the Jews is said to have dictated all that this
book contains to its writers, just as I dictate to Philippus, my hump-
backed secretary, all that I want said.  They regard everyone as a
blasphemer and desecrator who thinks that anything written in that roll
is erroneous, or even merely human.  Plato's doctrines are not amiss, and
yet Aristotle had criticised them severely and attempted to confute them.
I myself incline to the views of the Stagyrite, you to those of the noble
Athenian, and how many good and instructive hours we owe to our
discussions over this difference of opinion!  And how amusing it is to
listen when the Platonists on the one hand and the Aristotelians on the
other, among the busy threshers of straw in the Museum at Alexandria,
fall together by the ears so vehemently that they would both enjoy
flinging their metal cups at each others' heads--if the loss of the wine,
which I pay for, were not too serious to bear.  We still seek for truth;
the Jews believe they possess it entirely.

"Even those among them who most zealously study our philosophers believe
this; and yet the writers of this book know of nothing but actual
present, and their god--who will no more endure another god as his equal
than a citizen's wife will admit a second woman to her husband's house--
is said to have created the world out of nothing for no other purpose but
to be worshipped and feared by its inhabitants.

"Now, given a philosophical Jew who knows his Empedocles--and I grant
there are many such in Alexandria, extremely keen and cultivated men--
what idea can he form in his own mind of 'creation out of nothing?'  Must
he not pause to think very seriously when he remembers the fundamental
axiom that 'out of nothing, nothing can come,' and that nothing which has
once existed can ever be completely annihilated?  At any rate the
necessary deduction must be that the life of man ends in that nothingness
whence everything in existence has proceeded.  To live and to die
according to this book is not highly profitable.  I can easily reconcile
myself to the idea of annihilation, as a man who knows how to value a
dreamless sleep after a day brimful of enjoyment--as a man who if he must
cease to be Euergetes would rather spring into the open jaws of
nothingness--but as a philosopher, no, never!"

"You, it is true," replied the queen, "cannot help measuring all and
everything by the intellectual standard exclusively; for the gods, who
endowed you with gifts beyond a thousand others, struck with blindness or
deafness that organ which conveys to our minds any religious or moral
sentiment.  If that could see or hear, you could no more exclude the
conviction that these writings are full of the deepest purport than I
can, nor doubt that they have a powerful hold on the mind of the reader.

"They fetter their adherents to a fixed law, but they take all bitterness
out of sorrow by teaching that a stern father sends us suffering which is
represented as being sometimes a means of education, and sometimes a
punishment for transgressing a hard and clearly defined law.  Their god,
in his infallible but stern wisdom, sets those who cling to him on an
evil and stony path to prove their strength, and to let them at last
reach the glorious goal which is revealed to them from the beginning."

"How strange such words as these sound in the mouth of a Greek,"
interrupted Euergetes.  "You certainly must be repeating them after the
son of the Jewish high-priest, who defends the cause of his cruel god
with so much warmth and skill."

"I should have thought," retorted Cleopatra, "that this overwhelming
figure of a god would have pleased you, of all men; for I know of no
weakness in you.  Quite lately Dositheos, the Jewish centurion--a very
learned man--tried to describe to my husband the one great god to whom
his nation adheres with such obstinate fidelity, but I could not help
thinking of our beautiful and happy gods as a gay company of amorous
lords and pleasure-loving ladies, and comparing them with this stern and
powerful being who, if only he chose to do it, might swallow them all up,
as Chronos swallowed his own children."

"That," exclaimed Euergetes, "is exactly what most provokes me in this
superstition.  It crushes our light-hearted pleasure in life, and
whenever I have been reading the book of the Hebrews everything has come
into my mind that I least like to think of.  It is like an importunate
creditor that reminds us of our forgotten debts, and I love pleasure and
hate an importunate reminder. And you, pretty one, life blooms for you--"

"But  I," interrupted  Cleopatra, "I can  admire all that is great; and
does it not seem a bold and grand thing even to you, that the mighty idea
that it is one single power that moves and fills the world, should be
freely and openly declared in the sacred writings of the Jews--an idea
which the Egyptians carefully wrap up and conceal, which the priests of
the Nile only venture to divulge to the most privileged of those who are
initiated into their mysteries, and which--though the Greek philosophers
indeed have fearlessly uttered it--has never been introduced by any
Hellene into the religion of the people?  If you were not so averse to
the Hebrew nation, and if you, like my husband and myself, had diligently
occupied yourself with their concerns and their belief you would be
juster to them and to their scriptures, and to the great creating and
preserving spirit, their god--"

"You are confounding this jealous and most unamiable and ill-tempered
tyrant of the universe with the Absolute of Aristotle!" cried Euergetes;
"he stigmatises most of what you and I and all rational Greeks require
for the enjoyment of life as sin--sin upon sin.  And yet if my easily
persuadable brother governed at Alexandria, I believe the shrewd priests
might succeed in stamping him as a worshipper of that magnified
schoolmaster, who punishes his untutored brood with fire and torment."

"I cannot deny," replied Cleopatra, "that even to me the doctrine of the
Jews has something very fearful in it, and that to adopt it seems to me
tantamount to confiscating all the pleasures of life.--But enough of such
things, which I should no more relish as a daily food than you do.
Let us rejoice in that we are Hellenes, and let us now go to the banquet.
I fear you have found a very unsatisfactory substitute for what you
sought in coming up here."

"No--no.  I feel strangely excited to-day, and my work with Aristarchus
would have led to no issue.  It is a pity that we should have begun to
talk of that barbarian rubbish; there are so many other subjects more
pleasing and more cheering to the mind.  Do you remember how we used to
read the great tragedians and Plato together?"

"And how you would often interrupt our tutor Agatharchides in his
lectures on geography, to point out some mistake!  Did you prosecute
those studies in Cyrene?"

"Of course.  It really is a pity, Cleopatra, that we should no longer
live together as we did formerly.  There is no one, not even Aristarchus,
with whom I find it more pleasant and profitable to converse and discuss
than with you.  If only you had lived at Athens in the time of Pericles,
who knows if you might not have been his friend instead of the immortal
Aspasia.  This Memphis is certainly not the right place for you; for a
few months in the year you ought to come to Alexandria, which has now
risen to be superior to Athens."

"I do not know you to-day!"  exclaimed Cleopatra, gazing at her brother
in astonishment.  "I have never heard you speak so kindly and brotherly
since the death of my mother.  You must have some great request to make
of us."

"You see how thankless a thing it is for me to let my heart speak for
once, like other people.  I am like the boy in the fable when the wolf
came!  I have so often behaved in an unbrotherly fashion that when I show
the aspect of a brother you think I have put on a mask.  If I had had
anything special to ask of you I should have waited till to-morrow, for
in this part of the country even a blind beggar does not like to refuse
his lame comrade anything on his birthday."

"If only we knew what you wish for!  Philometor and I would do it more
than gladly, although you always want something monstrous.  Our
performance to-morrow will--at any rate--but--Zoe, pray be good enough
to retire with the maids; I have a few words to say to my brother alone."

As soon as the queen's ladies had withdrawn, she went on:

"It is a real grief to use, but the best part of the festival in honor of
your birthday will not be particularly successful, for the priests of
Serapis spitefully refuse us the Hebe about whom Lysias has made us so
curious.  Asclepiodorus, it would seem, keeps her in concealment, and
carries his audacity so far as to tell us that someone has carried her
off from the temple.  He insinuates that we have stolen her, and demands
her restitution in the name of all his associates."

"You are doing the man an injustice; our dove has followed the lure of a
dove-catcher who will not allow me to have her, and who is now billing
and cooing with her in his own nest.  I am cheated, but I can scarcely
be angry with the Roman, for his claim was of older standing than mine."

"The Roman?"  asked Cleopatra, rising from her seat and turning pale.
"But that is impossible.  You are making common cause with Eulaeus, and
want to set me against Publius Scipio.  At the banquet last night you
showed plainly enough your ill-feeling against him."

"You seem to feel more warmly towards him.  But before I prove to you
