own, but entreated him to seek some safe place of refuge, no matter
where; for powers against whom no resistance would avail were stretching
their hands towards him.  Even this statement, however, proved useless,
for Dion was convinced that the influence of his uncle, the Keeper of the
Seal, would guard him from any serious danger.  Then Anukis resolved to
confess what she had overheard; but she told the story without mentioning
Barine, and the peril threatening her also.  Finally, with all the warmth
of a really anxious heart, she entreated him to heed her warning.

Even while she was still speaking, the friends exchanged significant
glances; but scarcely had the last words fallen from her lips when the
giant figure of the freedman passed through the door, which had remained
open.

"You here, Pyrrhus?" cried the wounded man kindly.

"Yes, master, it is I," replied the stalwart fellow, twirling his sailor
hat still faster.  "Listening isn't exactly my trade, and I don't usually
enter your  presence uninvited;  but I couldn't help hearing what came
through the door, and the croaking of the old raven drew me in."

"I wish you had heard more cheerful things," replied Dion; "but the
brown-skinned bird of ill omen usually sings pleasant songs, and they all
come from a faithful heart.  But when my silent Pyrrhus opens his mouth
so far, something important must surely follow, and you can speak freely
in her presence."

The sailor cleared his throat, gripped his coarse felt hat in his sinewy
hands, and said, in such a tremulous, embarrassed tone that his heavy
chin quivered and his voice sometimes faltered: "If the woman is to be
trusted, you must leave here, master, and seek some safe hiding-place.
I came to offer one.  On my way I heard your name.  It was said that you
had wounded the Queen's son, and it might cost you your life.  Then I
thought: 'No, no, not that, so long as Pyrrhus lives, who taught his
young master Dion to use the oars and to set his first sail--Pyrrhus and
his family.'  Why repeat what we both know well enough?  From my first
boat and the land on our island to the liberty you bestowed upon us, we
owe everything to your father and to you, and a blessing has rested upon
your gift and our labour, and what is mine is yours.  No more words are
needed.  You know our cliff beyond the Alveus Steganus, north of the
great harbour--the Isle of Serpents.  It is quickly gained by any one who
knows the course through the water, but is as inaccessible to others as
the moon and stars.  People are afraid of the mere name, though we rid
the island of the vermin long ago.  My boys Dionysus, Dionichus, and
Dionikus--they all have 'Dion' in their name--are waiting in the fish
market, and when it grows dusk--"  Here the wounded man interrupted the
speaker by holding out his hand and thanking him warmly for his fidelity
and kindness, though he refused the well-meant invitation.  He admitted
that he knew no safer hiding-place than the cliff surrounded by
fluttering sea-gulls, where Pyrrhus lived with his family and earned
abundant support by fishing and serving as pilot.  But anxiety concerning
his future wife prevented his leaving the city.

The freedman however gave him no rest.  He represented how quickly the
harbour could be reached from his island, that fish were brought thence
from it daily, and he would therefore always have news of what was
passing.  His sons were like him, and never used any unnecessary words;
talking did not suit them.  The women of the household rarely left the
island.  So long as it sheltered their beloved guest, they should not set
foot away from it.  If occasion should require, the master could be in
Alexandria again quickly enough to put anything right.

This suggestion pleased the architect, who joined in the conversation to
urge the freedman's request.  But Dion, for Barine's sake, obstinately
refused, until Anukis, who had long been anxious to go in pursuit of
Archibius, thought it time to give her opinion.

"Go with the man, my lord!" she cried.  "I know what I know.  I will tell
our Barine of your faithful resolution; but how can she show her
gratitude for it if you are a dead man?"

This question and the information which followed it turned the scale;
and, as soon as Dion had consented to accompany the freedman, the Nubian
prepared to continue her errands, but the wounded man detained her to
give many messages for Barine, and then she was stopped by the architect,
who thought he had found in her the right assistant for numerous plans he
had in his mind.

He had returned early that morning from Heroonpolis, where, with other
members of his profession, he had inspected the newly constructed
waterway.  The result of the first investigation had been unfavourable to
the verge of discouragement; and, in behalf of the others, he had gone to
the Queen to persuade her to give up the enterprise which, though so full
of promise, was impracticable in the short time at their disposal.

He had travelled all night, and was received as soon as Cleopatra rose
from her couch.  He had driven from the Lochias in the carriage placed at
his disposal because he had business at the arsenal and various points
where building was going on, in order to inspect the wall erected for
Antony on the Choma, and the Temple of Isis at the Corner of the Muses,
to which Cleopatra desired to add a new building.  But scarcely had he
quitted the Bruchium when he was detained by the crowd assailing the
house of Didymus with beams and rams, and at the same time keeping off
the Ephebi who had attacked them.

He had forced his way through the raging mob to aid the old couple and
their granddaughter.  The slave Phryx had been busily preparing the boats
which lay moored in the harbour of the seawashed estate, but Gorgias had
found it difficult to persuade the grey-haired philosopher to go with him
and his family to the shore.  He was ready to face the enraged rioters
and--though it should cost his life--cry out that they were shamefully
deceived and were staining themselves with a disgraceful crime.  Not
until the architect represented that it was unworthy of a Didymus to
expose to bestial violence a life on which helpless women and the whole
world--to whom his writings were guide-posts to the realms of truth--
possessed a claim, could he be induced to yield.  Nevertheless, the sage
and his relatives almost fell into the hands of the furious rabble, for
Didymus would not depart until he had saved this, that, and the other
precious book, till the number reached twenty or thirty.  Besides, his
old deaf wife, who usually submitted quietly when her defective hearing
prevented her comprehension of many things, insisted upon knowing what
was occurring.  She ordered everybody who came near her to explain what
had happened, thus detaining her granddaughter Helena, who was trying to
save the most valuable articles in the dwelling.  So the departure was
delayed, and only the brave defence of young Philotas, Didymus's
assistant, and some of the Ephebi, who joined him, enabled them to escape
unharmed.

The Scythian guards, which at last put a stop to the frantic rage of the
deluded populace, arrived too late to prevent the destruction of the
house, but they saved Philotas and the other youths from the fists and
stones of the rabble.  When the boats had gone farther out into the
harbour the question of finding a home for the philosopher and his family
was discussed.  Berenike's house was also threatened, and the rules of
the museum prevented the reception of women.  Five servants had
accompanied the family, and none of Didymus's learned friends had room
for so many guests.  When the old man and Helena began to enumerate the
lodgings of which they could think, Gorgias interposed with an entreaty
that they would come to his house.

He had inherited the dwelling from his father.  It was very large and
spacious, almost empty, and they could reach it speedily, as it stood on
the seashore, north of the Forum.  The fugitives would be entirely at
liberty there, since he had work on hand which would permit him to spend
no time under his own roof except at night.  He soon overcame the trivial
objections made by the philosopher and, fifteen minutes after they had
left the Corner of the Muses, he was permitted to open the door of his
house to his guests, and he did so with genuine pleasure.  The old
housekeeper and the grey-haired steward, who had been in his father's
service, looked surprised, but worked zealously after Gorgias had
confided the visitors to their charge.  The pressure of business forbade
his fulfilling the duties of host in his own person.

Didymus and his family had reason to be grateful; and when the old sage
found in the large library which the architect placed at his disposal
many excellent books and among them some of his own, he ceased his
restless pacing to and fro and forced himself to settle down.  Then he
remembered that, by the advice of a friend, he had placed his property in
the keeping of a reliable banker and, though life still seemed dark grey,
it no longer looked as black as before.

Gorgias briefly related all this to the Nubian, and Dion added that she
would find Archibius with his Roman friend at the house of Berenike's
brother, the philosopher Arius.  Like himself, the latter was suffering
from an injury inflicted by a reckless trick of Antyllus.  Barine's
mother was there also, so Anukis could inform them of the fate of Didymus
and his brother, and tell them that he, Dion, intended to leave her house
and the city an hour after sunset.

"But," interrupted Gorgias, "no one, not even your hostess Berenike and
her brother, must know your destination.--You look as if you could keep a
secret, woman."

"Though she owes her nickname Aisopion to her nimble tongue," replied
Dion.

"But this tongue is like the little silver fish with scarlet spots in the
palace garden," said Anukis.  "They dart to and fro nimbly enough; but as
soon as danger threatens they keep as quiet in the water as though they
were nailed fast.  And--by mighty Isis!--we have no lack of peril in
these trying times.  Would you like to see the lady Berenike and the
others before your departure?"

"Berenike, yes; but the sons of Arius--they are fine fellows--would be
wise to keep aloof from this house to-day."

"Yes indeed!" the architect chimed in.  "It will be prudent for their
father, too, to seek some hiding-place.  He is too closely connected with
Octavianus.  It may indeed happen that the Queen will desire to make use
of him.  In that case he may be able to aid Barine, who is his sister's
child.  Timagenes, too, who comes from Rome as a mediator, may have some
influence."

