with Cleopatra, but a private citizen loves a queen only as a divinity.
I believe in your friendship for Barine, though I deem it dangerous."

"If you mean that it might injure the lovely woman," replied Dion,
raising his head more proudly as if to intimate that he required no
warning, even from him, "perhaps you are right.  Only I beg you not to
misunderstand me.  I am not vain enough to suppose that I could win her
heart, but unfortunately there are many who cannot forgive the power of
attraction which she exerts over me as well as upon all.  So many men
gladly visit Barine's house that there are an equal number of women who
would rejoice to close it.  Among them, of course, is Iras.  She dislikes
my friend; nay, I fear that what you witness yonder is the apple she
flung in order, if not to ruin, at least to drive her from the city, ere
the Queen--may the gods grant her victory!--ere Cleopatra returns.  You
know your niece Iras.  Like your sister Charmian, she will shrink from
nothing to remove an annoyance from her mistress's pathway, and it will
hardly please Cleopatra when she learns that the two youths whose welfare
lies nearest her heart--Antyllus and Caesarion--seek Barine's house, no
matter how stainless the latter's reputation may be."

"I have just heard of it," replied Archibius, "and I, too, am anxious.
Antony's son has inherited much of his father's insatiable love of
pleasure.  But Caesarion!  He has not yet ventured out of the dreamland
which surrounds him into actual life.  What others scarcely perceive
deals him a serious blow.  I fear Eros is sharpening arrows for him which
will pierce deep into his heart.  While talking with me he seemed
strangely changed.  His dreamy eyes glittered like a drunkard's when he
spoke of Barine.  I fear, I fear--"

"Impossible!" cried Dion, in surprise, nay, almost terror.  "If that is
the case, Iras is not wholly wrong, and we must deal with the matter
differently.  But it is of the first importance to conceal the fact that
Caesarion has any interest in the affairs of the old house-owner.  To
seek to maintain the old man's right to his own property is a matter of
course, and I will undertake to do this and try to get yonder orator home
Just see how the braggart is swinging his arms in Iras's service!  As for
Barine, it will be well to induce her to leave of her own free will a
city where it will be made unpleasant for her.  Try to persuade her to
pursue this course.  If I went to her with such a suggestion, I, who
yesterday--No, no!  Besides, she might hear that Iras and I--She would
imagine all sorts of absurdities.  You know what jealousy means.  To you,
whom she esteems, she would surely listen, and she need not go far from
the city.  If the heart of this enthusiastic boy--who might some day
desire to be 'King of kings' not only in name--should really be fired
with love for Barine, what serious misfortune might follow!  We must
secure her from him.  She could not go to my country house among the
papyrus plantations at Sebennys.  It would afford too much license for
evil tongues.  But you--your villa at Kanopus is too near--but, if I am
not mistaken, you have--"

"My estate in the lake region is remote enough, and will be at her
disposal," interrupted the other.  "The house is always kept ready for
my reception.  I will do my best to persuade her, for your advice is
prudent.  She must be withdrawn from the boy's eyes."

"I shall learn the result of your mission tomorrow," cried Dion eagerly--
"nay, this evening.  If she consents, I will tell Iras, as if by
accident, that Barine has gone to Upper Egypt to drink new milk, or
something of that kind.  Iras is a shrewd woman, and will be glad if she
can keep aloof from such trifles during the time which will decide the
fate of Cleopatra and of the world."

"My thoughts, too, are always with the army," said Archibius.  "How
trivial everything else seems compared with the result which will be
determined in the next few days!  But life is made up of trifles.  They
are food, drink, maintenance.  Should the Queen return triumphant, and
find Caesarion in wrong paths--"

"We must close them against him," exclaimed Dion.

"That the boy may not follow Barine?" asked Archibius, shaking his head.
"I think we need feel no anxiety on that score.  He will doubtless
eagerly desire to do so, but with him there is a wide gulf between the
wish and its fulfilment.  Antyllus is differently constituted.  He would
be quite capable of ordering a horse to be saddled, or the sails of a
boat to be spread in order to pursue her--beyond the Cataract if
necessary.  So we must maintain the utmost secrecy concerning the place
to which Barine voluntarily exiles herself."

"But she is not yet on her way," replied Dion with a faint sigh.  "She is
bound to this city by many ties."

"I know it," answered Archibius, confirming his companion's fear.  The
latter, pointing to the equipage, said in a rapid, earnest tone: "Gorgias
is beckoning.  But, before we part, let me beseech you to do everything
to persuade Barine to leave here.  She is in serious danger.  Conceal
nothing from her, and say that her friends will not leave her too long in
solitude."

Archibius, with a significant glance, shook his finger at the young man
in playful menace, and then went up to the carriage.

Caesarion's clear-cut but pallid face, whose every feature resembled that
of his father, the great Caesar, bent towards them from the opening above
the door, as he greeted both with a formal bend of the head and a
patronizing glance.  His eyes had sparkled with boyish glee when he first
caught sight of the friend from whom he had been separated several weeks,
but to the stranger he wished to assume the bearing which beseemed a
king.  He desired to make him feel his superior position, for he was ill-
disposed towards him.  He had seen him favoured by the woman whom he
imagined he loved, and whose possession he had been promised by the
secret science of the Egyptians, whose power to unveil the mysteries of
the future he firmly believed.  Antyllus, Antony's son, had taken him to
Barine, and she had received him with the consideration due his rank.
Spite of her bright graciousness, boyish timidity had hitherto prevented
any word of love to the young beauty whom he saw surrounded by so many
distinguished men of mature years.  Yet his beaming, expressive eyes must
have revealed his feelings to her.  Doubtless his glances had not been
unobserved, for only a few hours before an Egyptian woman had stopped him
at the temple of his father, Caesar, to which, according to the fixed
rules governing the routine of his life, he went daily at a certain hour
to pray, to offer sacrifices, to anoint the stone of the altar, or to
crown the statue of the departed emperor.

Caesarion had instantly recognized her as the female slave whom he had
seen in Barine's atrium, and ordered his train to fall back.

Fortunately his tutor, Rhodon, had not fulfilled his duty of accompanying
him.  So the youth had ventured to follow the slave woman, and in the
shadow of the mimosas, in the little grove beside the temple, he found
Barine's litter.  His heart throbbed violently as, full of anxious
expectation, he obeyed her signal to draw nearer.  Still, she had granted
him nothing save the favour of gratifying one of her wishes.  But his
heart had swelled almost to bursting when, resting her beautiful white
arm on the door of her litter, she had told him that unjust men were
striving to rob her grandfather Didymus of his garden, and she expected
him, who bore the title of the "King of kings" to do his best to prevent
such a crime.

It had been difficult for him to grasp her meaning while she was
speaking.  There was a roaring sound in his ears as if, instead of being
in the silent temple grove, he was standing on a stormy day upon the
surf-beaten promontory of Lochias.  He had not ventured to raise his eyes
and look into her face.  Not until she closed with the question whether
she might hope for his assistance did her gaze constrain him to glance
up.  Ah, what had he not fancied he read in her imploring blue eyes!
how unspeakably beautiful she had appeared!

He had stood before her as if bereft of his senses.  His sole knowledge
was that he had promised, with his hand on his heart, to do everything in
his power to prevent what threatened to cause her pain.  Then her little
hand, with its sparkling rings, was again stretched towards him, and he
had resolved to kiss it; but while he glanced around at his train, she
had already waved him a farewell, and the litter was borne away.

He stood motionless, like the figure of a man on one of his mother's
ancient vases, staring in bewilderment after the flying figure of
Happiness, whom he might easily have caught by her floating locks.  How
he raged over the miserable indecision which had defrauded him of so much
joy!  Yet nothing was really lost.  If he succeeded in fulfilling her
wishes, she could not fail to be grateful; and then--

He pondered over the person to whom he should apply--Mardion, the Regent,
or the Keeper of the Seal?  No, they had planned the erection of the
group of sculpture in the philosopher's garden.  To Iras, his mother's
confidante?  Nay, last of all to her.  The cunning woman would have
perceived his purpose and betrayed it to the Regent.  Ah, if Charmian,
his mother's other attendant, had been present!  but she was with the
fleet, which perhaps was even now engaged in battle with the enemy.

At this recollection his eyes again sought the ground--he had not been
permitted to take the place in the army to which his birth entitled him,
while his mother and Charmian--But he did not pursue this painful current
of thought; for a serious reproach had forced itself upon him and sent
the blood to his cheeks.  He wished to be considered a man, and yet, in
these fateful days, which would determine the destiny of his mother, his
native city, Egypt, and that Rome which he, the only son of Caesar, was
taught to consider his heritage, he was visiting a beautiful woman,
thinking of her, and of her alone.  His days and half the nights were
passed in forming plans for securing her love, forgetful of what should
have occupied his whole heart.

Only yesterday Iras had sharply admonished him that, in times like these,
it was the duty of every friend of Cleopatra, and every foe of her foes,
to be with the army at least in mind.

He had remembered this, but, instead of heeding the warning, the thought
of her had merely recalled her uncle, Archibius, who possessed great
influence, not merely on account of his wealth but because every one also
knew his high standing in the regard of the Queen.  Besides, the clever,
kindly man had always been friendly to him from childhood, and like a
revelation came the idea of applying to him, and to the architect
Gorgias, who had a voice in the matter, and by whom he had been strongly
attracted during the period while he was rebuilding the wing assigned to
the prince in the palace at Lochias.

So one of the attendants was instantly despatched with the little tablet
which invited Gorgias to the interview at the Temple of Isis.

Then, in the afternoon, Caesarion went secretly in a boat to the little
palace of Archibius, situated on the seashore at Kanopus, and now as the
latter, with his friend, stood beside the carriage door, he explained to
them that he was going with the architect to old Didymus to assure him of
his assistance.

This was unadvisable in every respect, but it required all the weight of
the older man's reasons to induce the prince to yield.  The consequences
which might ensue, should the populace discover that he was taking sides
against the Regent, would be incalculable.  But submission and withdrawal
were especially difficult to the young "King of kings."  He longed to
pose as a man in Dion's presence, and as this could not be, he strove
to maintain the semblance of independence by yielding his resolve
only on the plea of not desiring to injure the aged scholar and his
granddaughter.  Finally, he again entreated the architect to secure
Didymus in the possession of his property.  When at last he drove away
with Archibius, twilight was already gathering, torches were lighted in
front of the temple and the little mausoleum adjoining the cella, and
pitch-pans were blazing in the square.




CHAPTER III.

"The lad is in an evil plight," said Gorgias, shaking his head
thoughtfully as the equipage rolled over the stone pavement of the
Street of the King.

