her services and discovered Barine's flight.  True, she mentioned the
Queen's desire to place her children in Archibius's charge, but she could
not give him full particulars until she reached her own apartments.

Her absence had not been noticed.  The Regent Mardion had received the
procession in the Queen's name, for Cleopatra had driven into the city,
no one knew where.

Charmian entered her apartments with a lighter heart.  Anukis opened the
door to them.  She had remained undisturbed, and it was a pleasure to
Archibius to give the faithful, clever freedwoman an account of the
matter with his own lips.  He could have bestowed no richer reward upon
the modest servant, who listened to his words as if they were a
revelation.  When she disclaimed the thanks with which he concluded,
protesting that she was the person under obligation, the expression was
sincere.  Her keen intellect instantly recognized the aristocrat's manner
of addressing an equal or an inferior; and he who, in her eyes, was the
first of men, had described the course of events as though she had stood
on the same level.  The Queen herself might have been satisfied with the
report.

When she left Charmian's rooms to join the other servants, she told
herself that she was an especially favoured mortal; and when a young cook
teased her about her head being sunk between her shoulders, she answered,
laughing--"My shoulders have grown so high because I shrug them so often
at the fools who jeer at me and yet are not half so happy and grateful."

Charmian, sorely wearied, had flung herself into an arm-chair, and
Archibius took his place opposite to her.  They were happy in each
other's society, even when silent; but to-day the hearts of both were so
full that they fared like those who are so worn out by fatigue that they
cannot sleep.  How much they had to tell each other!--yet it was long ere
Charmian broke the silence and returned to the subject of the Queen's
wish, describing to her brother Cleopatra's visit to the house which the
children had built, how kind and cordial she had been; yet, a few minutes
later, incensed by the mere mention of Barine's name, she had dismissed
her so ungraciously.

"I do not know what you intend," she said in conclusion, "but,
notwithstanding my love for her, I must perhaps decide in favour of what
is most difficult, for--when she learns that it was I who withdrew the
daughter of Leonax from her and the base Alexas--what treatment can I
expect, especially as Iras no longer gives me the same affection, and
shows that she has forgotten my love and care?  This will increase, and
the worst of the matter is, that if the Queen begins to favour her, I
cannot justly reproach her, for Iras is keener-witted, and has a more
active brain.  Statecraft was always odious to me.  Iras, on the
contrary, is delighted with the opportunity to speak on subjects
connected with the government of the country, and especially the
ceaseless, momentous game with Rome and the men who guide her destiny."

"That game is lost," Archibius broke in with so much earnestness that
Charmian started, repeating in a low, timid tone:

"Lost?"

"Forever," said Archibius, "unless--

"The Olympians be praised--that there is still a doubt."

"Unless Cleopatra can decide to commit an act which will force her to
be faithless to herself, and destroy her noble image through all future
generations."

"How?"

"Whenever you learn it, will be too soon."

"And suppose she should do it, Archibius?  You are her most trusted
confidant.  She will place in your charge what she loves more than she
does herself."

"More?  You mean, I suppose, the children?"

"The children!  Yes, a hundred times yes.  She loves them better than
aught else on earth.  For them, believe me, she would be ready to go to
her death."

"Let us hope so."

"And you--were she to commit the horrible deed--I can only suspect what
it is.  But should she descend from the height which she has hitherto
occupied--would you still be ready--"

"With me," he interrupted quietly, "what she does or does not do matters
nothing.  She is unhappy and will be plunged deeper and deeper into
misery.  I know this, and it constrains me to exert my utmost powers in
her service.  I am hers as the hermit consecrated to Serapis belongs to
the god.  His every thought must be devoted to him.  To the deity who
created him he dedicates body and soul until the death to which he dooms
him.  The bonds which unite me to this woman--you know their origin--are
not less indestructible.  Whatever she desires whose fulfilment will not
force me to despise myself is granted in advance."

"She will never require such things from the friend of her childhood,"
cried Charmian.  Then, approaching him with both arms extended joyfully,
she exclaimed: "Thus you ought to speak and feel, and therein is the
answer to the question which has agitated my soul since yesterday.
Barine's flight, the favour and disfavour of Cleopatra, Iras, my poor
head, which abhors politics, while at this time the Queen needs keen-
sighted confidants--"

"By no means," her brother interrupted.  "It is for men alone to give
counsel in these matters.  Accursed be women's gossip over their toilet
tables.  It has already scattered to the four winds many a well-
considered plan of the wisest heads, and an Iras could never be more
fatal to statecraft than just at the present moment, had not Fate
already uttered the final verdict."

"Then hence with these scruples," cried Charmian eagerly; "my doubts are
at an end!  As usual, you point out the right path.  I had thought of
returning to the country estate we call Irenia--the abode of peace--or to
our beloved little palace at Kanopus, to spend the years which may still
be allotted to me, and return to everything that made my childhood
beautiful.  The philosophers, the flowers in the garden, the poets--
even the new Roman ones, of whose works Timagenes sent us such charming
specimens--would enliven the solitude.  The child, the daughter of the
man whose love I renounced, and afterwards perhaps her sons and
daughters, would fill the place of my own.  As they would have been dear
to Leonax, I, too, would have loved them!  This is the guise in which the
future has appeared to me in many a quiet hour.  But shall Charmian--who,
when her heart throbbed still more warmly and life lay fair before her,
laid her first love upon the altar of sacrifice for her royal playfellow
--abandon Cleopatra in misfortune from mere selfish scruples?  No, no!--
Like you, I too belong--come what may--to the Queen."

She gazed into her brother's face, sure of his approval but, waving his
uplifted hand, he answered gravely: "No, Charmian!  What I, a man, can
assume, might be fatal to you, a woman.  The present is not sweet enough
for me to embitter it with wormwood from the future.  And yet you must
cast one glance into its gloomy domain, in order to understand me.  You
can be silent, and what you now learn will be a secret between us.  Only
one thing"--here he lowered the loud tones of his deep voice--"only one
thing can save her: the murder of Antony, or an act of shameless
treachery which would deliver him into Octavianus's power.  This is the
proposal Timagenes brought."

"This?" she asked in a hollow tone, her grey head drooping.

"This," he repeated firmly.  "And if she succumbs to the temptation, she
will be faithless to the love which has coursed through her whole life as
the Nile flows through the land of her ancestors.  Then, Charmian, stay,
stay under any circumstances, cling to her more firmly than ever, for
then, then, my sister, she will be more wretched--ten, a hundred fold
more wretched than if Octavianus deprives her of everything, perhaps even
life itself."

"Nor will I leave her, come what may.  I will remain at her side until
the end," cried Charmian eagerly.  But Archibius, without noticing the
enthusiastic ardor, so unusual to his sister's quiet nature, calmly
continued: "She won your heart also, and it seems impossible for you to
desert her.  Many have shared our feelings; and it is no disgrace to any
one.  Misfortune is a weapon which cleaves base natures like a sword, yet
like a hammer welds noble ones more closely.  To you, therefore, it now
seems doubly difficult to leave her, but you need love.  The right to
live and guard yourself from the most pitiable retrogression is your due,
as much as that of the rare woman on the throne.  So long as you are sure
of her love, remain with her, and show your devotion in every situation
until the end.  But the motives which were drawing you away to books,
flowers, and children, weigh heavily in the balance, and if you lack the
anchor of her favour and love, I shall see you perish miserably.  The
frost emanating from Cleopatra, if her heart grew cold to you, the pin-
pricks with which Iras would assail you, were you defenceless, would kill
you.  This must not be, sister; we will guard against it  Do not
interrupt me.  The counsel I advise you to follow has been duly weighed.
If you see that the Queen still loves you as in former days, cling to
her; but should you learn the contrary, bid her farewell to-morrow.  My
Irenia is yours--"

"But she does love me, and even should she no longer--"

"The test is at hand.  We will leave the decision to her.  You shall
confess that you were the culprit who aided Barine to escape her power to
punish."

"Archibius!"

"If you did not, a series of falsehoods must ensue.  Try whether the
petty qualities in her nature, which urged her to commit the fate of
Leonax's daughter to unworthy hands, are more powerful than the nobler
ones.  Try whether she is worthy of the self-sacrificing fidelity which
you have given her all your life.  If she remains the same as before,
spite of this admission--"

Here he was interrupted by Anukis, who asked if her mistress would see
Iras at this late hour.  "Admit her," replied Archibius, after hastily
exchanging glances with his sister, whose face had paled at his demand.
He perceived it and, as the servant withdrew, he clasped her hand, saying
with earnest affection: "I gave you my opinion, but at our age we must
take counsel with ourselves, and you will find the right path."

"I have already found it," she answered softly with downcast eyes.  "This
visitor brought a speedy decision.  I must not feel ashamed in Iras's
presence."

She had scarcely finished speaking when the Queen's younger confidante
entered.  She was excited and, after casting a searching glance around
the familiar room, she asked, after a curt greeting:

"No one knows where the Queen has gone.  Mardion received the procession
in her place.  Did she take you into her confidence?"

Charmian answered in the negative, and inquired whether Antony had
arrived, and how she had found him.

"In a pitiable state," was the reply.  "I hastened hither to prevent the
Queen from visiting him, if possible.  She would have received a rebuff.
It is horrible."

"The disappointment of Paraetonium is added to the other burdens,"
observed Archibius.

"A feather compared with the rest," cried Iras indignantly.  "What a
spectacle!  A shrivelled soul, never too large, in the body of a powerful
giant.  Disaster crushes the courage of the descendant of Herakles.  The
weakling will drag the Queen's splendid courage with him into the dust."

"We will do our best to prevent it," replied Archibius firmly.
"The immortals have placed you and Charmian at her side to sustain her,
if her own strength fails.  The time to test your powers has arrived."

"I know my duty," replied Iras austerely.

"Prove it!" said Archibius earnestly.  "You think you have cause for
anger against Charmian."

"Whoever treats my foes so tenderly can doubtless dispense with my
affection.  Where is your ward?"

"That you shall learn later," replied Charmian advancing.  "But when you
do know, you will have still better reason to doubt my love; yet it was
only to save one dear to me from misery, certainly not to grieve you,
that I stepped between you and Barine.  And now let me say--had you
wounded me to the quick, and everything dear to the Greek heart called to
me for vengeance--I should impose upon myself whatever constraint might
be necessary to deny the impulse, because this breast contains a love
stronger, more powerful, than the fiercest hate.  And this love we both
share.  Hate me, strive to wound and injure one at whose side you have
hitherto stood like a daughter, but beware of robbing me of the strength
and freedom which I need, to be and to offer to my royal mistress all the
assistance in my power.  I have just been consulting my brother about
leaving Cleopatra's service."

"Now?" Iras broke in vehemently.  "No, no!  Not that!  It must not be!
She cannot spare you now."

"More easily, perhaps, than you," replied Charmian; "yet in many things
my services might be hard to replace."
