the goddess of my fate."  But he dared not utter this aloud.

But Petrus had heard him sigh, and said, "Let that pass.  This head
smiles with sweet fascination, and the countenance of the goddess that
rules the actions even of the immortals, should be stern and grave."

Polykarp could contain himself no longer.

"Yes, father," he exclaimed.  "Fate is terrible--and yet I will represent
the goddess with a smiling mouth, for that which is most terrible in her
is, that she rules not by stern laws, but smiles while she makes us her
sport."




CHAPTER XV.

It was a splendid morning; not a cloud dimmed the sky which spread high
above desert, mountain, and oasis, like an arched tent of uniform deep-
blue silk.  How delicious it is to breathe the pure, light, aromatic air
on the heights, before the rays of the sun acquire their mid-day power,
and the shadows of the heated porphyry cliffs, growing shorter and
shorter, at last wholly disappear!

With what delight did Sirona inhale this pure atmosphere, when after a
long night--the fourth that she had passed in the anchorite's dismal
cave-she stepped out into the air.  Paulus sat by the hearth, and was so
busily engaged with some carving, that he did not observe her approach.

"Kind good man!"  thought Sirona, as she perceived a steaming pot on the
fire, and the palm-branches which the Alexandrian had fastened up by the
entrance to the cave, to screen her from the mounting sun.  She knew the
way without a guide to the spring from which Paulus had brought her water
at their first meeting, and she now slipped away, and went down to it
with a pretty little pitcher of burnt clay in her hand.  Paulus did
indeed see her, but he made as though he neither, saw nor heard, for he
knew she was going there to wash herself, and to dress and smarten
herself as well as might be--for was she not a woman!  When she returned,
she looked not less fresh and charming than on that morning when she had
been seen and watched by Hermas.  True, her heart was sore, true, she was
perplexed and miserable, but sleep and rest had long since effaced from
her healthy, youthful, and elastic frame all traces left by that fearful
day of flight; and fate, which often means best by us when it shows us a
hostile face, had sent her a minor anxiety to divert her from her graver
cares.

Her greyhound was very ill, and it seemed that in the ill-treatment it
had experienced, not only its leg had been broken, but that it had
suffered some internal injury.  The brisk, lively little creature fell
down powerless when ever it tried to stand, and when she took it up to
nurse it comfortably in her lap, it whined pitifully, and looked up at
her sorrowfully, and as if complaining to her.  It would take neither
food nor drink; its cool little nose was hot; and when she left the cave,
Iambe lay panting on the fine woollen coverlet which Paulus had spread
upon the bed, unable even to look after her.

Before taking the dog the water she had fetched in the graceful jar--
which was another gift from her hospitable friend--she went up to Paulus
and greeted him kindly.  He looked up from his work, thanked her, and a
few minutes later, when she came out of the cave again, asked her, "How
is the poor little creature?"

Sirona shrugged her shoulders, and said sadly, "She has drunk nothing,
and does not even know me, and pants as rapidly as last evening--if I
were to lose the poor little beast!--"

She could say no more for emotion, but Paulus shook his head.

"It is sinful," he said, "to grieve so for a beast devoid of reason."

"Iambe is not devoid of reason," replied Sirona.  "And even if she were,
what have I left if she dies?  She grew up in my father's house, where
all loved me; I had her first when she was only a few days old, and I
brought her up on milk on a little bit of sponge.  Many a time, when I
heard the little thing whining for food, have I got out of bed at night
with bare feet; and so she came to cling to me like a child, and could
not do without me.  No one can know how another feels about such things.
My father used to tell us of a spider that beautified the life of a
prisoner, and what is a dirty dumb creature like that to my clever,
graceful little dog!  I have lost my home, and here every one believes
the worst of me, although I have done no one any harm, and no one, no one
loves me but Iambe."

"But I know of one who loves every one with a divine and equal love,"
interrupted Paulus.

"I do not care for such a one," answered Sirona.  "Iambe follows no one
but me; what good can a love do me that I must share with all the world!
But you mean the crucified God of the Christians?  He is good and
pitiful, so says Dame Dorothea; but he is dead--I cannot see him, nor
hear him, and, certainly, I cannot long for one who only shows me grace.
I want one to whom I can count for something, and to whose life and
happiness I am indispensable."

A scarcely perceptible shudder thrilled through the Alexandrian as she
spoke these words, and he thought, as he glanced at her face and figure
with a mingled expression of regret and admiration, "Satan, before he
fell, was the fairest among the pure spirits, and he still has power over
this woman.  She is still far from being ripe for salvation, and yet she
has a gentle heart, and even if she has erred, she is not lost."

Sirona's eyes had met his, and she said with a sigh, "You look at me so
compassionately--if only Iambe were well, and if I succeeded in reaching
Alexandria, my destiny would perhaps take a turn for the better."

Paulus had risen while she spoke, and had taken the pot from the hearth;
he now offered it to his guest, saying:

"For the present we will trust to this broth to compensate to you for the
delights of the capital; I am glad that you relish it.  But tell me now,
have you seriously considered what danger may threaten a beautiful,
young, and unprotected woman in the wicked city of the Greeks?  Would it
not be better that you should submit to the consequences of your guilt,
and return to Phoebicius, to whom unfortunately you belong?"

Sirona, at these words, had set down the vessel out of which she was
eating, and rising in passionate haste, she exclaimed:

"That shall never, never be!--And when I was sitting up there half-dead,
and took your step for that of Phoebicius, the gods showed me a way to
escape from him, and from you or anyone who would drag me back to him.
When I fled to the edge of the abyss, I was raving and crazed, but what I
then would have done in my madness, I would do now in cold blood--as
surely as I hope to see my own people in Arelas once more!  What was I
once, and to what have I come through Phoebicius!  Life was to me a sunny
garden with golden trellises and shady trees and waters as bright as
crystal, with rosy flowers and singing birds; and he, he has darkened its
light, and fouled its springs, and broken down its flowers.  All now
seems dumb and colorless, and if the abyss is my grave, no one will miss
me nor mourn for me."

"Poor woman!"  said Paulus.  "Your husband then showed you very little
love."

"Love," laughed Sirona, "Phoebicius and love!  Only yesterday I told you,
how cruelly he used to torture me after his feasts, when he was drunk or
when he recovered from one of his swoons.  But one thing he did to me,
one thing which broke the last thread of a tie between us.  No one yet
has ever heard a word of it from me; not even Dorothea, who often blamed
me when I let slip a hard word against my husband.  It was well for her
to talk--if I had found a husband like Petrus I might perhaps have been
like Dorothea.  It is a marvel, which I myself do not understand, that I
did not grow wicked with such a man, a man who--why should I conceal it--
who, when we were at Rome, because he was in debt, and because he hoped
to get promotion through his legate Quintillus, sold me--me--to him.  He
himself brought the old man--who had often followed me about--into his
house, but our hostess, a good woman, had overheard the matter, and
betrayed it all to me.  It is so base, so vile--it seems to blacken my
soul only to think of it!  The legate got little enough in return for his
sesterces, but Phoebicius did not restore his wages of sin, and his rage
against me knew no bounds when he was transferred to the oasis at the
instigation of his betrayed chief.  Now you know all, and never advise me
again to return to that man to whom my misfortune has bound me.

"Only listen how the poor little beast in there is whining.  It wants to
come to me, and has not the strength to move."

Paulus looked after her sympathetically as she disappeared under the
opening in the rock, and he awaited her return with folded arms.  He
could not see into the cave, for the space in which the bed stood was
closed at the end by the narrow passage which formed the entrance, and
which joined it at an angle as the handle of a scythe joins the blade.
She remained a long time, and he could hear now and then a tender word
with which she tried to comfort the suffering creature.  Suddenly he was
startled by a loud and bitter cry from Sirona; no doubt, the poor woman's
affectionate little companion was dead, and in the dim twilight of the
cave she had seen its dulled eye, and felt the stiffness of death
overspreading and paralyzing its slender limbs.  He dared not go into the
cavern, but he felt his eyes fill with tears, and he would willingly have
spoken some word of consolation to her.

At last she came out, her eyes red with weeping.  Paulus had guessed
rightly for she held the body of little Iambe in her arms.

"How sorry I am," said Paulus, "the poor little creature was so pretty."

Sirona nodded, sat down, and unfastened the prettily embroidered band
from the dog's neck, saying half to herself, and half to Paulus, "My
little Agnes worked this collar.  I myself had taught her to sew, and
this was the first piece of work that was all her own."  She held the
collar up to the anchorite.  "This clasp is of real silver," she went on,
"and my father himself gave it to me.  He was fond of the poor little dog
too.  Now it will never leap and spring again, poor thing."

She looked sadly down at the dead dog.  Then she collected herself, and
said hurriedly, "Now I will go away from here.  Nothing--nothing keeps me
any longer in this wilderness, for the senator's house, where I have
spent many happy hours, and where everyone was fond of me, is closed
against me, and must ever be so long as he lives there.  If you have not
been kind to me only to do me harm in the end, let me go today, and help
me to reach Alexandria."

"Not to-day, in any case not to-day," replied Paulus.  "First I must find
out when a vessel sails for Klysma or for Berenike, and then I have many
other things to see to for you.  You owe me an answer to my question, as
to what you expect to do and to find in Alexandria.  Poor child--the
younger and the fairer you are--"

"I know all you would say to me," interrupted Sirona.  "Wherever I have
been, I have attracted the eyes of men, and when I have read in their
looks that I pleased them, it has greatly pleased me--why should I deny
it?  Many a one has spoken fair words to me or given me flowers, and sent
old women to my house to win me for them, but even if one has happened to
