topmost stone, by which she had tried to steady herself, lost its
balance, its fall interrupted their conversation, and Miriam returned to
the sick man.

Now she was standing at the door, waiting for Hermas.  Long, long did she
wait; at last he appeared with Dorothea, and she could see that he
glanced up again at Sirona; but a spiteful smile passed over her lips,
for the window was empty and the fair form that he had hoped to see again
had vanished.

Sirona was now sitting at her loom in the front room, whither she had
been tempted by the sound of approaching hoofs.  Polykarp had ridden by
on his father's fine horse, had greeted her as he passed, and had dropped
a rose on the roadway.  Half an hour later the old black slave came to
Sirona, who was throwing the shuttle through the warp with a skilful
hand.

"Mistress," cried the negress with a hideous grin; the lonely woman
paused in her work, and as she looked up enquiringly the old woman gave
her a rose.  Sirona took the flower, blew away the road-side dust that
had clung to it, rearranged the tumbled delicate petals with her finger-
tips, and said, while she seemed to give the best part of her attention
to this occupation, "For the future let roses be when you find them.  You
know Phoebicius, and if any one sees it, it will be talked about."

The black woman turned away, shrugging her shoulders; but Sirona thought,
"Polykarp is a handsome and charming man, and has finer and more
expressive eyes than any other here, if he were not always talking of his
plans, and drawings, and figures, and mere stupid grave things that I do
not care for!"




CHAPTER VII.

The next day, after the sun had passed the meridian and it was beginning
to grow cool, Hermas and Paulus yielded to Stephanus' wish, as he began
to feel stronger, and carried him out into the air.  The anchorites sat
near each other on a low block of stone, which Hermas had made into a
soft couch for his father by heaping up a high pile of fresh herbs.
They looked after the youth, who had taken his bow and arrows, as he
went up the mountain to hunt a wild goat; for Petrus had prescribed a
strengthening diet for the sick man.  Not a word was spoken by either of
them till the hunter had disappeared.  Then Stephanus said, "How much he
has altered since I have been ill.  It is not so very long since I last
saw him by the broad light of day, and he seems meantime to have grown
from a boy into a man.  How self-possessed his gait is."

Paulus, looking down at the ground, muttered some words of assent.  He
remembered the discus-throwing and thought to himself, "The Palaestra
certainly sticks in his mind, and he has been bathing too; and yesterday,
when he came up from the oasis, he strode in like a young athlete."

That friendship only is indeed genuine when two friends, without speaking
a word to each other, can nevertheless find happiness in being together.
Stephanus and Paulus were silent, and yet a tacit intercourse subsisted
between them as they sat gazing towards the west, where the sun was near
its setting.

Far below them gleamed the narrow, dark blue-green streak of the Red Sea,
bounded by the bare mountains of the coast, which shone in a shimmer of
golden light.  Close beside them rose the toothed crown of the great
mountain which, so soon as the day-star had sunk behind it, appeared
edged with a riband of glowing rubies.  The flaming glow flooded the
western horizon, filmy veils of mist floated across the hilly coast-line,
the silver clouds against the pure sky changed their hue to the tender
blush of a newly opened rose, and the undulating shore floated in the
translucent violet of the amethyst.  There not a breath of air was
stirring, not a sound broke the solemn stillness of the evening.  Not
till the sea was taking a darker and still darker hue, till the glow on
the mountain peaks and in the west had begun to die away, and the night
to spread its shades over the heights and hollows, did Stephanus unclasp
his folded hands and softly speak his companion's name.  Paulus started
and said, speaking like a man who is aroused from a dream and who is
suddenly conscious of having heard some one speak, "You are right; it is
growing dark and cool and you must go back into the cave."

Stephanus offered no opposition and let himself be led back to his bed;
while Paulus was spreading the sheepskin over the sick man he sighed
deeply.

"What disturbs your soul?" asked the older man.  "It is--it was--what
good can it do me!" cried Paulus in strong excitement.  "There we sat,
witnesses of the most glorious marvels of the Most High, and I, in
shameless idolatry, seemed to see before me the chariot of Helios with
its glorious winged-horses, snorting fire as they went, and Helios
himself in the guise of Hermas, with gleaming golden hair, and the
dancing Hours, and the golden gates of the night.  Accursed rabble of
demons!--"

At this point the anchorite was interrupted, for Hermas entered the cave,
and laying a young steinbock, that he had killed, before the two men,
exclaimed, "fine fellow, and he cost me no more than one arrow.  I will
light a fire at once and roast the best pieces.  There are plenty of
bucks still on our mountain, and I know where to find them."

In about an hour, father and son were eating the pieces of meat, which
had been cooked on a spit.  Paulus declined to sup with them, for after
he had scourged himself in despair and remorse for the throwing of the
discus, he had vowed a strict fast.

"And now," cried Hermas, when his father declared himself satisfied,
after seeming to relish greatly the strong meat from which he had so long
abstained, "and now the best is to come!  In this flask I have some
strengthening wine, and when it is empty it will be filled afresh."
Stephanus took the wooden beaker that his son offered him, drank a
little, and then said, while he smacked his tongue to relish the after-
taste of the noble juice,  "That is something choice!--Syrian wine! only
taste it, Paulus."

Paulus took the beaker in his hand, inhaled the fragrance of the golden
fluid, and then murmured, but without putting it to his lips, "That is
not Syrian; it is Egyptian, I know it well.  I should take it to be
Mareotic."

"So Sirona called it," cried Hermas, "and you know it by the mere smell!
She said it was particularly good for the sick."

"That it is," Paulus agreed; but Stephanus asked in surprise, "Sirona?
who is she?"

The cave was but dimly lighted by the fire that had been made at the
opening, so that the two anchorites could not perceive that Hermas
reddened all over as he replied, "Sirona?  The Gaulish woman Sirona?  Do
you not know her?  She is the wife of the centurion down in the oasis."

"How do you come to know her?" asked his father.

"She lives in Petrus' house," replied the lad, "and as she had heard of
your wound--"

"Take her my thanks when you go there to-morrow morning," said Stephanus.
To her and to her husband too.  Is he a Gaul?"

"I believe so--nay, certainly," answered Hermas, "they call him the lion,
and he is no doubt a Gaul?"

When the lad had left the cave the old man laid himself down to rest, and
Paulus kept watch by him on his son's bed.  But Stephanus could not
sleep, and when his friend approached him to give him some medicine, he
said, "The wife of a Gaul has done me a kindness, and yet the wine would
have pleased me better if it had not come from a Gaul."

Paulus looked at him enquiringly, and though total darkness reigned in
the cave, Stephanus felt his gaze and said, "I owe no man a grudge and I
love my neighbor.  Great injuries have been done me, but I have for
given--from the bottom of my heart forgiven.  Only one man lives to whom
I wish evil, and he is a Gaul."

"Forgive him too," said Paulus, "and do not let evil thoughts disturb
your sleep."

"I am not tired," said the sick man, "and if you had gone through such
things as I have, it would trouble your rest at night too."

"I know, I know," said Paulus soothingly.  "It was a Gaul that persuaded
your wretched wife into quitting your house and her child."

"And I loved, oh! how I loved Glycera!"  groaned the old man.  "She lived
like a princess and I fulfilled her every wish before it was uttered.
She herself has said a hundred times that I was too kind and too
yielding, and that there was nothing left for her to wish.  Then the Gaul
came to our house, a man as acrid as sour wine, but with a fluent tongue
and sparkling eyes.  How he entangled Glycera I know not, nor do I want
to know; he shall atone for it in hell.  For the poor lost woman I pray
day and night.  A spell was on her, and she left her heart behind in my
house, for her child was there and she loved Hermas so fondly; indeed she
was deeply devoted to me.  Think what the spell must be that can
annihilate a mother's love!  Wretch, hapless wretch that I am!  Did you
ever love a woman, Paulus?"

"You ought to be asleep," said Paulus in a warning tone.  "Who ever lived
nearly half a century without feeling love!  Now I will not speak another
word, and you must take this drink that Petrus has sent for you."  The
senator's medicine was potent, for the sick man fell asleep and did not
wake till broad day lighted up the cave.

Paulus was still sitting on his bed, and after they had prayed together,
he gave him the jar which Hermas had filled with fresh water before going
down to the oasis.

"I feel quite strong," said the old man.  "The medicine is good; I have
slept well and dreamed sweetly; but you look pale and as if you had not
slept."

"I," said Paulus, "I lay down there on the bed.  Now let me go out in the
air for a moment."  With these words he went out of the cave.

As soon as he was out of sight of Stephanus he drew a deep breath,
stretched his limbs, and rubbed his burning eyes; he felt as if there was
sand gathered under their lids, for he had forbidden them to close for
three days and nights.  At the same time he was consumed by a violent
thirst, for neither food nor drink had touched his lips for the same
length of time.  His hands were beginning to tremble, but the weakness
and pain that he experienced filled him with silent joy, and he would
willingly have retired into his cave and have indulged, not for the first
time, in the ecstatic pain of hanging on the cross, and bleeding from
five wounds, in imitation of the Saviour.

But Stephanus was calling him, and without hesitation he returned to him
and replied to his questions; indeed it was easier to him to speak than
to listen, for in his ears there was a roaring, moaning, singing, and
piping, and he felt as if drunk with strong wine.

"If only Hermas does not forget to thank the Gaul!"  exclaimed Stephanus.

"Thank--aye, we should always be thankful!" replied his companion,
closing his eyes.

"I dreamed of Glycera," the old man began again.  You said yesterday that
love had stirred your heart too, and yet you never were married.  You are
silent?  Answer me something."

"I--who called me?" murmured Paulus, staring at the questioner with a
fixed gaze.

Stephanus was startled to see that his companion trembled in every limb,
he raised himself and held out to him the flask with Sirona's wine, which
the other, incapable of controlling himself, snatched eagerly from his
hand, and emptied with frantic thirst.  The fiery liquor revived his
failing strength, brought the color to his cheeks, and lent a strange
lustre to his eyes.  "How much good that has done me!" he cried with a
deep sigh and pressing his hands on his breast.

Stephanus was perfectly reassured and repeated his question, but he
almost repented of his curiosity, for his friend's voice had an utterly
strange ring in it, as he answered:

"No, I was never married--never, but I have loved for all that, and I
will tell you the story from beginning to end; but you must not interrupt
me, no not once.  I am in a strange mood--perhaps it is the wine.  I had
not drunk any for so long; I had fasted since--since but it does not
matter.  Be silent, quite silent, and let me tell my story."
