covered his eyes, crying out distressfully: "No, no; that hurts.  Take
away the lamp."

Katharina set it down on a low chest behind the head of the bed; then she
went up to the sufferer, gave him her mother's message, and asked him how
he was and why he was left alone.  He could only give incoherent answers
which he gasped out with great difficulty, bidding her go close to him
for he could not hear her distinctly.  He was very ill, he told her--
dying.  It was good of her to have come for she had always been his pet,
his dear, good little girl.

"And it was a happy impulse that brought you," he added, "to receive an
old man's blessing.  I give it you with my whole heart."

As he spoke he put forth his hand and she, following an instinctive
prompting, fell on her knees by the side of the couch.

He laid his burning right hand on her head and murmured some words of
blessing; she, however, scarcely heeded them, for his hand felt like lead
and its heat oppressed and distressed her dreadfully.  It was a sincere
grief to her to see this true old friend of her childhood suffering thus
--perhaps indeed dying; at the same time she did not forget what had
brought her here--still, she dared not disturb him in this act of
love.  He gave her his blessing--that was kind; but his mutterings did
not come to an end, the weight of the hot hand on her head grew heavier
and heavier, and at last became intolerable.  She felt quite dazed, but
with an effort she collected her senses and then perceived that the old
man had wandered off from the usual formulas of blessing and was
murmuring disconnected and inarticulate words.

At this she raised the terrible, fevered hand, laid it on the bed, and
was about to ask him whether he had betrayed her to Benjamin, and if he
had mentioned her name, when--Merciful God! there on his cheeks were the
same livid spots that she had noticed on those of the plague stricken man
in Medea's house.  With a cry of horror she sprang up, snatched at the
lamp, held it over the sufferer, heedless of his cries of anguish, looked
into his face, and pulled away the weary hands with which he tried to
screen his eyes from the light.  Then, having convinced herself that she
was not mistaken, she fled from room to room out into the hall.

Here she was met by the housekeeper, who took the lamp out of her hand
and was about to question her; but Katharina only screamed:

"The plague is in the house!  Lock the doors!"  and then rushed away,
past the leech who was coming in.  With one bound she was in the chariot,
and as the horses started she wailed out to the nurse:

"The plague--they have the plague.  Plotinus has taken the plague!"

The terrified woman tried to soothe her, assuring her that she must be
mistaken for such hellish fiends did not dare come near so holy a man.
But the girl vouchsafed no reply, merely desiring her to have a bath made
ready for her as soon as they should reach home.

She felt utterly shattered; on the spot where the old man's plague-
stricken hand had rested she was conscious of a heavy, hateful pressure,
and when the chariot at length drove into their own garden something warm
and heavy-something she could not shake off, still seemed to weigh on her
brain.

The windows were all dark excepting one on the ground-floor, where a
light was still visible in the room inhabited by Heliodora.  A diabolical
thought flashed through her over-excited and restless mind; without
looking to the right hand or the left she obeyed the impulse and went
forward, just as she was, into her friend's sitting-room and then,
lifting a curtain, on into the bedroom.  Heliodora was lying on her
couch, still suffering from a headache which had prevented her going to
visit their neighbors; at first she did not notice  the  late visitor who
stood by her side and bid her good evening.

A single lamp shed a dim light in the spacious room, and the young girl
had never thought their guest so lovely as she looked in that twilight.
A night wrapper of the thinnest material only half hid her beautiful
limbs.  Round her flowing, fair hair, floated the subtle, hardly
perceptible perfume which always pervaded this favorite of fortune.  Two
heavy plaits lay like sheeny snakes over her bosom and the white sheet.
Her face was turned upwards and was exquisitely calm and sweet; and as
she lay motionless and smiled up at Katharina, she looked like an angel
wearied in well-doing.

No man could resist the charms of this woman, and Orion had succumbed.
By her side was a lute, from which she brought the softest and most
soothing tones, and thus added to the witchery of her appearance.

Katharina's whole being was in wild revolt; she did not know how she was
able to return Heliodora's greeting, and to ask her how she could
possibly play the lute with a headache.

"Just gliding my fingers over the strings calms and refreshes my blood,"
she replied pleasantly.  "But you, child, look as if you were suffering
far worse than I.--Did you come home in the chariot that drove up just
now?"

"Yes," replied Katharina.  "I have been to see our dear old bishop.  He
is very ill, dying; he will soon be taken from us.  Oh, what a fearful
day!  First Orion's mother, then Paula, and now this to crown all!  Oh,
Heliodora, Heliodora!"

She fell on her knees by the bed and pressed her face against her pitying
friend's bosom.  Heliodora saw the tears which had risen with unaffected
feeling to the girl's eyes; her tender soul was full of sympathy with the
sorrow of such a gladsome young creature, who had already had so much to
suffer, and she leaned over the child, kissing her affectionately on the
brow, and murmuring words of consolation.  Katharina clung to her
closely, and pointing to the top of her head where that burning hand had
pressed it, she said: "There, kiss there: there is where the pain is
worst!--Ah, that is nice, that does me good."

And, as the tender-hearted Heliodora's fresh lips rested on the plague-
tainted hair, Katharina closed her eyes and felt as a gladiator might who
hitherto has only tried his weapons on the practising ground, and now for
the first time uses them in the arena to pierce his opponent's heart.
She had a vision of herself as some one else, taller and stronger than
she was; aye, as Death itself, the destroyer, breathing herself into her
victim's breast.

These feelings entirely possessed her as she knelt on the soft carpet,
and she did not notice that another woman was crossing it noiselessly to
her comforter's bed-side, with a glance of intelligence at Heliodora.
Just as she exclaimed: "Another kiss there-it burns so dreadfully," she
felt two hands on her temples and two lips, not Heliodora's, were pressed
on her head.

She looked up in astonishment and saw the smiling face of her mother, who
had come after her to ask how the bishop was, and who wished to take her
share in soothing the pain of her darling.

How well her little surprise had succeeded!

But what came over the child?  She started to her feet as if lightning
had struck her, as if an asp had stung her, looked horror-stricken into
her mother's eyes, and then, as Susannah was on the point of clasping the
little head to her bosom once more to kiss the aching, the cursed spot,
Katharina pushed her away, flew, distracted, through the sitting-room
into the vestibule, and down the narrow steps leading to the bathroom.

Her mother looked after her, shaking her head in bewilderment.  Then she
turned to Heliodora with a shrug, and said, as the tears filled her eyes:

"Poor, poor little thing!  Too many troubles have come upon her at once.
Her life till lately was like a long, sunny day, and now the hail is
pelting her from all sides at once.  She has bad news of the bishop, I
fear."

"He is dying, she said," replied the young widow with feeling.

"Our  best  and  truest  friend,"  sobbed  Susannah.  "It is, it really
is too much.  I often think that I must myself succumb, and as for her--
hardly more than a child!--And with what resignation she bears the
heaviest sorrows!--You, Heliodora, are far from knowing what she has gone
through; but you have no doubt seen how her only thought is to seem
bright, so as to cheer my heart.  Not a sigh, not a complaint has passed
her lips.  She submits like a saint to everything, without a murmur.
But, now that her clear old friend is stricken, she has lost her self-
control for the first time.  She knows all that Plotinus has been to me."
And she broke down into fresh sobbing.  When she was a little calmer, she
apologised for her weakness and bid her fair guest good night.

Katharina, meanwhile, was taking a bath.

A bathroom was an indispensable adjunct to every wealthy Graeco-Egyptian
house, and her father had taken particular pains with its construction.
It consisted of two chambers, one for men and one for women; both fitted
with equal splendor.

White marble, yellow alabaster, purple porphyry on all sides; while the
pavement was of fine Byzantine mosaic on a gold ground.  There were no
statues, as in the baths of the heathen; the walls were decorated with
bible texts in gold letters, and above the divan, which was covered with
a giraffe skin, there was a crucifix.  On the middle panel of the
coffered ceiling was inscribed defiantly, in the Coptic language the
first axiom of the Jacobite creed:  "We believe in the single,
indivisible nature of Christ Jesus."  And below this hung silver lamps.

The large bath had been filled immediately for Katharina, as the furnace
was heated every evening for the ladies of the house.  As she was
undressing, her maid showed her a diseased date.  The head gardener, had
brought it to her, for he had that afternoon, discovered that his palms,
too, had been attacked.  But the woman soon regretted her loquacity, for
when she went on to say that Anchhor, the worthy shoemaker who, only the
day before yesterday, had brought home her pretty new sandals, had died
of the plague, Katharina scolded her sharply and bid her be silent.  But
as the maid knelt before her to unfasten her sandals, Katharina herself
took up the story again, asking her whether the shoemaker's pretty young
wife had also been attacked.  The girl said that she was still alive, but
that the old mother-in-law and all the children had been shut into the
house, and even the shutters barred as soon as the corpse had been
brought out.  The authorities had ordered that this should be done in
every case, so that the pestilence might not pervade the streets or be
disseminated among the healthy.  Food and drink were handed to the
captives through a wicket in the door.  Such regulations, she added,
seemed particularly well-considered and wise.  But she would have done
better to keep her opinions to herself, for before she had done speaking
Katharina gave her an angry push with her foot.  Then she desired her not
to be sparing with the 'smegma',--[A material like soap, but used in a
soft state.]--and to wash her hair as thoroughly as possible.

This was done; and Katharina herself rubbed her hands and arms with
passionate diligence.  Then she had water poured over her head again and
again, till, when she desired the maid to desist, she had to lean
breathless and almost exhausted against the marble.

But in spite of smegma and water she still felt the pressure of the
burning hand on top of her head, and her heart seemed oppressed by some
invisible load of lead.

