these times the axis around which turned the inner life of the world and
every individual.  He himself had resolved to live for the object for
whose sake it was worth while to die.  He knew the great perils which
would be associated with it for one of his warlike temperament, but he
had become, by the divine summons, an evangelical theologian, a combatant
for the liberation of the slaves sighing under the tyranny of Rome.  A
serious conversation with a friend who was a German and resisted yielding
to a movement of the spirit which was kindling the inmost depths of the
German nature, thoughts, and feelings, and was destined to heal the woes
of the German nation and preserve it from the basest abuse, would be to
him inconceivable.

Wolf interrupted this avowal with the assurance that he must nevertheless
decline a religious discussion with him, for the weapons they would use
were too different.  Erasmus, as a theologian, was deeply versed in the
Protestant faith, while he professed Catholicism merely as a consequence
of his birth and with a layman's understanding and knowledge.  Yet he
would not shun the conflict if his hands were not bound by the most
sacred of oaths.  Then he turned to the past, and while he himself, as it
were, lived through for the second time the most affecting moment in his
existence, he transported his friend to his dead mother's sick-bed.

In vivid language he described how the devout widow and nun implored her
son to resist like a rock in the sea the assault of the new heretical
ideas, that the thousands of prayers which she had uttered for him, for
his soul, and his father's, might not be vain.

Then Wolf confessed that just at that time, as a pupil in the school of
poets, he had come under the influence of the scholar Naevius, whose
evangelical views Erasmus knew, and related how difficult it had been for
him to take the oath which, nevertheless, now that he had once sworn it,
he would keep, even though life and his own intelligence would not have
taught him to prefer the old faith to every new doctrine, whether it
emanated from Luther, from Calvin, or from Zwingli.

For a short time Erasmus found no answer to this statement, and Wolf's
old nurse, who herself clung to the Protestants from complete conviction,
and had listened attentively to his words, urged her young
co-religionist, by all sorts of signs, to respect his friend's decision.

The confession of his schoolmate had not been entirely without effect
upon the young theologian.  The name of "mother" also filled him with
reverence.

True, his birth had cost his own mother her life, but he had long
possessed a distinct idea of her nature and being, and had given her
precisely the same position which, in the early days of his school life,
the Virgin Mary had occupied.

To induce another to break a vow made to his mother would have been
sinful.  But a brief reflection changed his mind.

Were there not circumstances in which the Bible itself commanded a man to
leave father and mother?  Had not Jesus Christ made the surrender of
every old relation and the following after him the duty of those who were
to become his disciples?  What was the meaning of the words the Saviour
had uttered to his august mother, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?"
except it was commanded to turn even from the mother when religion was at
stake?

Many another passage of Scripture had strengthened the courage of the
young Bible student when at last, with a look of intelligence, he pledged
Wolf, and remarking, "How could I venture the attempt to lead you to
break so sacred an oath?" instantly brought forward every plea that
a son who, in religious matters, followed a different path from his
mother could allege in his justification.

A short time before, in Brussels, Wolf had seen a superior of the new
Society of Jesus, whose members were now appearing everywhere as
defenders of the violently assailed papacy, seek to win back to
Catholicism the son of evangelical parents with the very same arguments.
He told his friend this, and also expressed the belief that the Jesuit,
too, had spoken in good faith.

Erasmus shrugged his shoulders, saying "Doubtless there are many mansions
in our Father's house, but who will blame us if we left the dilapidated
old one, where our liberty was restricted and our consciences were
burdened, and preferred the new one, in which man is subject to no other
mortal, but only to the plain words of the Bible and to the judge in his
own breast?  If we prefer this mansion, which stands open to every one
whose heart the old one oppresses, to the ruinous one of former days----"

"Yet," interrupted Wolf,  "you must say to yourselves that you leave
behind in the old one much which the new one lacks, no matter with how
many good things you may equip it.  The history of our religion and its
development does not belong to your new home--only to the old one."

"We stand upon it as every newer thing rests on the older," replied
Erasmus eagerly.  "What we cast aside and refuse to take into the new
home with us is not the holy faith, but merely its deformity, abasement,
and falsification."

"Call it so," replied Wolf calmly.  "I have heard others name and
interpret differently what you probably have in mind while using these
harsh epithets.  But is it not the old house, and that alone, in which
the martyrs shed their blood for Christianity?  Where did it fulfil its
lofty task of saturating the heart of mankind with love, softening the
customs of rude pagans, clearing away forests, transforming barren wastes
into cultivated fields, planting the cross on chapels and churches,
summoning men with the consecrated voice of the bell to the sermon which
proclaims love and peace?  Where did it open the doors of the school
which prepares the intellect to satisfy its true destiny, and first
qualifies man to become the image of God?  By the old mansion this
country, covered with marshes, moors; and impenetrable forests, was
rendered what it now is; from it proceeded that fostering of science
and the arts of which as yet I have seen little in your circles."

"Give us time," cried the theologian, "and perhaps in our home their
flowering will attain an unsurpassed richness of development.  With what
loose bonds the humanists are still united to you!"

"And the finest intellect of all, the great scholar whose name you bear,
though he deemed many things in our old home deserving of improvement,
remained with us until his death.  Jesus Christ is one, and so his Church
must also remain.  The only question is, What the Saviour still is to you
Protestants, what he is to you, my friend?"

"Before how many saints, and many another whom your Church desires to
honour, do you bow the knee?"  Erasmus fervidly answered; "but we do so
only to the august Trinity.  And do you wish to know what Jesus Christ,
the Son, is to me?  All, and more than all, is the answer; I live and
breathe in my Saviour Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and
throughout eternity."

The young theologian raised his sparkling eyes heavenward as he spoke,
and continued: "Our doctrine is founded on him, his word, his love alone;
and who among the enthusiastic heralds of Christianity in ancient times
grasped faith in him with warmer sincerity than the very Martin Luther
whom you would have led to the stake had not the Emperor Charles's
plighted word been dearer to him than the approval of Rome?  Oh, my
friend, our young faith can also show its martyrs.  Think of the Bohemian
John Huss and the true Christians who, in the Netherlands and Spain, were
burned at the stake and bled upon the scaffold because they read the
Bible, the Word of God and their Saviour, and would rather die than deny
it.  If it should come to the worst, thousands here would also be ready
to ascend the funeral pyre, and I at their head.  If war is declared now,
the Emperor Charles will gain the victory; and if he does not wish to
withdraw in earnest from Romish influences, who can tell what will then
await us Protestants?  But I am not anxious about what may come.  We
German citizens, who are accustomed to guide our own destinies and
maintain the system of government we arranged for ourselves, who built by
our own strength our solid, comfortable, gable-roofed houses and noble,
towering cathedrals, will also independently maintain the life of our
minds and our souls.  Rome, with her legions of priests, claimed the
right not only to interfere in our civil life, but also to intrude into
our houses, our married lives, and our nurseries.  What could she not
decide for the individual by virtue of the power she arrogates to bind
and to loose, to forgive sins, and to open or to close the door of heaven
for the dying?  What she has done with the Church's gifts of grace we
know.

"There is a deep, beautiful meaning underlying this idea.  But it has
degenerated into a base traffic in indulgences.  We have sincere natures.
For a long time we believed that salvation is gained by works--gifts to
the Church, fasts, scourgings, seclusion from the world, self-confinement
in a cell--and our wealth went to Rome.  Rarely do we look vainly in the
most beautiful sites on mountain or by river for a monastery!  But at
last the sound sense of Germany rebelled, and when Luther saw in Rome
poor sufferers from gout and cripples ascending the stairs of the Lateran
on their knees, a voice within cried out to him the great 'sola fide' on
which our faith is founded.  On it alone, on devotion to Jesus Christ,
depends our salvation."

"Then," asked Wolf, "you boldly deny any saving power to good works?"

"Yes," was the firm reply, "so far as they do not proceed from faith."

"As if the Church did not impose the same demand!" replied Wolf in a more
animated tone.  "True, base wrong has been done in regard to the sale of
indulgences, but at the Council of Trent opposition will be made to it.
No estimable priest holds the belief that money can atone for a sin or
win the mercy of Heaven.  With us also sincere repentance or devout faith
must accompany the gift, the fasting, and whatever else the believer
imposes upon himself here below.  Man is so constituted that the only
things which make a deep impression are those that the body also feels.
The teacher's blow has a greater effect than his words, a gift produces
more willingness than an entreaty, and the tendency toward asceticism and
penance is genuinely Christian, and belongs to many a people of a
different faith.  Your Erasmus said that his heart was Catholic, but his
stomach desired to be Protestant.  You have an easier task than we."

"On the contrary," the young theologian burst forth.  "It is mere child's
play for you to obtain forgiveness by acts which really do not cut deeply
into the flesh; but if one of us errs, how hard must be the conflict in
his own breast ere he attains the conviction that his guilt is expiated
by deep repentance and better deeds!"

"I can answer for that," here interposed old Ursel, who from her arm-
chair had listened to the conversation between the two with intense
interest.

"Good heavens!  One went forth from the confessional as pure as a white
dove after absolution had been received and the penance performed; but
now that I belong to the Protestants, it is hard to reach a perfect
understanding with the dear Saviour and one's self."

