her soul, through some finer element than ordinary life is conscious
of. A delightsome gladness was between them, and their words had such
heart gaiety, that they seemed to dance as they spoke; while the wind
blowing Cornelia's curls, and scarf, and drapery, was like a merry
playfellow.

Now Love has always something in it of the sea; and the murmur of the
tide against the pier, the hoarse voices of the sailor men, the scent
of the salt water, and all the occult unrecognized, but keenly felt
life of the ocean, were ministers to their love, and forever and ever
blended in the heart and memory of the youth and maid who had set their
early dream of each other to its potent witchery. Time went swiftly,
and suddenly Cornelia remembered that she was subject to hours and
minutes, A little fear came into her heart, and closed it, and she
said, with a troubled air, "My mother will be anxious. I had forgotten.
I must go home." So they turned northward again, and Cornelia was
silent, and the ardour of her lover was a little chilled; but yet never
before had Cornelia heard simple conversation which seemed so eloquent,
and so full of meanings--only, now and then, a few brief words; but oh!
what long, long thoughts, they carried with them!

At the gates of her home they stood a moment, and there Hyde touched
her hand, and said, "I have never, in all my life, been so happy. It
has been a walk beyond hope, and beyond expression!" And she lifted her
face, and the smile on her lips and the light in her eyes answered him.
Then the great white door shut her from his sight, and he walked
rapidly away, saying to his impetuous steps--

"An enchanting creature! An adorable girl! I have given her my heart;
and lost, is lost; and gone, is gone forever. That I am sure of. But,
by St. George! every man has his fate, and I rejoice that mine is so
sweet and fair! so sweet! so sweet! so fair!"

Cornelia trembled as she opened the parlour door, she feared to look
into her mother's face, but it was as serene as usual, and she met her
daughter's glance with one of infinite affection and some little
expectancy. This was a critical moment, and Cornelia hesitated
slightly. Some little false sprite put a ready excuse into her heart,
but she banished it at once, and with the courage of one who fears lest
they are not truthful enough, she said with a blunt directness which
put all subterfuge out of the question--

"Mother, I have been a long time, but I met Lieutenant Hyde, and we
walked down to the Battery; and I think I have stayed beyond the hour I
ought to have stayed--but the weather was so delightful."

"The weather is very delightful, and Lieutenant Hyde is very polite.
Did he speak of the violets he sent you?"

"I suppose he forgot them. Ah, there they are! How beautiful! How
fragrant! I will give them to you, mother."

"They are your own, my dear. I would not give them away."

Then Cornelia lifted them, and shyly buried her face in their beauty
and sweetness; and afterwards took the card in her hand and read
"Lieutenant George Hyde." "But, mother," she said, "Arenta called him
Joris."

"Joris is George, my dear."

"Certainly, I had forgotten. Joris is the Dutch, George is the English
form. I think I like George better."

"As you have neither right nor occasion to call him by either name, it
is of no consequence Take away your flowers and put them in water--the
young man is very extravagant, I think. Do you know that it is quite
noon, and your father will be home in a little while?"

And there was such kind intent, such a divining sympathy in the simple
words, that Cornelia's heart grew warm with pleasure; and she felt that
her mother understood, and did not much blame her. At the same time she
was glad to escape all questioning, and with the violets pressed to her
heart, and her shining eyes dropped to them, she went with some haste
to her room. There she kissed the flowers, one by one, as she put them
in the refreshing water; and then, forgetting all else, sat down and
permitted herself to enter the delicious land of Reverie. She let the
thought of Hyde repossess her; and present again and again to her
imagination his form, his face, his voice, and those long caressing
looks she had seen and felt, without seeming to be aware of them.

A short time after Cornelia came home, Doctor Moran returned from his
professional visits. As he entered the room, his wife looked at him
with a curious interest. In the first place, the tenor of her thoughts
led her to this observation. She wished to assure herself again that
the man for whom she had given up everything previously dear to her was
worthy of such sacrifice. A momentary glance satisfied her. Nature had
left the impress of her nobility on his finely-formed forehead; nothing
but truth and kindness looked from his candid eyes; and his manner, if
a little dogmatic, had also an unmistakable air of that distinction
which comes from long and honourable ancestry and a recognized
position. He had also this morning an air of unusual solemnity, and on
entering the room, he drew his wife close to his heart and kissed her
affectionately, a token of love he was not apt to give without thought,
or under every circumstance.

"You are a little earlier to day," she said. "I am glad of it."

"I have had a morning full of feeling. There is no familiarity with
Death, however often you meet him."

"And you have met Death this morning, I see that, John?"

"As soon as I went out, I heard of the death of Franklin. We have truly
been expecting the news, but who can prepare for the final 'He is
gone.' Congress will wear mourning for two months, I hear, and all good
citizens who can possibly do so will follow their example. The flags
are at half-mast, and there is sorrow everywhere."

"And yet, John, why?" asked Mrs. Moran. "Franklin has quite finished
his work; and has also seen the fruit of all his labours. Not many men
are so happy. I, for one, shall rejoice with him, and not weep for him."

"You are right, Ava. I must now tell you that Elder Semple died this
morning. He has been long sick, but the end came suddenly at last."

"The dear old man! He has been sick and sorrowful, ever since his wife
died. Were any of his sons present?"

"None of them. The two eldest have been long away. Neil was obliged to
leave New York when the Act forbidding Tory lawyers to practice was
passed. But he was not quite alone, his old friend Joris Van Heemskirk
was with him to the last moment. The love of these old men for each
other was a very beautiful thing."

"He was once rich. Did he lose everything in the war?"

"Very near all. His home was saved by Van Heemskirk, and he had a
little money 'enough to die wi'' he said one day to me; and then he
continued, 'there's compensations, Doctor, in having naething to leave.
My lads will find no bone to quarrel over.' I met a messenger coming
for me this morning, and when I went to his bedside, he said, with a
pleasant smile, 'I'll be awa' in an hour or twa now, Doctor; and then
I'll hae no mair worrying anent rebellion and democrats; I'll be under
the dominion o' the King o' kings and His throned Powers and
Principalities; and after a' this weary voting, and confiscations, and
guillotining, it will be Peace--Peace--Peace:'--and with that word on
his lips, the 'flitting' as he called it was accomplished."

"There is nothing to mourn in such a death, John."

"Indeed, no. It was just as he said 'a flitting.' And it was strange
that, standing watching what he so fitly called the 'flitting,' I
thought of some lines I have not consciously remembered for many years.
They reflect only the old Greek spirit, with its calm acceptance of
death and its untroubled resignation, but they seemed to me very
applicable to the elder's departure:

 Not otherwise to the hall of Hades dim
    He fares, than if some summer eventide
 A Message, not unlooked for, came to him;
    Bidding him rise up presently, and ride
 Some few hours' journey, to a friendly home."

"There is nothing to fear in such a death."

"Nothing at all. Last week when Cornelia and I passed his house, he was
leaning on the garden gate, and he spoke pleasantly to her and told her
she was a 'bonnie lassie.' Where is Cornelia?"

"In her room. John, she went to Duyckinck's this morning for me, and
George Hyde met her again, and they took a walk together on the
Battery. It was near the noon hour when she returned."

"She told you about it?"

"Oh yes, and without inquiry."

"Very good. I must look after that young fellow." But he said the words
without much care, and Mrs. Moran was not satisfied.

"Then you do not disapprove the meeting, John?" she asked.

"Yes, I do. I disapprove of any young man meeting my daughter every
time she goes out. Cornelia is too young for lovers, and it is not
desirable that she should have attentions from young men who have no
intentions. I do not want her to be what is called a belle. Certainly
not."

"But the young men do not think her too young to be loved. I can see
that Rem Van Ariens is very fond of her."

"Rem is a very fine young man. If Cornelia was old enough to marry, I
should make no objections to Rem. He has some money. He promises to be
a good lawyer. I like the family. It is as pure Dutch as any in the
country. There is no objection to Rem Van Ariens."

"And George Hyde?"

"Has too many objectionable qualities to be worth considering."

"Such as?"

"Well, Ava, I will only name one, and one for which he is not
responsible; but yet it would be insuperable, as far as I am concerned.
His father is an Englishman of the most pronounced type, and this young
man is quite like him. I want no Englishman in my family."

"My family are of English descent."

"Thoroughly Americanized. They are longer in this country than the
Washingtons."

"There have been many Dutch marriages among the Morans."

"That is a different thing. The Dutch, as a race, have every desirable
quality. The English are natural despots. Rem was quite right last
night. I saw and felt, as much as he did, the quiet but sovereign
arrogance of young Hyde. His calm assumption of superiority was in
reality insufferable. The young man's faults are racial; they are in
the blood. Cornelia shall not have anything to do with him. Why do you
speak of such disagreeable things, Ava?"

"It is well to look forward, John."

"No. It is time enough to meet annoyances when they arrive. But this is
one not even to be thought of--to tell the last truth, Ava, I dislike
his father, General Hyde, very much indeed."

"Why?"

"I cannot tell you 'why.' Yes, I will be honest and acknowledge that he
always gives me a sense of hostility. He arrogates himself too much.
When I was in the army, a good many were angry at General Washington,
for making so close a friend of him--but Washington has much of the
same exclusive air. I hope it is no treason to say that much, for a
good deal of dignity is permissible, even peremptory, when a man fills
great positions. As for the Hydes, father and son, I would prefer to
hear no more about them. When the youth was my guest, I was civil to
him; but Arenta. You know that I have never seen her."

"That is the truth. I had forgotten. Well, then, I went to her with the
news; and she rubbed her chin, and called to her man Govert, to get a
bow of crape and put it on the front door. 'It is moral, and proper,
and respectable, Arenta,' she said, 'and I advise you to do the same.'
But then she laughed and added, 'Shall I tell you, niece, what I think
of the great men I have met? They are disagreeable, conceited
creatures; and ought, all of them, to have died before they were born;
and for my part, I am satisfied not to have had the fate to marry one
of them. As for Benjamin Franklin,' she continued, 'he was a
particularly great man, and I am particularly grateful that I never saw
him but once. I formed my opinion of him then; for I only need to see a
person once, to form an opinion--and he is dead! Well, then, every one
dies at their own time.'"

"My father says Congress goes into mourning for him."

"Does it?" asked Arenta, with indifference. "Aunt was beginning to tell
me something about him when he was in France, but I just put a stop to
talk like that, and said, 'Now, aunt, for a little of my own affairs.'
So I told her about George Berckel, and asked her if she thought I
might marry George; and she answered, 'If you are tired of easy days,
Arenta, go, and take a husband,' After a while I spoke to her about
Lieutenant Hyde, and she said, 'she had seen the little cockrel
strutting about Pearl Street.'"

"That was not a proper thing to say. Lieutenant Hyde carries himself in
the most distinguished manner."

"Well, then, that is exactly so; but Aunt Angelica has her own way of
saying things. She intended nothing unkind or disrespectful. She told
me that she had frequently danced with his father when she was a girl
and a beauty; and she added with a laugh, 'I can assure you, Arenta,
that in those days he was no saint; although he is now, I hear, the
very pink of propriety.'"

"Is not that as it should be, Arenta? We ought surely to grow better as
we grow older."

"That is not to be denied, Cornelia. Now I can tell you something worth
hearing about General Hyde."

"If it is anything wrong, or unkind, I will not listen to it, Arenta.
Have you forgotten that the good Sisters always forbid us to listen to
an evil report?"

"Then one must shut one's ears if one lives in New York. But, indeed,
it is nothing wrong--only something romantic and delightful, and quite
as good as a story book. Shall I tell you?"

"As you wish."

"As you wish."

"Then I would like to hear it."

"Listen! When Madame Hyde was Katherine Van Heemskirk, and younger than
you are, she had two lovers; one, Captain Dick Hyde, and the other a
young man called Neil Semple; and they fought a duel about her, and
nearly cut each other to pieces."

"Arenta!"

"Oh, it is the truth! It is the very truth, I assure you! And while
Hyde still lay between life and death, Miss Van Heemskirk married him;
and as soon as he was able, he carried her off at midnight to England;
and there they lived in a fine old house until the war. Then they came
back to New York, and Hyde went into the Continental army and did great
things, I suppose, for as we all knew, he was made a general. You
should have heard Aunt Angelica tell the story. She remembered the
whole affair. It was a delightful story to listen to, as we drank our
chocolate. And will you please only try to imagine it of Mrs. General
Hyde! A woman so lofty! So calm! So afar off from every impropriety
that you always feel it impossible in her presence to commit the least
bit of innocent folly. Will you imagine her as Katherine Van Heemskirk
in a short, quilted petticoat, with her hair hanging in two braids down
her back, running away at midnight with General Hyde!"

