quarrelled, supplied him with funds? No; war fed war--the Morgan system,
citizen. Let us pass on to Caesar. Ah, Caesar! That's another story. He
left for Spain with some thirty millions of debt, and returned with
practically the same. He started for Gaul, where he spent ten years with
our ancestors. During these ten years he sent over one hundred millions
to Rome, repassed the Alps, crossed the Rubicon, marched straight to the
Capitol, forced the gates of the Temple of Saturn, where the treasury
was, seized sufficient for his private needs--and not for those of the
Republic--three thousand pounds of gold in ingots; and died (he whom
creditors twenty years earlier refused to allow to leave his little
house in the Suburra) leaving two or three thousand sesterces per head
to the citizens, ten or twelve millions to Calpurnia, and thirty or
forty millions to Octavius; always the Morgan system, save that Morgan,
I am sure, would die sooner than subvert to his personal needs either
the silver of the Gauls or the gold of the capital. Now let us spring
over eighteen centuries and come to the General Buonaparte." And the
young aristocrat, after the fashion of the enemies of the Conqueror of
Italy, affected to emphasize the _u_, which Bonaparte had eliminated
from his name, and the _e_, from which he had removed the accent.

This affectation seemed to irritate Roland intensely. He made a movement
as if to spring forward, but his companion stopped him.

"Let be," said he, "let be, Roland. I am quite sure that citizen Barjols
will not say the General Buonaparte, as he calls him, is a thief."

"No, I will not say it; but there is an Italian proverb which says it
for me."

"What is the proverb?" demanded the general in his companion's stead,
fixing his calm, limpid eye upon the young noble.

"I give it in all its simplicity: 'Francesi non sono tutti ladroni, ma
buona parte'; which means: 'All Frenchmen are not thieves, but--"

"A good part are?" concluded Roland.

"Yes, 'Buonaparte,'" replied Alfred de Barjols.

Scarcely had these insolent words left the young aristocrat's lips than
the plate with which Roland was playing flew from his hands and struck
De Barjols full in the face. The women screamed, the men rose to their
feet. Roland burst into that nervous laugh which was habitual with him,
and threw himself back in his chair. The young aristocrat remained calm,
although the blood was trickling from his brow to his cheek.

At this moment the conductor entered with the usual formula:

"Come! citizen travellers, take your places."

The travellers, anxious to leave the scene of the quarrel, rushed to the
door.

"Pardon me, sir," said Alfred de Barjols to Roland, "you do not go by
diligence, I hope?"

"No, sir, I travel by post; but you need have no fear; I shall not
depart."

"Nor I," said the Englishman. "Have them unharness my horses; I shall
remain."

"I must go," sighed the dark young man whom Roland had addressed as
general. "You know it is necessary, my friend; my presence yonder is
absolutely imperative. But I swear that I would not leave you if I could
possibly avoid it."

In saying these words his voice betrayed an emotion of which, judging
from its usual harsh, metallic ring, it had seemed incapable. Roland, on
the contrary, seemed overjoyed. His belligerent nature seemed to expand
at the approach of a danger to which he had perhaps not given rise, but
which he at least had not endeavored to avoid.

"Good! general," he said. "We were to part at Lyons, since you have had
the kindness to grant me a month's furlough to visit my family at Bourg.
It is merely some hundred and sixty miles or so less than we intended,
that is all. I shall rejoin you in Paris. But you know if you need a
devoted arm, and a man who never sulks, think of me!"

"You may rest easy on that score, Roland," exclaimed the general.
Then, looking attentively at the two adversaries, he added with an
indescribable note of tenderness: "Above all, Roland, do not let
yourself be killed; but if it is a possible thing don't kill your
adversary. Everything considered, he is a gallant man, and the day will
come when I shall need such men at my side."

"I shall do my best, general; don't be alarmed." At this moment the
landlord appeared upon the thresh-hold of the door.

"The post-chaise is ready," said he.

The general took his hat and his cane, which he had laid upon the chair.
Roland, on the contrary, followed him bareheaded, that all might see
plainly he did not intend to leave with his friend. Alfred de Barjols,
therefore, offered no opposition to his leaving the room. Besides, it
was easy to see that his adversary was of those who seek rather than
avoid quarrels.

"Just the same," said the general, seating himself in the carriage to
which Roland had escorted him, "my heart is heavy at leaving you thus,
Roland, without a friend to act as your second."

"Good! Don't worry about that, general; seconds are never lacking. There
are and always will be enough men who are curious to see how one man can
kill another."

"Au revoir, Roland. Observe, I do not say farewell, but au revoir!"

"Yes, my dear general," replied the young man, in a voice that revealed
some emotion, "I understand, and I thank you."

"Promise that you will send me word as soon as the affair is over, or
that you will get some one to write if you are disabled."

"Oh, don't worry, general. You will have a letter from me personally
in less than four days," replied Roland, adding, in a tone of profound
bitterness: "Have you not perceived that I am protected by a fatality
which prevents me from dying?"

"Roland!" exclaimed the general in a severe tone, "Again!"

"Nothing, nothing," said the young man, shaking his head and assuming
an expression of careless gayety which must have been habitual with him
before the occurrence of that unknown misfortune which oppressed his
youth with this longing for death.

"Very well. By the way, try to find out one thing."

"What is that, general?"

"How it happens that at a time when we are at war with England an
Englishman stalks about France as freely and as easily as if he were at
home."

"Good; I will find out."

"How?"

"I do not know; but when I promise you to find out I shall do so, though
I have to ask it of himself."

"Reckless fellow! Don't get yourself involved in another affair in that
direction."

"In any case, it would not be a duel. It would be a battle, as he is a
national enemy."

"Well, once more--till I see you again. Embrace me."

Roland flung himself with passionate gratitude upon the neck of the
personage who had just given him this permission.

"Oh, general!" he exclaimed, "how happy I should be--if I were not so
unhappy!"

The general looked at him with profound affection, then asked: "One day
you will tell me what this sorrow is, will you not, Roland?"

Roland laughed that sorrowful laugh which had already escaped his lips
once or twice.

"Oh! my word, no," said he, "you would ridicule me too much."

The general stared at him as one would contemplate a madman.

"After all," he murmured, "one must accept men as they come."

"Especially when they are not what they seem to be."

"You must mistake me for OEdipe since you pose me with these enigmas,
Roland."

"Ah! If you guess this one, general, I will herald you king of Thebes!
But, with all my follies, I forgot that your time is precious and that I
am detaining you needlessly with my nonsense."

"That is so! Have you any commissions for Paris?"

"Yes, three; my regards to Bourrienne, my respects to your brother
Lucien, and my most tender homage to Madame Bonaparte."

"I will deliver them."

"Where shall I find you in Paris?"

"At my house in the Rue de la Victoire, perhaps."

"Perhaps--"

"Who knows? Perhaps at Luxembourg!" Then throwing himself back as if
he regretted having said so much, even to a man he regarded as his
best friend, he shouted to the postilion, "Road to Orange! As fast as
possible."

The postilion, who was only waiting for the order, whipped up his
horses; the carriage departed rapidly, rumbling like a roll of thunder,
and disappeared through the Porte d'Oulle.




CHAPTER III. THE ENGLISHMAN

Roland remained motionless, not only as long as he could see the
carriage, but long after it had disappeared. Then, shaking his head as
if to dispel the cloud which darkened his brow, he re-entered the inn
and asked for a room.

"Show the gentleman to number three," said the landlord to a
chambermaid.

The chambermaid took a key hanging from a large black wooden tablet on
which were arranged the numbers in white in two rows, and signed to the
young traveller to follow her.

"Send up some paper, and a pen and ink," Roland said to the landlord,
"and if M. de Barjols should ask where I am tell him the number of my
room."

The landlord promised to obey Roland's injunctions and the latter
followed the girl upstairs whistling the Marseillaise. Five minutes
later he was seated at a table with the desired paper, pen and ink
before him preparing to write. But just as he was beginning the first
line some one knocked, three times at the door.

"Come in," said he, twirling his chair on one of its hind legs so as to
face his visitor, whom he supposed to be either, M. de Barjols or one of
his friends.

The door opened with a steady mechanical motion and the Englishman
appeared upon the threshold.

"Ah!" exclaimed Roland, enchanted with this visit, in view of his
general's recommendation; "is it you?"

"Yes," said the Englishman, "it is I."

"You are welcome."

"Oh! if I am welcome, so much the better! I was not sure that I ought to
come."

"Why not?"

"On account of Aboukir."

Roland began to laugh.

"There are two battles of Aboukir," said he; "one which we lost; the
other we won."

"I referred to the one you lost."

"Good!" said Roland, "we fight, kill, and exterminate each other on the
battlefield, but that does not prevent us from clasping hands on neutral
ground. So I repeat, you are most welcome, especially if you will tell
me why you have come."

"Thank you; but, in the first place, read that." And the Englishman drew
a paper from his pocket.

"What is that?" asked Roland.

"My passport."

"What have I to do with your passport?" asked Roland, "I am not a
gendarme."

"No, but I have come to offer you my services. Perhaps you will not
accept them if you do not know who I am."

"Your services, sir?"

"Yes; but read that first."

Roland read:

  In the name of the French Republic--The Executive Directory hereby
  orders that Sir John Tanlay, Esq., be permitted to travel freely
  throughout the territory of the Republic, and that both assistance
  and protection be accorded him in case of need.
    (Signed) FOUCHE.

And below:

  To whom it may concern--I recommend Sir John Tanlay particularly
  as a philanthropist and a friend of liberty.
    (Signed) BARRAS.

"Have you read it?"

"Yes; what of it?"

"What of it? Well, my father, Lord Tanlay, rendered M. Barras some
services; that is why M. Barras permits me to roam about France. And I
am very glad to roam about; it amuses me very much."

"Oh, I remember, Sir John; you did us the honor to say so at dinner."

"I did say so, it is true; I also said that I liked the French people
heartily."

Roland bowed.

"And above all General Bonaparte," continued Sir John.

"You like General Bonaparte very much?"

"I admire him; he is a great, a very great, man."

"By Heavens! Sir John, I am sorry he is not here to hear an Englishman
say that of him."

"Oh! if he were here I should not say it."

"Why not?"

"I should not want him to think I was trying to please him. I say so
because it is my opinion."

"I don't doubt it, my lord," said Roland, who did not see what the
Englishman was aiming at, and who, having learned all that he wished to
know through the passport, held himself upon his guard.

"And when I heard," continued the Englishman with the same phlegm, "you
defend General Bonaparte, I was much pleased."

"Really?"

"Much pleased," repeated the Englishman, nodding his head affirmatively.

"So much the better!"

"But when I saw you throw a plate at M. Alfred de Barjols' head, I was
much grieved."

"You were grieved, my lord, and why?"

"Because in England no gentleman would throw a plate at the head of
another gentleman."

"My lord," said Roland, rising with a frown, "have you perchance come
here to read me a lecture?"

"Oh, no; I came to suggest that you are perhaps perplexed about finding
a second?"

"My faith, Sir John! I admit that the moment when you knocked at the
door I was wondering of whom I could ask this service."

"Of me, if you wish," said the Englishman. "I will be your second."

"On my honor!" exclaimed Roland, "I accept with all my heart."

"That is the service I wished to render you!"

Roland held out his hand, saying: "Thank you!"

The Englishman bowed.

"Now," continued Roland, "as you have had the good taste, my lord, to
tell me who you were before offering your services, it is but fair that,
since I accept them, I should tell you who I am."

"Oh! as you please."

"My name is Louis de Montrevel; I am aide-de-camp to General Bonaparte."

"Aide-de-camp to General Bonaparte. I am very glad."

"That will explain why I undertook, rather too warmly perhaps, my
general's defence."

"No, not too warmly; only, the plate--"

"Oh, I know well that the provocation did not entail that plate. But
what would you have me do! I held it in my hand, and, not knowing what
to do with it, I threw it at M. de Barjols' head; it went of itself
without any will of mine."

"You will not say that to him?"

"Reassure yourself; I tell you to salve your conscience."

"Very well; then you will fight?"

"That is why I have remained here, at any rate."

"What weapons?"

"That is not our affair, my lord."

"What! not our affair?"

"No; M. de Barjols is the one insulted; the choice is his."

"Then you will accept whatever he proposes?"

"Not I, Sir John, but you in my name, since you do me the honor to act
as my second."

"And if he selects pistols, what is the distance to be and how will you
fight?"

"That is your affair, my lord, and not mine. I don't know how you do in
England, but in France the principals take no part in the arrangements.
That duty devolves upon the seconds; what they decide is well decided!"

"Then my arrangements will be satisfactory?"

"Perfectly so, my lord."

The Englishman bowed.

"What hour and what day?"

"Oh! as soon as possible; I have not seen my family for two years, and I
confess that I am in a hurry to greet them."

The Englishman looked at Roland with a certain wonder; he spoke with
such assurance, as if he were certain that he would not be killed. Just
then some one knocked at the door, and the voice of the innkeeper asked:
"May I come in?"

The young man replied affirmatively. The door opened and the landlord
entered, holding a card in his hand which he handed his guest. The young
man took the card and read: "Charles du Valensolle."

"From M. Alfred de Barjols," said the host.

"Very well!" exclaimed Roland. Then handing the card to the Englishman,
he said: "Here, this concerns you; it is unnecessary for me to see this
monsieur--since we are no longer citizens--M. de Valensolle is M. de
Barjols' second; you are mine. Arrange this affair between you. Only,"
added the young man, pressing the Englishman's hand and looking fixedly
at him, "see that it holds a chance of certain death for one of us.
Otherwise I shall complain that it has been bungled."

"Don't worry," said the Englishman, "I will act for you as for myself."

"Excellent! Go now, and when everything is arranged come back. I shall
not stir from here."

Sir John followed the innkeeper. Roland reseated himself, twirled his
chair back to its former position facing the table, took up his pen and
began to write.

When Sir John returned, Roland had written and sealed two letters and
was addressing a third. He signed to the Englishman to wait until he had
finished, that he might give him his full attention. Then, the address
finished, he sealed the letter, and turned around.

"Well," he asked, "is everything arranged?"

"Yes," said the Englishman, "it was an easy matter. You are dealing with
a true gentleman."

"So much the better!" exclaimed Roland, waiting.

"You will fight two hours hence by the fountain of Vaucluse--a charming
spot--with pistols, advancing to each other, each to fire as he pleases
and continuing to advance after his adversary's fire."

"By my faith! you are right, Sir John. That is, indeed, excellent. Did
you arrange that?"

"I and M. de Barjols' second, your adversary having renounced his rights
of the insulted party."

"Have you decided upon the weapons?"

"I offered my pistols. They were accepted on my word of honor that you
were as unfamiliar with them as was M. de Barjols. They are excellent
weapons. I can cut a bullet on a knife blade at twenty paces."

"Peste! You are a good shot, it would seem, my lord."

"Yes, I am said to be the best shot in England."

"That is a good thing to know. When I wish to be killed, Sir John, I'll
pick a quarrel with you."

"Oh! don't pick a quarrel with me," said the Englishman, "it would
grieve me too much to have to fight you."

"We will try, my lord, not to cause you such grief. So it is settled
then, in two hours."

"Yes, you told me you were in a hurry."

"Precisely. How far is it to this charming spot?"

"From here to Vaucluse?"

"Yes."

"Twelve miles."

"A matter of an hour and a half. We have no time to lose, so let us rid
ourselves of troublesome things in order to have nothing but pleasure
before us."

The Englishman looked at the young man in astonishment. Roland did not
seem to pay any attention to this look.

"Here are three letters," said he; "one for Madame de Montrevel, my
mother; one for Mlle. de Montrevel, my sister; one for the citizen,
Bonaparte, my general. If I am killed you will simply put them in the
post. Will that be too much trouble?"

"Should that misfortune occur, I will deliver your letters myself," said
the Englishman. "Where do your mother and sister live?"

"At Bourg, the capital of the Department of Ain."

"That is near here," observed the Englishman. "As for General Bonaparte,
I will go to Egypt if necessary. I should be extremely pleased to meet
General Bonaparte."

"If you take the trouble, as you say, my lord, of delivering my letters
yourself, you will not have to travel such a distance. Within three days
General Bonaparte will be in Paris."

"Oh!" said the Englishman, without betraying the least surprise, "do you
think so?"

"I am sure of it," replied Roland.

"Truly, he is a very extraordinary man, your General Bonaparte. Now,
have you any other recommendations to make to me, M. de Montrevel?"

"One only, my lord."

"Oh! as many as you please."

"No, thank you, one only, but that is very important."

"What is it?"

"If I am killed--but I doubt if I be so fortunate."

Sir John looked at Roland with that expression of wonder which he had
already awakened three or four times.

"If I am killed," resumed Roland; "for after all one must be prepared
for everything--"

"Yes, if you are killed, I understand."

"Listen well, my lord, for I place much stress on my directions being
carried out exactly in this matter."

"Every detail shall be observed," replied Sir John, "I am very
punctilious."

"Well, then, if I am killed," insisted Roland, laying his hand upon his
second's shoulder, to impress his directions more firmly on his memory,
"you must not permit any one to touch my body, which is to be placed in
a leaden coffin without removing the garments I am wearing; the coffin
you will have soldered in your presence, then inclosed in an oaken bier,
which must also be nailed up in your presence. Then you will send it to
my mother, unless you should prefer to throw it into the Rhone, which I
leave absolutely to your discretion, provided only that it be disposed
of in some way."

"It will be no more difficult," replied the Englishman, "to take the
coffin, since I am to deliver your letter."

"Decidedly, my lord," said Roland, laughing in his strange way. "You
are a capital fellow. Providence in person brought us together. Let us
start, my lord, let us start!"

They left Roland's room; Sir John's chamber was on the same floor.
Roland waited while the Englishman went in for his weapons. He returned
a few seconds later, carrying the box in his hand.

"Now, my lord," asked Roland, "how shall we reach Vaucluse? On horseback
or by carriage?"

"By carriage, if you are willing. It is much more convenient in case one
is wounded. Mine is waiting below."

"I thought you had given the order to have it unharnessed?"

"I did, but I sent for the postilion afterward and countermanded it."

They went downstairs.

"Tom! Tom!" called Sir John at the door, where a servant, in the severe
livery of an English groom, was waiting, "take care of this box."

"Am I going with you, my lord?" asked the servant.

"Yes!" replied Sir John.

Then showing Roland the steps of his carriage, which the servant
lowered, he said:

"Come, M. de Montrevel."

Roland entered the carriage and stretched himself out luxuriously.

"Upon my word!" said he. "It takes you English to understand travelling.
This carriage is as comfortable as a bed. I warrant you pad your coffins
before you are put in them!"

"Yes, that is a fact," said Sir John, "the English people
understand comfort, but the French people are much more curious and
amusing--postilion, to Vaucluse!"




CHAPTER IV. THE DUEL

The road was passable only from Avignon to l'Isle. They covered the nine
miles between the two places in an hour. During this hour Roland, as he
resolved to shorten the time for his travelling companion, was witty
and animated, and their approach to the duelling ground only served to
redouble his gayety. To one unacquainted with the object of this
drive, the menace of dire peril impending over this young man, with
his continuous flow of conversation and incessant laughter, would have
seemed incredible.

At the village of l'Isle they were obliged to leave the carriage.
Finding on inquiry that they were the first to arrive, they entered the
path which led to the fountain.

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed Roland, "there ought to be a fine echo here." And he
gave one or two cries to which Echo replied with perfect amiability.

"By my faith!" said the young man, "this is a marvellous echo. I know
none save that of the Seinonnetta, at Milan, which can compare with it.
Listen, my lord."

And he began, with modulations which revealed an admirable voice and an
excellent method, to sing a Tyrolean song which seemed to bid defiance
to the human throat with its rebellious music. Sir John watched Roland,
and listened to him with an astonishment which he no longer took the
trouble to conceal. When the last note had died away among the cavities
of the mountain, he exclaimed:

"God bless me! but I think your liver is out of order."

Roland started and looked at him interrogatively. But seeing that Sir
John did not intend to say more, he asked:

"Good! What makes you think so?"

"You are too noisily gay not to be profoundly melancholy."

"And that anomaly astonishes you?"

"Nothing astonishes me, because I know that it has always its reason for
existing."

"True, and it's all in knowing the secret. Well, I'm going to enlighten
you."

"Oh! I don't want to force you."

"You're too polite to do that; still, you must admit you would be glad
to have your mind set at rest about me."

"Because I'm interested in you."

"Well, Sir John, I am going to tell you the secret of the enigma,
something I have never done with any one before. For all my seeming good
health, I am suffering from a horrible aneurism that causes me spasms of
weakness and faintness so frequent as to shame even a woman. I spend
my life taking the most ridiculous precautions, and yet Larrey warns me
that I am liable to die any moment, as the diseased artery in my breast
may burst at the least exertion. Judge for yourself how pleasant for
a soldier! You can understand that, once I understood my condition, I
determined incontinently to die with all the glory possible. Another
more fortunate than I would have succeeded a hundred times already.
But I'm bewitched; I am impervious alike to bullets and balls; even the
swords seem to fear to shatter themselves upon my skin. Yet I never miss
an opportunity; that you must see, after what occurred at dinner. Well,
we are going to fight. I'll expose myself like a maniac, giving my
adversary all the advantages, but it will avail me nothing. Though
he shoot at fifteen paces, or even ten or five, at his very pistol's
point, he will miss me, or his pistol will miss fire. And all this
wonderful luck that some fine day when I least expect it, I may die
pulling on my boots! But hush I here comes my adversary."

As he spoke the upper half of three people could be seen ascending the
same rough and rocky path that Roland and Sir John had followed, growing
larger as they approached. Roland counted them.

"Three!" he exclaimed. "Why three, when we are only two?"

"Ah! I had forgotten," replied the Englishman. "M. de Barjols, as much
in your interest as in his own, asked permission to bring a surgeon, one
of his friends."

"What for?" harshly demanded Roland, frowning.

"Why, in case either one of you was wounded. A man's life can often be
saved by bleeding him promptly."

"Sir John," exclaimed Roland, ferociously, "I don't understand these
delicacies in the matter of a duel. When men fight they fight to kill.
That they exchange all sorts of courtesies beforehand, as your ancestors
did at Fontenoy, is all right; but, once the swords are unsheathed or
the pistols loaded, one life must pay for the trouble they have taken
and the heart beats they have lost. I ask you, on your word of honor,
Sir John, to promise that, wounded or dying, M. de Barjols' surgeon
shall not be allowed to touch me."

"But suppose, M. Roland--"

"Take it or leave it. Your word of honor, my lord, or devil take me if I
fight at all."

The Englishman again looked curiously at the young man. His face was
livid, and his limbs quivered as though in extreme terror. Sir John,
without understanding this strange dread, passed his word.

"Good!" exclaimed Roland. "This, you see, is one of the effects of my
charming malady. The mere thought of surgical instruments, a bistoury or
a lance, makes me dizzy. Didn't I grow very pale?"

"I did think for an instant you were going to faint."

"What a stunning climax!" exclaimed Roland with a laugh. "Our
adversaries arrive and you are dosing me with smelling salts like a
hysterical woman. Do you know what they, and you, first of all, would
have said? That I was afraid."

Meantime, the three new-comers having approached within earshot, Sir
John was unable to answer Roland. They bowed, and Roland, with a smile
that revealed his beautiful teeth, returned their greeting. Sir John
whispered in his ear:

"You are still a trifle pale. Go on toward the fountain; I will fetch
you when we are ready."

"Ah! that's the idea," said Roland. "I have always wanted to see that
famous fountain of Vaucluse, the Hippocrene of Petrarch. You know his
sonnet?

  "'Chiari, fresche e dolci acque
    Ove le belle membra
    Pose colei, che sola a me perdona.'

This opportunity lost, I may never have another. Where is your
fountain?"

"Not a hundred feet off. Follow the path; you'll find it at the turn of
the road, at the foot of that enormous bowlder you see."

"My lord," said Roland, "you are the best guide I know; thanks!"

And, with a friendly wave of the hand, he went off in the direction
of the fountain, humming the charming pastoral of Philippe Desportes
beneath his breath:

  "'Rosette, a little absence
    Has turned thine heart from me;
    I, knowing that inconstance,
    Have turned my heart from thee.
    No wayward beauty o'er me
    Such power shall obtain;
    We'll see, my fickle lassie,
    Who first will turn again.'"

Sir John turned as he heard the modulations of that fresh sweet voice,
whose higher notes had something at a feminine quality. His cold
methodical mind understood nothing of that nervous impulsive nature,
save that he had under his eyes one of the most amazing organisms one
could possibly meet.

The other two young men were waiting for him; the surgeon stood a little
apart. Sir John carried his box of pistols in his hands. Laying it upon
a table-shaped rock, he drew a little key from his pocket, apparently
fashioned by a goldsmith rather than a locksmith, and opened the box.
The weapons were magnificent, although of great simplicity. They
came from Manton's workshop, the grandfather of the man who is still
considered one of the best gunsmiths in London. He handed them to M.
de Barjols' second to examine. The latter tried the triggers and played
with the lock, examining to see if they were double-barrelled. They were
single-barrelled. M. de Barjols cast a glance at them but did not even
touch them.

"Our opponent does not know these weapons?" queried M. Valensolle.

"He has not even seen them," replied Sir John, "I give you my word of
honor."

"Oh!" exclaimed M. de Valensolle, "a simple denial suffices."

The conditions of the duel were gone over a second time to avoid
possible misunderstanding. Then, these conditions determined, the
pistols were loaded. They were then placed, loaded, in the box, the box
left in the surgeon's charge, and Sir John, with the key in his pocket,
went after Roland.

He found him chatting with a little shepherd boy who was herding three
goats on the steep rocky slope of the mountain, and throwing pebbles
into the fountain. Sir John opened his lips to tell Roland that all
was ready; but the latter, without giving the Englishman time to speak,
exclaimed:

"You don't know what this child has been telling me, my lord! A perfect
legend of the Rhine. He says that this pool, whose depth is unknown,
extends six or eight miles under the mountain, and a fairy, half woman
half serpent, dwells here. Calm summer nights she glides over the
surface of water calling to the shepherds of the mountains, showing
them, of course, nothing more than her head with its long locks and her
beautiful bare shoulders and arms. The fools, caught by this semblance
of a woman, draw nearer, beckoning to her to come to them, while she
on her side signs to them to go to her. The unwary spirits advance
unwittingly, giving no heed to their steps. Suddenly the earth fails
them, the fairy reaches out her arms, and plunges down into her dripping
palaces, to reappear the next day alone. Where the devil did these
idiots of shepherds get the tale that Virgil related in such noble verse
to Augustus and Mecaenas?"

He remained pensive an instant, his eyes bent upon the azure depths,
then turning to Sir John:

"They say that, no matter how vigorous the swimmer, none has ever
returned from this abyss. Perhaps were I to try it, my lord, it might be
surer than M. de Barjols' bullet. However, it always remains as a last
resort; in the meantime let us try the bullet. Come, my lord, come."

Then turning to the Englishman, who listened, amazed by this mobility
of mind, he led him back to the others who awaited them. They in the
meantime had found a suitable place.

It was a little plateau, perched as it were on a rocky proclivity,
jutting from the mountain side, exposed to the setting sun, on which
stood a ruined castle where the shepherds were wont to seek shelter when
the mistral overtook them. A flat space, some hundred and fifty feet
long, and sixty wide, which might once have been the castle platform,
was now to be the scene of the drama which was fast approaching its
close.

"Here we are, gentlemen," said Sir John.

"We are ready, gentlemen," replied M. de Valensolle.

"Will the principals kindly listen to the conditions of the duel?" said
Sir John. Then addressing M. de Valensolle, he added: "Repeat them,
monsieur; you are French and I am a foreigner, you will explain them
more clearly than I."

"You belong to those foreigners, my lord, who teach us poor Provencals
