I fear not ere the tenth day from this."

"Ah," said the king, with a vivacity that surprised his listeners,
aware of his usual impetuous energy, "the delay will but befriend us;
as for Warwick, permit me to alter your arrangements; let him employ
the interval, not in London, where he is useless, but in raising men
in the neighbourhood of his castle, and in defeating the treason of
this Redesdale knave.  We will give commission to him and to Clarence
to levy troops; Hastings, see to this forthwith.  Ye say Sir Robert
Welles leads the Lincolnshire varlets; I know the nature of his
father, the Lord Welles,--a fearful and timorous one; I will send for
him, and the father's head shall answer for the son's faith.  Pardon
me, dear cousin, that I leave you to attend these matters.  Prithee
visit our queen, meanwhile, she holds you our guest."

"Nay, your Highness must vouchsafe my excuse; I also have your royal
interests too much at heart to while an hour in my pleasurement.  I
will but see the friends of our House now in London, and then back to
the More, and collect the force of my tenants and retainers."

"Ever right, fair speed to you, cardinal that shall be!  Your arm,
Hastings."

The king and his favourite took their way into the state chambers.

"Abet not Gloucester in this alliance,--abet him not!" said the king,
solemnly.

"Pause, sire!  This alliance gives to Warwick a wise counsellor,
instead of the restless Duke of Clarence.  Reflect what danger may
ensue if an ambitious lord, discontented with your reign, obtains the
hand of the great earl's coheiress, and the half of a hundred baronies
that command an army larger than the crown's."

Though these reasonings at a calmer time might well have had their
effect on Edward, at that moment they were little heeded by his
passions.  He stamped his foot violently on the floor.  "Hastings!" he
exclaimed, "be silent! or--"  He stopped short, mastered his emotion.
"Go, assemble our privy council.  We have graver matters than a boy's
marriage now to think of."

It was in vain that Edward sought to absorb the fire of his nature in
state affairs, in all needful provisions against the impending perils,
in schemes of war and vengeance.  The fatal frenzy that had seized him
haunted him everywhere, by day and by night.  For some days after the
unsuspected visit which he had so criminally stolen to his guest's
chamber, something of knightly honour, of religious scruple, of common
reason,--awakened in him the more by the dangers which had sprung up
and which the Neviles were now actively employed in defeating,--
struggled against his guilty desire, and roused his conscience to a
less feeble resistance than it usually displayed when opposed to
passion; but the society of Anne, into which he was necessarily thrown
so many hours in the day, and those hours chiefly after the
indulgences of the banquet, was more powerful than all the dictates of
a virtue so seldom exercised as to have none of the strength of habit.
And as the time drew near when he must visit the archbishop, head his
army against the rebels (whose force daily increased, despite the
captivity of Lord Welles and Sir Thomas Dymoke, who, on the summons of
the king, had first taken sanctuary, and then yielded their persons on
the promise of pardon and safety), and restore Anne to her mother,--as
this time drew near, his perturbation of mind became visible to the
whole court; but, with the instinct of his native craft, he contrived
to conceal its cause.  For the first time in his life he had no
confidant--he did not dare trust his secret to Hastings.  His heart
gnawed itself.  Neither, though constantly stealing to Anne's side,
could he venture upon language that might startle and enlighten her.
He felt that even those attentions, which on the first evening of her
arrival had been noticed by the courtiers, could not be safely
renewed.  He was grave and constrained, even when by her side, and the
etiquette of the court allowed him no opportunity for unwitnessed
conference.  In this suppressed and unequal struggle with himself the
time passed, till it was now but the day before that fixed for his
visit to the More.  And, as he rose at morning from his restless
couch, the struggle was over, and the soul resolved to dare the crime.
His first thought was to separate Anne from Sibyll.  He affected to
rebuke the queen for giving to his high-born guest an associate below
her dignity, and on whose character, poor girl, rested the imputation
of witchcraft; and when the queen replied that Lady Anne herself had
so chosen, he hit upon the expedient of visiting Warner himself, under
pretence of inspecting his progress,--affected to be struck by the
sickly appearance of the sage, and sending for Sibyll, told her, with
an air of gracious consideration, that her first duty was to attend
her parent; that the queen released her for some days from all court
duties; and that he had given orders to prepare the room adjoining
Master Warner's, and held by Friar Bungey, till that worthy had
retired with his patroness from the court, to which she would for the
present remove.

Sibyll, wondering at this novel mark of consideration in the careless
king, yet imputing it to the high value set on her father's labours,
thanked Edward with simple earnestness, and withdrew.  In the anteroom
she encountered Hastings, on his way to the king.  He started in
surprise, and with a jealous pang:  "What! thou, Sibyll! and from the
king's closet!  What led thee thither?"

"His grace's command."  And too noble for the pleasure of exciting the
distrust that delights frivolous minds as the proof of power, Sibyll
added, "The king has been kindly speaking to me of my father's
health."  The courtier's brow cleared; he mused a moment, and said, in
a whisper, "I beseech thee to meet me an hour hence at the eastern
rampart."

Since the return of Lord Hastings to the palace there had been an
estrangement and distance in his manner, ill suiting one who enjoyed
the rights of an accepted suitor, and wounding alike to Sibyll's
affection and her pride; but her confidence in his love and truth was
entire.  Her admiration for him partook of worship, and she steadily
sought to reason away any causes for alarm by recalling the state
cares which pressed heavily upon him, and whispering to herself that
word of "wife," which, coming in passionate music from those beloved
lips, had thrown a mist over the present, a glory over the future! and
in the king's retention of Adam Warner, despite the Duchess of
Bedford's strenuous desire to carry him off with Friar Bungey, and
restore him to his tasks of alchemist and multiplier, as well as in
her own promotion to the queen's service, Sibyll could not but
recognize the influence of her powerful lover.  His tones now were
tender, though grave and earnest. Surely, in the meeting he asked, all
not comprehended would be explained.  And so, with a light heart, she
passed on.

Hastings sighed as his eye followed her from the room, and thus said
he to himself, "Were I the obscure gentleman I once was, how sweet a
lot would that girl's love choose to me from the urn of fate!  But,
oh! when we taste of power and greatness, and master the world's dark
wisdom, what doth love shrink to?--an hour's bliss and a life's
folly."  His delicate lip curled, and breaking from his soliloquy, he
entered the king's closet.  Edward was resting his face upon the palms
of his hands, and his bright eyes dwelt upon vacant space, till they
kindled into animation as they lighted on his favourite.

"Dear Will," said the king, "knowest thou that men say thou art
bewitched?"

"Beau sire, often have men, when a sweet face hath captured thy great
heart, said the same of thee!"

"It may be so with truth, for verily love is the arch-devil's birth."

The king rose, and strode his chamber with a quick step; at last
pausing,--

"Hastings," he said, "so thou lovest the multiplier's pretty daughter?
She has just left me.  Art thou jealous?"

"Happily your Highness sees no beauty in looks that have the gloss of
the raven, and eyes that have the hue of the violet."

"No, I am a constant man, constant to one idea of beauty in a thousand
forms,--eyes like the summer's light-blue sky, and locks like its
golden sunbeams!  But to set thy mind at rest, Will, know that I have
but compassionated the sickly state of the scholar, whom thou prizest
so highly; and I have placed thy fair Sibyll's chamber near her
father's.  Young Lovell says thou art bent on wedding the wizard's
daughter."

"And if I were, beau sire?"

Edward looked grave.

"If thou wert, my poor Will, thou wouldst lose all the fame for shrewd
wisdom which justifies thy sudden fortunes.  No, no; thou art the
flower and prince of my new seignorie,--thou must mate thyself with a
name and a barony that shall be worthy thy fame and thy prospects.
Love beauty, but marry power, Will.  In vain would thy king draw thee
up, if a despised wife draw thee down!"

Hastings listened with profound attention to these words.  The king
did not wait for his answer, but added laughingly,--

"It is thine own fault, crafty gallant, if thou dost not end all her
spells."

"What ends the spells of youth and beauty, beau sire?"

"Possession!" replied the king, in a hollow and muttered voice.

Hastings was about to answer, when the door opened, and the officer in
waiting announced the Duke of Clarence.  "Ha!" said Edward, "George
comes to importune me for leave to depart to the government of
Ireland, and I have to make him weet that I think my Lord Worcester a
safer viceroy of the two."

"Your Highness will pardon me; but, though I deemed you too generous
in the appointment, it were dangerous now to annul it."

"More dangerous to confirm it.  Elizabeth has caused me to see the
folly of a grant made over the malmsey,--a wine, by the way, in which
poor George swears he would be content to drown himself.  Viceroy of
Ireland!  My father had that government, and once tasting the sweets
of royalty, ceased to be a subject!  No, no, Clarence--"

"Can never meditate treason against a brother's crown.  Has he the wit
or the energy or the genius for so desperate an ambition?"

"No; but he hath the vanity.  And I will wager thee a thousand marks
to a silver penny that my jester shall talk giddie Georgie into
advancing a claim to be soldan of Egypt or Pope of Rome!"




CHAPTER IV.

THE FOSTER-BROTHERS.

Sir Marmaduke Nevile was sunning his bravery in the Tower Green,
amidst the other idlers of the court, proud of the gold chain and the
gold spurs which attested his new rank, and not grieved to have
exchanged the solemn walls of Middleham for the gay delights of the
voluptuous palace, when to his pleasure and surprise, he perceived his
foster-brother enter the gateway; and no sooner had Nicholas entered,
than a bevy of the younger courtiers hastened eagerly towards him.

"Gramercy!" quoth Sir Marmaduke, to one of the bystanders, "what hath
chanced to make Nick Alwyn a man of such note, that so many wings of
satin and pile should flutter round him like sparrows round an owl?--
which, by the Holy Rood, his wise face somewhat resembleth."

"Know you not that Master Alwyn, since he hath commenced trade for
himself, hath acquired already the repute of the couthliest goldsmith
in London?  No dague-hilts, no buckles are to be worn, save those that
he fashions; and--an he live, and the House of York prosper--verily,
Master Alwyn the goldsmith will ere long be the richest and best man
from Mile-end to the Sanctuary."

"Right glad am I to hear it," said honest Marmaduke, heartily; and
approaching Alwyn, he startled the precise trader by a friendly slap
on the shoulder.

"What, man, art thou too proud to remember Marmaduke Nevile?  Come to
my lodgment yonder, and talk of old days over the king's canary."

"I crave your pardon, dear Master Nevile."

"Master--avaunt!  Sir Marmaduke,--knighted by the hand of Lord
Warwick,--Sir Marmaduke Nevile, lord of a manor he hath never yet
seen, sober Alwyn."

Then drawing his foster-brother's arm in his, Marmaduke led him to the
chamber in which he lodged.

The young men spent some minutes in congratulating each other on their
respective advances in life: the gentleman who had attained competence
and station simply by devotion to a powerful patron, the trader who
