most extensive in New York, was his pride and his place of special
recreation.


{illust. caption = ACTUAL PHOTOGRAPH OF THE ICEBERG THAT SUNK THE
TITANIC

Lady Duff Gordon, a prominent English woman who was aboard the...}


{illust. caption = HEART-BREAKING FAREWELLS

Both men and women were loaded into the first boats, but soon the cry of
"Women first" was raised. Then came the real note of tragedy.
Husbands and wives clung to each other in farewell; some refused to be
separated.}


GEORGE D. WIDENER

The best known of Philadelphia passengers aboard the Titanic were Mr.
and Mrs. George D. Widener. Mr. Widener was a son of Peter A. B. Widener
and, like his father, was recognized as one of the foremost financiers
of Philadelphia as well as a leader in society there. Mr. Widener
married Miss Eleanor Elkins, a daughter of the late William L. Elkins.
They made their home with his father at the latter's fine place
at Eastbourne, ten miles from Philadelphia. Mr. Widener was keenly
interested in horses and was a constant exhibitor at horse shows. In
business he was recognized as his father's chief adviser in managing the
latter's extensive traction interests. P. A. B. Widener is a director of
the International Mercantile Marine.

Mrs. Widener is said to be the possessor of one of the finest
collections of jewels in the world, the gift of her husband. One string
of pearls in this collection was reported to be worth $250,000.

The Wideners went abroad two months previous to the disaster, Mr.
Widener desiring to inspect some of his business interests on the other
side. At the opening of the London Museum by King George on March 21st
last it was announced that Mrs. Widener had presented to the museum
thirty silver plates once the property of Nell Gwyn. Mr. Widener is
survived by a daughter, Eleanor, and a son, George D. Widener, Jr. Harry
Elkins Widener was with his parents and went down on the ship.

COLONEL ROEBLING

Colonel Washington Augustus Roebling was president of the John A.
Roebling Sons' Company, manufacturers of iron and steel wire rope. He
served in the Union Army from 1861 to 1865, resigning to assist his
father in the construction of the Cincinnati and Covington suspension
bridge. At the death of his father in 1869 he took entire charge of the
construction of the Brooklyn Bridge, and it is to his genius that the
success of that great work may be said to be due.

WILLIAM T. STEAD

One of the most notable of the foreign passengers was William T. Stead.
Few names are more widely known to the world of contemporary literature
and journalism than that of the brilliant editor of the Review of
Reviews. Matthew Arnold called him "the inventor of the new journalism
in England." He was on his way to America to take part in the Men and
Religion Forward Movement and was to have delivered an address in Union
Square on the Thursday after the disaster, with William Jennings Bryan
as his chief associate.

Mr. Stead was an earnest advocate of peace and had written many books.
His commentary "If Christ Came to Chicago" raised a storm twenty years
ago. When he was in this country in 1907 he addressed a session of
Methodist clergymen, and at one juncture of the meeting remarked that
unless the Methodists did something about the peace movement besides
shouting "amen" nobody "would care a damn about their amens!"

OTHER ENGLISHMEN ABOARD

Other distinguished Englishmen on the Titanic were Norman C. Craig,
M.P., Thomas Andrews, a representative of the firm of Harland & Wolff,
of Belfast, the ship's builders, and J. Bruce Ismay, managing director
of the White Star Line.

J. BRUCE ISMAY

Mr. Ismay is president and one of the founders of the International
Mercantile Marine. He has made it a custom to be a passenger on the
maiden voyage of every new ship built by the White Star Line. It was Mr.
Ismay who, with J. P. Morgan, consolidated the British steamship lines
under the International Mercantile Marine's control; and it is largely
due to his imagination that such gigantic ships as the Titanic and
Olympic were made possible

JACQUES FUTRELLE

Jacques Futrelle was an author of short stories, some of which have
appeared in the Saturday Evening Post, and of many novels of the same
general type as "The Thinking Machine," with which he first gained a
wide popularity. Newspaper work, chiefly in Richmond, Va., engaged his
attention from 1890 to 1909, in which year he entered the theatrical
business as a manager. In 1904 he returned to his journalistic career.

HENRY B. HARRIS

Henry B. Harris, the theater manager, had been manager of May Irwin,
Peter Dailey, Lily Langtry, Amelia Bingham, and launched Robert Edeson
as star. He became the manager of the Hudson Theater in 1903 and the
Hackett Theater in 1906. Among his best known productions are "The Lion
and the Mouse," "The Traveling Salesman" and "The Third Degree." He was
president of the Henry B. Harris Company controlling the Harris Theater.

Young Harris had a liking for the theatrical business from a boy. Twelve
years ago Mr. Harris married Miss Rene Wallach of Washington. He was
said to have a fortune of between $1,000,000 and $3,000,000. He owned
outright the Hudson and the Harris theaters and had an interest in two
other show houses in New York. He owned three theaters in Chicago, one
in Syracuse and one in Philadelphia.


HENRY S. HARPER

Henry Sleeper Harper, who was among the survivors, is a grandson of John
Wesley Harper, one of the founders of the Harper publishing business. H.
Sleeper Harper was himself an incorporator of Harper & Brothers when the
firm became a corporation in 1896. He had a desk in the offices of the
publishers, but his hand of late years in the management of the business
has been very slight. He has been active in the work of keeping the
Adirondack forests free from aggression. He was in the habit of spending
about half of his time in foreign travel. His friends in New York
recalled that he had a narrow escape about ten years ago when a ship in
which he was traveling ran into an iceberg on the Grand Banks.

FRANCIS DAVID MILLET

Millet was one of the best-known American painters and many of his
canvasses are found in the leading galleries of the world. He served as
a drummer boy with the Sixtieth Massachusetts volunteers in the Civil
War, and from early manhood took a prominent part in public affairs. He
was director of the decorations for the Chicago Exposition and was, at
the time of the disaster, secretary of the American Academy in Rome. He
was a wide traveler and the author of many books, besides translations
of Tolstoi.

CHARLES M. HAYS

Another person of prominence was Charles Melville Hays, president of the
Grand Trunk and the Grand Trunk Pacific railways. He was described by
Sir Wilfrid Laurier at a dinner of the Canadian Club of New York, at the
Hotel Astor last year, as "beyond question the greatest railroad genius
in Canada, as an executive genius ranking second only to the late Edward
H. Harriman." He was returning aboard the Titanic with his wife and
son-in-law and daughter; Mr. and Mrs. Thornton Davidson, of Montreal.



CHAPTER V. THE TITANIC STRIKES AN ICEBERG!

TARDY ATTENTION TO WARNING RESPONSIBLE FOR ACCIDENT--THE DANGER NOT
REALIZED AT FIRST--AN INTERRUPTED CARD GAME--PASSENGERS JOKE AMONG
THEMSELVES--THE REAL TRUTH DAWNS--PANIC ON BOARD--WIRELESS CALLS FOR
HELP

SUNDAY night the magnificent ocean liner was plunging through a
comparatively placid sea, on the surface of which there was much mushy
ice and here and there a number of comparatively harmless-looking floes.
The night was clear and stars visible. First Officer William T. Murdock
was in charge of the bridge The first intimation of the presence of the
iceberg that he received was from the lookout in the crow's nest.

Three warnings were transmitted from the crow's nest of the Titanic
to the officer on the doomed steamship's bridge 15 minutes before she
struck, according to Thomas Whiteley, a first saloon steward.

Whiteley, who was whipped overboard from the ship by a rope while
helping to lower a life-boat, finally reported on the Carpathia aboard
one of the boats that contained, he said, both the crow's nest lookouts.
He heard a conversation between them, he asserted, in which they
discussed the warnings given to the Titanic's bridge of the presence of
the iceberg.

Whiteley did not know the names of either of the lookout men and
believed that they returned to England with the majority of the
surviving members of the crew.


{illust. caption = A GRAPHIC ILLUSTRATION OF THE FORCE WITH WHICH A
VESSEL STRIKES AN ICEBERG}



"I heard one of them say that at 11.15 o'clock, 15 minutes before the
Titanic struck, he had reported to First Officer Murdock, on the bridge,
that he fancied he saw an iceberg!" said Whiteley. "Twice after that,
the lookout said, he warned Murdock that a berg was ahead. They were
very indignant that no attention was paid to their warnings."

TARDY ATTENTION TO WARNING RESPONSIBLE FOR ACCIDENT

Murdock's tardy answering of a telephone call from the crow's nest is
assigned by Whiteley as the cause of the disaster.

When Murdock answered the call he received the information that the
iceberg was due ahead. This information was imparted just a few seconds
before the crash, and had the officer promptly answered the ring of the
bell it is probable that the accident could have been avoided, or at
least, been reduced by the lowered speed.

The lookout saw a towering "blue berg" looming up in the sea path of the
Titanic, and called the bridge on the ship's telephone. When, after the
passing of those two or three fateful minutes an officer on the bridge
lifted the telephone receiver from its hook to answer the lookout,
it was too late. The speeding liner, cleaving a calm sea under a
star-studded sky, had reached the floating mountain of ice, which the
theoretically "unsinkable" ship struck a crashing, if glancing, blow
with her starboard bow.

MURDOCK PAID WITH LIFE

Had Murdock, according to the account of the tragedy given by two of the
Titanic's seamen, known how imperative was that call from the lookout
man, the men at the wheel of the liner might have swerved the great ship
sufficiently to avoid the berg altogether. At the worst the vessel would
probably have struck the mass of ice with her stern.

Murdock, if the tale of the Titanic sailor be true, expiated his
negligence by shooting himself within sight of all alleged victims
huddled in life-boats or struggling in the icy seas.

When at last the danger was realized, the great ship was so close upon
the berg that it was practically impossible to avoid collision with it


VAIN TRIAL TO CLEAR BERG

The first officer did what other startled and alert commanders would
have done under similar circumstances, that is


{illust. caption = THE LOCATION OF THE DISASTER}


he made an effort by going full speed ahead on the starboard propeller
and reversing his port propeller, simultaneously throwing his helm
over, to make a rapid turn and clear the berg. The maneuver was not
successful. He succeeded in saving his bows from crashing into the
ice-cliff, but nearly the entire length of the underbody of the great
ship on the starboard side was ripped. The speed of the Titanic,
estimated to be at least twenty-one knots, was so terrific that the
knife-like edge of the iceberg's spur protruding under the sea cut
through her like a can-opener.

The Titanic was in 41.46 north latitude and 50.14 west longitude when
she was struck, very near the spot on the wide Atlantic where the
Carmania encountered a field of ice, studded with great bergs, on her
voyage to New York which ended on April 14th. It was really an ice pack,
due to an unusually severe winter in the north Atlantic. No less than
twenty-five bergs, some of great height, were counted.

The shock was almost imperceptible. The first officer did not apparently
realize that the great ship had received her death wound, and none of
the passengers had the slightest suspicion that anything more than a
usual minor sea accident had happened. Hundreds who had gone to their
berths and were asleep were unawakened by the vibration.


BRIDGE GAME NOT DISTURBED

To illustrate the placidity with which practically all the men regarded
the accident it is related that Pierre Marechal, son of the vice-admiral
of the French navy, Lucien Smith, Paul Chevre, a French sculptor, and A.
F. Ormont, a cotton broker, were in the Cafe Parisien playing bridge.

The four calmly got up from the table and after walking on deck and
looking over the rail returned to their game. One of them had left his
cigar on the card table, and while the three others were gazing out on
the sea he remarked that he couldn't afford to lose his smoke, returned
for his cigar and came out again.

They remained only for a few moments on deck, and then resumed their
game under the impression that the ship had stopped for reasons best
known to the captain and not involving any danger to her. Later, in
describing the scene that took place, M. Marechal, who was among the
survivors, said: "When three-quarters of a mile away we stopped, the
spectacle before our eyes was in its way magnificent. In a very calm
sea, beneath a sky moonless but sown with millions of stars, the
enormous Titanic lay on the water, illuminated from the water line to
the boat deck. The bow was slowly sinking into the black water."

The tendency of the whole ship's company except the men in the engine
department, who were made aware of the danger by the inrushing water,
was to make light of and in some instances even to ridicule the thought
of danger to so substantial a fabric.


THE CAPTAIN ON DECK

When Captain Smith came from the chart room onto the bridge, his first
words were, "Close the emergency doors."

"They're already closed, sir," Mr. Murdock replied.

"Send to the carpenter and tell him to sound the ship," was the next
order. The message was sent to the carpenter, but the carpenter never
came up to report. He was probably the first man on the ship to lose his
life.

The captain then looked at the communicator, which shows in what
direction the ship is listing. He saw that she carried five degrees list
to starboard.

The ship was then rapidly settling forward. All the steam sirens were
blowing. By the captain's orders, given in the next few minutes, the
engines were put to work at pumping out the ship, distress signals
were sent by the Marconi, and rockets were sent up from the bridge by
Quartermaster Rowe. All hands were ordered on deck.


PASSENGERS NOT ALARMED

The blasting shriek of the sirens had not alarmed the great company of
the Titanic, because such steam calls are an incident of travel in seas
where fogs roll. Many had gone to bed, but the hour, 11.40 P. M., was
not too late for the friendly contact of saloons and smoking rooms. It
was Sunday night and the ship's concert had ended, but there were many
hundreds up and moving among the gay lights, and many on deck with their
eyes strained toward the mysterious west, where home lay. And in one
jarring, breath-sweeping moment all of these, asleep or awake, were at
the mercy of chance. Few among the more than 2000 aboard could have had
a thought of danger. The man who had stood up in the smoking room to say
that the Titanic was vulnerable or that in a few minutes two-thirds of
her people would be face to face with death, would have been considered
a fool or a lunatic. No ship ever sailed the seas that gave her
passengers more confidence, more cool security.

Within a few minutes stewards and other members of the crew were sent
round to arouse the people. Some utterly refused to get up. The stewards
