
"You have done extremely well, Captain O'Grady," Major Harrison said, as
he reached the deck, "and I congratulate you heartily. You should,
however, have obeyed the order of recall; the brig might have proved too
strong for you, and, bound on service as we are, we have no right to risk
valuable lives except in self-defence."

"Sure I knew nothing about the signal," O'Grady said, with an air of
innocence; "I thought it just meant 'More power to ye! give it 'em hot!'
or something of that kind. It was not until after I had taken the brig
that I was told that it was an order of recall. As soon as I learned that,
we came along as fast as we could to you."

"But Mr. Woods must surely have known."

"Mr. Woods did tell me, Major," Terence put in, "but somehow I forgot to
mention it to Captain O'Grady."

There was a laugh among the officers standing round.

"You ought to have informed him at once, Mr. O'Connor," the major said,
with an attempt at gravity. "However," he went on, with a change of voice,
"we all owe so much to you that I must overlook it, as there can be very
little doubt that had it not been for your happy idea of taking possession
of the lugger we should have been obliged to surrender, for I should not
have been justified in holding out until the ship sank under us. I shall
not fail, in reporting the matter, to do you full credit for your share in
it. Now, what is your loss, Captain O'Grady?"

"Three men killed and eleven wounded, sir."

"And what is that of the enemy?"

"Thirty-two killed and about the same number of wounded, more or less. We
had not time to count them before we sent them down, and I had not time
afterwards, for I was occupied in obeying the order of recall. I am sorry
that we have killed so many of the poor beggars, but if they had hauled
down their flag when we got up with them there would have been no occasion
for it. I should have told their captain that I looked upon him as an
obstinate pig, but as he and his first officer were both killed, there was
no use in my spaking to him."

"Well, it has been a very satisfactory operation," the major said, "and we
are very well out of a very nasty fix. Now, you will go back to the brig,
Captain O'Grady, and prepare to send the prisoners on board. We will send
our boats for them. Doctor Daly and Doctor O'Flaherty will go on board
with you and see to the wounded French and English. Doctor Daly will bring
the worst cases on board here, and will leave O'Flaherty on the brig to
look after the others. They will be better there than in this crowded
ship. The first officer will remain there with you with five men, and you
will retain fifty men of your own company. The second officer, with five
men, will take charge of the lugger. He will have with him fifty men of
Captain O'Driscol's company, under that officer. That will give us a
little more room on board here. How many prisoners are there?"

"Counting the wounded, Major, there are about fifty of them; her crew was
eighty strong to begin with. There are only some thirty, including the
slightly wounded, to look after."

"If the brig's hold is clear, I think that you had better take charge of
them. At present you will both lie-to beside us here till we have
completed our repairs, and when we make sail you are both to follow us,
and keep as close as possible; and on no account, Captain O'Grady, are you
to undertake any cruises on your own account."

"I will bear it in mind, Major; and we will do all we can to keep up with
you."

A laugh ran round the circle of officers at O'Grady's obstinacy in
considering the _Sea-horse_ to be a fast vessel, in spite of the evidence
that they had had to the contrary. The major said, gravely:

"You will have to go under the easiest sail possible. The brig can go two
feet to this craft's one, and you will only want your lower sails. If you
put on more you will be running ahead and losing us at night. We shall
show a light over our stern, and on no account are you to allow yourselves
to lose sight of it."

A party of men were already at work nailing battens over the shattered
stern of the _Sea-horse_. When this was done, sail-cloth was nailed over
them, and a coat of pitch given to it. The operation took four hours, by
which time all the other arrangements had been completed. The holds of the
two privateers were found to be empty, and they learned from the French
crews that the two craft had sailed from Bordeaux in company but four days
previously, and that the _Sea-horse_ was the first English ship that they
had come across.

"You will remember, Captain O'Grady," the major said, as that officer
prepared to go on board, "that Mr. Woods is in command of the vessel, and
that he is not to be interfered with in any way with regard to making or
taking in sail. He has received precise instructions as to keeping near
us, and your duties will be confined to keeping guard over the prisoners,
and rendering such assistance to the sailors as they may require."

"I understand, Major; but I suppose that in case you are attacked we may
take a share in any divarsion that is going on?"

"I don't think that there is much chance of our being attacked, O'Grady;
but if we are, instructions will be signalled to you. French privateers
are not likely to interfere with us, seeing that we are together, and if
by any ill-luck a French frigate should fall in with us, you will have
instructions to sheer off at once, and for each of you to make your way to
Lisbon as quickly as you can. You see, we have transferred four guns from
each of your craft to take the place of the rotten cannon on board here,
but our united forces would be of no avail at all against a frigate, which
would send us to the bottom with a single broadside. We can neither run
nor fight in this wretched old tub. If we do see a French frigate coming,
I shall transfer the rest of the troops to the prizes and send them off at
once, and leave the _Sea-horse_ to her fate. Of course we should be very
crowded on board the privateers, but that would not matter for a few days.
So you see the importance of keeping quite close to us, in readiness to
come alongside at once if signalled to. We shall separate as soon as we
leave the ship, so as to ensure at least half our force reaching its
destination."

Captain O'Driscol took Terence with him on board the lugger, leaving his
lieutenant in charge of the wing that remained on board the ship.

"You have done credit to the company, and to my choice of you, Terence,"
he said, warmly, as they stood together on the deck of the lugger. "I did
not see anything for it but a French prison, and it would have broken my
heart to be tied up there while the rest of our lads were fighting the
French in Portugal. I thought that you would make a good officer some day
in spite of your love of devilment, but I did not think that before you
had been three weeks in the service you would have saved half the regiment
from a French prison."


CHAPTER III

DISEMBARKED

As soon as the vessels were under way again it was found that the lugger
was obliged to lower her main-sail to keep in her position astern of the
_Sea-horse_, while the brig was forced to take in sail after sail until
the whole of the upper sails had been furled.

"It is tedious work going along like this," O'Driscol said; "but it does
not so much matter, because as yet we do not know where we are going to
land. Sir Arthur has gone on in a fast ship to Corunna to see the Spanish
Junta there, and find out what assistance we are likely to get from
Northern Spain. That will be little enough. I expect they will take our
money and arms and give us plenty of fine promises in return, and do
nothing; that is the game they have been playing in the south, and if
there were a grain of sense among our ministers they would see that it is
not of the slightest use to reckon on Spain. As to Portugal, we know very
little at present, but I expect there is not a pin to choose between them
and the Spaniards."

"Then we are not going to Lisbon?" Terence said, in surprise.

"I expect not. Sir Arthur won't determine anything until he joins us after
his visit to Corunna, but I don't think that it will be at Lisbon, anyhow.
There are strong forts guarding the mouth of the river, and ten or twelve
thousand troops in the city, and a Russian fleet anchored in the port. I
don't know where it will be, but I don't think that it will be Lisbon. I
expect that we shall slip into some little port, land, and wait for Junot
to attack us; we shall be joined, I expect, by Stewart's force, that have
been fooling about for two or three months waiting for the Spaniards to
make up their minds whether they will admit them into Cadiz or not. You
see, at present there are only 9,000 of us, and they say that Junot has at
least 50,000 in Portugal; but of course they are scattered about, and it
is hardly likely that he would venture to withdraw all his garrisons from
the large towns, so that the odds may not be as heavy as they look, when
we meet him in the field. And I suppose that at any rate some of the
Portuguese will join us. From what I hear, the peasantry are brave enough,
only they have never had a chance yet of making a fight for it, owing to
their miserable government, which never can make up its mind to do
anything. I hope that Sir Arthur has orders, as soon as he takes Lisbon,
to assume the entire control of the country and ignore the native
government altogether. Even if they are worth anything, which they are
sure not to be, it is better to have one head than two, and as we shall
have to do all the fighting, it's just as well that we should have the
whole control of things too."

For four days they sailed along quietly. On the morning of the fifth the
signal was run up from the _Sea-horse_ for the prizes to close up to her.
Mr. Woods, the mate on board the brig, at once sent a sailor up to the
mast-head.

"There is a large ship away to the south-west, sir," he shouted down.

"What does she look like?"

"I can only see her royals and top-sails yet, but by their square cut I
think that she is a ship-of-war."

"Do you think she is French or English?"

"I cannot say for certain yet, sir, but it looks to me as if she is
French. I don't think that the sails are English cut anyhow."

Such was evidently the opinion on board the _Sea-horse_, for as the
prizes came up within a hundred yards of her they were hailed by the major
through a speaking-trumpet, and ordered to keep at a distance for the
present, but to be in readiness to come up alongside directly orders were
given to that effect.

In another half-hour the look-out reported that he could now see the lower
sails of the stranger, and had very little doubt but that it was a large
French frigate. Scarcely had he done so before the two prizes were ordered
to close up to the _Sea-horse_. The sea was very calm and they were able
to lie alongside, and as soon as they did so the troops began to be
transferred to them. In a quarter of an hour the operation was completed,
Major Harrison taking his place on board the lugger; half the men were
ordered below, and the prize sheered off from the _Sea-horse_.

"The Frenchman is bearing down straight for us," he said to O'Driscol;
"she is bringing a breeze down with her, and in an hour she will be
alongside. I shall wait another half-hour, and then we must leave the
_Sea-horse_ to her fate; except for our stores she is worthless. Well,
Terence, have you any suggestion to offer? You got us out of the last
scrape, and though this is not quite so bad as that, it is unpleasant
enough. The frigate when she comes near will see that the _Sea-horse_ is
a slow sailer, and will probably leave her to be picked up at her leisure,
and will go off in chase either of the brig or us. The brig is to make for
the north-west and we shall steer south-east, so that she will have to
make a choice between us. When we get the breeze we shall either of us
give her a good dance before she catches us--that is, if the breeze is not
too strong; if it is, her weight would soon bring her up to us."

"Yes, Major, but perhaps she may not trouble about us at all. She would
see at once that the lugger and brig are French, and if they were both to
hoist French colours, and the _Sea-horse_ were to fly French colours over
English, she would naturally suppose that she had been captured by us, and
would go straight on her course without troubling herself further about
it."

"So she might, Terence. At any rate the scheme is worth trying. If they
have anything like good glasses on board they could make out our colours
miles away. If she held on towards us after that, there would be plenty of
time for us to run, but if we saw her change her course we should know
that we were safe. Your head is good for other things besides mischief,
lad."

The lugger sailed up near the ship again, and the major gave the captain
instructions to hoist a French ensign over an English one, and then,
sailing near the brig, told them to hoist French colours.

"Keep all your men down below the line of the bulwarks, O'Grady. Mr.
Woods, you had better get your boat down and row alongside of the ship,
and ask the captain to get the slings at work and hoist some of our stores
into her; we will do the same on the other side. Tell the captain to lower
a couple of his boats; also take twenty soldiers on board with you without
their jackets; we will do the same, so that it may be seen that we have a
strong party on board getting out the cargo."

In a few minutes the orders were carried out, and forty soldiers were at
work on the deck of the Sea-horse, slinging up tents from below, and
lowering them into the boats alongside. The approach of the frigate was
anxiously watched from the decks of the prizes. The upper sails of the
_Sea-horse_ had been furled, and the privateers, under the smallest
possible canvas, kept abreast of her at a distance of a couple of lengths.
The hull of the French frigate was now visible. "She is very fast," the
mate said to the major, "and she is safe to catch one of us if the breeze
she has got holds."

As she came nearer the feeling of anxiety heightened.

"They ought to make out our colours now, sir."

Almost immediately afterwards the frigate was seen to change her course.
Her head was turned more to the east. A suppressed cheer broke from the
troops.

"It is all right now, sir," the mate said; "she is making for Brest. We
have fooled her nicely."

The boats passed and repassed between the _Sea-horse_ and the prizes, and
the frigate crossed a little more than a mile ahead.

"Five-and-twenty guns a-side," the major said. "By Jove! she would have
made short work of us."

As it was not advisable to make any change in the position until the
frigate was far on her way, the boats continued to pass to and fro,
carrying back to the _Sea-horse_ the stores that had just been removed,
until the Frenchman was five or six miles away.

"Don't you think that we might make sail again, Captain?" the major then
hailed.

"I think that we had better give him another hour, sir. Were she to see us
making sail with the prize to the south it would excite suspicion at once,
and the captain might take it into his head to come back again to inquire
into it."

"Half an hour will surely be sufficient," the major said. "She is
travelling at eight or nine knots an hour, and she is evidently bound for
port. It would be unlikely in the extreme that her commander would beat
back ten miles on what, after all, might be a fool's errand."

"That is true enough, sir. Then in half an hour we shall be ready to sail
again."

The major was rowed to the _Sea-horse_. "We may as well transfer the men
at once," he said. "We have had a very narrow escape of it, Captain, and
there is no doubt that we owe our safety entirely to the sharpness of that
young ensign. We should have been sunk or taken if he had not suggested
our manning the lugger in the first place, and of pretending that the ship
had been captured by French privateers in the second."

"You are right, Major. Another half-hour and the craft would have
foundered under us; and the frigate would certainly have captured the
_Sea-horse_ and one of the prizes if the Frenchman had not, as he
thought, seen two privateers at work emptying our hold. He is a sharp
young fellow, that."

"That he is," the major agreed. "He has been brought up with the regiment,
and has always been up to pranks of all kinds; but he has used his wits to
good purpose this time, and I have no doubt will turn out an excellent
officer."

Before sail was made the major summoned the officers on board the
_Sea-horse_. The troops from the lugger and brig were drawn up on deck,
and the major, standing on the poop, said in a voice that could be heard
from end to end of the ship:

"Officers and men, we have had a narrow escape from a French prison, and
as it is possible that before we arrive at our destination we may fall in
with an enemy again and not be so lucky, I think it right to take this
occasion at once of thanking Mr. O' Connor, before you all, in my own
name, and in yours, for to his intelligence and quickness of wit it is
entirely due that we escaped being captured when the brig was pounding us
with its shot, without our being able to make any return, and it was
certain that in a short time we should have had to haul down our flag or
be sunk. It was he who suggested that we should take possession of the
lugger, and with her guns drive off the brig. As the result of that
suggestion this craft was saved from being sunk, and the brig was also
captured.

"In the second place, when that French frigate was bearing down upon us
and our capture seemed certain, it was he who suggested to me, that by
hoisting the French flag and appearing to be engaged in transferring the
cargo of the ship to the privateers, we might throw dust into the eyes of
the Frenchmen. As you saw, the ruse succeeded perfectly. I therefore, Mr.
O'Connor, thank you most heartily in my own name, and in that of your
fellow-officers, also in the name of the four hundred men of the regiment,
and of the ship's company, for the manner in which you have, by your
quickness and good sense, saved us all from a French prison, and saved his
Majesty from the loss of the wing of a fine regiment."

As he concluded the men broke into loud cheering, and the officers
gathered around Terence and thanked and congratulated him most heartily on
the service that he had rendered them.

"You are a broth of a boy, Terence," Captain O'Grady said. "I knew that it
was in you all along. I would not give a brass farthing for a lad who had
not a spice of divil-ment in him. It shows that he has got his wits about
him, and that when he steddys down he will be hard to bate."

Terence was so much overpowered at the praise he had received that, beyond
protesting that it was quite undeserved, he had no reply to make to the
congratulations that he received from the captain. O'Driscol, seeing that
he was on the verge of breaking down, at once called upon him to take his
place in the boat, and rowed with him to the lugger.

A few minutes later all sail was set on the _Sea-horse_, and with her
yards braced tautly aft she laid her course south, close-hauled; a fresh
breeze was now blowing, and she ploughed her way through the water at a
rate that almost justified O'Grady's panegyrics upon her. In another three
days she entered the port of Vigo, where the convoy was to rendezvous, and
all were glad to find that the whole fleet were still there. On anchoring,
the major went on board the _Dauphin_, which had brought the
headquarters, and the other wing of the regiment. He was heartily greeted
by the colonel.

"We were getting very uneasy about you, Harrison," he said. "The last ship
of the convoy came in three days ago, and we began to fear that you must
have been either dismasted or sunk in the gale. I saw the senior naval
officer this morning, and he said that if you did not come in during the
day he would send a frigate out in search of you; but I could see by his
manner that he thought it most likely that you had gone down. So you may
imagine how pleased we were when we made out your number, though we could
not for the life of us make out what those two craft flying the English
colours over the French, that came in after you, were. But of course they
had nothing to do with you. I suppose they were two privateers that had
been captured by one of our frigates, and sent in here with prize crews to
refit before going home. They have both of them been knocked about a bit."

"I will tell you about them directly, Colonel; it is rather a long story.
We have had a narrow squeak of it. We got through the storm pretty well,
but we had a bad time of it afterwards, and we owe it entirely to young
O'Connor that we are not, all of us, in a prison at Brest at present."

"You don't say so! Wait a moment, I will call his father here; he will be
glad to hear that the young scamp has behaved well. I may as well call
them all up; they will like to hear the story."

Turning to the group of officers who were standing on the quarter-deck a
short distance away, waiting to hear the news when the major had given his
report, he said: "You may as well come now and hear Major Harrison's
story; it will save his telling it twice. You will be glad to hear,
O'Connor, that Terence has been distinguishing himself in some way, though
I know not yet in what; the major says that if it had not been for him the
whole wing of the regiment would have now been in a French prison."

"Terence was always good at getting out of scrapes, Colonel, though I
don't say he was not equally good in getting into them; but I am glad to
hear that this time he has done something useful."

The major then gave a full account of their adventure with the privateers,
and of the subsequent escape from the French frigate.

"Faith, O'Connor," the colonel said, warmly, holding out his hand to him,
"I congratulate you most heartily, which is more than I ever thought to do
on Terence's account. I had some misgivings when I recommended him for a
commission, but I may congratulate myself as well as you that I did so. I
was sure the lad had plenty in him, but I was afraid that it was more
likely to come out the wrong way than the right; and now it turns out that
he has saved half the regiment, for there is no doubt from what Harrison
says that he has done so."

"Thank you, Colonel; I am glad indeed that the boy has done credit to your
kindness. It was a mighty bad scrape this time, and he got out of it
well."

"Of course, Major, you will give a full report in writing of this, and
will send it in to Sir Arthur; he arrived this morning. I will go on board
the flag-ship at once and report as to the prizes. Who they belong to I
have not the least idea. I never heard of a transport capturing a couple
of privateers before; but, I suppose, as she is taken up for the king's
service and the prizes were captured by his Majesty's troops, they will
rank as if taken by the navy, that is, a certain amount of their value
will go to the admiral. Anyhow, the bulk of it will go, I should think, to
the troops--the crew and officers of the ship, of course, sharing."

"It won't come to much a head, Colonel, anyhow. You see, they were both
empty, and there is simply the value of the ships themselves, which I
don't suppose would fetch above five or six hundred apiece."

"Still, the thing must be done in a regular way, and I must leave it in
the admiral's hands. I will take your boat, Major, and go to him at once.
You will find pen and ink in my cabin, and I should be glad if you would
write your report by the time that I return; then I will go off at once to
Sir Arthur."

"I have it already written, Colonel," the major said, producing the
document.

"That looks to me rather long, Harrison, and busy as Sir Arthur must be,
he might not take the trouble to read it. I wish you would write out
another, as concise as you can make it, of the actual affair, saying at
the end that you beg to report especially the conduct of Ensign O'Connor,
to whose suggestions the escape of the ship both from the privateers and
French frigate were due. I will hand that in as the official report, and
with it the other, saying that it gives further details of the affair. Of
course, with them I must give in an official letter from myself, inclosing
your two reports. But first I will go and see the admiral."

In a little over half an hour he returned. "The admiral knows no more than
I do whether the navy have anything to do with the prizes or not. Being so
small in value he does not want to trouble himself about it. He says that
the matter would entail no end of correspondence and bother, and that the
crafts might rot at their anchors before the matter was decided. He thinks
the best thing that I can do will be to sell the two vessels for what they
