
  Ludere qui nescit, campestribus abstinet armis;
  Indoctusque pilae, discive, trochive, quiescit;
  Ne spissae risum tollant impune coronae:
  Qui nescit versus, tamen audet fingere. Quid ni?
  A _moderate_ proficient in the laws,
  A _moderate_ defender of a cause,
  Boasts not Messala's pleadings, nor is deem'd
  Aulus in Jurisprudence; yet esteem'd:
  But _middling Poet's, or degrees in Wit,_
  Nor men, nor Gods, nor niblick-polls admit.
  At festivals, as musick out of tune,
  Ointment, or honey rank, disgust us soon,
  Because they're not essential to the guest,
  And might be spar'd, Unless the very best;
  Thus Poetry, so exquisite of kind,
  Of Pleasure born, to charm the soul design'd,
  If it fall short but little of the first,
  Is counted last, and rank'd among the worst.
  The Man, unapt for sports of fields and plains,
  From implements of exercise abstains;
  For ball, or quoit, or hoop, without the skill,
  Dreading the croud's derision, he sits still:
  In Poetry he boasts as little art,
  And yet in Poetry he dares take part:
  Liber et ingenuus; praesertim census equestrem
  Summam nummorum, vitioque remotus ab omni.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Tu nihil invita dices faciesve Minerva:
  Id tibi judicium est, ea mens: si quid tamen olim
  Scripseris, in Metii descendat judicis aures,
  Et patris, et nostras; nonumque prematur in annum.
  Membranis intus positis, delere licebit
  Quod non edideris: nescit vox missa reverti.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Silvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum
  Caedibus et victu foedo deterruit Orpheus;
  Dictus ob hoc lenire tigres rabidosque leones.
  Dictus et Amphion, Thebanae conditor arcis,
  Saxa movere sono testudinis, et prece blanda.
  And why not? he's a Gentleman, with clear
  Good forty thousand sesterces a year;
  A freeman too; and all the world allows,
  "As honest as the skin between his brows!"
  Nothing, in spite of Genius, YOU'LL commence;
  Such is your judgment, such your solid sense!
  But if you mould hereafter write, the verse
  To _Metius_, to your _Sire_ to _me_, rehearse.
  Let it sink deep in their judicious ears!
  Weigh the work well; _and keep it back nine years_!
  Papers unpublish'd you may blot or burn:
  A word, once utter'd, never can return.

  The barb'rous natives of the shaggy wood
  From horrible repasts, and ads of blood,
  Orpheus, a priest, and heav'nly teacher, brought,
  And all the charities of nature taught:
  Whence he was said fierce tigers to allay,
  And sing the Savage Lion from his prey,
  Within the hollow of AMPHION'S shell
  Such pow'rs of found were lodg'd, so sweet a spell!
  Ducere quo vellet suit haec sapientia quondam,
  publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis;
  concubitu prohibere vago; dare jura maritis;
  Oppida moliri; leges incidere ligno.
  Sic honor et nomen divinis vatibus atque
  Carminibus venit post hos insignis Homerus
  Tyrtaeusque mares animos in Martia bella
  Versibus exacuit dictae per carmina sortes,
  Et vitae monstrata via est; et gratia regum

  That stones were said to move, and at his call,
  Charm'd to his purpose, form'd the Theban Wall.
  The love of Moral Wisdom to infuse
  _These_ were the Labours of THE ANCIENT MUSE.
  "To mark the limits, where the barriers stood
  'Twixt Private Int'rest, and the Publick Good;
  To raise a pale, and firmly to maintain
  The bound, that fever'd Sacred from Profane;
  To shew the ills Promiscuous Love should dread,
  And teach the laws of the Connubial Bed;
  Mankind dispers'd, to Social Towns to draw;
  And on the Sacred Tablet grave the Law."
  Thus fame and honour crown'd the Poet's line;
  His work immortal, and himself divine!
  Next lofty Homer, and Tyrtaeus strung
  Their Epick Harps, and Songs of Glory sung;
  Sounding a charge, and calling to the war
  The Souls that bravely feel, and nobly dare,
  In _Verse_ the Oracles their sense make known,
  In Verse the road and rule of life is shewn;
  Pieriis tentata modis, ludusque repertus,
  Et longorum operum finis j ne forte pudori
  Sit tibi Musa lyne folers, et cantor Apollo,

  Natura sieret laudabile carmen, an arte,
  Quaesitum ess. Ego nec studium sine divite vena,
  Nec rude quid possit video ingenium: alterius sic
  Altera poscit opem res, et conjurat amice.
  Qui studet optatam cursu contingere metam,
  Multa tulit fecitque puer; sudavit et alsit;
  Abstinuit venere et vino, qui Pythia cantat
  _Verse_ to the Poet royal favour brings,
  And leads the Muses to the throne of Kings;
  _Verse_ too, the varied Scene and sports prepares,
  Brings rest to toil, and balm to all our cares.
  deem then with rev'rence of the glorious fire,
  breath'd by the muse, the mistress of the lyre!
  blush not to own her pow'r, her glorious flame;
  nor think Apollo, lord of song, thy shame!

  Whether good verse of Nature is the fruit,
  Or form'd by Art, has long been in dispute.
  But what can Labour in a barren foil,
  Or what rude Genius profit without toil?
  The wants of one the other must supply
  Each finds in each a friend and firm ally.
  Much has the Youth, who pressing in the race
  Pants for the promis'd goal and foremost place,
  Suffer'd and done; borne heat, and cold's extremes,
  And Wine and Women scorn'd, as empty dreams,

  Tibicen, didicit prius, extimuitque magistrum.
  Nunc satis est dixisse, Ego mira poemata pango:
  Occupet extremum scabies: mihi turpe relinqui est,
  Et quod non didici, sane nescire sateri.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Ut praeco, ad merces turbam qui cogit emendas;
  Assentatores jubet ad lucrum ire poeta
  Dives agris, dives positis in foenore nummis.
  Si vero est, unctum qui recte ponere possit,
  Et spondere levi pro paupere, et eripere artis
  Litibus implicitum; mirabor, si sciet inter--
  Noscere mendacem verumque beatus amicum.
  The Piper, who the Pythian Measure plays,
  In fear of a hard matter learnt the lays:
  But if to desp'rate verse I would apply,
  What needs instruction? 'tis enough to cry;
  "I can write Poems, to strike wonder blind!
  Plague take the hindmost! Why leave _me_ behind?
  Or why extort a truth, so mean and low,
  That what I have not learnt, I cannot know?"

  As the sly Hawker, who a sale prepares,
  Collects a croud of bidders for his Wares,
  The Poet, warm in land, and rich in cash,
  Assembles flatterers, brib'd to praise his trash.
  But if he keeps a table, drinks good wine,
  And gives his hearers handsomely to dine;
  If he'll stand bail, and 'tangled debtors draw
  Forth from the dirty cobwebs of the law;
  Much shall I praise his luck, his sense commend,
  If he discern the flatterer from the friend.
  Tu seu donaris seu quid donare voles cui;
  Nolito ad versus tibi factos ducere plenum
  Laetitiae; clamabit enim, Pulchre, bene, recte!
  Pallescet; super his etiam stillabit amicis
  Ex oculis rorem; saliet; tundet pede terram.
  Ut qui conducti plorant in funere, dicunt
  Et faciunt prope plura dolentibus ex animo: sic
  Derisor vero plus laudatore movetur.
  Reges dicuntur multis urgere culullis,
  Et torquere mero quem perspexisse laborant
  An sit amicitia dignus: si carmina condes,
  Nunquam te fallant animi sub vulpe latentes.
  Quintilio si quid recitares: Corrige sodes
  Hoc, aiebat, et hoc: melius te posse negares
  Is there a man to whom you've given aught?
  Or mean to give? let no such man be brought
  To hear your verses! for at every line,
  Bursting with joy, he'll cry, "Good! rare! divine!"
  The blood will leave his cheek; his eyes will fill
  With tears, and soon the friendly dew distill:
  He'll leap with extacy, with rapture bound;
  Clap with both hands; with both feet beat the ground.
  As mummers, at a funeral hir'd to weep,
  More coil of woe than real mourners keep,
  More mov'd appears the laugher in his sleeve,
  Than those who truly praise, or smile, or grieve.
  Kings have been said to ply repeated bowls,
  Urge deep carousals, to unlock the souls
  Of those, whose loyalty they wish'd to prove,
  And know, if false, or worthy of their love:
  You then, to writing verse if you're inclin'd,
  Beware the Spaniel with the Fox's mind!

  Quintilius, when he heard you ought recite,
  Cried, "prithee, alter _this_! and make _that _right!"
  Bis terque expertum frustra? delere jubebat,
  Et male ter natos incudi reddere versus.
  Si defendere delictum, quam vortere, malles;
  Nullum ultra verbum, aut operam insumebat inanem,
  Quin sine rivali teque et tua folus amares.

  Vir bonus et prudens versus reprehendet inertes;
  Culpabit duros; incomptis allinet atrum
  Transverso calamo signum; ambitiosa recidet
  Ornamenta; parum claris lucem dare coget;
  Arguet ambigue dictum; mutanda notabit;
  Fiet Aristarchus; non dicet, Cur ego amicum
  Offendam in nugis? Hae migae feria ducent
  But if your pow'r to mend it you denied,
  Swearing that twice and thrice in vain you tried;
  "Then blot it out! (he cried) it must be terse:
  Back to the anvil with your ill-turn'd verse!"
  Still if you chose the error to defend,
  Rather than own, or take the pains to mend,
  He said no more; no more vain trouble took;
  But left you to admire yourself and book.

  The Man, in whom Good Sense and Honour join,
  Will blame the harsh, reprove the idle line;
  The rude, all grace neglected or forgot,
  Eras'd at once, will vanish at his blot;
  Ambitious ornaments he'll lop away;
  On things obscure he'll make you let in day,
  Loose and ambiguous terms he'll not admit,
  And take due note of ev'ry change that's fit,
  A very ARISTARCHUS he'll commence;
  Not coolly say--"Why give my friend offence?
  These are but trifles!"--No; these trifles lead
  To serious mischiefs, if he don't succeed;
  In mala derisum semel, exceptumque sinistre,
  Ut mala quem scabies aut morbus regius urget,
  Aut fanaticus error, et iracunda Diana;
  Vesanum tetigisse timent fugiuntque poetam,
  Qui sapiunt: agitant pueri, incautique sequuntur.
  Hic, dum sublimis versus ructatur, et errat,
  Si veluti menilis intentus decidit auceps
  In puteum, soveamve; licet, Succurrite, longum
  Clamet, in cives: non sit qui tollere curet.
  Si curet quis opem serre, et demittere sunem;
  Qui scis, an prudens huc se projecerit, atque
  Servari nolet? dicam: Siculique poetae
  Narrabo interitum.

  While the poor friend in dark disgrace sits down,
  The butt and laughing-stock of all the town,
  As one, eat up by Leprosy and Itch,
  Moonstruck, Posses'd, or hag-rid by a Witch,
  A Frantick Bard puts men of sense to flight;
  His slaver they detest, and dread his bite:
  All shun his touch; except the giddy boys,
  Close at his heels, who hunt him down with noise,
  While with his head erect he threats the skies,
  Spouts verse, and walks without the help of eyes;
  Lost as a blackbird-catcher, should he pitch
  Into some open well, or gaping ditch;
  Tho' he call lustily "help, neighbours, help!"
  No soul regards him, or attends his yelp.
  Should one, too kind, to give him succour hope,
  Wish to relieve him, and let down a rope;
  Forbear! (I'll cry for aught that you can tell)
  By sheer design he jump'd into the well.
  He wishes not you should preserve him, Friend!
  Know you the old Sicilian Poet's end?
  Deus immortalis haberi.

  Dum cupit Empedocles, ardeatem frigidus aetnam
  Infiluit. sit fas, liceatque perire poetis.
  Invitum qui fervat, idem facit occidenti.
  Nec semel hoc fecit; nec si retractus erit jam,
  Fiet homo, et ponet famosae mortis amorem.
  Nec fatis apparet, cur versus factitet; utrum
  Minxerit in patrios cineres, an triste bidental
  Moverit incestus: certe furit, ac velut ursus
  Objectos caveae valuit e srangere clathros,

  *       *       *       *       *

  Empedocles, ambitious to be thought
  A God, his name with Godlike honours fought,
  Holding a worldly life of no account,
  Lead'p coldly into aetna's burning mount.---
  Let Poets then with leave resign their breath,
  Licens'd and priveleg'd to rush on death!
  Who gives a man his life against his will,
  Murders the man, as much as those who kill.
  'Tis not once only he hath done this deed;
  Nay, drag him forth! your kindness wo'n't succeed:
  Nor will he take again a mortal's shame,
  And lose the glory of a death of fame.
  Nor is't apparent, _why_ with verse he's wild:
  Whether his father's ashes he defil'd;
  Whether, the victim of incestuous love,
  The Blasted Monument he striv'd to move:
  Whate'er the cause, he raves; and like a Bear,
  Burst from his cage, and loose in open air,
  Indoctum doctumque fugat recitator acerbus.
  Quem vero arripuit, tenet, occiditque legendo,
  Non miffura cutem, nisi plena cruroris, hirudo.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Learn'd and unlearn'd the Madman puts to flight,
  They quick to fly, he bitter to recite!
  What hapless soul he seizes, he holds fast;
  Rants, and repeats, and reads him dead at last:
  Hangs on him, ne'er to quit, with ceaseless speech.
  Till gorg'd and full of blood, a very Leech!





Notes on the EPISTLE to the PISOS Notes

I have referred the Notes to this place, that the reader might be left
to his genuine feelings, and the natural impression on reading the
Epistle, whether adverse or favourable to the idea I ventured to
premise, concerning its Subject and Design. In the address to my learned
and worthy friends I said little more than was necessary so open my
plan, and to offer an excuse for my undertaking. The Notes descend to
particulars, tending to illustrate and confirm my hypothesis; and adding
occasional explanations of the original, chiefly intended for the use
of the English Reader. I have endeavoured, according to the best of my
ability, to follow the advice of Roscommon in the lines, which I have
ventured to prefix to these Notes. How far I may be entitled to the
_poetical blessing_ promised by the Poet, the Publick must determine:
but were I, avoiding arrogance, to renounce all claim to it, such an
appearance of _Modesty_ would includes charge of _Impertinence_ for
having hazarded this publication._Take pains the_ genuine meaning _to
explore!_

  There sweat, there strain, tug the laborious oar:
  _Search ev'ry comment_, that your care can find;
  Some here, some there, may hit the Poet's mind:
  Yet be not blindly guided by the _Throng_;
  The Multitude is always in the _Wrong_.
  When things appear _unnatural_ or _hard_,
  _Consult your_ author, _with_ himself compar'd!
  Who knows what Blessing Phoebus may bestow,
  And future Ages to your labour owe?
  Such _Secrets_ are not easily found out,
  But once _discoverd_, leave no room for doubt.
  truth stamps _conviction_ in your ravish'd breast,
  And _Peace_ and _Joy_ attend _the_ glorious guest.



Essay on Translated Verse ART of POETRY, an EPISTLE, &c.

Q. HORATII FLACCI EPISTOLA AD PISONES.

The work of Horace, now under consideration, has been so long known, and
so generally received, by the name of The Art of Poetry, that I have, on
account of that notoriety, submitted this translation to the Publick,
under that title, rather than what I hold to be the true one, viz.
Horace's Epistle to The Pisos. The Author of the English Commentary has
adopted the same title, though directly repugnant to his own system;
and, I suppose, for the very same reason.

The title, in general a matter of indifference, is, in the present
instance, of much consequence. On the title Julius Scaliger founded his
invidious, and injudicious, attack. De arte quares quid sentiam. Quid?
eqvidem quod de arte, sine arte tradita. To the Title all the editors,
and commentators, have particularly adverted; commonly preferring the
Epistolary Denomination, but, in contradiction to that preference,
almost universally inscribing the Epistle, the Art of Poetry. The
conduct, however, of Jason De Nores, a native of Cyprus, a learned and
ingenious writer of the 16th century, is very remarkable. In the year
1553 he published at Venice this work of Horace, accompanied with a
commentary and notes, written in elegant Latin, inscribing it, after
Quintilian, Q. Horatii Flacci Liber De Arte Poetica. [Foot note: I think
it right to mention that I have never seen the 1st edition, published
at Venice. With a copy of the second edition, printed in Paris, I was
favoured by Dr. Warton of Winchester.] The very-next year, however,
he printed at Paris a second edition, enriching his notes with many
observations on Dante and Petrarch, and changing the title, after mature
consideration, to _Q. Horatii Flacii_ EPISTOLA AD PISONES, _de Arte
Poetica._ His motives for this change he assigns in the following terms.

_Quare adductum me primum sciant ad inscriptionem operis immutandam non
levioribus de causis,& quod formam epistolae, non autem libri, in quo
praecepta tradantur, vel ex ipso principio prae se ferat, & quod in
vetustis exemplaribus Epistolarum libros subsequatur, & quad etiam summi
et praestantissimi homines ita sentiant, & quod minime nobis obstet
Quintiliani testimonium, ut nonnullis videtur. Nam si librum appellat
Quintilianus, non est cur non possit inter epistolas enumerari, cum et
illae ab Horatio in libros digestae fuerint. Quod vero DE ARTE POETICA
idem Quintilianus adjangat, nihil commaveor, cum et in epistolis
praecepta de aliqua re tradi possint, ab eodemque in omnibus pene, et
in iis ad Scaevam & Lollium praecipue jam factum videatur, in quibus
breviter eos instituit, qua ratione apud majores facile versarentur._

Desprez, the Dauphin Editor, retains both titles, but says, inclining to
the Epistolary, _Attamen artem poeticam vix appellem cum Quintiliano et
aliis: malim vero epistolam nuncupare cum nonnullis eruditis._ Monsieur
Dacier inscribes it, properly enough, agreable to the idea of Porphyry,
Q. Horatii Flacci DE ARTE POETICA LIBER; feu, EPISTOLA AD PISONES,
patrem, et filios._

Julius Scaliger certainly stands convicted of critical malice by his
poor cavil at _the supposed title_; and has betrayed his ignorance of
the ease and beauty of Epistolary method, as well as the most gross
misapprehension, by his ridiculous analysis of the work, resolving it
into thirty-six parts. He seems, however, to have not ill conceived the
genius of the poem, in saying that _it relished satire_. This he has
urged in many parts of his Poeticks, particularly in the Dedicatory
Epistle to his son, not omitting, however, his constant charge of _Art
without Art_. Horatius artem cum inscripsit, adeo sine ulla docet arte,
ut satyrae propius totum opus illud esse videatur. This comes almost
home to the opinion of the Author of the elegant commentaries on the two
Epistles of Horace to the Pisos and to Augustus, as expressed in the
Dedication to the latter: With the recital of that opinion I shall
conclude this long note. "The genius of Rome was bold and elevated: but
Criticism of any kind, was little cultivated, never professed as an
_art_, by this people. The specimens we have of their ability in this
way (of which the most elegant, beyond all dispute, are the two epistles
to _Augustus_ and the _Pisos_) _are slight occasional attempts_, made in
the negligence of common sense, _and adapted to the peculiar exigencies
of their own taste and learning_; and not by any means the regular
productions of _art_, professedly bending itself to this work, and
ambitious to give the last finishing to the critical system."

[_Translated from Horace._] In that very entertaining and instructive
publication, entitled _An Essay on the Learning and Genius of Pope_,
the Critick recommends, as the properest poetical measure to render in
English the Satires and Epistles of Horace, that kind of familiar blank
verse, used in a version of Terence, attempted some years since by the
Author of this translation. I am proud of the compliment; yet I have
varied from the mode prescribed: not because Roscommon has already given
such a version; or because I think the satyrical hexameters of Horace
less familiar than the irregular lambicks of Terence. English Blank
Verse, like the lambick of Greece and Rome, is peculiarly adapted to
theatrical action and dialogue, as well as to the Epick, and the more
elevated Didactick Poetry: but after the models left by Dryden and Pope,
and in the face of the living example of Johnson, who shall venture to
reject rhime in the province of Satire and Epistle?



9.--TRUST ME, MY PISOS!] _Credite Pisones!_

Monsieur Dacier, at a very early period, feels the influence of _the
personal address_, that governs this Epistle. Remarking on this passage,
he observes that Horace, anxious to inspire _the Pisos _with a just
taste, says earnestly _Trust me, my Pisos! Credite Pisones! _an
expression that betrays fear and distrust, lest _the young Men _should
fall into the dangerous error of bad poets, and injudicious criticks,
who not only thought the want of unity of subject a pardonable effect
of Genius, but even the mark of a rich and luxuriant imagination.
And although this Epistle, continues Monsieur Dacier, is addressed
indifferently to Piso the father, and his Sons, as appears by v. 24 of
the original, yet it is _to the sons in particular _that these precepts
are directed; a consideration which reconciles the difference mentioned
by Porphyry. _Scribit ad Pisones, viros nobiles disertosque, patrem et
filios; vel, ut alii volunt,_ ad pisones fratres.

Desprez, the Dauphin Editor, observes also, in the same strain, Porro
_scribit Horatius ad patrem et ad filios Pisones, _praesertim vero ad
hos.

The family of the _Pisos_, to whom Horace addresses this Epistle, were
called Calpurnii, being descended from Calpus, son of Numa Pompilius,
whence, he afterwards stiles them _of the Pompilian Blood. Pompilius
Sanguis! _

10.--THE VOLUME SUCH] Librum _persimilem. Liber_, observes Dacier, is a
term applied to all literary productions, of whatever description. This
remark is undoubtedly just, confirms the sentiments of Jason de Nores,
and takes off the force of all the arguments founded on Quintilian's
having stiled his Epistle LIBER de _arte poetica_.

Vossius, speaking of the censure of Scaliger, "_de arte, sine arte_,"
subsoins sed fallitur, cum [Greek: epigraphaen] putat esse ab Horatio;
qui inscipserat EPISTOLAM AD PISONES. Argumentum vero, ut in Epistolarum
raeteris, ita in bac etiam, ab aliis postea appositum fuit.



l9.----OFT WORKS OF PROMISE LARGE, AND HIGH ATTEMPT.] Incaeptis gra-
nibus plerumque, &c. Buckingham's _Essay on Poetry_, Roscommon's _Essay
on Translated Verse_, as well as the Satires, and _Art Poetique_ of
Boileau, and Pope's _Essay on Criticism_, abound with imitations of
Horace. This passage of our Author seems to have given birth to the
following lines of Buckingham.

  'Tis not a slash of fancy, which sometimes,
  Dazzling our minds, sets off the slighted rhimes;
  Bright as a blaze, but in a moment done;
  True Wit is everlasting, like the Sun;
  Which though sometimes behind a cloud retir'd,
