he trailed his baleful folds, so that, at last, he could spring upon
his prey. Nature had given him sagacity and strength. The curse of
circumstance had humbled, but reconciled him to the dust. He had the
crawl of the reptile,--he had, also, its poison and its fangs.




CHAPTER VI. THE LION IN THE NET

IT was the next night, not long before daybreak, that the King of
Granada abruptly summoned to his council Jusef, his vizier. The old man
found Boabdil in great disorder and excitement; but he almost deemed
his sovereign mad, when he received from him the order to seize upon the
person of Muza Ben Abil Gazan, and to lodge him in the strongest dungeon
of the Vermilion Tower. Presuming upon Boabdil's natural mildness, the
vizier ventured to remonstrate,--to suggest the danger of laying violent
hands upon a chief so beloved,--and to inquire what cause should be
assigned for the outrage.

The veins swelled like cords upon Boabdil's brow, as he listened to the
vizier; and his answer was short and peremptory.

"Am I yet a king, that I should fear a subject, or excuse my will? Thou
hast my orders; there are my signet and the firman: obedience or the
bow-string!"

Never before had Boabdil so resembled his dread father in speech and
air; the vizier trembled to the soles of his feet, and withdrew in
silence. Boabdil watched him depart; and then, clasping his hands in
great emotion, exclaimed, "O lips of the dead! ye have warned me; and to
you I sacrifice the friend of my youth."

On quitting Boabdil the vizier, taking with him some of those foreign
slaves of a seraglio, who know no sympathy with human passion outside
its walls, bent his way to the palace of Muza, sorely puzzled and
perplexed. He did not, however, like to venture upon the hazard of the
alarm it might occasion throughout the neighbourhood, if he endeavoured,
at so unseasonable an hour, to force an entrance. He resolved, rather,
with his train to wait at a little distance, till, with the growing
dawn, the gates should be unclosed, and the inmates of the palace astir.

Accordingly, cursing his stars, and wondering at his mission, Jusef, and
his silent and ominous attendants, concealed themselves in a small copse
adjoining the palace, until the daylight fairly broke over the awakened
city. He then passed into the palace; and was conducted to a hall, where
he found the renowned Moslem already astir, and conferring with some
Zegri captains upon the tactics of a sortie designed for that day.

It was with so evident a reluctance and apprehension that Jusef
approached the prince, that the fierce and quick-sighted Zegris
instantly suspected some evil intention in his visit; and when Muza, in
surprise, yielded to the prayer of the vizier for a private audience,
it was with scowling brows and sparkling eyes that the Moorish warriors
left the darling of the nobles alone with the messenger of their king.

"By the tomb of the prophet!" said one of the Zegris, as he quitted the
hall, "the timid Boabdil suspects our Ben Abil Gazan. I learned of this
before."

"Hush!" said another of the band; "let us watch. If the king touch a
hair of Muza's head, Allah have mercy on his sins!"

Meanwhile, the vizier, in silence, showed to Muza the firman and the
signet; and then, without venturing to announce the place to which he
was commissioned to conduct the prince, besought him to follow at once.
Muza changed colour, but not with fear.

"Alas!" said he, in a tone of deep sorrow, "can it be that I have fallen
under my royal kinsman's suspicion or displeasure? But no matter; proud
to set to Granada an example of valour in her defence, be it mine to
set, also, an example of obedience to her king. Go on--I will follow
thee. Yet stay, you will have no need of guards; let us depart by a
private egress: the Zegris might misgive, did they see me leave
the palace with you at the very time the army are assembling in the
Vivarrambla, and awaiting my presence. This way."

Thus saying, Muza, who, fierce as he was, obeyed every impulse that the
oriental loyalty dictated from a subject to a king, passed from the hall
to a small door that admitted into the garden, and in thoughtful silence
accompanied the vizier towards the Alhambra. As they passed the copse in
which Muza, two nights before, had met with Almamen, the Moor, lifting
his head suddenly, beheld fixed upon him the dark eyes of the magician,
as he emerged from the trees. Muza thought there was in those eyes a
malign and hostile exultation; but Almamen, gravely saluting him, passed
on through the grove: the prince did not deign to look back, or he might
once more have encountered that withering gaze.

"Proud heathen!" muttered Almamen to himself, "thy father filled his
treasuries from the gold of many a tortured Hebrew; and even thou, too
haughty to be the miser, hast been savage enough to play the bigot. Thy
name is a curse in Israel; yet dost thou lust after the daughter of our
despised race, and, could defeated passion sting thee, I were avenged.
Ay, sweep on, with thy stately step and lofty crest-thou goest to
chains, perhaps to death."

As Almamen thus vented his bitter spirit, the last gleam of the white
robes of Muza vanished from his gaze. He paused a moment, turned away
abruptly, and said, half aloud, "Vengeance, not on one man only, but a
whole race! Now for the Nazarene."





BOOK. II.




CHAPTER I. THE ROYAL TENT OF SPAIN.--THE KING AND THE DOMINICAN--THE VISITOR AND
THE HOSTAGE.

Our narrative now summons us to the Christian army, and to the tent
in which the Spanish king held nocturnal counsel with some of his more
confidential warriors and advisers. Ferdinand had taken the field with
all the pomp and circumstance of a tournament rather than of a campaign;
and his pavilion literally blazed with purple and cloth of gold.

The king sat at the head of a table on which were scattered maps and
papers; nor in countenance and mien did that great and politic monarch
seem unworthy of the brilliant chivalry by which he was surrounded. His
black hair, richly perfumed and anointed, fell in long locks on either
side of a high imperial brow, upon whose calm, though not unfurrowed
surface, the physiognomist would in vain have sought to read the
inscrutable heart of kings. His features were regular and majestic: and
his mantle, clasped with a single jewel of rare price and lustre, and
wrought at the breast with a silver cross, waved over a vigorous and
manly frame, which derived from the composed and tranquil dignity of
habitual command that imposing effect which many of the renowned
knights and heroes in his presence took from loftier stature and ampler
proportions. At his right hand sat Prince Juan, his son, in the first
bloom of youth; at his left, the celebrated Rodrigo Ponce de Leon,
Marquess of Cadiz; along the table, in the order of their military rank,
were seen the splendid Duke of Medina Sidonia, equally noble in aspect
and in name; the worn and thoughtful countenance of the Marquess de
Villena (the Bayard of Spain); the melancholy brow of the heroic Alonzo
de Aguilar; and the gigantic frame, the animated features, and sparkling
eyes, of that fiery Hernando del Pulgar, surnamed "the knight of the
exploits."

"You see, senores," said the king, continuing an address, to which his
chiefs seemed to listen with reverential attention, "our best hope of
speedily gaining the city is rather in the dissensions of the Moors
than our own sacred arms. The walls are strong, the population still
numerous; and under Muza Ben Abil Gazan, the tactics of the hostile army
are, it must be owned, administered with such skill as to threaten very
formidable delays to the period of our conquest. Avoiding the hazard
of a fixed battle, the infidel cavalry harass our camp by perpetual
skirmishes; and in the mountain defiles our detachments cannot cope with
their light horse and treacherous ambuscades. It is true, that by
dint of time, by the complete devastation of the Vega, and by vigilant
prevention of convoys from the seatowns, we might starve the city into
yielding. But, alas! my lords, our enemies are scattered and numerous,
and Granada is not the only place before which the standard of Spain
should be unfurled. Thus situated, the lion does not disdain to serve
himself of the fox; and, fortunately, we have now in Granada an ally
that fights for us. I have actual knowledge of all that passes within
the Alhambra: the king yet remains in his palace, irresolute and
dreaming; and I trust that an intrigue by which his jealousies are
aroused against his general, Muza, may end either in the loss of that
able leader, or in the commotion of open rebellion or civil war. Treason
within Granada will open its gates to us."

"Sire," said Ponce de Leon, after a pause, "under your counsels, I no
more doubt of seeing our banner float above the Vermilion Towers, than I
doubt the rising of the sun over yonder hills; it matters little whether
we win by stratagem or force. But I need not say to your highness, that
we should carefully beware lest we be amused by inventions of the enemy,
and trust to conspiracies which may be but lying tales to blunt our
sabres, and paralyse our action."

"Bravely spoken, wise de Leon!" exclaimed Hernando del Pulgar, hotly:
"and against these infidels, aided by the cunning of the Evil One,
methinks our best wisdom lies in the sword-arm. Well says our old
Castilian proverb:

          'Curse them devoutly,
          Hammer them stoutly.'"

The king smiled slightly at the ardour of the favourite of his army, but
looked round for more deliberate counsel. "Sire," said Villena, "far be
it from us to inquire the grounds upon which your majesty builds
your hope of dissension among the foe; but, placing the most sanguine
confidence in a wisdom never to be deceived, it is clear that we should
relax no energy within our means, but fight while we plot, and seek to
conquer, while we do not neglect to undermine."

"You speak well, my Lord," said Ferdinand, thoughtfully; "and you
yourself shall head a strong detachment to-morrow, to lay waste
the Vega. Seek me two hours hence; the council for the present is
dissolved."

The knights rose, and withdrew with the usual grave and stately
ceremonies of respect, which Ferdinand observed to, and exacted from,
his court: the young prince remained.

"Son," said Ferdinand, when they were alone, "early and betimes should
the Infants of Spain be lessoned in the science of kingcraft. These
nobles are among the brightest jewels of the crown; but still it is
in the crown, and for the crown, that their light should sparkle.
Thou seest how hot, and fierce, and warlike, are the chiefs of
Spain--excellent virtues when manifested against our foes: but had we no
foes, Juan, such virtues might cause us exceeding trouble. By St.
Jago, I have founded a mighty monarchy! observe how it should be
maintained--by science, Juan, by science! and science is as far removed
from brute force as this sword from a crowbar. Thou seemest bewildered
and amazed, my son: thou hast heard that I seek to conquer Granada by
dissensions among the Moors; when Granada is conquered, remember that
the nobles themselves are at Granada. Ave Maria! blessed be the Holy
Mother, under whose eyes are the hearts of kings!" Ferdinand crossed
himself devoutly; and then, rising, drew aside a part of the drapery
of the pavilion, and called; in a low voice, the name of Perez. A grave
Spaniard, somewhat past the verge of middle age, appeared.

"Perez," said the king, reseating himself, "has the person we expected
from Granada yet arrived?"

"Sire, yes; accompanied by a maiden."

"He hath kept his word; admit them. Ha! holy father, thy visits are
always as balsam to the heart."

"Save you, my son!" returned a man in the robes of a Dominican friar,
who had entered suddenly and without ceremony by another part of the
tent, and who now seated himself with smileless composure at a little
distance from the king.

There was a dead silence for some moments; and Perez still lingered
within the tent, as if in doubt whether the entrance of the friar would
not prevent or delay obedience to the king's command. On the calm
face of Ferdinand himself appeared a slight shade of discomposure and
irresolution, when the monk thus resumed:

"My presence, my son, will not, I trust, disturb your conference with
the infidel--since you deem that worldly policy demands your parley with
the men of Belial."

"Doubtless not--doubtless not," returned the king, quickly: then,
muttering to himself, "how wondrously doth this holy man penetrate into
all our movements and designs!" he added, aloud, "Let the messenger
enter."

Perez bowed, and withdrew.

During this time, the young prince reclined in listless silence on his
seat; and on his delicate features was an expression of weariness which
augured but ill of his fitness for the stern business to which the
lessons of his wise father were intended to educate his mind. His,
indeed, was the age, and his the soul, for pleasure; the tumult of the
camp was to him but a holiday exhibition--the march of an army, the
exhilaration of a spectacle; the court as a banquet--the throne, the
best seat at the entertainment. The life of the heir-apparent, to the
life of the king possessive, is as the distinction between enchanting
hope and tiresome satiety.

The small grey eyes of the friar wandered over each of his royal
companions with a keen and penetrating glance, and then settled in the
aspect of humility on the rich carpets that bespread the floor; nor did
he again lift them till Perez, reappearing, admitted to the tent the
Israelite, Almamen, accompanied by a female figure, whose long veil,
extending from head to foot, could conceal neither the beautiful
proportions nor the trembling agitation, of her frame.

"When last, great king, I was admitted to thy presence," said Almamen,
"thou didst make question of the sincerity and faith of thy servant;
thou didst ask me for a surety of my faith; thou didst demand a hostage;
and didst refuse further parley without such pledge were yielded to
thee. Lo! I place under thy kingly care this maiden--the sole child of
my house--as surety of my truth; I intrust to thee a life dearer than my
own."

"You have kept faith with us, stranger," said the king, in that soft and
musical voice which well disguised his deep craft and his unrelenting
will; "and the maiden whom you intrust to our charge shall be ranked
with the ladies of our royal consort."

"Sire," replied Almamen, with touching earnestness, "you now hold the
power of life and death over all for whom this heart can breathe a
prayer or cherish a hope, save for my countrymen and my religion. This
solemn pledge between thee and me I render up without scruple, without
fear. To thee I give a hostage, from thee I have but a promise."

"But it is the promise of a king, a Christian, and a knight," said the
king, with dignity rather mild than arrogant; "among monarchs, what
hostage can be more sacred? Let this pass: how proceed affairs in the
rebel city?"

"May this maiden withdraw, ere I answer my lord the king?" said Almamen.

The young prince started to his feet. "Shall I conduct this new charge
to my mother?" he asked, in a low voice, addressing Ferdinand.

The king half smiled: "The holy father were a better guide," he
returned, in the same tone. But, though the Dominican heard the hint, he
retained his motionless posture; and Ferdinand, after a momentary gaze
on the friar, turned away. "Be it so, Juan," said he, with a look meant
to convey caution to the prince; "Perez shall accompany you to the
queen: return the moment your mission is fulfilled--we want your
presence."

While this conversation was carried on between the father and son,
the Hebrew was whispering, in his sacred tongue, words of comfort and
remonstrance to the maiden; but they appeared to have but little of the
desired effect; and, suddenly falling on his breast, she wound her
arms around the Hebrew, whose breast shook with strong emotions, and
exclaimed passionately, in the same language, "Oh, my father! what have
I done?--why send me from thee?--why intrust thy child to the stranger?
Spare me, spare me!"

"Child of my heart!" returned the Hebrew, with solemn but tender
accents, "even as Abraham offered up his son, must I offer thee, upon
the altars of our faith; but, O Leila! even as the angel of the Lord
forbade the offering, so shall thy youth be spared, and thy years
reserved for the glory of generations yet unborn. King of Spain!"
he continued in the Spanish tongue, suddenly and eagerly, "you are a
father, forgive my weakness, and speed this parting."

Juan approached; and with respectful courtesy attempted to take the hand
of the maiden.

"You?" said the Israelite, with a dark frown. "O king! the prince is
young."

"Honour knoweth no distinction of age," answered the king. "What ho,
Perez! accompany this maiden and the prince to the queen's pavilion."

The sight of the sober years and grave countenance of the attendant
seemed to re-assure the Hebrew. He strained Leila in his arms; printed a
kiss upon her forehead without removing her veil; and then, placing her
almost in the arms of Perez, turned away to the further end of the tent,
and concealed his face with his hands. The king appeared touched; but
the Dominican gazed upon the whole scene with a sour scowl.

Leila still paused for a moment; and then, as if recovering her
self-possession, said, aloud and distinctly,--"Man deserts me; but
I will not forget that God is over all." Shaking off the hand of the
Spaniard, she continued, "Lead on; I follow thee!" and left the tent
with a steady and even majestic step.

"And now," said the king, when alone with the Dominican and Almamen,
"how proceed our hopes?"
