

A PRESENT

"There was a gentleman sent him a present one time, and he bade a little
lad to bring it to him. Shut up in a box it was, and he bade the boy to
give it to himself, and not to open the box. So the little lad brought
it to O'Connell to give it to him. 'Let you open it yourself,' says
O'Connell. So he opened it, and whatever was in it blew up and made an
end of the boy, and it would have been the same with O'Connell if he had
opened it."


HIS STRATEGY

"O'Connell was a grand man; the best within the walls of the world. He
never led anyone astray. Did you hear that one time he turned the shoes
on his horses? There were bad members following him. I cannot say who
they were, for I will not tell what I don't know. He got a smith to turn
the shoes, and when they came upon his track, he went east and they went
west. Parnell was no bad man, but Dan O'Connell's name went up higher in
praises."


THE MAN WAS GOING TO BE HANGED

"I saw O'Connell in Galway one time, and I couldn't get anear him. All
the nations of the world were gathered there to see him. There were a
great many he hung and a great many he got off from death, the dear man.
He went into a town one time, and into a hotel, and he asked for his
dinner. And he had a frieze dress, for he was very simple, and always a
clerk along with him. And when the dinner was served to him, 'Is there
no one here,' says he, 'to sit along with me; for it is seldom I ever
dined without company.' 'If you think myself good enough to sit with
you,' says the man of the hotel, 'I will do it.' So the two of them sat
to the dinner together, and O'Connell asked was there any news in the
town. 'There is,' says the hotel man, 'there is a man to be hung
to-morrow.' 'Oh, my!' says O'Connell, 'what was it he did to deserve
that?' 'Himself and another that had been out fowling,' says he, 'and
they came in here and they began to dispute, and the one of them killed
the other, and he will be hung to-morrow.' 'He will not,' says
O'Connell. 'I tell you he will,' says the other, 'for the Judge is come
to give the sentence.' Well, O'Connell kept to it that he would not, and
they made a bet, and the hotel man bet all he had on the man being hung.
In the morning O'Connell was in no hurry out of bed, and when the two of
them walked into the Court, the Judge was after giving the sentence, and
the man was to be hung. '_Maisead_,' says the judge when he saw
O'Connell, 'I wish you had been here a half an hour ago, where there is
a man going to be hung.' 'He is not,' says O'Connell. 'He is,' says the
judge. 'If he is,' says O'Connell, 'that one will never let anyone go
living out of his hotel, and he making money out of the hanging.' 'What
do you mean saying that?' says the judge. Then O'Connell took the
instrument out of his pocket where it was written down all the
hotel-keeper had put on the hanging. And when the judge saw that, he set
the man free, and he was not hanged."


THE CUP OF THE SASSANACH

"He was over in England one time, and he was brought to a party, and tea
was made ready and cups. And as they were sitting at the table, a
servant girl that was in it, and that was Irish, came to O'Connell and
she said, 'Do you understand Irish?' [IRISH: 'An tuigeann tu Gaedilge,
O'Connell?' 'Tuigim,'] says he, 'I understand it.' 'Have a care,' says
she, 'for there is in your cup what would poison the whole nation!' 'If
that is true, girl, you will get a good fortune,' said he. It was in
Irish they said all that, and the people that were in it had no ears.
Then O'Connell quenched the candle, and he changed his cup for the cup
of the man that was next him. And it was not long till the man fell
dead. They were always trying to kill O'Connell, because he was a good
man. The Sassanach it was were against him. Terrible wicked they were,
and God save us, I believe they are every bit as wicked yet!"


THE THOUSAND FISHERS

"O'Connell came to Galway one time, and he sent for all the trades to
come out with the sign of their trade in their hand, and he would see
which was the best. And there came ten hundred fishers, having all white
flannel clothes and black hats and white scarves about them, and he gave
the sway to them. It wasn't a year after that, the half of them were
lost, going through the fogs at Newfoundland, where they went for a
better way of living."


WHAT THE OLD WOMEN SAW

"The greatest thing I ever saw was O'Connell driving through Gort, very
plain, and an oiled cap on him, and having only one horse; and there was
no house in Gort without his picture in it." "O'Connell rode up Crow
Lane and to Church Street on a single horse, and he stopped there and
took a view of Gort." "I saw O'Connell after he left Gort going on the
road to Kinvara, and seven horses in the coach--they could not get in
the eighth. He stopped, and he was talking to Hickman that was with me.
Shiel was in the coach along with him."


O'CONNELL'S HAT

"O'Connell wore his hat in the English House of Commons, what no man but
the King can do. He wore it for three days because he had a sore head,
and at the end of that they bade him put it off, and he said he would
not, where he had worn it three days."


THE CHANGE HE MADE

"O'Connell was a great councillor. At that time if there was a Catholic,
no matter how high or great or learned he was, he could not get a place.
But if a Protestant came that was a blockhead and ignorant, the place
would be open to him. There was a revolution rising because of that, and
O'Connell brought it into the House of Commons and got it changed. He
was the greatest man ever was in Ireland. He was a very clever lawyer;
he would win every case, he would put it so strong and clear and clever.
If there were fifteen lawyers against him--five and ten--he would win it
against them all, whether the case was bad or good."


THE MAN HE BROUGHT TO JUSTICE

"Corly, that burned his house in Burren, was very bad, and it was
O'Connell brought him to the gallows. The only case O'Connell lost was
against the Macnamaras, and he told them he would be even with them, and
so when Corly, that was a friend of theirs, was brought up he kept his
word. There was no doubt about him burning the house, it was to
implicate the Hynes he did it, to lay it on them. There was a girl used
to go out milking at daybreak, and she awoke, and the moon was shining,
and she thought it was day, and got up and looked out, and she saw him
doing it."


THE BINDING

"O'Connell was a great man, wide big arms he had. It was he left us the
cheap tea; to cheapen it he did, that was at that time a shilling for
one bare ounce. His heart is in Rome and his body in Glasnevin. A lovely
man, he would put you on your guard; he was for the country, he was all
for Ireland."


HIS MONUMENT

"There is a nice monument put up to O'Connell in Ennis, in a corner it
is of the middle of a street, and himself high up on it, holding a book.
It was a poor shoe-maker set that going. I saw him in Gort one time, a
coat of O'Connell's he had that he chanced in some place. Only for him
there would be no monument; it was he gathered money for it, and there
was none would refuse him."


A PRAISE MADE FOR DANIEL O'CONNELL BY OLD WOMEN AND THEY BEGGING AT THE
DOOR

"Dan O'Connell was the best man in the world, and a great man surely;
and there could not be better than what O'Connell was.

"It was from him I took the pledge and I a child, and kept it ever
after. He would give it to little lads and children, but not to any aged
person. Pilot trousers he had and a pilot coat, and a grey and white
waistcoat.

"O'Connell was all for the poor. See what he did at Saint Patrick's
Island--he cast out every bad thing and every whole thing, to England
and to America and to every part. He fought it well for every whole
body.

"A splendid monument there is to him in Ennis, and his fine top coat
upon him. A lovely man; you'd think he was alive and all, and he having
his hat in his hand. Everyone kneels down on the steps of it and says a
few prayers and walks away. It is as high as that tree below. If he was
in Ireland now the pension would go someway right.

"He was the best and the best to everyone; he got great sway in the town
of Gort, and in every other place.

"I suppose he has the same talk always; he is able to do for us now as
well as ever he was; surely his mercy and goodness are in the town of
Gort.

"He did good in the world while he was alive; he was a great man surely;
there couldn't be better in this world I believe, or in the next world;
there couldn't be better all over the world.

