year, and I will tell it to you before I go any further.

You know what the border peel castles are like, I have no doubt.
They were just square heaps built every here and there along the line,
so that the folk might have some place of protection against raiders and
mosstroopers.  When Percy and his men were over the Marches, then the
people would drive some of their cattle into the yard of the tower, shut
up the big gate, and light a fire in the brazier at the top, which would
be answered by all the other Peel towers, until the lights would go
twinkling up to the Lammermuir Hills, and so carry the news on to the
Pentlands and to Edinburgh.  But now, of course, all these old keeps
were warped and crumbling, and made fine nesting places for the wild
birds.  Many a good egg have I had for my collection out of the
Corriemuir Peel Tower.

One day I had been a very long walk, away over to leave a message at the
Laidlaw Armstrongs, who live two miles on this side of Ayton.
About five o'clock, just before the sun set, I found myself on the brae
path with the gable end of West Inch peeping up in front of me and the
old Peel tower lying on my left.  I turned my eyes on the keep, for it
looked so fine with the flush of the level sun beating full upon it and
the blue sea stretching out behind; and as I stared, I suddenly saw the
face of a man twinkle for a moment in one of the holes in the wall.

Well I stood and wondered over this, for what could anybody be doing in
such a place now that it was too early for the nesting season?  It was
so queer that I was determined to come to the bottom of it; so, tired as
I was, I turned my shoulder on home, and walked swiftly towards the
tower.  The grass stretches right up to the very base of the wall, and
my feet made little noise until I reached the crumbling arch where the
old gate used to be.  I peeped through, and there was Bonaventure de
Lapp standing inside the keep, and peeping out through the very hole at
which I had seen his face.  He was turned half away from me, and it was
clear that he had not seen me at all, for he was staring with all his
eyes over in the direction of West Inch.  As I advanced my foot rattled
the rubble that lay in the gateway, and he turned round with a start and
faced me.

He was not a man whom you could put out of countenance, and his face
changed no more than if he had been expecting me there for a
twelvemonth; but there was something in his eyes which let me know that
he would have paid a good price to have me back on the brae path again.

"Hullo!" said I, "what are you doing here?"

"I may ask you that," said he.

"I came up because I saw your face at the window."

"And I because, as you may well have observed, I have very much interest
for all that has to do with the military, and, of course, castles are
among them.  You will excuse me for one moment, my dear Jack."

And he stepped out suddenly through the hole in the wall, so as to be
out of my sight.

But I was very much too curious to excuse him so easily.  I shifted my
ground swiftly to see what it was that he was after.  He was standing
outside, and waving his hand frantically, as in a signal.

"What are you doing?" I cried; and then, running out to his side, I
looked across the moors to see whom he was beckoning to.

"You go too far, sir," said he, angrily; "I didn't thought you would
have gone so far.  A gentleman has the freedom to act as he choose
without your being the spy upon him.  If we are to be friends, you must
not interfere in my affairs."

"I don't like these secret doings," said I, "and my father would not
like them either."

"Your father can speak for himself, and there is no secret," said he,
curtly.  "It is you with your imaginings that make a secret.  Ta, ta,
ta! I have no patience with such foolishness."

And without as much as a nod, he turned his back upon me, and started
walking swiftly to West Inch.

Well, I followed him, and in the worst of tempers; for I had a feeling
that there was some mischief in the wind, and yet I could not for the
life of me think what it all meant.  Again I found myself puzzling over
the whole mystery of this man's coming, and of his long residence among
us.  And whom could he have expected to meet at the Peel Tower?  Was the
fellow a spy, and was it some brother spy who came to speak with him
there?  But that was absurd.  What could there be to spy about in
Berwickshire?  And besides, Major Elliott knew all about him, and he
would not show him such respect if there were anything amiss.

I had just got as far as this in my thoughts when I heard a cheery hail,
and there was the Major himself coming down the hill from his house,
with his big bulldog Bounder held in leash.  This dog was a savage
creature, and had caused more than one accident on the countryside; but
the Major was very fond of it, and would never go out without it, though
he kept it tied with a good thick thong of leather.  Well, just as I was
looking at the Major, waiting for him to come up, he stumbled with his
lame leg over a branch of gorse, and in recovering himself he let go his
hold of the leash, and in an instant there was the beast of a dog flying
down the hillside in my direction.

I did not like it, I can tell you; for there was neither stick nor stone
about, and I knew that the brute was dangerous.  The Major was shrieking
to it from behind, and I think that the creature thought that he was
hallooing it on, so furiously did it rush.  But I knew its name, and I
thought that maybe that might give me the privileges of
acquaintanceship; so as it came at me with bristling hair and its nose
screwed back between its two red eyes, I cried out "Bounder! Bounder!"
at the pitch of my lungs.  It had its effect, for the beast passed me
with a snarl, and flew along the path on the traces of Bonaventure de
Lapp.

He turned at the shouting, and seemed to take in the whole thing at a
glance; but he strolled along as slowly as ever.  My heart was in my
mouth for him, for the dog had never seen him before; and I ran as fast
as my feet would carry me to drag it away from him.  But somehow, as it
bounded up and saw the twittering finger and thumb which de Lapp held
out behind him, its fury died suddenly away, and we saw it wagging its
thumb of a tail and clawing at his knee.

"Your dog then, Major?" said he, as its owner came hobbling up.  "Ah, it
is a fine beast--a fine, pretty thing!"

The Major was blowing hard, for he had covered the ground nearly as fast
as I.

"I was afraid lest he might have hurt you," he panted.

"Ta, ta, ta!" cried de Lapp.  "He is a pretty, gentle thing; I always
love the dogs.  But I am glad that I have met you, Major; for here is
this young gentleman, to whom I owe very much, who has begun to think
that I am a spy.  Is it not so, Jack?"

I was so taken aback by his words that I could not lay my tongue to an
answer, but coloured up and looked askance, like the awkward country lad
that I was.

"You know me, Major," said de Lapp, "and I am sure that you will tell
him that this could not be."

"No, no, Jack!  Certainly not! certainly not!" cried the Major.

"Thank you," said de Lapp.  "You know me, and you do me justice.  And
yourself, I hope that your knee is better, and that you will soon have
your regiment given you."

"I am well enough," answered the Major; "but they will never give me a
place unless there is war, and there will be no more war in my time."

"Oh, you think that!" said de Lapp with a smile.   "Well, _nous
verrons!_  We shall see, my friend!"

He whisked off his hat, and turning briskly he walked off in the
direction of West Inch.  The Major stood looking after him with
thoughtful eyes, and then asked me what it was that had made me think
that he was a spy.  When I told him he said nothing, but he shook his
head, and looked like a man who was ill at ease in his mind.



CHAPTER VIII.

THE COMING OF THE CUTTER.

I never felt quite the same to our lodger after that little business at
the Peel Castle.  It was always in my mind that he was holding a secret
from me--indeed, that he was all a secret together, seeing that he
always hung a veil over his past.  And when by chance that veil was for
an instant whisked away, we always caught just a glimpse of something
bloody and violent and dreadful upon the other side.  The very  look of
his body was terrible.  I bathed with him once in the summer, and I saw
then that he was haggled with wounds all over.  Besides seven or eight
scars and slashes, his ribs on one side were all twisted out of shape,
and a part of one of his calves had been torn away.  He laughed in his
merry way when he saw my face of wonder.

"Cossacks! Cossacks!" said he, running his hand over his scars.
"And the ribs were broke by an artillery tumbril.  It is very bad to
have the guns pass over one.  Now with cavalry it is nothing.  A horse
will pick its steps however fast it may go.  I have been ridden over by
fifteen hundred cuirassiers A and by the Russian hussars of Grodno, and
I had no harm from that.  But guns are very bad."

"And the calf?" I asked.

"_Pouf!_ It is only a wolf bite," said he.  "You would not think how I
came by it!  You will understand that my horse and I had been struck,
the horse killed, and I with my ribs broken by the tumbril.  Well, it
was cold--oh, bitter, bitter!--the ground like iron, and no one to help
the wounded, so that they froze into such shapes as would make you
smile.  I too felt that I was freezing, so what did I do?  I took my
sword, and I opened my dead horse, so well as I could, and I made space
in him for me to lie, with one little hole for my mouth.  _Sapristi!_ It
was warm enough there.  But there was not room for the entire of me, so
my feet and part of my legs stuck out.  Then in the night, when I slept,
there came the wolves to eat the horse, and they had a little pinch of
me also, as you can see; but after that I was on guard with my pistols,
and they had no more of me.  There I lived, very warm and nice, for ten
days."

"Ten days!" I cried.  "What did you eat?"

"Why, I ate the horse.  It was what you call board and lodging to me.
But of course I have sense to eat the legs, and live in the body.  There
were many dead about who had all their water bottles, so I had all I
could wish.  And on the eleventh day there came a patrol of light
cavalry, and all was well."

It was by such chance chats as these--hardly worth repeating in
themselves--that there came light upon himself and his past.  But the
day was coming when we should know all; and how it came I shall try now
to tell you.

The winter had been a dreary one, but with March came the first signs of
spring, and for a week on end we had sunshine and winds from the south.
On the 7th Jim Horscroft was to come back from Edinburgh; for though the
session ended with the 1st, his examination would take him a week.
Edie and I were out walking on the sea beach on the 6th, and I could
talk of nothing but my old friend--for, indeed, he was the only friend
of my own age that I had at that time.  Edie was very silent, which was
a rare thing with her; but she listened smiling to all that I had to
say.

"Poor old Jim!" said she once or twice under her breath.  "Poor old
Jim!"

"And if he has passed," said I, "why, then of course he will put up his
plate and have his own house, and we shall be losing our Edie."

I tried to make a jest of it and to speak lightly, but the words still
stuck in my throat.

"Poor old Jim!" said she again, and there were tears in her eyes as she
said it.  "And poor old Jock!" she added, slipping her hand into mine as
we walked.  "You cared for me a little bit once also, didn't you, Jock?
Oh, is not that a sweet little ship out yonder!"

It was a dainty cutter of about thirty tons, very swift by the rake of
her masts and the lines of her bow.  She was coming up from the south
under jib, foresail, and mainsail; but even as we watched her all her
white canvas shut suddenly in, like a kittiwake closing her wings, and
we saw the splash of her anchor just under her bowsprit.  She may have
been rather less than a quarter of a mile from the shore--so near that I
could see a tall man with a peaked cap, who stood at the quarter with a
telescope to his eye, sweeping it backwards and forwards along the
coast.

"What can they want here?" asked Edie.

"They are rich English from London," said I; for that was how we
explained everything that was above our comprehension in the border
counties.  We stood for the best part of an hour watching the bonny
craft, and then, as the sun was lying low on a cloudbank and there was a
nip in the evening air, we turned back to West Inch.

As you come to the farmhouse from the front, you pass up a garden, with
little enough in it, which leads out by a wicket-gate to the road; the
same gate at which we stood on the night when the beacons were lit, the
night that we saw Walter Scott ride past on his way to Edinburgh.
On the right of this gate, on the garden side, was a bit of a rockery
which was said to have been made by my father's mother many years
before.  She had fashioned it out of water-worn stones and sea shells,
with mosses and ferns in the chinks.  Well, as we came in through the
gates my eyes fell upon this stone heap, and there was a letter stuck in
a cleft stick upon the top of it.  I took a step forward to see what it
was, but Edie sprang in front of me, and plucking it off she thrust it
into her pocket.

"That's for me," said she, laughing.  But I stood looking at her with a
face which drove the laugh from her lips.

"Who is it from, Edie?" I asked.

She pouted, but made no answer.

"Who is it from, woman?" I cried.  "Is it possible that you have been as
false to Jim as you were to me?"

"How rude you are, Jock!" she cried.  "I do wish that you would mind
your own business."

"There is only one person that it could be from," I cried.  "It is from
this man de Lapp!"

"And suppose that you are right, Jock?"

The coolness of the woman amazed and enraged me.

"You confess it!" I cried.  "Have you, then, no shame left?"

"Why should I not receive letters from this gentleman?"

"Because it is infamous."

"And why?"

"Because he is a stranger."

"On the contrary," said she, "he is my husband!"



CHAPTER IX.


THE DOINGS AT WEST INCH.

I can remember that moment so well.  I have heard from others that a
great, sudden blow has dulled their senses.  It was not so with me.
On the contrary, I saw and heard and thought more clearly than I had
ever done before.  I can remember that my eyes caught a little knob of
marble as broad as my palm, which was imbedded in one of the grey stones
of the rockery, and I found time to admire its delicate mottling.
And yet the look upon my face must have been strange, for Cousin Edie
screamed, and leaving me she ran off to the house.  I followed her and
tapped at the window of her room, for I could see that she was there.

"Go away, Jock, go away!" she cried.  "You are going to scold me!
I won't be scolded!  I won't open the window!  Go away!"

But I continued to tap.

"I must have a word with you!"

"What is it, then?" she cried, raising the sash about three inches.
"The moment you begin to scold I shall close it."

"Are you really married, Edie?"

"Yes, I am married."

"Who married you?"

"Father Brennan, at the Roman Catholic Chapel at Berwick."

"And you a Presbyterian?"

"He wished it to be in a Catholic Church."

"When was it?"

"On Wednesday week."

I remembered then that on that day she had driven over to Berwick, while
de Lapp had been away on a long walk, as he said, among the hills.

"What about Jim?" I asked.

"Oh, Jim will forgive me!"

"You will break his heart and ruin his life."

"No, no; he will forgive me."

"He will murder de Lapp!  Oh, Edie, how could you bring such disgrace
and misery upon us?"

"Ah, now you are scolding!" she cried, and down came the window.

I waited some little time, and tapped, for I had much still to ask her;
but she would return no answer, and I thought that I could hear her
sobbing.  At last I gave it up; and I was about to go into the house,
for it was nearly dark now, when I heard the click of the garden gate.
It was de Lapp himself.

But as he came up the path he seemed to me to be either mad or drunk.
He danced as he walked, cracked his fingers in the air, and his eyes
blazed like two will-o'-the-wisps.  "_Voltigeurs!_" he shouted;
"_Voltigeurs de la Garde!_" just as he had done when he was off his
head; and then suddenly, "_En avant! en avant!_" and up he came, waving
his walking-cane over his head.  He stopped short when he saw me looking
at him, and I daresay he felt a bit ashamed of himself.

"Hola, Jock!" he cried.  "I didn't thought anybody was there.  I am in
what you call the high spirits to-night."

"So it seems!" said I, in my blunt fashion.  "You may not feel so merry
when my friend Jim Horscroft comes back to-morrow."

"Ah! he comes back to-morrow, does he?  And why should I not feel merry?

"Because, if I know the man, he will kill you."

"Ta, ta, ta!" cried de Lapp.  "I see that you know of our marriage.
Edie has told you.  Jim may do what he likes."

"You have given us a nice return for having taken you in."

"My good fellow," said he, "I have, as you say, given you a very nice
return.  I have taken Edie from a life which is unworthy of her, and I
have connected you by marriage with a noble family.  However, I have
some letters which I must write to-night, and the rest we can talk over
to-morrow, when your friend Jim is here to help us."

He stepped towards the door.

"And this was whom you were awaiting at the peel tower!" I cried, seeing
light suddenly.

"Why, Jock, you are becoming quite sharp," said he, in a mocking tone;
and an instant later I heard the door of his room close and the key turn
in the lock.

I thought that I should see him no more that night; but a few minutes
later he came into the kitchen, where I was sitting with the old folk.

"Madame," said he, bowing down with his hand over his heart, in his own
queer fashion, "I have met with much kindness in your hands, and it
shall always be in my heart.  I didn't thought I could have been so
happy in the quiet country as you have made me.  You will accept this
small souvenir; and you also, sir, you will take this little gift,
which I have the honour to make to you."

He put two little paper packets down upon the table at their elbows, and
then, with three more bows to my mother, he walked from the room.

Her present was a brooch, with a green stone set in the middle and a
dozen little shining white ones all round it.  We had never seen such
things before, and did not know how to set a name to them; but they told
us afterwards at Berwick that the big one was an emerald and the others
were diamonds, and that they were worth much more than all the lambs we
had that spring.  My dear old mother has been gone now this many a year,
but that bonny brooch sparkles at the neck of my eldest daughter when
she goes out into company; and I never look at it that I do not see the
keen eyes and the long thin nose and the cat's whiskers of our lodger at
West Inch.  As to my father, he had a fine gold watch with a double
case; and a proud man was he as he sat with it in the palm of his hand,
his ear stooping to hearken to the tick.  I do not know which was best
pleased, and they would talk of nothing but what de Lapp had given them.

"He's given you something more," said I at last.

"What then, Jock?" asked father.

"A husband for Cousin Edie," said I.

They thought I was daffing when I said that; but when they came to
understand that it was the real truth, they were as proud and as pleased
as if I had told them that she had married the laird.  Indeed, poor Jim,
with his hard drinking and his fighting, had not a very bright name on
the country-side, and my mother had often said that no good could come
of such a match.  Now, de Lapp was, for all we knew, steady and quiet
and well-to-do.  And as to the secrecy of it, secret marriages were very
common in Scotland at that time, when only a few words were needed to
make man and wife, so nobody thought much of that.  The old folk were as
pleased, then, as if their rent had been lowered; but I was still sore
at heart, for it seemed to me that my friend had been cruelly dealt
with, and I knew well that he was not a man who would easily put up with
it.



CHAPTER X.


THE RETURN OF THE SHADOW.

I woke with a heavy heart the next morning, for I knew that Jim would be
home before long, and that it would be a day of trouble.  But how much
trouble that day was to bring, or how far it would alter the lives of
us, was more than I had ever thought in my darkest moments.  But let me
tell you it all, just in the order that it happened.

I had to get up early that morning; for it was just the first flush of
the lambing, and my father and I were out on the moors as soon as it was
fairly light.  As I came out into the passage a wind struck upon my
face, and there was the house door wide open, and the grey light drawing
another door upon the inner wall.  And when I looked again there was
Edie's room open also, and de Lapp's too; and I saw in a flash what that
giving of presents meant upon the evening before.  It was a
leave-taking, and they were gone.

My heart was bitter against Cousin Edie as I stood looking into her
room.  To think that for the sake of a newcomer she could leave us all
without one kindly word, or as much as a hand-shake.  And he, too!
I had been afraid of what would happen when Jim met him; but now there
seemed to be something cowardly in this avoidance of him.  I was angry
and hurt and sore, and I went out into the open without a word to my
father, and climbed up on to the moors to cool my flushed face.

When I got up to Corriemuir I caught my last glimpse of Cousin Edie.
The little cutter still lay where she had anchored, but a rowboat was
pulling out to her from the shore.  In the stern I saw a flutter of red,
and I knew that it came from her shawl.  I watched the boat reach the
yacht and the folk climb on to her deck.  Then the anchor came up, the
white wings spread once more, and away she dipped right out to sea.
I still saw that little red spot on the deck, and de Lapp standing
beside her.  They could see me also, for I was outlined against the sky,
and they both waved their hands for a long time, but gave it up at last
when they found that I would give them no answer.

I stood with my arms folded, feeling as glum as ever I did in my life,
until their cutter was only a square hickering patch of white among the
mists of the morning.  It was breakfast time and the porridge upon the
table before I got back, but I had no heart for the food.  The old folk
had taken the matter coolly enough, though my mother had no word too
hard for Edie; for the two had never had much love for each other, and
less of late than ever.

"There's a letter here from him," said my father, pointing to a note
folded up on the table; "it was in his room.  Maybe you would read it to
us."

They had not even opened it; for, truth to tell, neither of the good
folk were very clever at reading ink, though they could do well with a
fine large print.

It was addressed in big letters to "The good people of West Inch;" and
this was the note, which lies before me all stained and faded as I
write:

   "My friends,--
    I didn't thought to have left you so suddenly, but the matter was
    in other hands than mine.  Duty and honour have called me back to my
    old comrades.  This you will doubtless understand before many days
    are past.  I take your Edie with me as my wife; and it may be that
    in some more peaceful time you will see us again at West Inch.
    Meanwhile, accept the assurance of my affection, and believe me that
    I shall never forget the quiet months which I spent with you, at the
    time when my life would have been worth a week at the utmost had I
    been taken by the Allies.  But the reason of this you may also learn
    some day."

       "Yours,"
       "BONAVENTURE DE LISSAC"
       "(Colonel des Voltigeurs de la Garde, et
       aide-de-camp de S.M.I.  L'Empereur Napoleon.")

I whistled when I came to those words written under his name; for though
I had long made up my mind that our lodger could be none other than one
of those wonderful soldiers of whom we had heard so much, who had forced
their way into every capital of Europe, save only our own, still I had
little thought that our roof covered Napoleon's own aide-de-camp and a
colonel of his Guard.

"So," said I, "de Lissac is his name, and not de Lapp.  Well, colonel or
no, it is as well for him that he got away from here before Jim laid
hands upon him.  And time enough, too," I added, peeping out at the
kitchen window, "for here is the man himself coming through the garden."

I ran to the door to meet him, feeling that I would have given a deal to
have him back in Edinburgh again.  He came running, waving a paper over
his head; and I thought that maybe he had a note from Edie, and that it
was all known to him.  But as he came up I saw that it was a big, stiff,
yellow paper which crackled as he waved it, and that his eyes were
dancing with happiness.
