
"You have uttered your own condemnation, Jocelyn Mounchensey," Sir Giles
cried, with a savage laugh. "Know, to your confusion, that the High
Court of Star-Chamber is so tender of upholding the honour of its
sentences, that it ever punishes such as speak against them with the
greatest severity. You have uttered your scandals openly."

"Imprudent young man, you have, indeed, placed yourself in fearful
jeopardy," a gentleman near him observed to Jocelyn. "Escape, if you
can. You are lost, if you remain here."

But instead of following the friendly advice, Jocelyn would have
assaulted Sir Giles, if he had not been forcibly withheld by the
gentleman.

The knight was not slow to follow up the advantage he had gained.

"Stand forward, Clement Lanyere," he exclaimed, authoritatively.

The promoter instantly advanced.

"Look at this man," Sir Giles continued, addressing Jocelyn; "and you
will perceive how those who malign the Star-Chamber are treated. This
disfigured countenance was once as free from seam or scar as your own;
and yet, for an offence lighter than yours, it hath been stamped, as you
see, with indelible infamy. Answer, Clement Lanyere,--and answer
according to your conscience,--Was the sentence just of the high and
honourable court by which you were tried?"

"It was just," the promoter replied, a deep flush dyeing his ghastly
visage.

"And lenient?"

"Most lenient. For it left my foul tongue the power of speech it now
enjoys."

"By whom were you prosecuted in the Star-Chamber?"

"By him I now serve."

"That is, by myself. Do you bear me malice for what I did?"

"I have never said so. On the contrary, Sir Giles, I have always
declared I owe you a deep debt."

"Which you strive to pay?"

"Which I _will_ pay."

"You hear what this man says, Mounchensey?" Sir Giles cried. "You have
been guilty of the same offence as he. Why should you not be similarly
punished?"

"If I were so punished, I would stab my prosecutor to the heart,"
Jocelyn replied.

At this rejoinder, Lanyere, who had hitherto kept his eyes on the
ground, suddenly raised them, with a look of singular expression at the
speaker.

"Humph!" Sir Giles ejaculated. "I must proceed to extremities with him,
I find. Keep strict watch upon him, Lanyere; and follow him if he goes
forth. Trace him to his lair. Now to business. Give me the
letters-patent, Lupo," he added, turning to the scrivener, as Lanyere
retired. "These Letters-Patent," continued Sir Giles, taking two
parchment scrolls with large seals pendent from them from Lupo Vulp, and
displaying them to the assemblage, "these Royal Letters," he repeated in
his steady, stern tones, and glancing round with a look of
half-defiance, "passed under the great seal, and bearing the king's
sign-manual, as ye see, gentlemen, constitute the authority on which I
act. They accord to me and my co-patentee, Sir Francis Mitchell,
absolute and uncontrolled power and discretion in granting and refusing
licenses to all tavern-keepers and hostel-keepers throughout London.
They give us full power to enter and inspect all taverns and hostels, at
any time that may seem fit to us; to prevent any unlawful games being
used therein; and to see that good order and rule be maintained. They
also render it compulsory upon all ale-house-keepers, tavern-keepers,
and inn-keepers throughout London, to enter into their own recognizances
with us against the non-observance of our rules and regulations for
their governance and maintenance, and to find two sureties: and in case
of the forfeiture of such recognizances by any act of the parties,
coming within the scope of our authority, it is provided that one moiety
of the sum forfeited be paid to the Crown, and the other moiety to us.
Lend me your ears yet further, I pray ye, gentlemen. These Royal Letters
empower us to inflict certain fines and penalties upon all such as
offend against our authority, or resist our claims; and they enable us
to apprehend and commit to prison such offenders without further warrant
than the letters themselves contain. In brief, gentlemen," he continued
in a peremptory tone, as if insisting upon attention, "you will observe,
that the absolute control of all houses of entertainment, where
exciseable liquors are vended, is delegated to us by his most gracious
Majesty, King James. To which end ample powers have been given us by his
Majesty, who has armed us with the strong arm of the law. Will it please
ye to inspect the letters, gentlemen?" holding them forth. "You will
find that his Majesty hath thus written;--'_In cujus rei testimonium has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Teste Meipso, apud Westm. 10
die Maij, Anno Regni nostri_,' &c. Then follows the royal signature.
None of ye, I presume, will question its authenticity?"

A deep silence succeeded, in the midst of which Jocelyn Mounchensey
broke forth:--

"I, for one, question it," he cried. "I will never believe that a king,
who, like our gracious sovereign, has the welfare of his subjects at
heart, would sanction the oppression and injustice which those warrants,
if entrusted to unscrupulous hands, must inevitably accomplish. I
therefore mistrust the genuineness of the signature. If not forged, it
has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation."

Some murmurs of applause followed this bold speech; but the gentleman
who had previously counselled the young man again interposed, and
whispered these words in his ear:--

"Your rash vehemence will undo you, if you take not heed. Beyond
question, Sir Giles hath the king's sanction for what he does, and to
censure him as you have done is to censure the Crown, which is next to
treason. Be ruled by me, my good young Sir, and meddle no more in the
matter."

Sir Giles, who had some difficulty in controlling his choler, now
spoke:--

"You have cast an imputation upon me, Jocelyn Mounchensey," he cried
with concentrated fury, "which you shall be compelled to retract as
publicly as you have made it. To insult an officer of the Crown, in the
discharge of his duty, is to insult the Crown itself, as you will find.
In the King's name, I command you to hold your peace, or, in the King's
name, I will instantly arrest you; and I forbid any one to give you aid.
I will not be troubled thus. Appointed by his Majesty to a certain
office, I exercise it as much for the benefit of the Royal Exchequer, as
for my own personal advantage. I have his Majesty's full approval of
what I do, and I need nothing more. I am accountable to no man--save the
King," addressing this menace as much to the rest of the company as to
Jocelyn. "But I came not here to render explanation, but to act. What,
ho! Madame Bonaventure! Where are ye, Madame? Oh! you are here!"

"_Bon jour_, sweet Sir Giles," the landlady said, making him a profound
obeisance. "What is your pleasure with me, Sir? And to what am I to
attribute the honour of this visit?"

"Tut! Madame. You know well enough what brings me hither, and thus
attended," he replied. "I come in pursuance of a notice, served upon you
a month ago. You will not deny having received it, since the officer who
placed it in your hands is here present." And he indicated Clement
Lanyere.

"_Au contraire_, Sir Giles," Madame Bonaventure replied. "I readily
admit the receipt of a written message from you, which, though scarcely
intelligible to my poor comprehension, did not seem as agreeably worded
as a _billet-doux. Mais, ma foi_! I attached little importance to it. I
did not suppose it possible--nor do I suppose it possible now"--with a
captivating smile, which was totally lost upon Sir Giles--"that you
could adopt such rigorous measures against me."

"My measures may appear rigorous, Madame," Sir Giles coldly replied;
"but I am warranted in taking them. Nay, I am compelled to take them.
Not having made the satisfaction required by the notice, you have
deprived yourself of the protection I was willing to afford you. I am
now merely your judge. The penalties incurred by your neglect are these:
Your licence was suspended a month ago; the notice expressly stating
that it would be withdrawn, unless certain conditions were fulfilled.
Consequently, as ever since that time you have been vending exciseable
liquors without lawful permission, you have incurred a fine of one
hundred marks a day, making a total of three thousand marks now due and
owing from you, partly to his Majesty, and partly to his Majesty's
representatives. This sum I now demand."

"Ah! Dieu! three thousand marks!" Madame Bonaventure screamed. "What
robbery is this!--what barbarity! 'T is ruin--utter ruin! I may as well
close my house altogether, and return to my own fair country. As I am an
honest woman, Sir Giles, I cannot pay it. So it is quite useless on
your part to make any such demand."

"You profess inability to pay, Madame," Sir Giles rejoined. "I cannot
believe you; having some knowledge of your means. Nevertheless, I will
acquaint you with a rule of law applicable to the contingency you put.
'_Quod non habet in cere, luet in corpore_' is a decree of the
Star-Chamber; meaning, for I do not expect you to understand Latin, that
he who cannot pay in purse shall pay in person. Aware of the
alternative, you will make your choice. And you may thank me that I have
not adjudged you at once--as I have the power--to three months within
the Wood Street Compter."

"Ah, Sir Giles! what an atrocious idea. You are worse than a savage to
talk of such a loathsome prison to me. Ah! mon Dieu! what is to happen
to me! would I were back again in my lovely Bordeaux!"

"You will have an opportunity of revisiting that fine city, Madame; for
you will no longer be able to carry on your calling here."

"Ciel! Sir Giles! what mean you?"

"I mean, Madame, that you are disabled from keeping any tavern for the
space of three years."

Madame Bonaventure clasped her hands together, and screamed aloud.

"In pity, Sir Giles!--In pity!" she cried.

The inexorable knight shook his head. The low murmurs of indignation
among the company which had been gradually gathering force during the
foregoing dialogue, now became clamorous. "A most scandalous
proceeding!" exclaimed one. "Deprive us of our best French ordinary!"
cried another. "Infamous extortioner!" shouted a third. "We'll not
permit such injustice. Let us take the law into our own hands, and
settle the question!" shouted a fourth. "Ay, down with the knight!"
added a fifth.

But Sir Giles continued perfectly unmoved by the tempest raging around,
and laughed to scorn these menaces, contenting himself with signing to
Captain Bludder to be in readiness.

"A truce to this, gentlemen;" he at length thundered forth; "the King's
warrant must be respected."

Again Madame Bonaventure besought his pity, but in vain. She took hold
of his arm, and feigned to kneel to him; but he shook her coldly off.

"You are a very charming woman, no doubt, Madame," he said
sarcastically; "and some men might find you irresistible; but I am not
made of such yielding stuff, and you may spare yourself further trouble,
for all your powers of persuasion will fail with me. I renew my
demand--and for the last time. Do not compel me to resort to extremities
with you. It would grieve me," he added with a bitter smile, "to drag so
pretty a woman through the public streets, like a common debtor, to the
Compter."

"Grace! grace! Sir Giles," cried Madame Bonaventure. Then seeing him
remain inflexible, she added, in an altered tone, "I will never submit
with life to such an indignity--never!"

"We'll all protect you, Madame," cried the assemblage with one
voice--"Let him lay hands upon you, and he shall see."

Sir Giles glanced at his myrmidons. They stepped quickly towards him in
a body. At the same time Jocelyn Mounchensey, whom no efforts of the
friendly gentleman could now restrain, sprang forward, and, drawing his
sword, was just in time to place himself before Madame Bonaventure, as
she drew hastily back.

"Have no fear, Madame, you are safe with me," the young man said,
glancing fiercely at the knight and his troop.

The greatest confusion now reigned throughout the room. Other swords
were drawn, and several of the guests mounted upon the benches to
overlook the scene. Cyprien, and the rest of the drawers and tradesmen
ranged themselves behind their mistress, prepared to resist any attempt
on the part of the myrmidons to seize her. The curtain at the head of
the room was partly drawn aside, showing that the distinguished persons
at the upper table were equally excited.

"Gentlemen," Sir Giles said, still maintaining perfect calmness in the
midst of the tumult, "a word with you ere it be too late. I don't
address myself to you, Jocelyn Mounchensey, for you are undeserving of
any friendly consideration--but to all others I would counsel
forbearance and non-resistance. Deliver up that woman to me."

"I will die upon the spot sooner than you shall be surrendered," said
Jocelyn, encouraging the hostess, who clung to his disengaged arm.

"Oh! merci! grand merci, mon beau gentilhomme!" she exclaimed.

"Am I to understand then, that you mean to impede me in the lawful
execution of my purposes, gentlemen?" Sir Giles demanded.

"We mean to prevent an unlawful arrest," several voices rejoined.

"Be it so," the knight said; "I wash my hands of the consequences." Then
turning to his followers, he added--"Officers, at all hazards, attach
the person of Dameris Bonaventure, and convey her to the Compter. At the
same time, arrest the young man-beside her--Jocelyn Mounchensey,--who
has uttered treasonable language against our sovereign lord the King. I
will tell you how to dispose of him anon. Do my bidding at once."

But ere the order could be obeyed, the authoritative voice which had
previously been heard from the upper table exclaimed--"Hold!"

Sir Giles paused; looked irresolute for a minute; and then checked his
myrmidons with a wave of the hand.

"Who is it stays the law?" he said, with the glare of a tiger from whom
a bone has been snatched.

"One you must needs obey, Sir Giles," replied Lord Roos, coming towards
him from the upper table. "You have unconsciously played a part in a
comedy--and played it very well, too--but it is time to bring the piece
to an end. We are fast verging on the confines of tragedy."

"I do not understand you, my lord," Sir Giles returned, gravely. "I
discern nothing comic in the matter; though much of serious import."

"You do not perceive the comedy, because it has been part of our scheme
to keep you in the dark, Sir Giles."

"So there is a scheme, then, a-foot here, my lord?--ha!"

"A little merry plot; nothing more, Sir Giles--in the working of which
your worthy co-patentee, Sir Francis Mitchell, has materially assisted."

"Ha!" exclaimed Sir Giles, glancing at his partner, who still occupied
his elevated position upon the table--"I presume, then, I have to thank
you, my lord, for the indignity offered to my friend?"

"As you please, Sir Giles," Lord Roos returned carelessly. "You call it
an indignity; but in my opinion the best thing to be done with a man
whose head so swims with wine that his legs refuse to support him, is to
tie him in a chair. He may else sacrifice his dignity by rolling under
the table. But let this pass for the nonce. Before Sir Francis was
wholly overcome, he was good enough to give me his signature. You saw
him do it, gentlemen?" he added, appealing to the company.

"Yes--yes!--we saw him write it!" was the general reply.

"And to what end was this done, my lord?" Sir Giles demanded, sternly.

"To enable me," replied the imperturbable young nobleman, "to draw out a
receipt in full of your joint claims against Madame Bonaventure. I have
done it, Sir Giles; and here it is. And I have taken care to grant a
renewal of her licence from the date of your notice; so that no
penalties or fines can attach to her for neglect. Take it, Madame
Bonaventure" he continued, handing her the paper. "It is your full
acquittance."

"And think you, my lord, that this shallow artifice--to give it no
harsher term--will avail you any thing?" Sir Giles cried scornfully. "I
set it aside at once."

"Your pardon, Sir Giles; you will do no such thing."

"And who will hinder me?--You, my lord?"

"Even I, Sir Giles. Proceed at your peril."

The young nobleman's assurance staggered his opponent.

"He must have some one to uphold him, or he would not be thus
confident," he thought. "Whose was the voice I heard? It sounded
like--No matter! 'Tis needful to be cautious."

"You do not, then, hold yourself bound by the acts of your partner, Sir
Giles?" Lord Roos said.

"I deny this to be his act," the knight replied.

"Better question him at once on the subject," Lord Roos said. "Set him
free, Cyprien."

The Gascon did as he was bidden, and with the aid of his fellow drawers,
helped Sir Francis from the table. To the surprise of the company, the
knight then managed to stagger forward unassisted, and would have
embraced Sir Giles, if the latter had not thrust him off in disgust,
with some violence.

"What folly is this, Sir Francis?" Sir Giles cried angrily. "You have
forgotten yourself strangely, you have taken leave of your senses,
methinks!"

"Not a whit of it, Sir Giles--not a whit. I never was more my own master
than I am at present, as I will prove to you."

"Prove it, then, by explaining how you came to sign that paper. You
could not mean to run counter to me?"

"But I did," Sir Francis rejoined, highly offended. "I meant to run
counter to you in signing it, and I mean it now."

"'Sdeath! you besotted fool, you are playing into their hands!"

"Besotted fool in your teeth, Sir Giles. I am as sober as yourself. My
hand has been put to that paper, and what it contains I stand by."

"You design, then, to acquit Madame Bonaventure? Consider what you say?"

"No need for consideration; I have always designed it."

"Ten thousand thanks, Sir Francis!" the hostess cried. "I knew I had an
excellent friend in you."

The enamoured knight seized the hand she extended towards him, but in
the attempt to kiss it fell to the ground, amid the laughter of the
company.

"Are you satisfied now, Sir Giles?" asked Lord Roos.

"I am satisfied that Sir Francis has been duped," he replied, "and that
when his brain is free from the fumes of wine, he will bitterly regret
his folly. But even his discharge will be insufficient. Though it may
bind me, it will not bind the Crown, which will yet enforce its claims."

"That, Sir Giles, I leave competent authority to decide," Lord Roos
replied, retiring.

And as he withdrew, the curtains before the upper table were entirely
withdrawn, disclosing the whole of the brilliant assemblage, and at the
head of them one person far more brilliant and distinguished than the
rest.

"Buckingham!" Sir Giles exclaimed. "I thought I knew the voice."

It was, indeed, the King's omnipotent favourite. Magnificently attired,
the Marquis of Buckingham as far outshone his companions in splendour of
habiliments as he did in stateliness of carriage and beauty of person.
Rising from the table, and donning his plumed hat, looped with diamonds,
with a gesture worthy of a monarch, while all the rest remained
uncovered, as if in recognition of his superior dignity, he descended to
where Sir Giles Mompesson was standing. It need scarcely be said that
Jocelyn Mounchensey had never seen the superb favourite before; but he
