
"While I can lay my hand on you, I feel you are safe, not else. Foolish
Gerard! nothing ails me. I am weak, dearest, but happy, oh! so happy!"

Then it was Gerard's turn to support that dear head, with its great
waves of hair flowing loose over him, and nurse her, and soothe her,
quivering on his bosom, with soft encouraging words and murmurs of love,
and gentle caresses. Sweetest of all her charms is a woman's weakness to
a manly heart.

Poor things! they were happy. To-morrow they must part. But that was
nothing to them now. They had seen Death, and all other troubles seemed
light as air. While there is life there is hope; while there is hope
there is joy. Separation for a year or two, what was it to them, who
were so young, and had caught a glimpse of the grave? The future was
bright, the present was Heaven: so passed the blissful hours.

Alas! their innocence ran other risks besides the prison and the grave.
They were in most danger from their own hearts and their inexperience,
now that visible danger there was none.



CHAPTER XVIII

Ghysbrecht Van Swieten could not sleep all night for anxiety. He was
afraid of thunder and lightning, or he would have made one of the party
that searched Peter's house. As soon as the storm ceased altogether,
he crept downstairs, saddled his mule, and rode to the "Three Kings" at
Sevenbergen. There he found his men sleeping, some on the chairs, some
on the tables, some on the floor. He roused them furiously, and heard
the story of their unsuccessful search, interlarded with praises of
their zeal.

"Fool! to let you go without me," cried the burgomaster. "My life on't
he was there all the time. Looked ye under the girl's bed?"

"No; there was no room for a man there."

"How know ye that, if ye looked not?" snarled Ghysbrecht. "Ye should
have looked under her bed, and in it too, and sounded all the panels
with your knives. Come, now, get up, and I shall show ye how to search."

Dierich Brower got up and shook himself. "If you find him, call me a
horse and no man."

In a few minutes Peter's house was again surrounded.

The fiery old man left his mule in the hands of Jorian Ketel, and, with
Dierich Brower and the others, entered the house.

The house was empty.

Not a creature to be seen, not even Peter. They went upstairs, and
then suddenly one of the men gave a shout, and pointed through Peter's
window, which was open. The others looked, and there, at some little
distance, walking quietly across the fields with Margaret and Martin,
was the man they sought. Ghysbrecht, with an exulting yell, descended
the stairs and flung himself on his mule; and he and his men set off in
hot pursuit.



CHAPTER XIX

Gerard warned by recent peril, rose before daybreak and waked Martin.
The old soldier was astonished. He thought Gerard had escaped by the
window last night. Being consulted as to the best way for him to leave
the country and elude pursuit, he said there was but one road safe. "I
must guide you through the great forest to a bridle-road I know of. This
will take you speedily to a hostelry, where they will lend you a swift
horse; and then a day's gallop will take you out of Holland. But let us
start ere the folk here quit their beds."

Peter's house was but a furlong and a half from the forest. They
started, Martin with his bow and three arrows, for it was Thursday;
Gerard with nothing but a stout oak staff Peter gave him for the
journey.

Margaret pinned up her kirtle and farthingale, for the road was wet.
Peter went as far as his garden hedge with them, and then with more
emotion than he often bestowed on passing events, gave the young man his
blessing.

The sun was peeping above the horizon as they crossed the stony field
and made for the wood. They had crossed about half, when Margaret, who
kept nervously looking back every now and then, uttered a cry, and,
following her instinct, began to run towards the wood, screaming with
terror all the way.

Ghysbrecht and his men were in hot pursuit.

Resistance would have been madness. Martin and Gerard followed
Margaret's example. The pursuers gained slightly on them; but Martin
kept shouting, "Only win the wood! only win the wood!"

They had too good a start for the men on foot, and their hearts bounded
with hope at Martin's words, for the great trees seemed now to stretch
their branches like friendly arms towards them, and their leaves like a
screen.

But an unforeseen danger attacked them. The fiery old burgomaster flung
himself on his mule, and, spurring him to a gallop, he headed not his
own men only, but the fugitives. His object was to cut them off. The
old man came galloping in a semicircle, and got on the edge of the wood,
right in front of Gerard; the others might escape for aught he cared.

Margaret shrieked, and tried to protect Gerard by clasping him; but he
shook her off without ceremony.

Ghysbrecht in his ardour forgot that hunted animals turn on the hunter;
and that two men can hate, and two can long to kill the thing they hate.

Instead of attempting to dodge him, as the burgomaster made sure he
would, Gerard flew right at him, with a savage, exulting cry, and struck
at him with all his heart, and soul and strength. The oak staff came
down on Ghysbrecht's face with a frightful crash, and laid him under
his mule's tail beating the devil's tattoo with his heels, his face
streaming, and his collar spattered with blood.

The next moment the three were in the wood. The yell of dismay and
vengeance that burst from Ghysbrecht's men at that terrible blow which
felled their leader, told the fugitives that it was now a race for life
or death.

"Why run?" cried Gerard, panting. "You have your bow, and I have this,"
and he shook his bloody staff.

"Boy!" roared Martin; "the GALLOWS! Follow me," and he fled into the
wood. Soon they heard a cry like a pack of hounds opening on sight of
the game. The men were in the wood, and saw them flitting amongst the
trees. Margaret moaned and panted as she ran; and Gerard clenched his
teeth and grasped his staff. The next minute they came to a stiff hazel
coppice. Martin dashed into it, and shouldered the young wood aside as
if it were standing corn.

Ere they had gone fifty yards in it they came to four blind paths.

Martin took one. "Bend low," said he. And, half creeping, they glided
along. Presently their path was again intersected with other little
tortuous paths. They took one of them. It seemed to lead back; but
it soon took a turn, and, after a while, brought them to a thick pine
grove, where the walking was good and hard. There were no paths here;
and the young fir-trees were so thick, you could not see three yards
before your nose.

When they had gone some way in this, Martin sat down; and, having
learned in war to lose all impression of danger with the danger itself,
took a piece of bread and a slice of ham out of his wallet, and began
quietly to eat his breakfast.

The young ones looked at him with dismay. He replied to their looks.

"All Sevenbergen could not find you now; you will lose your purse,
Gerard, long before you get to Italy; is that the way to carry a purse?"

Gerard looked, and there was a large triangular purse, entangled by its
chains to the buckle and strap of his wallet.

"This is none of mine," said he. "What is in it, I wonder?" and he
tried to detach it; but in passing through the coppice it had become
inextricably entangled in his strap and buckle. "It seems loath to leave
me," said Gerard, and he had to cut it loose with his knife. The purse,
on examination, proved to be well provided with silver coins of all
sizes, but its bloated appearance was greatly owing to a number of
pieces of brown paper folded and doubled. A light burst on Gerard. "Why,
it must be that old thief's; and see! stuffed with paper to deceive the
world!"

The wonder was how the burgomaster's purse came on Gerard.

They hit at last upon the right solution. The purse must have been
at Ghysbrecht's saddle-bow, and Gerard rushing at his enemy, had
unconsciously torn it away, thus felling his enemy and robbing him, with
a single gesture.

Gerard was delighted at this feat, but Margaret was uneasy.

"Throw it away, Gerard, or let Martin take it back. Already they call
you a thief. I cannot bear it."

"Throw it away! give it him back? not a stiver! This is spoil lawfully
won in battle from an enemy. Is it not, Martin?"

"Why, of course. Send him back the brown paper, and you will; but the
purse or the coin--that were a sin."

"Oh, Gerard!" said Margaret, "you are going to a distant land. We need
the goodwill of Heaven. How can we hope for that if we take what is not
ours?"

But Gerard saw it in a different light.

"It is Heaven that gives it me by a miracle, and I shall cherish it
accordingly," said this pious youth. "Thus the favoured people spoiled
the Egyptians, and were blessed."

"Take your own way," said Margaret humbly; "you are wiser than I am. You
are my husband," added she, in a low murmuring voice; "is it for me to
gainsay you?"

These humble words from Margaret, who, till that day, had held the
whip-hand, rather surprised Martin for the moment. They recurred to him
some time afterwards, and then they surprised him less.

Gerard kissed her tenderly in return for her wife-like docility, and
they pursued their journey hand in hand, Martin leading the way,
into the depths of the huge forest. The farther they went, the more
absolutely secure from pursuit they felt. Indeed, the townspeople never
ventured so far as this into the trackless part of the forest.

Impetuous natures repent quickly. Gerard was no sooner out of all danger
than his conscience began to prick him.

"Martin, would I had not struck quite so hard."

"Whom? Oh! let that pass, he is cheap served."

"Martin, I saw his grey hairs as my stick fell on him. I doubt they will
not from my sight this while."

Martin grunted with contempt. "Who spares a badger for his grey hairs?
The greyer your enemy is, the older; and the older the craftier and the
craftier the better for a little killing."

"Killing? killing, Martin? Speak not of killing!" and Gerard shook all
over.

"I am much mistook if you have not," said Martin cheerfully.

"Now Heaven forbid!"

"The old vagabond's skull cracked like a walnut. Aha!"

"Heaven and the saints forbid it!"

"He rolled off his mule like a stone shot out of a cart. Said I to
myself, 'There is one wiped out,'" and the iron old soldier grinned
ruthlessly.

Gerard fell on his knees and began to pray for his enemy's life.

At this Martin lost his patience. "Here's mummery. What! you that set up
for learning, know you not that a wise man never strikes his enemy but
to kill him? And what is all this coil about killing of old men? If it
had been a young one, now, with the joys of life waiting for him, wine,
women, and pillage! But an old fellow at the edge of the grave, why not
shove him in? Go he must, to-day or to-morrow; and what better place for
greybeards? Now, if ever I should be so mischancy as to last so long
as Ghysbrecht did, and have to go on a mule's legs instead of Martin
Wittenhaagen's, and a back like this (striking the wood of his bow),
instead of this (striking the string), I'll thank and bless any
young fellow who will knock me on the head, as you have done that old
shopkeeper; malison on his memory.

"Oh, culpa mea! culpa mea!" cried Gerard, and smote upon his breast.

"Look there!" cried Martin to Margaret scornfully, "he is a priest at
heart still--and when he is not in ire, St. Paul, what a milksop!"

"Tush, Martin!" cried Margaret reproachfully: then she wreathed her arms
round Gerard, and comforted him with the double magic of a woman's sense
and a woman's voice.

"Sweetheart!" murmured she, "you forget: you went not a step out of the
way to harm him, who hunted you to your death. You fled from him. He it
was who spurred on you. Then did you strike; but in self-defence and
a single blow, and with that which was in your hand. Malice had drawn
knife, or struck again and again. How often have men been smitten with
staves not one but many blows, yet no lives lost! If then your enemy
has fallen, it is through his own malice, not yours, and by the will of
God."

"Bless you, Margaret; bless you for thinking so!"

"Yes; but, beloved one, if you have had the misfortune to kill that
wicked man, the more need is there that you fly with haste from Holland.
Oh, let us on."

"Nay, Margaret," said Gerard. "I fear not man's vengeance, thanks to
Martin here and this thick wood: only Him I fear whose eye pierces the
forest and reads the heart of man. If I but struck in self-defence,
'tis well; but if in hate, He may bid the avenger of blood follow me to
Italy--to Italy? ay, to earth's remotest bounds."

"Hush!" said Martin peevishly. "I can't hear for your chat."

"What is it?"

"Do you hear nothing, Margaret; my ears are getting old."

Margaret listened, and presently she heard a tuneful sound, like a
single stroke upon a deep ringing bell. She described it so to Martin.

"Nay, I heard it," said he.

"And so did I," said Gerard; "it was beautiful. Ah! there it is again.
How sweetly it blends with the air. It is a long way off. It is before
us, is it not?"

"No, no! the echoes of this wood confound the ear of a stranger. It
comes from the pine grove."

"What! the one we passed?"

"Why, Martin, is this anything? You look pale."

"Wonderful!" said Martin, with a sickly sneer. "He asks me is it
anything? Come, on, on! at any rate, let us reach a better place than
this."

"A better place--for what?"

"To stand at bay, Gerard," said Martin gravely; "and die like soldiers,
killing three for one."

"What's that sound?"

"IT IS THE AVENGER OF BLOOD."

"Oh, Martin, save him! Oh, Heaven be merciful What new mysterious peril
is this?"

"GIRL, IT'S A BLOODHOUND."



CHAPTER XX

The courage, like the talent, of common men, runs in a narrow groove.
Take them but an inch out of that, and they are done. Martin's courage
was perfect as far as it went. He had met and baffled many dangers in
the course of his rude life, and these familiar dangers he could face
with Spartan fortitude, almost with indifference; but he had never
been hunted by a bloodhound, nor had he ever seen that brute's unerring
instinct baffled by human cunning. Here then a sense of the supernatural
combined with novelty to ungenteel his heart. After going a few steps,
he leaned on his bow, and energy and hope oozed out of him. Gerard, to
whom the danger appeared slight in proportion as it was distant, urged
him to flight.

"What avails it?" said Martin sadly; "if we get clear of the wood we
shall die cheap; here, hard by, I know a place where we may die dear."

"Alas! good Martin," cried Gerard, "despair not so quickly; there must
be some way to escape."

"Oh, Martin!" cried Margaret, "what if we were to part company? Gerard's
life alone is forfeit. Is there no way to draw the pursuit on us twain
and let him go safe?"

"Girl, you know not the bloodhound's nature. He is not on this man's
track or that; he is on the track of blood. My life on't they have taken
him to where Ghysbrecht fell, and from the dead man's blood to the man
that shed it that cursed hound will lead them, though Gerard should run
through an army or swim the Meuse." And again he leaned upon his bow,
and his head sank.

The hound's mellow voice rang through the wood.

     A cry more tunable
     Was never halloed to, nor cheered with horn,
     In Crete, in Sparta, or in Thessaly.

Strange that things beautiful should be terrible and deadly' The eye
of the boa-constrictor, while fascinating its prey, is lovely. No royal
crown holds such a jewel; it is a ruby with the emerald's green light
playing ever upon it. Yet the deer that sees it loses all power of
motion, and trembles, and awaits his death and even so, to compare
hearing with sight, this sweet and mellow sound seemed to fascinate
Martin Wittenhaagen. He stood uncertain, bewildered, and unnerved.
Gerard was little better now. Martin's last words had daunted him, He
had struck an old man and shed his blood, and, by means of that very
blood, blood's four-footed avenger was on his track. Was not the finger
of Heaven in this?

Whilst the men were thus benumbed, the woman's brain was all activity.
The man she loved was in danger.

"Lend me your knife," said she to Martin. He gave it her.

"But 'twill be little use in your hands," said he.

Then Margaret did a sly thing. She stepped behind Gerard, and furtively
drew the knife across her arm, and made it bleed freely; then stooping,
smeared her hose and shoes; and still as the blood trickled she smeared
them; but so adroitly that neither Gerard nor Martin saw. Then she
seized the soldier's arm.

"Come, be a man!" she said, "and let this end. Take us to some thick
place, where numbers will not avail our foes."

"I am going," said Martin sulkily. "Hurry avails not; we cannot shun the
hound, and the place is hard by;" then turning to the left, he led the
way, as men go to execution.

He soon brought them to a thick hazel coppice, like the one that had
favoured their escape in the morning.

"There," said he, "this is but a furlong broad, but it will serve our
turn."

"What are we to do?"

"Get through this, and wait on the other side; then as they come
straggling through, shoot three, knock two on the head, and the rest
will kill us."

"Is that all you can think of?" said Gerard.

"That is all."

"Then, Martin Wittenhaagen, I take the lead, for you have lost your
head. Come, can you obey so young a man as I am?"

"Oh, yes, Martin," cried Margaret, "do not gainsay Gerard! He is wiser
than his years."

Martin yielded a sullen assent.

"Do then as you see me do," said Gerard; and drawing his huge knife, he
cut at every step a hazel shoot or two close by the ground, and turning
round twisted them breast-high behind him among the standing shoots.
Martin did the same, but with a dogged hopeless air. When they had
thus painfully travelled through the greater part of the coppice, the
bloodhound's deep bay came nearer and nearer, less and less musical,
louder and sterner.

Margaret trembled.

Martin went down on his stomach and listened.

"I hear a horse's feet."

"No," said Gerard; "I doubt it is a mule's. That cursed Ghysbrecht is
still alive: none other would follow me up so bitterly."

"Never strike your enemy but to slay him," said Martin gloomily.

"I'll hit harder this time, if Heaven gives me the chance," said Gerard.

At last they worked through the coppice, and there was an open wood. The
trees were large, but far apart, and no escape possible that way.

And now with the hound's bay mingled a score of voices hooping and
hallooing.

"The whole village is out after us," said Martin.

"I care not," said Gerard. "Listen, Martin. I have made the track smooth
to the dog, but rough to the men, that we may deal with them apart.
Thus the hound will gain on the men, and as soon as he comes out of the
coppice we must kill him."

"The hound? There are more than one."

"I hear but one."

"Ay! but one speaks, the others run mute; but let the leading hound lose
the scent, then another shall give tongue. There will be two dogs, at
least, or devils in dog's hides."

"Then we must kill two instead of one. The moment they are dead, into
the coppice again, and go right back."

"That is a good thought, Gerard," said Martin, plucking up heart.

"Hush! the men are in the wood."

Gerard now gave his orders in a whisper.

"Stand you with your bow by the side of the coppice--there, in the
ditch. I will go but a few yards to yon oak-tree, and hide behind it;
the dogs will follow me, and, as they come out, shoot as many as you
can, the rest will I brain as they come round the tree."

Martin's eye flashed. They took up their places.

The hooping and hallooing came closer and closer, and soon even the
rustling of the young wood was heard, and every now and then the
unerring bloodhound gave a single bay.

It was terrible! the branches rustling nearer and nearer, and the
inevitable struggle for life and death coming on minute by minute,
and that death-knell leading it. A trembling hand was laid on Gerard's
shoulder. It made him start violently, strung up as he was.

"Martin says if we are forced to part company, make for that high
ash-tree we came in by."

"Yes! yes! yes! but go back for Heaven's sake! don't come here, all out
in the open!"

She ran back towards Martin; but, ere she could get to him, suddenly a
huge dog burst out of the coppice, and stood erect a moment. Margaret
cowered with fear, but he never noticed her. Scent was to him what sight
is to us. He lowered his nose an instant, and the next moment, with an
awful yell, sprang straight at Gerard's tree and rolled head-over-heels
dead as a stone, literally spitted with an arrow from the bow that
twanged beside the coppice in Martin's hand. That same moment out came
another hound and smelt his dead comrade. Gerald rushed out at him;
but ere he could use his cudgel, a streak of white lightning seemed to
strike the hound, and he grovelled in the dust, wounded desperately, but
not killed, and howling piteously.

Gerard had not time to despatch him: the coppice rustled too near: it
seemed alive. Pointing wildly to Martin to go back, Gerard ran a few
yards to the right, then crept cautiously into the thick coppice just as
three men burst out. These had headed their comrades considerably: the
rest were following at various distances. Gerard crawled back almost on
all-fours. Instinct taught Martin and Margaret to do the same upon their
line of retreat. Thus, within the distance of a few yards, the pursuers
and pursued were passing one another upon opposite tracks.

A loud cry announced the discovery of the dead and the wounded hound.
Then followed a babble of voices, still swelling as fresh pursuers
reached the spot. The hunters, as usual on a surprise, were wasting
time, and the hunted ones were making the most of it.

"I hear no more hounds," whispered Martin to Margaret, and he was
himself again.

It was Margaret's turn to tremble and despair.

"Oh, why did we part with Gerard? They will kill my Gerard, and I not
near him."

"Nay, nay! the head to catch him is not on their shoulders. You bade him
meet us at the ash-tree?"

"And so I did. Bless you, Martin, for thinking of that. To the
ash-tree!"

"Ay! but with less noise."

They were now nearly at the edge of the coppice, when suddenly
they heard hooping and hallooing behind them. The men had satisfied
themselves the fugitives were in the coppice, and were beating back.

"No matter," whispered Martin to his trembling companion. "We shall have
time to win clear and slip back out of sight by hard running. Ah!"

He stooped suddenly; for just as he was going to burst out of the
brushwood, his eye caught a figure keeping sentinel. It was Ghysbrecht
Van Swieten seated on his mule; a bloody bandage was across his nose,
the bridge of which was broken; but over this his eyes peered keenly,
and it was plain by their expression he had heard the fugitives rustle,
and was looking out for them. Martin muttered a terrible oath, and
cautiously strung his bow, then with equal caution fitted his last arrow
to the string. Margaret put her hands to her face, but said nothing.
She saw this man must die or Gerard. After the first impulse she peered
through her fingers, her heart panting to her throat.

The bow was raised, and the deadly arrow steadily drawn to its head,
when at that moment an active figure leaped on Ghysbrecht from behind so
swiftly, it was like a hawk swooping on a pigeon. A kerchief went over
the burgomaster, in a turn of the hand his head was muffled in it, and
he was whirled from his seat and fell heavily upon the ground, where he
lay groaning with terror; and Gerard jumped down after him.

"Hist, Martin! Martin!"

Martin and Margaret came out, the former openmouthed crying, "Now fly!
fly! while they are all in the thicket; we are saved."

At this crisis, when safety seemed at hand, as fate would have it,
Margaret, who had borne up so bravely till now, began to succumb, partly
from loss of blood.

"Oh, my beloved, fly!" she gasped. "Leave me, for I am faint."

"No! no!" cried Gerard. "Death together, or safety. Ah! the mule! mount
her, you, and I'll run by your side."

In a moment Martin was on Ghysbrecht's mule, and Gerard raised the
fainting girl in his arms and placed her on the saddle, and relieved
Martin of his bow.

"Help! treason! murder! murder!" shrieked Ghysbrecht, suddenly rising on
his hams.

"Silence, cur," roared Gerard, and trode him down again by the throat as
men crush an adder.

"Now, have you got her firm? Then fly! for our lives! for our lives!"

But even as the mule, urged suddenly by Martin's heel, scattered the
flints with his hind hoofs ere he got into a canter, and even as Gerard
withdrew his foot from Ghysbrecht's throat to run, Dierich Brower and
his five men, who had come back for orders, and heard the burgomaster's
cries, burst roaring out of the coppice on them.



CHAPTER XXI

Speech is the familiar vent of human thoughts; but there are emotions so
simple and overpowering, that they rush out not in words, but eloquent
sounds. At such moments man seems to lose his characteristics, and to
be merely one of the higher animals; for these, when greatly agitated,
ejaculate, though they cannot speak.

There was something terrible and truly animal, both in the roar
of triumph with which the pursuers burst out of the thicket on our
fugitives, and the sharp cry of terror with which these latter darted
away. The pursuers hands clutched the empty air, scarce two feet behind
them, as they fled for life. Confused for a moment, like lions that miss
their spring, Dierich and his men let Gerard and the mule put ten yards
between them. Then they flew after with uplifted weapons. They were
sure of catching them; for this was not the first time the parties had
measured speed. In the open ground they had gained visibly on the three
this morning, and now, at last, it was a fair race again, to be settled
by speed alone. A hundred yards were covered in no time. Yet still there
remained these ten yards between the pursuers and the pursued.

This increase of speed since the morning puzzled Dierich Brower. The
reason was this. When three run in company, the pace is that of the
slowest of the three. From Peter's house to the edge of the forest
Gerard ran Margaret's pace; but now he ran his own; for the mule was
fleet, and could have left them all far behind. Moreover, youth and
chaste living began to tell. Daylight grew imperceptibly between the
hunted ones and the hunters. Then Dierich made a desperate effort, and
gained two yards; but in a few seconds Gerard had stolen them quietly
back. The pursuers began to curse.

Martin heard, and his face lighted up. "Courage, Gerard! courage, brave
lad! they are straggling."

It was so. Dierich was now headed by one of his men, and another dropped
into the rear altogether.

They came to a rising ground, not sharp, but long; and here youth, and
grit, and sober living told more than ever.

Ere he reached the top, Dierich's forty years weighed him down like
forty bullets. "Our cake is dough," he gasped. "Take him dead, if you
can't alive;" and he left running, and followed at a foot's pace. Jorian
Ketel tailed off next; and then another, and so, one by one, Gerard ran
them all to a standstill, except one who kept on stanch as a bloodhound,
though losing ground every minute. His name, if I am not mistaken,
was Eric Wouverman. Followed by him, they came to a rise in the wood,
shorter, but much steeper than the last.

"Hand on mane!" cried Martin.

Gerard obeyed, and the mule helped him up the hill faster even than he
was running before.

At the sight of this manoeuvre, Dierich's man lost heart, and, being now
full eighty yards behind Gerard, and rather more than that in advance of
his nearest comrade, he pulled up short, and, in obedience to Dierich's
order, took down his crossbow, levelled it deliberately, and just as the
trio were sinking out of sight over the crest of the hill, sent the bolt
whizzing among them.

There was a cry of dismay; and, next moment, as if a thunder-bolt had
fallen on them, they were all lying on the ground, mule and all.



CHAPTER XXII

The effect was so sudden and magical, that the shooter himself was
stupefied for an instant. Then he hailed his companions to join him in
effecting the capture, and himself set off up the hill; but, ere he had
got half way, up rose the figure of Martin Wittenhaagen with a bent bow
in his hand. Eric Wouverman no sooner saw him in this attitude, than he
darted behind a tree, and made himself as small as possible. Martin's
skill with that weapon was well known, and the slain dog was a keen
reminder of it.

Wouverman peered round the bark cautiously: there was the arrow's point
still aimed at him. He saw it shine. He dared not move from his shelter.

When he had been at peep-ho some minutes, his companions came up in
great force.

Then, with a scornful laugh, Martin vanished, and presently was heard to
ride off on the mule.

All the men ran up together. The high ground commanded a view of a
narrow but almost interminable glade.

They saw Gerard and Margaret running along at a prodigious distance;
they looked like gnats; and Martin galloping after them ventre a terre.

The hunters were outwitted as well as outrun. A few words will explain
Martin's conduct. We arrive at causes by noting coincidences; yet, now
and then, coincidences are deceitful. As we have all seen a hare tumble
over a briar just as the gun went off, and so raise expectations, then
dash them to earth by scudding away untouched, so the burgomaster's mule
put her foot in a rabbit-hole at or about the time the crossbow bolt
whizzed innocuous over her head: she fell and threw both her riders.
Gerard caught Margaret, but was carried down by her weight and impetus;
and, behold, the soil was strewed with dramatis personae.

The docile mule was up again directly, and stood trembling. Martin was
next, and looking round saw there was but one in pursuit; on this he
made the young lovers fly on foot, while he checked the enemy as I have
recorded.

He now galloped after his companions, and when after a long race he
caught them, he instantly put Gerard and Margaret on the mule, and ran
by their side till his breath failed, then took his turn to ride, and so
in rotation. Thus the runner was always fresh, and long ere they relaxed
their speed all sound and trace of them was hopelessly lost to Dierich
and his men. These latter went crestfallen back to look after their
chief and their winged bloodhound.



CHAPTER XXIII

Life and liberty, while safe, are little thought of: for why? they are
matters of course. Endangered, they are rated at their real value. In
this, too, they are like sunshine, whose beauty men notice not at noon
when it is greatest, but towards evening, when it lies in flakes of
topaz under shady elms. Yet it is feebler then; but gloom lies beside
it, and contrast reveals its fire. Thus Gerard and Margaret, though they
started at every leaf that rustled louder than its fellows, glowed all
over with joy and thankfulness as they glided among the friendly trees
in safety and deep tranquil silence, baying dogs and brutal voices yet
ringing in their mind's ears.

But presently Gerard found stains of blood on Margaret's ankles.

"Martin! Martin! help! they have wounded her: the crossbow!"

"No, no!" said Margaret, smiling to reassure him; "I am not wounded, nor
hurt at all."

"But what is it, then, in Heaven's name?" cried Gerard, in great
agitation.

"Scold me not, then!" and Margaret blushed.

"Did I ever scold you?"

"No, dear Gerard. Well, then, Martin said it was blood those cruel dogs
followed; so I thought if I could but have a little blood on my shoon,
the dogs would follow me instead, and let my Gerard wend free. So I
scratched my arm with Martin's knife--forgive me! Whose else could I
take? Yours, Gerard? Ah, no. You forgive me?" said she beseechingly, and
lovingly and fawningly, all in one.

"Let me see this scratch first," said Gerard, choking with emotion.
"There, I thought so. A scratch? I call it a cut--a deep, terrible,
cruel cut."

Gerard shuddered at sight of it.

"She might have done it with her bodkin," said the soldier. "Milksop!
that sickens at sight of a scratch and a little blood."

"No, no. I could look on a sea of blood, but not on hers. Oh, Margaret!
how could you be so cruel?"

Margaret smiled with love ineffable. "Foolish Gerard," murmured she, "to
make so much of nothing." And she flung the guilty arm round his neck.
"As if I would not give all the blood in my heart for you, let alone
a few drops from my arm." And with this, under the sense of his recent
danger, she wept on his neck for pity and love; and he wept with her.

"And I must part from her," he sobbed; "we two that love so dear--one
must be in Holland, one in Italy. Ah me! ah me! ah me!"

At this Margaret wept afresh, but patiently and silently. Instinct is
never off its guard, and with her unselfishness was an instinct.
To utter her present thoughts would be to add to Gerard's misery at
parting, so she wept in silence.

Suddenly they emerged upon a beaten path, and Martin stopped.

"This is the bridle-road I spoke of," said he hanging his head; "and
there away lies the hostelry."

Margaret and Gerard cast a scared look at one another.

"Come a step with me, Martin," whispered Gerard. When he had drawn him
aside, he said to him in a broken voice, "Good Martin, watch over her
for me! She is my wife; yet I leave her. See Martin! here is gold--it
was for my journey; it is no use my asking her to take it--she would
not; but you will for her, will you not? Oh, Heaven! and is this all I
can do for her? Money? But poverty is a curse. You will not let her want
for anything, dear Martin? The burgomaster's silver is enough for me."

"Thou art a good lad, Gerard. Neither want nor harm shall come to her.
I care more for her little finger than for all the world; and were she
nought to me, even for thy sake would I be a father to her. Go with
a stout heart, and God be with thee going and coming." And the rough
soldier wrung Gerard's hand, and turned his head away, with unwonted
feeling.

After a moment's silence he was for going back to Margaret, but Gerard
stopped him. "No, good Martin; prithee, stay here behind this thicket,
and turn your head away from us, while I-oh, Martin! Martin!"

By this means Gerard escaped a witness of his anguish at leaving her he
loved, and Martin escaped a piteous sight. He did not see the poor
young things kneel and renew before Heaven those holy vows cruel men had
interrupted. He did not see them cling together like one, and then try
to part, and fail, and return to one another, and cling again, like
drowning, despairing creatures. But he heard Gerard sob, and sob, and
Margaret moan.

At last there was a hoarse cry, and feet pattered on the hard road.

He started up, and there was Gerard running wildly, with both hands
clasped above his head, in prayer, and Margaret tottering back towards
him with palms extended piteously, as if for help, and ashy cheek and
eyes fixed on vacancy.

He caught her in his arms, and spoke words of comfort to her; but her
mind could not take them in; only at the sound of his voice she moaned
and held him tight, and trembled violently.

He got her on the mule, and put his arm around her, and so, supporting
her frame, which, from being strong like a boy, had now turned all
relaxed and powerless, he took her slowly and sadly home.

She did not shed one tear, nor speak one word.

At the edge of the wood he took her off the mule, and bade her go across
to her father's house. She did as she was bid.

Martin to Rotterdam. Sevenbergen was too hot for him.

Gerard, severed from her he loved, went like one in a dream. He hired a
horse and a guide at the little hostelry, and rode swiftly towards the
German frontier. But all was mechanical; his senses felt blunted; trees
and houses and men moved by him like objects seen through a veil. His
companions spoke to him twice, but he did not answer. Only once he cried
out savagely, "Shall we never be out of this hateful country?"

After many hours' riding they came to the brow of a steep hill; a small
brook ran at the bottom.

"Halt!" cried the guide, and pointed across the valley. "Here is
Germany."

"Where?"

"On t'other side of the bourn. No need to ride down the hill, I trow."

Gerard dismounted without a word, and took the burgomaster's purse from
his girdle: while he opened it, "You will soon be out of this hateful
country," said his guide, half sulkily; "mayhap the one you are going to
will like you no better; any way, though it be a church you have robbed,
they cannot take you, once across that bourn."

These words at another time would have earned the speaker an admonition
or a cuff. They fell on Gerard now like idle air. He paid the lad in
silence, and descended the hill alone. The brook was silvery; it ran
murmuring over little pebbles, that glittered, varnished by the clear
water; he sat down and looked stupidly at them. Then he drank of the
brook; then he laved his hot feet and hands in it; it was very cold:
it waked him. He rose, and taking a run, leaped across it into Germany.
Even as he touched the strange land he turned suddenly and looked back.
"Farewell, ungrateful country!" he cried. "But for her it would cost me
nought to leave you for ever, and all my kith and kin, and--the mother
that bore me, and--my playmates, and my little native town. Farewell,
fatherland--welcome the wide world! omne so-lum for-ti p p-at-r-a." And
with these brave words in his mouth he drooped suddenly with arms and
legs all weak, and sat down and sobbed bitterly upon the foreign soil.

When the young exile had sat a while bowed down, he rose and dashed the
tears from his eyes like a man; and not casting a single glance more
behind him, to weaken his heart, stepped out into the wide world.

His love and heavy sorrow left no room in him for vulgar misgivings.
Compared with rending himself from Margaret, it seemed a small thing to
go on foot to Italy in that rude age.

All nations meet in a convent. So, thanks to his good friends the monks,
and his own thirst of knowledge, he could speak most of the languages
needed on that long road. He said to himself, "I will soon be at Rome;
the sooner the better now."

After walking a good league, he came to a place where four ways
met. Being country roads, and serpentine, they had puzzled many an
inexperienced neighbour passing from village to village. Gerard took out
a little dial Peter had given him, and set it in the autumn sun, and by
this compass steered unhesitatingly for Rome inexperienced as a young
swallow flying south; but unlike the swallow, wandering south alone.



CHAPTER XXIV

Not far on this road he came upon a little group. Two men in sober suits
stood leaning lazily on each side of a horse, talking to one another.
The rider, in a silk doublet and bright green jerkin and hose, both
of English cloth, glossy as a mole, lay flat on his stomach in the
afternoon sun, and looked an enormous lizard. His velvet cloak (flaming
yellow) was carefully spread over the horse's loins.

"Is aught amiss?" inquired Gerard.

"Not that I wot of," replied one of the servants.

"But your master, he lies like a corpse. Are ye not ashamed to let him
grovel on the ground?"

"Go to; the bare ground is the best cure for his disorder. If you get
sober in bed, it gives you a headache; but you leap up from the hard
ground like a lark in spring. Eh, Ulric?"

"He speaks sooth, young man," said Ulric warmly.

"What, is the gentleman drunk?"

The servants burst into a hoarse laugh at the simplicity of Gerard's
question. But suddenly Ulric stopped, and eyeing him all over, said very
gravely, "Who are you, and where born, that know not the Count is ever
drunk at this hour?" And Gerard found himself a suspected character.

"I am a stranger," said he, "but a true man, and one that loves
knowledge; therefore ask I questions, and not for love of prying."

"If you be a true man," said Ulric shrewdly, "then give us trinkgeld for
the knowledge we have given you."

Gerard looked blank, but putting a good face on it, said, "Trinkgeld you
shall have, such as my lean purse can spare, an if you will tell me why
ye have ta'en his cloak from the man and laid it on the beast."

Under the inspiring influence of coming trinkgeld, two solutions were
instantly offered Gerard at once: the one was, that should the Count
come to himself (which, being a seasoned toper, he was apt to do all
in a minute), and find his horse standing sweating in the cold, while
a cloak lay idle at hand, he would fall to cursing, and peradventure
to laying on; the other, more pretentious, was, that a horse is a poor
milksop, which, drinking nothing but water, has to be cockered up and
warmed outside; but a master, being a creature ever filled with good
beer, has a store of inward heat that warms him to the skin, and renders
a cloak a mere shred of idle vanity.

Each of the speakers fell in love with his theory, and, to tell the
truth, both had taken a hair or two of the dog that had bitten their
master to the brain; so their voices presently rose so high, that the
green sot began to growl instead of snoring. In their heat they did not
notice this.

Ere long the argument took a turn that sooner or later was pretty sure
to enliven a discussion in that age. Hans, holding the bridle with his
right hand, gave Ulric a sound cuff with his left; Ulric returned it
with interest, his right hand being free; and at it they went, ding
dong, over the horse's mane, pommelling one another, and jagging the
poor beast, till he ran backward, and trode with iron heel upon a
promontory of the green lord; he, like the toad stung by Ithuriel's
spear, started up howling, with one hand clapped to the smart and the
other tugging at his hilt. The servants, amazed with terror, let the
horse go; he galloped off whinnying, the men in pursuit of him crying
out with fear, and the green noble after them, volleying curses, his
naked sword in his hand, and his body rebounding from hedge to hedge in
his headlong but zigzag career down the narrow lane.

"In which hurtling" Gerard turned his back on them all, and went calmly
south, glad to have saved the four tin farthings he had got ready for
trinkgeld, but far too heavy hearted even to smile at their drunken
extravagance.


The sun was nearly setting, and Gerard, who had now for some time been
hoping in vain to find an inn by the way, was very ill at ease. To make
matters worse, black clouds gathered over the sky.

Gerard quickened his pace almost to a run.

It was in vain; down came the rain in torrents, drenched the bewildered
traveller, and seemed to extinguish the very sun-for his rays, already
fading, could not cope with this new assailant.

Gerard trudged on, dark, and wet, and in an unknown region. "Fool! to
leave Margaret," said he.

Presently the darkness thickened.

He was entering a great wood. Huge branches shot across the narrow road,
and the benighted stranger groped his way in what seemed an interminable
and inky cave with a rugged floor, on which he stumbled and stumbled as
he went.

On, and on, and on, with shivering limbs and empty stomach, and fainting
heart, till the wolves rose from their lairs and bayed all round the
wood.

His hair bristled; but he grasped his cudgel, and prepared to sell his
life dear.

There was no wind; and his excited ear heard light feet patter at times
over the newly fallen leaves, and low branches rustle with creatures
gliding swiftly past them.

Presently in the sea of ink there was a great fiery star close to the
ground. He hailed it as he would his patron saint. "CANDLE! a CANDLE!"
he shouted, and tried to run. But the dark and rugged way soon stopped
that. The light was more distant than he had thought. But at last, in
the very heart of the forest, he found a house, with lighted candles
and loud voices inside it. He looked up to see if there was a signboard.
There was none. "Not an inn after all!" said he sadly. "No matter; what
Christian would turn a dog out into this wood to-night?" and with this
he made for the door that led to the voices. He opened it slowly, and
put his head in timidly. He drew it out abruptly, as if slapped in the
face, and recoiled into the rain and darkness.

He had peeped into a large but low room, the middle of which was filled
by a huge round stove, or clay oven, that reached to the ceiling;
round this, wet clothes were drying-some on lines, and some more
compendiously, on rustics. These latter habiliments, impregnated with
the wet of the day, but the dirt of a life, and lined with what another
foot traveller in these parts call "rammish clowns," evolved rank
vapours and compound odours inexpressible, in steaming clouds.

In one corner was a travelling family, a large one: thence flowed into
the common stock the peculiar sickly smell of neglected brats. Garlic
filled up the interstices of the air. And all this with closed window,
and intense heat of the central furnace, and the breath of at least
forty persons.

They had just supped.

Now Gerard, like most artists, had sensitive organs, and the potent
effluvia struck dismay into him. But the rain lashed him outside, and
the light and the fire tempted him in.

He could not force his way all at once through the palpable perfumes,
but he returned to the light again and again, like the singed moth.
At last he discovered that the various smells did not entirely mix, no
fiend being there to stir them round. Odour of family predominated in
two corners; stewed rustic reigned supreme in the centre; and garlic in
the noisy group by the window. He found, too, by hasty analysis, that of
these the garlic described the smallest aerial orbit, and the scent of
reeking rustic darted farthest--a flavour as if ancient goats, or the
fathers of all foxes, had been drawn through a river, and were here
dried by Nebuchadnezzar.

So Gerard crept into a corner close to the door. But though the solidity
of the main fetors isolated them somewhat, the heat and reeking vapours
circulated, and made the walls drip; and the home-nurtured novice found
something like a cold snake wind about his legs, and his head turn to a
great lump of lead; and next, he felt like choking, sweetly slumbering,
and dying, all in one.

He was within an ace of swooning, but recovered to a deep sense of
disgust and discouragement; and settled to go back to Holland at peep
of day. This resolution formed, he plucked up a little heart; and being
faint with hunger, asked one of the men of garlic whether this was not
an inn after all?

"Whence come you, who know not 'The Star of the Forest'?" was the reply.

"I am a stranger; and in my country inns have aye a sign."

"Droll country yours! What need of a sign to a public-house--a place
that every soul knows?"

Gerard was too tired and faint for the labour of argument, so he turned
the conversation, and asked where he could find the landlord?

At this fresh display of ignorance, the native's contempt rose too high
for words. He pointed to a middle-aged woman seated on the other side
of the oven; and turning to his mates, let them know what an outlandish
animal was in the room. Thereat the loud voices stopped, one by one, as
the information penetrated the mass; and each eye turned, as on a pivot,
following Gerard, and his every movement, silently and zoologically.

The landlady sat on a chair an inch or two higher than the rest, between
two bundles. From the first, a huge heap of feathers and wings, she was
taking the downy plumes, and pulling the others from the quills, and so
filling bundle two littering the floor ankle-deep, and contributing to
the general stock a stuffy little malaria, which might have played a
distinguished part in a sweet room, but went for nothing here. Gerard
asked her if he could have something to eat.

She opened her eyes with astonishment. "Supper is over this hour and
more.

"But I had none of it, good dame."

"Is that my fault? You were welcome to your share for me."

"But I was benighted, and a stranger; and belated sore against my will."

"What have I to do with that? All the world knows 'The Star of the
Forest' sups from six till eight. Come before six, ye sup well; come
before eight, ye sup as pleases Heaven; come after eight, ye get a clean
bed, and a stirrup cup, or a horn of kine's milk, at the dawning."

Gerard looked blank. "May I go to bed, then, dame?" said he sulkily "for
it is ill sitting up wet and fasting, and the byword saith, 'He sups who
sleeps.'"

"The beds are not come yet," replied the landlady. "You will sleep when
the rest do. Inns are not built for one."

It was Gerard's turn to be astonished. "The beds were not come! what, in
Heaven's name, did she mean?" But he was afraid to ask for every word
he had spoken hitherto had amazed the assembly, and zoological eyes were
upon him--he felt them. He leaned against the wall, and sighed audibly.

At this fresh zoological trait, a titter went round the watchful
