number. Your men-of-war ships capture more prisoners than ours, but we
make up for it by the numbers our privateers bring in. At any rate
they might exchange as many as they can, say once in six months. One
would have thought they would be glad to do so so as to save
themselves the trouble and expense of looking after and feeding such a
number of useless mouths. Governments always have curious ways."

"But how did you get away from prison?" Ralph asked.

"It was a woman," the man replied. "It is always women who help men
out of scrapes. It was the wife of one of the jailers. She used to
bring her husband's dinner sometimes when we were exercising in the
yard. When I first went there she had a child in her arms--a little
thing about a year old. I was always fond of children; for we had a
lot at home, brothers and sisters, and I was the eldest. She saw me
look at it one day, and I suppose she guessed it reminded me of home.
So she stopped and let me pat its cheek and talk to it. Then I knitted
it some socks and a little jacket and other things, and that made a
sort of friendship between us. You can always win a woman's heart by
taking notice of her child. Then she got to letting me carry it about
on my shoulder while she took her husband's dinner in to him, if he
did not happen to be in the yard. And when the little thing was able
to totter it would hold on to my finger, and was always content to
stay with me while she was away. So it went on till the child was four
years old.

"One day it was running across the court to its mother as she came out
from the prison. Two of the men were what you call skylarking, and
running one way while the child was running the other. One of them
knocked it down heavily. It was an accident, and if he had picked it
up and been sorry, there would have been an end of it; but instead of
that the brute burst into a loud laugh. By this time I was as fond of
the child as if it had been my own, and I rushed furiously at him and
knocked him down. As he sprang to his feet he drew a knife he used in
wood-carving and came at me. I caught the blow on my arm and closed
with him, and we fell together. The guard in the yard rushed up and
pulled us apart, and we both got a fortnight's close confinement for
fighting.

"The first time I came into the yard again and met the woman with her
child, the little one ran to me; but the woman, a little to my
surprise, said nothing. As she passed I lifted the child up, and after
giving me a hug and a kiss she said: 'Mammy gave me this to give to
you;' and she put a little note into my hand. I took the first
opportunity to read it in a quiet corner. It was as follows: 'Dear
Jacques--I saw how nobly you stood up for my Carrie the other day, and
how you got wounded in protecting her. You have always been good to
her. I have often thought I might help you to escape, but was afraid
to try. Now I will do so. It will not be easy, but I will manage it.
Do not be impatient; the child will give you another note when I have
quite arranged things. I shall not talk much to you in future, or else
when you have got away I may be suspected; so do not be surprised at
my seeming cold.'

"After that the woman only brought her child once a week or so to the
prison, and only gave me a nod as she passed through the yard. Upon
the third visit of the child it gave me a little packet containing two
or three small steel saws and a little bottle of oil. On the paper
which held them was written, 'For the bars. You shall have a rope next
time.' Sure enough next time the child had hidden in its frock a hank
of very thin cord, which I managed as I was playing with her to slip
unobserved into my breast. 'Mammy says more next time.' And next time
another hank came. There was a third, and a note, 'Twist the three
ropes together and they will be strong enough to bear you. On the
third night from this, saw through the bars and lower yourself into
court. There will be no moon. Go to the right-hand corner of the court
in the rear of the prison. Fasten a knife to one end of the cord and
throw it over the wall. I shall be waiting there with a friend.
Directly you feel the cord jerked climb up to the top of the wall. If
you can find something to fasten your end of the rope to you can slide
down it. If not, you must jump. There will be a boat ready to take you
away.'

"It all turned out well. It was a pitch dark night, raining and
blowing, and the sentries kept inside their boxes. I got up to the top
of the wall all right, and was able to fasten the rope on to the
spikes and slide down on the other side. The woman was there with a
man, whom she told me was her brother. They took me to a creek two
miles away and there put me on board a boat, and I was rowed out to a
smuggling craft which at once set sail, and two days later was landed
at Cherbourg. So that's how I came to learn English."

"Did you ever hear whether the woman who helped you was suspected?"

"I saw her brother two months afterward on one of the trips that the
craft he belonged to made. He said that of course there were a great
many inquiries made, and his sister had been questioned closely. She
swore that she had hardly spoken to me for the last two months and
that she had given me nothing; which in a way was true enough, for she
had not handed them to me herself. The prisoners bore her out about
her not coming near me, for it had been noticed that she was not as
friendly as she had been. Some had thought her ungrateful, while
others had fancied that she was angry at my interfering and making a
tumult about the child. Anyhow, whatever suspicions they might have
had they could prove nothing. They forbade her entering the prison in
future; but she didn't mind that so long as her husband, who had been
employed a good many years there, did not lose his situation. He had
been kept by her in entire ignorance of the whole affair, and was very
indignant at her having been suspected. I sent her a letter of thanks
by her brother, and a little present for her and one for the child.
The brother was to give them to her as if from himself, so that the
husband should not smell a rat, but of course to make her understand
who they came from."

"Well, I only hope, Jacques," Ralph said, "that when I get shut up in
one of your prisons I shall find some French woman to aid me to
escape, just as you found an English woman to help you; only I hope it
won't be four years coming about."

"I think we look sharper after our prisoners than you do; still it may
be. But it will be some time before you are in prison; and if you play
your cards well and learn to speak our language, and make yourself
useful, I do not think the captain is likely to hand you over to the
authorities when we get back to a French port again."

"I am quite ready to do my best to learn the language and to make
myself useful," Ralph said. "It is always a good thing to know French,
especially as I am going into the army some day; that is if I get back
again in time."

"Oh, I think you will do so," the man said. "You keep up your spirits
well, and that is the great thing. There are many boys that would sit
down and cry if they found themselves in such a scrape as you have got
into."

"Cry!" Ralph repeated indignantly. "You don't suppose a boy of my age
is going to cry like a girl! An English boy would be ashamed to cry,
especially when Frenchmen were looking on."

Jacques laughed good-temperedly. "There would be nothing to be ashamed
of. We are not like you cold English! A Frenchman laughs and sings
when he is pleased, and cries when he is sorry. Why shouldn't he?"

"Oh, I can't tell you why," Ralph replied, "only we don't do it. I
don't say I shouldn't halloo out if I were hurt very much, though I
should try my best not to; but I feel sure I shouldn't cry like a
great baby. Why, what would be the good of it?"

Jacques shrugged his shoulders. "People are different," he said. "A
man is not a coward because he cries. I have seen two boys fighting
and pulling each other's hair and crying all the time, but they fought
on. They did not cry because they were afraid."

"Pulling each other's hair!" Ralph repeated contemptuously. "They
ought to have been ashamed of themselves, both of them. I don't call
that fighting at all. I should call it disgusting. Why, in England
even girls would hardly pull each other's hair. I have seen two or
three fights between fishwomen in Dover, and even they did not go on
like that. If that's the way French boys fight, no wonder our soldiers
and sailors--" But here it struck Ralph that the remark he was about
to make would be altogether out of place under present circumstances.
He was therefore seized with an opportune fit of coughing, and then
turned the conversation by asking Jacques at what rate he thought the
vessel was slipping through the water.

A few minutes later the first mate came up and told Jacques to inform
Ralph that the captain had ordered him to be supplied with clothes
similar to those worn by the rest of the crew, and that he was to be
told off to take his post regularly as a boy in the starboard watch.
Ralph was well pleased at the news. He felt that his best chance was
to make himself useful on board, and to become one of the crew as soon
as possible, so that in case an English merchantman was met with and
captured he should not be sent with her crew as a prisoner to a French
port. As long as he was on board various opportunities of escape might
present themselves. He might slip away in port, or the brig might be
captured by an English cruiser or privateer; whereas, once lodged in a
French prison, the chances of such good fortune as had befallen
Jacques were slight indeed. He therefore at once turned to with
alacrity.

That he would have a hard time of it for a bit he felt sure; for
although in Jacques he had evidently found a friend, he saw by the
scowling glances of several of the men as he passed near them that the
national feeling told heavily against him. Nor was it surprising that
it should be so. The animosity between the two nations had lasted so
long that it had extended to individuals. Englishmen despised as well
as disliked Frenchmen. They were ready to admit that they might be
brave, but considered them as altogether wanting in personal strength.
The popular belief was that they were half-starved, and existed
chiefly upon frogs and hot water with a few bits of bread and scraps
of vegetables in it which they called soup, and that upon the sea
especially they were almost contemptible. Certainly the long
succession of naval victories that our fleets had won afforded some
justification for our sailors' opinion of the enemy. But in fights
between detached vessels the French showed many times that in point of
courage they were in no way inferior to our own men; and indeed our
victories were mainly due to two causes. In the first place, the
superior physique and stamina of our men, the result partly of race
and partly of feeding; they were consequently able to work their guns
faster and longer than could their adversaries. In the second place
the British sailor went into battle with an absolute conviction that
he was going to be victorious; while the Frenchman, on the other hand,
although determined to do his best to win, had from the first doubts
whether the British would not be as usual victorious.

It is probable that the French sailors hated us far more than our men
did them. We had lowered their national prestige, had defeated them
whenever we met them, had blockaded their ports, ruined their trade,
inflicted immense damage upon their fisheries, and subsidized other
nations against them, and were the heart and center of the coalition
against which France was struggling to maintain herself. It was not
therefore surprising that among the hundred and ten men on board La
Belle Marie there were many who viewed Ralph with hostile eyes and who
only refrained from personal violence owing to the strict order the
captain had given that he should be well treated.

Toward midday the fog lifted suddenly and the wind freshened, and
lookouts were stationed in the tops. There was little hope indeed of
any English merchantmen having come over so far toward the French
coast, but British cruisers might be anywhere. A few distant sails
could be seen far out on the horizon proceeding up or down channel;
but the captain of La Belle Marie had no idea of commencing operations
until very much further away from the shores of England. All day the
vessel ran down the French coast; and although he was a captive, and
every mile reeled off the log took him further from home, Ralph could
not help admiring the speed at which the brig slipped through the
water, cutting the waves with her sharp bow and leaving scarcely a
ripple behind her, so fine and clean was her run. Very different was
this smooth, gliding motion from the quick plunge and shock of the
bluff-bowed fishing boat to which he was accustomed. The sails had
been scrubbed until there was not a speck upon them. The masts were
lofty and tapering, the rigging neat and trim, and every stay as taut
as iron.

We could fight our ships better than the French, but as far as
building and rigging went they were vastly our superiors; and La Belle
Marie looked to Ralph almost like a gentleman's yacht in its cleanness
and order, and in these respects vied with the men-of-war that he had
so often watched from the heights of Dover. He had, however, but
little time for admiration; for he was kept at work rubbing and
polishing the guns and brass-work, and was not idle for a minute from
the time he came on deck dressed as a cabin-boy on the morning after
he was picked up until sunset. There were two French boys about his
own age forward, and as soon as his work was done and the evening
watch set they began to torment him; for, acting as they did as
servants to the officers, they did not take share in the watch.

Fortunately Jacques had gone below at the same time as Ralph; and when
the boys, finding that their taunts had no effect whatever upon Ralph,
began to get bolder, and one of them snatched off his cap, Jacques
interfered at once. "Look here, youngsters," he said, "this young
English boy is at present one of the crew of this brig, and he has
just the same right to fair treatment as any one else, so I warn you
if you interfere with him you will have to fight him fairly. I know
enough of these English boys to know that with your hands you would
not have the least chance with him. He could thrash you both at once;
for even little English boys do not wrestle, tear, and kick, but hit
straight out just as the men do.

"With swords it would be different, but in a row between you and him
it would be just the naked hands. So I advise you to leave him alone,
for if you make him fight I will see fair play. All the time I was a
prisoner in England I was well treated by his people, and just as I
was treated myself and saw other French prisoners treated so I will
see him treated. Before this voyage is over it is not impossible the
tables will be turned, and that you may find yourselves prisoners in
the hands of the English; so I recommend you to behave to him in the
same way you would like to be treated yourselves if you were taken
prisoners. I can see the lad is good-tempered and willing. He is a
stranger here among us all, he can't speak a word of our language, and
he has a right to fair treatment. When he gets to know our language
he will be able to shift for himself; but until he does I mean to look
after him, and any one who plays tricks on him has got to talk to me."

As Jacques Clery was one of the most powerful and active men on board
the brig, this assertion was sufficient to put a stop to practical
joking with Ralph, and the lad had a much easier time of it than he
expected. The men, finding him willing to work and anxious to oblige
in every way, soon took to him; and by paying attention to their talk,
and asking the French name of every object on board the ship, it was
not many days before Ralph found himself able so far to understand
that he could obey orders, and pull and haul on any sheet that needed
handling.

Upon the second day, the wind having dropped again, more sail was set,
and when the word was given to go aloft he went up with the rest; and
although he was of little practical use in loosing the gaskets, he
soon shook off his first feelings of discomfort and nervousness on
seeing how carelessly and unconcernedly the men on each side of him
did their work, and before he had been many days at sea was as quick
and active aloft as any of the hands on board the brig. After running
down nearly as far as Bordeaux the vessel's head was pointed west, and
by nightfall the French coast was out of sight. A vigilant lookout was
now kept, one man being constantly stationed aloft, and by the
increased animation of the crew Ralph judged that they would soon
arrive at a point where they should be on the course of homeward bound
merchantmen. He had quite made up his mind that, although ready in all
other matters to do his duty as one of the crew of La Belle Marie,
nothing should induce him to take part in a fight against his own
countrymen.

As soon as night fell sail was reduced, and in the morning when at
eight bells Ralph came on deck with his watch he found that the whole
of the upper sails had been taken off her and the topsails lowered on
the cap, and the brig was only moving through the water at the rate of
two or three knots an hour. He guessed that she must be just upon the
track of ships, and that her object in thus taking off sail was to
catch sight of vessels in the distance while she herself would be
unobserved by them. During the course of the day several sail were
seen passing, but all at a considerable distance. Either the captain
did not think that it was safe to commence operations at present, or
he did not like the look of some of the passing vessels; but at any
rate he made no movement to close with any of them, and it was not
until nightfall that sail was again hoisted and the brig proceeded on
her course.

Ralph noticed that she carried no light, and that even the binnacle
was carefully shaded so that its light could not be seen except by the
helmsman. At midnight his watch went on deck, and Ralph perceived that
while he had been below the sail had again been greatly reduced, and
noticed that from time to time the officer on watch swept the horizon
with his night-glass. He apparently observed nothing until about two
o'clock, when he stood for some time gazing intently astern. Then he
turned, gave an order to a sailor, who went below, and two or three
minutes later the captain came on deck. After speaking to the officer
he too gazed intently astern. Then the ship's course was suddenly
changed, the sheets eased off, and for half an hour she ran at a sharp
angle to the course she had before been following, then she was
brought up into the eye of the wind and laid to.

Although Ralph strained his eyes in the direction in which the captain
had been looking, he could see nothing; but he had no doubt a sail had
been seen coming up astern, and that the object of the change of
course was to let her pass them without their being seen. He rather
wondered that, instead of running off the wind, the captain had not
put her about so as to take her position to windward instead of to
leeward of the vessel behind; but he soon arrived at the object of the
maneuver. There were no stars to be seen, and the bank of clouds
overhead stretched away to the east, and the horizon there was
entirely obscured; but to the west the sky was lighter, and a vessel
would be clearly visible to the eye. The brig, therefore, in the
position she had taken up could not be seen, while she herself would
obtain a full view of the other as she passed her.

In an hour the other ship came along. She was a large ship, full
rigged, and the French sailors, who had all come on deck, now
clustered against the bulwarks and eagerly discussed her. She was
about two miles to windward, and opinions differed as to whether she
was a man-of-war or an Indiaman. Ralph rather wondered that the
privateer had not tried to get alongside in the darkness and take the
vessel by surprise, but he understood now that there was a strong
probability that the Belle Marie might have caught a tartar and have
suddenly run herself under the guns of a British frigate. As soon as
the vessel had passed, the braces were manned and the yards swung
round, and the brig continued her course. She was brought up almost to
the wind's-eye and sailed as closely as possible, so that when morning
broke she should have recovered the leeway she had made and should be
to windward of the vessel she was pursuing, no matter how much astern.




CHAPTER IV.

THE PRIVATEER'S RENDEZVOUS.


When morning broke the vessel that the privateer had been watching in
the night was seen to be three miles directly ahead. She was a large
vessel, and for some time opinions differed as to whether she was a
frigate or an Indiaman; but when it became quite light a patch or two
in the canvas showed that she could not be a man-of-war, and all sail
was at once crowded on to the privateer. The other ship at once shook
out more canvas, but half an hour sufficed to show that the privateer
was much the faster vessel. The stranger took in the extra canvas she
had set, and continued her course as if altogether regardless of the
privateer.

"They have made up their minds to fight," Jacques said to Ralph. "Now
he finds that he can't outsail us he has got on to easy working
canvas. She is a big ship, and I expect carries heavier metal than we
do. It may be that she has troops on board."

The brig kept eating out to windward until she gained a position about
a mile upon the starboard quarter of the Indiaman, then the long
pivot-gun was leveled and the first shot fired. The crew had by this
time all taken their places by the guns, and Ralph and the other boys
brought up powder and shot from the magazine. It was not without a
struggle that Ralph brought himself to do this; but he saw that a
refusal would probably cost him his life, and as some one else would
bring up the cartridges in his place his refusal would not benefit his
countrymen.

He had just come on deck when the gun was fired, and saw the water
thrown up just under the ship's stern, and the shot was dancing away
to leeward. The next shot struck the merchantman on the quarter. A
moment later the vessel was brought up into the wind and a broadside
of eight guns fired. Two of them struck the hull of the privateer,
another wounded the mainmast, while the rest cut holes through the
sails and struck the water a quarter of a mile to windward. With an
oath the captain of the privateer brought his vessel up into the wind,
and then payed off on the other tack.

The merchantman carried much heavier metal than he had given her
credit for. As she came round too, some redcoats were seen on her
deck. Apparently well satisfied with the display she had made of her
strength, the ship bore off again and went quietly, on her way, while
the privateer was hove to and preventer stays put to the mainmast.
Ralph remained below for some time; he heard the men savagely cursing,
and thought it was best for him not to attract attention at present.
The sails were lowered and the brig drifted quietly all day; but about
ten o'clock Ralph heard a creaking of blocks, and knew that the sails
had been hoisted again. Half an hour later the watch below was ordered
to come quietly on deck. Ralph went up with the rest.

For a quarter of an hour he could see nothing, and then he made out a
dark mass a few hundred yards to leeward; immediately afterward the
helm was put up, and the brig run down toward the stranger. Two
minutes later there was a sharp hail, followed instantly by shouts and
the sound of feet; but before the crew could gain the deck and prepare
for defence the brig was alongside, and a moment later her crew sprang
upon the decks of the stranger. A few blows were given; but the
resistance offered was slight, and in a very short time the crew were
disarmed or driven below, and the vessel in the possession of the
privateer. She proved to be a small bark on her way out to the
Mediterranean. She carried only twenty hands and four small guns, and
was laden with hardware.

The privateer's crew at once set to work upon her. At first Ralph
could not understand what they were about, but he was not long in
discovering. The wedges round the mainmast were knocked out, the
topmast lowered to the deck, the shrouds and stays slacked off, and
then the mast was lifted and carried on board the brig. As soon as
this was done, the second mate of the brig with eight sailors went on
board as a prize crew. Everything was made taut and trim for them by
the brig's crew. The English prisoners had already been disarmed and
battened down in the hold, and the prize crew then hoisted sail and
prepared to take her under mizzen and foremast only to a French port.
This, if she had luck, she would reach in safety, but if on the way
