inertes a maioribus nominabantur_), but the meaning 'inactive', 'lazy',
'slovenly' seems to suit _neglectum_ better. -- POETA: nature is here the
dramatist, the drama is life, the actors are human beings. -- SED TAMEN
etc.: 'but for all that it was inevitable that there should be something
with the nature of an end'. So 69 _in quo est aliquid extremum_, 43
_aliquid pulchrum_. -- ARBORUM BACIS: the word _baca_ (the spelling _bacca_
has little or no authority) is applied to all fruits growing on bushes or
trees, cf. Tusc. 1, 31 _arbores seret diligens agricola, quarum aspiciet
bacam ipse numquam_ -- TERRAEQUE FRUCTIBUS: here = cereals, roots,
vegetables and small fruits. No sharp distinction can be drawn between
_fruges_ and _fructus_ (_e.g._ in Div. 1, 116 we have _fruges terrae
bacasve arborum_) though _fructus_ as commonly used is the more general
word of the two. -- MATURITATE CADUCUM: 'a time of senility, so to speak
and readiness to drop, that comes of a seasonable ripeness'. _Vietus_ is
literally 'twisted' or bent', being originally the passive participle of
_viere_. The comparison of old age with the ripeness of fruit recurs in 71.
Cf. Plin. Ep. 5, 14, 5 _non tam aetatis maturitate quam vitae_. --
FERUNDUM: the form in _undus_ is archaic, and generally used by Cic. in
quoting or imitating passages of laws, sacred formulae, and the like. H.
239. -- MOLLITER: here 'gently', 'with resignation', though _molliter
ferre_ often has another meaning, viz. to bear pain or trouble in an
_unmanly_ fashion. Cf. _facillime ferre_ below. -- QUID EST ALIUD etc. The
words perhaps imply the rationalistic explanation of myths which the Greeks
had begun to teach to the Romans during Cato's lifetime. Trans 'what else
but resistance to nature is equivalent to warring against the gods, and
_not_ 'what else does warring with the gods mean but to resist nature.' In
comparisons of this sort the Latins generally put the things compared in a
different order from that required by English idiom. Thus in Div. 2, 78
_quid est aliud nolle moneri a Iove nisi efficere ut aut ne fieri possit
auspicium aut, si fiat, videri_, S. Rosc. 54 _quid est aliud iudicio ac
legibus ac maiestate vestra abuti ad quaestum ac libidinem nisi hoc modo
accusare_. Phil. 1, 22, 2, 7, 5, 5, 10, 5. -- GIGANTUM MODO: see n. on 4
_Aetna gravius_ -- DIS: for the form _dis_ see n. on 25.

6. ATQUI: in the best Latin _atqui_ does not introduce a statement
_contradicting_ the preceding statement, but one that _supplements_ it.
Here it may be translated 'True, but'. Cf. 66, 81. -- GRATISSIMUM:
equivalent to _rem gratissimam_. With the thought cf. Rep. 1, 34 _gratum
feceris si explicaris_. Lael. 16 _pergratum feceris si disputaris_ -- UT
POLLICEAR: so Acad. 1, 33 _nos vero volumus ut pro Attico respondeam_.
Brut. 122 _nobis vero placet, ut pro Bruto etiam respondeam_; Lael. 32 _tu
vero perge, pro hoc enim respondeo_ A 317, _c_, H 499, 2, n. -- SENES
FIERI: if the infinitive had depended on _speramus_ alone and _volumus_ had
not intervened, Cicero would probably have written _nos futuros esse
senes_. -- MULTO ANTE: _sc. quam id factum erit_ so Balb. 41 _re denique
multo ante (sc. quam factum est) audita_, and very often in Cicero. --
DIDICERIMUS: as this corresponds with _feceris,_it would have been formally
correct to write here _nos docueris_ -- QUIBUS POSSIMUS: 'what
considerations will enable us most easily to support the growing burden of
age'. -- FUTURUM EST: = [Greek: mellei einai] this form of the future is
used in preference to the simple _erit_ because it is desired to represent
the event as _on the very point of fulfilment_, and therefore sure of
fulfilment. _Erit_ would have implied much less certainty. Trans. 'I will
do so if my action _is going to give_ you pleasure' Cf. 67 _beatus futurus
sum_, also 81, 85. See Roby, 1494. -- NISI MOLESTUM EST:3 a common
expression of courtesy, like 15 _nisi alienum putas, si placet_, cf. Hor.
Sat. 2, 8, 4 _si grave non est_. -- TAMQUAM LONGAM VIAM: Cicero here puts
into Laelius' mouth almost the very words addressed by Socrates to the aged
Cephalus in the introduction to Plato's Republic, 328 E. Observe the
succession of similar sounds in t_am_qu_am_, aliqu_am_, long_am_, vi_am_.
-- VIAM CONFECERIS: so pro Quint. 79 _conficere DCC milia passuum,
conficere iter_ a common phrase. For mood see A 312, G 604, H 513, II. --
QUAM ... INGREDIUNDUM SIT: this construction, the neuter of the gerundive
with _est_ followed by an accusative case, is exceedingly rare excepting in
two writers, Lucretius and Varro. See the full list of examples given by
Roby, Gram., Pref. to vol. 2, p. LXXII. A 294, _c_, H 371, I. 2, 2, n. The
best texts of Cicero now give only one example of a construction at all
resembling this, viz. pro Scauro 13 _obliviscendum vobis putatis matrum in
liberos, virorum in uxores scelera?_ The supposition of some scholars, that
in this passage Cic. used the construction in imitation of the archaic
style of Cato, is not likely to be true, seeing that in Cato's extant works
the construction does not once occur. For the form _undum_ see n. on 5
_ferundum_. -- ISTUC not adverb, but neuter pronoun, as in 8. The kind of
construction, _istuc videre quale sit_ for _videre quale istuc sit_, is
especially common in Cicero.

7. FACIAM UT POTERO: 'I will do it as well as I can.' Observe the future
_potero_ where English idiom would require a present. So Rep. 1, 38 _hic
Scipio, faciam quod voltis, ut potero_. -- SAEPE ENIM: _enim_ introduces a
reason, not for the words _ut potero_, but for _faciam_ -- 'I will grant
your request because I have often heard complaints about old age and
therefore have thought of the matter'. -- PARES AUTEM etc.: parenthetical.
-- VETERE PROVERBIO: the saying is as old as Homer, Od. 17, 218 as [Greek:
hos aiei ton homoion agei theos hos ton homoion]; cf. also Plat., Rep. 329
A, Symp. 195 B, Phaedr. 240 C.

P. 4. -- FACILLIME: 'most cheerfully', 'most eagerly'; a common meaning of
the word in Cic., _e.g._ Fam. 2, 16, 2 _in maritimis facillime sum_, _i.e._
'I find most pleasure in staying by the sea'. -- QUAE: a kind of
explanation of _querellis_: -- 'lamentations, viz. such utterances as'
etc.; see n. on Lael. 14 _quae_; cf. Fam. 2, 8, 2 _sermonibus de re publica
... quae nec possunt scribi nec scribenda sunt_. A. 199, _b_; G. 616, 3,
I.; H. 445, 5. -- C. SALINATOR: probably C. Livius Salinator, praetor in
191 B.C. (Livy 35, 24), who was entrusted with the equipment of the Roman
fleets during the war against Antiochus. He was born about 230, and was
therefore a little younger than Cato; cf. _fere aequales_ below. Salinator
was consul in 188, and died in 170. For the name Salinator cf. n. on 11. --
SP. ALBINUS: Sp. Postumius Albinus was consul in 186, and was with his
colleague appointed to investigate the great Bacchanalian conspiracy of
that year (Livy 39, CC. 1 seq.). Albinus died in 180. He was probably a
little younger than Salinator. He can scarcely have been fifty years of age
at his death. -- TUM ... TUM: 'now ... again'; so in 45. -- CARERENT: see
n. on 3 _ferat_. -- VITAM NULLAM PUTARENT: 'they considered life to be not
life at all'. For _vitam nullam_ cf. Lael. 86 _sine amicitia vitam esse
nullam_; also the Greek phrase [Greek: bios abiotos]; and below, 77 _vitam
quae est sola vita nominanda_; also 82. A. 239; H. 373, 1, n. 2. _Putarent_
= 'thought, as they said'. -- ID QUOD ESSET ACCUSANDUM: the subjunctive
_esset_ is used because a _class_ of things is referred to, 'nothing of a
nature to deserve complaint'; _id quod erat_, etc. would have meant merely
'that one thing which was matter for complaint'. A. 320; G. 634, Rem. 1; H.
503, I. -- USU VENIRENT: the phrase _usu venire_ differs very little in
meaning from _accidere_. _Usu_ is commonly explained as an ablative ('in
practice', 'in experience'), but is quite as likely to be a dative of the
sort generally called predicative ('to come as matter of experience'); cf.
Verg. Aen. 1, 22 _venire excidio_; Plin. N.H. 28, 106 _odio_; Caes. B.G. 5,
27 _subsidio_. -- QUORUM ... MULTORUM: the first genitive is dependent on
the second, so that _quorum = e quibus_. Notice the separation of _quorum_
from _multorum_ and of _multorum_ from _senectutem_. -- SINE QUERELLA:
attribute of _senectutem_. A. 217, Rem.; H. 359, n. 1, 4), and n. 3. This
form of attributive phrase, consisting of a preposition with a noun, is
common; cf. 24 _ex agro Sabino rusticos Romanos_; 40 _cum hostibus
clandestina colloquia_. _Querella_ is better spelling than _querela_. See
Roby, 177, 2. -- QUI: 'men of such nature as to ...'. -- ET ... NEC: Roby
2241. The reason for the departure from the ordinary sequence of particles
lies in the words _non moleste_. _Nec ...et _ is common; see 51, 53. --
LIBIDINUM VINCULIS etc.: Cic. is here thinking of the conversation between
Socrates and Cephalus in Plato, Rep. 329 D, for which see Introd. --
MODERATI: 'self-controlled'; cf. n. on 1 _moderationem_; _difficiles_,
'peevish'; _inhumani_, 'unkindly'; _importunitas_, 'perversity'.
_Importunitas_ seems to be used as the substantive corresponding in sense
with the adjective _difficilis_. _Difficultas_, in the sense of
'peevishness', probably occurs only in Mur. 19.

8. DIXERIT QUISPIAM: 'some one will say presently'; a gentle way of
introducing one's own objection. The mood of _dixerit_ is probably
indicative, not subjunctive; see the thorough discussion in Roby, Gram.,
Vol. 2, Pref., p. CIV. _et seq_. -- OPES ET COPIAS: 'resources and means'.
_Opes_ has a wider meaning than _copias_ (mere material wealth) and
includes all sources of power, influence, and authority as well as wealth.
Thus in Lael. 22 the end of _divitiae_ is said to be enjoyment; of _opes_,
worship (_opes ut colare_). _Dignitas_ is social position. -- ID: remark
the singular pronoun, which indicates that the preceding clause is now
taken as conveying one idea. Trans. 'such fortune'. -- CONTINGERE: 'to fall
to one's lot' is the phrase in English which most closely represents
_contingere_. This verb is not, as is often assumed, used merely of _good_
fortune; it implies in itself nothing concerning the _character_ of events,
whether they be good or bad, but simply that the events take place
_naturally_ and were to be expected. See n. on Lael. 8, where the word is
distinctly used in connection with _bad_ fortune, as it is, strikingly, in
71 below. -- EST ... OMNIA: 'your statement indeed amounts to something,
but it by no means comprises every consideration'. The phrase _esse
aliquid_, 'to be of some importance', is often used by Cic. both of things
and of persons; cf. Tusc. 5, 104 _eos aliquid esse_, also n. on 17 _nihil
afferunt_. So _esse aliquis_ of persons, as in the well-known passage of
Iuvenal, 1, 72 _aude aliquid brevibus Gyaris et carcere dignum si vis esse
aliquis_. For the general sense cf. Tusc. 3, 52 _est id quidem magnum, sed
non sunt in hoc omnia_; so De Or. 2, 215; ib. 3, 221; Leg. 2, 24 _in quo
sunt omnia_. -- ISTO: the use of the neuter pronoun in the oblique case as
substantive is noticeable. -- THEMISTOCLES ETC.: Cicero borrows the story
from Plato (Rep. 329 E _et seq_.), but it was first told by Herodotus, 8,
125 who gave a somewhat different version. Themistocles had received great
honors at Sparta when Athenian ambassador there; an envious man declaring
that the honors were paid really to Athens and not to Themistocles, the
statesman answered [Greek: out an ego, eon Belbinites] (_i.e._ an
inhabitant of the small island of Belbina lying to the S. of Cape Sunium)
[Greek: etimethen outo pros Spartiereon, out an su, anthrope, eon
Athenaios]. -- SERIPHIO: Seriphus is a small island belonging to the Cyclad
group and lying almost due N. of Melos, and due E. of the Scyllaean
promontory. Seriphus is often taken by ancient writers as a specimen of an
insignificant community (_e.g._ Aristoph. Acharn. 542; Cic. N.D. 1, 88),
but it had the honor of being one of the three island states which refused
to give earth and water to the Persian envoys, the other two being the
adjacent islands of Melos and Siphnus (Herodotus, 8, 46). -- IURGIO:
_iurgium_ is a quarrel which does not go beyond words; _rixa_ a quarrel
where the disputants come to blows. -- SI EGO: but further on, _tu si_. The
contrast would certainly be more perfect if _ego si_ were read, as has been
proposed, in place of _si ego_. -- QUOD EODEM MODO ... DICI: Cic. commonly
says _quod ita dicendum_ and the like; see n. on 35 _quod ni ita fuisset_.
Cato means that just as Themistocles' success was due to two things, his
own character and his good fortune, so two things are necessary to make old
age endurable, viz. moderate fortune and wisdom. He then in 9 insists that
of these two conditions wisdom is far the more important. -- NEC ... LEVIS
... NEC ... NON GRAVIS: notice the chiasmus.

9. OMNINO: here = [Greek: pantapasi] 'undoubtedly', in a strongly
affirmative sense, as in 76; but in 28 (where see n.) it is concessive. --
CUM DIU MULTUMQUE VIXERIS: literally 'when you have lived long and much',
_i.e._ when you have not only had a long life but have done a great deal in
the course of it. The phrases _diu multumque, multum et diu_ are common in
Cic., as below, 38; Acad. 1, 4; Div. 2, 1; Off 1, 118; Leg. Agr. 2, 88; De
Or. 1, 152. For mood see A. 309, a; H. 518, 2. -- ECFERUNT: _ecferunt_ for
_efferunt_ (_ec_ = _ex_ = _ecs_; so [Greek: ek] = [Greek: ex] = [Greek:
eks]) was old-fashioned in Cicero's time, but forms of the sort, as below,
39 _ecfrenate_, according to the evidence of the best MSS., occur in a good
many passages. See Neue, Formenlehre, Vol. 2, pp. 766 seq., ed. 2. --
NUMQUAM DESERUNT: the omission of the object after _deserunt_ is not
common. With the general sense of this passage cf. Arch. 16 _litterarum
studia adulescentiam alunt, senectutem oblectant, secundas res ornant,
adversis perfugium ac solarium praebent, delectant domi, non impediunt
foris, pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur._

P. 5. -- 10. Q. MAXIMUM: the famous Q. Fabius Maximus Verrucosus Ovicula
Cunctator, hero of the Second Punic War. -- EUM ... RECEPIT: this clause
has often been suspected to be an insertion of the writers of MSS. But (1)
the capture of Tarentum in 209 B.C. was Fabius' crowning achievement, and
'captor of Tarentum' was often added to his name as a title of honor; see
De Orat. 2, 273; and (2) there were several other persons of distinction
bearing the name Q. Maximus about the same time, so that some special mark
was wanted for the sake of clearness. Notice _recepit_ 'recovered',
Tarentum having been lost by the Romans to Hannibal in 212 B.C. -- SENEM
ADULESCENS: observe the emphasis given by placing close together the two
words of opposite meaning. -- ERAT ... GRAVITAS: 'that hero possessed
dignity tempered by courtesy'. Expressions like _erat in illo gravitas_ are
common in Cicero; _e.g._ Mur. 58 _erat in Cotta summa eloquentia._ The
metaphor in _condita_, 'seasoned', is also common; cf. Lael. 66
_condimentum amicitiae_. -- QUAMQUAM: 'though indeed', introducing a
necessary correction of the last words _nec senectus mores mutaverat._ For
this corrective _quamquam_ cf. n. on 2. -- CONSUL PRIMUM: B.C. 233. --
GRANDEM NATU: although the phrases _maior, maximus, parvus, minor, minimus
natu_ are of frequent occurrence, yet _magnus natu_ is not Latin, _grandis
natu_ being always used instead. The historians sometimes use _magno natu
esse_ or _in magno natu esse_. -- ANNO POST: the word _unus_ is not usually
attached to _annus_ except where there is a strong contrast between one and
a larger number of years. _Anno post_ must not be translated 'during the
year after'; but either 'a year after', _anno_ being regarded as the
ablative of measure or excess, literally 'later by a year', or 'at the end
of a year', the ablative being one of limitation, and _fuerat_ being
equivalent to _factus erat_ 'had been elected'. So _quinto anno_ below, 'at
the end of the fifth year', _i.e._ 'five years after'. -- ADULESCENTULUS
MILES: See n. on 21 _quemquam senem._ Translate 'when quite a youth I
marched with him to Capua as a private soldier'. G. 324; H. 363, 3, 2).
_Miles_ here = _gregarius miles_. -- QUEM MAGISTRATUM: _sc. quaesturam_, to
be understood from _quaestor_ Cf. Mur. 18 _quaesturam una petiit et sum ego
factus (sc. quaestor) prior_. -- TUDITANO ET CETHEGO: when the _praenomina_
of the consuls are given the names generally stand side by side without
_et_; when they are omitted _et_ is generally inserted. Cf. n. on 50
_Centone Tuditanoque_, etc. -- CUM QUIDEM: the _quidem_ simply adds a
slight emphasis to _cum_; 'at the very time when', [Greek: epeide ge]. --
SUASOR: _suasor legis_ was any person who publicly (_i.e._ before the
senate or people in _contio_ assembled) spoke in favor of a measure,
_dissuasor_ any one who spoke against it. Cf. 14 _suasissem_. -- LEGIS
CINCIAE: a law passed in 204 B.C. by M. Cincius Alimentus, a plebeian
tribune, whereby advocates were forbidden to take fees from their clients,
and certain limitations were placed on gifts of property by private
persons. -- CUM ... ESSET: '_though_ he was'; so below 11, 30, etc. --
GRANDIS: = _grandis natu_. -- IUVENILITER: Hannibal was 29 years of age
when he entered Italy in 218. -- EXSULTANTEM: 'wildly roaming'. The word in
its literal sense is used of a horse galloping at its own will over a
plain. The metaphorical use is common in Cicero; cf. Acad. 2, 112 _cum sit
campus in quo exsultare possit oratio, cur eam tantas in angustias
compellimus?_ -- PATIENTIA: 'endurance', 'persistence'; it is not
equivalent to our 'patience'. -- PRAECLARE: _sc. dicit_; cf. n. on 3. --
FAMILIARIS: see Introd. -- UNUS HOMO etc.: these lines were famous, and
were not only often quoted with the name of Ennius attached (as in Off. 1,
84; Livy 30, 26), but also imitated or adapted without mention of his name,
as, being too familiar to need it; cf. Att. 2, 19, 2; Ovid, Fast. 2, 241;
Verg. Aen. 6, 846; Suet. Tib. 21. -- CUNCTANDO: Cf. Polybius 3, 105, 8. On
Fabius' military policy consult Mommsen, Hist. of Rome, Bk. III. ch. 5. --
REM: here = _rem publicam_. -- NOENUM: the older form from which _non_ is
an abbreviation; = _ne-oinom_, _n-oinom_, literally 'not one thing'; cf.
_nihil_ = _ne-hilum_ 'not a whit', also the rare word _ningulus_ = _ne
oinculus_, 'not even a little one'. -- RUMORES: 'fame', 'public opinion'.
-- PONEB[=A]T: for the long vowel cf. n. on 1, l. 2 _versat_. -- PLUSQUE:
MSS. _postque_; _plusque_is the emendation of Bernays. _Plusque magisque_
is a variation upon the ordinary phrases _plus plusque_, _magis magisque_.

11. SALINATORI: there can be no doubt that Cicero is guilty of a blunder
here, and in De Or. 2, 273 where the story also occurs. Livy (27, 34, 7)
gives M. Livius Macatus as the name of the Roman commander who held the
citadel of Tarentum while Hannibal was in possession of the town. Cicero
probably found the commander described by the annalists merely as M. Livius
(so in Livy 24, 20, 13; 26, 39, 1), and then jumped to tne conclusion that
he was the famous M. Livius Salinator. This man, the father of the
Salinator mentioned in 7, was consul in 219 and subdued the Illyrians, but
was condemned for misappropriation of public moneys and went into exile. In
210 he was induced to return by the desire of the senate. In 207 he became
consul with C. Claudius Nero, and defeated Hasdrubal in the great battle of
the Metaurus. In 204 Livius was censor with Nero as his colleague, and won
his name _Salinator_ by imposing a tax on salt. The title was bestowed in
ridicule, but clung to the family. Salinator was a relative of M. Livius
Macatus. See Liv 27, 34, 7. -- ITA DICENTI etc.: the anecdote is told by
Livy, 27, 25, 5 and Plutarch, Fab. 23. Both, however, refer the story not
to the time at which Tarentum was taken, but to the year after, when
altercations about it took place in the senate. -- TOGA: here put for
'civil life', the _toga_ being replaced in time of war by the _sagum_. Cf.
in Pisonem 73 _pacis est insigne et oti toga, contra autem arma tumultus
atque belli;_ De Or. 3, 167 _'togam', pro 'pace', 'arma', ac 'tela', pro
'bello'._ We have the same contrast between _arma_ and _toga_ in Cicero's
own much-derided verse, _cedant arma togae, concedat laurea laudi_, which
is defended by him, in Pis. 73 and Off. 1, 77. -- CONSUL ITERUM etc.: as
the second consulship of Fabius was in 228 B.C., while the law of Flaminius
was passed in 232 (according to Polybius), it is very difficult to
understand the statement here made. It is possible that Flaminius was one
of the commissioners for executing his own law, and that its execution
lasted over the time of Fabius' second consulship. The Flaminius here
mentioned is the same who fell as consul in 217 at the battle of lake
Trasimenus. He held large and statesman-like views on the policy of
securing Italy by planting Romans and Latins in the territory then recently
taken from the Gauls, in the neighborhood of Ariminum. This particular
measure was carried against the will of the senate, and was the first law
passed, since the _lex Hortensia_ of 287, in defiance of its wishes. It was
also the first agrarian law since the Licinio-Sextian law of 367. Polybius
dates the decline of the Roman constitution from the passing of the _lex
Flaminia_. Cf.'Rheinisches Museum', 1843, p. 573. -- SP. CARVILIO
QUIESCENTE: this Sp. Carvilius was consul in 234 when he conquered the
Corsicans and Sardinians. In 228 he was again consul, and died as augur in
212. He is said, but erroneously, to have been the first Roman who divorced
his wife. In 216, just after the battle of Cannae, he made a most
remarkable proposal, to fill up the gaps which that battle had made in the
numbers of the senate by selecting two members from each of the Latin
communities. It was almost the only occasion in the course of Roman history
when anything like modern representative government was advocated.
Carvilius was not sprung from one of the noble families, who for the most
part monopolized the higher offices of state, it is therefore not
surprising that he should have sympathized with Flaminius. -- CONTRA
SENATUS AUCTORITATEM: 'against the expressed wish of the senate' _Senatus
auctoritas_ is, strictly speaking, an opinion of the senate not formally
embodied in a decree, _senatus consultum_. Cicero, in Invent. 2, 52 says
Flaminius carried his law _contra voluntatem omnium optimatium_. --
DIVIDENTI: 'when he tried to divide'. The participle is here equivalent to
_cum_ with the imperfect indicative (dividebat). So in 54 _lenientem_ A.
290, _a_; G 668; H 549, 1.

P. 6. -- CUM ESSET: '_though_ he was'. What Fabius declared was reaily that
the _auspicia_ were a political instrument in the hands of the aristocrats,
rather than a part of religion. Fabius, according to Liv. 30, 26, 7, was
augur for 62 years before his death, and had no doubt had a large
experience in the manipulation of the _auspicia_ for political purposes.
Compare Homer, Iliad, 12, 243, also Cic. Phil. 11, 28 _Iuppiter ipse sanxit
ut omnia quae rei publicae salutaria essent legitima et iusta haberentur_.
Consult Mommsen, Hist of Rome, Bk. IV. Ch. 12.

12. ADMIRABILIUS: 'more amazing'. The Latin word has a much stronger
meaning than the English word derived from it. -- QUO MODO TULIT: = _eum
modum quo tulit_, so that the clause is not really dependent on _cognovi_,
nor _tulit_ irregularly put for _tulerit_. In Lael. 9 Laelius exclaims, of
Cato himself, _quo modo, ut alia omittam, mortem fili tulit_. And no doubt
Cic. meant here to make Cato allude to _his_ loss, described in 84. --
FILI: see n. on 1 _praemi_. -- CONSULARIS: the son of Fabius was consul in
213 with Ti. Sempronius Gracchus -- EST IN MANIBUS: 'is in every one's
hands', 'is commonly read'. The expression is common enough in this sense;
_e.g._ Lael. 96 _in manibus est oratio_. -- LAUDATIO: _sc. funebris_, the
funeral speech. This composition was read in Cicero's time (see Tusc. 3,
70; Fam. 4, 6, 1) and existed in the time of Plutarch. See Plutarch's life
of Fab. 24. -- QUEM PHILOSOPHUM: many of the ancient philosophers wrote
popular treatises in which the principles of philosophy were applied to the
alleviation of sorrow. The most famous of these in Cicero's time was
Crantor's [Greek: peri penthous], which Cicero used largely in writing his
_Tusculan Disputations_, and also in his _De Consolatione_ on the death of
his daughter. -- IN LUCE ... CIVIUM: 'in public and under the gaze of his
fellow-countrymen'. Do not translate _in oculis_ by the English phrase 'in
the eyes of', which has another sense. The metaphor in _lux_ is often used
by Cicero, as Qu. Fr. 1, 1, 7 _in luce Asiae, in oculis provinciae_. --
NOTITIA: _notitia_ is general knowledge, often merely the result of
superficial observation; _scientia_ is thorough knowledge, the result of
elaboration and generalization. -- MULTAE LITTERAE: 'great literary
attainments.' In this sense _magnae_ could not be used to represent
'great'. Note the ellipsis of _erant_. -- UT IN HOMINE ROMANO: 'considering
that he was a Roman', or 'for a Roman'. On the backwardness of the Romans
in literary pursuits see Teuffel, Hist. of Rom. Lit, Sec. 2; cf. also Ritter,
Hist. of Ancient Philosophy, Vol. IV. pp. 1-13, Eng. ed. In parenthetic
clauses like this, the introductory _ut_ may convey two very different
meanings according to the context. Thus in Acad. 2, 98 _homo acutus, ut
Poenus_ is 'a keen witted man, _as might be expected of_ a Carthaginian'
(cf Colum 1, 3, 8 _acutissimam gentem Poenos_) while Nepos, Epam. 5, 2
_exercitatum in dicendo ut Thebanum_ implies that oratory was _not_ to be
expected of a Theban. -- DOMESTICA ... EXTERNA BELLA: here the _domestica
bella_ are those wars which belong to the history of Rome, the _externa
bella_ those wars which belong to the history of other states; but usually
_domestica bella_ are civil wars, _externa_ foreign wars in which Rome is
engaged; _e.g._ Leg. agr. 2, 90 _omnibus domesticis externisque bellis_; in
Catil 2, 11 _omnia sunt externa unius virtute pacata; domesticum bellum
manet, intus insidiae sunt_. The practice of reading military history was
common among Roman commanders; see for instance Acad. 2, 3 of Lucullus; the
practice is ridiculed by Marius in Sall. Iug. 85. -- ITA: _ita_ does not
qualify _cupide_, and has not the sense of _tam_, it means rather 'in this
state', 'under these conditions'; the words from _quasi_ to the end of the
sentence really form an explanation of _ita_. This mode of expression is
often found, _ita_ and _sic_ frequently look on to clauses introduced by
_quasi_, _si_, _ut_, _cum_ etc. Cf below 26 _sic quasi, cupiens_ (where see
n.); Sall. Iug. 85, 19 _ita aetatem agunt quasi vestros honores contemnunt,
ita hos petunt quasi honeste vixerint_. -- DIVINAREM: see references on 6
_confeceris_. -- ILLO EXSTINCTO: Fabius died in 203 B.C. -- FORE UNDE
DISCEREM NEMINEM: cf. Acad. 1, 8 _quae nemo adhuc docuerat nec erat unde
studiosi scire possent. Unde_ of persons (here = _a quo_); is common in
both verse and prose (so [Greek: hothen] and [Greek: hothenper], vid.
Liddell and Scott in vv.); cf. Horace 1, 12, 17 _unde nil maius generatur
ipso_; 1, 28, 28; Cic. de Or. 1, 67 _ille ipse unde cognorit_; ib. 2, 285.
So _ubi = apud quem_ in Verr. 4, 29; _quo = ad quos_ below, 83, and in
Verr. 4 38; cf. also n. on _istinc_ in 47. For mood of _discerem_ see A.
320; G. 634; H. 503, I.

13. QUORSUS IGITUR HAEC: _sc. dixi._ -- TAM MULTA: this takes the place of
_tot_, which, like _quot_, cannot be used as a substantive. -- SCIPIONES:
'men like Scipio', _i.e._ the elder Africanus; so 15 _Fabricii Curii
Coruncanii_. Cicero has here put his own opinion of Scipio into the mouth
of Cato, who, during a large part of his life, was a staunch and even
bitter opponent of Scipio, and therefore not likely to couple him with
Fabius. Cf. Introd. -- UT ... RECORDENTUR: the repetition of _ut_ with each
clause for the sake of effect may be compared with the repetition of
_nihil_ in 15, 27, 41; of _non_ in 32; of _hinc_ in 40; of _sibi_ in 58. --
PEDESTRIS: for _terrestris_; the usage is very common; so in Greek [Greek:
pezomachia] and [Greek: naumachia], [Greek: pezomachein] and [Greek:
naumachein] are often contrasted (see Liddell and Scott). It is not
recorded by historians that either Scipio or Fabius took part personally in
naval warfare. -- RECORDENTUR: this verb implies the habitual dwelling of
the memory upon the past. -- QUIETE ET PURE ATQUE ELEGANTER: the
enumeration consists of two branches connected by _et_, the second branch
being subdivided into two members connected by _atque_. Had each of the
adverbs been intended to stand on exactly the same footing Cic. would have
written _et_ instead of _atque_, or else would have omitted the copula
altogether; see n. on 53 _capitum iugatio_. In enumerations of the form A +
(Bl + B2), the + outside the bracket is expressed by _et_, the + inside the
bracket generally being expressed by _ac_, for which _atque_ is substituted
when the following word (_i.e._ B2) begins with a vowel, a guttural (_c, q,
g_) or _h_, before which _ac_ was very seldom written. -- PURE ATQUE
ELEGANTER: 'sinlessly and gently'. _Pure_ implies moral stainlessness,
_eleganter_, literally 'in choice fashion', implies daintiness combined
with simplicity in regard to the external conditions of life. The same
ideas are put together in Sull. 79 _cum summa elegantia atque integritate
vixistis_. -- AETATIS: see n. on 5. -- PLACIDA AC LENIS: 'quiet and mild';
_placida_ refers to the external surroundings, _lenis_ to the temper and
character. -- ACCEPIMUS: _sc. fuisse_; for the ellipsis of the infinitive
cf. n. on 22 _videretur_. -- UNO ET OCTOGESIMO: but below _quarto_ (not
_quattuor_) _nonagesimo_. In the compound _ordinal_ numbers corresponding
to those _cardinal_ numbers which are made up of one and a multiple of ten,
the Latins use _unus_ oftener than _primus_, which would be strictly
correct; so in English 'one and eightieth' for 'eighty-first'. The ordinary
Grammar rule (Roby, Vol. I, p. 443 'the _ordinal_ not the _cardinal_ is
used in giving the date') requires slight correction. For the position of
the words see G. 94, 3; H. 174, footnote 3. -- SCRIBENS EST MORTUUS: 'died
while still engaged upon his works'; cf. 23 _num Platonem ... coegit in
suis studiis obmutiscere senectus?_ Diog. Laert. 3, 2 quoting Hermippus (a
Greek writer of biography who lived about the time of the Second Punic
war), says that Plato died in the middle of a marriage-feast at which he
was a guest. Val. Max. 8, 7, 3 gives a slightly different account. --
ISOCRATI: this form of the genitive of Greek proper names in _-es_ was
probably used by Cicero rather than the form in _-is_; see Madvig on Fin.
1, 14; Neue, Formenlehre, 1 squared 332. Isocrates, the greatest teacher of
rhetoric of his time, lived from 436 to 338, when he died by voluntary
starvation owing to his grief at the loss of Greek freedom through the
battle of Chaeronea. Milton, Sonnet X. 'That dishonest victory At
Chaeronea, fatal to liberty, Kill'd with report that old man eloquent'. --
EUM ... INSCRIBITUR: the periphrasis is common, and the verb _inscribere_
is nearly always in the present tense (in later prose as well as in Cicero)
as in 59. This is sometimes the case even where the neighboring verbs are
in past tenses, as in Acad. 1, 12 _nec se tenuit quin contra suum doctorem
librum etiam ederet qui Sosus inscribitur_. The present seems to mean that
the name mentioned is continually given to each copy of the book as
produced; where the continuing multiplication of copies is not looked to,
we have the perfect, as Att. 8, 5, 2 _tu fasciculum_ (bundle of letters)
_qui est inscriptus 'des M'. Curio', velim cures ad eum perferendum_. Cf.
also De Or. 2, 61 _deceptus indicibus librorum qui sunt fere inscripti_
('to which the authors--once for all--have given the titles') _de virtute,
de iustitia_, etc.; so Div. 2, 1 _eo libro qui inscriptus Hortensius_. --
DICIT: the 'Panathenaicus', an encomium of Athens written for recitation at
the great festival of the Panathenaea, is among the works of Isocrates
which we still possess. In c. 1 Isocrates says [Greek: tois etesi
enenekonta kai tettarsin, hon ego tynchano gegonos]. -- VIXITQUE: 'and yet
he lived'. The _que_ here has a slight adversative force, as is often the
case with _et_. Cf. n. on 28, 43, 73. -- GORGIAS: the greatest of the
sophists, born at Leontini in Sicily about 485 B.C.; his death took place,
according to the varying accounts, in 380, 378, or 377. In his old age he
lived in Thessaly where Isocrates studied with him; see Or. 176; Fin. 2, 1.
For the adjective _Leontinus_ placed before the name rather than after cf.
43 _Thessalo Cinea_. -- CENTUM ET SEPTEM ANNOS: Kennedy, Gram., Sec. 34, vii,
_c_, says, 'in compound numbers above 100 the larger number, with or
without _et_, generally precedes the smaller'; cf. Roby, Vol. 1 p. 443. --
CESSO: does not correspond in meaning with our 'cease', _i.e._ '_to come
to_ a standstill'; _cesso_ is 'I am in a state of rest', 'I am idle'. --
QUAERERETUR: the past tense, though the principal verb _inquit_, is in the
present, because the present is the _historical_ present and so equivalent
to a past tense. Cf. Roby, 1511-1514; Kennedy 229, 2. A. 287, _e_; G. 511,
Rem. 1; H. 495, II. The idiom by which the imperfect stands where we should
expect a tense of completed action, should be noticed; cf. Tusc. 2, 60
_quem cum rogaret, respondit._ The explanation of the imperfect in such
cases is that it marks out, more clearly than the pluperfect would, the
fact that the action of the principal verb and the action of the dependent
verb are practically contemporaneous. In our passage if _quaesitum esset_
had been written it would have indicated merely that at some quite
indefinite time after the question was put the answer was given. Cf. N.D.
1, 60 _auctore ... obscurior_. -- CUR ... VITA: a hint at suicide, which
the ancients thought a justifiable mode of escape from troubles,
particularly those of ill health or old age. See n. on 73 _vetat
Pythagoras. Esse in vita_ is stronger than _vivere_; cf. Qu. Fr. 1, 3, 5.
-- NIHIL HABEO QUOD ACCUSEM: 'I have no reason to reproach'. Cf. the common
phrase _quid est quod ...? Quod_, adverbial acc. A. 240, _a_; G. 331, R. 3;
H. 378, 2. For mood of _accusem_ see H. 503, I. n. 2, and references on 12
_discerem_. -- PRAECLARUM RESPONSUM: _est_ is not required, because
_responsum_ is in apposition to the last part of the preceding sentence.
Similar appositions occur in Laelius, 67, 71, 79. -- DOCTO: applied
especially to philosophers, but also to poets. The word implies
_cultivation_ as well as mere _knowledge_; 'a learned man', merely as such,
is '_homo litteratus_'; cf. n. on 54.

P. 7. -- 14. CUIUS ... FECI: 'the aforesaid' is in good Latin always
expressed by a parenthesis like this and not by a participle in agreement
with the noun. The phrases '_ante dictus_', '_supra dictus_', belong to
silver Latin, where they are common. Cf. 23 _quos ante dixi_. -- SIC UT
etc.: the lines are from the Annals of Ennius, for which see n. on 1. --
ECUS: Ennius did not write _uu_, nor most likely did Cicero; the former may
have written either _ecus, equos,_ or _equs_. The last form Vahlen prints
in his edition of Ennius. -- SPATIO SUPREMO: 'at the end of the
race-course', 'at the goal', or it may be 'at the last turn round the
course', the race requiring the course to be run round several times; cf.
Homer's [Greek: pymaton dromon] in Iliad 23, 768. So 83 _decurso spatio_;
Verg. Aen. 5, 327 _iamque fere spatio extreme fessique sub ipsam finem
adventabant_. -- VICIT OLUMPIA: a direct imitation of the Greek phrase
[Greek: nikan Olympia], to win a victory at an Olympic contest. So Horace
Ep. 1, 1, 50 has _coronari Olympia_ = [Greek: stephanousthai Olympia]. The
editors print _Olympia_, but the use of _y_ to represent Greek [Greek: u]
did not come in till long after the time of Ennius. -- SENIO: differs from
_senectute_ in implying not merely old age, but the weakness which usually
accompanies it. -- CONFECTUS: for the disregard of the final _s_ in
scanning cf. n. on 1, l. 6. -- EQUI VICTORIS: for the almost adjectival use
of the substantive _victor_, cf. Verg. Aen. 7, 656 _victores equos_; ib.
12, 751 _venator canis_; ib. 10, 891; 11, 89, and Georg. 2, 145 _bellator
equus_, in Theocritus 15, 51 [Greek: polemistai hippoi]. The feminine nouns
in _-trix_ are freely used as adjectives both in verse and in prose. A. 88,
_c_; H. 441, 3. -- QUEM QUIDEM: the same form of transition is used in 26,
29, 46, 53. The whole of this passage to _suasissem_ is an exhibition of
antiquarian learning quite unnatural and inappropriate in a dialogue. --
PROBE MEMINISSE POTESTIS: cf. De Or. 3, 194 _quem tu probe meministi_; Fin.
2, 63 _L. Thorius quem meminisse tu non potes. Memini_ can take a
_personal_ accusative only when the person who remembers was a contemporary
of the person remembered; otherwise the gen. follows. Cf. Roby, 1333; A.
219, Rem.; H. 407, n. 1. -- HI CONSULES: 'the present consuls'. -- T.
FLAMININUS: commonly said to be the son of the great Flamininus (1, l. 1).
He was altogether undistinguished, as also were the Acilius and the Caepio
here mentioned. This passage gives the imagined date of the dialogue as 150
B.C. -- PHILIPPO: this was Q. Marcius Philippus, who was consul in 186 and
took part in the suppression of the great Bacchanalian conspiracy of that
year. For the next 17 years he was a leading senator and much engaged in
diplomacy in the East. In 169 he was again consul and commanded against
Perseus in the early part of the war. -- CUM ... LEGEM VOCONIAM ...
SUASISSEM: 'after I had spoken publicly in favor of the law oL Voconius'.
For _suasissem_ cf. 10 _suasor_ with n. The _Lex Voconia de mulierum
hereditatibus_ aimed at securing the continuance of property in families.
By its provisions no man who possessed property valued in the censors'
lists at 100,000 sesterces or more, could appoint a woman or women as his
_heres_ or _heredes_; further, no person or persons, male or female, could
receive under the will legacies amounting in all to a larger sum than that
received by the principal heir or heirs. Every Roman will named a _heres_
or _heredes_, on whom devolved all the privileges and duties of the
