drinking-cups, spoons, ladles, brooches, watches, chains, and bracelets,
so as to make an imposing show.

Day was ushered in by a merry peal of bells from the tower of the old
parish church, and the ringers practised all kinds of joyous changes
during the morning, and fired many a clanging volley. The whole village
was early astir; and as these were times when good hours were kept; and
as early rising is a famous sharpener of the appetite, especially when
attended with exercise, so an hour before noon the rustics one and all
sat down to dinner, the strangers being entertained by their friends,
and if they had no friends, throwing themselves upon the general
hospitality. The alehouses were reserved for tippling at a later hour,
for it was then customary for both gentleman and commoner, male as well
as female, as will be more fully shown hereafter, to take their meals at
home, and repair afterwards to houses of public entertainment for wine
or other liquors. Private chambers were, of course, reserved for the
gentry; but not unfrequently the squire and his friends would take their
bottle with the other guests. Such was the invariable practice in the
northern counties in the reign of James the First.

Soon after mid-day, and when the bells began to peal merrily again (for
even ringers must recruit themselves), at a small cottage in the
outskirts of the village, and close to the Calder, whose waters swept
past the trimly kept garden attached to it, two young girls were
employed in attiring a third, who was to represent Maid Marian, or Queen
of May, in the pageant then about to ensue. And, certainly, by sovereign
and prescriptive right of beauty, no one better deserved the high title
and distinction conferred upon her than this fair girl. Lovelier maiden
in the whole county, and however high her degree, than this rustic
damsel, it was impossible to find; and though the becoming and fanciful
costume in which she was decked could not heighten her natural charms,
it certainly displayed them to advantage. Upon her smooth and beautiful
brow sat a gilt crown, while her dark and luxuriant hair, covered behind
with a scarlet coif, embroidered with gold; and tied with yellow, white,
and crimson ribands, but otherwise wholly unconfirmed, swept down
almost to the ground. Slight and fragile, her figure was of such just
proportion that every movement and gesture had an indescribable charm.
The most courtly dame might have envied her fine and taper fingers, and
fancied she could improve them by protecting them against the sun, or by
rendering them snowy white with paste or cosmetic, but this was
questionable; nothing certainly could improve the small foot and
finely-turned ankle, so well displayed in the red hose and smart little
yellow buskin, fringed with gold. A stomacher of scarlet cloth, braided
with yellow lace in cross bars, confined her slender waist. Her robe was
of carnation-coloured silk, with wide sleeves, and the gold-fringed
skirt descended only a little below the knee, like the dress of a modern
Swiss peasant, so as to reveal the exquisite symmetry of her limbs. Over
all she wore a surcoat of azure silk, lined with white, and edged with
gold. In her left hand she held a red pink as an emblem of the season.
So enchanting was her appearance altogether, so fresh the character of
her beauty, so bright the bloom that dyed her lovely checks, that she
might have been taken for a personification of May herself. She was
indeed in the very May of life--the mingling of spring and summer in
womanhood; and the tender blue eyes, bright and clear as diamonds of
purest water, the soft regular features, and the merry mouth, whose
ruddy parted lips ever and anon displayed two rows of pearls, completed
the similitude to the attributes of the jocund month.

Her handmaidens, both of whom were simple girls, and though not
destitute of some pretensions to beauty themselves, in nowise to be
compared with her, were at the moment employed in knotting the ribands
in her hair, and adjusting the azure surcoat.

Attentively watching these proceedings sat on a stool, placed in a
corner, a little girl, some nine or ten years old, with a basket of
flowers on her knee. The child was very diminutive, even for her age,
and her smallness was increased by personal deformity, occasioned by
contraction of the chest, and spinal curvature, which raised her back
above her shoulders; but her features were sharp and cunning, indeed
almost malignant, and there was a singular and unpleasant look about the
eyes, which were not placed evenly in the head. Altogether she had a
strange old-fashioned look, and from her habitual bitterness of speech,
as well as from her vindictive character, which, young as she was, had
been displayed, with some effect, on more than one occasion, she was no
great favourite with any one. It was curious now to watch the eager and
envious interest she took in the progress of her sister's adornment--for
such was the degree of relationship in which she stood to the May
Queen--and when the surcoat was finally adjusted, and the last riband
tied, she broke forth, having hitherto preserved a sullen silence.

[Illustration: THE MAY QUEEN.]

"Weel, sister Alizon, ye may a farrently May Queen, ey mun say" she
observed, spitefully, "but to my mind other Suky Worseley, or Nancy
Holt, here, would ha' looked prottier."

"Nah, nah, that we shouldna," rejoined one of the damsels referred to;
"there is na a lass i' Lonkyshiar to hold a condle near Alizon Device."

"Fie upon ye, for an ill-favort minx, Jennet," cried Nancy Holt; "yo're
jealous o' your protty sister."

"Ey jealous," cried Jennet, reddening, "an whoy the firrups should ey be
jealous, ey, thou saucy jade! Whon ey grow older ey'st may a prottier
May Queen than onny on you, an so the lads aw tell me."

"And so you will, Jennet," said Alizon Device, checking, by a gentle
look, the jeering laugh in which Nancy seemed disposed to indulge--"so
you will, my pretty little sister," she added, kissing her; "and I will
'tire you as well and as carefully as Susan and Nancy have just 'tired
me."

"Mayhap ey shanna live till then," rejoined Jennet, peevishly, "and when
ey'm dead an' gone, an' laid i' t' cowld churchyard, yo an they win be
sorry fo having werreted me so."

"I have never intentionally vexed you, Jennet, love," said Alizon, "and
I am sure these two girls love you dearly."

"Eigh, we may allowance fo her feaw tempers," observed Susan Worseley;
"fo we knoa that ailments an deformities are sure to may folk fretful."

"Eigh, there it is," cried Jennet, sharply. "My high shoulthers an sma
size are always thrown i' my feace. Boh ey'st grow tall i' time, an get
straight--eigh straighter than yo, Suky, wi' your broad back an short
neck--boh if ey dunna, whot matters it? Ey shall be feared at onny
rate--ay, feared, wenches, by ye both."

"Nah doubt on't, theaw little good-fo'-nothin piece o' mischief,"
muttered Susan.

"Whot's that yo sayn, Suky?" cried Jennet, whose quick ears had caught
the words, "Tak care whot ye do to offend me, lass," she added, shaking
her thin fingers, armed with talon-like claws, threateningly at her, "or
ey'll ask my granddame, Mother Demdike, to quieten ye."

At the mention of this name a sudden shade came over Susan's
countenance. Changing colour, and slightly trembling, she turned away
from the child, who, noticing the effect of her threat, could not
repress her triumph. But again Alizon interposed.

"Do not be alarmed, Susan," she said, "my grandmother will never harm
you, I am sure; indeed, she will never harm any one; and do not heed
what little Jennet says, for she is not aware of the effect of her own
words, or of the injury they might do our grandmother, if repeated."

"Ey dunna wish to repeat them, or to think of em," sobbed Susan.

"That's good, that's kind of you, Susan," replied Alizon, taking her
hand. "Do not be cross any more, Jennet. You see you have made her
weep."

"Ey'm glad on it," rejoined the little girl, laughing; "let her cry on.
It'll do her good, an teach her to mend her manners, and nah offend me
again."

"Ey didna mean to offend ye, Jennet," sobbed Susan, "boh yo're so
wrythen an marr'd, a body canna speak to please ye."

"Weel, if ye confess your fault, ey'm satisfied," replied the little
girl; "boh let it be a lesson to ye, Suky, to keep guard o' your tongue
i' future."

"It shall, ey promise ye," replied Susan, drying her eyes.

At this moment a door opened, and a woman entered from an inner room,
having a high-crowned, conical-shaped hat on her head, and broad white
pinners over her cheeks. Her dress was of dark red camlet, with
high-heeled shoes. She stooped slightly, and being rather lame,
supported herself on a crutch-handled stick. In age she might be between
forty and fifty, but she looked much older, and her features were not at
all prepossessing from a hooked nose and chin, while their sinister
effect was increased by a formation of the eyes similar to that in
Jennet, only more strongly noticeable in her case. This woman was
Elizabeth Device, widow of John Device, about whose death there was a
mystery to be inquired into hereafter, and mother of Alizon and Jennet,
though how she came to have a daughter so unlike herself in all respects
as the former, no one could conceive; but so it was.

"Soh, ye ha donned your finery at last, Alizon," said Elizabeth. "Your
brother Jem has just run up to say that t' rush-cart has set out, and
that Robin Hood and his merry men are comin' for their Queen."

"And their Queen is quite ready for them," replied Alizon, moving
towards the door.

"Neigh, let's ha' a look at ye fust, wench," cried Elizabeth, staying
her; "fine fitthers may fine brids--ey warrant me now yo'n getten these
May gewgaws on, yo fancy yourself a queen in arnest."

"A queen of a day, mother; a queen of a little village festival; nothing
more," replied Alizon. "Oh, if I were a queen in right earnest, or even
a great lady--"

"Whot would yo do?" demanded Elizabeth Device, sourly.

"I'd make you rich, mother, and build you a grand house to live in,"
replied Alizon; "much grander than Browsholme, or Downham, or
Middleton."

"Pity yo're nah a queen then, Alizon," replied Elizabeth, relaxing her
harsh features into a wintry smile.

"Whot would ye do fo me, Alizon, if ye were a queen?" asked little
Jennet, looking up at her.

"Why, let me see," was the reply; "I'd indulge every one of your whims
and wishes. You should only need ask to have."

"Poh--poh--yo'd never content her," observed Elizabeth, testily.

"It's nah your way to try an content me, mother, even whon ye might,"
rejoined Jennet, who, if she loved few people, loved her mother least of
all, and never lost an opportunity of testifying her dislike to her.

"Awt o'pontee, little wasp," cried her mother; "theaw desarves nowt boh
whot theaw dustna get often enough--a good whipping."

"Yo hanna towd us whot yo'd do fo yurself if yo war a great lady,
Alizon?" interposed Susan.

"Oh, I haven't thought about myself," replied the other, laughing.

"Ey con tell ye what she'd do, Suky," replied little Jennet, knowingly;
"she'd marry Master Richard Assheton, o' Middleton."

"Jennet!" exclaimed Alizon, blushing crimson.

"It's true," replied the little girl; "ye knoa ye would, Alizon, Look at
her feace," she added, with a screaming laugh.

"Howd te tongue, little plague," cried Elizabeth, rapping her knuckles
with her stick, "and behave thyself, or theaw shanna go out to t' wake."

Jennet dealt her mother a bitterly vindictive look, but she neither
uttered cry, nor made remark.

In the momentary silence that ensued the blithe jingling of bells was
heard, accompanied by the merry sound of tabor and pipe.

"Ah! here come the rush-cart and the morris-dancers," cried Alizon,
rushing joyously to the window, which, being left partly open, admitted
the scent of the woodbine and eglantine by which it was overgrown, as
well as the humming sound of the bees by which the flowers were invaded.

Almost immediately afterwards a frolic troop, like a band of masquers,
approached the cottage, and drew up before it, while the jingling of
bells ceasing at the same moment, told that the rush-cart had stopped
likewise. Chief amongst the party was Robin Hood clad in a suit of
Lincoln green, with a sheaf of arrows at his back, a bugle dangling from
his baldric, a bow in his hand, and a broad-leaved green hat on his
head, looped up on one side, and decorated with a heron's feather. The
hero of Sherwood was personated by a tall, well-limbed fellow, to whom,
being really a forester of Bowland, the character was natural. Beside
him stood a very different figure, a jovial friar, with shaven crown,
rubicund cheeks, bull throat, and mighty paunch, covered by a russet
habit, and girded in by a red cord, decorated with golden twist and
tassel. He wore red hose and sandal shoon, and carried in his girdle a
Wallet, to contain a roast capon, a neat's tongue, or any other dainty
given him. Friar Tuck, for such he was, found his representative in Ned
Huddlestone, porter at the abbey, who, as the largest and stoutest man
in the village, was chosen on that account to the part. Next to him came
a character of no little importance, and upon whom much of the mirth of
the pageant depended, and this devolved upon the village cobbler, Jack
Roby, a dapper little fellow, who fitted the part of the Fool to a
nicety. With bauble in hand, and blue coxcomb hood adorned with long
white asses' ears on head, with jerkin of green, striped with yellow;
hose of different colours, the left leg being yellow, with a red
pantoufle, and the right blue, terminated with a yellow shoe; with bells
hung upon various parts of his motley attire, so that he could not move
without producing a jingling sound, Jack Roby looked wonderful indeed;
and was constantly dancing about, and dealing a blow with his bauble.
Next came Will Scarlet, Stukely, and Little John, all proper men and
tall, attired in Lincoln green, like Robin Hood, and similarly equipped.
Like him, too, they were all foresters of Bowland, owning service to the
bow-bearer, Mr. Parker of Browsholme hall; and the representative of
Little John, who was six feet and a half high, and stout in proportion,
was Lawrence Blackrod, Mr. Parker's head keeper. After the foresters
came Tom the Piper, a wandering minstrel, habited for the occasion in a
blue doublet, with sleeves of the same colour, turned up with yellow,
red hose, and brown buskins, red bonnet, and green surcoat lined with
yellow. Beside the piper was another minstrel, similarly attired, and
provided with a tabor. Lastly came one of the main features of the
pageant, and which, together with the Fool, contributed most materially
to the amusement of the spectators. This was the Hobby-horse. The hue of
this, spirited charger was a pinkish white, and his housings were of
crimson cloth hanging to the ground, so as to conceal the rider's real
legs, though a pair of sham ones dangled at the side. His bit was of
gold, and his bridle red morocco leather, while his rider was very
sumptuously arrayed in a purple mantle, bordered with gold, with a rich
cap of the same regal hue on his head, encircled with gold, and having a
red feather stuck in it. The hobby-horse had a plume of nodding feathers
on his head, and careered from side to side, now rearing in front, now
kicking behind, now prancing, now gently ambling, and in short indulging
in playful fancies and vagaries, such as horse never indulged in before,
to the imminent danger, it seemed, of his rider, and to the huge delight
of the beholders. Nor must it be omitted, as it was matter of great
wonderment to the lookers-on, that by some legerdemain contrivance the
rider of the hobby-horse had a couple of daggers stuck in his cheeks,
while from his steed's bridle hung a silver ladle, which he held now and
then to the crowd, and in which, when he did so, a few coins were sure
to rattle. After the hobby-horse came the May-pole, not the tall pole so
called and which was already planted in the green, but a stout staff
elevated some six feet above the head of the bearer, with a coronal of
flowers atop, and four long garlands hanging down, each held by a
morris-dancer. Then came the May Queen's gentleman usher, a fantastic
personage in habiliments of blue guarded with white, and holding a long
willow wand in his hand. After the usher came the main troop of
morris-dancers--the men attired in a graceful costume, which set off
their light active figures to advantage, consisting of a slashed-jerkin
of black and white velvet, with cut sleeves left open so as to reveal
the snowy shirt beneath, white hose, and shoes of black Spanish leather
with large roses. Ribands were every where in their dresses--ribands and
tinsel adorned their caps, ribands crossed their hose, and ribands were
tied round their arms. In either hand they held a long white
handkerchief knotted with ribands. The female morris-dancers were
habited in white, decorated like the dresses of the men; they had
ribands and wreaths of flowers round their heads, bows in their hair,
and in their hands long white knotted kerchiefs.

In the rear of the performers in the pageant came the rush-cart drawn by
a team of eight stout horses, with their manes and tails tied with
ribands, their collars fringed with red and yellow worsted, and hung
with bells, which jingled blithely at every movement, and their heads
decked with flowers. The cart itself consisted of an enormous pile of
rushes, banded and twisted together, rising to a considerable height,
and terminated in a sharp ridge, like the point of a Gothic window. The
sides and top were decorated with flowers and ribands, and there were
eaves in front and at the back, and on the space within them, which was
covered with white paper, were strings of gaudy flowers, embedded in
moss, amongst which were suspended all the ornaments and finery that
could be collected for the occasion: to wit, flagons of silver, spoons,
ladles, chains, watches, and bracelets, so as to make a brave and
resplendent show. The wonder was how articles of so much value would be
trusted forth on such an occasion; but nothing was ever lost. On the top
of the rush-cart, and bestriding its sharp ridges, sat half a dozen men,
habited somewhat like the morris-dancers, in garments bedecked with
tinsel and ribands, holding garlands formed by hoops, decorated with
flowers, and attached to poles ornamented with silver paper, cut into
various figures and devices, and diminishing gradually in size as they
rose to a point, where they were crowned with wreaths of daffodils.

A large crowd of rustics, of all ages, accompanied the morris-dancers
and rush-cart.

This gay troop having come to a halt, as described, before the cottage,
the gentleman-usher entered it, and, tapping against the inner door with
his wand, took off his cap as soon as it was opened, and bowing
deferentially to the ground, said he was come to invite the Queen of May
to join the pageant, and that it only awaited her presence to proceed to
the green. Having delivered this speech in as good set phrase as he
could command, and being the parish clerk and schoolmaster to boot,
Sampson Harrop by name, he was somewhat more polished than the rest of
the hinds; and having, moreover, received a gracious response from the
May Queen, who condescendingly replied that she was quite ready to
accompany him, he took her hand, and led her ceremoniously to the door,
whither they were followed by the others.

Loud was the shout that greeted Alizon's appearance, and tremendous was
the pushing to obtain a sight of her; and so much was she abashed by the
enthusiastic greeting, which was wholly unexpected on her part, that she
would have drawn back again, if it had been possible; but the usher led
her forward, and Robin Hood and the foresters having bent the knee
before her, the hobby-horse began to curvet anew among the spectators,
and tread on their toes, the fool to rap their knuckles with his bauble,
the piper to play, the taborer to beat his tambourine, and the
morris-dancers to toss their kerchiefs over their heads. Thus the
pageant being put in motion, the rush-cart began to roll on, its horses'
bells jingling merrily, and the spectators cheering lustily.




CHAPTER II.--THE BLACK CAT AND THE WHITE DOVE.


Little Jennet watched her sister's triumphant departure with a look in
which there was far more of envy than sympathy, and, when her mother
took her hand to lead her forth, she would not go, but saying she did
not care for any such idle sights, went back sullenly to the inner room.
When there, however, she could not help peeping through the window, and
saw Susan and Nancy join the revel rout, with feelings of increased
bitterness.

"Ey wish it would rain an spile their finery," she said, sitting down on
her stool, and plucking the flowers from her basket in pieces. "An yet,
why canna ey enjoy such seets like other folk? Truth is, ey've nah heart
for it."

"Folks say," she continued, after a pause, "that grandmother Demdike is
a witch, an con do os she pleases. Ey wonder if she made Alizon so
protty. Nah, that canna be, fo' Alizon's na favourite o' hern. If she
loves onny one it's me. Why dunna she make me good-looking, then? They
say it's sinfu' to be a witch--if so, how comes grandmother Demdike to
be one? Boh ey'n observed that those folks os caws her witch are afeard
on her, so it may be pure spite o' their pert."

As she thus mused, a great black cat belonging to her mother, which had
followed her into the room, rubbed himself against her, putting up his
back, and purring loudly.

"Ah, Tib," said the little girl, "how are ye, Tib? Ey didna knoa ye were
here. Lemme ask ye some questions, Tib?"

The cat mewed, looked up, and fixed his great yellow eyes upon her.

"One 'ud think ye onderstud whot wos said to ye, Tib," pursued little
Jennet. "We'n see whot ye say to this! Shan ey ever be Queen o' May,
like sister Alizon?"

The cat mewed in a manner that the little girl found no difficulty in
interpreting the reply into "No."

"How's that, Tib?" cried Jennet, sharply. "If ey thought ye meant it,
ey'd beat ye, sirrah. Answer me another question, ye saucy knave. Who
will be luckiest, Alizon or me?"

This time the cat darted away from her, and made two or three skirmishes
round the room, as if gone suddenly mad.

"Ey con may nowt o' that," observed Jennet, laughing.

All at once the cat bounded upon the chimney board, over which was
placed a sampler, worked with the name "ALIZON."

"Why Tib really seems to onderstond me, ey declare," observed Jennet,
uneasily. "Ey should like to ask him a few more questions, if ey durst,"
she added, regarding with some distrust the animal, who now returned,
and began rubbing against her as before. "Tib--Tib!"

The cat looked up, and mewed.

"Protty Tib--sweet Tib," continued the little girl, coaxingly. "Whot mun
one do to be a witch like grandmother Demdike?"

The cat again dashed twice or thrice madly round the room, and then
stopping suddenly at the hearth, sprang up the chimney.

"Ey'n frightened ye away ot onny rate," observed Jennet, laughing. "And
yet it may mean summot," she added, reflecting a little, "fo ey'n heerd
say os how witches fly up chimleys o' broomsticks to attend their
sabbaths. Ey should like to fly i' that manner, an change myself into
another shape--onny shape boh my own. Oh that ey could be os protty os
Alizon! Ey dunna knoa whot ey'd nah do to be like her!"

Again the great black cat was beside her, rubbing against her, and
purring. The child was a good deal startled, for she had not seen him
return, and the door was shut, though he might have come in through the
open window, only she had been looking that way all the time, and had
never noticed him. Strange!

"Tib," said the child, patting him, "thou hasna answered my last
question--how is one to become a witch?"

As she made this inquiry the cat suddenly scratched her in the arm, so
that the blood came. The little girl was a good deal frightened, as well
as hurt, and, withdrawing her arm quickly, made a motion of striking the
animal. But starting backwards, erecting his tail, and spitting, the cat
assumed such a formidable appearance, that she did not dare to touch
him, and she then perceived that some drops of blood stained her white
sleeve, giving the spots a certain resemblance to the letters J. and D.,
her own initials.

At this moment, when she was about to scream for help, though she knew
no one was in the house, all having gone away with the May-day
revellers, a small white dove flew in at the open window, and skimming
round the room, alighted near her. No sooner had the cat caught sight of
this beautiful bird, than instead of preparing to pounce upon it, as
might have been expected, he instantly abandoned his fierce attitude,
and, uttering a sort of howl, sprang up the chimney as before. But the
child scarcely observed this, her attention being directed towards the
bird, whose extreme beauty delighted her. It seemed quite tame too, and
allowed itself to be touched, and even drawn towards her, without an
effort to escape. Never, surely, was seen so beautiful a bird--with such
milkwhite feathers, such red legs, and such pretty yellow eyes, with
crimson circles round them! So thought the little girl, as she gazed at
it, and pressed it to her bosom. In doing this, gentle and good thoughts
came upon her, and she reflected what a nice present this pretty bird
would make to her sister Alizon on her return from the merry-making, and
how pleased she should feel to give it to her. And then she thought of
Alizon's constant kindness to her, and half reproached herself with the
poor return she made for it, wondering she could entertain any feelings
of envy towards one so good and amiable. All this while the dove nestled
in her bosom.

While thus pondering, the little girl felt an unaccountable drowsiness
steal over her, and presently afterwards dropped asleep, when she had a
very strange dream. It seemed to her that there was a contest going on
between two spirits, a good one and a bad,--the bad one being
represented by the great black cat, and the good spirit by the white
dove. What they were striving about she could not exactly tell, but she
felt that the conflict had some relation to herself. The dove at first
appeared to have but a poor chance against the claws of its sable
adversary, but the sharp talons of the latter made no impression upon
the white plumage of the bird, which now shone like silver armour, and
in the end the cat fled, yelling as it darted off--"Thou art victorious
now, but her soul shall yet be mine."

Something awakened the little sleeper at the same moment, and she felt
very much terrified at her dream, as she could not help thinking her own
soul might be the one in jeopardy, and her first impulse was to see
whether the white dove was safe. Yes, there it was still nestling in her
bosom, with its head under its wing.

Just then she was startled at hearing her own name pronounced by a
hoarse voice, and, looking up, she beheld a tall young man standing at
the window. He had a somewhat gipsy look, having a dark olive
complexion, and fine black eyes, though set strangely in his head, like
those of Jennet and her mother, coal black hair, and very prominent
features, of a sullen and almost savage cast. His figure was gaunt but
very muscular, his arms being extremely long and his hands unusually
large and bony--personal advantages which made him a formidable
antagonist in any rustic encounter, and in such he was frequently
engaged, being of a very irascible temper, and turbulent disposition. He
was clad in a holiday suit of dark-green serge, which fitted him well,
and carried a nosegay in one hand, and a stout blackthorn cudgel in the
other. This young man was James Device, son of Elizabeth, and some four
or five years older than Alizon. He did not live with his mother in
Whalley, but in Pendle Forest, near his old relative, Mother Demdike,
and had come over that morning to attend the wake.

"Whot are ye abowt, Jennet?" inquired James Device, in tones naturally
hoarse and deep, and which he took as little pains to soften, as he did
to polish his manners, which were more than ordinarily rude and
churlish.

"Whot are ye abowt, ey sey, wench?" he repeated, "Why dunna ye go to t'
green to see the morris-dancers foot it round t' May-pow? Cum along wi'
me."

"Ey dunna want to go, Jem," replied the little girl.

"Boh yo shan go, ey tell ey," rejoined her brother; "ye shan see your
sister dawnce. Ye con sit a whoam onny day; boh May-day cums ony wonst a
year, an Alizon winna be Queen twice i' her life. Soh cum along wi' me,
dereckly, or ey'n may ye."

"Ey should like to see Alizon dance, an so ey win go wi' ye, Jem,"
replied Jennet, getting up, "otherwise your orders shouldna may me stir,
ey con tell ye."

As she came out, she found her brother whistling the blithe air of
"Green Sleeves," cutting strange capers, in imitation of the
morris-dancers, and whirling his cudgel over his head instead of a
kerchief. The gaiety of the day seemed infectious, and to have seized
even him. People stared to see Black Jem, or Surly Jem, as he was
indifferently called, so joyous, and wondered what it could mean. He
then fell to singing a snatch of a local ballad at that time in vogue in
the neighbourhood:--


          "If thou wi' nah my secret tell,
              Ne bruit abroad i' Whalley parish,
          And swear to keep my counsel well,
              Ey win declare my day of marriage."

"Cum along, lass," he cried stopping suddenly in his song, and snatching
his sister's hand. "What han ye getten there, lapped up i' your kirtle,
eh?"

"A white dove," replied Jennet, determined not to tell him any thing
about her strange dream.

"A white dove!" echoed Jem. "Gi' it me, an ey'n wring its neck, an get
it roasted for supper."

"Ye shan do nah such thing, Jem," replied Jennet. "Ey mean to gi' it to
Alizon."

"Weel, weel, that's reet," rejoined Jem, blandly, "it'll may a protty
offering. Let's look at it."

"Nah, nah," said Jennet, pressing the bird gently to her bosom, "neaw
one shan see it efore Alizon."

"Cum along then," cried Jem, rather testily, and mending his pace, "or
we'st be too late fo' t' round. Whoy yo'n scratted yourself," he added,
noticing the red spots on her sleeve.

"Han ey?" she rejoined, evasively. "Oh now ey rekilect, it wos Tib did
it."

"Tib!" echoed Jem, gravely, and glancing uneasily at the marks.

Meanwhile, on quitting the cottage, the May-day revellers had proceeded
slowly towards the green, increasing the number of their followers at
each little tenement they passed, and being welcomed every where with
shouts and cheers. The hobby-horse curveted and capered; the Fool
fleered at the girls, and flouted the men, jesting with every one, and
when failing in a point rapping the knuckles of his auditors; Friar Tuck
chucked the pretty girls under the chin, in defiance of their
sweethearts, and stole a kiss from every buxom dame that stood in his
way, and then snapped his fingers, or made a broad grimace at the
husband; the piper played, and the taborer rattled his tambourine; the
morris-dancers tossed their kerchiefs aloft; and the bells of the
rush-cart jingled merrily; the men on the top being on a level with the
roofs of the cottages, and the summits of the haystacks they passed, but
in spite of their exalted position jesting with the crowd below. But in
spite of these multiplied attractions, and in spite of the gambols of
Fool and Horse, though the latter elicited prodigious laughter, the main
attention was fixed on the May Queen, who tripped lightly along by the
side of her faithful squire, Robin Hood, followed by the three bold
foresters of Sherwood, and her usher.

In this way they reached the green, where already a large crowd was
collected to see them, and where in the midst of it, and above the heads
of the assemblage, rose the lofty May-pole, with all its flowery
garlands glittering in the sunshine, and its ribands fluttering in the
breeze. Pleasant was it to see those cheerful groups, composed of happy
rustics, youths in their holiday attire, and maidens neatly habited too,
and fresh and bright as the day itself. Summer sunshine sparkled in
their eyes, and weather and circumstance as well as genial natures
disposed them to enjoyment. Every lass above eighteen had her
sweetheart, and old couples nodded and smiled at each other when any
tender speech, broadly conveyed but tenderly conceived, reached their
ears, and said it recalled the days of their youth. Pleasant was it to
hear such honest laughter, and such good homely jests.

Laugh on, my merry lads, you are made of good old English stuff, loyal
to church and king, and while you, and such as you, last, our land will
be in no danger from foreign foe! Laugh on, and praise your sweethearts
how you will. Laugh on, and blessings on your honest hearts!

The frolic train had just reached the precincts of the green, when the
usher waving his wand aloft, called a momentary halt, announcing that
Sir Ralph Assheton and the gentry were coming forth from the Abbey gate
to meet them.




CHAPTER III.--THE ASSHETONS.


Between Sir Ralph Assheton of the Abbey and the inhabitants of Whalley,
many of whom were his tenants, he being joint lord of the manor with
John Braddyll of Portfield, the best possible feeling subsisted; for
though somewhat austere in manner, and tinctured with Puritanism, the
worthy knight was sufficiently shrewd, or, more correctly speaking,
sufficiently liberal-minded, to be tolerant of the opinions of others,
and being moreover sincere in his own religious views, no man could call
him in question for them; besides which, he was very hospitable to his
friends, very bountiful to the poor, a good landlord, and a humane man.
His very austerity of manner, tempered by stately courtesy, added to the
respect he inspired, especially as he could now and then relax into
gaiety, and, when he did so, his smile was accounted singularly sweet.
But in general he was grave and formal; stiff in attire, and stiff in
gait; cold and punctilious in manner, precise in speech, and exacting in
due respect from both high and low, which was seldom, if ever, refused
him. Amongst Sir Ralph's other good qualities, for such it was esteemed
by his friends and retainers, and they were, of course, the best judges,
was a strong love of the chase, and perhaps he indulged a little too
freely in the sports of the field, for a gentleman of a character so
staid and decorous; but his popularity was far from being diminished by
the circumstance; neither did he suffer the rude and boisterous
companionship into which he was brought by indulgence in this his
favourite pursuit in any way to affect him. Though still young, Sir
Ralph was prematurely grey, and this, combined with the sad severity of
his aspect, gave him the air of one considerably past the middle term of
life, though this appearance was contradicted again by the youthful fire
of his eagle eye. His features were handsome and strongly marked, and he
wore a pointed beard and mustaches, with a shaved cheek. Sir Ralph
Assheton had married twice, his first wife being a daughter of Sir James
Bellingham of Levens, in Northumberland, by whom he had two children;
while his second choice fell upon Eleanor Shuttleworth, the lovely and
well-endowed heiress of Gawthorpe, to whom he had been recently united.
In his attire, even when habited for the chase or a merry-making, like
the present, the Knight of Whalley affected a sombre colour, and
ordinarily wore a quilted doublet of black silk, immense trunk hose of
the same material, stiffened with whalebone, puffed out well-wadded
sleeves, falling bands, for he eschewed the ruff as savouring of vanity,
boots of black flexible leather, ascending to the hose, and armed with
spurs with gigantic rowels, a round-crowned small-brimmed black hat,
with an ostrich feather placed in the side and hanging over the top, a
long rapier on his hip, and a dagger in his girdle. This buckram attire,
it will be easily conceived, contributed no little to the natural
stiffness of his thin tall figure.

Sir Ralph Assheton was great grandson of Richard Assheton, who
flourished in the time of Abbot Paslew, and who, in conjunction with
John Braddyll, fourteen years after the unfortunate prelate's attainder
and the dissolution of the monastery, had purchased the abbey and
domains of Whalley from the Crown, subsequently to which, a division of
the property so granted took place between them, the abbey and part of
the manor falling to the share of Richard Assheton, whose descendants
had now for three generations made it their residence. Thus the whole of
Whalley belonged to the families of Assheton and Braddyll, which had
intermarried; the latter, as has been stated, dwelling at Portfield, a
fine old seat in the neighbourhood.

A very different person from Sir Ralph was his cousin, Nicholas Assheton
of Downham, who, except as regards his Puritanism, might be considered a
type of the Lancashire squire of the day. A precisian in religious
notions, and constant in attendance at church and lecture, he put no
sort of restraint upon himself, but mixed up fox-hunting, otter-hunting,
shooting at the mark, and perhaps shooting with the long-bow,
foot-racing, horse-racing, and, in fact, every other kind of country
diversion, not forgetting tippling, cards, and dicing, with daily
devotion, discourses, and psalm-singing in the oddest way imaginable. A
thorough sportsman was Squire Nicholas Assheton, well versed in all the
arts and mysteries of hawking and hunting. Not a man in the county could
ride harder, hunt deer, unkennel fox, unearth badger, or spear otter,
better than he. And then, as to tippling, he would sit you a whole
afternoon at the alehouse, and be the merriest man there, and drink a
bout with every farmer present. And if the parson chanced to be out of
hearing, he would never make a mouth at a round oath, nor choose a
second expression when the first would serve his turn. Then, who so
constant at church or lecture as Squire Nicholas--though he did snore
sometimes during the long sermons of his cousin, the Rector of
Middleton? A great man was he at all weddings, christenings, churchings,
and funerals, and never neglected his bottle at these ceremonies, nor
any sport in doors or out of doors, meanwhile. In short, such a
roystering Puritan was never known. A good-looking young man was the
Squire of Downham, possessed of a very athletic frame, and a most
vigorous constitution, which helped him, together with the prodigious
exercise he took, through any excess. He had a sanguine complexion, with
a broad, good-natured visage, which he could lengthen at will in a
surprising manner. His hair was cropped close to his head, and the razor
did daily duty over his cheek and chin, giving him the roundhead look,
some years later, characteristic of the Puritanical party. Nicholas had
taken to wife Dorothy, daughter of Richard Greenacres of Worston, and
was most fortunate in his choice, which is more than can be said for his
lady, for I cannot uphold the squire as a model of conjugal fidelity.
Report affirmed that he loved more than one pretty girl under the rose.
Squire Nicholas was not particular as to the quality or make of his
clothes, provided they wore well and protected him against the weather,
and was generally to be seen in doublet and hose of stout fustian, which
had seen some service, with a broad-leaved hat, originally green, but of
late bleached to a much lighter colour; but he was clad on this
particular occasion in ash-coloured habiliments fresh from the tailor's
hands, with buff boots drawn up to the knee, and a new round hat from
York with a green feather in it. His legs were slightly embowed, and he
bore himself like a man rarely out of the saddle.

Downham, the residence of the squire, was a fine old house, very
charmingly situated to the north of Pendle Hill, of which it commanded a
magnificent view, and a few miles from Clithero. The grounds about it
were well-wooded and beautifully broken and diversified, watered by the
Ribble, and opening upon the lovely and extensive valley deriving its
name from that stream. The house was in good order and well maintained,
and the stables plentifully furnished with horses, while the hall was
adorned with various trophies and implements of the chase; but as I
propose paying its owner a visit, I shall defer any further description
of the place till an opportunity arrives for examining it in detail.

A third cousin of Sir Ralph's, though in the second degree, likewise
present on the May-day in question, was the Reverend Abdias Assheton,
Rector of Middleton, a very worthy man, who, though differing from his
kinsmen upon some religious points, and not altogether approving of the
conduct of one of them, was on good terms with both. The Rector of
Middleton was portly and middle-aged, fond of ease and reading, and by
no means indifferent to the good things of life. He was unmarried, and
passed much of his time at Middleton Hall, the seat of his near relative
Sir Richard Assheton, to whose family he was greatly attached, and whose
residence closely adjoined the rectory.

A fourth cousin, also present, was young Richard Assheton of Middleton,
eldest son and heir of the owner of that estate. Possessed of all the
good qualities largely distributed among his kinsmen, with none of their
drawbacks, this young man was as tolerant and bountiful as Sir Ralph,
without his austerity and sectarianism; as keen a sportsman and as bold
a rider as Nicholas, without his propensities to excess; as studious, at
times, and as well read as Abdias, without his laziness and
self-indulgence; and as courtly and well-bred as his father, Sir
Richard, who was esteemed one of the most perfect gentlemen in the
county, without his haughtiness. Then he was the handsomest of his race,
though the Asshetons were accounted the handsomest family in Lancashire,
and no one minded yielding the palm to young Richard, even if it could
be contested, he was so modest and unassuming. At this time, Richard
Assheton was about two-and-twenty, tall, gracefully and slightly formed,
but possessed of such remarkable vigour, that even his cousin Nicholas
could scarcely compete with him in athletic exercises. His features were
fine and regular, with an almost Phrygian precision of outline; his hair
was of a dark brown, and fell in clustering curls over his brow and
neck; and his complexion was fresh and blooming, and set off by a slight
beard and mustache, carefully trimmed and pointed. His dress consisted
of a dark-green doublet, with wide velvet hose, embroidered and fringed,
descending nearly to the knee, where they were tied with points and
ribands, met by dark stockings, and terminated by red velvet shoes with
roses in them. A white feather adorned his black broad-leaved hat, and
he had a rapier by his side.

Amongst Sir Ralph Assheton's guests were Richard Greenacres, of Worston,
Nicholas Assheton's father-in-law; Richard Sherborne of Dunnow, near
Sladeburne, who had married Dorothy, Nicholas's sister; Mistress
Robinson of Raydale House, aunt to the knight and the squire, and two of
her sons, both stout youths, with John Braddyll and his wife, of
Portfield. Besides these there was Master Roger Nowell, a justice of the
peace in the county, and a very active and busy one too, who had been
invited for an especial purpose, to be explained hereafter. Head of an
ancient Lancashire family, residing at Read, a fine old hall, some
little distance from Whalley, Roger Nowell, though a worthy,
well-meaning man, dealt hard measure from the bench, and seldom tempered
justice with mercy. He was sharp-featured, dry, and sarcastic, and being
adverse to country sports, his presence on the occasion was the only
thing likely to impose restraint on the revellers. Other guests there
were, but none of particular note.

The ladies of the party consisted of Lady Assheton, Mistress Nicholas
Assheton of Downham, Dorothy Assheton of Middleton, sister to Richard, a
lovely girl of eighteen, with light fleecy hair, summer blue eyes, and a
complexion of exquisite purity, Mistress Sherborne of Dunnow, Mistress
Robinson of Raydale, and Mistress Braddyll of Portfield, before
mentioned, together with the wives and daughters of some others of the
neighbouring gentry; most noticeable amongst whom was Mistress Alice
Nutter of Rough Lee, in Pendle Forest, a widow lady and a relative of
the Assheton family.

Mistress Nutter might be a year or two turned of forty, but she still
retained a very fine figure, and much beauty of feature, though of a
cold and disagreeable cast. She was dressed in mourning, though her
husband had been dead several years, and her rich dark habiliments well
became her pale complexion and raven hair. A proud poor gentleman was
Richard Nutter, her late husband, and his scanty means not enabling him
to keep up as large an establishment as he desired, or to be as
hospitable as his nature prompted, his temper became soured, and he
visited his ill humours upon his wife, who, devotedly attached to him,
to all outward appearance at least, never resented his ill treatment.
All at once, and without any previous symptoms of ailment, or apparent
cause, unless it might be over-fatigue in hunting the day before,
Richard Nutter was seized with a strange and violent illness, which,
after three or four days of acute suffering, brought him to the grave.
During his illness he was constantly and zealously tended by his wife,
but he displayed great aversion to her, declaring himself bewitched, and
that an old woman was ever in the corner of his room mumbling wicked
enchantments against him. But as no such old woman could be seen, these
assertions were treated as delirious ravings. They were not, however,
forgotten after his death, and some people said that he had certainly
been bewitched, and that a waxen image made in his likeness, and stuck
full of pins, had been picked up in his chamber by Mistress Alice and
cast into the fire, and as soon as it melted he had expired. Such tales
only obtained credence with the common folk; but as Pendle Forest was a
sort of weird region, many reputed witches dwelling in it, they were the
more readily believed, even by those who acquitted Mistress Nutter of
all share in the dark transaction.

Mistress Nutter gave the best proof that she respected her husband's
memory by not marrying again, and she continued to lead a very secluded
life at Rough Lee, a lonesome house in the heart of the forest. She
lived quite by herself, for she had no children, her only daughter
having perished somewhat strangely when quite an infant. Though a
relative of the Asshetons, she kept up little intimacy with them, and it
was a matter of surprise to all that she had been drawn from her
seclusion to attend the present revel. Her motive, however, in visiting
the Abbey, was to obtain the assistance of Sir Ralph Assheton, in
settling a dispute between her and Roger Nowell, relative to the
boundary line of part of their properties which came together; and this
was the reason why the magistrate had been invited to Whalley. After
hearing both sides of the question, and examining plans of the estates,
which he knew to be accurate, Sir Ralph, who had been appointed umpire,
pronounced a decision in favour of Roger Nowell, but Mistress Nutter
refusing to abide by it, the settlement of the matter was postponed till
the day but one following, between which time the landmarks were to be
investigated by a certain little lawyer named Potts, who attended on
behalf of Roger Nowell; together with Nicholas and Richard Assheton, on
behalf of Mistress Nutter. Upon their evidence it was agreed by both
parties that Sir Ralph should pronounce a final decision, to be accepted
by them, and to that effect they signed an agreement. The three persons
appointed to the investigation settled to start for Rough Lee early on
the following morning.

A word as to Master Thomas Potts. This worthy was an attorney from
London, who had officiated as clerk of the court at the assizes at
Lancaster, where his quickness had so much pleased Roger Nowell, that he
sent for him to Read to manage this particular business. A sharp-witted
fellow was Potts, and versed in all the quirks and tricks of a very
subtle profession--not over-scrupulous, provided a client would pay
well; prepared to resort to any expedient to gain his object, and quite
conversant enough with both practice and precedent to keep himself
straight. A bustling, consequential little personage was he, moreover;
very fond of delivering an opinion, even when unasked, and of a
meddling, make-mischief turn, constantly setting men by the ears. A suit
of rusty black, a parchment-coloured skin, small wizen features, a
turn-up nose, scant eyebrows, and a great yellow forehead, constituted
his external man. He partook of the hospitality at the Abbey, but had
his quarters at the Dragon. He it was who counselled Roger Nowell to
abide by the decision of Sir Ralph, confidently assuring him that he
must carry his point.

This dispute was not, however, the only one the knight had to adjust, or
in which Master Potts was concerned. A claim had recently been made by a
certain Sir Thomas Metcalfe of Nappay, in Wensleydale, near Bainbridge,
to the house and manor of Raydale, belonging to his neighbour, John
Robinson, whose lady, as has been shown, was a relative of the
Asshetons. Robinson himself had gone to London to obtain advice on the
subject, while Sir Thomas Metcalfe, who was a man of violent
disposition, had threatened to take forcible possession of Raydale, if
it were not delivered to him without delay, and to eject the Robinson
family. Having consulted Potts, however, on the subject, whom he had met
at Read, the latter strongly dissuaded him from the course, and
recommended him to call to his aid the strong arm of the law: but this
he rejected, though he ultimately agreed to refer the matter to Sir
Ralph Assheton, and for this purpose he had come over to Whalley, and
was at present a guest at the vicarage. Thus it will be seen that Sir
