husbands, of whom women are to be the friends, nay, sometimes the
advisers?' Ione stopped short suddenly, and her face was suffused with
the most enchanting blushes.  She feared lest her enthusiasm had led her
too far; yet she feared the austere Arbaces less than the courteous
Glaucus, for she loved the last, and it was not the custom of the Greeks
to allow their women (at least such of their women as they most honored)
the same liberty and the same station as those of Italy enjoyed. She
felt, therefore, a thrill of delight as Glaucus earnestly replied:

'Ever mayst thou think thus, Ione--ever be your pure heart your unerring
guide!  Happy it had been for Greece if she had given to the chaste the
same intellectual charms that are so celebrated amongst the less worthy
of her women.  No state falls from freedom--from knowledge, while your
sex smile only on the free, and by appreciating, encourage the wise.'

Arbaces was silent, for it was neither his part to sanction the
sentiment of Glaucus, nor to condemn that of Ione, and, after a short
and embarrassed conversation, Glaucus took his leave of Ione.

When he was gone, Arbaces, drawing his seat nearer to the fair
Neapolitan's, said in those bland and subdued tones, in which he knew so
well how to veil the mingled art and fierceness of his character:

'Think not, my sweet pupil, if so I may call you, that I wish to shackle
that liberty you adorn while you assume: but which, if not greater, as
you rightly observe, than that possessed by the Roman women, must at
least be accompanied by great circumspection, when arrogated by one
unmarried. Continue to draw crowds of the gay, the brilliant, the wise
themselves, to your feet--continue to charm them with the conversation
of an Aspasia, the music of an Erinna--but reflect, at least, on those
censorious tongues which can so easily blight the tender reputation of a
maiden; and while you provoke admiration, give, I beseech you, no
victory to envy.'

'What mean you, Arbaces?' said Ione, in an alarmed and trembling voice:
'I know you are my friend, that you desire only my honour and my
welfare.  What is it you would say?'

'Your friend--ah, how sincerely!  May I speak then as a friend, without
reserve and without offence?'

'I beseech you do so.'

'This young profligate, this Glaucus, how didst thou know him? Hast thou
seen him often?' And as Arbaces spoke, he fixed his gaze steadfastly
upon Ione, as if he sought to penetrate into her soul.

Recoiling before that gaze, with a strange fear which she could not
explain, the Neapolitan answered with confusion and hesitation: 'He was
brought to my house as a countryman of my father's, and I may say of
mine.  I have known him only within this last week or so: but why these
questions?'

'Forgive me,' said Arbaces; 'I thought you might have known him longer.
Base insinuator that he is!'

'How! what mean you?  Why that term?'

'It matters not: let me not rouse your indignation against one who does
not deserve so grave an honour.'

'I implore you speak.  What has Glaucus insinuated? or rather, in what
do you suppose he has offended?'

Smothering his resentment at the last part of Ione's question, Arbaces
continued: 'You know his pursuits, his companions his habits; the
comissatio and the alea (the revel and the dice) make his occupation;
and amongst the associates of vice how can he dream of virtue?'

'Still you speak riddles.  By the gods!  I entreat you, say the worst at
once.'

'Well, then, it must be so.  Know, my Ione, that it was but yesterday
that Glaucus boasted openly--yes, in the public baths--of your love to
him.  He said it amused him to take advantage of it. Nay, I will do him
justice, he praised your beauty.  Who could deny it? But he laughed
scornfully when his Clodius, or his Lepidus, asked him if he loved you
enough for marriage, and when he purposed to adorn his door-posts with
flowers?'

'Impossible!  How heard you this base slander?'

'Nay, would you have me relate to you all the comments of the insolent
coxcombs with which the story has circled through the town? Be assured
that I myself disbelieved at first, and that I have now painfully been
convinced by several ear-witnesses of the truth of what I have
reluctantly told thee.'

Ione sank back, and her face was whiter than the pillar against which
she leaned for support.

'I own it vexed--it irritated me, to hear your name thus lightly pitched
from lip to lip, like some mere dancing-girl's fame.  I hastened this
morning to seek and to warn you.  I found Glaucus here.  I was stung
from my self-possession.  I could not conceal my feelings; nay, I was
uncourteous in thy presence.  Canst thou forgive thy friend, Ione?'

Ione placed her hand in his, but replied not.

'Think no more of this,' said he; 'but let it be a warning voice, to
tell thee how much prudence thy lot requires.  It cannot hurt thee,
Ione, for a moment; for a gay thing like this could never have been
honored by even a serious thought from Ione.  These insults only wound
when they come from one we love; far different indeed is he whom the
lofty Ione shall stoop to love.'

'Love!' muttered Ione, with an hysterical laugh.  'Ay, indeed.'

It is not without interest to observe in those remote times, and under a
social system so widely different from the modern, the same small causes
that ruffle and interrupt the 'course of love', which operate so
commonly at this day--the same inventive jealousy, the same cunning
slander, the same crafty and fabricated retailings of petty gossip,
which so often now suffice to break the ties of the truest love, and
counteract the tenor of circumstances most apparently propitious.  When
the bark sails on over the smoothest wave, the fable tells us of the
diminutive fish that can cling to the keel and arrest its progress: so
is it ever with the great passions of mankind; and we should paint life
but ill if, even in times the most prodigal of romance, and of the
romance of which we most largely avail ourselves, we did not also
describe the mechanism of those trivial and household springs of
mischief which we see every day at work in our chambers and at our
hearths.  It is in these, the lesser intrigues of life, that we mostly
find ourselves at home with the past.

Most cunningly had the Egyptian appealed to Ione's ruling foible--most
dexterously had he applied the poisoned dart to her pride.  He fancied
he had arrested what he hoped, from the shortness of the time she had
known Glaucus, was, at most, but an incipient fancy; and hastening to
change the subject, he now led her to talk of her brother.  Their
conversation did not last long.  He left her, resolved not again to
trust so much to absence, but to visit--to watch her--every day.

No sooner had his shadow glided from her presence, than woman's
pride--her sex's dissimulation--deserted his intended victim, and the
haughty Ione burst into passionate tears.



Chapter VII

THE GAY LIFE OF THE POMPEIAN LOUNGER.  A MINIATURE LIKENESS OF THE ROMAN
BATHS.

WHEN Glaucus left Ione, he felt as if he trod upon air.  In the
interview with which he had just been blessed, he had for the first time
gathered from her distinctly that his love was not unwelcome to, and
would not be unrewarded by, her.  This hope filled him with a rapture
for which earth and heaven seemed too narrow to afford a vent.
Unconscious of the sudden enemy he had left behind, and forgetting not
only his taunts but his very existence, Glaucus passed through the gay
streets, repeating to himself, in the wantonness of joy, the music of
the soft air to which Ione had listened with such intentness; and now he
entered the Street of Fortune, with its raised footpath--its houses
painted without, and the open doors admitting the view of the glowing
frescoes within.  Each end of the street was adorned with a triumphal
arch: and as Glaucus now came before the Temple of Fortune, the jutting
portico of that beautiful fane (which is supposed to have been built by
one of the family of Cicero, perhaps by the orator himself) imparted a
dignified and venerable feature to a scene otherwise more brilliant than
lofty in its character.  That temple was one of the most graceful
specimens of Roman architecture. It was raised on a somewhat lofty
podium; and between two flights of steps ascending to a platform stood
the altar of the goddess.  From this platform another flight of broad
stairs led to the portico, from the height of whose fluted columns hung
festoons of the richest flowers.  On either side the extremities of the
temple were placed statues of Grecian workmanship; and at a little
distance from the temple rose the triumphal arch crowned with an
equestrian statue of Caligula, which was flanked by trophies of bronze.
In the space before the temple a lively throng were assembled--some
seated on benches and discussing the politics of the empire, some
conversing on the approaching spectacle of the amphitheatre.  One knot
of young men were lauding a new beauty, another discussing the merits of
the last play; a third group, more stricken in age, were speculating on
the chance of the trade with Alexandria, and amidst these were many
merchants in the Eastern costume, whose loose and peculiar robes,
painted and gemmed slippers, and composed and serious countenances,
formed a striking contrast to the tunicked forms and animated gestures
of the Italians.  For that impatient and lively people had, as now, a
language distinct from speech--a language of signs and motions,
inexpressibly significant and vivacious: their descendants retain it,
and the learned Jorio hath written a most entertaining work upon that
species of hieroglyphical gesticulation.

Sauntering through the crowd, Glaucus soon found himself amidst a group
of his merry and dissipated friends.

'Ah!' said Sallust, 'it is a lustrum since I saw you.'

'And how have you spent the lustrum?  What new dishes have you
discovered?'

'I have been scientific,' returned Sallust, 'and have made some
experiments in the feeding of lampreys: I confess I despair of bringing
them to the perfection which our Roman ancestors attained.'

'Miserable man! and why?'

'Because,' returned Sallust, with a sigh, 'it is no longer lawful to
give them a slave to eat.  I am very often tempted to make away with a
very fat carptor (butler) whom I possess, and pop him slily into the
reservoir.  He would give the fish a most oleaginous flavor!  But slaves
are not slaves nowadays, and have no sympathy with their masters'
interest--or Davus would destroy himself to oblige me!'

'What news from Rome?' said Lepidus, as he languidly joined the group.

'The emperor has been giving a splendid supper to the senators,'
answered Sallust.

'He is a good creature,' quoth Lepidus; 'they say he never sends a man
away without granting his request.'

'Perhaps he would let me kill a slave for my reservoir?' returned
Sallust, eagerly.

'Not unlikely,' said Glaucus; 'for he who grants a favor to one Roman,
must always do it at the expense of another.  Be sure, that for every
smile Titus has caused, a hundred eyes have wept.'

'Long live Titus!' cried Pansa, overhearing the emperor's name, as he
swept patronizingly through the crowd; 'he has promised my brother a
quaestorship, because he had run through his fortune.'

'And wishes now to enrich himself among the people, my Pansa,' said
Glaucus.

'Exactly so,' said Pansa.

'That is putting the people to some use,' said Glaucus.

'To be sure, returned Pansa.  'Well, I must go and look after the
aerarium--it is a little out of repair'; and followed by a long train of
clients, distinguished from the rest of the throng by the togas they
wore (for togas, once the sign of freedom in a citizen, were now the
badge of servility to a patron), the aedile fidgeted fussily away.

'Poor Pansa!' said Lepidus: 'he never has time for pleasure.  Thank
Heaven I am not an aedile!'

'Ah, Glaucus! how are you? gay as ever?' said Clodius, joining the
group.

'Are you come to sacrifice to Fortune?' said Sallust.

'I sacrifice to her every night,' returned the gamester.

'I do not doubt it.  No man has made more victims!'

'By Hercules, a biting speech!' cried Glaucus, laughing.

'The dog's letter is never out of your mouth, Sallust,' said Clodius,
angrily: 'you are always snarling.'

'I may well have the dog's letter in my mouth, since, whenever I play
with you, I have the dog's throw in my hand,' returned Sallust.

'Hist!' said Glaucus, taking a rose from a flower-girl, who stood
beside.

'The rose is the token of silence,' replied Sallust, 'but I love only to
see it at the supper-table.'

'Talking of that, Diomed gives a grand feast next week,' said Sallust:
'are you invited, Glaucus?'

'Yes, I received an invitation this morning.'

'And I, too,' said Sallust, drawing a square piece of papyrus from his
girdle: 'I see that he asks us an hour earlier than usual: an earnest of
something sumptuous.'

'Oh! he is rich as Croesus,' said Clodius; 'and his bill of fare is as
long as an epic.'

'Well, let us to the baths,' said Glaucus: 'this is the time when all
the world is there; and Fulvius, whom you admire so much, is going to
read us his last ode.'

The young men assented readily to the proposal, and they strolled to the
baths.

Although the public thermae, or baths, were instituted rather for the
poorer citizens than the wealthy (for the last had baths in their own
houses), yet, to the crowds of all ranks who resorted to them, it was a
favorite place for conversation, and for that indolent lounging so dear
to a gay and thoughtless people.  The baths at Pompeii differed, of
course, in plan and construction from the vast and complicated thermae
of Rome; and, indeed, it seems that in each city of the empire there was
always some slight modification of arrangement in the general
architecture of the public baths. This mightily puzzles the learned--as
if architects and fashion were not capricious before the nineteenth
century!  Our party entered by the principal porch in the Street of
Fortune.  At the wing of the portico sat the keeper of the baths, with
his two boxes before him, one for the money he received, one for the
tickets he dispensed.  Round the walls of the portico were seats crowded
with persons of all ranks; while others, as the regimen of the
physicians prescribed, were walking briskly to and fro the portico,
stopping every now and then to gaze on the innumerable notices of shows,
games, sales, exhibitions, which were painted or inscribed upon the
walls. The general subject of conversation was, however, the spectacle
announced in the amphitheatre; and each new-comer was fastened upon by a
group eager to know if Pompeii had been so fortunate as to produce some
monstrous criminal, some happy case of sacrilege or of murder, which
would allow the aediles to provide a man for the jaws of the lion: all
other more common exhibitions seemed dull and tame, when compared with
the possibility of this fortunate occurrence.

'For my part,' said one jolly-looking man, who was a goldsmith, 'I think
the emperor, if he is as good as they say, might have sent us a Jew.'

'Why not take one of the new sect of Nazarenes?' said a philosopher.  'I
am not cruel: but an atheist, one who denies Jupiter himself, deserves
no mercy.'

'I care not how many gods a man likes to believe in,' said the
goldsmith; 'but to deny all gods is something monstrous.'

'Yet I fancy,' said Glaucus, 'that these people are not absolutely
atheists. I am told that they believe in a God--nay, in a future state.'

'Quite a mistake, my dear Glaucus,' said the philosopher.  'I have
conferred with them--they laughed in my face when I talked of Pluto and
Hades.'

'O ye gods!' exclaimed the goldsmith, in horror; 'are there any of these
wretches in Pompeii?'

'I know there are a few: but they meet so privately that it is
impossible to discover who they are.'

As Glaucus turned away, a sculptor, who was a great enthusiast in his
art, looked after him admiringly.

'Ah!' said he, 'if we could get him on the arena--there would be a model
for you! What limbs! what a head! he ought to have been a gladiator!  A
subject--a subject--worthy of our art!  Why don't they give him to the
lion?'

Meanwhile Fulvius, the Roman poet, whom his contemporaries declared
immortal, and who, but for this history, would never have been heard of
in our neglectful age, came eagerly up to Glaucus. 'Oh, my Athenian, my
Glaucus, you have come to hear my ode!  That is indeed an honour; you, a
Greek--to whom the very language of common life is poetry.  How I thank
you. It is but a trifle; but if I secure your approbation, perhaps I may
get an introduction to Titus.  Oh, Glaucus! a poet without a patron is
an amphora without a label; the wine may be good, but nobody will laud
it!  And what says Pythagoras?--"Frankincense to the gods, but praise to
man." A patron, then, is the poet's priest: he procures him the incense,
and obtains him his believers.'

'But all Pompeii is your patron, and every portico an altar in your
praise.'

'Ah! the poor Pompeians are very civil--they love to honour merit. But
they are only the inhabitants of a petty town--spero meliora! Shall we
within?'

'Certainly; we lose time till we hear your poem.'

At this instant there was a rush of some twenty persons from the baths
into the portico; and a slave stationed at the door of a small corridor
now admitted the poet, Glaucus, Clodius, and a troop of the bard's other
friends, into the passage.

'A poor place this, compared with the Roman thermae!' said Lepidus,
disdainfully.

'Yet is there some taste in the ceiling,' said Glaucus, who was in a
mood to be pleased with everything; pointing to the stars which studded
the roof.

Lepidus shrugged his shoulders, but was too languid to reply.

They now entered a somewhat spacious chamber, which served for the
purposes of the apodyterium (that is, a place where the bathers prepared
themselves for their luxurious ablutions).  The vaulted ceiling was
raised from a cornice, glowingly colored with motley and grotesque
paintings; the ceiling itself was paneled in white compartments bordered
with rich crimson; the unsullied and shining floor was paved with white
mosaics, and along the walls were ranged benches for the accommodation
of the loiterers.  This chamber did not possess the numerous and
spacious windows which Vitruvius attributes to his more magnificent
frigidarium.  The Pompeians, as all the southern Italians, were fond of
banishing the light of their sultry skies, and combined in their
voluptuous associations the idea of luxury with darkness.  Two windows
of glass alone admitted the soft and shaded ray; and the compartment in
which one of these casements was placed was adorned with a large relief
of the destruction of the Titans.

In this apartment Fulvius seated himself with a magisterial air, and his
audience gathering round him, encouraged him to commence his recital.

The poet did not require much pressing.  He drew forth from his vest a
roll of papyrus, and after hemming three times, as much to command
silence as to clear his voice, he began that wonderful ode, of which, to
the great mortification of the author of this history, no single verse
can be discovered.

By the plaudits he received, it was doubtless worthy of his fame; and
Glaucus was the only listener who did not find it excel the best odes of
Horace.

The poem concluded, those who took only the cold bath began to undress;
they suspended their garments on hooks fastened in the wall, and
receiving, according to their condition, either from their own slaves or
those of the thermae, loose robes in exchange, withdrew into that
graceful circular building which yet exists, to shame the unlaving
posterity of the south.

The more luxurious departed by another door to the tepidarium, a place
which was heated to a voluptuous warmth, partly by a movable fireplace,
principally by a suspended pavement, beneath which was conducted the
caloric of the laconicum.

Here this portion of the intended bathers, after unrobing themselves,
remained for some time enjoying the artificial warmth of the luxurious
air. And this room, as befitted its important rank in the long process
of ablution, was more richly and elaborately decorated than the rest;
the arched roof was beautifully carved and painted; the windows above,
of ground glass, admitted but wandering and uncertain rays; below the
massive cornices were rows of figures in massive and bold relief; the
walls glowed with crimson, the pavement was skillfully tessellated in
white mosaics.  Here the habituated bathers, men who bathed seven times
a day, would remain in a state of enervate and speechless lassitude,
either before or (mostly) after the water-bath; and many of these
victims of the pursuit of health turned their listless eyes on the
newcomers, recognizing their friends with a nod, but dreading the
fatigue of conversation.

From this place the party again diverged, according to their several
fancies, some to the sudatorium, which answered the purpose of our
vapor-baths, and thence to the warm-bath itself; those more accustomed
to exercise, and capable of dispensing with so cheap a purchase of
fatigue, resorted at once to the calidarium, or water-bath.

In order to complete this sketch, and give to the reader an adequate
notion of this, the main luxury of the ancients, we will accompany
Lepidus, who regularly underwent the whole process, save only the cold
bath, which had gone lately out of fashion.  Being then gradually warmed
in the tepidarium, which has just been described, the delicate steps of
the Pompeian elegant were conducted to the sudatorium.  Here let the
reader depict to himself the gradual process of the vapor-bath,
accompanied by an exhalation of spicy perfumes.  After our bather had
undergone this operation, he was seized by his slaves, who always
awaited him at the baths, and the dews of heat were removed by a kind of
scraper, which (by the way) a modern traveler has gravely declared to be
used only to remove the dirt, not one particle of which could ever
settle on the polished skin of the practised bather. Thence, somewhat
cooled, he passed into the water-bath, over which fresh perfumes were
profusely scattered, and on emerging from the opposite part of the room,
a cooling shower played over his head and form.  Then wrapping himself
in a light robe, he returned once more to the tepidarium, where he found
Glaucus, who had not encountered the sudatorium; and now, the main
delight and extravagance of the bath commenced.  Their slaves anointed
the bathers from vials of gold, of alabaster, or of crystal, studded
with profusest gems, and containing the rarest unguents gathered from
all quarters of the world.  The number of these smegmata used by the
wealthy would fill a modern volume--especially if the volume were
printed by a fashionable publisher; Amaracinum, Megalium, Nardum--omne
quod exit in um--while soft music played in an adjacent chamber, and
such as used the bath in moderation, refreshed and restored by the
grateful ceremony, conversed with all the zest and freshness of
rejuvenated life.

'Blessed be he who invented baths!' said Glaucus, stretching himself
along one of those bronze seats (then covered with soft cushions) which
the visitor to Pompeii sees at this day in that same tepidarium.
'Whether he were Hercules or Bacchus, he deserved deification.'

'But tell me,' said a corpulent citizen, who was groaning and wheezing
under the operation of being rubbed down, 'tell me, O Glaucus!--evil
chance to thy hands, O slave! why so rough?--tell me--ugh--ugh!--are the
baths at Rome really so magnificent?' Glaucus turned, and recognized
Diomed, though not without some difficulty, so red and so inflamed were
the good man's cheeks by the sudatory and the scraping he had so lately
undergone.  'I fancy they must be a great deal finer than these.  Eh?'
Suppressing a smile, Glaucus replied:

'Imagine all Pompeii converted into baths, and you will then form a
notion of the size of the imperial thermae of Rome.  But a notion of the
size only. Imagine every entertainment for mind and body--enumerate all
the gymnastic games our fathers invented--repeat all the books Italy and
Greece have produced--suppose places for all these games, admirers for
all these works--add to this, baths of the vastest size, the most
complicated construction--intersperse the whole with gardens, with
theatres, with porticoes, with schools--suppose, in one word, a city of
the gods, composed but of palaces and public edifices, and you may form
some faint idea of the glories of the great baths of Rome.'

'By Hercules!' said Diomed, opening his eyes, 'why, it would take a
man's whole life to bathe!'

'At Rome, it often does so,' replied Glaucus, gravely.  'There are many
who live only at the baths.  They repair there the first hour in which
the doors are opened, and remain till that in which the doors are
closed.  They seem as if they knew nothing of the rest of Rome, as if
they despised all other existence.'

'By Pollux! you amaze me.'

'Even those who bathe only thrice a day contrive to consume their lives
in this occupation.  They take their exercise in the tennis-court or the
porticoes, to prepare them for the first bath; they lounge into the
theatre, to refresh themselves after it.  They take their prandium under
the trees, and think over their second bath. By the time it is prepared,
the prandium is digested.  From the second bath they stroll into one of
the peristyles, to hear some new poet recite: or into the library, to
sleep over an old one. Then comes the supper, which they still consider
but a part of the bath: and then a third time they bathe again, as the
best place to converse with their friends.'

'Per Hercle! but we have their imitators at Pompeii.'

'Yes, and without their excuse.  The magnificent voluptuaries of the
Roman baths are happy: they see nothing but gorgeousness and splendor;
they visit not the squalid parts of the city; they know not that there
is poverty in the world.  All Nature smiles for them, and her only frown
is the last one which sends them to bathe in Cocytus. Believe me, they
are your only true philosophers.'

While Glaucus was thus conversing, Lepidus, with closed eyes and scarce
perceptible breath, was undergoing all the mystic operations, not one of
which he ever suffered his attendants to omit.  After the perfumes and
the unguents, they scattered over him the luxurious powder which
prevented any further accession of heat: and this being rubbed away by
the smooth surface of the pumice, he began to indue, not the garments he
had put off, but those more festive ones termed 'the synthesis', with
which the Romans marked their respect for the coming ceremony of supper,
if rather, from its hour (three o'clock in our measurement of time), it
might not be more fitly denominated dinner.  This done, he at length
opened his eyes and gave signs of returning life.

At the same time, too, Sallust betokened by a long yawn the evidence of
existence.

'It is supper time,' said the epicure; 'you, Glaucus and Lepidus, come
and sup with me.'

'Recollect you are all three engaged to my house next week,' cried
Diomed, who was mightily proud of the acquaintance of men of fashion.

'Ah, ah! we recollect,' said Sallust; 'the seat of memory, my Diomed, is
certainly in the stomach.'

Passing now once again into the cooler air, and so into the street, our
gallants of that day concluded the ceremony of a Pompeian bath.



Chapter VIII

ARBACES COGS HIS DICE WITH PLEASURE AND WINS THE GAME.

THE evening darkened over the restless city as Apaecides took his way to
the house of the Egyptian.  He avoided the more lighted and populous
streets; and as he strode onward with his head buried in his bosom, and
his arms folded within his robe, there was something startling in the
contrast, which his solemn mien and wasted form presented to the
thoughtless brows and animated air of those who occasionally crossed his
path.

At length, however, a man of a more sober and staid demeanor, and who
had twice passed him with a curious but doubting look, touched him on
the shoulder.

'Apaecides!' said he, and he made a rapid sign with his hands: it was
the sign of the cross.

'Well, Nazarene,' replied the priest, and his face grew paler; 'what
wouldst thou?'

'Nay,' returned the stranger, 'I would not interrupt thy meditations;
but the last time we met, I seemed not to be so unwelcome.'

'You are not unwelcome, Olinthus; but I am sad and weary: nor am I able
this evening to discuss with you those themes which are most acceptable
to you.'

'O backward of heart!' said Olinthus, with bitter fervor; and art thou
sad and weary, and wilt thou turn from the very springs that refresh and
heal?'

'O earth!' cried the young priest, striking his breast passionately,
'from what regions shall my eyes open to the true Olympus, where thy
