
"Moon-struck, or sun-struck, or saint-struck, she will strike down our
ancient enemy of England, and show you men how it is not wine and
wickedness that make good soldiers!" cried the girl whom he called
Elliot, her face rose-red with anger; and from her eyes two blue rays of
light shot straight to mine, so that I believe my face waxed wan, the
blood flying to my heart.

"Listen to her! look at her!" said her father, jestingly.  "Elliot, if
your renowned maid can fright the English as you have affrayed a good
Scot, the battle is won and Orleans is delivered."

But she had turned her back on us pettishly, and was talking in a low
voice to her jackanapes.  As for me, if my face had been pale before, it
now grew red enough for shame that I had angered her, who was so fair,
though how I had sinned I knew not.  But often I have seen that women,
and these the best, will be all afire at a light word, wherein the
touchiest man-at-arms who ever fought on the turn of a straw could pick
no honourable quarrel.

"How have I been so unhappy as to offend mademoiselle?" I asked, in a
whisper, of her father, giving her a high title, in very confusion.

"Oh, she will hear no bourde nor jest on this Pucelle that all the
countryside is clashing of, and that is bewitching my maid, methinks,
even from afar.  My maid Elliot (so I call her from my mother's kin, but
her true name is Marion, and the French dub her Heliote) hath set all her
heart and her hope on one that is a young lass like herself, and she is
full of old soothsayings about a virgin that is to come out of an oak-
wood and deliver France--no less!  For me, I misdoubt that Merlin, the
Welsh prophet on whom they set store, and the rest of the soothsayers,
are all in one tale with old Thomas Rhymer, of Ercildoune, whose
prophecies our own folk crack about by the ingle on winter nights at
home.  But be it as it may, this wench of Lorraine has, these
three-quarters of a year, been about the Sieur Robert de Baudricourt, now
commanding for the King at Vaucouleurs, away in the east, praying him to
send her to the Court.  She has visions, and hears voices--so she says;
and she gives Baudricourt no peace till he carries her to the King.  The
story goes that, on the ill day of the Battle of the Herrings, she, being
at Vaucouleurs--a hundred leagues away and more,--saw that fight plainly,
and our countrymen fallen, manlike, around the Constable, and the French
flying like hares before a little pack of English talbots.  When the evil
news came, and was approved true, Baudricourt could hold her in no
longer, and now she is on the way with half a dozen esquires and archers
of his command.  The second-sight she may have--it is common enough, if
you believe the red-shanked Highlanders; but if maiden she set forth from
Vaucouleurs, great miracle it is if maiden she comes to Chinon."  He
whispered this in a manner that we call "pauky," being a free man with
his tongue.

"This is a strange tale enough," I said; "the saints grant that the Maid
speaks truly!"

"But yesterday came a letter of her sending to the King," he went on,
"but never of her writing, for they say that she knows not 'A' from 'B,'
if she meets them in her voyaging.  Now, nothing would serve my wilful
daughter Elliot (she being possessed, as I said, with love for this
female mystery), but that we must ride forth and be the first to meet the
Maid on her way, and offer her shelter at my poor house, if she does but
seem honest, though methinks a hostelry is good enough for one that has
ridden so far, with men for all her company.  And I, being but a subject
of my daughter's, as I said, and this a Saint's Day, when a man may rest
from his paints and brushes, I even let saddle the steeds, and came forth
to see what ferlies Heaven would send us."

"Oh, a lucky day for me, fair sir," I answered him, marvelling to hear
him speak of paint and brushes, and even as I spoke a thought came into
my mind.  "If you will listen to me, sir," I said, "and if the gentle
maid, your daughter, will pardon me for staying you so long from the
road, I will tell you that, to my thinking, you have come over late, for
that yesterday the Maiden you speak of rode, after nightfall, into
Chinon."

Now the girl turned round on me, and, in faith, I asked no more than to
see her face, kind or angry.  "You tell us, sir, that you never heard
speak of the Maid till this hour, and now you say that you know of her
comings and goings.  Unriddle your riddle, sir, if it pleases you, and
say how you saw and knew one that you never heard speech of."

She was still very wroth, and I knew not whether I might not anger her
yet more, so I louted lowly, cap in hand, and said--

"It is but a guess that comes into my mind, and I pray you be not angry
with me, who am ready and willing to believe in this Maid, or in any that
will help France, for, if I be not wrong, last night her coming saved my
life, and that of her own company."

"How may that be, if thieves robbed and bound you?"

"I told you not all my tale," I said, "for, indeed, few would have
believed the thing that had not seen it.  But, upon my faith as a
gentleman, and by the arm-bone of the holy Apostle Andrew, which these
sinful eyes have seen, in the church of the Apostle in his own town,
somewhat holy passed this way last night; and if this Maid be indeed sent
from heaven, that holy thing was she, and none other."

"Nom Dieu! saints are not common wayfarers on our roads at night.  There
is no 'wale' of saints in this country," said the father of Elliot; "and
as this Pucelle of Lorraine must needs pass by us here, if she is still
on the way, even tell us all your tale."

With that I told them how the "brigands" (for so they now began to call
such reivers as Brother Thomas) were, to my shame, and maugre my head,
for a time of my own company.  And I told them of the bushment that they
laid to trap travellers, and how I had striven to give a warning, and how
they bound me and gagged me, and of the strange girl's voice that spoke
through the night of "mes Freres de Paradis," and of that golden "boyn"
faring in the dark, that I thought I saw, and of the words spoken by the
blind man and the soldier, concerning some vision which affrayed them, I
know not what.

At this tale the girl Elliot, crossing herself very devoutly, cried
aloud--

"O father, did I not tell you so?  This holy thing can have been no other
but that blessed Maiden, guarded by the dear saints in form visible, whom
this gentleman, for the sin of keeping evil company, was not given the
grace to see.  Oh, come, let us mount and ride to Chinon, for already she
is within the walls; had we not ridden forth so early, we must have heard
tell of it."

It seemed something hard to me that I was to have no grace to behold what
others, and they assuredly much more sinful men than myself, had been
permitted to look upon, if this damsel was right in that she said.  And
how could any man, were he himself a saint, see what was passing by, when
his head was turned the other way?  Howbeit, she called me a gentleman,
as indeed I had professed myself to be, and this I saw, that her passion
of anger against me was spent, as then, and gone by, like a shower of
April.

"Gentleman you call yourself, sir," said her father; "may I ask of what
house?"

"We are cadets of the house of Rothes," I answered.  "My father, Leslie
of Pitcullo, is the fourth son of the third son of the last laird of
Rothes but one; and, for me, I was of late a clerk studying in St.
Andrews."

"I will not ask why you left your lore," he said; "I have been young
myself, and, faith, the story of one lad varies not much from the story
of another.  If we have any spirit, it drives us out to fight the foreign
loons in their own country, if we have no feud at home.  But you are a
clerk, I hear you say, and have skill enough to read and write?"

"Yea, and, if need were, can paint, in my degree, and do fair lettering
on holy books, for this art was my pleasure, and I learned it from a
worthy monk in the abbey."

"O day of miracles!" he cried.  "Listen, Elliot, and mark how finely I
have fallen in luck's way!  Lo you, sir, I also am a gentleman in my
degree, simple as you see me, being one of the Humes of Polwarth; but by
reason of my maimed leg, that came to me with scars many, from certain
shrewd blows got at Verneuil fight, I am disabled from war.  A murrain on
the English bill that dealt the stroke!  To make up my ransom (for I was
taken prisoner there, where so few got quarter) cost me every crown I
could gather, so I even fell back on the skill I learned, like you, when
I was a lad, from a priest in the Abbey of Melrose.  Ashamed of my craft
I am none, for it is better to paint banners and missals than to beg; and
now, for these five years, I am advanced to be Court painter to the King
himself, thanks to John Kirkmichael, Bishop of Orleans, who is of my far-
away kin.  A sore fall it is, for a Hume of Polwarth; and strangely
enough do the French scribes write my name--'Hauves Poulvoir,' and
otherwise, so please you; but that is ever their wont with the best names
in all broad Scotland.  Lo you, even now there is much ado with banner-
painting for the companies that march to help Orleans, ever and again."

"When the Maiden marches, father, you shall have banner-painting," said
the girl.

"Ay, lass, when the Maid marches, and when the lift falls and smoors the
laverocks we shall catch them in plenty. {8} But, Maid or no Maid, saving
your presence, sir, I need what we craftsmen (I pray you again to pardon
me) call an apprentice, and I offer you, if you are skilled as you say,
this honourable post, till you find a better."

My face grew red again with anger at the word "apprentice," and I know
not how I should have answered an offer so unworthy of my blood, when the
girl broke in--

"Till this gentleman marches with the flower of France against our old
enemy of England, you should say, father, and helps to show them another
Bannockburn on Loire-side."

"Ay, well, till then, if it likes you," he said, smiling.  "Till then
there is bed, and meat, and the penny fee for him, till that great day."

"That is coming soon!" she cried, her eyes raised to heaven, and so fair
she looked, that, being a young man and of my complexion amorous, I could
not bear to be out of her company when I might be in it, so stooped my
pride to agree with him.

"Sir," I said, "I thank you heartily for your offer.  You come of as good
a house as mine, and yours is the brag of the Border, as mine is of the
kingdom of Fife.  If you can put your pride in your pouch, faith, so can
I; the rather that there is nothing else therein, and so room enough and
to spare.  But, as touching what this gentle demoiselle has said, I may
march also, may I not, when the Maid rides to Orleans?"

"Ay, verify, with my goodwill, then you may," he cried, laughing, while
the lass frowned.

Then we clapped hands on it, for a bargain, and he did not insult me by
the offer of any arles, or luck penny.

The girl was helped to horse, setting her foot on my hand, that dirled as
her little shoe sole touched it; and the jackanapes rode on her saddle-
bow very proudly.  For me, I ran as well as I might, but stiffly enough,
being cold to the marrow, holding by the father's stirrup-leather and
watching the lass's yellow hair that danced on her shoulders as she rode
foremost.  In this company, then, so much better than that I had left, we
entered Chinon town, and came to their booth, and their house on the
water-side.  Then, of their kindness, I must to bed, which comfort I
sorely needed, and there I slept, in fragrant linen sheets, till compline
rang.




CHAPTER V--OF THE FRAY ON THE DRAWBRIDGE AT CHINON CASTLE


During supper, to which they called me, my master showed me the best
countenance that might be, and it was great joy to me to eat off clean
platters once again, on white linen strewn with spring flowers.  As the
time was Lent, we had fare that they called meagre: fish from the Vienne
water, below the town, and eggs cooked in divers fashions, all to the
point of excellence, for the wine and fare of Chinon are famous in
France.  As my duty was, I waited on my master and on the maid Elliot,
who was never silent, but babbled of all that she had heard since she
came into the town; as to where the Pucelle had lighted off her horse (on
the edge-stone of a well, so it seemed), and where and with what goodwife
she lodged, and how as yet no message had come to her from the castle and
the King; and great joy it was to watch and to hear her.  But her father
mocked, though in a loving manner; and once she wept at his bourdes, and
shone out again, when he fell on his knees, offering her a knife and
baring his breast to the stroke, for I have never seen more love between
father and child, my own experience being contrary.  Yet to my sisters my
father was ever debonnair; for, as I have often marked, the mothers love
the sons best and the sons the mothers, and between father and daughters
it is the same.  But of my mother I have spoken in the beginning of this
history.

When supper was ended, and all things made orderly, I had no great mind
for my bed, having slept my fill for that time.  But the maid Elliot left
us early, which was as if the light had been taken out of the room.

Beside the fire, my master fell to devising about the state of the
country, as burgesses love to do.  And I said that, if I were the
Dauphin, Chinon Castle should not hold me long, for my "spur would be in
my horse's side, and the bridle on his mane," {9} as the old song of the
Battle of Harlaw runs, and I on the way to Orleans.  Thereto he answered,
that he well wished it were so, and, mocking, wished that I were the
Dauphin.

"Not that our Dauphin is a coward, the blood of Saint Louis has not
fallen so low, but he is wholly under the Sieur de La Tremouille, who was
thrust on him while he was young, and still is his master, or, as we say,
his governor.  Now, this lord is one that would fain run with the hare
and hunt with the hounds, and this side of him is Burgundian and that is
Armagnac, and on which of the sides his heart is, none knows.  At
Azincour, as I have heard, he played the man reasonably well.  But he
waxes very fat for a man-at-arms, and is fond of women, and wine, and of
his ease.  Now, if once the King ranges up with the Bastard of Orleans,
and Xaintrailles, and the other captains, who hate La Tremouille, then
his power, and the power of the Chancellor, the Archbishop of Rheims, is
gone and ended.  So these two work ever to patch up a peace with
Burgundy, but, seeing that the duke has his father's death to avenge on
our King, they may patch and better patch, but no peace will come of it.
And the captains cry 'Forward!' and the archbishop and La Tremouille cry
'Back!' and in the meantime Orleans will fall, and the Dauphin may fly
whither he will, for France is lost.  But, for myself, I would to the
saints that I and my lass were home again, beneath the old thorn-tree at
Polwarth on the green, where I have been merry lang syne."

With that word he fell silent, thinking, I doubt not, of his home, as I
did of mine, and of the house of Pitcullo and the ash-tree at the door,
and the sea beyond the ploughed land of the plain.  So, after some space
of silence, he went to his bed, and I to mine, where for long I lay
wakeful, painting on the dark the face of Elliot, and her blue eyes, and
remembering her merry, changeful ways.

Betimes in the morning I was awakened by the sound of her moving about
through the house, and having dressed and gone forth from my little
chamber, I found her in the house-place, she having come from early Mass.
She took little heed of me, giving me some bread and wine, the same as
she and her father took; and she was altogether less gay and wilful than
she had been, and there seemed to be something that lay heavy on her
mind.  When her father asked her if the gossips at the church door had
given her any more tidings of the Maid, she did but frown, and soon left
the chamber, whence my master led me forth into his booth, and bade me
show him my hand in writing.  This pleased him not ill, and next I must
grind colours to his liking; and again he went about his business, while
I must mind the booth, and be cap in hand to every saucy page that came
from the castle with an order from his lord.

Full many a time my hand was on my whinger, and yet more often I wished
myself on the free road again, so that I were out of ill company, and
assuredly the Lorrainer Maid, whatever she might be, was scarcely longing
more than I for the day when she should unfurl her banner and march, with
me at her back, to Orleans.  For so irksome was my servitude, and the
laying of colours on the ground of banners for my master to paint, and
the copying of books of Hours and Missals, and the insolence of customers
worse born than myself, that I could have drowned myself in the Vienne
water but for the sight of Elliot.  Yet she was become staid enough, and
betimes sad; as it seemed that there was no good news of her dear Maid,
for the King would not see her, and all men (it appeared), save those who
had ridden with her, mocked the Pucelle for a bold ramp, with a bee in
her bonnet.  But the two gentlemen that had been her escort were staunch.
Their names were Jean de Metz and Bertrand de Poulengy, good esquires.

Of me Elliot made ofttimes not much more account than of her jackanapes,
which was now in very high favour, and waxing fat, so that, when none but
her father could hear her, she would jest and call him La Tremouille.

Yet I, as young men will, was forward in all ways to serve her, and to
win her grace and favour.  She was fain to hear of Scotland, her own
country, which she had never seen, and I was as fain to tell her.  And
betimes I would say how fair were the maidens of our own country, and how
any man that saw her would know her to be a Scot, though from her tongue,
in French, none might guess it.  And, knowing that she loved wildflowers,
I would search for them and bring them to her, and would lead her to
speak of romances which she loved, no less than I, and of pages who had
loved queens, and all such matters as young men and maids are wont to
devise of; and now she would listen, and at other seasons would seem
proud, and as if her mind were otherwhere.  Young knights many came to
our booth, and looked ill-pleased when I served them, and their eyes were
ever on the inner door, watching for Elliot, whom they seldom had sight
of.

So here was I, in a double service, who, before I met Brother Thomas, had
been free of heart and hand.  But, if my master's service irked me, in
that other I found comfort, when I could devise with Elliot, as
concerning our country and her hopes for the Maid.  But my own hopes were
not high, nor could I mark any sign that she favoured me more than
another, though I had the joy to be often in her company.  And, indeed,
what hope could I have, being so young, and poor, and in visible station
no more than any 'prentice lad?  My heart was much tormented in these
fears, and mainly because we heard no tidings that the Maid was accepted
by the Dauphin, and that the day of her marching, and of my deliverance
from my base craft of painting, was at hand.

It so fell out, how I knew not, whether I had shown me too presumptuous
for an apprentice, or because of any other reason, that Elliot had much
forborne my company, and was more often in church at her prayers than in
the house, or, when in the house, was busy in divers ways, and I scarce
ever could get word of her.  Finding her in this mood, I also withdrew
within myself, and was both proud and sorely unhappy, longing more than
ever to take my own part in the world as a man-at-arms.  Now, one day
right early, I being alone in the chamber, copying a psalter, Elliot came
in, looking for her father.  I rose at her coming, doffing my cap, and
told her, in few words, that my master had gone forth.  Thereon she
flitted about the chamber, looking at this and that, while I stood
silent, deeming that she used me in a sort scarce becoming my blood and
