stream, pointing out to them, when they had passed above the limits
of the city, the various noblemen's houses scattered along the
banks of the river. Off Westminster the waterman ceased rowing, to
allow them to view the grand old Abbey; and then as they went on
again, they marvelled at the contrast of the low, deserted marshes
of Lambeth and Bankside, which contrasted so strongly with the
magnificence and the life they had left behind.

At Chelsea they admired the grand palace for the reception of old
soldiers, and then--for the tide was turning now--floated back to
Westminster. So long were they in going round the Abbey, and
examining the tombs of the kings, that it was getting dark when
they started eastward again, up past the Palace of Whitehall, and
then along the Strand. Already the distance between the city and
Westminster was connected with houses, and the junction of the two
cities had fairly taken place.

Dim oil lamps were lighted here and there as they went along, foot
passengers bore lanterns to enable them to pick their way across
rough places, and link men carried torches in front of sedan
chairs, in which ladies were being taken to fashionable
entertainments, which then commenced at six o'clock.

All this was new and amusing to the boys; and having gone into a
tavern near the Abbey, and partaken of some refreshment, they were
not pressed for time; and it was near eight before they seriously
thought of proceeding towards the city.

When a few hundred yards from Temple Bar, they heard a shouting and
a scream down one of the streets leading to the river. The street
was deserted, but down at the farther end they could see the flash
of sword blades, in the light of an oil lamp.

"Come along, Hugh; that is a woman's scream."

"Better not interfere, Master Rupert," Hugh said.

But Rupert had already darted off, and Hugh without a moment's
hesitation followed in his steps.

At the end of the street they came upon a sedan chair. The two
porters stood surlily against the wall, menaced by the drawn swords
of two men standing over them; while two other men--evidently of
higher rank, but enveloped in cloaks--were forcibly dragging a lady
from the chair. They had thrown a cloak over her head to drown her
cries.

As the lads came up, one of the men uttered a furious oath.

"Rolf, Simon! leave those fellows and keep these springalls back.
They are but boys. I will whistle when I am in the boat.

"Now, mistress!" and he began to carry the lady away.

As the lads arrived, the servitors--for such they were by their
appearance--leaving the chairmen, turned upon them. One of the
chairmen at once ran off as fast as his legs could carry him; but
the other, a sturdy fellow, leaped on the back of the man who had
been guarding him, as the latter turned upon Rupert. Hugh was
attacked by the other.

"Be careful, Hugh! keep out of reach of his point," Rupert cried;
and darting past, he struck the man who had hold of the lady a
sharp blow across the ankle, which brought him instantly to the
ground with his burden.

The other gentleman drew his sword, and rushed upon Rupert. It was
fortunate for the latter that he had chosen his stick for lightness
and balance, for it moved as quickly and easily as a foil. Without
a thought of guarding, his assailant rushed at him to run him
through; but Rupert parried the thrust, and in turn drove the end
of his stick, with all his force, into his opponent's stomach. The
man instantaneously doubled up with a low cry, and fell on the
ground.

Then the other man, who had by this time risen to his feet, in turn
rushed furiously at Rupert. A few times the sword and stick scraped
and rasped against each other, and then Rupert lunged full at the
other's face.

There was a loud cry, an oath, and then, as the sound of the watch
running down the street, led by the chairman who had run away, was
heard, the man took to his feet and fled. The lackey who had
engaged Hugh, and who had in vain endeavoured to get to close
quarters with the lad, imitated his example; but the prostrate man
on the ground, and the fellow held by the chairman, were seized by
the watch.

Rupert turned to the young lady, who, having now disencumbered
herself of the folds of the cloak over her head, was leaning, half
fainting, against the chair.

Taking off his hat and bowing deeply, he expressed his hope that
she had suffered no harm through the unmannerly assault upon her.

"I thank you greatly, sir," she said, speaking with a slightly
foreign accent. "I am unhurt, although somewhat breathless. I owe
you my deep gratitude for rescue from these evil-minded men."

"What may be your name, mistress?" one of the watch asked. "You
will be needed tomorrow to testify against these men."

"My name is Maria Von Duyk, and I reside at present with the worthy
alderman, Peter Hawkins, to whom I was returning in the chair, as
the chairmen will tell you, after a visit to Mistress Vanloct,
whose house we had just left when molested."

"And yours, young sir?" the watchman asked.

"My name is Rupert Holliday. I am staying at the Bell, in
Bishopsgate Street."

"You will both have to be present tomorrow morning before the
worshipful magistrate Master Forman, at Westminster."

The watch now secured the man on the ground, who was recovering
from the effect of the violent thrust in the stomach, and putting
handcuffs on him and the other, led them away.

"You will permit me, I trust, to escort you to your door," Rupert
said, as he ceremoniously handed the young lady into her chair.

"Yes, indeed, sir; and I trust that you will enter, and allow Dame
Hawkins to add her thanks to mine."

Rupert bowed, and the chair being closed the chairmen lifted it,
and with Rupert and Hugh following, proceeded eastward.

When they arrived at the house of Alderman Hawkins, in Lawrence
Pulteney, the young lady on alighting begged Rupert to enter; but
the latter excused himself on account of the hour, but said that he
would call next morning, and would, if allowed, accompany her and
the alderman to give evidence as to the assault.

On arriving next morning, Rupert was overwhelmed with thanks by the
alderman, his wife, and Mistress Maria Von Duyk, all of whom were
much surprised at his youth, for in the dim light of the preceding
evening the young lady had not perceived that her rescuer was a
mere lad.

Rupert found that there was no occasion to go before the
magistrate, for the alderman having sent down early to the watch
house to inquire at what hour their presence would be required,
found that the prisoners had been rescued, on their way to the
watch house, by a party of armed men.

"We are," the alderman said, "well aware who was the leader of the
assailants, the man who escaped. Sir Richard Fulke is a ruined
gamester, and is a distant relation of Dame Vanloct, whom my young
friend was yesterday visiting. Knowing the wealth of Mistress Von
Duyk's good father, he has sought to mend his ruined fortune by a
match with her. At the urgent request of Mistress Von Duyk I wrote
to him, saying that his attentions were unpleasing to her, and that
they must be discontinued, or that she could no longer visit at
Dame Vanloct's where she usually had met him. This was a week
since. He replied courteously, regretting that the deep devotion he
felt was unrequited, but withdrawing from the undertaking of trying
to win her, and promising that henceforth she should be no longer
troubled with his presence when she visited Dame Vanloct. This was
of course done to lull our suspicion. When the chair was stopped
yesterday, Maria at once recognized his voice. As they dragged her
from the chair, he said:

"'Quick! hurry her down to the boat.'

"There is no doubt upon my mind that he intended to carry her off,
and to compel her to marry him. I bethought me at first of applying
to the secretary of state for a warrant for his arrest to answer
for this outrage, but Mistress Maria leaves us tomorrow for
Holland, and the process would delay her departure, and would cause
a scandal and talk very unpleasant to herself, and which would
greatly offend my good friend her father. Had the men in custody
been brought up this morning, there would have been no choice but
to have carried the matter through. It was then a relief to us to
find that they had escaped. I have told you this, young sir, as
your due after having rescued Mistress Von Duyk from so great a
peril. Now, as to yourself, believe me if my friendship and
assistance can in any way advantage you, they are at your service.
Even of your name I am yet in ignorance."

Rupert thanked the worthy alderman, and then stated that he was the
grandson of Colonel Holliday, of Windthorpe Chace, in Derbyshire,
and had come up to London to wait upon the Earl of Marlborough, who
had promised him his protection and a cornetcy in a regiment of
horse for service in Holland.

"In that case, sir," Mistress Von Duyk said, "it is like you may
come to Dort. If so, believe me that my father, whom I shall tell
how much we are indebted to you, will not be backward in
manifesting his gratitude for the great service that you have
rendered to his daughter."

"How were you thinking of passing the day?" the alderman asked.

"I had no plan," Rupert said. "In truth, I am waiting to call upon
the Earl of Marlborough until Master Haliford has fashioned me a
suit of clothes fitted for such an occasion; he has promised them
for this evening."

"Would it please you to go down the river? I have a boat, and if
you would like to see the shipping of this great port, and the
palace at Greenwich for our seamen, my boatmen will take you down;
and you will, I trust, return and take your midday meal with us."

And so it was arranged; and as Rupert and Hugh were rowed down the
river, lost in wonder at the numerous craft that lay there, Hugh
admitted that Rupert's interference in a business which was no
concern of his had turned out a fortunate occurrence.



Chapter 5: The Fencing School.

It was with no small trepidation that Rupert Holliday ascended the
steps of the Earl of Marlborough's residence in Pall Mall. Hugh
accompanied him thus far and stopped at the door, outside which, in
the courtyard and in the hall, were standing many lackeys who had
attended their masters. Rupert felt very young, and the somewhat
surprised looks of the servants in the hall at his appearance added
to his feeling of youth. He was shown into an antechamber, where a
number of officers of all ranks, of courtiers, and politicians,
were assembled, talking in groups. Rupert felt alone and
uncomfortable among this crowd of distinguished men, none of whom
did he know, and no one paid the smallest attention to him. He had
on entering written his name down in a book in the hall, whence it
would be taken in with others to the great man.

Presently an officer in general's uniform came out from an inner
room, and an instant afterwards the earl himself appeared. Not only
was John Churchill one of the most handsome men in Europe, but he
was the most courtly and winning in manner; and Rupert, shrinking
back from observation, watched with admiration as he moved round
the room, stopping to say a few words here, shaking hands there,
listening to a short urgent person, giving an answer to a petition,
before presented, by another, giving pleasure and satisfaction
wherever he moved.

Rupert saw, however, that even while speaking his eye was wandering
round the room, and directly he perceived him he walked straight
towards him, those standing between falling back as he advanced.

"Ah, my young friend," he said warmly, holding out his hand to
Rupert, "I was expecting you.

"Sir John Loveday, Lord Fairholm," he said, turning to two young
gentlemen near, "let me present to you Master Rupert Holliday,
grandson of Colonel Holliday, one of the bravest of our cavaliers,
and who I can guarantee has inherited the skill and courage of his
grandfather. He will make the campaign in Holland with you,
gentlemen, for his commission has been made out today in her
Majesty's fifth regiment of dragoons.

"I will speak to you more, presently, Rupert."

So saying, the earl moved away among his visitors, leaving Rupert
flushed with pleasure and confusion. The young gentlemen to whom
the earl had introduced him, much surprised at the flattering
manner in which the great general had spoken of the lad before
them, at once entered into conversation with him, and hearing that
he was but newly come to London, offered to show him the various
places where men of fashion resorted, and begged him to consider
them at his disposal. Rupert, who had been carefully instructed by
his grandfather in courtly expression and manner, returned many
thanks to the gentlemen for their obliging offers, of which, after
he had again spoken to the earl, and knew what commands he would
lay upon him, he would thankfully avail himself.

It was nearly an hour before the Earl of Marlborough had made the
round of the antechamber, but the time passed quickly to Rupert.
The room was full of men whose names were prominent in the history
of the time, and these Sir John Loveday, and Lord Fairholm, who
were lively young men, twenty-two or twenty-three years old,
pointed out to him, often telling him a merry story or some droll
jest regarding them. There was Saint John, handsome, but delicate
looking, with a half sneer on his face, and dressed in the
extremity of fashion, with a coat of peach-coloured velvet with
immense cuffs, crimson leather shoes with diamond buckles; his
sword was also diamond hilted, his hands were almost hidden in lace
ruffles, and he wore his hair in ringlets of some twenty inches in
length, tied behind with a red ribbon. The tall man, with a haughty
but irritable face, in the scarlet uniform of a general officer,
was the Earl of Peterborough. There too were Godolphin and Orford,
both leading members of the cabinet; the Earl of Sutherland, the
Dukes of Devonshire and Newcastle, Lord Nottingham, and many
others.

At last the audience was over, and the minister, bowing to all,
withdrew, and the visitors began to leave. A lackey came up to
Rupert and requested him to follow him; and bidding adieu to his
new friends, who both gave him their addresses and begged him to
call up on them, he followed the servant into the hall and upstairs
into a cosy room, such as would now be called a boudoir. There
stood the Earl of Marlborough, by the chair in which a lady of
great beauty and commanding air was sitting.

"Sarah," he said, "this is my young friend, Rupert Holliday, who as
you know did me good service in the midlands."

The countess held out her hand kindly to Rupert, and he bent over
it and touched it with his lips.

"You must remember you are my friend as well as my husband's," she
said. "He tells me you saved his life; and although I can scarce
credit the tale, seeing how young you are, yet courage and skill
dwell not necessarily in great bodies. Truly, Master Holliday, I am
deeply indebted to you; and Sarah Churchill is true in her
friendships."

"As in her hates, eh?" laughed the earl.

Between the Earl of Marlborough and his wife there existed no
common affection. They were passionately attached to each other;
and the earl's letters show that at all times, even when in the
field surrounded by difficulties, harassed by opposition, menaced
with destruction by superior forces, his thoughts were turned
affectionately towards her, and he was ever wishing that the war
would end that he might return to her side. She on her part was
equally attached to him, but much as she strove to add to his power
and to forward his plans, her haughty and violent temper was the
main cause of the unmerited disgrace into which he fell with his
royal mistress, who owed so much to him personally, and whose reign
he did so much to render a brilliant and successful one. At the
present time, however, she stood upon the footing of the closest
intimacy and affection with Queen Anne.

The earl then introduced Rupert to those other ladies who were
present; the eldest, his daughter Lady Harriet, recently married to
Mr. Godolphin; the second, Anne, married to Lord Spencer; and the
two daughters still unmarried, aged sixteen and seventeen
respectively.

Rupert was so confused with the earl's kindness that he had
difficulty in finding words, but he made a great effort, and
expressed in proper set terms his thankfulness to the countess for
her great kindness to him, and of his own want of deserts.

"There," the countess said, "that will do very nicely and prettily;
and now put it aside until we are in public, and talk in your own
natural way. So you have been fighting again, have you, and
well-nigh killing young Master Brownlow?"

Rupert was completely astounded at this address; and the earl said,
laughing:

"I told you that I expected you. The worthy colonel your
grandfather wrote me a letter, which I received this morning,
telling me the incident which had taken place, and your sudden
disappearance, stating that he doubted not you had made for London,
and begging--which indeed was in no way necessary--my protection on
your behalf."

"Did my grandfather say, sir," Rupert asked anxiously, "aught of
the state of Master Brownlow?"

"Yes; he said that the leech had strong hopes that he would
recover."

"I am indeed glad of that," Rupert said; "for I had no ill will to
him."

"We must be careful of you, Master Holliday," the countess said;
"for if you go on like this you will much diminish the number of
the queen's subjects."

"I can assure your grace," Rupert said earnestly, "that I am no
brawler, and am not quarrelsome by nature, and that the thought of
shedding blood, except of the foes of my country in battle, pains
me much."

"I'll warrant me you are the mildest-tempered boy alive," the earl
said. "Now tell me frankly: you have been in London some
forty-eight hours; have you passed that time without getting into a
fray or quarrel of any kind?"

Rupert turned scarlet with confusion.

"His looks betray him," the earl laughed. "Look, girls, at the
mild-tempered young gentleman.

"Now, out with it. How was it?"

Thus exhorted, Rupert very stammeringly gave an account of the fray
in which he had been engaged.

"Von Duyk!" the earl said. "She must be a daughter of the great
merchant of Dort--a useful friend to have made, maybe, Master
Holliday; and it may be that your adventure may even be of service
to the state. Never speak now, Master Rupert, of your peaceful
intentions. You take after your namesake, the Prince, and are a
veritable knight errant of adventure. The sooner I have you over in
Holland fighting the queen's enemies, and not the queen's subjects,
the better.

"Now tell me, where have you taken up your abode?"

"At the Bell, at Bishopsgate Street," Rupert answered.

"And your follower, for I know one accompanied you; where is he?"

"He waits without, sir."

The earl touched a hand bell.

"Fetch in Master Holliday's retainer; you will find him without.
Make him at home in the servant's hall. Send a messenger down to
the Bell at Bishopsgate, fetch hither the mails of Master Holliday;
he will remain as my guest at present."

Rupert now entered upon a life very different to that which he had
led hitherto. He received a letter from Colonel Holliday, enclosing
