attend upon thee, and entertain thee." She thanked him. Then Thorstein
Ericsson sat up, and exclaimed: "Where is Gudrid?" Thrice he repeated the
question, but Gudrid made no response. She then asked Thorstein, the
master, "Shall I give answer to his question, or not?" Thorstein, the
master, bade her make no reply, and he then crossed the floor, and seated
himself upon the chair, with Gudrid in his lap, and spoke, saying: "What
dost thou wish, namesake?" After a little while, Thorstein replies: "I
desire to tell Gudrid of the fate which is in store for her, to the end
that she may be better reconciled to my death, for I am indeed come to a
goodly resting-place. This I have to tell thee, Gudrid, that thou art to
marry an Icelander, and that ye are to have a long wedded life together,
and a numerous and noble progeny, illustrious, and famous, of good odor
and sweet virtues. Ye shall go from Greenland to Norway, and thence to
Iceland, where ye shall build your home. There ye shall dwell together
for a long time, but thou shalt outlive him, and shalt then go abroad and
to the South, and shalt return to Iceland again, to thy home, and there a
church shall then be raised, and thou shalt abide there and take the
veil, and there thou shalt die." When he had thus spoken, Thorstein sank
back again, and his body was laid out for burial, and borne to the ship.
Thorstein, the master, faithfully performed all his promises to Gudrid.
He sold his lands and live-stock in the spring, and accompanied Gudrid to
the ship, with all his possessions. He put the ship in order, procured a
crew, and then sailed to Ericsfirth. The bodies of the dead were now
buried at the church, and Gudrid then went home to Leif at Brattahlid,
while Thorstein the Swarthy made a home for himself on Ericsfirth, and
remained there as long as he lived, and was looked upon as a very
superior man.

_Of the Wineland Voyages of Thorfinn and his Companions._--That same
summer a ship came from Norway to Greenland. The skipper's name was
Thorfinn Karlsefni; he was a son of Thord Horsehead, and a grandson of
Snorri, the son of Thord of Hoefdi. Thorfinn Karlsefni, who was a very
wealthy man, passed the winter at Brattahlid with Leif Ericsson. He very
soon set his heart upon Gudrid, and sought her hand in marriage; she
referred him to Leif for her answer, and was subsequently betrothed to
him, and their marriage was celebrated that same winter. A renewed
discussion arose concerning a Wineland voyage, and the folk urged
Karlsefni to make the venture, Gudrid joining with the others. He
determined to undertake the voyage, and assembled a company of sixty men
and five women, and entered into an agreement with his shipmates that
they should each share equally in all the spoils of the enterprise. They
took with them all kinds of cattle, as it was their intention to settle
the country, if they could. Karlsefni asked Leif for the house in
Wineland, and he replied, that he would lend it but not give it. They
sailed out to sea with the ship, and arrived safe and sound at
Leif's-booths, and carried their hammocks ashore there. They were soon
provided with an abundant and goodly supply of food, for a whale of good
size and quality was driven ashore there, and they secured it, and
flensed it, and had then no lack of provisions. The cattle were turned
out upon the land, and the males soon became very restless and vicious;
they had brought a bull with them. Karlsefni caused trees to be felled,
and to be hewed into timbers, wherewith to load his ship, and the wood
was placed upon a cliff to dry. They gathered somewhat of all of the
valuable products of the land, grapes, and all kinds of game and fish,
and other good things. In the summer succeeding the first winter,
Skrellings were discovered. A great troop of men came forth from out the
woods. The cattle were hard by, and the bull began to bellow and roar
with a great noise, whereat the Skrellings were frightened, and ran away,
with their packs wherein were gray furs, sables, and all kinds of
peltries. They fled towards Karlsefni's dwelling, and sought to effect an
entrance into the house, but Karlsefni caused the doors to be defended
[against them]. Neither [people] could understand the other's language.
The Skrellings put down their bundles then, and loosed them, and offered
their wares [for barter], and were especially anxious to exchange these
for weapons, but Karlsefni forbade his men to sell their weapons, and
taking counsel with himself, he bade the women carry out milk to the
Skrellings, which they no sooner saw, than they wanted to buy it, and
nothing else. Now the outcome of the Skrellings' trading was, that they
carried their wares away in their stomachs, while they left their packs
and peltries behind with Karlsefni and his companions, and having
accomplished this [exchange] they went away. Now it is to be told, that
Karlsefni caused a strong wooden palisade to be constructed and set up
around the house. It was at this time that Gudrid, Karlsefni's wife, gave
birth to a male child, and the boy was called Snorri. In the early part
of the second winter the Skrellings came to them again, and these were
now much more numerous than before, and brought with them the same wares
as at first. Then said Karlsefni to the women: "Do ye carry out now the
same food, which proved so profitable before, and nought else." When they
saw this they cast their packs in over the palisade. Gudrid was sitting
within, in the doorway, beside the cradle of her infant son, Snorri, when
a shadow fell upon the door, and a woman in a black namkirtle entered.
She was short in stature, and wore a fillet about her head; her hair was
of a light chestnut color, and she was pale of hue, and so big-eyed, that
never before had eyes so large been seen in a human skull. She went up to
where Gudrid was seated, and said: "What is thy name?" "My name is
Gudrid; but what is thy name?" "My name is Gudrid," says she. The
housewife, Gudrid, motioned her with her hand to a seat beside her; but
it so happened, that at that very instant Gudrid heard a great crash,
whereupon the woman vanished, and at that same moment one of the
Skrellings, who had tried to seize their weapons, was killed by one of
Karlsefni's followers. At this the Skrellings fled precipitately, leaving
their garments and wares behind them; and not a soul, save Gudrid alone,
beheld this woman. "Now we must needs take counsel together," says
Karlsefni, "for that I believe they will visit us a third time, in great
numbers, and attack us. Let us now adopt this plan: ten of our number
shall go out upon the cape, and show themselves there, while the
remainder of our company shall go into the woods and hew a clearing for
our cattle, when the troop approaches from the forest. We will also take
our bull, and let him go in advance of us." The lie of the land was such
that the proposed meeting-place had the lake upon the one side, and the
forest upon the other. Karlsefni's advice was now carried into execution.
The Skrellings advanced to the spot which Karlsefni had selected for the
encounter, and a battle was fought there, in which great numbers of the
band of the Skrellings were slain. There was one man among the
Skrellings, of large size and fine bearing, whom Karlsefni concluded must
be their chief. One of the Skrellings picked up an axe, and having looked
at it for a time, he brandished it about one of his companions, and
hewed at him, and on the instant the man fell dead. Thereupon the big man
seized the axe, and after examining it for a moment, he hurled it as far
as he could, out into the sea; then they fled helter-skelter into the
woods, and thus their intercourse came to an end. Karlsefni and his party
remained there throughout the winter, but in the spring Karlsefni
announces, that he is not minded to remain there longer, but will return
to Greenland. They now made ready for the voyage, and carried away with
them much booty in vines and grapes, and peltries. They sailed out upon
the high seas, and brought their ship safely to Ericsfirth, where they
remained during the winter.

_Freydis causes the Brothers to be put to Death._--There was now much
talk anew, about a Wineland-voyage, for this was reckoned both a
profitable and an honorable enterprise. The same summer that Karlsefni
arrived from Wineland, a ship from Norway arrived in Greenland. This ship
was commanded by two brothers, Helgi and Finnbogi, who passed the winter
in Greenland. They were descended from an Icelandic family of the
East-firths. It is now to be added, that Freydis,[62-1] Eric's daughter,
set out from her home at Gardar, and waited upon the brothers, Helgi and
Finnbogi, and invited them to sail with their vessel to Wineland, and to
share with her equally all of the good things which they might succeed in
obtaining there. To this they agreed, and she departed thence to visit
her brother, Leif, and ask him to give her the house which he had caused
to be erected in Wineland, but he made her the same answer [as that which
he had given Karlsefni], saying, that he would lend the house, but not
give it. It was stipulated between Karlsefni and Freydis, that each
should have on shipboard thirty able-bodied men, besides the women; but
Freydis immediately violated this compact, by concealing five men more
[than this number], and this the brothers did not discover before they
arrived in Wineland. They now put out to sea, having agreed beforehand,
that they would sail in company, if possible, and although they were not
far apart from each other, the brothers arrived somewhat in advance, and
carried their belongings up to Leif's house. Now when Freydis arrived,
her ship was discharged, and the baggage carried up to the house,
whereupon Freydis exclaimed: "Why did you carry your baggage in here?"
"Since we believed," said they, "that all promises made to us would be
kept." "It was to me that Leif loaned the house," says she, "and not to
you." Whereupon Helgi exclaimed: "We brothers cannot hope to rival thee
in wrong-dealing." They thereupon carried their baggage forth, and built
a hut, above the sea, on the bank of the lake, and put all in order about
it; while Freydis caused wood to be felled, with which to load her ship.
The winter now set in, and the brothers suggested, that they should amuse
themselves by playing games. This they did for a time, until the folk
began to disagree, when dissensions arose between them, and the games
came to an end, and the visits between the houses ceased; and thus it
continued far into the winter. One morning early, Freydis arose from her
bed, and dressed herself, but did not put on her shoes and stockings. A
heavy dew had fallen, and she took her husband's cloak, and wrapped it
about her, and then walked to the brothers' house, and up to the door,
which had been only partly closed by one of the men, who had gone out a
short time before. She pushed the door open, and stood, silently, in the
doorway for a time. Finnbogi, who was lying on the innermost side of the
room, was awake, and said: "What dost thou wish here, Freydis?" She
answers: "I wish thee to rise, and go out with me, for I would speak with
thee." He did so, and they walked to a tree, which lay close by the wall
of the house, and seated themselves upon it. "How art thou pleased here?"
says she. He answers: "I am well pleased with the fruitfulness of the
land, but I am ill-content with the breach which has come between us,
for, methinks, there has been no cause for it." "It is even as thou
sayest," says she, "and so it seems to me; but my errand to thee is, that
I wish to exchange ships with you brothers, for that ye have a larger
ship than I, and I wish to depart from here." "To this I must accede,"
says he; "if it is thy pleasure." Therewith they parted, and she returned
home, and Finnbogi to his bed. She climbed up into bed, and awakened
Thorvard with her cold feet, and he asked her why she was so cold and
wet. She answered, with great passion: "I have been to the brothers,"
says she, "to try to buy their ship, for I wished to have a larger
vessel, but they received my overtures so ill, that they struck me, and
handled me very roughly; what time thou, poor wretch, wilt neither avenge
my shame nor thy own, and I find, perforce, that I am no longer in
Greenland, moreover I shall part from thee unless thou wreakest vengeance
for this." And now he could stand her taunts no longer, and ordered the
men to rise at once, and take their weapons, and this they did, and they
then proceeded directly to the house of the brothers, and entered it,
while the folk were asleep, and seized and bound them, and led each one
out, when he was bound; and as they came out, Freydis caused each one to
be slain. In this wise all of the men were put to death, and only the
women were left, and these no one would kill. At this Freydis exclaimed:
"Hand me an axe!" This was done, and she fell upon the five women, and
left them dead. They returned home, after this dreadful deed, and it was
very evident that Freydis was well content with her work. She addressed
her companions, saying: "If it be ordained for us, to come again to
Greenland, I shall contrive the death of any man who shall speak of these
events. We must give it out, that we left them living here, when we came
away." Early in the spring, they equipped the ship, which had belonged to
the brothers, and freighted it with all of the products of the land,
which they could obtain, and which the ship would carry. Then they put
out to sea, and, after a prosperous voyage, arrived with their ship in
Ericsfirth early in the summer. Karlsefni was there, with his ship all
ready to sail, and was awaiting a fair wind; and people say, that a ship
richer laden, than that which he commanded, never left Greenland.

_Concerning Freydis._--Freydis now went to her home, since it had
remained unharmed during her absence. She bestowed liberal gifts upon all
of her companions, for she was anxious to screen her guilt. She now
established herself at her home; but her companions were not all so
close-mouthed, concerning their misdeeds and wickedness, that rumors did
not get abroad at last. These finally reached her brother, Leif, and he
thought it a most shameful story. He thereupon took three of the men, who
had been of Freydis's party, and forced them all at the same time to a
confession of the affair, and their stories entirely agreed. "I have no
heart," says Leif, "to punish my sister, Freydis, as she deserves, but
this I predict of them, that there is little prosperity in store for
their offspring." Hence it came to pass, that no one from that time
forward thought them worthy of aught but evil. It now remains to take up
the story from the time when Karlsefni made his ship ready, and sailed
out to sea. He had a successful voyage, and arrived in Norway safe and
sound. He remained there during the winter, and sold his wares, and both
he and his wife were received with great favor by the most distinguished
men of Norway. The following spring he put his ship in order for the
voyage to Iceland; and when all his preparations had been made, and his
ship lying at the wharf, awaiting favorable winds, there came to him a
Southerner, a native of Bremen in the Saxonland, who wished to buy his
"house-neat."[65-1] "I do not wish to sell it," said he. "I will give
thee half a 'moerk' in gold for it," says the Southerner. This Karlsefni
thought a good offer, and accordingly closed the bargain. The Southerner
went his way, with the "house-neat," and Karlsefni knew not what wood it
was, but it was "moesur," come from Wineland.

Karlsefni sailed away, and arrived with his ship in the north of
Iceland, in Skagafirth. His vessel was beached there during the winter,
and in the spring he bought Glaumboeiar-land, and made his home there,
and dwelt there as long as he lived, and was a man of the greatest
prominence. From him and his wife, Gudrid, a numerous and goodly
lineage is descended. After Karlsefni's death, Gudrid, together with her
son, Snorri, who was born in Wineland, took charge of the farmstead; and
when Snorri was married, Gudrid went abroad, and made a pilgrimage to
the South, after which she returned again to the home of her son,
Snorri, who had caused a church to be built at Glaumboer. Gudrid then
took the veil and became an anchorite, and lived there the rest of her
days. Snorri had a son, named Thorgeir, who was the father of Ingveld,
the mother of Bishop Brand. Hallfrid was the name of the daughter of
Snorri, Karlsefni's son; she was the mother of Runolf, Bishop Thorlak's
father. Biorn was the name of [another] son of Karlsefni and Gudrid; he
was the father of Thorunn, the mother of Bishop Biorn. Many men are
descended from Karlsefni, and he has been blessed with a numerous and
famous posterity; and of all men Karlsefni has given the most exact
accounts of all these voyages, of which something has now been

recounted.

FOOTNOTES:

[45-1] Reeves's translation. In _Origines Islandicae_, Vol. II., p. 598,
this saga is called "The Story of the Wineland Voyages, commonly called
The Story of Eric the Red."

[45-2] The original word for "Brief History" also means "section,"
"episode," "little story," _i.e._, extract or abbreviated account.

[46-1] About 985 (983-986). One vellum of the _Landnama-bok_ (Book of
Settlements) says sixteen, the other fifteen years.

[46-2] Bishop Frederick was from "Saxland" (Saxony). According to the
Kristni-Saga he came to Iceland "in the summer when the land had been
settled one-hundred-and-seven winters," _i.e._, in 981. He made but
little headway in preaching Christianity.

[47-1] _Hafgerdingar_ (sea-rollers) are supposed to have been earthquake
waves, and the lines evidently refer to such tidal-waves caused by an
unusually severe earthquake in the year 986. See Reeves, p. 180, (63).
The prose sense of the stave is: "I beg the blessed friend of the monks
to further our voyage. May the Lord of the heavens hold his hand over
me."

[49-1] "Certainly a marvellous coincidence, but it is quite in character
with the no less surprising accuracy with which the explorers of this
history [_i.e._, the Flat Island Book narrative] succeeded in finding
'Leif's-booths' in a country which was as strange to them as Greenland to
Biarni." (Reeves.)

[50-1] Earl Eric ruled in Norway from 1000 to 1015.

[52-1] These two words designate positions of the sun at two points of
time. Early commentators got much more definite results from this
observation than later ones, with scientific assistance, have succeeded
in getting. Largely on the basis of it, Rafn (in _Antiquitates
Americanae_), concluded that Vinland was in Rhode Island. Both Storm and
Reeves, after detailed investigation, declare that it cannot be shown
from this passage how far to the south Vinland was located. Captain
Phythian, U.S.N., who has given the question careful consideration, says:
"The data furnished are not sufficiently definite to warrant a more
positive assertion than that the explorers could not have been, when the
record was made, farther north than Lat. [say] 49 deg.." See Reeves, p. 181,
(66).

[56-1] Evidently an incorrect statement. _Landnama-bok_, the authority on
genealogical matters, says: "His son was Thorbiorn, father of Gudrid who
married Thorstein, son of Eric the Red, and afterwards Thorfinn
Karlsefni." Thori Eastman (the Norwegian) is not mentioned in the
_Landnama-bok_.

[62-1] This cruel virago plays a much less conspicuous part in the
version of Hauk's Book and AM. 557.

[65-1] "A weather-vane, or other ornament at the point of the gable of a
house or upon a ship." (Fritzner.)




FROM ADAM OF BREMEN'S[67-1] DESCRIPTIO INSULARUM AQUILONIS


Moreover he[67-2] spoke of an island in that ocean[67-3] discovered by
many, which is called Vinland, for the reason that vines grow wild there,
which yield the best of wine. Moreover that grain unsown[67-4] grows
there abundantly, is not a fabulous fancy, but, from the accounts of the
Danes, we know to be a fact. Beyond this island, it is said, that there
is no habitable land in that ocean, but all those regions which are
beyond are filled with insupportable ice and boundless gloom, to which
Martian thus refers: "One day's sail beyond Thile the sea is frozen."
This was essayed not long since by that very enterprising Northmen's
prince, Harold,[68-1] who explored the extent of the northern ocean with
his ship, but was scarcely able by retreating to escape in safety from
the gulf's enormous abyss, where before his eyes the vanishing bounds of
earth were hidden in gloom.

FOOTNOTES:

[67-1] Adam of Bremen was a prebendary and writer on ecclesiastical
history. The _Descriptio Insularum Aquilonis_ is an appendix to his
_Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum_. For the preparation of his
work on the "Northern Islands," Adam spent some time at the Danish court,
where he obtained much information from the king, Svend Estridson
(1047-1076), an unusually well informed monarch. Adam's work was
undoubtedly completed before the king's death, which occurred in 1076.
The _Descriptio_ was first printed in Lindenbrog's edition of Adam's
work, published in 1595, which thus contains the first printed allusions
to Vinland. Rafn gives a facsimile of one of the manuscripts, for part of
the passage.

[67-2] Svend Estridson, king of Denmark.

[67-3] Immediately before this extract, the author describes the islands
in the northern seas--among them Iceland--and then proceeds to speak of
newer lands "deeper in the ocean," first of all Greenland, "far up
towards the Swedish or Riphaean mountains," distant five or seven days'
sailing from Norway, then Halagland, somewhat nearer, where the sun is
above the horizon fourteen days in summer, and lastly Vinland. That is,
according to Adam, Vinland was in a northern region.

[67-4] The reference to the "unsown grain," and vines in the preceding
sentence, are sufficiently characteristic to have enabled any one
familiar with the "Saga of Eric the Red" to identify the new land as
Vinland, even though it had not been named. It is interesting to note
that the reference to "unsown grain" does not appear in the Flat Island
Book saga.

[68-1] Evidently a reference to Harold the Stern-ruler (Haardraade). He
was a contemporary of Svend Estridson, and ruler in Norway from 1047 to
1066. The saga of Harold Haardraade in Snorri Sturlason's "Saga of the
Kings of Norway" contains no reference to any such expedition. Yet it
would be quite in keeping with the other adventures of this
much-travelled king to have undertaken such an expedition. It is to be
noted that he did not, according to Adam, go in search of Vinland.




FROM THE ICELANDIC ANNALS[69-1]


ANNALES REGII

A.D. 1121. Bishop Eric[69-2] of Greenland went in search of Vinland.


FROM THE ELDER SKALHOLT[69-3] ANNALS

A.D. 1347. There came also a ship from Greenland, less in size than small
Icelandic trading vessels. It came into the outer Stream-firth.[69-4] It
was without an anchor. There were seventeen men on board, and they had
sailed to Markland,[69-5] but had afterwards been driven hither by storms
at sea.

FOOTNOTES:

[69-1] Besides the Annales Regii, which are the most important, there are
several other Icelandic annals. All have, under the year 1121, the entry
given here, (facsimile in Rafn). It is the only information that they
give concerning Vinland, and is the last surviving mention of Vinland in
the older Icelandic records. It must be remarked, however, that there
were no contemporary annals as early as 1121; the earliest entries on
Scandinavian events are gleaned from various sources, especially the
early historians.

[69-2] According to the _Landnama-bok_ he was an Icelander, his full name
being Eric Gnupson. He is also known as Eric Uppsi. He was, according to
some accounts, the first bishop of Greenland. The exact date of his
consecration is not known; but the Lawman's Annals have, under date of
1112, these words: "Bishop Eric's expedition," referring no doubt to his
departure from Iceland. There is no record of his consecration at Lund
(Sweden), the seat of the primate at that time, as in the case of his
successor, Bishop Arnold. In regard to Bishop Eric's seeking Vinland,
there is no indication anywhere why he went, or whether he ever returned.
At any rate, the Greenlanders applied for a new bishop, and, according to
the annals, one was consecrated in 1124; this was Bishop Arnold, and he
reached Greenland the following year. See "The Tale of the Greenlanders,"
in _Origines Islandicae_, II. 748.

[69-3] So called because the manuscript was found at Skalholt, in
southern Iceland. This entry (facsimile in Rafn) is corroborated, in
abbreviated form, by the Annals of Gottskalk, in these words: "A ship
came then from Greenland, which had sailed to Markland, and there were
eighteen men on board."

[69-4] Stream-firth is on the western coast of Iceland.

[69-5] One of the new lands mentioned in the sagas of the Vinland
voyages.




PAPAL LETTERS CONCERNING THE BISHOPRIC OF GARDAR IN GREENLAND DURING THE
FIFTEENTH CENTURY[70-1]


LETTER OF NICHOLAS V., _September_ 20, 1448

Called by a command from on high to preside over all the churches in the
exercise of our apostolic duty, with the Lord's help we employ all our
solicitude in laboring for the salvation of souls redeemed by the
precious blood of Christ, and we strive earnestly to restore to a state
of peace and tranquillity, not only those who are frequently tossed about
by the storms of impiety and error, but also those who are involved in
the hardships and whirlwinds of persecution. Profoundly impressed
therefore with the responsibility of our position, it is not difficult to
understand how our mind was filled with bitterness by the tearful
lamentations[71-1] which have reached our ears from our beloved children,
the native and other inhabitants of the island of Greenland, a region
situated at the uttermost end of the earth. The island, belonging[71-2]
to the kingdom of Norway, and under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of
the Archbishop of Drontheim,[71-3] received the faith of Christ almost
six[71-4] centuries ago, through the piety of blessed King Olaf, and
preserved it steadfastly and inviolably in accordance with the tradition
of the Roman Church, and the Apostolic See. After their conversion, the
people of this island, with untiring and characteristic devotion, erected
many temples[71-5] to the worship of God and his saints, as well as a
magnificent cathedral,[71-6] in which divine worship was diligently
celebrated, until about thirty[71-7] years ago, when God permitting it, a
barbarous and pagan fleet from neighboring shores[71-8] invaded the
island, laying waste the land with fire and sword, and destroying the
sacred temples. Just nine parish churches were left standing. To these
are attached, it is said, parishes of very great extent. These churches
are left intact, because being situated in the mountain fastnesses, they
were inaccessible to the barbarian hordes, who, after completing their
work of destruction, led captive to their shores the unfortunate
inhabitants of both sexes, and more particularly those who seemed best
able to bear the hardships of servitude and tyranny. But as the same
complaint sets forth, many of these captives, after a time, returned to
their native land. They set to work to rebuild their ruined homes, and
were particularly desirous of restoring divine worship to its former
splendor. Because, however, of their past calamities, as well as the
added trials of famine and want, they had not wherewith to support
priests or bishop. They have been consequently during these thirty years
past without the comfort and ministry of bishop or priest, unless some
one of a very zealous disposition, and at long intervals, and in spite of
danger from the raging sea, ventured to visit the island and minister to
them in those churches which the barbarians had left standing. Having
acquainted us with this deplorable state of affairs, and knowing our
paternal solicitude, they have supplicated us to come to their rescue in
this their hour of spiritual need. Our hearts have been moved by the
prayers of the people of Greenland, but not being sufficiently acquainted
with the circumstances, we direct and command you, or either of
you,[73-1] beloved brothers, who as we understand are the bishops living
nearest to that island, to institute a diligent inquiry as to whether
things are as they have been reported to us, and if you should find them
so, and the number of people warrant it, and if they are in a condition
to provide sufficiently, we command you or either of you, to send worthy
priests who will minister to them, erect churches, govern parishes, and
administer the sacraments.

Moreover, if you or either of you should deem it expedient, and in this
you will consult, of course, the metropolitan,[73-2] if his residence be
not too far away from you, we empower you to select and consecrate a
bishop, having first required him to take the usual oath to us and the
Roman See. Be mindful, however, that we burden your conscience with this
work, and we grant you, or either of you, full authority to carry it out,
even if there should exist any constitution of the Apostolic See, general
councils, canonical or other statutes to the contrary.

Given at Rome as dated above in the second year of our pontificate.


LETTER OF ALEXANDER VI.; WRITTEN IN THE FIRST YEARS OF HIS
PONTIFICATE[73-3]

It has been reported to us that in the diocese of Gardar in Greenland,
situated at the confines of the known world, the inhabitants, because of
the scarcity of bread, wine and oil, live for the most part on dried fish
and milk products. Wherefore because of the difficulty of passing through
such immense quantities of ice, and likewise because of the poverty of
the land, and the scant means of living, ships rarely visit its shores.
We have learned in fact that no vessel has touched there during the past
eighty years, and if a voyage be made at all, it must be in the month of
August, when the ice has broken up. On this account, during eighty years
no bishop or priest has resided personally among those people, and by
reason of this, we are informed that many who were formerly Catholics
have forgotten the faith of their baptism, and that no memory of the
Christian religion is found, except a corporal, which is shown to the
people once a year, and on which it is said the last priest who
officiated there consecrated the body of Christ a hundred years
ago.[74-1] In consideration of these things, Innocent the VIII., our
predecessor of happy memory, wishing to provide a proper pastor for those
forlorn people, conferred with his brethren, of whom we were one, and
elected Matthias, our venerable brother, a member of the Order of St.
Benedict, as well as professed monk, at our suggestion, and while we were
still in minor orders, to be Bishop of Gardar. This good man, fired with
great zeal to recall those people from the way of error to the practice
of their faith, is about to undertake this perilous voyage and laborious
duty.[74-2] We, on our part, accordingly, recognizing the pious and
praiseworthy purpose of the same elect, and wishing to succor in some
manner his poverty, which is very great indeed, command the officials of
our chancery, as well as those of our palace, under pain of
excommunication _ipso facto_ to be incurred, that all apostolic letters
destined for the church of Gardar, be written gratis for the glory of God
alone, without exacting or charging any stipend; and we command the
clergy and notaries of our palace to forward all letters to the above
mentioned bishop, without demanding any payment whatsoever for services
rendered.

To him everything must be free, other things to the contrary
notwithstanding.

FOOTNOTES:

[70-1] In 1893 an American in Rome, Mr. J.C. Heywood, one of the papal
chamberlains, brought out, in a very small edition (twenty-five copies),
a book of photographic facsimiles of documents in the Vatican relating to
Greenland and the discovery of America, _Documenta Selecta e Tabulario
Secreto Vaticano_. The Latin text of those here presented may be found in
Fischer, _Discoveries of the Northmen_, pp. 49-51. A translation of all
was made for the Tennessee Historical Society by Rev. John B. Morris and
printed in Vol. IX. of the society's organ, the _American Historical
Magazine_. Using this translation, we have printed Letters IX. and X. as
the only ones that contain anything of particular interest concerning the
Gardar bishopric in Greenland, excepting, possibly, the following
sentence from Letter II. (December 4, 1276), to the Archbishop of
Drontheim: "Your Fraternity having been explicitly directed by letters
apostolic to visit personally all parts of the kingdom of Norway, for the
purpose of collecting the tithes due the Holy Land, has informed us that
this seems almost impossible, when it is taken into consideration that
the diocese of Gardar in Greenland is so remote from your metropolitan
see and kingdom, that five years or more would be consumed in going
thither and returning." It has been inferred, on account of the length of
this time, that the Vinland colony was included. There is no documentary
evidence of this. The papal letters contain no reference to Vinland.

[71-1] No record of these reports from Greenland has been found.

[71-2] Both Iceland and Greenland came under Norwegian rule in 1261,
during the reign of Haakon Haakonson (1217-1263).

[71-3] In Norway.

[71-4] Only four and a half centuries before this time. Olaf Tryggvason,
who reigned from 995 to 1000, sent Leif Ericson as a missionary to
Greenland in the year 1000.

[71-5] According to Northern chorography, the Eastern Settlement had one
hundred and ninety farmsteads, twelve churches, and two monasteries; the
Western Settlement had ninety farmsteads and three churches.

[71-6] The cathedral (hardly magnificent) was in the Eastern Settlement
(_i.e._, in southern Greenland), no doubt the present Kakortok. The
village of Gardar, which gave its name to the bishopric, was at the
present Kaksiarsuk. The authority which makes this identification
possible, is Ivar Bardsen's description of Greenland written in that
country in the fourteenth century. He was for many years steward to the
Gardar bishopric. An English version of Bardsen's description is printed
in Major's _The Voyages of the Venetian Brothers Zeno_ (London, 1873).
See also Fiske, _The Discovery of America_, pp. 239 and 242.

[71-7] That is, about 1418. The last notice of Greenland based on
Northern tradition is from the year 1409, telling of a marriage ceremony
performed by Endride Andreson, the last bishop. See Laing's _The Sagas of
the Norse Kings_ (London, 1889), p. 177.

[71-8] From Ivar Bardsen's description of Greenland it is known that the
Greenlanders first came in conflict with the Eskimos during the
fourteenth century. He was appointed to lead an expedition from the
Eastern Settlement against the Skrellings (Eskimos), who had taken
possession of the Western Settlement. When he arrived there the
Skrellings had departed, and they found nothing but ruins and some cattle
running wild. See _Antiquitates Americanae_, p. 316.

The letter of Nicholas V. refers to an attack on the Western Settlement,
