side will win."

The faces of all became unanimously anxious.

"Let us put up the coach at that inn which I see over there," said the
patriot; "we can hide it till we know the result of the fight."

The advice seemed so good that Coupiau followed it. The patriot helped
him to conceal the coach behind a wood-pile; the abbe seized the
occasion to pull Coupiau aside and say to him, in a low voice: "Has he
really any money?"

"Hey, Monsieur Gudin, if it gets into the pockets of your Reverence,
they won't be weighed down with it."

When the Blues marched by, after the encounter on La Pelerine, they were
in such haste to reach Ernee that they passed the little inn without
halting. At the sound of their hasty march, Gudin and the innkeeper,
stirred by curiosity, went to the gate of the courtyard to watch them.
Suddenly, the fat ecclesiastic rushed to a soldier who was lagging in
the rear.

"Gudin!" he cried, "you wrong-headed fellow, have you joined the Blues?
My lad, you are surely not in earnest?"

"Yes, uncle," answered the corporal. "I've sworn to defend France."

"Unhappy boy! you'll lose your soul," said the uncle, trying to rouse
his nephew to the religious sentiments which are so powerful in the
Breton breast.

"Uncle," said the young man, "if the king had placed himself at the head
of his armies, I don't say but what--"

"Fool! who is talking to you about the king? Does your republic give
abbeys? No, it has upset everything. How do you expect to get on in
life? Stay with us; sooner or later we shall triumph and you'll be
counsellor to some parliament."

"Parliaments!" said young Gudin, in a mocking tone. "Good-bye, uncle."

"You sha'n't have a penny at my death," cried his uncle, in a rage.
"I'll disinherit you."

"Thank you, uncle," said the Republican, as they parted.

The fumes of the cider which the patriot copiously bestowed on Coupiau
during the passage of the little troop had somewhat dimmed the driver's
perceptions, but he roused himself joyously when the innkeeper, having
questioned the soldiers, came back to the inn and announced that the
Blues were victorious. He at once brought out the coach and before long
it was wending its way across the valley.

When the Blues reached an acclivity on the road from which the plateau
of La Pelerine could again be seen in the distance, Hulot turned
round to discover if the Chouans were still occupying it, and the sun,
glinting on the muzzles of the guns, showed them to him, each like a
dazzling spot. Giving a last glance to the valley of La Pelerine before
turning into that of Ernee, he thought he saw Coupiau's vehicle on the
road he had just traversed.

"Isn't that the Mayenne coach?" he said to his two officers.

They looked at the venerable turgotine, and easily recognized it.

"But," said Hulot, "how did we fail to meet it?"

Merle and Gerard looked at each other in silence.

"Another enigma!" cried the commandant. "But I begin to see the meaning
of it all."

At the same moment Marche-a-Terre, who also knew the turgotine, called
his comrades' attention to it, and the general shout of joy which they
sent up roused the young lady from her reflections. She advanced a
little distance and saw the coach, which was beginning the ascent of
La Pelerine with fatal rapidity. The luckless vehicle soon reached the
plateau. The Chouans, who had meantime hidden themselves, swooped on
their prey with hungry celerity. The silent traveller slipped to the
floor of the carriage, bundling himself up into the semblance of a bale.

"Well done!" cried Coupiau from his wooden perch, pointing to the man in
the goatskin; "you must have scented this patriot who has lots of gold
in his pouch--"

The Chouans greeted these words with roars of laughter, crying out:
"Pille-Miche! hey, Pille-Miche! Pille-Miche!"

Amid the laughter, to which Pille-Miche responded like an echo, Coupiau
came down from his seat quite crestfallen. When the famous Cibot,
otherwise called Pille-Miche, helped his neighbor to get out of the
coach, a respectful murmur was heard among the Chouans.

"It is the Abbe Gudin!" cried several voices. At this respected name
every hat was off, and the men knelt down before the priest as they
asked his blessing, which he gave solemnly.

"Pille-Miche here could trick Saint Peter and steal the keys of
Paradise," said the rector, slapping that worthy on the shoulder. "If it
hadn't been for him, the Blues would have intercepted us."

Then, noticing the lady, the abbe went to speak to her apart.
Marche-a-Terre, who had meantime briskly opened the boot of the
cabriolet, held up to his comrades, with savage joy, a bag, the shape of
which betrayed its contents to be rolls of coin. It did not take long
to divide the booty. Each Chouan received his share, so carefully
apportioned that the division was made without the slightest dispute.
Then Marche-a-Terre went to the lady and the priest, and offered them
each about six thousand francs.

"Can I conscientiously accept this money, Monsieur Gudin?" said the
lady, feeling a need of justification.

"Why not, madame? In former days the Church approved of the confiscation
of the property of Protestants, and there's far more reason for
confiscating that of these revolutionists, who deny God, destroy
chapels, and persecute religion."

The abbe then joined example to precept by accepting, without the
slightest scruple, the novel sort of tithe which Marche-a-Terre offered
to him. "Besides," he added, "I can now devote all I possess to the
service of God and the king; for my nephew has joined the Blues, and I
disinherit him."

Coupiau was bemoaning himself and declaring that he was ruined.

"Join us," said Marche-a-Terre, "and you shall have your share."

"They'll say I let the coach be robbed on purpose if I return without
signs of violence."

"Oh, is that all?" exclaimed Marche-a-Terre.

He gave a signal and a shower of bullets riddled the turgotine. At this
unexpected volley the old vehicle gave forth such a lamentable cry
that the Chouans, superstitious by nature, recoiled in terror; but
Marche-a-Terre caught sight of the pallid face of the silent traveller
rising from the floor of the coach.

"You've got another fowl in your coop," he said in a low voice to
Coupiau.

"Yes," said the driver; "but I make it a condition of my joining you
that I be allowed to take that worthy man safe and sound to Fougeres.
I'm pledged to it in the name of Saint Anne of Auray."

"Who is he?" asked Pille-Miche.

"That I can't tell you," replied Coupiau.

"Let him alone!" said Marche-a-Terre, shoving Pille-Miche with his
elbow; "he has vowed by Saint Anne of Auray, and he must keep his word."

"Very good," said Pille-Miche, addressing Coupiau; "but mind you don't
go down the mountain too fast; we shall overtake you,--a good reason
why; I want to see the cut of your traveller, and give him his
passport."

Just then the gallop of a horse coming rapidly up the slopes of La
Pelerine was heard, and the young chief presently reappeared. The lady
hastened to conceal the bag of plunder which she held in her hand.

"You can keep that money without any scruple," said the young man,
touching the arm which the lady had put behind her. "Here is a letter
for you which I have just found among mine which were waiting for me at
La Vivetiere; it is from your mother." Then, looking at the Chouans who
were disappearing into the woods, and at the turgotine which was now on
its way to the valley of Couesnon, he added: "After all my haste I see I
am too late. God grant I am deceived in my suspicions!"

"It was my poor mother's money!" cried the lady, after opening her
letter, the first lines of which drew forth her exclamation.

A smothered laugh came from the woods, and the young man himself
could not help smiling as he saw the lady holding in her hand the bag
containing her share in the pillage of her own money. She herself began
to laugh.

"Well, well, marquis, God be praised! this time, at least, you can't
blame me," she said, smiling.

"Levity in everything! even your remorse!" said the young man.

She colored and looked at the marquis with so genuine a contrition that
he was softened. The abbe politely returned to her, with an equivocal
manner, the sum he had received; then he followed the young leader who
took the by-way through which he had come. Before following them the
lady made a sign to Marche-a-Terre, who came to her.

"Advance towards Mortagne," she said to him in a low voice. "I know that
the Blues are constantly sending large sums of money in coin to Alencon
to pay for their supplies of war. If I allow you and your comrades to
keep what you captured to-day it is only on condition that you repay it
later. But be careful that the Gars knows nothing of the object of the
expedition; he would certainly oppose it; in case of ill-luck, I will
pacify him."

"Madame," said the marquis, after she had rejoined him and had mounted
his horse _en croupe_, giving her own to the abbe, "my friends in Paris
write me to be very careful of what we do; the Republic, they say, is
preparing to fight us with spies and treachery."

"It wouldn't be a bad plan," she replied; "they have clever ideas, those
fellows. I could take part in that sort of war and find foes."

"I don't doubt it!" cried the marquis. "Pichegru advises me to be
cautious and watchful in my friendships and relations of every kind.
The Republic does me the honor to think me more dangerous than all the
Vendeans put together, and counts on certain of my weaknesses to lay
hands upon me."

"Surely you will not distrust me?" she said, striking his heart with the
hand by which she held to him.

"Are you a traitor, madame?" he said, bending towards her his forehead,
which she kissed.

"In that case," said the abbe, referring to the news, "Fouche's police
will be more dangerous for us than their battalions of recruits and
counter-Chouans."

"Yes, true enough, father," replied the marquis.

"Ah! ah!" cried the lady. "Fouche means to send women against you, does
he? I shall be ready for them," she added in a deeper tone of voice and
after a slight pause.

             *     *     *     *     *

At a distance of three or four gunshots from the plateau, now abandoned,
a little scene was taking place which was not uncommon in those days
on the high-roads. After leaving the little village of La Pelerine,
Pille-Miche and Marche-a-Terre again stopped the turgotine at a dip in
the road. Coupiau got off his seat after making a faint resistance. The
silent traveller, extracted from his hiding place by the two Chouans,
found himself on his knees in a furze bush.

"Who are you?" asked Marche-a-Terre in a threatening voice.

The traveller kept silence until Pille-Miche put the question again and
enforced it with the butt end of his gun.

"I am Jacques Pinaud," he replied, with a glance at Coupiau; "a poor
linen-draper."

Coupiau made a sign in the negative, not considering it an infraction
of his promise to Saint Anne. The sign enlightened Pille-Miche, who
took aim at the luckless traveller, while Marche-a-Terre laid before him
categorically a terrible ultimatum.

"You are too fat to be poor. If you make me ask you your name again,
here's my friend Pille-Miche, who will obtain the gratitude and
good-will of your heirs in a second. Who are you?" he added, after a
pause.

"I am d'Orgemont, of Fougeres."

"Ah! ah!" cried the two Chouans.

"I didn't tell your name, Monsieur d'Orgemont," said Coupiau. "The Holy
Virgin is my witness that I did my best to protect you."

"Inasmuch as you are Monsieur d'Orgemont, of Fougeres," said
Marche-a-Terre, with an air of ironical respect, "we shall let you go in
peace. Only, as you are neither a good Chouan nor a true Blue (thought
it was you who bought the property of the Abbey de Juvigny), you
will pay us three hundred crowns of six francs each for your ransom.
Neutrality is worth that, at least."

"Three hundred crowns of six francs each!" chorussed the luckless
banker, Pille-Miche, and Coupiau, in three different tones.

"Alas, my good friend," continued d'Orgemont, "I'm a ruined man. The
last forced loan of that devilish Republic for a hundred millions sucked
me dry, taxed as I was already."

"How much did your Republic get out of you?"

"A thousand crowns, my dear man," replied the banker, with a piteous
air, hoping for a reduction.

"If your Republic gets forced loans out of you for such big sums as that
you must see that you would do better with us; our government would cost
you less. Three hundred crowns, do you call that dear for your skin?"

"Where am I to get them?"

"Out of your strong-box," said Pille-Miche; "and mind that the money is
forthcoming, or we'll singe you still."

"How am I to pay it to you?" asked d'Orgemont.

"Your country-house at Fougeres is not far from Gibarry's farm where my
cousin Galope-Chopine, otherwise called Cibot, lives. You can pay the
money to him," said Pille-Miche.

"That's not business-like," said d'Orgemont.

"What do we care for that?" said Marche-a-Terre. "But mind you remember
that if that money is not paid to Galope-Chopine within two weeks we
shall pay you a little visit which will cure your gout. As for
you, Coupiau," added Marche-a-Terre, "your name in future is to be
Mene-a-Bien."

So saying, the two Chouans departed. The traveller returned to the
vehicle, which, thanks to Coupiau's whip, now made rapid progress to
Fougeres.

"If you'd only been armed," said Coupiau, "we might have made some
defence."

"Idiot!" cried d'Orgemont, pointing to his heavy shoes. "I have ten
thousand francs in those soles; do you think I would be such a fool as
to fight with that sum about me?"

Mene-a-Bien scratched his ear and looked behind him, but his new
comrades were out of sight.

Hulot and his command stopped at Ernee long enough to place the wounded
in the hospital of the little town, and then, without further hindrance,
they reached Mayenne. There the commandant cleared up his doubts as
to the action of the Chouans, for on the following day the news of the
pillage of the turgotine was received.

A few days later the government despatched to Mayenne so strong a force
of "patriotic conscripts," that Hulot was able to fill the ranks of his
brigade. Disquieting rumors began to circulate about the insurrection. A
rising had taken place at all the points where, during the late war, the
Chouans and Bretons had made their chief centres of insurrection. The
little town of Saint-James, between Pontorson and Fougeres was occupied
by them, apparently for the purpose of making it for the time being a
headquarters of operations and supplies. From there they were able to
communicate with Normandy and the Morbihan without risk. Their subaltern
leaders roamed the three provinces, roused all the partisans of
monarchy, and gave consistence and unity to their plans. These
proceedings coincided with what was going on in La Vendee, where the
same intrigues, under the influence of four famous leaders (the Abbe
Vernal, the Comte de Fontaine, De Chatillon, and Suzannet), were
agitating the country. The Chevalier de Valois, the Marquis d'Esgrignon,
and the Troisvilles were, it was said, corresponding with these leaders
in the department of the Orne. The chief of the great plan of operations
which was thus developing slowly but in formidable proportions was
really "the Gars,"--a name given by the Chouans to the Marquis de
Montauran on his arrival from England. The information sent to Hulot by
the War department proved correct in all particulars. The marquis
gained after a time sufficient ascendancy over the Chouans to make them
understand the true object of the war, and to persuade them that the
excesses of which they were guilty brought disgrace upon the cause they
had adopted. The daring nature, the nerve, coolness, and capacity
of this young nobleman awakened the hopes of all the enemies of the
Republic, and suited so thoroughly the grave and even solemn enthusiasm
of those regions that even the least zealous partisans of the king
did their part in preparing a decisive blow in behalf of the defeated
monarchy.

Hulot received no answer to the questions and the frequent reports which
he addressed to the government in Paris.

But the news of the almost magical return of General Bonaparte and the
events of the 18th Brumaire were soon current in the air. The military
commanders of the West understood then the silence of the ministers.
Nevertheless, they were only the more impatient to be released from
the responsibility that weighed upon them; and they were in every way
desirous of knowing what measures the new government was likely to take.
When it was known to these soldiers that General Bonaparte was appointed
First Consul of the Republic their joy was great; they saw, for the
first time, one of their own profession called to the management of the
nation. France, which had made an idol of this young hero, quivered with
hope. The vigor and energy of the nation revived. Paris, weary of its
long gloom, gave itself up to fetes and pleasures of which it had been
so long deprived. The first acts of the Consulate did not diminish any
hopes, and Liberty felt no alarm. The First Consul issued a proclamation
to the inhabitants of the West. The eloquent allocutions addressed to
the masses which Bonaparte had, as it were, invented, produced effects
in those days of patriotism and miracle that were absolutely startling.
His voice echoed through the world like the voice of a prophet, for none
of his proclamations had, as yet, been belied by defeat.

  INHABITANTS:

  An impious war again inflames the West.

  The makers of these troubles are traitors sold to the English, or
  brigands who seek in civil war opportunity and license for
  misdeeds.

  To such men the government owes no forbearance, nor any
  declaration of its principles.

  But there are citizens, dear to France, who have been misled by
  their wiles. It is so such that truth and light are due.

  Unjust laws have been promulgated and executed; arbitrary acts
  have threatened the safety of citizens and the liberty of
  consciences; mistaken entries on the list of _emigres_ imperil
  citizens; the great principles of social order have been violated.

  The Consuls declare that liberty of worship having been guaranteed
  by the Constitution, the law of 11 Prairial, year III., which
  gives the use of edifices built for religious worship to all
  citizens, shall be executed.

  The government will pardon; it will be merciful to repentance; its
  mercy will be complete and absolute; but it will punish whosoever,
  after this declaration, shall dare to resist the national
  sovereignty.

"Well," said Hulot, after the public reading of this Consular manifesto,
"Isn't that paternal enough? But you'll see that not a single royalist
brigand will be changed by it."

The commandant was right. The proclamation merely served to strengthen
