Natural objects abound in features highly suggestive of embellishment
and these are constantly employed in art. Artificial objects have two
classes of features capable of giving rise to ornament: these are
_constructional_ and _functional_. In a late stage of development all
things in nature and in art, however complex or foreign to the art in
its practice, are subject to decorative treatment. This latter is the
realistic pictorial stage, one of which the student of native American
culture needs to take little cognizance.

Elements of design are not invented outright: man modifies, combines,
and recombines elements or ideas already in existence, but does not
create.

A classification of the sources of decorative motives employed in the
ceramic art is given in the following diagram:

                  /Suggestions of features of natural utensils or objects.
                  |                               /
                  |                               |           /Handles.
                  |                               |           |Legs
                  |                               | Functional|Bands
                  |                               |           \Perforations, etc.
                  |                               |
                  |Suggestions of features of     |
                  |artificial utensils or objects.|              /The coil.
                  |                               |              |The seam.
Origin of ornament|                               |Constructional|The stitch.
                  |                               |              |The plait.
                  |                               \              \The twist, etc.
                  |Suggestions from accidents     /Marks of fingers.
                  | attending construction.       |Marks of implements.
                  |                               \Marks of molds, etc.
                  |
                  |
                  \Suggestions of ideographic features or pictorial delineations.

+SUGGESTIONS OF NATURAL FEATURES OF OBJECTS.+

The first articles used by men in their simple arts have in many cases
possessed features suggestive of decoration. Shells of mollusks are
exquisitely embellished with ribs, spines, nodes, and colors. The same
is true to a somewhat limited extent of the shells of the turtle and the
armadillo and of the hard cases of fruits.

These decorative features, though not essential to the utensil, are
nevertheless inseparable parts of it, and are cast or unconsciously
copied by a very primitive people when similar articles are artificially
produced in plastic material. In this way a utensil may acquire
ornamental characters long before the workman has learned to take
pleasure in such details or has conceived an idea beyond that of simple
utility. This may be called unconscious embellishment. In this
fortuitous fashion a ribbed variety of fruit shell would give rise to a
ribbed vessel in clay; one covered with spines would suggest a noded
vessel, etc. When taste came to be exercised upon such objects these
features would be retained and copied for the pleasure they afforded.

[Illustration: _a._--Shell vessel. _b._--Copy in clay. FIG. 475.--Scroll
derived from the spire of a conch shell.]

Passing by the many simple elements of decoration that by this
unconscious process could be derived from such sources, let me give a
single example by which it will be seen that not only elementary forms
but even so highly constituted an ornament as the scroll may have been
brought thus naturally into the realm of decorative art. The sea-shell
has always been intimately associated with the arts that utilize clay
and abounds in suggestions of embellishment. The _Busycon_ was almost
universally employed as a vessel by the tribes of the Atlantic drainage
of North America. Usually it was trimmed down and excavated until only
about three-fourths of the outer wall of the shell remained. At one end
was the long spike-like base which served as a handle, and at the other
the flat conical apex, with its very pronounced spiral line or ridge
expanding from the center to the circumference, as seen in Fig. 475 _a_.
This vessel was often copied in clay, as many good examples now in our
museums testify. The notable feature is that the shell has been copied
literally, the spiral appearing in its proper place. A specimen is
illustrated in Fig. 475 _b_ which, although simple and highly
conventionalized, still retains the spiral figure.

[Illustration: _a_ _b_ _c_ FIG. 476.--Possible derivation of the
current scroll.]

In another example we have four of the noded apexes placed about the rim
of the vessel, as shown in Fig. 476_a_, the conception being that of
four conch shells united in one vessel, the bases being turned inward
and the apexes outward. Now it is only necessary to suppose the addition
of the spiral lines, always associated with the nodes, to have the
result shown in _b_, and by a still higher degree of convention we have
the classic scroll ornament given in _c_. Of course, no such result as
this could come about adventitiously, as successful combination calls
for the exercise of judgment and taste; but the initiatory steps could
be taken--the motive could enter art--without the conscious supervision
of the human agent.


+SUGGESTIONS BY FEATURES OF ARTIFICIAL OBJECTS.+

[Illustration: FIG. 477.--Ornament derived through the modification of
handles.]

_Functional features_.--Functional features of art products liable to
influence ornament comprise handles, legs, feet, rims, bands, and other
peculiarities of shape originating in utility. Handles, for instance,
may have been indigenous to a number of arts; they are coeval and
coextensive with culture. The first load, weapon, or vessel transported
by man may have been suspended by a vine or filament. Such arts as have
fallen heir to handles have used them according to the capacities of the
material employed. Of all the materials stone is probably the least
suited to their successful use, while clay utilizes them in its own
peculiar way, giving to them a great variety of expression. They are
copied in clay from various models, but owing to the inadequate
capacities of the material, often lose their function and degenerate
into mere ornaments, which are modified as such to please the potter's
fancy. Thus, for example, the series of handles placed about the neck of
the vessel become, by modification in frequent copying, a mere band of
ornamental figures in relief, or even finally in engraved, punctured, or
painted lines, in the manner suggested in Fig. 477. Legs, pedestals,
spouts, and other features may in a like manner give rise to decoration.

[Illustration: _a._--Coiled fillet of clay. _b._--Double coil.
FIG. 478.--Scroll derived from coil of clay.]


_Constructional features._-Features of vessels resulting from
construction are infinitely varied and often highly suggestive of
decoration. Constructional peculiarities of the clay utensils themselves
are especially worthy of notice, and on account of their actual presence
in the art itself are more likely to be utilized or copied for ceramic
ornament than those of other materials. The coil, so universally
employed in construction, has had a decided influence upon the ceramic
decoration of certain peoples, as I have shown in a paper on ancient
Pueblo art. From it we have not only a great variety of surface
ornamentation produced by simple treatment of the coil in place, but
probably many forms suggested by the use of the coil in vessel building,
as, for instance, the spiral formed in beginning the base of a coiled
vessel, Fig. 478 _a_, from which the double scroll _b_, as a separate
feature, could readily be derived, and finally the chain of scrolls so
often seen in border and zone decoration. This familiarity with the use
of fillets or ropes of clay would also lead to a great variety of
applied ornament, examples of which, from Pueblo art, are given in Fig.
479. The sinuous forms assumed by a rope of clay so employed would
readily suggest to the Indian the form of the serpent and the means of
representing it, and might thus lead to the introduction of this much
revered creature into art.

