Albany; some settled on the Connecticut River, and several families made
their homes in what is at present Ulster County. The Company sent over
Peter Minuit as Governor in 1626, who bought from the natives their title
to Manhattan Island, paying therefor trinkets and liquor to the value of
twenty-four dollars. Governor Minuit built a fortification at the
southern end of the island, and called it New Amsterdam. The
States-General constituted the colony a county of Holland, and bestowed
on it a seal, being a shield enclosed in a chain, with an escutcheon on
which was the figure of a beaver. The crest was the coronet of a count.

In 1629 the Dutch West India Company gave to the settlers a charter of
"privileges and exemptions," and sought to encourage immigration by
offering as much land as the immigrants could cultivate, with free
liberty of hunting and fowling under the direction of the Governor. They
also offered to any person who should "discover any shore, bay or other
fit place for erecting fisheries or the making of salt pounds" an
absolute property in the same. To further promote the settlement of New
Netherland the company proposed to grant lands in any part of the colony
outside the island of Manhattan, to the extent of sixteen miles along any
navigable stream, or four miles if on each shore, and indefinitely in the
interior, to any person who should agree to plant a colony of adults
within four years; or if he should bring more, his domain to be enlarged
in proportion. He was to be the absolute lord of the manor, with the
feudal right to hold manorial courts; and if cities should grow up on his
domain he was to have power to appoint the magistrates and other officers
of such municipalities, and have a deputy to confer with the Governor.
Settlers under these lords, who were known as patroons--a term synonymous
with the Scottish "laird" and the Swedish "patroon"--were to be exempt
for ten years from the payment of taxes and tribute for the support of
the colonial government, and for the same period every man, woman and
child was bound not to leave the service of the patroon without his
written consent. In order to prevent the colonists from building up local
manufactures to the detriment of Holland industries and of the Company's
trade, the settlers were forbidden to manufacture cloth of any kind under
pain of banishment, and the Company agreed to supply settlers with as
many African slaves "as they conveniently could," and to protect them
against enemies. Each settlement was required to support a minister of
the gospel and a schoolmaster. The system thus established contained the
seed of evil as well as of good. African slave labor, already introduced
in Virginia, where the climate was some excuse for its adoption, worked
injury to the New Netherland, where all the conditions were favorable to
white labor, and tended to create a servile class. The negroes, both bond
and free, were for many years a most obnoxious element in the colony,
viewed with apprehension and suspicion even down to the beginning of the
present century by the general body of white citizens, and often
subjected to most cruel and unjust persecution and punishment on charges
that were either baseless or founded only in malice. The restriction on
domestic manufactures was another barb in the side of the colonists, and
that policy continued by the English successors of the Dutch, had much to
do with exciting the War for Independence. The patroons also were an
aristocratic element foreign to the prevalent spirit of North American
settlement, and their feudal rule, although liberal and patriarchal in
some instances, became less tolerable as years rolled on, and the people
comprehended the absurdity and injustice of mediaeval institutions on
American soil. It is fortunate that the patroon system, unlike slavery,
was ultimately uprooted without revolution.

                        *          *          *

Americans should be proud of the fact that Gustavus Adolphus, the great
king of Sweden who died on the field of Lutzen in the cause of religious
liberty, gave his approval to the project for planting a Swedish colony
in America, and by proclamation, while in the midst of his campaign
against the Catholic League, recommended the enterprise to his people.
Eighteen days later the champion of Protestantism fell in the hour of
victory, and a noble monument erected by the German people marks the spot
where he gave up his life that Germany might be free. The scheme was
carried out by the regency which took charge of the kingdom, and Governor
Minuit, recalled from New Netherland, sailed from Gottenburg in 1637 to
plant a new colony on the west side of Delaware Bay. The colonists
arrived at their destination in the spring of 1638, and Minuit procured
from an Indian sachem a deed for a region which, the Swedes claimed,
extended from Cape Henlopen to the Falls of the Delaware, where Trenton
is now, and an indefinite distance inland. The Dutch protested and
threatened, but Minuit built a fort on the site of Wilmington, and called
it Fort Christina, in honor of the young queen of Sweden, daughter of
Gustavus Adolphus. The colony prospered, and a number of Hollanders
settled there with the Swedes. Minuit died in 1641, and the Swedish
government proceeded to place the colony on a permanent footing, and
called it "New Sweden." The colony was unable to hold its own against the
Dutch, and surrendered in 1655 to an expedition led by Peter Stuyvesant.

While New Netherland remained under Dutch rule the people had no voice in
the choice of those officers whose duties were more than local in
character. The governor was an appointee of the West India Company, and
responsible solely to it; though the latter was subject to a certain
amount of control from the States-General. That the people desired the
privilege of electing their general officers, is shown by a petition sent
in 1649 to the States-General from the Nine Men. A request was made in
this document for a suitable system of government, and it was accompanied
by a sketch of the methods of written proxies used by the New England
colonies in selecting their governors. On the other hand, a letter sent
two years later by the magistrates of Gravesend to the directors at
Amsterdam, stated that it would involve "ruin and destruction" to
frequently change the government by allowing the people to elect the
governor, partly on account of the numerous factions, and partly because
there were no persons in the province capable of filling the office. Nor
did the Dutch colonists possess any voice in the making of laws. There
was no regular representative assembly, although we find that there were
several emergencies when the advice of the people was asked by the
governors.[1]

      [1] See "History of Elections in the American Colonies." Columbia
      College Series.




CHAPTER V.

Landing of the Pilgrims--Their Abiding Faith in God's Goodness--The
Agreement Signed on the Mayflower--A Winter of Hardship--The Indians Help
the Settlers--Improved Conditions--The Colony Buys Its Freedom--Priscilla
and John Alden--Their Romantic Courtship and Marriage.


It is usual to celebrate the landing day of the Pilgrim Fathers on the
bleak shore of New Plymouth, December 11 (22) 1620, as the beginning of
New England. It was an event which richly deserves all the commemoration
in song and story and banquet-hall which it has received or ever will
receive, but the real and substantial foundation of New England was laid
about ten years later, when a numerous and well-to-do body of Puritans,
under a charter granted by the crown, formed the colony of Massachusetts
Bay. The Pilgrim Fathers were merely a handful in number, and as poor as
they were loyal and conscientious. Exiles to Holland, they declined an
offer from the Dutch West India Company to accept lands in New
Netherland. They wished to remain English, and with the aid of some
London merchants whose Puritan sympathies were mingled with a desire for
gain, the little community procured the means to sail for "the northern
parts of Virginia." The Pilgrims were just as true to King James as the
settlers of Jamestown, but they did not intend to join that colony, whose
members were attached to the Established Church, so far as they had any
religion, and where dissenters would have been ill at ease. At the same
time the immigrants in the Mayflower did not intend to land so far north
as they did. The wearisome voyage, however, made them anxious to get on
shore, the land could not be more inhospitable than the winter sea, and
they had an abiding faith in God's goodness and providence which enabled
them to face with resolution the hardships and dangers of the northern
wilderness. The act which the men of the party signed on the Mayflower,
previous to landing, showed that they were determined to have an orderly
government. It was the first American constitution, and as such deserves
to be remembered: "In the name of God, Amen. We, whose names are
hereunder written, the loyal subjects of our dread sovereign lord, King
James, by the grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc., having undertaken for the glory of God and
the advancement of the Christian Faith, and honor of our King and
country, a voyage to plant the first colony in the northern parts of
Virginia, do, by these presents, solemnly and mutually, in the presence
of God and of one another, covenant and combine ourselves together into a
civil body politic for our better ordering and preservation and
furtherance of the ends aforesaid; and by virtue hereof to enact,
constitute and frame such just and equal laws, ordinances, acts,
constitution and offices, from time to time, as shall be thought most
meet and convenient for the general good of the colony, unto which we
promise all due submission and obedience. In witness whereof we have
hereunto subscribed our names at Cape Cod, the 11th of November (O. S.)
in the year of the reign of our sovereign lord, King James of England,
France and Ireland, the eighteenth, and of Scotland the fifty-fourth,
Anno Domini 1620."

The day of landing was, as already stated, December 11, or according to
the new style, December 22. The spot which the Pilgrims selected for
settlement was well-watered and promising, and they gave to it the name
of the haven where they had taken a final leave of their native land. The
winter was fortunately mild, but they had to endure cruel hardships.
Their stores were scanty; they had no fishing tackle, and game was not
abundant. Fortunately spring came early; but forty-four of the little
company succumbed to want and cold, and those who retained their health
were hardly equal to the task of nursing the sick and burying the dead.
Had the savages been numerous and hostile they could have swept the
little settlement out of existence with but small effort; but the country
had been wasted not long before by a deadly pestilence and the native
tribes were too weak and too much in fear of more powerful enemies of
their own race, to make an attack on the strangers. Instead of injuring
the newcomers the Indians helped them, brought them game and fish, and
taught them how to cultivate corn. In 1623 the colony had, with new
arrivals, about one hundred and fifty inhabitants. The first division of
land was made this year, and a large crop of corn was harvested. Twelve
years after the foundation the people of Plymouth hardly numbered five
hundred, and they were soon overshadowed by the large Puritan immigration
to Salem and Boston. The poor and struggling settlers of Plymouth did not
even have the satisfaction of knowing that the fruits of their toils and
sufferings would be their own. They were still bound to the London
merchants who had supplied them with the means for emigration, and these
partners in the enterprise were impatient of the lack of returns. As the
Pilgrims gradually grew better off they were the more anxious to remove
the yoke which interfered with their independence, and some members of
the community who were richer than the others agreed, in exchange for a
monopoly of the Indian trade and the surrender of the accumulated wealth
of the colony, to pay its debt to the English shareholders. The colony
thus achieved its freedom, and its members were able to proceed in
building their settlement according to their own ideas of religion and
civil government without restraint from partners who had sought only for
worldly profit.

One of the most interesting incidents connected with the early history of
the Plymouth Colony was the romantic marriage of Priscilla and John
Alden, immortalized in the verse of Longfellow. Captain Miles Standish
was a redoubtable soldier, small in person, but of great activity and
courage. He came over in the Mayflower, and his wife Rose Standish fell a
victim to the privations which attended the first year in America.
Another passenger on the Mayflower was Priscilla Mullins, daughter of
William Mullins, a maiden of unusual beauty, just blooming into
womanhood. The gallant widower fell in love with Priscilla, but for some
reason which does not clearly appear, but probably bashfulness, he sent
another to do his courting. Standish himself was about thirty-seven years
of age, and doubtless showed the effect of his hard service in the wars.
Nevertheless, he might have won Priscilla had he gone for her in person,
for, as the military leader of the colony, beset as it was by savages who
might at any time become hostile, he was a man of importance and
desirable for a son-in-law. He made the mistake of choosing as Cupid's
messenger a handsome young man named John Alden, a cooper from
Southampton, with whom Priscilla was already well acquainted, and with
whom she had quite possibly whiled away many hours of the wearisome three
months' voyage from old Plymouth. Alden and Priscilla may have been in
love with each other already, when Captain Standish sent the youth on his
embarrassing mission. Even the rigid rules of Puritanism could not
prevent young men and women from falling in love, while their elders were
engaged in more sedate occupations. It is to be said for Standish, also,
that he evidently did not intend that the young man should state the case
to Priscilla, but only to her father. The parent promptly gave his
consent, but added that "Priscilla must be consulted." The maiden was
called into the room, and a brighter light dawned in her eyes, and a
ruddier flush suffused her cheeks, as her gaze met that of the handsome
young cooper. John Alden, too, could not remain unaffected, as he
repeated his message to the fair young woman, into whose ears he had
probably poured sweet nothings many a time while they dreamed, perhaps,
of the day when more serious words would be spoken. Priscilla asked why
Captain Standish had not come himself. Alden replied that the Captain was
too busy. This naturally made the maiden indignant, for she was justified
in assuming that no business could be more important than that of asking
for her hand. It is also possible that she was glad of an excuse for
rejecting the proffered honor. She declared that she would never marry a
man who was too busy to court her, adding, in the words of Longfellow:

    "Had he waited awhile, had only showed that he loved me,
    Even this captain of yours--who knows?--at last might have won me,
    Old and rough as he is, but now it never can happen."

John Alden pressed the suit in behalf of his soldier friend, secretly
hoping, it is to be feared, that Priscilla would not take him too much in
earnest, when, continues Longfellow:

    "Archly the maiden smiled, and with eyes over-running with laughter.
    Said, in a tremulous voice: 'Why don't you speak for yourself, John?'"

John did not speak for himself--at least not directly, on that occasion,
but he did later on, and shortly afterward the marriage of John Alden and
Priscilla Mullins was celebrated with all the display that the Plymouth
settlers could afford. Captain Standish did not blame Alden, but he did
not remain long near the scene of his disappointment, moving, in 1626, to
Duxbury, Massachusetts. He lived to a hale old age, respected both for
his private virtues and his public services.




CHAPTER VI.

The Puritan Immigration--Wealth and Learning Seek These Shores--Charter
Restrictions Dead Letters--A Stubborn Struggle for Self-government--
Methods of Election--The Early Government an Oligarchy--The Charter of
1691--New Hampshire and Maine--The New Haven Theocracy--Hartford's
Constitution--The United Colonies--The Clergy and Politics--Every
Election Sermon a Declaration of Independence.


John Endicott's settlement at Salem, and the large immigration which
followed the granting of a royal patent to the Massachusetts Bay Company,
together with the transfer of the charter and corporate powers of the
company from England to Massachusetts, led to the growth of a powerful
Puritan commonwealth which overshadowed and ultimately absorbed the
feeble settlement at Plymouth. The natal day of New England was that on
which John Winthrop landed at Salem, with nine hundred immigrants in the
summer of 1630, bringing not merely virtue, muscle and brawn, such as
carried the Pilgrims through their appalling experience, but wealth and
substance, learning and art, men to command as well as men to obey. From
that time, except during the season of depression which followed King
Philip's war, New England went steadily forward in population, prosperity
and political power. Her rulers were well able to meet and defeat their
would-be oppressors in the field of diplomacy, and now defying, now
ignoring and again pretending to yield to royal dictation, Massachusetts
never gave up the principles which animated her founders, or the purpose
which prompted them to abandon homes of comfort and even of luxury, and
establish new institutions in a new world. The Massachusetts settlers
were forbidden by the terms of their charter to enact any laws repugnant
to the laws of England. This restriction was a dead letter from the very
beginning. Indeed, literally construed, it would have defeated the very
object of Puritan emigration--to escape from the rule of a hierarchy
established under English laws. As Massachusetts was for many years the
leading colony of the north of English origin, and probably made more of
an impress than any other colony and State upon our national character,
it may be of interest to quote here a sketch of its political
institutions and their changes in the colonial period.

The charter of the Massachusetts Bay Company authorized the election of a
governor, deputy governor and eighteen assistants on the last Wednesday
of Easter. Endicott, the first governor, was chosen by the company in
London in April, 1629, but in October of the following year it was
resolved that the governor and deputy governor should be chosen by the
assistants out of their own number. After 1632, however, the governor was
chosen by the whole body of the freemen from among the assistants at a
general court or assembly held in May of each year. The deputy governor
was elected at the same time. The charter, as already mentioned, provided
also for the annual election of assistants or magistrates, whose number
was fixed at eighteen. Besides the officers mentioned in the charter, an
order of 1647 declared that a treasurer, major-general, admiral at sea,
commissioners for the United Colonies, secretary of the General Court and
"such others as are, or hereafter may be, of like general nature," should
be chosen annually "by the freemen of this jurisdiction." The voting took
place in Boston in May at a court of election held annually, and freemen
could vote at first only in person, but eventually by proxy also, if they
desired to do so. In both Massachusetts and New Plymouth all freemen had
originally a personal voice in the transaction of public business at the
general courts or assemblies which were held at stated intervals. One of
these was known as the Court of Election, and at this were chosen the
officers of the colony for the ensuing year. As the number of settlements
increased, it became inconvenient for freemen to attend the general
courts in person and they were allowed to be represented by deputies. As
it was impossible for all freemen when the colony became more populated,
to attend the courts of election, the deputies were at length permitted
to carry the votes of their townsmen to Boston.

The governor, as well as the other officers in Massachusetts, were first
chosen by show of hands, but about 1634 it was provided that the names
should be written on papers, the papers to be open or only once folded,
so that they might be the sooner perused. Afterward the voting was by
corn and beans, a grain of Indian corn signifying election, and a black
bean the contrary. The offence of ballot-box stuffing seems to have
existed, or at least was provided against even among the early Puritans,
for it was enacted that any freeman putting more than one grain should be
fined ten pounds--a large sum of money in those days.

The Massachusetts colonial government has been called a theocracy. As a
matter of fact it was an oligarchy, the political power residing in but a
small proportion of even the church-going freemen. This is shown in the
remonstrance addressed to the colony by the royal commission appointed
under King Charles II. to investigate the governments of the New England
