"Permit her to neglect the embroidery for this evening. I wish her whole
attention to be fixed on my accent; and to ensure this, she must follow
the reading with her eyes--she must look at the book."

He placed it between them, reposed his arm on the back of Caroline's
chair, and thus began to read.

The very first scene in "Coriolanus" came with smart relish to his
intellectual palate, and still as he read he warmed. He delivered the
haughty speech of Caius Marcius to the starving citizens with unction;
he did not say he thought his irrational pride right, but he seemed to
feel it so. Caroline looked up at him with a singular smile.

"There's a vicious point hit already," she said. "You sympathize with
that proud patrician who does not sympathize with his famished
fellow-men, and insults them. There, go on." He proceeded. The warlike
portions did not rouse him much; he said all that was out of date, or
should be; the spirit displayed was barbarous; yet the encounter
single-handed between Marcius and Tullus Aufidius he delighted in. As he
advanced, he forgot to criticise; it was evident he appreciated the
power, the truth of each portion; and, stepping out of the narrow line
of private prejudices, began to revel in the large picture of human
nature, to feel the reality stamped upon the characters who were
speaking from that page before him.

He did not read the comic scenes well; and Caroline, taking the book out
of his hand, read these parts for him. From her he seemed to enjoy them,
and indeed she gave them with a spirit no one could have expected of
her, with a pithy expression with which she seemed gifted on the spot,
and for that brief moment only. It may be remarked, in passing, that the
general character of her conversation that evening, whether serious or
sprightly, grave or gay, was as of something untaught, unstudied,
intuitive, fitful--when once gone, no more to be reproduced as it had
been than the glancing ray of the meteor, than the tints of the dew-gem,
than the colour or form of the sunset cloud, than the fleeting and
glittering ripple varying the flow of a rivulet.

Coriolanus in glory, Coriolanus in disaster, Coriolanus banished,
followed like giant shades one after the other. Before the vision of the
banished man Moore's spirit seemed to pause. He stood on the hearth of
Aufidius's hall, facing the image of greatness fallen, but greater than
ever in that low estate. He saw "the grim appearance," the dark face
"bearing command in it," "the noble vessel with its tackle torn." With
the revenge of Caius Marcius, Moore perfectly sympathized; he was not
scandalized by it; and again Caroline whispered, "There I see another
glimpse of brotherhood in error."

The march on Rome, the mother's supplication, the long resistance, the
final yielding of bad passions to good, which ever must be the case in a
nature worthy the epithet of noble, the rage of Aufidius at what he
considered his ally's weakness, the death of Coriolanus, the final
sorrow of his great enemy--all scenes made of condensed truth and
strength--came on in succession and carried with them in their deep,
fast flow the heart and mind of reader and listener.

"Now, have you felt Shakespeare?" asked Caroline, some ten minutes after
her cousin had closed the book.

"I think so."

"And have you felt anything in Coriolanus like you?"

"Perhaps I have."

"Was he not faulty as well as great?"

Moore nodded.

"And what was his fault? What made him hated by the citizens? What
caused him to be banished by his countrymen?"

"What do you think it was?"

"I ask again--

                      'Whether was it pride,
    Which out of daily fortune ever taints
    The happy man? whether defect of judgment,
    To fail in the disposing of those chances
    Which he was lord of? or whether nature,
    Not to be other than one thing, not moving
    From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
    Even with the same austerity and garb
    As he controlled the war?'"

"Well, answer yourself, Sphinx."

"It was a spice of all; and you must not be proud to your workpeople;
you must not neglect chances of soothing them; and you must not be of an
inflexible nature, uttering a request as austerely as if it were a
command."

"That is the moral you tack to the play. What puts such notions into
your head?"

"A wish for your good, a care for your safety, dear Robert, and a fear,
caused by many things which I have heard lately, that you will come to
harm."

"Who tells you these things?"

"I hear my uncle talk about you. He praises your hard spirit, your
determined cast of mind, your scorn of low enemies, your resolution not
'to truckle to the mob,' as he says."

"And would you have me truckle to them?"

"No, not for the world. I never wish you to lower yourself; but somehow
I cannot help thinking it unjust to include all poor working-people
under the general and insulting name of 'the mob,' and continually to
think of them and treat them haughtily."

"You are a little democrat, Caroline. If your uncle knew, what would he
say?"

"I rarely talk to my uncle, as you know, and never about such things. He
thinks everything but sewing and cooking above women's comprehension,
and out of their line."

"And do you fancy you comprehend the subjects on which you advise me?"

"As far as they concern you, I comprehend them. I know it would be
better for you to be loved by your workpeople than to be hated by them,
and I am sure that kindness is more likely to win their regard than
pride. If you were proud and cold to me and Hortense, should we love
you? When you are cold to me, as you _are_ sometimes, can I venture to
be affectionate in return?"

"Now, Lina, I've had my lesson both in languages and ethics, with a
touch on politics; it is your turn. Hortense tells me you were much
taken by a little piece of poetry you learned the other day, a piece by
poor Andre Chenier--'La Jeune Captive.' Do you remember it still?"

"I think so."

"Repeat it, then. Take your time and mind your accent; especially let us
have no English _u_'s."

Caroline, beginning in a low, rather tremulous voice, but gaining
courage as she proceeded, repeated the sweet verses of Chenier. The last
three stanzas she rehearsed well.

    "Mon beau voyage encore est si loin de sa fin!
     Je pars, et des ormeaux qui bordent le chemin
       J'ai passe le premiers a peine.
     Au banquet de la vie a peine commence,
     Un instant seulement mes levres ont presse
       La coupe en mes mains encore pleine.

    "Je ne suis qu'au printemps--je veux voir la moisson;
     Et comme le soleil, de saison en saison,
       Je veux achever mon annee,
     Brillante sur ma tige, et l'honneur du jardin
     Je n'ai vu luire encore que les feux du matin,
       Je veux achever ma journee!"

Moore listened at first with his eyes cast down, but soon he furtively
raised them. Leaning back in his chair he could watch Caroline without
her perceiving where his gaze was fixed. Her cheek had a colour, her
eyes a light, her countenance an expression this evening which would
have made even plain features striking; but there was not the grievous
defect of plainness to pardon in her case. The sunshine was not shed on
rough barrenness; it fell on soft bloom. Each lineament was turned with
grace; the whole aspect was pleasing. At the present moment--animated,
interested, touched--she might be called beautiful. Such a face was
calculated to awaken not only the calm sentiment of esteem, the distant
one of admiration, but some feeling more tender, genial,
intimate--friendship, perhaps, affection, interest. When she had
finished, she turned to Moore, and met his eye.

"Is that pretty well repeated?" she inquired, smiling like any happy,
docile child.

"I really don't know."

"Why don't you know? Have you not listened?"

"Yes--and looked. You are fond of poetry, Lina?"

"When I meet with _real_ poetry, I cannot rest till I have learned it by
heart, and so made it partly mine."

Mr. Moore now sat silent for several minutes. It struck nine o'clock.
Sarah entered, and said that Mr. Helstone's servant was come for Miss
Caroline.

"Then the evening is gone already," she observed, "and it will be long,
I suppose, before I pass another here."

Hortense had been for some time nodding over her knitting; fallen into a
doze now, she made no response to the remark.

"You would have no objection to come here oftener of an evening?"
inquired Robert, as he took her folded mantle from the side-table, where
it still lay, and carefully wrapped it round her.

"I like to come here; but I have no desire to be intrusive. I am not
hinting to be asked; you must understand that."

"Oh! I understand thee, child. You sometimes lecture me for wishing to
be rich, Lina; but if I _were_ rich, you should live here always--at any
rate, you should live with me wherever my habitation might be."

"That would be pleasant; and if you were poor--ever so poor--it would
still be pleasant. Good-night, Robert."

"I promised to walk with you up to the rectory."

"I know you did; but I thought you had forgotten, and I hardly knew how
to remind you, though I wished to do it. But would you like to go? It is
a cold night, and as Fanny is come, there is no necessity----"

"Here is your muff; don't wake Hortense--come."

The half mile to the rectory was soon traversed. They parted in the
garden without kiss, scarcely with a pressure of hands; yet Robert sent
his cousin in excited and joyously troubled. He had been singularly kind
to her that day--not in phrase, compliment, profession, but in manner,
in look, and in soft and friendly tones.

For himself, he came home grave, almost morose. As he stood leaning on
his own yard-gate, musing in the watery moonlight all alone, the hushed,
dark mill before him, the hill-environed hollow round, he exclaimed,
abruptly,--

"This won't do! There's weakness--there's downright ruin in all this.
However," he added, dropping his voice, "the frenzy is quite temporary.
I know it very well; I have had it before. It will be gone to-morrow."




CHAPTER VII.

The Curates at Tea.


Caroline Helstone was just eighteen years old, and at eighteen the true
narrative of life is yet to be commenced. Before that time we sit
listening to a tale, a marvellous fiction, delightful sometimes, and sad
sometimes, almost always unreal. Before that time our world is heroic,
its inhabitants half-divine or semi-demon; its scenes are dream-scenes;
darker woods and stranger hills, brighter skies, more dangerous waters,
sweeter flowers, more tempting fruits, wider plains, drearier deserts,
sunnier fields than are found in nature, overspread our enchanted globe.
What a moon we gaze on before that time! How the trembling of our hearts
at her aspect bears witness to its unutterable beauty! As to our sun, it
is a burning heaven--the world of gods.

At that time, at eighteen, drawing near the confines of illusive, void
dreams, Elf-land lies behind us, the shores of Reality rise in front.
These shores are yet distant; they look so blue, soft, gentle, we long
to reach them. In sunshine we see a greenness beneath the azure, as of
spring meadows; we catch glimpses of silver lines, and imagine the roll
of living waters. Could we but reach this land, we think to hunger and
thirst no more; whereas many a wilderness, and often the flood of death,
or some stream of sorrow as cold and almost as black as death, is to be
crossed ere true bliss can be tasted. Every joy that life gives must be
earned ere it is secured; and how hardly earned, those only know who
have wrestled for great prizes. The heart's blood must gem with red
beads the brow of the combatant, before the wreath of victory rustles
over it.

At eighteen we are not aware of this. Hope, when she smiles on us, and
promises happiness to-morrow, is implicitly believed; Love, when he
comes wandering like a lost angel to our door, is at once admitted,
welcomed, embraced. His quiver is not seen; if his arrows penetrate,
their wound is like a thrill of new life. There are no fears of poison,
none of the barb which no leech's hand can extract. That perilous
passion--an agony ever in some of its phases; with many, an agony
throughout--is believed to be an unqualified good. In short, at eighteen
the school of experience is to be entered, and her humbling, crushing,
grinding, but yet purifying and invigorating lessons are yet to be
learned.

Alas, Experience! No other mentor has so wasted and frozen a face as
yours, none wears a robe so black, none bears a rod so heavy, none with
hand so inexorable draws the novice so sternly to his task, and forces
him with authority so resistless to its acquirement. It is by your
instructions alone that man or woman can ever find a safe track through
life's wilds; without it, how they stumble, how they stray! On what
forbidden grounds do they intrude, down what dread declivities are they
hurled!

Caroline, having been convoyed home by Robert, had no wish to pass what
remained of the evening with her uncle. The room in which he sat was
very sacred ground to her; she seldom intruded on it; and to-night she
kept aloof till the bell rang for prayers. Part of the evening church
service was the form of worship observed in Mr. Helstone's household. He
read it in his usual nasal voice, clear, loud, and monotonous. The rite
over, his niece, according to her wont, stepped up to him.

"Good-night, uncle."

"Hey! You've been gadding abroad all day--visiting, dining out, and what
not!"

"Only at the cottage."

"And have you learned your lessons?"

"Yes."

"And made a shirt?"

"Only part of one."

"Well, that will do. Stick to the needle, learn shirt-making and
gown-making and piecrust-making, and you'll be a clever woman some day.
Go to bed now. I'm busy with a pamphlet here."

Presently the niece was enclosed in her small bedroom, the door bolted,
her white dressing-gown assumed, her long hair loosened and falling
thick, soft, and wavy to her waist; and as, resting from the task of
combing it out, she leaned her check on her hand and fixed her eyes on
the carpet, before her rose, and close around her drew, the visions we
see at eighteen years.

Her thoughts were speaking with her, speaking pleasantly, as it seemed,
for she smiled as she listened. She looked pretty meditating thus; but a
brighter thing than she was in that apartment--the spirit of youthful
Hope. According to this flattering prophet, she was to know
disappointment, to feel chill no more; she had entered on the dawn of a
summer day--no false dawn, but the true spring of morning--and her sun
would quickly rise. Impossible for her now to suspect that she was the
sport of delusion; her expectations seemed warranted, the foundation on
which they rested appeared solid.

"When people love, the next step is they marry," was her argument. "Now,
I love Robert, and I feel sure that Robert loves me. I have thought so
many a time before; to-day I _felt_ it. When I looked up at him after
repeating Chenier's poem, his eyes (what handsome eyes he has!) sent the
truth through my heart. Sometimes I am afraid to speak to him, lest I
should be too frank, lest I should seem forward--for I have more than
once regretted bitterly overflowing, superfluous words, and feared I had
said more than he expected me to say, and that he would disapprove what
he might deem my indiscretion; now, to-night I could have ventured to
express any thought, he was so indulgent. How kind he was as we walked
up the lane! He does not flatter or say foolish things; his love-making
(friendship, I mean; of course I don't yet account him my lover, but I
hope he will be so some day) is not like what we read of in books,--it
is far better--original, quiet, manly, sincere. I _do_ like him; I would
be an excellent wife to him if he did marry me; I would tell him of his
faults (for he has a few faults), but I would study his comfort, and
cherish him, and do my best to make him happy. Now, I am sure he will
not be cold to-morrow. I feel almost certain that to-morrow evening he
will either come here, or ask me to go there."

She recommenced combing her hair, long as a mermaid's. Turning her head
as she arranged it she saw her own face and form in the glass. Such
reflections are soberizing to plain people: their own eyes are not
enchanted with the image; they are confident then that the eyes of
others can see in it no fascination. But the fair must naturally draw
other conclusions: the picture is charming, and must charm. Caroline saw
a shape, a head, that, daguerreotyped in that attitude and with that
expression, would have been lovely. She could not choose but derive
from the spectacle confirmation to her hopes. It was then in
undiminished gladness she sought her couch.

And in undiminished gladness she rose the next day. As she entered her
uncle's breakfast-room, and with soft cheerfulness wished him
good-morning, even that little man of bronze himself thought, for an
instant, his niece was growing "a fine girl." Generally she was quiet
and timid with him--very docile, but not communicative; this morning,
however, she found many things to say. Slight topics alone might be
discussed between them; for with a woman--a girl--Mr. Helstone would
touch on no other. She had taken an early walk in the garden, and she
told him what flowers were beginning to spring there; she inquired when
the gardener was to come and trim the borders; she informed him that
certain starlings were beginning to build their nests in the
church-tower (Briarfield church was close to Briarfield rectory); she
wondered the tolling of the bells in the belfry did not scare them.

Mr. Helstone opined that "they were like other fools who had just
paired--insensible to inconvenience just for the moment." Caroline, made
perhaps a little too courageous by her temporary good spirits, here
hazarded a remark of a kind she had never before ventured to make on
observations dropped by her revered relative.

"Uncle," said she, "whenever you speak of marriage you speak of it
scornfully. Do you think people shouldn't marry?"

"It is decidedly the wisest plan to remain single, especially for
women."

"Are all marriages unhappy?"

"Millions of marriages are unhappy. If everybody confessed the truth,
perhaps all are more or less so."

"You are always vexed when you are asked to come and marry a couple.
Why?"

"Because one does not like to act as accessory to the commission of a
piece of pure folly."

Mr. Helstone spoke so readily, he seemed rather glad of the opportunity
to give his niece a piece of his mind on this point. Emboldened by the
impunity which had hitherto attended her questions, she went a little
further.

"But why," said she, "should it be pure folly? If two people like each
other, why shouldn't they consent to live together?"

"They tire of each other--they tire of each other in a month. A
yokefellow is not a companion; he or she is a fellow-sufferer."

It was by no means naive simplicity which inspired Caroline's next
remark; it was a sense of antipathy to such opinions, and of displeasure
at him who held them.

"One would think you had never been married, uncle. One would think you
were an old bachelor."

"Practically, I am so."

"But you have been married. Why were you so inconsistent as to marry?"

"Every man is mad once or twice in his life."

"So you tired of my aunt, and my aunt of you, and you were miserable
together?"

Mr. Helstone pushed out his cynical lip, wrinkled his brown forehead,
and gave an inarticulate grunt.

"Did she not suit you? Was she not good-tempered? Did you not get used
to her? Were you not sorry when she died?"

"Caroline," said Mr. Helstone, bringing his hand slowly down to within
an inch or two of the table, and then smiting it suddenly on the
mahogany, "understand this: it is vulgar and puerile to confound
generals with particulars. In every case there is the rule and there are
the exceptions. Your questions are stupid and babyish. Ring the bell, if
you have done breakfast."

The breakfast was taken away, and that meal over, it was the general
custom of uncle and niece to separate, and not to meet again till
dinner; but to-day the niece, instead of quitting the room, went to the
window-seat, and sat down there. Mr. Helstone looked round uneasily once
or twice, as if he wished her away; but she was gazing from the window,
and did not seem to mind him: so he continued the perusal of his morning
paper--a particularly interesting one it chanced to be, as new movements
had just taken place in the Peninsula, and certain columns of the
journal were rich in long dispatches from General Lord Wellington. He
little knew, meantime, what thoughts were busy in his niece's
mind--thoughts the conversation of the past half-hour had revived but
not generated; tumultuous were they now, as disturbed bees in a hive,
but it was years since they had first made their cells in her brain.

She was reviewing his character, his disposition, repeating his
sentiments on marriage. Many a time had she reviewed them before, and
sounded the gulf between her own mind and his; and then, on the other
side of the wide and deep chasm, she had seen, and she now saw, another
figure standing beside her uncle's--a strange shape, dim, sinister,
scarcely earthly--the half-remembered image of her own father, James
Helstone, Matthewson Helstone's brother.

Rumours had reached her ear of what that father's character was; old
servants had dropped hints; she knew, too, that he was not a good man,
and that he was never kind to her. She recollected--a dark recollection
it was--some weeks that she had spent with him in a great town
somewhere, when she had had no maid to dress her or take care of her;
when she had been shut up, day and night, in a high garret-room, without
a carpet, with a bare uncurtained bed, and scarcely any other furniture;
when he went out early every morning, and often forgot to return and
give her her dinner during the day, and at night, when he came back, was
like a madman, furious, terrible, or--still more painful--like an idiot,
imbecile, senseless. She knew she had fallen ill in this place, and that
one night, when she was very sick he had come raving into the room, and
said he would kill her, for she was a burden to him. Her screams had
brought aid; and from the moment she was then rescued from him she had
never seen him, except as a dead man in his coffin.

That was her father. Also she had a mother, though Mr. Helstone never
spoke to her of that mother, though she could not remember having seen
her; but that she was alive she knew. This mother was then the
drunkard's wife. What had _their_ marriage been? Caroline, turning from
the lattice, whence she had been watching the starlings (though without
seeing them), in a low voice, and with a sad, bitter tone, thus broke
the silence of the room,--

"You term marriage miserable, I suppose, from what you saw of my father
and mother's. If my mother suffered what I suffered when I was with
papa, she must have had a dreadful life."

Mr. Helstone, thus addressed, wheeled about in his chair, and looked
over his spectacles at his niece. He was taken aback.

Her father and mother! What had put it into her head to mention her
father and mother, of whom he had never, during the twelve years she had
lived with him, spoken to her? That the thoughts were self-matured, that
she had any recollections or speculations about her parents, he could
not fancy.

"Your father and mother? Who has been talking to you about them?"

"Nobody; but I remember something of what papa was, and I pity mamma.
Where is she?"

This "Where is she?" had been on Caroline's lips hundreds of times
before, but till now she had never uttered it.

"I hardly know," returned Mr. Helstone; "I was little acquainted with
her. I have not heard from her for years: but wherever she is, she
thinks nothing of you; she never inquires about you. I have reason to
believe she does not wish to see you. Come, it is school-time. You go to
your cousin at ten, don't you? The clock has struck."

Perhaps Caroline would have said more; but Fanny, coming in, informed
her master that the churchwardens wanted to speak to him in the vestry.
He hastened to join them, and his niece presently set out for the
cottage.

The road from the rectory to Hollow's Mill inclined downwards; she ran,
therefore, almost all the way. Exercise, the fresh air, the thought of
seeing Robert, at least of being on his premises, in his vicinage,
revived her somewhat depressed spirits quickly. Arriving in sight of the
white house, and within hearing of the thundering mill and its rushing
watercourse, the first thing she saw was Moore at his garden gate. There
he stood, in his belted Holland blouse, a light cap covering his head,
which undress costume suited him. He was looking down the lane, not in
the direction of his cousin's approach. She stopped, withdrawing a
little behind a willow, and studied his appearance.

"He has not his peer," she thought. "He is as handsome as he is
intelligent. What a keen eye he has! What clearly-cut, spirited
features--thin and serious, but graceful! I do like his face, I do like
his aspect, I do like him so much--better than any of those shuffling
curates, for instance--better than anybody; bonny Robert!"

She sought "bonny Robert's" presence speedily. For his part, when she
challenged his sight, I believe he would have passed from before her
eyes like a phantom, if he could; but being a tall fact, and no fiction,
he was obliged to stand the greeting. He made it brief. It was
cousin-like, brother-like, friend-like, anything but lover-like. The
nameless charm of last night had left his manner: he was no longer the
same man: or, at any rate, the same heart did not beat in his breast.
Rude disappointment, sharp cross! At first the eager girl would not
believe in the change, though she saw and felt it. It was difficult to
withdraw her hand from his, till he had bestowed at least something like
a kind pressure; it was difficult to turn her eyes from his eyes, till
his looks had expressed something more and fonder than that cool
welcome.

A lover masculine so disappointed can speak and urge explanation, a
lover feminine can say nothing; if she did, the result would be shame
and anguish, inward remorse for self-treachery. Nature would brand such
demonstration as a rebellion against her instincts, and would
vindictively repay it afterwards by the thunderbolt of self-contempt
smiting suddenly in secret. Take the matter as you find it: ask no
questions, utter no remonstrances; it is your best wisdom. You expected
bread, and you have got a stone: break your teeth on it, and don't
shriek because the nerves are martyrized; do not doubt that your mental
stomach--if you have such a thing--is strong as an ostrich's; the stone
will digest. You held out your hand for an egg, and fate put into it a
scorpion. Show no consternation: close your fingers firmly upon the
gift; let it sting through your palm. Never mind; in time, after your
hand and arm have swelled and quivered long with torture, the squeezed
scorpion will die, and you will have learned the great lesson how to
endure without a sob. For the whole remnant of your life, if you survive
the test--some, it is said, die under it--you will be stronger, wiser,
less sensitive. This you are not aware of, perhaps, at the time, and so
cannot borrow courage of that hope. Nature, however, as has been
intimated, is an excellent friend in such cases, sealing the lips,
interdicting utterance, commanding a placid dissimulation--a
dissimulation often wearing an easy and gay mien at first, settling down
to sorrow and paleness in time, then passing away, and leaving a
convenient stoicism, not the less fortifying because it is half-bitter.

Half-bitter! Is that wrong? No; it should be bitter: bitterness is
strength--it is a tonic. Sweet, mild force following acute suffering you
find nowhere; to talk of it is delusion. There may be apathetic
exhaustion after the rack. If energy remains, it will be rather a
dangerous energy--deadly when confronted with injustice.

Who has read the ballad of "Puir Mary Lee"--that old Scotch ballad,
written I know not in what generation nor by what hand? Mary had been
ill-used--probably in being made to believe that truth which was
falsehood. She is not complaining, but she is sitting alone in the
snowstorm, and you hear her thoughts. They are not the thoughts of a
model heroine under her circumstances, but they are those of a
deeply-feeling, strongly-resentful peasant-girl. Anguish has driven her
from the ingle-nook of home to the white-shrouded and icy hills.
Crouched under the "cauld drift," she recalls every image of
horror--"the yellow-wymed ask," "the hairy adder," "the auld moon-bowing
tyke," "the ghaist at e'en,", "the sour bullister," "the milk on the
taed's back." She hates these, but "waur she hates Robin-a-Ree."

    "Oh, ance I lived happily by yon bonny burn--
       The warld was in love wi' me;
     But now I maun sit 'neath the cauld drift and mourn,
       And curse black Robin-a-Ree!

    "Then whudder awa, thou bitter biting blast,
       And sough through the scrunty tree,
     And smoor me up in the snaw fu' fast,
       And n'er let the sun me see!

    "Oh, never melt awa, thou wreath o' snaw,
       That's sae kind in graving me;
     But hide me frae the scorn and guffaw
       O' villains like Robin-a-Ree!"

But what has been said in the last page or two is not germane to
Caroline Helstone's feelings, or to the state of things between her and
Robert Moore. Robert had done her no wrong; he had told her no lie; it
was she that was to blame, if any one was. What bitterness her mind
distilled should and would be poured on her own head. She had loved
without being asked to love--a natural, sometimes an inevitable chance,
but big with misery.

Robert, indeed, had sometimes seemed to be fond of her; but why? Because
she had made herself so pleasing to him, he could not, in spite of all
his efforts, help testifying a state of feeling his judgment did not
approve nor his will sanction. He was about to withdraw decidedly from
intimate communication with her, because he did not choose to have his
affections inextricably entangled, nor to be drawn, despite his reason,
into a marriage he believed imprudent. Now, what was she to do? To give
way to her feelings, or to vanquish them? To pursue him, or to turn
upon herself? If she is weak, she will try the first expedient--will
lose his esteem and win his aversion; if she has sense, she will be her
own governor, and resolve to subdue and bring under guidance the
disturbed realm of her emotions. She will determine to look on life
steadily, as it is; to begin to learn its severe truths seriously, and
to study its knotty problems closely, conscientiously.

It appeared she had a little sense, for she quitted Robert quietly,
without complaint or question, without the alteration of a muscle or the
shedding of a tear, betook herself to her studies under Hortense as
usual, and at dinner-time went home without lingering.

When she had dined, and found herself in the rectory drawing-room alone,
having left her uncle over his temperate glass of port wine, the
difficulty that occurred to and embarrassed her was, "How am I to get
through this day?"

Last night she had hoped it would be spent as yesterday was, that the
evening would be again passed with happiness and Robert. She had learned
her mistake this morning; and yet she could not settle down, convinced
that no chance would occur to recall her to Hollow's Cottage, or to
bring Moore again into her society.

He had walked up after tea more than once to pass an hour with her
uncle. The door-bell had rung, his voice had been heard in the passage
just at twilight, when she little expected such a pleasure; and this had
happened twice after he had treated her with peculiar reserve; and
though he rarely talked to her in her uncle's presence, he had looked at
her relentingly as he sat opposite her work-table during his stay. The
few words he had spoken to her were comforting; his manner on bidding
her good-night was genial. Now, he might come this evening, said False
Hope. She almost knew it was False Hope which breathed the whisper, and
yet she listened.

She tried to read--her thoughts wandered; she tried to sew--every stitch
she put in was an _ennui_, the occupation was insufferably tedious; she
opened her desk and attempted to write a French composition--she wrote
nothing but mistakes.

Suddenly the door-bell sharply rang; her heart leaped; she sprang to the
drawing-room door, opened it softly, peeped through the aperture. Fanny
was admitting a visitor--a gentleman--a tall man--just the height of
Robert. For one second she thought it was Robert--for one second she
exulted; but the voice asking for Mr. Helstone undeceived her. That
voice was an Irish voice, consequently not Moore's, but the
curate's--Malone's. He was ushered into the dining-room, where,
doubtless, he speedily helped his rector to empty the decanters.

It was a fact to be noted, that at whatever house in Briarfield,
Whinbury, or Nunnely one curate dropped in to a meal--dinner or tea, as,
the case might be--another presently followed, often two more. Not that
they gave each other the rendezvous, but they were usually all on the
run at the same time; and when Donne, for instance, sought Malone at his
lodgings and found him not, he inquired whither he had posted, and
having learned of the landlady his destination, hastened with all speed
after him. The same causes operated in the same way with Sweeting. Thus
it chanced on that afternoon that Caroline's ears were three times
tortured with the ringing of the bell and the advent of undesired
guests; for Donne followed Malone, and Sweeting followed Donne; and more
wine was ordered up from the cellar into the dining-room (for though old
Helstone chid the inferior priesthood when he found them "carousing," as
he called it, in their own tents, yet at his hierarchical table he ever
liked to treat them to a glass of his best), and through the closed
doors Caroline heard their boyish laughter, and the vacant cackle of
their voices. Her fear was lest they should stay to tea, for she had no
pleasure in making tea for that particular trio. What distinctions
people draw! These three were men--young men--educated men, like Moore;
yet, for her, how great the difference! Their society was a bore--his a
delight.

Not only was she destined to be favoured with their clerical company,
but Fortune was at this moment bringing her four other guests--lady
guests, all packed in a pony-phaeton now rolling somewhat heavily along
the road from Whinbury: an elderly lady and three of her buxom daughters
were coming to see her "in a friendly way," as the custom of that
neighbourhood was. Yes, a fourth time the bell clanged. Fanny brought
the present announcement to the drawing-room,--

"Mrs. Sykes and the three Misses Sykes."

When Caroline was going to receive company, her habit was to wring her
hands very nervously, to flush a little, and come forward hurriedly yet
hesitatingly, wishing herself meantime at Jericho. She was, at such
crises, sadly deficient in finished manner, though she had once been at
school a year. Accordingly, on this occasion, her small white hands
sadly maltreated each other, while she stood up, waiting the entrance of
Mrs. Sykes.

In stalked that lady, a tall, bilious gentlewoman, who made an ample and
not altogether insincere profession of piety, and was greatly given to
hospitality towards the clergy. In sailed her three daughters, a showy
trio, being all three well-grown, and more or less handsome.

In English country ladies there is this point to be remarked. Whether
young or old, pretty or plain, dull or sprightly, they all (or almost
all) have a certain expression stamped on their features, which seems to
say, "I know--I do not boast of it, but I _know_ that I am the standard
of what is proper; let every one therefore whom I approach, or who
approaches me, keep a sharp lookout, for wherein they differ from me--be
the same in dress, manner, opinion, principle, or practice--therein they
are wrong."

Mrs. and Misses Sykes, far from being exceptions to this observation,
were pointed illustrations of its truth. Miss Mary--a well-looked,
well-meant, and, on the whole, well-dispositioned girl--wore her
complacency with some state, though without harshness. Miss Harriet--a
beauty--carried it more overbearingly; she looked high and cold. Miss
Hannah, who was conceited, dashing, pushing, flourished hers consciously
and openly. The mother evinced it with the gravity proper to her age and
religious fame.

The reception was got through somehow. Caroline "was glad to see them"
(an unmitigated fib), hoped they were well, hoped Mrs. Sykes's cough was
better (Mrs. Sykes had had a cough for the last twenty years), hoped the
Misses Sykes had left their sisters at home well; to which inquiry the
Misses Sykes, sitting on three chairs opposite the music-stool, whereon
Caroline had undesignedly come to anchor, after wavering for some
seconds between it and a large arm-chair, into which she at length
recollected she ought to induct Mrs. Sykes--and indeed that lady saved
her the trouble by depositing herself therein--the Misses Sykes replied
to Caroline by one simultaneous bow, very majestic and mighty awful. A
pause followed. This bow was of a character to ensure silence for the
next five minutes, and it did. Mrs. Sykes then inquired after Mr.
Helstone, and whether he had had any return of rheumatism, and whether
preaching twice on a Sunday fatigued him, and if he was capable of
taking a full service now; and on being assured he was, she and all her
daughters, combining in chorus, expressed their opinion that he was "a
wonderful man of his years."

Pause second.

Miss Mary, getting up the steam in her turn, asked whether Caroline had
attended the Bible Society meeting which had been held at Nunnely last
Thursday night. The negative answer which truth compelled Caroline to
utter--for last Thursday evening she had been sitting at home, reading a
novel which Robert had lent her--elicited a simultaneous expression of
surprise from the lips of the four ladies.

"We were all there," said Miss Mary--"mamma and all of us. We even
persuaded papa to go. Hannah would insist upon it. But he fell asleep
while Mr. Langweilig, the German Moravian minister, was speaking. I felt
quite ashamed, he nodded so."

"And there was Dr. Broadbent," cried Hannah--"such a beautiful speaker!
You couldn't expect it of him, for he is almost a vulgar-looking man."

"But such a dear man," interrupted Mary.

"And such a good man, such a useful man," added her mother.

"Only like a butcher in appearance," interposed the fair, proud Harriet.
"I couldn't bear to look at him. I listened with my eyes shut."

Miss Helstone felt her ignorance and incompetency. Not having seen Dr.
Broadbent, she could not give her opinion. Pause third came on. During
its continuance, Caroline was feeling at her heart's core what a
dreaming fool she was, what an unpractical life she led, how little
fitness there was in her for ordinary intercourse with the ordinary
world. She was feeling how exclusively she had attached herself to the
white cottage in the Hollow, how in the existence of one inmate of that
cottage she had pent all her universe. She was sensible that this would
not do, and that some day she would be forced to make an alteration. It
could not be said that she exactly wished to resemble the ladies before
her, but she wished to become superior to her present self, so as to
feel less scared by their dignity.

The sole means she found of reviving the flagging discourse was by
asking them if they would all stay to tea; and a cruel struggle it cost
her to perform this piece of civility. Mrs. Sykes had begun, "We are
much obliged to you, but----" when in came Fanny once more.

"The gentlemen will stay the evening, ma'am," was the message she
brought from Mr. Helstone.

"What gentlemen have you?" now inquired Mrs. Sykes. Their names were
specified; she and her daughters interchanged glances. The curates were
not to them what they were to Caroline. Mr. Sweeting was quite a
favourite with them; even Mr. Malone rather so, because he was a
clergyman. "Really, since you have company already, I think we will
stay," remarked Mrs. Sykes. "We shall be quite a pleasant little party.
I always like to meet the clergy."

And now Caroline had to usher them upstairs, to help them to unshawl,
smooth their hair, and make themselves smart; to reconduct them to the
drawing-room, to distribute amongst them books of engravings, or odd
things purchased from the Jew-basket. She was obliged to be a purchaser,
though she was but a slack contributor; and if she had possessed plenty
of money, she would rather, when it was brought to the rectory--an awful
incubus!--have purchased the whole stock than contributed a single
pin-cushion.

It ought perhaps to be explained in passing, for the benefit of those
who are not _au fait_ to the mysteries of the "Jew-basket" and
"missionary-basket," that these _meubles_ are willow repositories, of
the capacity of a good-sized family clothes-basket, dedicated to the
purpose of conveying from house to house a monster collection of
pin-cushions, needle-books, card-racks, workbags, articles of infant
wear, etc., etc., etc., made by the willing or reluctant hands of the
Christian ladies of a parish, and sold perforce to the heathenish
gentlemen thereof, at prices unblushingly exorbitant. The proceeds of
such compulsory sales are applied to the conversion of the Jews, the
seeking up of the ten missing tribes, or to the regeneration of the
interesting coloured population of the globe. Each lady contributor
takes it in her turn to keep the basket a month, to sew for it, and to
foist off its contents on a shrinking male public. An exciting time it
is when that turn comes round. Some active-minded woman, with a good
trading spirit, like it, and enjoy exceedingly the fun of making
hard-handed worsted-spinners cash up, to the tune of four or five
hundred per cent. above cost price, for articles quite useless to them;
other feebler souls object to it, and would rather see the prince of
darkness himself at their door any morning than that phantom basket,
brought with "Mrs. Rouse's compliments; and please, ma'am, she says it's
your turn now."

Miss Helstone's duties of hostess performed, more anxiously than
cheerily, she betook herself to the kitchen, to hold a brief
privy-council with Fanny and Eliza about the tea.

"What a lot on 'em!" cried Eliza, who was cook. "And I put off the
baking to-day because I thought there would be bread plenty to fit while
morning. We shall never have enow."

"Are there any tea-cakes?" asked the young mistress.

"Only three and a loaf. I wish these fine folk would stay at home till
they're asked; and I want to finish trimming my hat" (bonnet she meant).

"Then," suggested Caroline, to whom the importance of the emergency gave
a certain energy, "Fanny must run down to Briarfield and buy some
muffins and crumpets and some biscuits. And don't be cross, Eliza; we
can't help it now."

"And which tea-things are we to have?"

"Oh, the best, I suppose. I'll get out the silver service." And she ran
upstairs to the plate-closet, and presently brought down teapot,
cream-ewer, and sugar-basin.

"And mun we have th' urn?"

"Yes; and now get it ready as quickly as you can, for the sooner we have
tea over the sooner they will go--at least, I hope so. Heigh-ho! I wish
they were gone," she sighed, as she returned to the drawing-room.
"Still," she thought, as she paused at the door ere opening it, "if
