gamekeeper; a dark velveteen dress and leathern gaiters. As Egremont
caught his form, he threw his broad-brimmed country hat upon the ground
and showed a frank and manly countenance. His complexion might in youth
have been ruddy, but time and time's attendants, thought and passion,
had paled it: his chesnut hair, faded, but not grey, still clustered
over a noble brow; his features were regular and handsome, a well-formed
nose, the square mouth and its white teeth, and the clear grey eye which
befitted such an idiosyncracy. His time of vigorous manhood, for he was
much nearer forty than fifty years of age, perhaps better suited his
athletic form, than the more supple and graceful season of youth.

Stretching his powerful arms in the air, and delivering himself of
an exclamation which denoted his weariness, and which had broken the
silence, he expressed to his companion his determination to rest himself
under the shade of the yew in the contiguous garden, and inviting his
friend to follow him, he took up his hat and moved away.

There was something in the appearance of the stranger that interested
Egremont; and waiting till he had established himself in his pleasant
resting place, Egremont descended into the cloister garden and
determined to address him.




Book 2 Chapter 5



"You lean against an ancient trunk," said Egremont, carelessly advancing
to the stranger, who looked up at him without any expression of
surprise, and then replied. "They say 'tis the trunk beneath whose
branches the monks encamped when they came to this valley to raise their
building. It was their house, till with the wood and stone around them,
their labour and their fine art, they piled up their abbey. And then
they were driven out of it, and it came to this. Poor men! poor men!"

"They would hardly have forfeited their resting-place had they deserved
to retain it," said Egremont.

"They were rich. I thought it was poverty that was a crime," replied the
stranger in a tone of simplicity.

"But they had committed other crimes."

"It may be so; we are very frail. But their history has been written by
their enemies; they were condemned without a hearing; the people rose
oftentimes in their behalf; and their property was divided with those on
whose reports it was forfeited."

"At any rate, it was a forfeiture which gave life to the community,"
said Egremont; "the lands are held by active men and not by drones."

"A drone is one who does not labour," said the stranger; "whether he
wear a cowl or a coronet, 'tis the same to me. Somebody I suppose must
own the land; though I have heard say that this individual tenure is not
a necessity; but however this may be, I am not one who would object to
the lord, provided he were a gentle one. All agree the Monastics were
easy landlords; their rents were low; they granted leases in those days.
Their tenants too might renew their term before their tenure ran out: so
they were men of spirit and property. There were yeomen then, sir: the
country was not divided into two classes, masters and slaves; there was
some resting-place between luxury and misery. Comfort was an English
habit then, not merely an English word."

"And do you really think they were easier landlords than our present
ones?" said Egremont, inquiringly.

"Human nature would tell us that, even if history did not confess it.
The Monastics could possess no private property; they could save no
money; they could bequeath nothing. They lived, received, and expended
in common. The monastery too was a proprietor that never died and never
wasted. The farmer had a deathless landlord then; not a harsh guardian,
or a grinding mortgagee, or a dilatory master in chancery, all was
certain; the manor had not to dread a change of lords, or the oaks to
tremble at the axe of the squandering heir. How proud we are still in
England of an old family, though, God knows, 'tis rare to see one now.
Yet the people like to say, We held under him, and his father and his
grandfather before him: they know that such a tenure is a benefit. The
abbot was ever the same. The monks were in short in every district a
point of refuge for all who needed succour, counsel, and protection; a
body of individuals having no cares of their own, with wisdom to guide
the inexperienced, with wealth to relieve the suffering, and often with
power to protect the oppressed."

"You plead their cause with feeling," said Egremont, not unmoved.

"It is my own; they were the sons of the People, like myself."

"I had thought rather these monasteries were the resort of the younger
branches of the aristocracy?" said Egremont.

"Instead of the pension list;" replied his companion, smiling, but not
with bitterness. "Well, if we must have an aristocracy, I would sooner
that its younger branches should be monks and nuns, than colonels
without regiments, or housekeepers of royal palaces that exist only
in name. Besides see what advantage to a minister if the unendowed
aristocracy were thus provided for now. He need not, like a minister
in these days, entrust the conduct of public affairs to individuals
notoriously incompetent, appoint to the command of expeditions generals
who never saw a field, make governors of colonies out of men who never
could govern themselves, or find an ambassador in a broken dandy or
a blasted favourite. It is true that many of the monks and nuns were
persons of noble birth. Why should they not have been? The aristocracy
had their share; no more. They, like all other classes, were benefitted
by the monasteries: but the list of the mitred abbots when they were
suppressed, shows that the great majority of the heads of houses were of
the people."

"Well, whatever difference of opinion may exist on these points," said
Egremont, "there is one on which there can be no controversy: the monks
were great architects."

"Ah! there it is," said the stranger, in a tone of plaintiveness; "if
the world but only knew what they had lost! I am sure that not the
faintest idea is generally prevalent of the appearance of England before
and since the dissolution. Why, sir, in England and Wales alone, there
were of these institutions of different sizes; I mean monasteries, and
chantries and chapels, and great hospitals; considerably upwards of
three thousand; all of them fair buildings, many of them of exquisite
beauty. There were on an average in every shire at least twenty
structures such as this was; in this great county double that number:
establishments that were as vast and as magnificent and as beautiful as
your Belvoirs and your Chatsworths, your Wentworths and your Stowes. Try
to imagine the effect of thirty or forty Chatsworths in this county
the proprietors of which were never absent. You complain enough now
of absentees. The monks were never non-resident. They expended their
revenue among those whose labour had produced it. These holy men too
built and planted as they did everything else for posterity: their
churches were cathedrals; their schools colleges; their halls and
libraries the muniment rooms of kingdoms; their woods and waters, their
farms and gardens, were laid out and disposed on a scale and in a spirit
that are now extinct: they made the country beautiful, and the people
proud of their country."

"Yet if the monks were such public benefactors, why did not the people
rise in their favour?"

"They did, but too late. They struggled for a century, but they
struggled against property and they were beat. As long as the monks
existed, the people, when aggrieved, had property on their side. And
now 'tis all over," said the stranger; "and travellers come and stare at
these ruins, and think themselves very wise to moralize over time. They
are the children of violence, not of time. It is war that created these
ruins, civil war, of all our civil wars the most inhuman, for it was
waged with the unresisting. The monasteries were taken by storm, they
were sacked, gutted, battered with warlike instruments, blown up with
gunpowder; you may see the marks of the blast against the new tower
here. Never was such a plunder. The whole face of the country for a
century was that of a land recently invaded by a ruthless enemy; it was
worse than the Norman conquest; nor has England ever lost this character
of ravage. I don't know whether the union workhouses will remove it.
They are building something for the people at last. After an experiment
of three centuries, your gaols being full, and your treadmills losing
something of their virtue, you have given us a substitute for the
monasteries."

"You lament the old faith," said Egremont, in a tone of respect.

"I am not viewing the question as one of faith," said the stranger.
"It is not as a matter of religion, but as a matter of right, that I am
considering it: as a matter, I should say, of private right and public
happiness. You might have changed if you thought fit the religion of the
abbots as you changed the religion of the bishops: but you had no right
to deprive men of their property, and property moreover which under
their administration so mainly contributed to the welfare of the
community."

"As for community," said a voice which proceeded neither from Egremont
nor the stranger, "with the monasteries expired the only type that we
ever had in England of such an intercourse. There is no community in
England; there is aggregation, but aggregation under circumstances which
make it rather a dissociating, than an uniting, principle."

It was a still voice that uttered these words, yet one of a peculiar
character; one of those voices that instantly arrest attention: gentle
and yet solemn, earnest yet unimpassioned. With a step as whispering
as his tone, the man who had been kneeling by the tomb, had unobserved
joined his associate and Egremont. He hardly reached the middle height;
his form slender, but well proportioned; his pale countenance, slightly
marked with the small pox, was redeemed from absolute ugliness by
a highly-intellectual brow, and large dark eyes that indicated deep
sensibility and great quickness of apprehension. Though young, he was
already a little bald; he was dressed entirely in black; the fairness
of his linen, the neatness of his beard, his gloves much worn, yet
carefully mended, intimated that his very faded garments were the result
of necessity rather than of negligence.

"You also lament the dissolution of these bodies," said Egremont.

"There is so much to lament in the world in which we live," said the
younger of the strangers, "that I can spare no pang for the past."

"Yet you approve of the principle of their society; you prefer it, you
say, to our existing life."

"Yes; I prefer association to gregariousness."

"That is a distinction," said Egremont, musingly.

"It is a community of purpose that constitutes society," continued the
younger stranger; "without that, men may be drawn into contiguity, but
they still continue virtually isolated."

"And is that their condition in cities?"

"It is their condition everywhere; but in cities that condition is
aggravated. A density of population implies a severer struggle for
existence, and a consequent repulsion of elements brought into too close
contact. In great cities men are brought together by the desire of gain.
They are not in a state of co-operation, but of isolation, as to
the making of fortunes; and for all the rest they are careless of
neighbours. Christianity teaches us to love our neighbour as ourself;
modern society acknowledges no neighbour."

"Well, we live in strange times," said Egremont, struck by the
observation of his companion, and relieving a perplexed spirit by an
ordinary exclamation, which often denotes that the mind is more stirring
than it cares to acknowledge, or at the moment is capable to express.

"When the infant begins to walk, it also thinks that it lives in strange
times," said his companion.

"Your inference?" asked Egremont.

"That society, still in its infancy, is beginning to feel its way."

"This is a new reign," said Egremont, "perhaps it is a new era."

"I think so," said the younger stranger.

"I hope so," said the elder one.

"Well, society may be in its infancy," said Egremont slightly smiling;
"but, say what you like, our Queen reigns over the greatest nation that
ever existed."

"Which nation?" asked the younger stranger, "for she reigns over two."

The stranger paused; Egremont was silent, but looked inquiringly.

"Yes," resumed the younger stranger after a moment's interval. "Two
nations; between whom there is no intercourse and no sympathy; who are
as ignorant of each other's habits, thoughts, and feelings, as if they
were dwellers in different zones, or inhabitants of different planets;
who are formed by a different breeding, are fed by a different food, are
ordered by different manners, and are not governed by the same laws."

"You speak of--" said Egremont, hesitatingly.

"THE RICH AND THE POOR."

At this moment a sudden flush of rosy light, suffusing the grey ruins,
indicated that the sun had just fallen; and through a vacant arch that
overlooked them, alone in the resplendent sky, glittered the twilight
star. The hour, the scene, the solemn stillness and the softening
beauty, repressed controversy, induced even silence. The last words
of the stranger lingered in the ear of Egremont; his musing spirit was
teeming with many thoughts, many emotions; when from the Lady Chapel
there rose the evening hymn to the Virgin. A single voice; but tones
of almost supernatural sweetness; tender and solemn, yet flexible and
thrilling.

Egremont started from his reverie. He would have spoken, but
he perceived that the elder of the strangers had risen from his
resting-place, and with downcast eyes and crossed arms, was on his
knees. The other remained standing in his former posture.

The divine melody ceased; the elder stranger rose; the words were on the
lips of Egremont, that would have asked some explanation of this sweet
and holy mystery, when in the vacant and star-lit arch on which his
glance was fixed, he beheld a female form. She was apparently in the
habit of a Religious, yet scarcely could be a nun, for her veil, if
indeed it were a veil, had fallen on her shoulders, and revealed her
thick tresses of long fair hair. The blush of deep emotion lingered on
a countenance, which though extremely young, was impressed with a
character of almost divine majesty; while her dark eyes and long dark
lashes, contrasting with the brightness of her complexion and the
luxuriance of her radiant locks, combined to produce a beauty as rare as
it is choice; and so strange, that Egremont might for a moment have been
pardoned for believing her a seraph, that had lighted on this sphere,
or the fair phantom of some saint haunting the sacred ruins of her
desecrated fane.




Book 2 Chapter 6



"I understand, then," said Lord Marney to his brother, as on the evening
of the same day they were seated together in the drawing-room, in close
converse "I understand then, that you have in fact paid nothing, and
that my mother will give you a thousand pounds. That won't go very far."

"It will hardly pay for the chairing," said Egremont; "the restoration
of the family influence was celebrated on so great a scale."

"The family influence must be supported," said Lord Marney, "and my
mother will give you a thousand pounds; as I said, that will not do much
for you, but I like her spirit. Contests are very expensive things, yet
I quite approve of what you have done, especially as you won. It is a
great thing in these ten pound days to win your first contest, and
shows powers of calculation which I respect. Everything in this world is
calculation; there is no such thing as luck, depend upon it; and if you
go on calculating with equal exactness, you must succeed in life. Now
the question is, what is to be done with your election bills?"

"Exactly."

"You want to know what I will do for you, or rather what I can do for
you; that is the point. My inclination of course is to do everything
for you; but when I calculate my resources, I may find that they are not
equal to my inclination."

"I am sure, George, you will do everything, and more than everything you
ought."

"I am extremely pleased about this thousand pounds of my mother,
Charles."

"Most admirable of her! But she always is so generous!"

"Her jointure has been most regularly paid," continued Lord Marney.
"Always be exact in your payments, Charles. There is no end to the good
it produces. Now if I had not been so regular in paying my mother her
jointure, she would not in all probability have been able to have given
you this thousand pounds; and, therefore, to a certain extent, you are
indebted for this thousand pounds to me."

Egremont drew up a little, but said nothing.

"I am obliged to pay my mother her jointure, whether ricks are burnt or
not," said Lord Marney. "It's very hard, don't you think so?"

"But these ricks were Bingley's?"

"But he was not insured, and he will want some reduction in his rent,
and if I do not see fit to allow it him, which I probably shall not, for
he ought to have calculated on these things, I have ricks of my own, and
they may be burnt any night."

"But you, of course, are insured?"

"No, I am not; I calculate 'tis better to run the risk."

"I wonder why ricks are burnt now, and were not in old days," said
Egremont.

"Because there is a surplus population in the kingdom," said Lord
Marney, "and no rural police in the county."

"You were speaking of the election, George," said Egremont, not without
reluctance, yet anxious, as the ice had been broken, to bring the matter
to a result. Lord Marney, before the election, had written, in reply
to his mother consulting him on the step a letter with which she was
delighted, but which Egremont at the time could have wished to have been
more explicit. However in the excitement attendant on a first contest,
and influenced by the person whose judgment always swayed, and, in
the present case, was peculiarly entitled to sway him, he stifled his
scruples, and persuaded himself that he was a candidate not only with
the sanction, but at the instance, of his brother. "You were speaking of
the election, George," said Egremont.

"About the election, Charles. Well, the long and short of it is this:
that I wish to see you comfortable. To be harassed about money is one of
the most disagreeable incidents of life. It ruffles the temper, lowers
the spirits, disturbs the rest, and finally breaks up one's health.
Always, if you possibly can, keep square. And if by any chance you do
find yourself in a scrape, come to me. There is nothing under those
circumstances like the advice of a cool-headed friend."

"As valuable as the assistance of a cold-hearted one," thought Egremont,
who did not fancy too much the tone of this conversation.

"But there is one thing of which you must particularly beware,"
continued Lord Marney, "there is one thing worse even than getting into
difficulties--patching them up. The patching-up system is fatal; it is
sure to break down; you never get clear. Now, what I want to do for you,
Charles, is to put you right altogether. I want to see you square and
more than square, in a position which will for ever guarantee you from
any annoyance of this kind."

"He is a good fellow after all," thought Egremont.

"That thousand pounds of my mother was very a propos," said Lord Marney;
"I suppose it was a sop that will keep them all right till we have made
our arrangements."

"Oh! there is no pressure of that kind," said Egremont; "if I see my
way, and write to them, of course they will be quite satisfied."

"Excellent," said Lord Marney; "and nothing could be more convenient to
me, for, between ourselves, my balances are very low at this moment.
The awful expenditure of keeping up this place! And then such terrible
incumbrances as I came to!"

"Incumbrances, George! Why, I thought you had not any. There was not a
single mortgage."

"No mortgages; they are nothing; you find them, you get used to them,
and you calculate accordingly. You quite forget the portions for younger
children."

"Yes; but you had plenty of ready money for them."

"I had to pay them though," said Lord Marney. "Had I not, I might have
bought Grimblethorpe with the money; such an opportunity will never
occur again."

"But you talked of incumbrances," said Egremont.

"Ah! my dear fellow," said Lord Marney, "you don't know what it is to
have to keep up an estate like this; and very lucky for you. It is
not the easy life you dream of. There's buildings--I am ruined in
buildings--our poor dear father thought he left me Marney without an
incumbrance; why, there was not a barn on the whole estate that was
weather-proof; not a farm-house that was not half in ruins. What I have
spent in buildings! And draining! Though I make my own tiles, draining,
my dear fellow, is a something of which you have not the least idea!"

"Well," said Egremont, anxious to bring his brother back to the point,
"you think, then, I had better write to them and say--"

"Ah! now for your business," said Lord Marney. "Now, I will tell you
what I can do for you. I was speaking to Arabella about it last night;
she quite approves my idea. You remember the De Mowbrays? Well, we are
going to stay at Mowbray Castle, and you are to go with us. It is the
first time they have received company since their great loss. Ah! you
were abroad at the time, and so you are behind hand. Lord Mowbray's
only son, Fitz-Warene, you remember him, a deuced clever fellow, he died
about a year ago, in Greece, of a fever. Never was such a blow! His
two sisters, Lady Joan and Lady Maud, are looked upon as the greatest
heiresses in the kingdom; but I know Mowbray well; he will make an
eldest son of his eldest daughter. She will have it all; she is one of
Arabella's dearest friends; and you are to marry her."

Egremont stared at his brother, who patted him on the back with an
expression of unusual kindness, and adding, "You have no idea what
a load this has taken off my mind, my dear Charles; so great has my
anxiety always been about you, particularly of late. To see you lord of
Mowbray Castle will realize my fondest hopes. That is a position fit for
a man, and I know none more worthy of it than yourself, though I am your
brother who say so. Now let us come and speak to Arabella about it."

So saying, Lord Marney, followed somewhat reluctantly by his brother,
advanced to the other end of the drawing-room, where his wife was
employed with her embroidery-frame, and seated next to her young friend,
Miss Poinsett, who was playing chess with Captain Grouse, a member of
the chess club, and one of the most capital performers extant.

"Well, Arabella," said Lord Marney, "it is all settled; Charles agrees
with me about going to Mowbray Castle, and I think the sooner we go the
better. What do you think of the day after to-morrow? That will suit me
exactly, and therefore I think we had better fix on it. We will consider
it settled."

Lady Marney looked embarrassed, and a little distressed. Nothing
could be more unexpected by her than this proposition; nothing more
inconvenient than the arrangement. It was very true that Lady Joan
Fitz-Warene had invited them to Mowbray, and she had some vague
intention, some day or other, of deliberating whether they should avail
themselves of this kindness; but to decide upon going, and upon going
instantly, without the least consultation, the least inquiry as to the
suitableness of the arrangement, the visit of Miss Poinsett abruptly
and ungraciously terminated, for example--all this was vexatious,
distressing: a mode of management which out of the simplest incidents
of domestic life contrived to extract some degree of perplexity and
annoyance.

"Do not you think, George," said Lady Marney, "that we had better talk
it over a little?"

"Not at all," said Lord Marney: "Charles will go, and it quite suits me,
and therefore what necessity for any consultation?"

"Oh! if you and Charles like to go, certainly." said Lady Marney in a
hesitating tone; "only I shall be very sorry to lose your society."

"How do you mean lose our society Arabella? Of course you must go with
us. I particularly want you to go. You are Lady Joan's most intimate
friend; I believe there is no one she likes so much."

"I cannot go the day after to-morrow," said Lady Marney, speaking in a
whisper, and looking volumes of deprecation.

"I cannot help it," said Lord Marney; "you should have told me this
before. I wrote to Mowbray to-day, that we should be with him the day
after to-morrow, and stay a week."

"But you never mentioned it to me," said Lady Marney, slightly blushing
and speaking in a tone of gentle reproach.

"I should like to know when I am to find time to mention the contents
of every letter I write," said Lord Marney; "particularly with all the
vexatious business I have had on my hands to-day. But so it is; the more
one tries to save you trouble, the more discontented you get."

"No, not discontented, George."

"I do not know what you call discontented; but when a man has made every
possible arrangement to please you and every body, and all his plans are
to be set aside merely because the day he has fixed on does not exactly
suit your fancy, if that be not discontent, I should like very much to
know what is, Arabella."

Lady Marney did not reply. Always sacrificed, always yielding, the
moment she attempted to express an opinion, she ever seemed to assume
the position not of the injured but the injurer.

Arabella was a woman of abilities, which she had cultivated. She had
excellent sense, and possessed many admirable qualities; she was far
from being devoid of sensibility; but her sweet temper shrank from
controversy, and Nature had not endowed her with a spirit which could
direct and control. She yielded without a struggle to the arbitrary will
and unreasonable caprice of a husband, who was scarcely her equal in
intellect, and far her inferior in all the genial qualities of our
nature, but who governed her by his iron selfishness.

Lady Marney absolutely had no will of her own. A hard, exact, literal,
bustling, acute being environed her existence; directed, planned,
settled everything. Her life was a series of petty sacrifices and
baulked enjoyments. If her carriage were at the door, she was never
certain that she would not have to send it away; if she had asked some
friends to her house, the chances were she would have to put them off;
if she were reading a novel, Lord Marney asked her to copy a letter; if
she were going to the opera, she found that Lord Marney had got seats
for her and some friend in the House of Lords, and seemed expecting the
strongest expressions of delight and gratitude from her for his unasked
and inconvenient kindness. Lady Marney had struggled against this
tyranny in the earlier days of their union. Innocent, inexperienced Lady
Marney! As if it were possible for a wife to contend against a selfish
husband, at once sharp-witted and blunt-hearted! She had appealed to
him, she had even reproached him; she had wept, once she had knelt.
But Lord Marney looked upon these demonstrations as the disordered
sensibility of a girl unused to the marriage state, and ignorant of the
wise authority of husbands, of which he deemed himself a model. And
so, after a due course of initiation, Lady Marney invisible for days,
plunged in remorseful reveries in the mysteries of her boudoir, and her
lord dining at his club and going to the minor theatres; the countess
was broken in, and became the perfect wife of a perfect husband.

Lord Marney, who was fond of chess, turned out Captain Grouse, and very
gallantly proposed to finish his game with Miss Poinsett, which Miss
Poinsett, who understood Lord Marney as well as he understood chess,
took care speedily to lose, so that his lordship might encounter a
champion worthy of him. Egremont seated by his sister-in-law, and
anxious by kind words to soothe the irritation which he had observed
with pain his brother create, entered into easy talk, and after some
time, said, "I find you have been good enough to mould my destiny."

Lady Marney looked a little surprised, and then said, "How so?"

"You have decided on I hear the most important step of my life."

"Indeed you perplex me."

"Lady Joan Fitz-Warene, your friend--"

The countess blushed; the name was a clue which she could follow, but
Egremont nevertheless suspected that the idea had never previously
occurred to her. Lady Joan she described as not beautiful; certainly not
beautiful; nobody would consider her beautiful, many would indeed think
her quite the reverse; and yet she had a look, one particular look when
according to Lady Marney, she was more than beautiful. But she was very
clever, very indeed, something quite extraordinary.

"Accomplished?"

"Oh! far beyond that; I have heard even men say that no one knew so
much."

"A regular blue?"

"Oh! no; not at all a blue; not that kind of knowledge. But languages
and learned books; Arabic, and Hebrew, and old manuscripts. And then she
has an observatory, and was the first person who discovered the comet.
Dr Buckland swears by her; and she corresponds with Arago."

"And her sister, is she the same?"

"Lady Maud: she is very religious. I do not know her so well."

"Is she pretty?"

"Some people admire her very much."

"I never was at Mowbray. What sort of a place is it?"

"Oh! it is very grand," said Lady Marney; "but like all places in the
manufacturing districts, very disagreeable. You never have a clear sky.
Your toilette table is covered with blacks; the deer in the park seem
as if they had bathed in a lake of Indian ink; and as for the sheep, you
expect to see chimney-sweeps for the shepherds."

"And do you really mean to go on Thursday?" said Egremont: "I think we
had better put it off."

"We must go," said Lady Marney, with a sort of sigh, and shaking her
head.

"Let me speak to Marney."

"Oh! no. We must go. I am annoyed about this dear little Poinsett: she
has been to stay with me so very often, and she has only been here
three days. When she comes in again, I wish you would ask her to sing,
Charles."

