'When I wake in the morning, I shall have lived a month or two in Arabia,
Zotti.  Tell me no more; I will come in,' said Vittoria.

'Then, signorina, a little crisp filbert--biscuit--a composition!  You
crack it, and a surprise!  And then, and then my dish; Zotti's dish, that
is not yet christened.  Signorina, let Italy rise first; the great
inventor of the dish winked and nodded temperately.  'Let her rise.  A
battle or a treaty will do.  I have two or three original conceptions,
compositions, that only wait for some brilliant feat of arms, or a
diplomatic triumph, and I send them forth baptized.'

Vittoria threw large eyes upon Ammiani, and set the underlids humorously
quivering.  She kissed her fingers: 'Addio; a rivederla.'  He bowed
formally: he was startled to find the golden thread of their
companionship cut with such cruel abruptness.  But it was cut; the door
had closed on her.  The moment it had closed she passed into his
imagination.  By what charm had she allayed the fever of his anxiety?
Her naturalness had perforce given him assurance that peace must surround
one in whom it shone so steadily, and smiling at the thought of Zotti's
repast and her twinkle of subdued humour, he walked away comforted;
which, for a lover in the season of peril means exalted, as in a sudden
conflagration of the dry stock of his intelligence.  'She must have some
great faith in her heart,' he thought, no longer attributing his
exclusion from it to a lover's rivalry, which will show that more than
imagination was on fire within him.  For when the soul of a youth can be
heated above common heat, the vices of passion shrivel up and aid the
purer flame.  It was well for Ammiani that he did perceive (dimly though
it was perceived) the force of idealistic inspiration by which Vittoria
was supported.  He saw it at this one moment, and it struck a light to
light him in many subsequent perplexities; it was something he had never
seen before.  He had read Tuscan poetry to her in old Agostino's rooms;
he had spoken of secret preparations for the revolt; he had declaimed
upon Italy,--the poetry was good though the declamation may have been
bad,--but she had always been singularly irresponsive, with a practical
turn for ciphers.  A quick reckoning, a sharp display of figures in
Italy's cause, kindled her cheeks and took her breath.  Ammiani now
understood that there lay an unspoken depth in her, distinct from her
visible nature.

He had first an interview with Rocco Ricci, whom he prepared to replace
Irma.

His way was then to the office of his Journal, where he expected to be
greeted by two members of the Polizia, who would desire him to march
before the central bureau, and exhibit proofs of articles and the items
of news for inspection, for correction haply, and possibly for approval.
There is a partial delight in the contemplated submission to an act of
servitude for the last time.  Ammiani stepped in with combative gaiety,
but his stiff glance encountered no enemy.  This astonished him.  He
turned back into the street and meditated.  The Pope's Mouth might, he
thought, hold the key to the riddle.  It is not always most comfortable
for a conspirator to find himself unsuspected: he reads the blank
significantly.  It looked ill that the authorities should allow anything
whatsoever to be printed on such a morrow: especially ill, if they were
on the alert.  The neighbourhood by the Pope's Mouth was desolate under
dark starlight.  Ammiani got his fingers into the opening behind the
rubbish of brick, and tore them on six teeth of a saw that had been fixed
therein.  Those teeth were as voluble to him as loud tongues.  The Mouth
was empty of any shred of paper.  They meant that the enemy was ready to
bite, and that the conspiracy had ceased to be active.  He perceived that
a stripped ivy-twig, with the leaves scattered around it, stretched at
his feet.  That was another and corroborative sign, clearer to him than
printed capitals.  The reading of it declared that the Revolt had
collapsed.  He wound and unwound his handkerchief about his fingers
mechanically: great curses were in his throat.  'I would start for South
America at dawn, but for her!' he said.  The country of Bolivar still had
its attractions for Italian youth.  For a certain space Ammiani's soul
was black with passion.  He was the son of that fiery Paolo Ammiani who
had cast his glove at Eugene's feet, and bade the viceroy deliver it to
his French master.  (The General was preparing to break his sword on his
knee when Eugene rushed up to him and kissed him.) Carlo was of this
blood.  Englishmen will hardly forgive him for having tears in his eyes,
but Italians follow the Greek classical prescription for the emotions,
while we take example by the Roman.  There is no sneer due from us.  He
sobbed.  It seemed that a country was lost.

Ammiani had moved away slowly: he was accidentally the witness of a
curious scene.  There came into the irregular triangle, and walking up
to where the fruitstalls stood by day, a woman and a man.  The man was
an Austrian soldier.  It was an Italian woman by his side.  The sight of
the couple was just then like an incestuous horror to Ammiani.  She led
the soldier straight up to the Mouth, directing his hand to it, and, what
was far more wonderful, directing it so that he drew forth a packet of
papers from where Ammiani had found none.  Ammiani could see the light of
them in his hand.  The Austrian snatched an embrace and ran.  Ammiani was
moving over to her to seize and denounce the traitress, when he beheld
another figure like an apparition by her side; but this one was not a
whitecoat.  Had it risen from the earth?  It was earthy, for a cloud of
dust was about it, and the woman gave a stifled scream.  'Barto!  Barto!'
she cried, pressing upon her eyelids.  A strong husky laugh came from
him.  He tapped her shoulder heartily, and his 'Ha! ha!' rang in the
night air.

'You never trust me,' she whimpered from shaken nerves.

He called her, 'Brave little woman! rare girl!'

'But you never trust me!'

'Do I not lay traps to praise you?'

'You make a woman try to deceive you.'  If she could!  If only she
could!'

Ammiani was up with them.

'You are Barto Rizzo,' he spoke, half leaning over the man in his
impetuosity.

Barto stole a defensive rearward step.  The thin light of dawn had in a
moment divided the extreme starry darkness, and Ammiani, who knew his
face, had not to ask a second time.  It was scored by a recent sword-cut.
He glanced at the woman: saw that she was handsome.  It was enough; he
knew she must be Barto's wife, and, if not more cunning than Barto, his
accomplice, his instrument, his slave.

'Five minutes ago I would have sworn you were a traitress he said to her.

She was expressionless, as if she had heard nothing; which fact,
considering that she was very handsome, seemed remarkable to the young
man.  Youth will not believe that stupidity and beauty can go together.

'She is the favourite pupil of Bartolommeo Rizzo, Signor Carlo Ammiani,'
quoth Barto, having quite regained his composure.  'She is my pretty
puppet-patriot.  I am not in the habit of exhibiting her; but since you
see her, there she is.'

Barto had fallen into the Southern habit of assuming ease in quasi-
rhetorical sentences, but with wary eyes over them.  The peculiar,
contracting, owl-like twinkle defied Ammiani's efforts to penetrate
his look; so he took counsel of his anger, and spoke bluntly.

'She does your work?'

'Much of it, Signor Carlo: as the bullet does the work of the rifle.'

'Beast! was it your wife who pinned the butterfly to the Signorina
Vittoria's dress?'

'Signor Carlo Ammiani, you are the son of Paolo, the General: you call me
beast?  I have dandled you in my arms, my little lad, while the bands
played "There's yet a heart in Italy!"  Do you remember it?'  Barto sang
out half-a-dozen bars.  'You call me beast?  I'm the one man in Milan who
can sing you that.'

'Beast or man, devil or whatever you are!' cried Ammiani, feeling
nevertheless oddly unnerved, 'you have committed a shameful offence: you,
or the woman, your wife, who serves you, as I see.  You have thwarted the
best of plots; you have dared to act in defiance of your Chief--'

'Eyes to him!' Barto interposed, touching over his eyeballs.

'And you have thrown your accursed stupid suspicions on the Signorina
Vittoria.  You are a mad fool.  If I had the power, I would order you to
be shot at five this morning; and that 's the last rising of the light
you should behold.  Why did you do it?  Don't turn your hellish eyes in
upon one another, but answer at once!  Why did you do it?'

'The Signorina Vittoria,' returned Barto--his articulation came forth
serpent-like--'she is not a spy, you think.  She has been in England: I
have been in England.  She writes; I can read.  She is a thing of whims.
Shall she hold the goblet of Italy in her hand till it overflows?  She
writes love-letters to an English whitecoat.  I have read them.  Who bids
her write?  Her whim!  She warns her friends not to enter Milan.  She--
whose puppet is she?  Not yours; not mine.  She is the puppet of an
English Austrian!'

Barto drew back, for Ammiani was advancing.

'What is it you mean?' he cried.

'I mean,' said Ammiani, still moving on him, 'I mean to drag you first
before Count Medole, and next before the signorina; and you shall abjure
your slander in her presence.  After that I shall deal with you.  Mark
me!  I have you: I am swifter on foot, and I am stronger.  Come quietly.'

Barto smiled in grim contempt.

'Keep your foot fast on that stone, you're a prisoner,' he replied, and
seeing Ammiani coming, 'Net him, my sling-stone! my serpent!' he
signalled to his wife, who threw herself right round Ammiani in a
tortuous twist hard as wire-rope.  Stung with irritation, and a sense of
disgrace and ridicule and pitifulness in one, Ammiani, after a struggle,
ceased the attempt to disentwine her arms, and dragged her clinging to
him.  He was much struck by hearing her count deliberately, in her
desperation, numbers from somewhere about twenty to one hundred.  One
hundred was evidently the number she had to complete, for when she had
reached it she threw her arms apart.  Barto was out of sight.  Ammiani
waved her on to follow in his steps: he was sick of her presence, and had
the sensations of a shame-faced boy whom a girl has kissed.  She went
without uttering a word.

The dawn had now traversed the length of the streets, and thrown open the
wide spaces of the city.  Ammiani found himself singing, 'There's yet a
heart in Italy!' but it was hardly the song of his own heart.  He slept
that night on a chair in the private room of his office, preferring not
to go to his mother's house.  'There 's yet a heart in Italy!' was on his
lips when he awoke with scattered sensations, all of which collected in
revulsion against the song.  'There's a very poor heart in Italy!' he
said, while getting his person into decent order; 'it's like the bell in
the lunatic's tower between Venice and the Lido: it beats now and then
for meals: hangs like a carrion-lump in the vulture's beak meanwhile!'

These and some other similar sentiments, and a heat about the brows
whenever he set them frowning over what Barto had communicated concerning
an English Austrian, assured Ammiani that he had no proper command of
himself: or was, as the doctors would have told him, bilious.  It seemed
to him that he must have dreamed of meeting the dark and subtle Barto
Rizzo overnight; on realizing that fact he could not realize how the man
had escaped him, except that when he thought over it, he breathed deep
and shook his shoulders.  The mind will, as you may know, sometimes
refuse to work when the sensations are shameful and astonished.  He
despatched a messenger with a 'good morrow' to his mother, and then went
to a fencing-saloon that was fitted up in the house of Count Medole,
where, among two or three, there was the ordinary shrugging talk of the
collapse of the projected outbreak, bitter to hear.  Luciano Romara came
in, and Ammiani challenged him to small-sword and broadsword.  Both being
ireful to boiling point, and mad to strike at something, they attacked
one another furiously, though they were dear friends, and the helmet-
wires and the padding rattled and smoked to the thumps.  For half an hour
they held on to it, when, their blood being up, they flashed upon the men
present, including the count, crying shame to them for letting a woman
alone be faithful to her task that night.  The blood forsook Count
Medole's cheeks, leaving its dead hue, as when blotting-paper is laid on
running-ink.  He deliberately took a pair of foils, and offering the
handle of one to Ammiani, broke the button off the end of his own, and
stood to face an adversary.  Ammiani followed the example: a streak of
crimson was on his shirt-sleeve, and his eyes had got their hard black
look, as of the flint-stone, before Romara in amazement discovered the
couple to be at it in all purity of intention, on the sharp edge of the
abyss.  He knocked up their weapons and stood between them, puffing his
cigarette leisurely.

'I fine you both,' he said.

He touched Ammiani's sword-arm, nodded with satisfaction to find that
there was no hurt, and cried, 'You have an Austrian out on the ground by
this time tomorrow morning.  So, according to the decree!'

'Captain Weisspriess is in the city,' was remarked.

'There are a dozen on the list,' said little Pietro Cardi, drawing out a
paper.

'If you are to be doing nothing else to-morrow morning,' added Leone
Rufo, 'we may as well march out the whole dozen.'

These two were boys under twenty.

'Shall it be the first hit for Captain Weisspriess?' Count Medole said
this while handing a fresh and fairly-buttoned foil to Ammiani.

Romara laughed: 'You will require to fence the round of Milan city, my
dear count, to win a claim to Captain Weisspriess.  In the first place,
I yield him to no man who does not show himself a better man than I.
It's the point upon which I don't pay compliments.'

Count Medole bowed.

'But, if you want occupation,' added Luciano, closing his speech with a
merely interrogative tone.

'I scarcely want that, as those who know me will tell you,' said Medole,
so humbly, that those who knew him felt that he had risen to his high
seat of intellectual contempt.  He could indulge himself, having shown
his courage.

'Certainly not; if you are devising means of subsistence for the widows
