forth, and the people hooted him.  I stood up, and petitioned to kiss his
hand.  The people knew me.  They did not hoot any more for some time.

"So that you have heard the truth, and you must judge me by it.  I cannot
even add that I am sorry, though I strive to wish that I had not been
present.  I might wish it really, if I did not feel it to be a cowardly
wish.

"Oh, my Carlo! my lover! my husband! you would not have me go against my
nature?  I have seen the king upon the battle-field.  He has deigned to
speak to me of Italy and our freedom.  I have seen him facing our enemy;
and to see him hooted by the people, and in misfortune and with sad eyes!
--he looked sad and nothing else--and besides, I am sure I know the king.
I mean that I understand him.  I am half ashamed to write so boldly, even
to you.  I say to myself you should know me, at least; and if I am guilty
of a piece of vanity, you should know that also.  Carlo Alberto is quite
unlike other men.  He worships success as, much; but they are not, as he
is, so much bettered by adversity.  Indeed I do not believe that he has
exact intentions of any sort, or ever had the intention to betray us, or
has done so in reality, that is, meaningly, of his own will.  Count
Medole and his party did, as you know, offer Lombardy to him; and Venice
gave herself--brave, noble Venice!  Oh! if we two were there--Venice has
England's sea-spirit.  But, did we not flatter the king?  And ask
yourself, my Carlo, could a king move in such an enterprise as a common
person?  Ought we not to be in union with Sardinia?  How can we be if we
reject her king?  Is it not the only positive army that, we can look to--
I mean regular army?  Should we not; make some excuses for one who is not
in our position?

"I feel that I push my questions like waves that fall and cannot get
beyond--they crave so for answers agreeing to them.  This should make me
doubt myself, perhaps; but they crowd again, and seem so conclusive until
I have written them down.  I am unworthy to struggle with your intellect;
but I say to myself, how unworthy of you I should be if I did not use my
own, such as it is!  The poor king; had to conclude an armistice to save
his little kingdom.  Perhaps we ought to think of that sternly.  My heart
is; filled with pity.

"It cannot but be right that you should know the worst; of me.  I call
you my husband, and tremble to be permitted to lean my head on your bosom
for hours, my sweet lover!  And yet my cowardice, if I had let the king
go by without a reverential greeting from me, in his adversity, would
have rendered me insufferable to myself.  You are hearing me, and I am
compelled to say, that rather than behave so basely I would forfeit your
love, and be widowed till death should offer us for God to join us.  Does
your face change to me?

"Dearest, and I say it when the thought of you sets me almost swooning.
I find my hands clasped, and I am muttering I know not what, and I am
blushing.  The ground seems to rock; I can barely breathe; my heart is
like a bird caught in the hands of a cruel boy: it will not rest.  I fear
everything.  I hear a whisper, 'Delay not an instant!' and it is like a
furnace; 'Hasten to him!  Speed!' and I seem to totter forward and drop--
I think I have lost you--I am like one dead.

"I remain here to nurse our dear friend Merthyr.  For that reason I am
absent from your mother.  It is her desire that we should be married.

"Soon, soon, my own soul!

"I seem to be hanging on a tree for you, swayed by such a teazing wind.

"Oh, soon!  or I feel that I shall hate any vestige of will that I have
in this head of mine.  Not in the heart--it is not there!

"And sometimes I am burning to sing.  The voice leaps to my lips; it is
quite like a thing that lives apart--my prisoner.

"It is true, Laura is here with Merthyr.

"Could you come at once?--not here, but to Pallanza?  We shall both make
our mother happy.  This she wishes, this she lives for, this consoles
her--and oh, this gives me peace!  Yes, Merthyr is recovering!  I can
leave him without the dread I had; and Laura confesses to the feminine
sentiment, if her funny jealousy of a rival nurse is really simply
feminine.  She will be glad of our resolve, I am sure.  And then you will
order all my actions; and I shall be certain that they are such as I
would proudly call mine; and I shall be shut away from the world.  Yes;
let it be so!  Addio.  I reserve all sweet names for you.  Addio.  In
Pallanza:--no not Pallanza--Paradise!

"Hush! and do not smile at me:--it was not my will, I discover, but my
want of will, that distracted me.

"See my last signature of--not Vittoria; for I may sign that again and
still be Emilia Alessandra Ammiani.

                                        "SANDRA BELLONI"

The letter was sealed; Luigi bore it away, and a brief letter to Countess
Ammiani, in Pallanza, as well.

Vittoria was relieved of her anxiety concerning Merthyr by the arrival of
Georgiana, who had been compelled to make her way round by Piacenza and
Turin, where she had left Gambier, with Beppo in attendance on him.
Georgiana at once assumed all the duties of head-nurse, and the more
resolutely because of her brother's evident moral weakness in sighing for
the hand of a fickle girl to smooth his pillow.  "When he is stronger you
can sit beside him a little," she said to Vittoria, who surrendered her
post without a struggle, and rarely saw him, though Laura told her that
his frequent exclamation was her name, accompanied by a soft look at his
sister--"which would have stirred my heart like poor old Milan last
March," Laura added, with a lift of her shoulders.

Georgiana's icy manner appeared infinitely strange to Vittoria when she
heard from Merthyr that his sister had become engaged to Captain Gambier.

"Nothing softens these women," said Laura, putting Georgiana in a class.

"I wish you could try the effect of your winning Merthyr," Vittoria
suggested.

"I remember that when I went to my husband, I likewise wanted every woman
of my acquaintance to be married."  Laura sighed deeply.  "What is this
poor withered body of mine now?  It feels like an old volcano, cindery,
with fire somewhere:--a charming bride!  My dear, if I live till my
children make me a grandmother, I shall look on the love of men and women
as a toy that I have played with.  A new husband?  I must be dragged
through the Circles of Dante before I can conceive it, and then I should
loathe the stranger."

News came that the volunteers were crushed.  It was time for Vittoria to
start for Pallanza, and she thought of her leave-taking; a final leave-
taking, in one sense, to the friends who had cared too much for her.
Laura delicately drew Georgiana aside in the sick-room, which she would
not quit, and alluded to the necessity for Vittoria's departure without
stating exactly wherefore: but Georgiana was a Welshwoman.  Partly to
show her accurate power of guessing, and chiefly that she might reprove
Laura's insulting whisper, which outraged and irritated her as much as if
"Oh! your poor brother!"  had been exclaimed, she made display of
Merthyr's manly coldness by saying aloud, "You mean, that she is going to
her marriage."  Laura turned her face to Merthyr.  He had striven to rise
on his elbow, and had dropped flat in his helplessness.  Big tears were
rolling down his cheeks.  His articulation failed him, beyond a
reiterated "No, no," pitiful to hear, and he broke into childish sobs.
Georgiana hurried Laura from the room.  By-and-by the doctor was promptly
summoned, and it was Georgiana herself, miserably humbled, who obtained
Vittoria's sworn consent to keep the life in Merthyr by lingering yet
awhile.

Meantime Luigi brought a letter from Pallanza in Carlo's handwriting.
This was the burden of it:

"I am here, and you are absent.  Hasten!"




CHAPTER XXXVI

A FRESH ENTANGLEMENT

The Lenkenstein ladies returned to Milan proudly in the path of the army
which they had followed along the city walls on the black March midnight.
The ladies of the Austrian aristocracy generally had to be exiles from
Vienna, and were glad to flock together even in an alien city.  Anna and
Lena were aware of Vittoria's residence in Milan, through the interchange
of visits between the Countess of Lenkenstein and her sister Signora
Piaveni.  They heard also of Vittoria's prospective and approaching
marriage to Count Ammiani.  The Duchess of Graatli, who had forborne a
visit to her unhappy friends, lest her Austrian face should wound their
sensitiveness, was in company with the Lenkensteins one day, when Irma di
Karski called on them.  Irma had come from Lago Maggiore, where she had
left her patron, as she was pleased to term Antonio-Pericles.  She was
full of chatter of that most worthy man's deplorable experiences of
Vittoria's behaviour to him during the war, and of many things besides.
According to her account, Vittoria had enticed him from place to place
with promises that the next day, and the next day, and the day after, she
would be ready to keep her engagement to go to London, and at last she
had given him the slip and left him to be plucked like a pullet by a
horde of volunteer banditti, out of whose hands Antonio-Pericles-"one of
our richest millionaires in Europe, certainly our richest amateur," said
Irma--escaped in fit outward condition for the garden of Eden.

Count Karl was lying on the sofa, and went into endless invalid's
laughter at the picture presented by Irma of the 'wild man' wanderings
of poor infatuated Pericles, which was exaggerated, though not
intentionally, for Irma repeated the words and gestures of Pericles in
the recital of his tribulations.  Being of a somewhat similar physical
organization, she did it very laughably.  Irma declared that Pericles was
cured of his infatuation.  He had got to Turin, intending to quit Italy
for ever, when--"he met me," said Irma modestly.

"And heard that the war was at an end," Count Karl added.

"And he has taken the superb Villa Ricciardi, on Lago Maggiore, where he
will have a troupe of singers, and perform operas, in which I believe I
may possibly act as prima donna.  The truth is, I would do anything to
prevent him from leaving the country."

But Irma had more to say; with "I bear no malice," she commenced it.  The
story she had heard was that Count Ammiani, after plighting himself to a
certain signorina, known as Vittoria Campa, had received tidings that she
was one of those persons who bring discredit on Irma's profession.
"Gifted by nature, I can acknowledge," said Irma; "but devoured by vanity
--a perfect slave to the appetite for praise; ready to forfeit anything
for flattery!  Poor signor Antonio-Pericles!--he knows her."  And now
Count Ammiani, persuaded to reason by his mother, had given her up.
There was nothing more positive, for Irma had seen him in the society of
Countess Violetta d'Isorella.

Anna and Lena glanced at their brother Karl.

"I should not allude to what is not notorious," Irma pursued.  "They are
always together.  My dear Antonio-Pericles is most amusing in his
expressions of delight at it.  For my part, though she served me an evil
turn once,--you will hardly believe, ladies, that in her jealousy of me
she was guilty of the most shameful machinations to get me out of the way
on the night of the first performance of Camilla,--but, for my part, I
bear no malice.  The creature is an inveterate rebel, and I dislike her
for that, I do confess."

"The signorina Vittoria Campa is my particular and very dear friend,"
said the duchess.

"She is not the less an inveterate rebel," said Anna.

Count Karl gave a long-drawn sigh.  "Alas, that she should have brought
discredit on Fraulein di Karski's profession!"

The duchess hurried straightway to Laura, with whom was Count
Serabiglione, reviewing the present posture of affairs from the
condescending altitudes of one that has foretold it.  Laura and Amalia
embraced and went apart.  During their absence Vittoria came down to the
count and listened to a familiar illustration of his theory of the
relations which should exist between Italy and Austria, derived from the
friendship of those two women.

"What I wish you to see, signorina, is that such an alliance is possible;
and, if we supply the brains, as we do, is by no means likely to be
degrading.  These bears are absolutely on their knees to us for good
fellowship.  You have influence, you have amazing wit, you have
unparalleled beauty, and, let me say it with the utmost sadness, you have
now had experience.  Why will you not recognize facts?  Italian unity!
I have exposed the fatuity--who listens?  Italian freedom!  I do not
attempt to reason with my daughter.  She is pricked by an envenomed fly
of Satan.  Yet, behold her and the duchess!  It is the very union I
preach; and I am, I declare to you, signorina, in great danger.  I feel
it, but I persist.  I am in danger" (Count Serabiglione bowed his head
low) "of the transcendent sin of scorn of my species."

The little nobleman swayed deploringly in his chair.  "Nothing is so
perilous for a soul's salvation as that.  The one sane among madmen!
The one whose reason is left to him among thousands who have forsaken it!
I beg you to realize the idea.  The Emperor, as I am given to understand,
is about to make public admission of my services.  I shall be all the
more hated.  Yet it is a considerable gain.  I do not deny that I esteem
it as a promotion for my services.  I shall not be the first martyr in
this world, signorina."

Count Serabiglione produced a martyr's smile.

"The profits of my expected posts will be," he was saying, with a
reckoning eye cast upward into his cranium for accuracy, when Laura
returned, and Vittoria ran out to the duchess.  Amalia repeated Irma's
tattle.  A curious little twitching of the brows at Violetta d'Isorella's
name marked the reception of it.

"She is most lovely," Vittoria said.

"And absolutely reckless."

"She is an old friend of Count Ammiani's."

"And you have an old friend here.  But the old friend of a young woman--
I need not say further than that it is different."

The duchess used the privilege of her affection, and urged Vittoria not
to trifle with her lover's impatience.

Admitted to the chamber where Merthyr lay, she was enabled to make
allowance for her irresolution.  The face of the wounded man was like a
lake-water taking light from Vittoria's presence.

"This may go on for weeks," she said to Laura.

Three days later, Vittoria received an order from the Government to quit
the city within a prescribed number of hours, and her brain was racked to
discover why Laura appeared so little indignant at the barbarous act of
despotism.  Laura undertook to break the bad news to Merthyr.  The
parting was as quiet and cheerful as, in the opposite degree, Vittoria
had thought it would be melancholy and regretful.  "What a Government!"
Merthyr said, and told her to let him hear of any changes.  "All changes
that please my friends please me."

Vittoria kissed his forehead with one grateful murmur of farewell to the
bravest heart she had ever known.  The going to her happiness seemed more
like going to something fatal until she reached the Lago Maggiore.  There
she saw September beauty, and felt as if the splendour encircling her
were her bridal decoration.  But no bridegroom stood to greet her on the
terrace-steps between the potted orange and citron-trees.  Countess
Ammiani extended kind hands to her at arms' length.

"You have come," she said.  "I hope that it is not too late."

Vittoria was a week without sight of her lover: nor did Countess Ammiani
attempt to explain her words, or speak of other than common daily things.
In body and soul Vittoria had taken a chill.  The silent blame resting on
her in this house called up her pride, so that she would not ask any
questions; and when Carlo came, she wanted warmth to melt her.  Their
meeting was that of two passionless creatures.  Carlo kissed her loyally,
and courteously inquired after her health and the health of friends in
Milan, and then he rallied his mother.  Agostino had arrived with him,
and the old man, being in one of his soft moods, unvexed by his conceits,
Vittoria had some comfort from him of a dull kind.  She heard Carlo
telling his mother that he must go in the morning.  Agostino replied to
her quick look at him, "I stay;" and it seemed like a little saved from
the wreck, for she knew that she could speak to Agostino as she could not
to the countess.  When his mother prepared to retire, Carlo walked over
to his bride, and repeated rapidly and brightly his inquiries after
friends in Milan.  She, with a pure response to his natural-unnatural
manner, spoke of Merthyr Powys chiefly: to which he said several times,
"Dear fellow!"  and added, "I shall always love Englishmen for his sake."

This gave her one throb.  "I could not leave him, Carlo."

"Certainly not, certainly not," said Carlo.  "I should have been happy to
wait on him myself.  I was busy; I am still.  I dare say you have guessed
that I have a new journal in my head: the Pallanza Iris is to be the name
of it;--to be printed in three colours, to advocate three principles, in
three styles.  The Legitimists, the Moderates, and the Republicans are to
proclaim themselves in its columns in prose, poetry, and hotch-potch.
Once an editor, always an editor.  The authorities suspect that something
of the sort is about to be planted, so I can only make occasional visits
here:--therefore, as you will believe,"--Carlo let his voice fall--"I
have good reason to hate them still.  They may cease to persecute me
soon."

He insisted upon lighting his mother to her room.  Vittoria and Agostino
sat talking of the Chief and the minor events of the war--of Luciano,
Marco, Giulio, and Ugo Corte--till the conviction fastened on them that
Carlo would not return, when Agostino stood up and said, yawning wearily,
"I'll talk further to you, my child, tomorrow."

She begged that it might be now.

"No; to-morrow," said he.

"Now, now!" she reiterated, and brought down a reproof from his fore-
finger.

"The poetic definition of 'now' is that it is a small boat, my daughter,
in which the female heart is constantly pushing out to sea and sinking.
'To-morrow' is an island in the deeps, where grain grows.  When I land
you there, I will talk to you."

She knew that he went to join Carlo after he had quitted her.
