"Advise him! stop him! my friend.  I would advise him, if I had the
patience of angels; stop him, if I had the power of Lucifer.  Did you not
see that he shunned speaking to me?  I have been such a perpetual dish of
vinegar under his nose for the last month, that the poor fellow sniffs
when I draw near.  He must go his way.  He leads a torrent that must
sweep him on.  Corte, Sana, and the rest would be in Rome now, but for
him.  So should I.  Your Agostino, however, is not of Bergamo, or of
Brescia; he is not a madman; simply a poor rheumatic Piedmontese, who
discerns the point where a united Italy may fix its standard.  I would
start for Rome to-morrow, if I could leave her--my soul's child!"
Agostino raised his hand: "I do love the woman, Countess Alessandra
Ammiani.  I say, she is a peerless woman.  Is she not?"

"There is none like her," said Merthyr.

"A peerless woman, recognized and sacrificed!  I cannot leave her.  If
the Government here would lay hands on Carlo and do their worst at once,
I would be off.  They are too wary.  I believe that they are luring him
to his ruin.  I can give no proofs, but I judge by the best evidence.
What avails my telling him?  I lose my temper the moment I begin to
speak.  A curst witch beguiles the handsome idiot--poor darling lad that
he is!  She has him--can I tell you how?  She has got him--got him fast!
--The nature of the chains are doubtless innocent, if those which a woman
throws round us be ever distinguishable.  He loves his wife--he is not
a monster."

"He appears desperately feverish," said Merthyr.

"Did you not notice it?  Yes, like a man pushed by his destiny out of the
path.  He is ashamed to hesitate; he cannot turn back.  Ahead of him he
sees a gulf.  That army of Carlo Alberto may do something under its Pole.
Prophecy is too easy.  I say no more.  We may have Lombardy open; and if
so, my poor boy's vanity will be crowned: he will only have the king and
his army against him then."

Discoursing in this wise, they reached the caffe where Beppo had
appointed to meet his old master, and sat amid here and there a
whitecoat, and many nods and whispers over such news as the privileged
journals and the official gazette afforded.

Beppo's destination was to the Duchess of Graatli's palace.  Nearing it,
he perceived Luigi endeavouring to gain a passage beside the burly form
of Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz, who presently seized him and hurled him
into the road.  As Beppo was sidling up the courtway, Jacob sprang back;
Luigi made a rush; Jacob caught them both, but they wriggled out of his
clutch, and Luigi, being the fearfuller, ran the farthest.  While he was
out of hearing, Beppo told Jacob to keep watch upon Luigi, as the bearer
of an amorous letter from a signor of quality to Aennchen, the which he
himself desired to obtain sight of; "for the wench has caused me three
sleepless nights," he confessed frankly.  Jacob affected not to
understand.  Luigi and Beppo now leaned against the wall on either side
of him and baited him till he shook with rage.

"He is the lord of the duchess, his mistress--what a lucky fellow!" said
Luigi.  "When he's dog at the gates no one can approach her.  When he
isn't, you can fancy what!"--"He's only a mechanical contrivance; he's
not a man," said Beppo.  "He's the principal flea-catcher of the palace,"
said Luigi--"here he is all day, and at night the devil knows where he
hunts."--Luigi hopped in a half-circle round the exacerbated Jacob, and
finally provoked an assault that gave an opening to Beppo.  They all ran
in, Luigi last.  Jacob chased Beppo up the stairs, lost him, and
remembered what he had said of the letter borne by Luigi, for whom he
determined to lie in waiting.  "Better two in there than one," he
thought.  The two courted his Aennchen openly; but Luigi, as the bearer
of an amorous letter from the signor of quality, who could be no other
than signor Antonio-Pericles, was the one to be intercepted.  Like other
jealous lovers, Jacob wanted to read Aennchen's answer, to be cured of
his fatal passion for the maiden, and on this he set the entire force of
his mind.

Running up by different staircases, Beppo and Luigi came upon Aennchen
nearly at the same time.  She turned a cold face on Beppo, and requested
Luigi to follow her.  Astonished to see him in such favour, Beppo was
ready to provoke the quarrel before the kiss when she returned; but she
said that she had obeyed her mistress's orders, and was obeying the
duchess in refusing to speak of them, or of anything relating to them.
She had promised him an interview in that little room leading into the
duchess's boudoir.  He pressed her to conduct him.  "Ah; then it's not
for me you come," she said.  Beppo had calculated that the kiss would
open his way to the room, and the quarrel disembarrass him of his pretty
companion when there.  "You have come to listen to conversation again,"
said Aennchen.  "Ach! the fool a woman is to think that you Italians have
any idea except self-interest when you, when you .  .  .  talk nonsense
to us.  Go away, if you please.  Good-evening."  She dropped a curtsey
with a surly coquetry, charming of its kind.  Beppo protested that the
room was dear to him because there first he had known for one blissful
half-second the sweetness of her mouth.

"Who told you that persons who don't like your mistress are going to talk
in there?"  said Aennchen.

"You," said Beppo.

Aennchen drew up in triumph: "And now will you pretend that you didn't
come up here to go in there to listen to what they say?"

Beppo clapped hands at her cleverness in trapping him.  "Hush," said all
her limbs and features, belying the previous formal "good-evening."  He
refused to be silent, thinking it a way of getting to the little
antechamber.  "Then, I tell you, downstairs you go," said Aennchen
stiffly.

"Is it decided?"  Beppo asked.  "Then, good-evening.  You detestable
German girls can't love.  One step--a smile: another step--a kiss.  You
tit-for-tat minx!  Have you no notion of the sacredness of the sentiments
which inspires me to petition that the place for our interview should be
there where I tasted ecstatic joy for the space of a flash of lightning?
I will go; but it is there that I will go, and I will await you there,
signorina Aennchen.  Yes, laugh at me! laugh at me!"

"No; really, I don't laugh at you, signor Beppo," said Aennchen,
protesting in denial of what she was doing.  "This way."

"No, it's that way," said Beppo.

"It's through here."  She opened a door.  "The duchess has a reception
to-night, and you can't go round.  Ach! you would not betray me?"

"Not if it were the duchess herself," said Beppo; "he would refuse to
satisfy man's natural vanity, in such a case."

Eager to advance to the little antechamber, he allowed Aennchen to wait
behind him.  He heard the door shut and a lock turn, and he was in the
dark, and alone, left to take counsel of his fingers' ends.

"She was born to it," Beppo remarked, to extenuate his outwitted cunning,
when he found each door of the room fast against him.

On the following night Vittoria was to sing at a concert in the Duchess
of Graatli's great saloon, and the duchess had humoured Pericles by
consenting to his preposterous request that his spy should have an
opportunity of hearing Countess d'Isorella and Irma di Karski in private
conversation together, to discover whether there was any plot of any sort
to vex the evening's entertainment; as the jealous spite of those two
women, Pericles said, was equal to any devilry on earth.  It happened
that Countess d'Isorella did not come.  Luigi, in despair,--was the
hearer of a quick question and answer dialogue, in the obscure German
tongue, between Anna von Lenkenstein and Irma di Karski; but a happy peep
between the hanging curtains gave him sight of a letter passing from
Anna's hands to Irma's.  Anna quitted her.  Irma, was looking at the
superscription of the letter, an the act of passing in her steps, when
Luigi tore the curtains apart, and sprang on her arm like a cat.  Before
her shrieks could bring succour, Luigi was bounding across the court with
the letter in his possession.  A dreadful hug awaited him; his pockets
were ransacked, and he was pitched aching into the street.  Jacob
Baumwalder Feckelwitz went straightway under a gas-lamp, where he read
the address of the letter to Countess d'Isorella.  He doubted; he had a
half-desire to tear the letter open.  But a rumour of the attack upon
Irma had spread among the domestics and Jacob prudently went up to his
mistress.  The duchess was sitting with Laura.  She received the letter,
eyed: it all over, and held it to a candle.

Laura's head was bent in dark meditation.  The sudden increase of light
aroused her, and she asked, "What is that?"

"A letter from Countess Anna to Countess d'Isorella," said the duchess.

"Burnt!"  Laura screamed.

"It's only fair," the duchess remarked.

"From her to that woman!  It may be priceless.  Stop!  Let me see what
remains.  Amalia! are you mad?  Oh! you false friend.  I would have
sacrificed my right hand to see it."

"Try and love me still," said the duchess, letting her take one unburnt
corner, and crumble the black tissuey fragments to smut in her hands.

There was no writing; the unburnt corner of the letter was a blank.

Laura fooled the wretched ashes between her palms.  "Good-night," she
said.  "Your face will be of this colour to me, my dear, for long."

"I cannot behave disgracefully, even to keep your love, my beloved," said
the duchess.

"You cannot betray a German, you mean," Laura retorted.  "You could let a
spy into the house."

"That was a childish matter--merely to satisfy a whim."

"I say you could let a spy into the house.  Who is to know where the
scruples of you women begin?  I would have given my jewels, my head, my
husband's sword, for a sight of that letter.  I swear that it concerns
us.  Yes, us.  You are a false friend.  Fish-blooded creature! may it be
a year before I look on you again.  Hide among your miserable set!"

"Judge me when you are cooler, dearest," said the duchess, seeking to
detain the impetuous sister of her affection by the sweeping skirts; but
Laura spurned her touch, and went from her.

Irma drove to Countess d'Isorella's.  Violetta was abed, and lay fair
and placid as a Titian Venus, while Irma sputtered out her tale, with
intermittent sobs.  She rose upon her elbow, and planting it in her
pillow, took half-a-dozen puffs of a cigarette, and then requested Irma
to ring for her maid.  "Do nothing till you see me again," she said;
"and take my advice: always get to bed before midnight, or you'll have
unmanageable wrinkles in a couple of years.  If you had been in bed at a
prudent hour to-night, this scandal would not have occurred."

"How can I be in bed?  How could I help it?"  moaned Irma, replying to
the abstract rule, and the perplexing illustration of its force.

Violetta dismissed her.  "After all, my wish is to save my poor
Amaranto," she mused.  "I am only doing now what I should have been doing
in the daylight; and if I can't stop him, the Government must; and they
will.  Whatever the letter contained, I can anticipate it.  He knows my
profession and my necessities.  I must have money.  Why not from the rich
German woman whom he jilted?"

She attributed Anna's apparent passion of revenge to a secret passion of
unrequited love.  What else was implied by her willingness to part with
land and money for the key to his machinations?

Violetta would have understood a revenge directed against Angelo
Guidascarpi, as the slayer of Anna's brother.  But of him Anna had only
inquired once, and carelessly, whether he was in Milan.  Anna's mystical
semi-patriotism--prompted by her hatred of Vittoria, hatred of Carlo as
Angelo's cousin and protector, hatred of the Italy which held the three,
who never took the name Tedesco on their tongues without loathing--was
perfectly hidden from this shrewd head.

Some extra patrols were in the streets.  As she stepped into the
carriage, a man rushed up, speaking hoarsely and inarticulately, and
jumped in beside her.  She had discerned Barto Rizzo in time to give
directions to her footman, before she was addressed by a body of
gendarmes in pursuit, whom she mystified by entreating them to enter her
house and search it through, if they supposed that any evil-doer had
taken advantage of the open door.  They informed her that a man had
escaped from the civil prison.  "Poor creature!"  said the countess, with
womanly pity; "but you must see that he is not in my house.  How could
three of you let one escape?  "She drove off laughing at their vehement
assertion that he would not have escaped from them.  Barto Rizzo made her
conduct him to Countess Ammiani's gates.

Violetta was frightened by his eyes when she tried to persuade him in her
best coaxing manner to avoid Count Ammiani.  In fact she apprehended that
he would be very much in her way.  She had no time for chagrin at her
loss of power over him, though she was sensible of vexation.  Barto
folded his arms and sat with his head in his chest, silent, till they
reached the' gates, when he said in French, "Madame, I am a nameless
person in your train.  Gabble!"  he added, when the countess advised him
not to enter; nor would he allow her to precede him by more than one
step.  Violetta sent up her name.  The man had shaken her nerves.
"At least, remember that your appearance should be decent," she said,
catching sight of blood on his hands, and torn garments.  "I expect,
madame," he replied, "I shall not have time to wash before I am laid out.
My time is short.  I want tobacco.  The washing can be done by-and-by,
but not the smoking."

They were ushered up to the reception-room, where Countess Ammiani,
Vittoria, and Carlo sat, awaiting the visitor whose unexpected name, cast
in their midst at so troubled a season, had clothed her with some of the
midnight's terrors.




CHAPTER XLIII

THE LAST MEETING IN MILAN

Barto Rizzo had silence about him without having to ask for it, when he
followed Violetta into Countess Ammiani's saloon of reception.  Carlo was
leaning over his mother's chair, holding Vittoria's wrist across it, and
so enclosing her, while both young faces were raised to the bowed
forehead of the countess.  They stood up.  Violetta broke through the
formal superlatives of an Italian greeting.  "Speak to me alone," she
murmured for Carlo's ear and glancing at Barto: "Here is a madman; a mild
one, I trust."  She contrived to show that she was not responsible for
his intrusion.  Countess Ammiani gathered Vittoria in her arms; Carlo
stepped a pace before them.  Terror was on the venerable lady's face,
wrath on her son's.  As he fronted Barto, he motioned a finger to the
curtain hangings, and Violetta, quick at reading signs, found his bare
sword there.  "But you will not want it," she remarked, handing the hilt
to him, and softly eyeing the impression of her warm touch on the steel
as it passed.

"Carlo, thou son of Paolo!  Countess Marcellina, wife of a true patriot!
stand aside, both of you.  It is between the Countess Alessandra and
myself," so the man commenced, with his usual pomp of interjection.
"Swords and big eyes,--are they things to stop me?"  Barto laughed
scornfully.  He had spoken in the full roll of his voice, and the sword
was hard back for the thrust.

Vittoria disengaged herself from the countess.  "Speak to me," she said,
dismayed by the look of what seemed an exaltation of madness in Barto's
visage, but firm as far as the trembling of her limbs would let her be.

He dropped to her feet and kissed them.

"Emilia Alessandra Belloni!  Vittoria!  Countess Alessandra Ammiani!
pity me.  Hear this:--I hated you as the devil is hated.  Yesterday I
woke up in prison to hear that I must adore you.  God of all the pits of
punishment! was there ever one like this?  I had to change heads."

It was the language of a distorted mind, and lamentable to hear when a
sob shattered his voice.

"Am I mad?" he asked piteously, clasping his temples.

"You are as we are, if you weep," said Vittoria, to sooth him.

"Then I have been mad!" he cried, starting.  "I knew you a wicked virgin
--signora contessa, confess to me, marriage has changed you.  Has it not
changed you?  In the name of the Father of the Saints, help me out of it:
--my brain reels backwards.  You were false, but marriage--It acts in
this way with you women; yes, that we know--you were married, and you
said, 'Now let us be faithful.' Did you not say that?  I am forgiving,
though none think it.  You have only to confess.  If you will not,--oh!"
He smote his face, groaning.

Carlo spoke a stern word in an undertone; counselling him to be gone.

"If you will not--what was she to do?" Barto cut the question to
interrogate his strayed wits.  "Look at me, Countess Alessandra.  I was
in the prison.  I heard that my Rosellina had a tight heart.  She cried
for her master, poor heathen, and I sprang out of the walls to her.
There--there--she lay like a breathing board; a woman with a body like a
coffin half alive; not an eye to show; nothing but a body and a whisper.
She perished righteously, for she disobeyed.  She acted without my
orders: she dared to think!  She will be damned, for she would have
vengeance before she went.  She glorified you over me--over Barto Rizzo.
Oh! she shocked my soul.  But she is dead, and I am her slave.  Every
word was of you.  Take another head, Barto Rizzo your old one was mad:
she said that to my soul.  She died blessing you above me.  I saw the
last bit of life go up from her mouth blessing you.  It's heard by this
time in heaven, and it's written.  Then I have had two years of madness.
If she is right, I was wrong; I was a devil of hell.  I know there's an
eye given to dying creatures, and she looked with it, and she said, the
soul of Rinaldo Guidascarpi, her angel, was glorifying you; and she
thanked the sticking of her heart, when she tried to stab you, poor
fool!"

Carlo interrupted: "Now go; you have said enough."

"No, let him speak," said Vittoria.  She supposed that Barto was going to
say that he had not given the order for her assassination.  "You do not
wish me dead, signore?"

"Nothing that is not standing in my way, signora contessa," said Barto;
and his features blazed with a smile of happy self-justification.
"I have killed a sentinel this night: Providence placed him there.  I
wish for no death, but I punish, and--ah! the cursed sight of the woman
who calls me mad for two years.  She thrusts a bar of iron in an engine
at work, and says, Work on! work on!  Were you not a traitress?  Countess
Alessandra, were you not once a traitress?  Oh! confess it; save my head.
Reflect, dear lady!  it's cruel to make a man of a saintly sincerity look
back--I count the months--seventeen months!  to look back seventeen
months, and see that his tongue was a clapper,--his will, his eyes, his
ears, all about him, everything, stirred like a pot on the fire.  I
traced you.  I saw your treachery.  I said--I, I am her Day of Judgement.
She shall look on me and perish, struck down by her own treachery.  Were
my senses false to me?  I had lived in virtuous fidelity to my
principles.  None can accuse me.  Why were my senses false, if my
principles were true?  I said you were a traitress.  I saw it from the
