possible that we shall be compelled to silence a sentinel. If you would
not mind, sir, I should like to have six copies of your letter to the
commandant. I could manage to swallow six as well as one, and as it is
not likely that I shall be able to enter the citadel it would be as well
to give them a better chance of finding the letter if I have to try to
shoot or throw it in."

"That shall be done; we will use the thinnest paper, so that if you have
to swallow them you can do so without difficulty."

"If I find that I cannot by any possibility get my message in through
the town, sir, I shall try to cross the river and so make my way in on
that side."

"That would be even more dangerous than the other," Turenne said. "On
that side an even stricter watch is likely to be kept than on that
facing the town, for the Spaniards know that the garrison is not strong
enough to attempt any enterprise against the city, while it might at any
moment attempt to break out and march away on the other side.

"I own that I do not see myself how you can possibly succeed in either
case, but assuredly there must be more chance on the side of the town.
I have been thinking it over, and will order a troop of cavalry to
ride with you to Chivasso, for the Spanish horse from time to time make
forays from Turin, carry off prisoners, and burn villages. Until we are
in a position to make a general advance it is impossible to check these
attacks without keeping the whole of our cavalry massed near Turin, and
wearing out horses and men by the necessity for perpetual vigilance. And
now, goodbye; may fortune attend you! Do not be too rash. The letters
shall be sent you in an hour's time."

As they issued out from Susa they found the troop of cavalry awaiting
them. The officer in command was well known to Hector, and said:

"So it is you that I am to escort to Chivasso, Monsieur Campbell?"

"Yes; I am sorry to give you occasion for so much trouble."

"No trouble at all; we have not been in the saddle for the past week,
and a ride to Chivasso will make a pleasant change. Besides, I have
a brother in the garrison there, so that altogether I shall be your
debtor. You see, we are not allowed to ride beyond St. Ambrogio, or
Rivoli at farthest, for once beyond that, we should be liable to be
caught by the enemy's scouting parties. Of course we have a strong force
at Rivoli, but except to drive off small parties of the enemy who
may venture to come up too close, they are forbidden to engage in any
affairs. It is annoying, but one can understand that the general is
anxious to avoid encounters in which the enemy is sure to be superior
in force, until his reinforcements come up and we are able to take the
field in earnest."

"I do not think we shall be otherwise than inferior in force even when
our last regiment comes up," Hector said. "What with Holland and the
Rhine and the frontier of Spain, it is clear that the cardinal must have
as much as he can do to enable all our commanders to make head against
the enemy, and it is no secret that beyond one more regiment of cavalry
that will arrive with Count d'Harcourt, no other reinforcements are
likely to reach us for some time to come. But then, you see, we have
Turenne as well as d'Harcourt, and each of them ought to count for two
or three thousand men."

"Well, I would rather fight against long odds," the officer said, "than
be kept here month after month doing nothing. Here is winter coming on,
and I suppose that will put a stop to everything."

"I should hardly think so," Hector replied. "I am sure that the viscount
is as eager for action as we are, and winter here is not the same thing
as in Holland or on the Rhine. From what I hear there is very little
snow in the plains; and as the country is generally flat, an army could
march almost as easily as in summer, and in some respects they would be
better off."

"How do you mean?"

"I mean that in summer the barns would be all empty of food until filled
again by the harvest, whereas in winter they would be all well stocked
with forage for the cattle and horses."

"You are right, Monsieur Campbell. Certainly there should be nothing to
prevent our operating through the winter, and I shall look forward even
more eagerly than I did before for d'Harcourt's return. Will you come
back with us tomorrow from Chivasso?"

"That will depend upon circumstances. I think it is more probable that I
shall not return to Susa for a few days; my orders are to report myself
to the governor."

No bodies of the enemy's cavalry were met with on the way, and at four
o'clock in the afternoon they rode into Chivasso. They alighted at the
commandant's, and on stating that he was the bearer of a despatch from
the general Hector was at once shown in. As he had more than once ridden
there with despatches from Turenne, he was known to the officer.

"We heard of the victory three days since," the latter said, as Hector
handed him the despatch, "and fired a salvo of guns in honour of it. An
Italian deserter from the other side brought the news. The two generals
were unwounded, I hope?"

"Yes, colonel, and our losses were altogether slight."

The commandant opened the despatch. He looked a little surprised at
its contents. "So you are going to endeavour to pass a message into
the citadel. It is a difficult undertaking. The enemy's watch is a
very vigilant one. Once or twice during the siege men have succeeded in
swimming the Po and evading the enemy's guards, but of late these have
been doubled, for it is thought that the garrison may attempt to break
out. On the town side the firing has all but ceased; they know that the
store of provisions is almost exhausted, and regard it as a waste of
powder and shot to continue their cannonade, which only results in
the citadel answering it, and that with very much more effect than the
Spanish guns produce. May I ask if you have any plan of getting in?"

"No, sir, we must decide upon that when we see how matters stand."

"Who is the we?" the colonel asked.

"Myself and my servant, who is a very sharp and intelligent lad whom I
can thoroughly trust. Alone I could do nothing, for I have only picked
up a few phrases in Italian yet, and should be detected at once; so
anything that has to be said must be said by him. May I ask, sir, if the
enemy are in force on the other side of the bridge? if so, we must cross
by swimming, either above or below it."

"No; there was a regiment there until three days ago, but they marched
away, and no doubt formed a portion of Prince Thomas's force. They know
well enough that although our garrison can hold the walls, we are not
strong enough to undertake any enterprise."

"Then, sir, we have only to ask for an escort for a mile or so beyond
the other side of the bridge, in case a company should have been left
to watch the road. Beyond that we will dismount and proceed on foot. We
will, if you please, put on our disguises here, with the exception of
our hats, and perhaps you will lend us a couple of long cloaks, so that
our appearance may not be noticed. Although we shall not start until
after dark, it is as well to be upon the safe side. Maybe the enemy have
spies in the town, and were it noticed that two young peasants rode out
under the escort of a troop of cavalry news might be sent to Turin. In
that case we might be arrested as soon as we entered the city. I should
be obliged if you would give orders to the officer in command that one
of the troopers should bring the horses, cloaks, and hats back here with
him."

The governor rang a bell, and on an orderly entering said: "Tell Captain
Sion to have his troop in readiness to start in an hour's time, in order
to form an escort for one of Viscount Turenne's officers, and tell
him that when he has the troop ready to start he is to come to me for
detailed orders. I have said an hour, Monsieur Campbell," he went on,
after the orderly had left the room, "because, in the first place, it
is not yet dark, and in the second, it will take some twenty minutes to
prepare a meal. You will have a long night's work before you, and I dare
say you have had nothing since you halted for breakfast."

"Thank you, colonel, I had not thought of it; but I should certainly
have remembered it before tomorrow morning. We halted for breakfast at
eleven, and if it had not been for your kind offer we should have had
no chance of getting anything till we entered Turin, and even there the
less we go into any cabarets the better."

"That is true. I have sent a message to the cook that twenty minutes is
the utmost we can give for the preparation of a meal."



CHAPTER IV: SUCCESS


Although the governor apologized to Hector for the poorness of the
repast and the haste with which it had been prepared, it was really
excellent, consisting of soup, some fish fresh from the river, a cutlet,
and an omelette, with a bottle of good wine of Asti. Paolo's wants had
been attended to in the kitchen. It was six o'clock when they started.
The officer in command had already received his instructions, and the
governor accompanied Hector to the door, where two horses were standing
saddled.

"They are not your own," he said, "but are two of mine. I thought that
yours had made a sufficiently long journey today."

Thanking him for his kindness, Hector mounted, and took his place by
the side of Captain Simon, while Paolo fell in with the orderlies riding
close behind.

"I presume, monsieur, that you are going to obtain some information for
Viscount Turenne. I don't want to ask any questions as to the nature of
your mission, but as I have orders to bring back with the horses your
cloaks and hats, I presume that in the first place you are going on
foot, and in the second, you are going in disguise."

"Your judgment is correct, captain. The viscount wishes to obtain
certain information, and I am going to fetch it for him, if I can."

"I hope that you will be successful, sir. It is a good night for
travelling, the stars are bright and the moon down, so that you will
have light enough to keep the road, and time enough to step aside should
you meet any party who might be inclined to question all passersby."

"Do you know the roads well about here?" Hector asked.

"I was stationed in Turin before the enemy came with too great a force
to be resisted."

"I want to strike across the country, and to come into the road from
Turin to Casale at a distance of three or four miles from the city."

"A mile or so away a road branches off from this which keeps by the
river. It is a mere country road, and except in two or three small
villages that you will pass through, you are not likely to meet with
anyone upon it. It is about eight miles to the main road from the point
where you turn off, and you will then be five miles from Turin. It is
just possible that you may meet patrols, but I should think it very
unlikely; now that our army has gone into winter quarters at Carignano,
they are not likely to be very vigilant."

As they rode along Hector related some of the incidents of the late
battle. No signs of the enemy were met with, and the officer presently
said, "I am sorry to say that this is the point where you leave us,
monsieur. I wish it had been a little farther, so that I could hear more
of the fight."

Hector and Paolo dismounted. Two troopers were called up and took charge
of their horses, while the cloaks and hats were given to the officer's
orderly, then the two lads put on the Savoyard hats they had carried
under their cloaks. The officer took two packets from his holster.

"The colonel bade me give this to you at starting," he said. "He thought
that after a long walk on foot you would want some slight refreshment
before the inns were open in the morning."

"Will you please give him my hearty thanks for his thoughtfulness,"
Hector said, "and accept the same yourself for your courtesy in
escorting me."

"Now we are fairly on our way, Paolo," he went on as he turned down the
lane, for it was little more; "this package is a bottle of wine, and the
one that I have handed to you contains the eatables."

"That is good, master. We shall find it pretty cold before morning, and
there is nothing like a good meal to warm one up again."

"Did you get the bow and arrows at Chivasso?"

"Yes, sir. I went out and bought them as soon as we got there. I wanted
them, I told the man, for a boy of ten years old, but all he had were a
good deal too long, which I was glad of, for a child's bow would hardly
have been strong enough, so I made him cut one down until it was not
more than three feet long. That way I shall be able, as we agreed, to
carry it under my doublet. Of course it will make me walk stiffly, and
there will be no possibility of sitting down, but that matters not at
all. It is all the stronger, and will send an arrow a good distance. I
have got six arrows as you ordered me. They are regular arrows, but I
made the man shorten them so as to suit the bow, and then repoint them.
I have got them inside my doublet. I tied them together, made a hole in
the lining under the arm, and put them in."

"You have not forgotten the cord, I hope, Paolo?"

"Not I, master. I should have deserved having my ears cut off if I had
done so."

They were in no hurry, and walked only fast enough to keep themselves
warm. In two hours and a half they arrived at the main road and turned
to the right. "Now we will go another couple of miles, Paolo, and then
look out for a sleeping place. An empty barn or stable or a stack of
fodder is what we want. We may as well sleep warm as cold. We shall not
want to be moving on till seven o'clock."

After walking three miles they came upon a small village.

"Do you stay here, master, I will go round and see if I can find a
place. I am more accustomed to these villages than you are."

In five minutes he returned. "I have found a capital place," he said.
"It is a stable, but it is empty. No doubt the Spaniards have taken the
horses, and are using them in their transport wagons."

"It is enough for us that the place is empty, Paolo."

The door stood ajar. They entered and closed it behind them, and they
then felt about until they found a pile of rough fodder. They pulled
some of this aside, lay down and covered themselves up with the stalks
they had removed, and in three minutes were fast asleep, for they had
had a long day's work. Hector slept until he was awakened by Paolo,
who said, "The day is breaking, and the village will be astir in a few
minutes." The weather had changed, and as they stepped out fine flakes
of snow were drifting through the air, and the ground was already
whitened. They regained the road and walked along until they came to a
wood.

"We may as well wait here and breakfast, Paolo." The parcel was opened
and found to contain a cold capon and some bread, and on these and the
wine they made a capital breakfast, each taking a long sip at the bottle
to the health of the colonel. "The market people are beginning to come
along, and we may as well buy something from them going in. If we
have not something to sell it is not unlikely that we shall be asked
questions." It was now broad daylight, and they saw several peasants
pass along the road, some with baskets, others driving a pig or a goat.

"Either of these would do," Hector said; "but we don't know where the
market is, and it would never do to seem ignorant of that." The snow had
stopped suddenly some minutes before, and the sun was now shining.

"That is lucky," Hector said as they walked down towards the road, "we
may hope that there will be no more snow and that the sun will soon melt
what has fallen. It would be fatal to us if the ground were white, for
the most careless sentry could not help seeing us upon it."

They reached the road just as a peasant came along. He was an old man,
and was dragging behind him a pile of faggots, which were placed upon
two rough poles. He was walking between these, holding two ends in his
hands, while the others trailed along on the ground behind.

"Bargain with him, Paolo."

"That is a heavy load, father," the latter said.

"Ay, it is heavy."

"How much do you expect to get for your faggots in the town?"

"I shall get a crown," the man said. "I would not take under, and they
ought to be worth more than that now the snow has begun to fall."

"We are going into the town," Paolo said. "We are younger than you,
and between us we could drag it along easily. I have got a crown in my
pocket to buy some things with. I don't mind giving it to you for your
load. If I can sell the faggots for a few soldi over that we shall be
able to buy something for ourselves."

"It is a bargain, lad," the old man said. "I am getting old and the
rheumatism is in my bones, and I shall be very glad to be spared the
journey; so give me your money and take the poles. I hope you will be
successful, and sell them a little higher. You had better ask a crown
and a half. The women are sure to beat you down, but you will make ten
or twelve soldi for yourselves."

Paolo handed the crown to the old man.

"How had we better take this, Paolo?" Hector asked, as the old man,
chuckling with satisfaction at having escaped a toilsome journey, turned
to retrace his steps.

"There is room for us both between the shafts," Paolo said, "one behind
the other. It would be much easier to walk holding both poles than for
us both to take one, as in that way the weight will be balanced on each
side of us."

There was indeed just room between the ends of the poles and the pile of
brushwood for them to walk close behind each other, and as the greater
portion of the weight rested on the other ends of the poles they did not
find the burden a heavy one.

"How are we going to sell these, Paolo?"

"We shall have no difficulty in selling them, master. This frost will
set every housewife on the lookout for wood, and you will find that we
sha'n't have to go far before we are accosted."

It was two miles from the spot where they had bought the faggots to the
gates of Turin.

"I sha'n't be sorry to get rid of this load," Hector said. "It is not
the weight but the roughness of the poles. My hands are quite chafed by
them."

"Loose your hold for a bit, master. My hands have been accustomed to
rough work, and many a load of faggots have I drawn in my time."

"I will hold on, Paolo. It is not more than a quarter of a mile farther.
My hands have done plenty of work, too, but it has been done with smooth
handled weapons. It is well that they should become accustomed to harder
work."

They passed without a question through the gate, and following the
example of other vendors of wood, of whom they saw several, Paolo began
to shout, "Large faggots for sale!"

It was not long before a door opened and a woman beckoned him.

"How much do you want for the whole?"

"A crown and a half," Paolo said.

"I have been offered as many for a crown," the woman replied.

"Then, signora, you did wrong to refuse. It took two days' work to cut
them, and we have dragged them here for miles. Two crowns would not pay
for the labour. Not one scudo would I take under the price that I have
named. Why, if the town is besieged these faggots would be worth twenty
crowns before the winter is over."

"Well, I will give you the money," the woman said. "It is extortionate.
Generally I can buy them at half that price."

"I do not say no to that," Paolo laughed, "but with two armies wanting
firewood and cutting down the copses without even taking trouble to ask
leave of their owners, I think that you will see firewood very scarce in
the city before long."

"Well, carry it in and pile it in the yard."

This was soon done, the poles were thrown on to the top of the heap, and
the boys went off along the street again.

"We have made half a crown for ourselves," Paolo laughed; "now we must
decide how we shall spend it."

"It would be a good plan to spend some money anyhow," Hector said.
"What kind of things would you be likely to buy for your family in the
country?"

"Well, I should say a cooking pan to begin with, and a few yards of warm
stuff for making my mother a skirt."

"Well, buy the cooking pan first and sling it across your shoulder, and
then as we wander about we can look in the shops and it will seem as if
we were on the search for articles that we had been told to purchase; it
would be better than sauntering about without any apparent object.
But first let us walk briskly towards the side of the town facing the
citadel. The Strada Vecchia is the one that I want to examine first."

The knowledge that he had gained from the plan of the city enabled
Hector to find the street without their having to ask any questions.

"Now, buy your cooking pan at the next smith's shop you come to, and
then we can go slowly along making our observations."

They soon found that the street they had entered was, for the most part,
deserted by its inhabitants. The shops were all closed, the road was
strewn with fallen chimneys and balconies, and here and there were
yawning holes showing how severely the street had suffered when the
artillery duel was going on between the guns on the walls and those
of the citadel. A short distance down the street a chain was stretched
across it, and here a musketeer was pacing up and down on guard. Two
others could be seen at the farther end of the street, where there was
a gateway in the wall, now closed up with sandbags piled thickly against
it.

