'He, who covers his limbs with names,' as the sacred Text expresses
itself, is the power which gives to things their distinctive forms; the
scarabaeus, 'which enters life as its own son' reminds us of the ever
self-renewing creative power which causes you to call our merciful and
benevolent God a monster, but which you can deny as little as you can the
happy choice of the type; for, as you know, there are only male scarabei,
and this animal reproduces itself."

Nebsecht smiled.  "If all the doctrines of the mysteries," he said,
"have no more truth than this happily chosen image, they are in a bad
way.  These beetles have for years been my friends and companions.
I know their family life, and I can assure you that there are males and
females amongst them as amongst cats, apes, and human beings.  Your 'good
God' I do not know, and what I least comprehend in thinking it over
quietly is the circumstance that you distinguish a good and evil
principle in the world.  If the All is indeed God, if God as the
scriptures teach, is goodness, and if besides him is nothing at all,
where is a place to be found for evil?"

"You talk like a school-boy," said Pentaur indignantly.  "All that is,
is good and reasonable in itself, but the infinite One, who prescribes
his own laws and his own paths, grants to the finite its continuance
through continual renewal, and in the changing forms of the finite
progresses for evermore.  What we call evil, darkness, wickedness, is in
itself divine, good, reasonable, and clear; but it appears in another
light to our clouded minds, because we perceive the way only and not the
goal, the details only, and not the whole.  Even so, superficial
listeners blame the music, in which a discord is heard, which the harper
has only evoked from the strings that his hearers may more deeply feel
the purity of the succeeding harmony; even so, a fool blames the painter
who has colored his board with black, and does not wait for the
completion of the picture which shall be thrown into clearer relief by
the dark background; even so, a child chides the noble tree, whose fruit
rots, that a new life may spring up from its kernel.  Apparent evil is
but an antechamber to higher bliss, as every sunset is but veiled by
night, and will soon show itself again as the red dawn of a new day."

"How convincing all that sounds!"  answered the physician, "all, even the
terrible, wins charm from your lips; but I could invert your proposition,
and declare that it is evil that rules the world, and sometimes gives us
one drop of sweet content, in order that we may more keenly feel the
bitterness of life.  You see harmony and goodness in everything.  I have
observed that passion awakens life, that all existence is a conflict,
that one being devours another."

"And do you not feel the beauty of visible creation, and does not the
immutable law in everything fill you with admiration and humility?"

"For beauty," replied Nebsecht, "I have never sought; the organ is
somehow wanting in me to understand it of myself, though I willingly
allow you to mediate between us.  But of law in nature I fully appreciate
the worth, for that is the veritable soul of the universe.  You call the
One 'Temt,' that is to say the total--the unity which is reached by the
addition of many units; and that pleases me, for the elements of the
universe and the powers which prescribe the paths of life are strictly
defined by measure and number--but irrespective of beauty or
benevolence."

"Such views," cried Pentaur troubled, "are the result of your strange
studies.  You kill and destroy, in order, as you yourself say, to come
upon the track of the secrets of life.  Look out upon nature, develop the
faculty which you declare to be wanting, in you, and the beauty of
creation will teach you without my assistance that you are praying to a
false god."

"I do not pray," said Nebsecht, "for the law which moves the world is as
little affected by prayers as the current of the sands in your hour-
glass.  Who tells you that I do not seek to come upon the track of the
first beginning of things?  I proved to you just now that I know more
about the origin of Scarabei than you do.  I have killed many an animal,
not only to study its organism, but also to investigate how it has built
up its form.  But precisely in this work my organ for beauty has become
blunt rather than keen.  I tell you that the beginning of things is not
more attractive to contemplate than their death and decomposition."

Pentaur looked at the physician enquiringly.

"I also for once," continued Nebsecht, "will speak in figures.  Look at
this wine, how pure it is, how fragrant; and yet it was trodden from the
grape by the brawny feet of the vintagers.  And those full ears of corn!
They gleam golden yellow, and will yield us snow-white meal when they are
ground, and yet they grew from a rotting seed.  Lately you were praising
to me the beauty of the great Hall of Columns nearly completed in the
Temple of Amon over yonder in Thebes.

     [Begun by Rameses I. continued by Seti I., completed by Rameses II.
     The remains of this immense hall, with its 134 columns, have not
     their equal in the world.]

How posterity will admire it!  I saw that Hall arise.  There lay masses
of freestone in wild confusion, dust in heaps that took away my breath,
and three months since I was sent over there, because above a hundred
workmen engaged in stone-polishing under the burning sun had been beaten
to death.  Were I a poet like you, I would show you a hundred similar
pictures, in which you would not find much beauty.  In the meantime, we
have enough to do in observing the existing order of things, and
investigating the laws by which it is governed."

"I have never clearly understood your efforts, and have difficulty in
comprehending why you did not turn to the science of the haruspices,"
said Pentaur.  "Do you then believe that the changing, and--owing to the
conditions by which they are surrounded--the dependent life of plants and
animals is governed by law, rule, and numbers like the movement of the
stars?"

"What a question!  Is the strong and mighty hand, which compels yonder
heavenly bodies to roll onward in their carefully-appointed orbits, not
delicate enough to prescribe the conditions of the flight of the bird,
and the beating of the human heart?"

"There we are again with the heart," said the poet smiling, "are you any
nearer your aim?"

The physician became very grave.  "Perhaps tomorrow even," he said,
"I may have what I need.  You have your palette there with red and black
color, and a writing reed.  May I use this sheet of papyrus?"

"Of course; but first tell me .  .  .  ."

"Do not ask; you would not approve of my scheme, and there would only be
a fresh dispute."

"I think," said the poet, laying his hand on his friend's shoulder, "that
we have no reason to fear disputes.  So far they have been the cement,
the refreshing dew of our friendship."

"So long as they treated of ideas only, and not of deeds."

"You intend to get possession of a human heart!"  cried the poet.  "Think
of what you are doing!  The heart is the vessel of that effluence of the
universal soul, which lives in us."

"Are you so sure of that?"  cried the physician with some irritation,
"then give me the proof.  Have you ever examined a heart, has any one
member of my profession done so?  The hearts of criminals and prisoners
of war even are declared sacred from touch, and when we stand helpless by
a patient, and see our medicines work harm as often as good, why is it?
Only because we physicians are expected to work as blindly as an
astronomer, if he were required to look at the stars through a board.
At Heliopolis I entreated the great Urma Rahotep, the truly learned chief
of our craft, and who held me in esteem, to allow me to examine the heart
of a dead Amu; but he refused me, because the great Sechet leads virtuous
Semites also into the fields of the blessed.

     [According to the inscription accompanying the famous
     representations of the four nations (Egyptians, Semites, Libyans,
     and Ethiopians) in the tomb of Seti I.]

And then followed all the old scruples: that to cut up the heart of a
beast even is sinful, because it also is the vehicle of a soul, perhaps a
condemned and miserable human soul, which before it can return to the
One, must undergo purification by passing through the bodies of animals.
I was not satisfied, and declared to him that my great-grandfather
Nebsecht, before he wrote his treatise on the heart, must certainly have
examined such an organ.  Then he answered me that the divinity had
revealed to him what he had written, and therefore his work had been
accepted amongst the sacred writings of Toth,

     [Called by the Greeks "Hermetic Books."  The Papyrus Ebers is the
     work called by Clemens of Alexandria "the Book of Remedies."]

which stood fast and unassailable as the laws of the world; he wished to
give me peace for quiet work, and I also, he said, might be a chosen
spirit, the divinity might perhaps vouchsafe revelations to me too.  I
was young at that time, and spent my nights in prayer, but I only wasted
away, and my spirit grew darker instead of clearer.  Then I killed in
secret--first a fowl, then rats, then a rabbit, and cut up their hearts,
and followed the vessels that lead out of them, and know little more now
than I did at first; but I must get to the bottom of the truth, and I
must have a human heart."

"What will that do for you?"  asked Pentaur; "you cannot hope to perceive
the invisible and the infinite with your human eyes?"

"Do you know my great-grandfather's treatise?"

"A little," answered the poet; "he said that wherever he laid his
finger, whether on the head, the hands, or the stomach, he everywhere met
with the heart, because its vessels go into all the members, and the
heart is the meeting point of all these vessels.  Then Nebsecht proceeds
to state how these are distributed in the different members, and shows--
is it not so?--that the various mental states, such as anger, grief,
aversion, and also the ordinary use of the word heart, declare entirely
for his view."

"That is it.  We have already discussed it, and I believe that he is
right, so far as the blood is concerned, and the animal sensations.  But
the pure and luminous intelligence in us--that has another seat," and the
physician struck his broad but low forehead with his hand.  "I have
observed heads by the hundred down at the place of execution, and I have
also removed the top of the skulls of living animals.  But now let me
write, before we are disturbed."

     [Human brains are prescribed for a malady of the eyes in the Ebers
     papyrus.  Herophilus, one of the first scholars of the Alexandrine
     Museum, studied not only the bodies of executed criminals, but made
     his experiments also on living malefactors.  He maintained that the
     four cavities of the human brain are the seat of the soul.]

The physician took the reed, moistened it with black color prepared from
burnt papyrus, and in elegant hieratic characters

     [At the time of our narrative the Egyptians had two kinds of
     writing-the hieroglyphic, which was generally used for monumental
     inscriptions, and in which the letters consisted of conventional
     representations of various objects, mathematical and arbitrary
     symbols, and the hieratic, used for writing on papyrus, and in
     which, with the view of saving time, the written pictures underwent
     so many alterations and abbreviations that the originals could
     hardly be recognized.  In the 8th century there was a further
     abridgment of the hieratic writing, which was called the demotic, or
     people's writing, and was used in commerce.  Whilst the hieroglyphic
     and hieratic writings laid the foundations of the old sacred
     dialect, the demotic letters were only used to write the spoken
     language of the people.  E. de Rouge's Chrestomathie Egyptienne.
     H.  Brugsch's Hieroglyphische Grammatik.  Le Page Renouf's shorter
     hieroglyphical grammar.  Ebers' Ueber das Hieroglyphische
     Schriftsystem, 2nd edition, 1875, in the lectures of Virchow
     Holtzendorff.]

wrote the paper for the paraschites, in which he confessed to having
impelled him to the theft of a heart, and in the most binding manner
declared himself willing to take the old man's guilt upon himself before
Osiris and the judges of the dead.

When he had finished, Pentaur held out his hand for the paper, but
Nebsecht folded it together, placed it in a little bag in which lay an
amulet that his dying mother had hung round his neck, and said, breathing
deeply:

"That is done.  Farewell, Pentaur."

But the poet held the physician back; he spoke to him with the warmest
words, and conjured him to abandon his enterprise.  His prayers, however,
had no power to touch Nebsecht, who only strove forcibly to disengage his
