accompany him to the carriage, as interpreter between himself and
Nitetis.

In an instant his highest office-bearers were at hand to lift the king
once more on to his horse, and at a single nod from their lord, the train
was again in motion.

Cambyses and Croesus rode by the side of the carriage.

"She is beautiful, and pleases me well," began the king.  "Interpret
faithfully all her answers, for I understand only the Persian, Assyrian
and Median tongues."

Nitetis caught and understood these words.  A feeling of intense joy
stole into her heart, and before Croesus could answer, she began softly
in broken Persian and blushing deeply: "Blessed be the gods, who have
caused me to find favor in thine eyes.  I am not ignorant of the speech
of my lord, for the noble Croesus has instructed me in the Persian
language during our long journey.  Forgive, if my sentences be broken and
imperfect; the time was short, and my capacity only that of a poor and
simple maiden."

     [Diodorus tells us that Themistocles learnt the Persian language
     during the journey to Susa.  We are not, therefore, requiring an
     impossibility of Nitetis.]

A smile passed over the usually serious mouth of Cambyses.  His vanity
was flattered by Nitetis' desire to win his approbation, and, accustomed
as he was to see women grow up in idleness and ignorance, thinking of
nothing but finery and intrigue, her persevering industry seemed to him
both wonderful and praise worthy.  So he answered with evident
satisfaction: "I rejoice that we can speak without an interpreter.
Persevere in learning the beautiful language of my forefathers.  Croesus,
who sits at my table, shall still remain your instructor."

"Your command confers happiness!"  exclaimed the old man.  "No more eager
or thankful pupil could be found, than the daughter of Amasis."

"She justifies the ancient report of the wisdom of Egypt," answered the
king, "and I can believe that she will quickly understand and receive
into her soul the religious instructions of our Magi."

Nitetis dropped her earnest gaze.  Her fears were being realized.  She
would be compelled to serve strange gods.

But her emotion passed unnoticed by Cambyses, who went on speaking: "My
mother Kassandane will tell you the duties expected from my wives.  To-
morrow I myself will lead you to her.  The words, which you innocently
chanced to hear, I now repeat; you please me well.  Do nothing to
alienate my affection.  We will try to make our country agreeable, and,
as your friend, I counsel you to treat Boges whom I sent as my
forerunner, in a kind and friendly manner.  As head over the house
of the women, you will have to conform to his will in many things."

"Though he be head over the house of the women," answered Nitetis,
"surely your wife is bound to obey no other earthly will than yours.
Your slightest look shall be for me a command; but remember that I am a
king's daughter, that in my native land the weaker and the stronger sex
have equal rights, and that the same pride reigns in my breast, which I
see kindling in your eyes, my lord and king!  My obedience to you, my
husband and my ruler, shall be that of a slave, but I can never stoop to
sue for the favor, or obey the orders of a venal servant, the most
unmanly of his kind!"

Cambyses' wonder and satisfaction increased.  He had never heard any
woman speak in this way before, except his mother; the clever way in
which Nitetis acknowledged, and laid stress on, his right to command her
every act, was very flattering to his self-love, and her pride found an
echo in his own haughty disposition.  He nodded approvingly and answered:
"You have spoken well.  A separate dwelling shall be appointed you.
I, and no one else, will prescribe your rules of life and conduct.  This
day the pleasant palace on the hanging-gardens shall be prepared for your
reception."

"A thousand, thousand thanks," cried Nitetis.  "You little know the
blessing you are bestowing in this permission.  Again and again I have
begged your brother Bartja to repeat the story of these gardens, and the
love of the king who raised that verdant and blooming hill, pleased us
better than all the other glories of your vast domains."

"To-morrow," answered the king, "you can enter your new abode.  But tell
me now how my messengers pleased you and your countrymen."

"How can you ask?  Who could know the noble Croesus without loving him?
Who could fail to admire the beauty of the young heroes, your friends?
They have all become dear to us, but your handsome brother Bartja
especially, won all hearts.  The Egyptians have no love for strangers,
and yet the gaping crowd would burst into a murmur of admiration, when
his beautiful face appeared among them."

At these words the king's brow darkened; he struck his horse so sharply
that the creature reared, and then turning it quickly round he gallopped
to the front and soon reached the walls of Babylon.

                    ...........................

Though Nitetis had been brought up among the huge temples and palaces of
Egypt, she was still astonished at the size and grandeur of this gigantic
city.

Its walls seemed impregnable; they measured more than seventy-five feet
--[Fifty ells.  The Greek ell is equal to one foot and a half English.]--
in height and their breadth was so great, that two chariots could
conveniently drive abreast upon them.  These mighty defences were crowned
and strengthened by two hundred and fifty high towers, and even these
would have been insufficient, if Babylon had not been protected on one
side by impassable morasses.  The gigantic city lay on both
shores of the Euphrates.  It was more than forty miles in circumference,
and its walls enclosed buildings surpassing in size and grandeur even the
Pyramids and the temples of Thebes.

     [These numbers and measurements are taken partly from Herodotus,
     partly from Diodorus, Strabo and Arrian.  And even the ruins of this
     giant city, writes Lavard, are such as to allow a very fair
     conclusion of its enormous size.  Aristotle (Polit. III.  I.) says
     Babylon's dimensions were not those of a city, but of a nation.]

The mighty gates of brass, through which the royal train entered the
city, had opened wide to receive this noble company.  This entrance was
defended on each side by a strong tower, and before each of these towers
lay, as warder, a gigantic winged bull carved in stone, with a human
head, bearded and solemn.  Nitetis gazed at these gates in astonishment,
and then a joyful smile lighted up her face, as she looked up the long
broad street so brightly and beautifully decorated to welcome her.

The moment they beheld the king and the gilded carriage, the multitude
burst into loud shouts of joy, but when Bartja, the people's darling,
came in sight, the shouts rose to thunder-peals and shrieks of delight,
which seemed as if they would never end.  It was long since the populace
had seen Cambyses, for in accordance with Median customs the king seldom
appeared in public.  Like the Deity, he was to govern invisibly, and his
occasional appearance before the nation to be looked upon as a festival
and occasion of rejoicing.  Thus all Babylon had come out to-day to look
upon their awful ruler and to welcome their favorite Bartja on his
return.  The windows were crowded with eager, curious women, who threw
flowers before the approaching train, or poured sweet perfumes from above
as they passed by.  The pavement was thickly strewn with myrtle and palm
branches, trees of different kinds had been placed before the house-
doors, carpets and gay cloths hung from the windows, garlands of flowers
were wreathed from house to house, fragrant odors of incense and sandal-
wood perfumed the air, and the way was lined with thousands of gaping
Babylonians dressed in white linen shirts, gaily-colored woollen
petticoats and short cloaks, and carrying long staves headed with
pomegranates, birds, or roses, of gold or silver.

The streets through which the procession moved were broad and straight,
the houses on either side, built of brick, tall and handsome.  Towering
above every thing else, and visible from all points, rose the gigantic
temple of Bel.  Its colossal staircase, like a huge serpent, wound round
and round the ever-diminishing series of stories composing the tower,
until it reached the summit crowned by the sanctuary itself.

     [This temple of Bel, which many consider may have been the tower of
     Babel of Genesis XI., is mentioned by Herodotus I.  181. 182. 183.
     Diodorus II. 8. 9.  (Ktesias), Strabo 738 and many other ancient
     writers.  The people living in its neighborhood now call the ruins
     Birs Nimrod, the castle of Nimrod.  In the text we have
     reconstructed it as far as possible from the accounts of classical
     writers.  The first story, which is still standing, in the midst of
     a heap of ruins, is 260 feet high.  The walls surrounding the tower
     are said to be still clearly recognizable, and were 4000 feet long
     and 3000 broad. ]

The procession approached the royal palace.  This corresponded in its
enormous size to the rest of the vast city.  The walls surrounding it
were covered with gaily-colored and glazed representations of strange
figures made up of human beings, birds, quadrupeds and fishes; hunting-
scenes, battles and solemn processions.  By the side of the river towards
the north, rose the hanging-gardens, and the smaller palace lay toward
the east on the other bank of the Euphrates, connected with the larger
one by the wondrous erection, a firm bridge of stone.

Our train passed on through the brazen gates of three of the walls
surrounding the palace, and then halted.  Nitetis was lifted from her
carriage by bearers; she was at last in her new home, and soon after in
the apartments of the women's house assigned to her temporary use.

Cambyses, Bartja and their friends already known to us, were still
standing in the gaily-carpeted court of the palace, surrounded by at
least a hundred splendid dignitaries in magnificent dresses, when
suddenly a sound of loud female voices was heard, and a lovely Persian
girl richly dressed, her thick fair hair profusely wreathed with pearls,
rushed into the court, pursued by several women older than herself.  She
ran up to the group of men; Cambyses with a smile placed himself in her
path, but the impetuous girl slipped adroitly past him, and in another
moment was hanging on Bartja's neck, crying and laughing by turns.

The attendants in pursuit prostrated themselves at a respectful distance,
but Cambyses, on seeing the caresses lavished by the young girl on her
newly-returned brother, cried: "For shame, Atossa!  remember that since
you began to wear ear-rings you have ceased to be a child!

     [Ear-rings were given to the Persian girls in their fifteenth year,
     the marriageable age.  Vendid.  Farlard XIV. 66.  At this age too
     boys as well as girls were obliged to wear the sacred cord, Kuctl or
     Kosti as a girdle; and were only allowed to unloose it in the night.
     The making of this cord is attended with many ceremonies, even among
     the Persians of our own day.  Seventy-two threads must be employed,
     but black wool is prohibited.]

It is right that you should rejoice to see your brother again, but a
king's daughter must never forget what is due to her rank, even in her
greatest joy.  Go back to your mother directly.  I see your attendants
waiting yonder.  Go and tell them, that as this is a day of rejoicing I
will allow your heedless conduct to pass unpunished, but the next time
you appear unbidden in these apartments, which none may enter without
permission, I shall tell Boges to keep you twelve days in confinement.
Remember this, thoughtless child, and tell our mother, Bartja and I are
coming to visit her.  Now give me a kiss.  You will not?  We shall see,
capricious little one!"  And so saying the king sprang towards his
refractory little sister, and seizing both her hands in one of his own,
bent back her charming head with the other and kissed her in spite of
her resistance.  She screamed from the violence of his grasp, and ran
away crying to her attendants, who took her back to her apartments.

When Atossa had disappeared, Bartja said; "You were too rough with the
little one, Cambyses.  She screamed with pain!"

Once more the king's face clouded, but suppressing the harsh words which
trembled on his lips, he only answered, turning towards the house: "Let
us come to our mother now; she begged me to bring you as soon as you
arrived.  The women, as usual, are all impatience.  Nitetis told me your
rosy cheeks and fair curls had bewitched the Egyptian women too.  I would
advise you to pray betimes to Mithras  for eternal youth, and for his
protection against the wrinkles of age!"

"Do you mean to imply by these words that I have no virtues which could
make an old age beautiful?"  asked Bartja.

"I explain my words to no one.  Come."

"But I ask for an opportunity of proving, that I am inferior to none of
my nation in manly qualities."

"For that matter, the shouts of the Babylonians today will have been
proof enough, that deeds are not wanted from you, in order to win their
admiration."

"Cambyses!"

"Now come!  We are just on the eve of a war with the Massagetae; there
you will have a good opportunity of proving what you are worth."

A few minutes later, and Bartja was in the arms of his blind mother.
She had been waiting for her darling's arrival with a beating heart, and
in the joy of hearing his voice once more, and of being able to lay her
hands again on that beloved head, she forgot everything else--even her
first-born son who stood by smiling bitterly, as he watched the rich and
boundless stream of a mother's love flowing out to his younger brother.

Cambyses had been spoiled from his earliest infancy.  Every wish had been
fulfilled, every look regarded as a command; and thus he grew up totally
unable to brook contradiction, giving way to the most violent anger if
