police in the world, and accomplished much; but my highest aim, namely:
to infuse into this country, at once so gay and so gloomy, the spirit and
intellect of the Greeks, their sense of beauty in form, their love of
life and joy in it, this all was shivered on the same rock which
threatens me with overthrow and ruin whenever I attempt to accomplish
anything new.  The priests are my opponents, my masters, they hang like a
dead weight upon me.  Clinging with superstitious awe to all that is old
and traditionary, abominating everything foreign, and regarding every
stranger as the natural enemy of their authority and their teaching, they
can lead the most devout and religious of all nations with a power that
has scarcely any limits.  For this I am forced to sacrifice all my plans,
for this I see my life passing away in bondage to their severe
ordinances, this will rob my death-bed of peace, and I cannot be secure
that this host of proud mediators between god and man will allow me to
rest even in my grave!"

"By Zeus our saviour, with all thy good fortune, thou art to be pitied!"
interrupted Croesus sympathetically, "I understand thy misery; for though
I have met with many an individual who passed through life darkly and
gloomily, I could not have believed that an entire race of human beings
existed, to whom a gloomy, sullen heart was as natural as a poisonous
tooth to the serpent.  Yet it is true, that on my journey hither and
during my residence at this court I have seen none but morose and gloomy
countenances among the priesthood.  Even the youths, thy immediate
attendants, are never seen to smile; though cheerfulness, that sweet gift
of the gods, usually belongs to the young, as flowers to spring."

"Thou errest," answered Amasis, "in believing this gloom to be a
universal characteristic of the Egyptians.  It is true that our religion
requires much serious thought.  There are few nations, however, who have
so largely the gift of bantering fun and joke: or who on the occasion of
a festival, can so entirely forget themselves and everything else but the
enjoyments of the moment; but the very sight of a stranger is odious to
the priests, and the moroseness which thou observest is intended as
retaliation on me for my alliance with the strangers.  Those very boys,
of whom thou spakest, are the greatest torment of my life.  They perform
for me the service of slaves, and obey my slightest nod.  One might
imagine that the parents who devote their children to this service, and
who are the highest in rank among the priesthood, would be the most
obedient and reverential servants of the king whom they profess to honor
as divine; but believe me, Croesus, just in this very act of devotion,
which no ruler can refuse to accept without giving offence, lies the most
crafty, scandalous calculation.  Each of these youths is my keeper, my
spy.  They watch my smallest actions and report them at once to the
priests."

"But how canst thou endure such an existence?  Why not banish these spies
and select servants from the military caste, for instance?  They would be
quite as useful as the priests."

"Ah! if I only could, if I dared!"  exclaimed Amasis loudly.  And then,
as if frightened at his own rashness, he continued in a low voice, "I
believe that even here I am being watched.  To-morrow I will have that
grove of fig-trees yonder uprooted.  The young priest there, who seems so
fond of gardening, has other fruit in his mind besides the half-ripe figs
that he is so slowly dropping into his basket.  While his hand is
plucking the figs, his ear gathers the words that fall from the mouth of
his king."

"But, by our father Zeus, and by Apollo--"

"Yes, I understand thy indignation and I share it; but every position has
its duties, and as a king of a people who venerate tradition as the
highest divinity, I must submit, at least in the main, to the ceremonies
handed down through thousands of years.  Were I to burst these fetters,
I know positively that at my death my body would remain unburied; for,
know that the priests sit in judgment over every corpse, and deprive the
condemned of rest, even in the grave."

     [This well-known custom among the ancient Egyptians is confirmed,
     not only by many Greek narrators, but by the laboriously erased
     inscriptions discovered in the chambers of some tombs.]

"Why care about the grave?"  cried Croesus, becoming angry.  "We live for
life, not for death!"

"Say rather," answered Amasis rising from his seat, "we, with our Greek
minds, believe a beautiful life to be the highest good.  But Croesus, I
was begotten and nursed by Egyptian parents, nourished on Egyptian food,
and though I have accepted much that is Greek, am still, in my innermost
being, an Egyptian.  What has been sung to us in our childhood, and
praised as sacred in our youth, lingers on in the heart until the day
which sees us embalmed as mummies.  I am an old man and have but a short
span yet to run, before I reach the landmark which separates us from that
farther country.  For the sake of life's few remaining days, shall I
willingly mar Death's thousands of years?  No, my friend, in this point
at least I have remained an Egyptian, in believing, like the rest of my
countrymen, that the happiness of a future life in the kingdom of
Osiris, depends on the preservation of my body, the habitation of the
soul.

     [Each human soul was considered as a part of the world-soul Osiris,
     was united to him after the death of the body, and thenceforth took
     the name of Osiris.  The Egyptian Cosmos consisted of the three
     great realms, the Heavens, the Earth and the Depths.  Over the vast
     ocean which girdles the vault of heaven, the sun moves in a boat or
     car drawn by the planets and fixed stars.  On this ocean too the
     great constellations circle in their ships, and there is the kingdom
     of the blissful gods, who sit enthroned above this heavenly ocean
     under a canopy of stars.  The mouth of this great stream is in the
     East, where the sun-god rises from the mists and is born again as a
     child every morning.  The surface of the earth is inhabited by human
     beings having a share in the three great cosmic kingdoms.  They
     receive their soul from the heights of heaven, the seat and source
     of light; their material body is of the earth; and the appearance or
     outward form by which one human being is distinguished from another
     at sight--his phantom or shadow--belongs to the depths.  At death,
     soul, body, and shadow separate from one another.  The soul to
     return to the place from whence it came, to Heaven, for it is a part
     of God (of Osiris); the body, to be committed to the earth from
     which it was formed in the image of its creator; the phantom or
     shadow, to descend into the depths, the kingdom of shadows.  The
     gate to this kingdom was placed in the West among the sunset hills,
     where the sun goes down daily,--where he dies.  Thence arise the
     changeful and corresponding conceptions connected with rising and
     setting, arriving and departing, being born and dying.  The careful
     preservation of the body after death from destruction, not only
     through the process of inward decay, but also through violence or
     accident, was in the religion of ancient Egypt a principal condition
     (perhaps introduced by the priests on sanitary grounds) on which
     depended the speedy deliverance of the soul, and with this her
     early, appointed union with the source of Light and Good, which two
     properties were, in idea, one and indivisible.  In the Egyptian
     conceptions the soul was supposed to remain, in a certain sense,
     connected with the body during a long cycle of solar years.  She
     could, however, quit the body from time to time at will, and could
     appear to mortals in various forms and places; these appearances
     differed according to the hour, and were prescribed in exact words
     and delineations.]

"But enough of these matters; thou wilt find it difficult to enter into
such thoughts.  Tell me rather what thou thinkest of our temples and
pyramids."

Croesus, after reflecting a moment, answered with a smile: "Those huge
pyramidal masses of stone seem to me creations of the boundless desert,
the gaily painted temple colonnades to be the children of the Spring; but
though the sphinxes lead up to your temple gates, and seem to point the
way into the very shrines themselves, the sloping fortress-like walls of
the Pylons, those huge isolated portals, appear as if placed there to
repel entrance.  Your many-colored hieroglyphics likewise attract the
gaze, but baffle the inquiring spirit by the mystery that lies within
their characters.  The images of your manifold gods are everywhere to be
seen; they crowd on our gaze, and yet who knows not that their real is
not their apparent significance? that they are mere outward images of
thoughts accessible only to the few, and, as I have heard, almost
incomprehensible in their depth?  My curiosity is excited everywhere,
and my interest awakened, but my warm love of the beautiful feels itself
in no way attracted.  My intellect might strain to penetrate the secrets
of your sages, but my heart and mind can never be at home in a creed
which views life as a short pilgrimage to the grave, and death as the
only true life!"

"And yet," said Amasis, "Death has for us too his terrors, and we do all
in our power to evade his grasp.  Our physicians would not be celebrated
and esteemed as they are, if we did not believe that their skill could
prolong our earthly existence.  This reminds me of the oculist Nebenchari
whom I sent to Susa, to the king.  Does he maintain his reputation? is
the king content with him?"

"Very much so," answered Croesus.  "He has been of use to many of the
blind; but the king's mother is alas! still sightless.  It was Nebenchari
who first spoke to Cambyses of the charms of thy daughter Tachot.  But we
deplore that he understands diseases of the eye alone.  When the Princess
Atossa lay ill of fever, he was not to be induced to bestow a word of
counsel."

"That is very natural; our physicians are only permitted to treat one
part of the body.  We have aurists, dentists and oculists, surgeons for
fractures of the bone, and others for internal diseases.  By the ancient
priestly law a dentist is not allowed to treat a deaf man, nor a surgeon
for broken bones a patient who is suffering from a disease of the bowels,
even though he should have a first rate knowledge of internal complaints.
This law aims at securing a great degree of real and thorough knowledge;
an aim indeed, pursued by the priests (to whose caste the physicians
belong) with a most praiseworthy earnestness in all branches of science.
Yonder lies the house of the high-priest Neithotep, whose knowledge of
astronomy and geometry was so highly praised, even by Pythagoras.  It
lies next to the porch leading into the temple of the goddess Neith, the
protectress of Sais.  Would I could show thee the sacred grove with its
magnificent trees, the splendid pillars of the temple with capitals
modelled from the lotus-flower, and the colossal chapel which I caused to
be wrought from a single piece of granite, as an offering to the goddess;
but alas! entrance is strictly refused to strangers by the priests.
Come, let us seek my wife and daughter; they have conceived an affection
for thee, and indeed it is my wish that thou shouldst gain a friendly
feeling towards this poor maiden before she goes forth with thee to the
strange land, and to the strange nation whose princess she is to become.
Wilt thou not adopt and take her under thy care?"

"On that thou may'st with fullest confidence rely," replied Croesus with
warmth, returning the pressure of Amasis' hand.  "I will protect thy
Nitetis as if I were her father; and she will need my help, for the
apartments of the women in the Persian palaces are dangerous ground.
But she will meet with great consideration.  Cambyses may be contented
with his choice, and will be highly gratified that thou hast entrusted
him with thy fairest child.  Nebenchari had only spoken of Tachot, thy
second daughter."

"Nevertheless  I  will send my beautiful  Nitetis.  Tachot is so tender,
that she could scarcely endure the fatigues of the journey and the pain
of separation.  Indeed were I to follow the dictates of my own heart,
Nitetis should never leave us for Persia.  But Egypt stands in need of
