that I am neither lying nor joking, may I enquire what has this man, this
many-named Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, to recommend him above any
handsome well-grown Macedonian, who is resolute in my cause, in the whole
corps of your body guard, excepting his patrician pride?  He is as bitter
and ungenial as a sour apple, and all the very best that you--a subtle
thinker, a brilliant and cultivated philosopher--can find to say is no
more appreciated by his meanly cultivated intellect than the odes of
Sappho by a Nubian boatman."

"It is exactly for that," cried the queen, "that I value him; he is
different from all of us; we who--how shall I express myself--who always
think at second-hand, and always set our foot in the rut trodden by the
master of the school we adhere to; who squeeze our minds into the moulds
that others have carved out, and when we speak hesitate to step beyond
the outlines of those figures of rhetoric which we learned at school!
You have burst these bonds, but even your mighty spirit still shows
traces of them.  Publius Scipio, on the contrary, thinks and sees and
speaks with perfect independence, and his upright sense guides him to the
truth without any trouble or special training.  His society revives me
like the fresh air that I breathe when I come out into the open air from
the temple filled with the smoke of incense--like the milk and bread
which a peasant offered us during our late excursion to the coast, after
we had been living for a year on nothing but dainties."

"He has all the admirable characteristics of a child!"  interrupted
Euergetes.  "And if that is all that appears estimable to you in the
Roman your son may soon replace the great Cornelius."

"Not soon! no, not till he shall have grown older than you are, and a
man, a thorough man, from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot,
for such a man is Publius!  I believe--nay, I am sure--that he is
incapable of any mean action, that he could not be false in word or
even in look, nor feign a sentiment be did not feel."

"Why so vehement, sister?  So much zeal is quite unnecessary on this
occasion!  You know well enough that I have my easy days, and that this
excitement is not good for you; nor has the Roman deserved that you
should be quite beside yourself for his sake.  The fellow dared in my
presence to look at you as Paris might at Helen before he carried her
off, and to drink out of your cup; and this morning he no doubt did not
contradict what he conveyed to you last night with his eyes--nay, perhaps
by his words.  And yet, scarcely an hour before, he had been to the
Necropolis to bear his sweetheart away from the temple of the gloomy
Serapis into that of the smiling Eros."

"You shall prove this!" cried the queen in great excitement.  "Publius is
my friend--"

"And I am yours!"

"You have often proved the reverse, and now again with lies
and cheating--"

"You seem," interrupted Euergetes, "to have learned from your
unphilosophical favorite to express your indignation with extraordinary
frankness; to-day however I am, as I have said, as gentle as a kitten--"

"Euergetes and gentleness!" cried Cleopatra with a forced laugh.  "No,
you only step softly like a cat when she is watching a bird, and your
gentleness covers some ruthless scheme, which we shall find out soon
enough to our cost.  You have been talking with Eulaeus to-day; Eulaeus,
who fears and hates Publius, and it seems to me that you have hatched
some conspiracy against him; but if you dare to cast a single stone in
his path, to touch a single hair of his head, I will show you that even a
weak woman can be terrible.  Nemesis and the Erinnyes from Alecto to
Megaera, the most terrible of all the gods, are women!"

Cleopatra had hissed rather than spoken these words, with her teeth set
with rage, and had raised her small fist to threaten her brother; but
Euergetes preserved a perfect composure till she had ceased speaking.
Then he took a step closer to her, crossed his arms over his breast, and
asked her in the deepest bass of his fine deep voice:

"Are you idiotically in love with this Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica,
or do you purpose to make use of him and his kith and kin in Rome against
me?"

Transported with rage, and without blenching in the least at her
brother's piercing gaze, she hastily retorted: "Up to this moment only
the first perhaps--for what is my husband to me?  But if you go on as you
have begun I shall begin to consider how I may make use of his influence
and of his liking for me, on the shores of the Tiber."

"Liking!"  cried Euergetes, and he laughed so loud and violently that
Zoe, who was listening at the tent door, gave a little scream, and
Cleopatra drew back a step.  "And to think that you--the most prudent of
the prudent--who can hear the dew fall and the grass grow, and smell here
in Memphis the smoke of every fire that is lighted in Alexandria or in
Syria or even in Rome--that you, my mother's daughter, should be caught
over head and ears by a broad-shouldered lout, for all the world like a
clumsy town-girl or a wench at a loom.  This ignorant Adonis, who knows
so well how to make use of his own strange and resolute personality, and
of the power that stands in his background, thinks no more of the hearts
he sets in flames than I of the earthen jar out of which water is drawn
when I am thirsty.  You think to make use of him by the 'Tiber; but he
has anticipated you, and learns from you all that is going on by the Nile
and everything they most want to know in the Senate.

"You do not believe me, for no one ever is ready to believe anything that
can diminish his self-esteem--and why should you believe me?  I frankly
confess that I do not hesitate to lie when I hope to gain more by untruth
than by that much-belauded and divine truth, which, according to your
favorite Plato, is allied to all earthly beauty; but it is often just as
useless as beauty itself, for the useful and the beautiful exclude each
other in a thousand cases, for ten when they coincide.  There, the gong
is sounding for the third time.  If you care for plain proof that the
Roman, only an hour before he visited you this morning, had our
little Hebe carried off from the temple, and conveyed to the house of
Apollodorus, the sculptor, at Memphis, you have only to come to see me in
my rooms early to-morrow after the first morning sacrifice.  You will at
any rate wish to come and congratulate me; bring your children with you,
as I propose making them presents.  You might even question the Roman
himself at the banquet to-day, but he will hardly appear, for the
sweetest gifts of Eros are bestowed at night, and as the temple of
Serapis is closed at sunset Publius has never yet seen his Irene in the
evening.  May I expect you and the children after morning sacrifice?"

Before Cleopatra had time to answer this question another trumpet-blast
was heard, and she exclaimed: "That is Philometor, come to fetch us to
the banquet.  I will ere long give the Roman the opportunity of defending
himself, though--in spite of your accusations--I trust him entirely.
This morning I asked him solemnly whether it was true that he was in love
with his friend's charming Hebe, and he denied it in his firm and manly
way, and his replies were admirable and worthy of the noblest mind, when
I ventured to doubt his sincerity.  He takes truth more seriously than
you do.  He regards it not only as beautiful and right to be truthful,
he says, but as prudent too; for lies can only procure us a small short-
lived advantage, as transitory as the mists of night which vanish as soon
as the sun appears, while truth is like the sunlight itself, which as
often as it is dimmed by clouds reappears again and again.  And, he says,
what makes a liar so particularly contemptible in his eyes is, that to
attain his end, he must be constantly declaring and repeating the horror
he has of those who are and do the very same thing as he himself.  The
ruler of a state cannot always be truthful, and I often have failed in
truth; but my intercourse with Publius has aroused much that is good in
me, and which had been slumbering with closed eyes; and if this man
should prove to be the same as all the rest of you, then I will follow
your road, Euergetes, and laugh at virtue and truth, and set the busts of
Aristippus and Strato on the pedestals where those of Zeno and
Antisthenes now stand."

"You mean to have the busts of the philosophers moved again?"  asked King
Philometor, who, as he entered the tent, had heard the queen's last
words.  "And Aristippus is to have the place of honor?  I have no
objection--though he teaches that man must subjugate matter and not
become subject to it.--["Mihi res, non me rebus subjungere."]--This
indeed is easier to say than to do, and there is no man to whom it is
more impossible than to a king who has to keep on good terms with Greeks
and Egyptians, as we have, and with Rome as well.  And besides all this
to avoid quarrelling with a jealous brother, who shares our kingdom!  If
men could only know how much they would have to do as kings only in
reading and writing, they would take care never to struggle for a crown!
Up to this last half hour I have been examining and deciding applications
and petitions.  Have you got through yours, Euergetes?  Even more had
accumulated for you than for us."

"All were settled in an hour," replied the other promptly.  "My eye is
quicker than the mouth of your reader, and my decisions commonly consist
of three words while you dictate long treatises to your scribes.  So I
had done when you had scarcely begun, and yet I could tell you at once,
if it were not too tedious a matter, every single case that has come
before me for months, and explain it in all its details."

"That I could not indeed," said Philometor modestly, "but I know and
admire your swift intelligence and accurate memory."

"You see I am more fit for a king than you are;" laughed Euergetes.  "You
are too gentle and debonair for a throne!  Hand over your government to
me.  I will fill your treasury every year with gold.  I beg you now, come
to Alexandria with Cleopatra for good, and share with me the palace and
the gardens in the Bruchion.  I will nominate your little Philopator heir
to the throne, for I have no wish to contract a permanent tie with any
woman, as Cleopatra belongs to you.  This is a bold proposal, but
reflect, Philometor, if you were to accept it, how much time it would
give you for your music, your disputations with the Jews, and all your
other favorite occupations."

"You never know how far you may go with your jest!"  interrupted
Cleopatra.  "Besides, you devote quite as much time to your studies in
philology and natural history as he does to music and improving
conversations with his learned friends."

"Just so," assented Philometor, "and you may be counted among the sages
of the Museum with far more reason than I."

"But the difference between us," replied Euergetes, "is that I despise
all the philosophical prattlers and rubbish-collectors in Alexandria
almost to the point of hating them, while for science I have as great a
passion as for a lover.  You, on the contrary, make much of the learned
men, but trouble yourself precious little about science."

"Drop the subject, pray," begged Cleopatra.  "I believe that you two have
never yet been together for half an hour without Euergetes having begun
some dispute, and Philometor having at last given in, to pacify him.  Our
guests must have been waiting for us a long time.  Had Publius Scipio
made his appearance?"

"He had sent to excuse himself," replied the king as he scratched the
poll of Cleopatra's parrot, parting its feathers with the tips of his
fingers.  "Lysias, the Corinthian, is sitting below, and he says he does
not know where his friend can be gone."

"But we know very well," said Euergetes, casting an ironical glance at
the queen.  "It is pleasant to be with Philometor and Cleopatra, but
better still with Eros and Hebe.  Sister, you look pale--shall I call for
Zoe?"

Cleopatra shook her head in negation, but she dropped into a seat, and
sat stooping, with her head bowed over her knees as if she were
dreadfully tired.  Euergetes turned his back on her, and spoke to his
brother of indifferent subjects, while she drew lines, some straight and
some crooked, with her fan-stick through the pile of the soft rug on the
floor, and sat gazing thoughtfully at her feet.  As she sat thus her eye
was caught by her sandals, richly set with precious stones, and the
slender toes she had so often contemplated with pleasure; but now the
sight of them seemed to vex her, for in obedience to a swift impulse she
loosened the straps, pushed off her right sandal with her left foot,
kicked it from her, and said, turning to her husband:

"It is late and I do not feel well, and you may sup without me."

"By the healing Isis!"  exclaimed Philometor, going up to her.  "You look
suffering.  Shall I send for the physicians?  Is it really nothing more
than your usual headache?  The gods be thanked!  But that you should be
unwell just to-day!  I had so much to say to you; and the chief thing of
all was that we are still a long way from completeness in our
preparations for our performance.  If this luckless Hebe were not--"

"She is in good hands," interrupted Euergetes.  "The Roman, Publius
Scipio, has taken her to a place of safety; perhaps in order to present
her to me to morrow morning in return for the horses from Cyrene which I
sent him to-day.  How brightly your eyes sparkle, sister--with joy no
doubt at this good idea.  This evening, I dare say he is rehearsing the
little one in her part that she may perform it well to-morrow.  If we are
mistaken--if Publius is ungrateful and proposes keeping the dove, then
Thais, your pretty Athenian waiting-woman, may play the part of Hebe.
What do you think of that suggestion, Cleopatra?"

"That I forbid such jesting with me!"  cried the queen vehemently.
"No one has any consideration for me--no one pities me, and I suffer
fearfully!  Euergetes scorns me--you, Philometor, would be glad to drag
me down!  If only the banquet is not interfered with, and so long as
nothing spoils your pleasure!--Whether I die or no, no one cares!"

With these words the queen burst into tears, and roughly pushed away her
husband as he endeavored to soothe her.  At last she dried her eyes, and
said: "Go down-the guests are waiting."

"Immediately, my love," replied Philometor.  "But one thing I must tell
you, for I know that it will arouse your sympathy.  The Roman read to you
the petition for pardon for Philotas, the chief of the Chrematistes
and 'relative of the king,' which contains such serious charges against
Eulaeus.  I was ready with all my heart to grant your wish and to pardon
the man who is the father of these miserable water-bearers; but, before
having the decree drawn up, I had the lists of the exiles to the gold-
mines carefully looked through, and there it was discovered that Philotas
and his wife have both been dead more than half a year.  Death has
settled this question, and I cannot grant to Publius the first service he
has asked of me--asked with great urgency too.  I am sorry for this, both
for his sake and for that of poor Philotas, who was held in high esteem
by our mother."

"May the ravens devour them!" answered Cleopatra, pressing her forehead
against the ivory frame which surrounded the stuffed back of her seat.
