out 'Here am I!' and drags our nobler part down again into the dust.  It
is bad enough that we must hinder the flight of the soul, and are forced
to nourish and strengthen the perishable part of our being with bread and
water and slothful sleep to the injury of the immortal part, however much
we may fast and watch.  And shall we indulge the flesh, to the detriment
of the spirit, by granting it any of its demands that can easily be
denied?  Only he who despises and sacrifices his wretched self can, when
he has lost his baser self by the Redeemer's grace, find himself again in
God."

Hermas had listened patiently to the anchorite, but he now shook his
head, and said: "I cannot under stand either you or my father.  So long
as I walk on this earth, I am I and no other.  After death, no doubt, but
not till then, will a new and eternal life begin"

"Not so," cried Paulus hastily, interrupting him.  "That other and higher
life of which you speak, does not begin only after death for him who
while still living does not cease from dying, from mortifying the flesh,
and from subduing its lusts, from casting from him the world and his
baser self, and from seeking the Lord.  It has been vouchsafed to many
even in the midst of life to be born again to a higher existence.  Look
at me, the basest of the base.  I am not two but one, and yet am I in the
sight of the Lord as certainly another man than I was before grace found
me, as this young shoot, which has grown from the roots of an overthrown
palmtree is another tree than the rotten trunk.  I was a heathen and
enjoyed every pleasure of the earth to the utmost; then I became a
Christian; the grace of the Lord fell upon me, and I was born again, and
became a child again; but this time--the Redeemer be praised!--the child
of the Lord.  In the midst of life I died, I rose again, I found the joys
of Heaven.  I had been Menander, and like unto Saul, I became Paulus.
All that Menander loved--baths, feasts, theatres, horses and chariots,
games in the arena, anointed limbs, roses and garlands, purple-garments,
wine and the love of women--lie behind me like some foul bog out of which
a traveller has struggled with difficulty.  Not a vein of the old man
survives in the new, and a new life has begun for me, mid-way to the
grave; nor for me only, but for all pious men.  For you too the hour will
sound, in which you will die to--"

"If only I, like you, had been a Menander," cried Hermas, sharply
interrupting the speaker: "How is it possible to cast away that which I
never possessed?  In order to die one first must live.  This wretched
life seems to me contemptible, and I am weary of running after you like a
calf after a cow.  I am free-born, and of noble race, my father himself
has told me so, and I am certainly no feebler in body than the citizens'
sons in the town with whom I went from the baths to the wrestling-
school."

"Did you go to the Palaestra?" asked Paulus in surprise.

"To the wrestling-school of Timagetus," cried Hermas, coloring.  "From
outside the gate I watched the games of the youths as they wrestled, and
threw heavy disks at a mark.  My eyes almost sprang out of my head at the
sight, and I could have cried out aloud with envy and vexation, at having
to stand there in my ragged sheep-skin excluded from all competition.  If
Pachomius had not just then come up, by the Lord I must have sprung into
the arena, and have challenged the strongest of them all to wrestle with
me, and I could have thrown the disk much farther than the scented puppy
who won the victory and was crowned."

"You may thank, Pachomius," said Paulus laughing, "for having hindered
you, for you would have earned nothing in the arena but mockery and
disgrace.  You are strong enough, certainly, but the art of the
discobolus must be learned like any other.  Hercules himself would be
beaten at that game without practice, and if he did not know the right
way to handle the disk."

"It would not have been the first time I had thrown one," cried the boy.
"See, what I can do!"  With these words he stooped and raised one of the
flat stones, which lay piled up to secure the pathway; extending his arm
with all his strength, he flung the granite disk over the precipice away
into the abyss.

"There, you see," cried Paulus, who had watched the throw carefully and
not without some anxious excitement.  "However strong your arm may be,
any novice could throw farther than you if only he knew the art of
holding the discus.  It is not so--not so; it must cut through the air
like a knife with its sharp edge.  Look how you hold your hand, you throw
like a woman!  The wrist straight, and now your left foot behind, and
your knee bent! see, how clumsy you are!  Here, give me the stone.  You
take the discus so, then you bend your body, and press down your knees
like the arc of a bow, so that every sinew in your body helps to speed
the shot when you let go.  Aye--that is better, but it is not quite right
yet.  First heave the discus with your arm stretched out, then fix your
eye on the mark; now swing it out high behind you--stop! once more! your
arm must be more strongly strained before you throw.  That might pass,
but you ought to be able to hit the palm-tree yonder.  Give me your
discus, and that stone.  There; the unequal corners hinder its flight--
now pay attention!"  Paulus spoke with growing eagerness, and now he
grasped the flat stone, as he might have done many years since when no
youth in Alexandria had been his match in throwing the discus.

He bent his knees, stretched out his body, gave play to his wrist,
extended his arm to the utmost and hurled the stone into space, while the
clenched toes of his right foot deeply dinted the soil.

But it fell to the ground before reaching which Paulus had indicated as
the mark.

"Wait!" cried Hermas.  "Let me try now to hit the tree."

His stone whistled through the air, but it did not even reach the mound,
into which the palm-tree had struck root.

Paulus shook his head disapprovingly, and in his, turn seized a flat
stone; and now an eager contest began.  At every throw Hermas' stone flew
farther, for he copied his teacher's action and grasp with increasing
skill, while the older man's arm began to tire.  At last Hermas for the
second time hit the palm-tree, while Paulus had failed to reach even the
mound with his last fling.

The pleasure of the contest took stronger possession of the anchorite;
he flung his raiment from him, and seizing another stone he cried out--
as though he were standing once more in the wrestling school among his
old companions; all shining with their anointment.

"By the silver-bowed Apollo, and the arrow-speeding Artemis, I will hit
the palm-tree."

The missile sang through the air, his body sprang back, and he stretched
out his left arm to save his tottering balance; there was a crash, the
tree quivered under the blow, and Hermas shouted joyfully:  "Wonderful!
wonderful! that was indeed a throw.  The old Menander is not dead!
Farewell--to-morrow we will try again."

With these words Hermas quitted the anchorite, and hastened with wide
leaps down the hill in the oasis.  Paulus started at the words like a
sleep-walker who is suddenly wakened by hearing his name called.  He
looked about him in bewilderment, as if he had to find his way in some
strange world.  Drops of sweat stood on his brow, and with sudden shame
he snatched up his garments that were lying on the ground, and covered
his naked limbs.

For some time he stood gazing after Hermas, then he clasped his brow in
deep anguish and large tears ran down upon his beard.

"What have I said?"  he muttered to himself; "That every vein of the old
man in me was extirpated?  Fool! vain madman that I am.  They named me
Paulus, and I am in truth Saul, aye, and worse than Saul!"

With these words he threw himself on his knees, pressing his forehead
against the hard rock, and began to pray.  He felt as if he had been
flung from a height on to spears and lances, as if his heart and soul
were bleeding, and while he remained there, dissolved in grief and
prayer, accusing and condemning himself, he felt not the burning of the
sun as it mounted in the sky, heeded not the flight of time, nor heard
the approach of a party of pilgrims, who, under the guidance of bishop
Agapitus, were visiting the Holy Places.  The palmers saw him at prayer,
heard his sobs, and, marvelling at his piety, at a sign from their pastor
they knelt down behind him.

When Paulus at last arose, he perceived with surprise and alarm the
witnesses of his devotions, and approached Agapitus to kiss his robe.
But the bishop said: "Not so; he that is most pious is the greatest among
us.  My friends, let us bow down before this saintly man!"

The pilgrims obeyed his command.  Paulus hid his face in his hands and
sobbed out: "Wretch, wretch that I am!"

And the pilgrims lauded his humility, and followed their leader who left
the spot.




CHAPTER III.

Hermas had hastened onwards without delay.  He had already reached the
last bend of the path he had followed down the ravine, and he saw at his
feet the long narrow valley and the gleaming waters of the stream, which
here fertilized the soil of the desert.  He looked down on lofty palms
and tamarisk shrubs innumerable, among which rose the houses of the
inhabitants, surrounded by their little gardens and small carefully-
irrigated fields; already he could hear the crowing of a cock and the
hospitable barking of a dog, sounds which came to him like a welcome from
the midst of that life for which he yearned, accustomed as he was to be
surrounded day and night by the deep and lonely stillness of the rocky
heights.

He stayed his steps, and his eyes followed the thin columns of smoke,
which floated tremulously up in the clear light of the ever mounting sun
from the numerous hearths that lay below him.

"They are cooking breakfast now," thought he, "the wives for their
husbands, the mothers for their children, and there, where that dark
smoke rises, very likely a splendid feast is being prepared for guests;
but I am nowhere at home, and no one will invite me in."  The contest
with Paulus had excited and cheered him, but the sight of the city filled
his young heart with renewed bitterness, and his lips trembled as he
looked down on his sheepskin and his unwashed limbs.  With hasty resolve
he turned his back on the oasis and hurried up the mountain.  By the side
of the brooklet that he knew of he threw off his coarse garment, let the
cool water flow over his body, washed himself carefully and with much
enjoyment, stroked clown his thick hair with his fingers, and then
hurried down again into the valley.

The gorge through which he had descended debouched by a hillock that rose
from the valley-plain; a small newly-built church leaned against its
eastern declivity, and it was fortified on all sides by walls and dikes,
behind which the citizens found shelter when they were threatened by the
Saracen robbers of the oasis.  This hill passed for a particularly sacred
spot.  Moses was supposed to have prayed on its summit during the battle
with the Amalekites while his arms were held up by Aaron and Hur.

But there were other notable spots in the neighborhood of the oasis.
There farther to the north was the rock whence Moses had struck the
water; there higher up, and more to the south-east, was the hill, where
the Lord had spoken to the law-giver face to face, and where he had seen
the burning bush; there again was the spring where he had met the
daughters of Jethro, Zippora and Ledja, so called in the legend.  Pious
pilgrims came to these holy places in great numbers, and among them many
natives of the peninsula, particularly Nabateans, who had previously
visited the holy mountain in order to sacrifice on its summit to their
gods, the sun, moon, and planets.  At the outlet, towards the north,
stood a castle, which ever since the Syrian Prefect, Cornelius Palma, had
subdued Arabia Petraea in the time of Trajan, had been held by a Roman
garrison for the protection of the blooming city of the desert against
the incursions of the marauding Saracens and Blemmyes.

But the citizens of Pharan themselves had taken measures for the security
of their property.  On the topmost cliffs of the jagged crown of the
giant mountain--the most favorable spots for a look-out far and wide--
they placed sentinels, who day and night scanned the distance, so as to
