the old church songs for the boy choir.  I regret to see you do such
tradesmen's work without adequate reward.  Why, even if her Majesty would
give you a fat living or appoint you to the imperial council which
directs musical affairs in the Netherlands!  Pardon me, Sir Wolf!
But give people an inch, and they take an ell, and your ever ready
obligingness will injure you, for the harder it is to win a thing the
higher its value becomes.  You made yourself too cheap at court here
people will surely know how to put a higher value upon a man who is
equally skilful in Netherland, Italian, and German music.  In
counterpoint you are little inferior to Maestro Gombert, and, besides,
you play as many instruments as you have fingers on your hands.  We all
like to have you lead us, because you do it with such delicate taste and
comprehension, and, moreover, with a vigour which one would scarcely
expect from you.  You will not lack patrons.  Look around you here or
elsewhere for a position as leader of an orchestra.  Goinbert, to relieve
himself a little, would like to have de Hondt come from Antwerp to
Brussels.  His place would be the very one for you if you find nothing
worthy of you here, where you have a house of your own and other things
that bind you to the city."

"Here I should probably be obliged to crowd somebody else out of one in
order to obtain a position," replied Wolf, "and I am unwilling to do so."

"You are wrong," cried the violinist.  "The course of the world causes
the stronger--and that you are--to take precedence of the weaker.  Learn
at last to give up this modest withdrawal and elbow your way forward!"

"Pressing and jostling are not in my nature;" replied Wolf with a slight
shrug of the shoulders.  "Since I may hope to be relieved of anxiety
concerning my daily bread, I am disposed to leave the court and seek
quiet happiness in a more definite circle of duties at home.  You see,
Massi, it is just the same with us human beings as with material things.
There is my man cutting the rope from yonder package with his sharp
knife.  The contents are distributed in a trice, and yet it was tiresome
to collect them and pack them carefully.  Thus it would need only a word
to separate myself from the court; but to join it again would be a
totally different affair.  There have been numerous changes in this city
since I went away, and many a hand which pressed mine in farewell is no
longer here, or would perhaps be withdrawn, merely because I am a
Catholic and intend to stay here among the Protestants.  Besides--lay the
roll on the table, Janche--besides, as you have already heard, the final
decision does not depend upon myself.--Take care, Jan.  That little
package is breakable!"

This last exclamation was addressed to Wolf's Netherland servant, who was
just unpacking his master's leather bag.

Massi noticed that the articles taken out could scarcely be intended for
a man's use, and, pointing to a piece of Flanders velvet, he gaily
remarked:

"So my guess was correct.  Here, too, the verdict is to be pronounced by
beardless lips."  Wolf blushed like a girl, but, after the violinist had
waited a short time for the confirmation of his conjecture, he continued
more gravely:

"It ill befits me to intrude upon your secret.  Every one must go his own
way, and I have wondered why a person who so readily renders a service to
others pursues his own path so unsocially.  Will you ever let your friend
know what stirs your heart?"

"I should often have confided in you gladly," replied Wolf, "but a
certain shyness always restrained me.  How can others be interested in
what befalls a lonely, quiet fellow like me?  It is not my habit to talk
much, but you will always find me ready to use hand and brain in behalf
of one who is as dear to me as you, Massi."

"You have already given me proof of that," replied the violinist, "and I
often marvel how you find time, without neglecting your own business, to
do so much for others with no payment except thanks.  I thought you would
accomplish something great, because you paid no heed to women; but
probably you depend on other powers, for if it is a pair of beautiful
eyes whose glance is to decide so important a matter----"

"Never mind that," interrupted Wolf beseechingly, raising his hand
soothingly.  "I confess with Terentius that nothing human is strange to
me.  As soon as the decision comes, I will tell you--but you alone--
several particulars.  Now accept my thanks for your well-meant counsel
and the use of your room.  I'll see you again early to-morrow.  I
promised Gombert and the leader of the boy choir to lend them a helping
hand, so we shall probably meet at the rehearsal.--Go to the stable,
Janche, and see that the groom has rubbed the bay down thoroughly.  As
for the rolls and packages here----"

"I'll help you carry them," said the violinist, seizing his shoes; but
Wolf eagerly declined his assistance, and went out to ask the landlord to
let him have one of his men.

But the servants of the overcrowded Red Cock all had their hands full,
so the nine-year-old son of the Leitgeb couple and the cellar man's two
somewhat younger boys, who had not yet gone to bed, were made bearers of
the parcels.

How eager they were to do something which suited grown people, and, when
Wolf described the place where they were to carry the articles, Fran
Leitgeb sympathizingly helped him, and charged the children to hold the
valuable packages very carefully.  They must not spare the knocker in the
second story of the cantor house, for old Ursula's hearing was no longer
the best, and since the day before yesterday--Kathl had brought the news
home--she had been ill.  "Some rare luck," the landlady continued, "will
surely follow the knight up to the Blombergs.  The same old steep path,
leads there; but as to Wawer!--it would be improper to say Jungfrau
Barbara--you will surer open your eyes--" Here she was summoned to the
kitchen, and Wolf followed his little assistants into the street.




CHAPTER III.

The cantor house was only a few steps from the Red Cock, and Wolf knew
every stone in the street, which was named for the tavern.  Yet that very
circumstance delayed him, for even the smallest trifle which had changed
during his absence attracted his attention.

He had already noticed at the familiar inn that the gay image of the
Madonna and Cluld, and the little lamp above, were no longer there.  The
pictures of the saints had been removed from the public rooms, and even
the painting which had been impressed upon his memory from boyhood--like
a sign of the house--had vanished.  A large red cock, crowing with wide-
open beak at the Apostle Peter, had been there.

This venerable work of an old artist ought to have been retained, no
matter what doctrine the Leitgebs now professed.  Its disappearance
affected the knight unpleasantly.

It also induced him to see whether the Madonna with the swords in her
heart, which, at the time of his departure, had adorned the Ark, the
great house at the corner of the Haidplatz, had met with the same fate,
and this sacred witness of former days had likewise been sacrificed to
the iconoclasm of the followers of the new Protestant faith.  This also
grieved him, and urged him to go from street to street, from church to
church, from monastery to monastery, from one of the chapels which no
great mansion in his native land lacked to another, in order to ascertain
what else religious fanaticism had destroyed; but he was obliged to
hasten if he wished to be received by those in his home whom he most
desired to see.

The windows of the second story in the Golden Cross, opposite to the Ark,
were brilliantly lighted.  The Emperor Charles lodged there, and probably
his royal sister also.  Wolf had given his heart to her with the devotion
with which he had always clung to every one to whom he was indebted for
anv kindness.  He knew her imperial brother's convictions, too, and when
he saw at one of the windows a man's figure leaning, motionless against
the casement with his hand pressed upon his brow, he realized what deep
indignation had doubtless seized upon him at the sight of the changes
which had taken place here during the five years of his absence.

But Emperor Charles was not the man to allow matters which aroused his
wrath and strong disapproval to pass unpunished.  Wolf suspected that
the time was not far distant when yonder monarch at the window, who had
won so many victories, would have a reckoning with the Smalcalds, the
allied Protestants of Germany, and his vivid imagination surrounded him
with an almost mystical power.

He would surely succeed in becoming the master of the Protestant princes;
but was the steel sword the right weapon to destroy this agitation of the
soul which had sprung from the inmost depths of the German nature?  He
knew the firm, obstinate followers of the new doctrine, for there had
been a time when his own young mind had leaned toward it.

Since those days, however, events had happened which had bound him by
indestructible fetters to the old faith.  He had vowed to his dying
mother to remain faithful to the Holy Church and loyally to keep his
oath.  It was not difficult for one of his modest temperament to be
content with the position of spectator of the play of life which he
occupied.  He was not born for conflict, and from the seat to which he
had retired he thought he had perceived that the burden of existence was
easier to bear, and the individual not only obtained external comfort,
but peace of mind more speedily, if he left to the Church many things
which the Protestant was obliged to settle for himself.  Besides, as
such, he would have missed many beautiful and noble things which the
old faith daily bestowed upon him, the artist.

People in Ratisbon held a different opinion.  Defection from the Roman
Catholic Church, which seemed to him reprehensible, was considered here a
sacred duty, worthy of every sacrifice.  This threatened to involve him
in fresh spiritual conflicts, and, as he dreaded such things as nocturnal
birds shun the sunlight, he stood still, thoughtfully asking himself
whether he ought not at once to give up the desire of striking new roots
into this perilous soil.

Only one thing really bound him to Ratisbon, and that was by no means the
house which he had inherited, but a very young girl, and, moreover, a
very changeable one, of whose development and life he had heard nothing
during his absence except that she had not become another's wife.
Perhaps this girl, whose charm and musical talent, according to his
opinion, were unequalled in Ratisbon, had remained free solely because
she was keeping the promise made when, a child of sixteen, she bade him
farewell.  She had told him, though only in her lively childish fashion,
that she would wait for him and become his wife when he returned home a
made man.  Yet it now seemed that she had been as sincerely in earnest in
that youthful betrothal as he himself.

This fair hope crowded every scruple far into the shade.  If Barbara had
kept her troth to him, he would reward her.  Wherever he might build his
nest with her, he would be sure of the richest happiness.  Therefore he
persisted in making his decision for the future depend upon her
reception.

The only question was whether it had not already grown too late for him
to visit her and her father, who went to bed with the chickens.  But the
new clock in Jacobsplatz pealed only nine bell-like strokes through the
stillness of the evening, and, as he had sent his gifts in advance, he
was obliged to follow them.

He might now regard the cantor house, which was quickly gained, as his
own.  Though it was now in the deepest darkness, he gazed up at the high,
narrow building, with the pointed arches of the windows and the bracket
which supported the image of St. Cecilia carved from sandstone, as
intently as if he could distinguish every defect in the windows, every
ornament carved in the ends of the beams.

The second story, which projected above the ground floor into the street,
was completely dark; but a faint glimmer of light streamed from the
little window over the spurge laurel tree, and--this was the main thing
--the bow window in the third story was still lighted.

She whom he sought was waiting there with her father, while beneath it
was the former abode of the precentor and organist and his wife, who had
reared Wolf, and whose heir, after the old man's death, he had become.

He would take up his quarters in the room which he had occupied as a
