too stunned to inquire more.

Five minutes afterwards the sound of carriage wheels was heard in the
courtyard, then a slight bustle in the hall, and the door of the
ante-room being thrown open Mr. St. John entered.

He was in the very prime of life, about the middle height, and of a mien
and air so strikingly noble that it was some time before you recovered
the general effect of his person sufficiently to examine its peculiar
claims to admiration.  However, he lost nothing by a further survey: he
possessed not only an eminently handsome but a very extraordinary
countenance.  Through an air of /nonchalance/, and even something of
lassitude; through an ease of manners sometimes sinking into effeminate
softness, sometimes bordering upon licentious effrontery,--his eye
thoughtful, yet wandering, seemed to announce that the mind partook but
little of the whim of the moment, or of those levities of ordinary life
over which the grace of his manner threw so peculiar a charm.  His brow
was, perhaps, rather too large and prominent for the exactness of
perfect symmetry, but it had an expression of great mental power and
determination.  His features were high, yet delicate, and his mouth,
which, when closed, assumed a firm and rather severe expression,
softened, when speaking, into a smile of almost magical enchantment.
Richly but not extravagantly dressed, he appeared to cultivate rather
than disdain the ornaments of outward appearance; and whatever can
fascinate or attract was so inherent in this singular man that all which
in others would have been most artificial was in him most natural: so
that it is no exaggeration to add that to be well dressed seemed to the
elegance of his person not so much the result of art as of a property
innate and peculiar to himself.

Such was the outward appearance of Henry St. John; one well suited to
the qualities of a mind at once more vigorous and more accomplished than
that of any other person with whom the vicissitudes of my life have ever
brought me into contact.

I kept my eye on the new guest throughout the whole day: I observed the
mingled liveliness and softness which pervaded his attentions to women,
the intellectual yet unpedantic superiority he possessed in his
conversations with men; his respectful demeanour to age; his careless,
yet not over-familiar, ease with the young; and, what interested me more
than all, the occasional cloud which passed over his countenance at
moments when he seemed sunk into a revery that had for its objects
nothing in common with those around him.

Just before dinner St. John was talking to a little group, among whom
curiosity seemed to have drawn the Whig parson whom I have before
mentioned.  He stood at a little distance, shy and uneasy; one of the
company took advantage of so favourable a butt for jests, and alluded to
the bystander in a witticism which drew laughter from all but St. John,
who, turning suddenly towards the parson, addressed an observation to
him in the most respectful tone.  Nor did he cease talking with him
(fatiguing as the conference must have been, for never was there a
duller ecclesiastic than the gentleman conversed with) until we
descended to dinner.  Then, for the first time, I learned that nothing
can constitute good breeding that has not good-nature for its
foundation; and then, too, as I was leading Lady Barbara Lackland to the
great hall by the tip of her forefinger I made another observation.
Passing the priest, I heard him say to a fellow-clerk,--

"Certainly, he is the greatest man in England;" and I mentally remarked,
"There is no policy like politeness; and a good manner is the best thing
in the world, either to get one a good name or to supply the want of
it."



CHAPTER VI.

A DIALOGUE, WHICH MIGHT BE DULL IF IT WERE LONGER.

THREE days after the arrival of St. John, I escaped from the crowd of
impertinents, seized a volume of Cowley, and, in a fit of mingled poetry
and melancholy, strolled idly into the park.  I came to the margin of
the stream, and to the very spot on which I had stood with my uncle on
the evening when he had first excited my emulation to scholastic rather
than manual contention with my brother; I seated myself by the
water-side, and, feeling indisposed to read, leaned my cheek upon my
hand, and surrendered my thoughts as prisoners to the reflections which
I could not resist.

I continued I know not how long in my meditation, till I was roused by a
gentle touch upon my shoulder; I looked up, and saw St. John.

"Pardon me, Count," said he, smiling, "I should not have disturbed your
reflections had not your neglect of an old friend emboldened me to
address you upon his behalf."  And St. John pointed to the volume of
Cowley which he had taken up without my perceiving it.

"Well," added he, seating himself on the turf beside me, "in my younger
days, poetry and I were better friends than we are now.  And if I had
had Cowley as a companion, I should not have parted with him as you have
done, even for my own reflections."

"You admire him then?" said I.

"Why, that is too general a question.  I admire what is fine in him, as
in every one else, but I do not love him the better for his points and
his conceits.  He reminds me of what Cardinal Pallavicino said of
Seneca, that he 'perfumes his conceits with civet and ambergris.'
However, Count, I have opened upon a beautiful motto for you:--

  "'Here let me, careless and unthoughtful lying,
    Hear the soft winds above me flying,
    With all their wanton boughs dispute,
    And the more tuneful birds to both replying;
    Nor be myself too mute.'

"What say you to that wish?  If you have a germ of poetry in you such
verse ought to bring it into flower."

"Ay," answered I, though not exactly in accordance with the truth; "but
I have not that germ.  I destroyed it four years ago.  Reading the
dedications of poets cured me of the love for poetry.  What a pity that
the Divine Inspiration should have for its oracles such mean souls!"

"Yes, and how industrious the good gentlemen are in debasing themselves!
Their ingenuity is never half so much shown in a simile as in a
compliment; I know nothing in nature more melancholy than the discovery
of any meanness in a great man.  There is so little to redeem the dry
mass of follies and errors from which the materials of this life are
composed, that anything to love or to reverence becomes, as it were, the
sabbath for the mind.  It is better to feel, as we grow older, how the
respite is abridged, and how the few objects left to our admiration are
abased.  What a foe not only to life, but to all that dignifies and
ennobles it, is Time!  Our affections and our pleasures resemble those
fabulous trees described by Saint Oderic: the fruits which they bring
forth are no sooner ripened into maturity than they are transformed into
birds and fly away.  But these reflections cannot yet be familiar to
you.  Let us return to Cowley.  Do you feel any sympathy with his prose
writings?  For some minds they have a great attraction."

"They have for mine," answered I: "but then I am naturally a dreamer;
and a contemplative egotist is always to me a mirror in which I behold
myself."

"The world," answered St. John, with a melancholy smile, "will soon
dissolve, or forever confirm, your humour for dreaming; in either case,
Cowley will not be less a favourite.  But you must, like me, have long
toiled in the heat and travail of business, or of pleasure, which is
more wearisome still, in order fully to sympathize with those beautiful
panegyrics upon solitude which make perhaps the finest passages in
Cowley.  I have often thought that he whom God hath gifted with a love
of retirement possesses, as it were, an extra sense.  And among what our
poet so eloquently calls 'the vast and noble scenes of Nature,' we find
the balm for the wounds we have sustained among the 'pitiful shifts of
policy;' for the attachment to solitude is the surest preservative from
the ills of life: and I know not if the Romans ever instilled, under
allegory, a sublimer truth than when they inculcated the belief that
those inspired by Feronia, the goddess of woods and forests, could walk
barefoot and uninjured over burning coals."

At this part of our conference, the bell swinging hoarsely through the
long avenues, and over the silent water, summoned us to the grand
occupation of civilized life; we rose and walked slowly towards the
house.

"Does not," said I, "this regular routine of petty occurrence, this
periodical solemnity of trifles, weary and disgust you?  For my part, I
almost long for the old days of knight-errantry, and would rather be
knocked on the head by a giant, or carried through the air by a flying
griffin, than live in this circle of dull regularities,--the brute at
the mill."

"You may live even in these days," answered St. John, "without too tame
a regularity.  Women and politics furnish ample food for adventure, and
you must not judge of all life by country life."

"Nor of all conversation," said I, with a look which implied a
compliment, "by the insipid idlers who fill our saloons.  Behold them
now, gathered by the oriel window, yonder; precious distillers of
talk,--sentinels of society with certain set phrases as watchwords,
which they never exceed; sages, who follow Face's advice to Dapper,--

  "'Hum thrice, and buzz as often.'"



CHAPTER VII.

A CHANGE OF PROSPECTS.--A NEW INSIGHT INTO THE CHARACTER OF THE HERO.--A
CONFERENCE BETWEEN TWO BROTHERS.

A DAY or two after the conversation recorded in my last chapter, St.
John, to my inexpressible regret, left us for London; however, we had
enjoyed several conferences together during his stay, and when we parted
it was with a pressing invitation on his side to visit him in London,
and a most faithful promise on mine to avail myself of the request.

No sooner was he fairly gone than I went to seek my uncle; I found him
reading one of Farquhar's comedies.  Despite my sorrow at interrupting
him in so venerable a study, I was too full of my new plot to heed
breaking off that in the comedy.  In very few words I made the good
knight understand that his descriptions had infected me, and that I was
dying to ascertain their truth; in a word, that his hopeful nephew was
fully bent on going to town.  My uncle first stared, then swore, then
paused, then looked at his leg, drew up his stocking, frowned, whistled,
and told me at last to talk to him about it another time.  Now, for my
part, I think there are only two classes of people in the world
authorized to put one off to "another time,"--prime ministers and
creditors; accordingly, I would not take my uncle's dismissal.  I had
not read plays, studied philosophy, and laid snares for the Abbe
Montreuil without deriving some little wisdom from my experience; so I
took to teasing, and a notable plan it is too!  Whoever has pursued it
may guess the result.  My uncle yielded, and that day fortnight was
fixed for my departure.

Oh! with what transport did I look forward to the completion of my
wishes, the goal of my ambition!  I hastened forth; I hurried into the
woods; I sang out in the gladness of my heart, like a bird released; I
drank in the air with a rapturous sympathy in its freedom; my step
scarcely touched the earth, and my whole frame seemed ethereal, elated,
exalted by the vivifying inspiration of my hopes.  I paused by a little
streamlet, which, brawling over stones and through unpenetrated
thicknesses of wood, seemed, like confined ambition, not the less
restless for its obscurity.

"Wild brooklet," I cried, as my thoughts rushed into words, "fret on,
our lot is no longer the same; your wanderings and your murmurs are
wasted in solitude and shade; your voice dies and re-awakes, but without
an echo; your waves spread around their path neither fertility nor
terror; their anger is idle, and their freshness is lavished on a
sterile soil; the sun shines in vain for you, through these unvarying
wastes of silence and gloom; Fortune freights not your channel with her
hoarded stores, and Pleasure ventures not her silken sails upon your
tide; not even the solitary idler roves beside you, to consecrate with
human fellowship your melancholy course; no shape of beauty bends over
your turbid waters, or mirrors in your breast the loveliness that
hallows earth.  Lonely and sullen, through storm or sunshine, you repine
along your desolate way, and only catch, through the matted boughs that
darken over you, the beams of the wan stars, which, like human hopes,
tremble upon your breast, and are broken, even before they fade, by the
very turbulence of the surface on which they fall.  Rove, repine, murmur
on!  Such was my fate, but the resemblance is no more.  I shall no
longer be a lonely and regretful being; my affections will no longer
waste themselves upon barrenness and stone.  I go among the living and
warm world of mortal energies and desires; my existence shall glide
alternately through crested cities, and bowers in which Poetry worships
Love; and the clear depths of my heart shall reflect whatever its young
dreams have shadowed forth, the visioned form, the gentle and fairy
spirit, the Eve of my soul's imagined and foreboded paradise."

Venting, in this incoherent strain, the exultation which filled my
thoughts, I wandered on, throughout the whole day, till my spirits had
exhausted themselves by indulgence; and, wearied alike by mental
excitement and bodily exertion, I turned, with slow steps, towards the
house.  As I ascended the gentle acclivity on which it stood, I saw a
figure approaching towards me: the increasing shades of the evening did
not allow me to recognize the shape until it was almost by my side; it
was Aubrey.

Of late I had seen very little of him.  His devotional studies and
habits seemed to draw him from the idle pursuits of myself and my
uncle's guests; and Aubrey was one peculiarly susceptible of neglect,
and sore, to morbidity, at the semblance of unkindness; so that he
required to be sought, and rarely troubled others with advances: that
night, however, his greeting was unusually warm.

"I was uneasy about you, Morton," said he, drawing my arm in his; "you
have not been seen since morning; and, oh! Morton, my uncle told me,
with tears in his eyes, that you were going to leave us.  Is it so?"

"Had he tears in his eyes?  Kind old man!  And you, Aubrey, shall you,
too, grieve for my departure?"

"Can you ask it, Morton?  But why will you leave us? Are we not all
happy here, now?  /Now/ that there is no longer any barrier or
difference between us,--/now/ that I may look upon you, and listen to
you, and love you, and /own/ that I love you?  Why will you leave us
now?  And [continued Aubrey, as if fearful of giving me time to
answer]--and every one praises you so here; and my uncle and all of us
are so proud of you.  Why should you desert our affections merely
because they are not new?  Why plunge into that hollow and cold world
which all who have tried it picture in such fearful hues?  Can you find
anything there to repay you for the love you leave behind?"

"My brother," said I, mournfully, and in a tone which startled him,--it
was so different from that which I usually assumed,--"my brother, hear
before you reproach me.  Let us sit down upon this bank, and I will
suffer you to see more of my restless and secret heart than any hitherto
have beheld."

We sat down upon a little mound: how well I remember the spot!  I can
see the tree which shadows it from my window at this moment.  How many
seasons have the sweet herb and the emerald grass been withered there
and renewed!  Ah, what is this revival of all things fresh and youthful
in external Nature but a mockery of the wintry spot which lies perished
and /irrenewable/ within!

We drew near to each other, and as my arm wound around him, I said,
"Aubrey, your love has been to me a more precious gift than any who have
not, like me, thirsted and longed even for the love of a dog, can
conceive.  Never let me lose that affection!  And do not think of me
hereafter as of one whose heart echoed all that his lip uttered.  Do not
believe that irony, and sarcasm, and bitterness of tongue flowed from a
malignant or evil source.  That disposition which seems to you
alternately so light and gloomy had, perhaps, its origin in a mind too
intense in its affections, and too exacting in having them returned.
Till you sought my friendship, three short years ago, none but my uncle,
with whom I could have nothing in common but attachment, seemed to care
for my very existence.  I blame them not; they were deceived in my
nature: but blame /me/ not too severely if my temper suffered from their
mistake.  Your friendship came to me, not too late to save me from a
premature misanthropy, but too late to eradicate every morbidity of
mind.  Something of sternness on the one hand, and of satire on the
other, has mingled so long with my better feelings that the taint and
the stream have become inseparable.  Do not sigh, Aubrey.  To be
unamiable is not to be ungrateful; and I shall not love you the less if
I have but a few objects to love.  You ask me my inducement to leave
you.  'The World' will be sufficient answer.  I cannot share your
contempt of it, nor your fear.  I am, and have been of late, consumed
with a thirst,--eager, and burning, and unquenchable: it is ambition!"

"Oh, Morton!" said Aubrey, with a second sigh, longer and deeper than
the first, "that evil passion! the passion which lost an angel heaven."

"Let us not now dispute, my brother, whether it be sinful in itself, or
whether, if its object be virtuous, it is not a virtue.  In baring my
soul before you, I only speak of my motives, and seek not to excuse
them.  Perhaps on this earth there is no good without a little evil.
When my mind was once turned to the acquisition of mental superiority,
every petty acquisition I made increased my desire to attain more, and
partial emulation soon widened into universal ambition.  We three,
Gerald and ourselves, are the keepers of a treasure more valuable than
gold,--the treasure of a not ignoble nor sullied name.  For my part, I
confess that I am impatient to increase the store of honour which our
father bequeathed to us.  Nor is this all: despite our birth, we are
poor in the gifts of fortune.  We are all dependants on my uncle's
favour; and, however we may deserve it, there would be something better
in earning an independence for ourselves."

"That," said Aubrey, "may be an argument for mine and Gerald's
exertions; but not for yours.  You are the eldest, and my uncle's
favourite.  Nature and affection both point to you as his heir."

"If so, Aubrey, may many years pass before that inheritance be mine!
Why should those years that might produce so much lie fallow?  But
though I would not affect an unreal delicacy, and disown my chance of
future fortune, yet you must remember that it is a matter possible, not
certain.  My birthright gives me no claim over my uncle, whose estates
are in his own gift; and favour, even in the good, is a wind which
varies without power on our side to calculate the season or the cause.
However this be,--and I love the person on whom fortune depends so much
that I cannot, without pain, speak of the mere chance of its passing
from his possession into mine,--you will own at least that I shall not
hereafter deserve wealth the less for the advantages of experience."

"Alas!" said Aubrey, raising his eyes, "the worship of our Father in
Heaven finds us ample cause for occupation, even in retirement; and the
more we mix with His creatures, the more, I fear, we may forget the
Creator.  But if it must be so, I will pray for you, Morton; and you
will remember that the powerless and poor Aubrey can still lift up his
voice in your behalf."

As Aubrey thus spoke, I looked with mingled envy and admiration upon the
countenance beside me, which the beauty of a spirit seemed at once to
soften and to exalt.

Since our conference had begun, the dusk of twilight had melted away;
and the moon had called into lustre--living, indeed, but unlike the
common and unhallowing life of day--the wood and herbage, and silent
variations of hill and valley, which slept around us; and, as the still
and shadowy light fell over the upward face of my brother, it gave to
his features an additional, and not wholly earth-born, solemnity of
expression.  There was indeed in his face and air that from which the
painter of a seraph might not have disdained to copy: something
resembling the vision of an angel in the dark eyes that swam with tears,
in which emotion had so little of mortal dross; in the youthful and soft
cheeks, which the earnestness of divine thought had refined by a pale
but transparent hue; in the high and unclouded forehead, over which the
hair, parted in the centre, fell in long and wavelike curls; and in the
lips, silent, yet moving with internal prayer, which seemed the more
fervent, because unheard.

I did not interrupt him in the prayer, which my soul felt, though my ear
caught it not, was for me.  But when he had ceased, and turned towards
me, I clasped him to my breast.  "My brother," I said, "we shall part,
it is true, but not till our hearts have annihilated the space that was
between them; not till we have felt that the love of brotherhood can
pass the love of woman.  Whatever await you, your devoted and holy mind
will be, if not your shield from affliction, at least your balm for its
wounds.  Remain here.  The quiet which breathes around you well becomes
your tranquillity within; and sometimes bless me in your devotions, as
you have done now.  For me, I shall not regret those harder and harsher
qualities which you blame in me, if thereafter their very sternness can
afford me an opportunity of protecting your gentleness from evil, or
redressing the wrongs from which your nature may be too innocent to
preserve you.  And now let us return home in the conviction that we have
in our friendship one treasure beyond the reach of fate."

Aubrey did not answer; but he kissed my forehead, and I felt his tears
upon my cheek.  We rose, and with arms still embracing each other as we
walked, bent our steps to the house.

Ah, earth! what hast thou more beautiful than the love of those whose
ties are knit by nature, and whose union seems ordained to begin from
the very moment of their birth?



CHAPTER VIII.

FIRST LOVE.

WE are under very changeful influences in this world!  The night on
which occurred the interview with Aubrey that I have just narrated, I
was burning to leave Devereux Court.  Within one little week from that
time my eagerness was wonderfully abated.  The sagacious reader will
readily discover the cause of this alteration.  About eight miles from
my uncle's house was a seaport town; there were many and varied rides
leading to it, and the town was a favourite place of visitation with all
the family.  Within a few hundred yards of the town was a small cottage,
prettily situated in the midst of a garden, kept with singular neatness,
and ornamented with several rare shrubs and exotics.  I had more than
once observed in the garden of this house a female in the very first
blush of youth, and beautiful enough to excite within me a strong
curiosity to learn the owner of the cottage.  I inquired, and
ascertained that its tenant was a Spaniard of high birth, and one who
had acquired a melancholy celebrity by his conduct and misfortunes in
the part he had taken in a certain feeble but gallant insurrection in
his native country.  He had only escaped with life and a very small sum
of money, and now lived in the obscure seaport of ------, a refugee and
