"I know not, but there is no youth in his eye and in his heart.  Even
as a child he had the hard will and the cold craft of gray hairs.
Pray Saint Mary you give me not Gloucester for a brother!"

Anne sighed and smiled.  "Ah, no," she said, after a short pause,
"when thou art Princess of Clarence may I--"

"May thou what?"

"Pray for thee and thine in the house of God!  Ah, thou knowest not,
sweet Isabel, how often at morn and even mine eyes and heart turn to
the spires of yonder convent!"  She rose as she said this, her lip
quivered, and she moved on in the opposite direction to that in which
Richard stood, still unseen, and no longer within his hearing.  Isabel
rose also, and hastening after her, threw her arms round Anne's neck,
and kissed away the tears that stood in those meek eyes.

"My sister, my Anne!  Ah, trust in me, thou hast some secret, I know
it well,--I have long seen it.  Is it possible that thou canst have
placed thy heart, thy pure love--Thou blushest!  Ah, Anne!  Anne! thou
canst not have loved beneath thee?"

"Nay," said Anne, with a spark of her ancestral fire lighting her meek
eyes through its tears, "not beneath me, but above.  What do I say!
Isabel, ask me no more.  Enough that it is a folly, a dream, and that
I could smile with pity at myself to think from what light causes love
and grief can spring."

"Above thee!" repeated Isabel, in amaze; "and who in England is above
the daughter of Earl Warwick?  Not Richard of Gloucester?  If so,
pardon my foolish tongue."

"No, not Richard,--though I feel kindly towards him, and his sweet
voice soothes me when I listen,--not Richard.  Ask no more."

"Oh, Anne, speak, speak!--we are not both so wretched?  Thou lovest
not Clarence?  It is--it must be!"

"Canst thou think me so false and treacherous,--a heart pledged to
thee?  Clarence!  Oh, no!"

"But who then--who then?" said Isabel, still suspiciously.  "Nay, if
thou wilt not speak, blame thyself if I must still wrong thee."

Thus appealed to, and wounded to the quick by Isabel's tone and eye,
Anne at last with a strong effort suppressed her tears, and, taking
her sister's hand, said in a voice of touching solemnity, "Promise,
then, that the secret shall be ever holy; and, since I know that it
will move thine anger--perhaps thy scorn--strive to forget what I will
confess to thee."

Isabel for answer pressed her lips on the hand she held; and the
sisters, turning under the shadow of a long row of venerable oaks,
placed themselves on a little mound, fragrant with the violets of
spring.  A different part of the landscape beyond was now brought in
view; calmly slept in the valley the roofs of the subject town of
Middleham, calmly flowed through the pastures the noiseless waves of
Ure.  Leaning on Isabel's bosom, Anne thus spake, "Call to mind, sweet
sister, that short breathing-time in the horrors of the Civil War,
when a brief peace was made between our father and Queen Margaret.  We
were left in the palace--mere children that we were--to play with the
young prince, and the children in Margaret's train."

"I remember."

"And I was unwell and timid, and kept aloof from the sports with a
girl of my own years, whom I think--see how faithful my memory!--they
called Sibyll; and Prince Edward, Henry's son, stealing from the rest,
sought me out; and we sat together, or walked together alone, apart
from all, that day and the few days we were his mother's guests.  Oh,
if you could have seen him and heard him then,--so beautiful, so
gentle, so wise beyond his years, and yet so sweetly sad; and when we
parted, he bade me ever love him, and placed his ring on my finger,
and wept,--as we kissed each other, as children will."

"Children! ye were infants!" exclaimed Isabel, whose wonder seemed
increased by this simple tale.

"Infant though I was, I felt as if my heart would break when I left
him; and then the wars ensued; and do you not remember how ill I was,
and like to die, when our House triumphed, and the prince and heir of
Lancaster was driven into friendless exile?  From that hour my fate
was fixed.  Smile if you please at such infant folly, but children
often feel more deeply than later years can weet of."

"My sister, this is indeed a wilful invention of sorrow for thine own
scourge.  Why, ere this, believe me, the boy-prince hath forgotten thy
very name."

"Not so, Isabel," said Anne, colouring, and quickly, "and perchance,
did all rest here, I might have outgrown my weakness.  But last year,
when we were at Rouen with my father--"

"Well?"

"One evening on entering my chamber, I found a packet,--how left I
know not, but the French king and his suite, thou rememberest, made
our house almost their home,--and in this packet was a picture, and on
its back these words, Forget not the exile who remembers thee!"

"And that picture was Prince Edward's?"

Anne blushed, and her bosom heaved beneath the slender and high-laced
gorget.  After a pause, looking round her, she drew forth a small
miniature, which lay on the heart that beat thus sadly, and placed it
in her sister's hands.

"You see I deceive you not, Isabel.  And is not this a fair excuse
for--"

She stopped short, her modest nature shrinking from comment upon the
mere beauty that might have won the heart.  And fair indeed was the
face upon which Isabel gazed admiringly, in spite of the stiff and
rude art of the limner; full of the fire and energy which
characterized the countenance of the mother, but with a tinge of the
same profound and inexpressible melancholy that gave its charm to the
pensive features of Henry VI.,--a face, indeed, to fascinate a young
eye, even if not associated with such remembrances of romance and
pity.

Without saying a word, Isabel gave back the picture; but she pressed
the hand that took it, and Anne was contented to interpret the silence
into sympathy.

"And now you know why I have so often incurred your anger by
compassion for the adherents of Lancaster; and for this, also, Richard
of Gloucester hath been endeared to me,--for fierce and stern as he
may be called, he hath ever been gentle in his mediation for that
unhappy House."

"Because it is his policy to be well with all parties.  My poor Anne,
I cannot bid you hope; and yet, should I ever wed with Clarence, it
may be possible--that--that--but you in turn will chide me for
ambition."

"How?"

