
On arriving at the More, its stately architecture, embellished by the
prelate with a facade of double arches, painted and blazoned somewhat
in the fashion of certain old Italian houses, much dazzled Marmaduke.
And the splendour of the archbishop's retinue--less martial indeed
than Warwick's--was yet more imposing to the common eye.  Every office
that pomp could devise for a king's court was to be found in the
household of this magnificent prelate,--master of the horse and the
hounds, chamberlain, treasurer, pursuivant, herald, seneschal, captain
of the body-guard, etc.,--and all emulously sought for and proudly
held by gentlemen of the first blood and birth.  His mansion was at
once a court for middle life, a school for youth, an asylum for age;
and thither, as to a Medici, fled the letters and the arts.

Through corridor and hall, lined with pages and squires, passed
Montagu and Marmaduke, till they gained a quaint garden, the wonder
and envy of the time, planned by an Italian of Mantua, and perhaps the
stateliest one of the kind existent in England.  Straight walks,
terraces, and fountains, clipped trees, green alleys, and smooth
bowling-greens abounded; but the flowers were few and common: and if
here and there a statue might be found, it possessed none of the art
so admirable in our earliest ecclesiastical architecture, but its
clumsy proportions were made more uncouth by a profusion of barbaric
painting and gilding.  The fountains, however, were especially
curious, diversified, and elaborate: some shot up as pyramids, others
coiled in undulating streams, each jet chasing the other as serpents;
some, again, branched off in the form of trees, while mimic birds,
perched upon leaden boughs, poured water from their bills.  Marmaduke,
much astonished and bewildered, muttered a paternoster in great haste;
and even the clerical rank of the prelate did not preserve him from
the suspicion of magical practices in the youth's mind.

Remote from all his train, in a little arbour overgrown with the
honeysuckle and white rose, a small table before him bearing fruits,
confectionery, and spiced wines (for the prelate was a celebrated
epicure, though still in the glow of youth), they found George Nevile,
reading lazily a Latin manuscript.

"Well, my dear lord and brother," said Montagu, laying his arm on the
prelate's shoulder, "first let me present to thy favour a gallant
youth, Marmaduke Nevile, worthy his name and thy love."

"He is welcome, Montagu, to our poor house," said the archbishop,
rising, and complacently glancing at his palace, splendidly gleaming
through the trellis-work. 'Puer ingenui vultus.'  Thou art acquainted,
doubtless, young sir, with the Humaner Letters?"

"Well-a-day, my lord, my nurturing was somewhat neglected in the
province," said Marmaduke, disconcerted, and deeply blushing, "and
only of late have I deemed the languages fit study for those not
reared for our Mother Church."

"Fie, sir, fie!  Correct that error, I pray thee.  Latin teaches the
courtier how to thrive, the soldier how to manoeuvre, the husbandman
how to sow; and if we churchmen are more cunning, as the profane call
us (and the prelate smiled) than ye of the laity, the Latin must
answer for the sins of our learning."

With this, the archbishop passed his arm affectionately through his
brother's, and said, "Beshrew me, Montagu, thou lookest worn and
weary.  Surely thou lackest food, and supper shall be hastened.  Even
I, who have but slender appetite, grow hungered in these cool gloaming
hours."

"Dismiss my comrade, George,--I would speak to thee," whispered
Montagu.

"Thou knowest not Latin?" said the archbishop, turning with a
compassionate eye to Nevile, whose own eye was amorously fixed on the
delicate confectioneries,--"never too late to learn.  Hold, here is a
grammar of the verbs, that, with mine own hand, I have drawn up for
youth.  Study thine amo and thy moneo, while I confer on Church
matters with giddy Montagu.  I shall expect, ere we sup, that thou
wilt have mastered the first tenses."

"But--"

"Oh, nay, nay; but me no buts.  Thou art too tough, I fear me, for
flagellation, a wondrous improver of tender youth,"--and the prelate
forced his grammar into the reluctant hands of Marmaduke, and
sauntered down one of the solitary alleys with his brother.

Long and earnest was their conference, and at one time keen were their
dispute's.

The archbishop had very little of the energy of Montagu or the
impetuosity of Warwick, but he had far more of what we now call mind,
as distinct from talent, than either; that is, he had not their
capacities for action, but he had a judgment and sagacity that made
him considered a wise and sound adviser: this he owed principally to
the churchman's love of ease, and to his freedom from the wear and
tear of the passions which gnawed the great minister and the aspiring
courtier; his natural intellect was also fostered by much learning.
George Nevile had been reared, by an Italian ecclesiastic, in all the
subtle diplomacy of the Church; and his ambition, despising lay
objects (though he consented to hold the office of chancellor), was
concentrated in that kingdom over kings which had animated the august
dominators of religious Rome.  Though, as we have said, still in that
age when the affections are usually vivid, [He was consecrated Bishop
of Exeter at the age of twenty; at twenty-six he became Archbishop of
York, and was under thirty at the time referred to in the text.]
George Nevile loved no human creature,--not even his brothers; not
even King Edward, who, with all his vices, possessed so eminently the
secret that wins men's hearts.  His early and entire absorption in the
great religious community, which stood apart from the laymen in order
to control them, alienated him from his kind; and his superior
instruction only served to feed him with a calm and icy contempt for
all that prejudice, as he termed it, held dear and precious.  He
despised the knight's wayward honour, the burgher's crafty honesty.
For him no such thing as principle existed; and conscience itself lay
dead in the folds of a fancied exemption from all responsibility to
the dull herd, that were but as wool and meat to the churchman
shepherd.  But withal, if somewhat pedantic, he had in his manner a
suavity and elegance and polish which suited well his high station,
and gave persuasion to his counsels.  In all externals he was as
little like a priest as the high-born prelates of that day usually
were.  In dress he rivalled the fopperies of the Plantagenet brothers;
in the chase he was more ardent than Warwick had been in his earlier
youth; and a dry sarcastic humour, sometimes elevated into wit, gave
liveliness to his sagacious converse.

Montagu desired that the archbishop and himself should demand solemn
audience of Edward, and gravely remonstrate with the king on the
impropriety of receiving the brother of a rival suitor, while Warwick
was negotiating the marriage of Margaret with a prince of France.

"Nay," said the archbishop, with a bland smile, that fretted Montagu
to the quick, "surely even a baron, a knight, a franklin, a poor
priest like myself, would rise against the man who dictated to his
hospitality.  Is a king less irritable than baron, knight, franklin,
and priest,--or rather, being, as it were, per legem, lord of all,
hath he not irritability eno' for all four?  Ay, tut and tush as thou
wilt, John, but thy sense must do justice to my counsel at the last. I
know Edward well; he hath something of mine own idlesse and ease of
temper, but with more of the dozing lion than priests, who have only,
look you, the mildness of the dove.  Prick up his higher spirit, not
by sharp remonstrance, but by seeming trust. Observe to him, with thy
gay, careless laugh--which, methinks, thou hast somewhat lost of late
--that with any other prince Warwick might suspect some snare, some
humiliating overthrow of his embassage, but that all men know how
steadfast in faith and honour is Edward IV."

"Truly," said Montagu, with a forced smile, "you understand mankind;
but yet, bethink you--suppose this fail, and Warwick return to England
to hear that he hath been cajoled and fooled; that the Margaret he had
crossed the seas to affiance to the brother of Louis is betrothed to
Charolois--bethink you, I say, what manner of heart beats under our
brother's mail."

"Impiger, iracundus!" said the archbishop; "a very Achilles, to whom
our English Agamemnon, if he cross him, is a baby.  All this is sad
truth; our parents spoilt him in his childhood, and glory in his
youth, and wealth, power, success, in his manhood.  Ay! if Warwick be
chafed, it will be as the stir of the sea-serpent, which, according to
the Icelanders, moves a world.  Still, the best way to prevent the
danger is to enlist the honour of the king in his behalf,--to show
that our eyes are open, but that we disdain to doubt, and are frank to
confide.  Meanwhile send messages and warnings privately to Warwick."

These reasonings finally prevailed with Montagu, and the brothers
returned with one mind to the house.  Here, as after their ablutions
they sat down to the evening meal, the archbishop remembered poor
Marmaduke, and despatched to him one of his thirty household
chaplains.  Marmaduke was found fast asleep over the second tense of
the verb amo.




CHAPTER VI.

THE ARRIVAL OF THE COUNT DE LA ROCHE, AND THE VARIOUS EXCITEMENT
PRODUCED ON MANY PERSONAGES BY THAT EVENT.

The prudence of the archbishop's counsel was so far made manifest,
that on the next day Montagu found all remonstrance would have been
too late.  The Count de la Roche had already landed, and was on his
way to London.  The citizens, led by Rivers partially to suspect the
object of the visit, were delighted not only by the prospect of a
brilliant pageant, but by the promise such a visit conveyed of a
continued peace with their commercial ally; and the preparations made
by the wealthy merchants increased the bitterness and discontent of
Montagu.  At length, at the head of a gallant and princely retinue,
the Count de la Roche entered London.  Though Hastings made no secret
of his distaste to the Count de la Roche's visit, it became his office
as lord chamberlain to meet the count at Blackwall, and escort him and
his train, in gilded barges, to the palace.

In the great hall of the Tower, in which the story of Antiochus was
painted by the great artists employed under Henry III., and on the
elevation of the dais, behind which, across Gothic columns, stretched
draperies of cloth-of-gold, was placed Edward's chair of state.
Around him were grouped the Dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, the
Lords Worcester, Montagu, Rivers, D'Eyncourt, St. John, Raoul de
Fulke, and others.  But at the threshold of the chamber stood Anthony
Woodville, the knightly challenger, his knee bound by the ladye-badge
of the S. S., and his fine person clad in white-flowered velvet of
Genoa, adorned with pearls.  Stepping forward, as the count appeared,
the gallant Englishman bent his knee half-way to the ground, and
raising the count's hand to his lips, said in French, "Deign, noble
sir, to accept the gratitude of one who were not worthy of encounter
from so peerless a hand, save by the favour of the ladies of England,
and your own courtesy, which ennobles him whom it stoops to."  So
saying, he led the count towards the king.

De la Roche, an experienced and profound courtier, and justly
deserving Hall's praise as a man of "great witte, courage,
valiantness, and liberalitie," did not affect to conceal the
admiration which the remarkable presence of Edward never failed to
excite; lifting his hand to his eyes, as if to shade them from a
sudden blaze of light, he would have fallen on both knees, but Edward
with quick condescension raised him, and, rising himself, said gayly,--

"Nay, Count de la Roche, brave and puissant chevalier, who hath
crossed the seas in honour of knighthood and the ladies, we would,
indeed, that our roiaulme boasted a lord like thee, from whom we might
ask such homage.  But since thou art not our subject, it consoles us
at least that thou art our guest.  By our halidame, Lord Scales, thou
must look well to thy lance and thy steed's girths, for never, I trow,
hast thou met a champion of goodlier strength and knightlier mettle."

"My lord king," answered the count, "I fear me, indeed, that a knight
like the Sieur Anthony, who fights under the eyes of such a king, will
prove invincible.  Did kings enter the lists with kings, where,
through broad Christendom, find a compeer for your Highness?"

"Your brother, Sir Count, if fame lies not," returned Edward, slightly
laughing, and lightly touching the Bastard's shoulder, "were a fearful
lance to encounter, even though Charlemagne himself were to revive
with his twelve paladins at his back.  Tell us, Sir Count," added the
king, drawing himself up,--"tell us, for we soldiers are curious in
such matters, hath not the Count of Charolois the advantage of all
here in sinews and stature?"

"Sire," returned De la Roche, "my princely brother is indeed mighty
with the brand and battle-axe, but your Grace is taller by half the
head,--and, peradventure, of even a more stalwart build; but that mere
strength in your Highness is not that gift of God which strikes the
beholder most."

Edward smiled good-humouredly at a compliment the truth of which was
too obvious to move much vanity, and said with a royal and knightly
grace, "Our House of York hath been taught, Sir Count, to estimate
men's beauty by men's deeds, and therefore the Count of Charolois hath
long been known to us--who, alas, have seen him not!--as the fairest
gentleman of Europe.  My Lord Scales, we must here publicly crave your
pardon.  Our brother-in-law, Sir Count, would fain have claimed his
right to hold you his guest, and have graced himself by exclusive
service to your person.  We have taken from him his lawful office, for
we kings are jealous, and would not have our subjects more honoured
than ourselves."  Edward turned round to his courtiers as he spoke,
and saw that his last words had called a haughty and angry look to the
watchful countenance of Montagu.  "Lord Hastings," he continued, "to
your keeping, as our representative, we intrust this gentleman.  He
must need refreshment ere we present him to our queen."

The count bowed to the ground, and reverently withdrew from the royal
presence, accompanied by Hastings.  Edward then, singling Anthony
Woodville and Lord Rivers from the group, broke up the audience, and,
followed by those two noblemen, quitted the hall.

Montagu, whose countenance had recovered the dignified and high-born
calm habitual to it, turned to the Duke of Clarence, and observed
indifferently, "The Count de la Roche hath a goodly mien, and a fair
tongue."

"Pest on these Burgundians!" answered Clarence, in an undertone, and
drawing Montagu aside.  "I would wager my best greyhound to a
scullion's cur that our English knights will lower their burgonets."

"Nay, sir, an idle holiday show.  What matters whose lance breaks, or
whose destrier stumbles?"

"Will you not, yourself, cousin Montagu--you who are so peerless in
the joust--take part in the fray?"

"I, your Highness,--I, the brother of the Earl of Warwick, whom this
pageant hath been devised by the Woodvilles to mortify and disparage
in his solemn embassy to Burgundy's mightiest foe!--I!"

"Sooth to say," said the young prince, much embarrassed, "it grieves
me sorely to hear thee speak as if Warwick would be angered at this
pastime.  For, look you, Montagu, I, thinking only of my hate to
Burgundy and my zeal for our English honour, have consented, as high
constable, and despite my grudge to the Woodvilles, to bear the
bassinet of our own champion, and--"

"Saints in heaven!" exclaimed Montagu, with a burst of his fierce
brother's temper, which he immediately checked, and changed into a
tone that concealed, beneath outward respect, the keenest irony, "I
crave your pardon humbly for my vehemence, Prince of Clarence.  I
suddenly remember me that humility is the proper virtue of knighthood.
Your Grace does indeed set a notable example of that virtue to the
peers of England; and my poor brother's infirmity of pride will stand
rebuked for aye, when he hears that George Plantagenet bore the
bassinet of Anthony Woodville."

"But it is for the honour of the ladies," said Clarence, falteringly;
"in honour of the fairest maid of all--the flower of English beauty--
the Lady Isabel--that I--"

"Your Highness will pardon me," interrupted Montagu; "but I do trust
to your esteem for our poor and insulted House of Nevile so far as to
be assured that the name of my niece Isabel will not be submitted to
the ribald comments of a base-born Burgundian."

"Then I will break no lance in the lists!"

"As it likes you, prince," replied Montagu, shortly; and, with a low
bow, he quitted the chamber, and was striding to the outer gate of the
Tower, when a sweet, clear voice behind him called him by his name.
He turned abruptly, to meet the dark eye and all-subduing smile of the
boy-Duke of Gloucester.

"A word with you, Montagu, noblest and most prized, with your princely
brothers, of the champions of our House,--I read your generous
indignation with our poor Clarence.  Ay, sir! ay!--it was a weakness
in him that moved even me.  But you have not now to learn that his
nature, how excellent soever, is somewhat unsteady.  His judgment
alone lacks weight and substance,--ever persuaded against his better
reason by those who approach his infirmer side; but if it be true that
our cousin Warwick intends for him the hand of the peerless Isabel,
wiser heads will guide his course."

"My brother," said Montagu, greatly softened, "is much beholden to
your Highness for a steady countenance and friendship, for which I
also, believe me--and the families of Beauchamp, Montagu, and Nevile--
are duly grateful.  But to speak plainly (which your Grace's youthful
candour, so all-acknowledged, will permit), the kinsmen of the queen
do now so aspire to rule this land, to marry or forbid to marry, not
only our own children, but your illustrious father's, that I foresee
in this visit of the bastard Anthony the most signal disgrace to
Warwick that ever king passed upon ambassador or gentleman.  And this
moves me more!--yea, I vow to Saint George, my patron, it moves me
more--by the thought of danger to your royal House than by the grief
of slight to mine; for Warwick--but you know him."

"Montagu, you must soothe and calm your brother if chafed.  I impose
that task on your love for us.  Alack, would that Edward listened more
to me and less to the queen's kith!  These Woodvilles!--and yet they
may live to move not wrath but pity.  If aught snapped the thread of
Edward's life (Holy Paul forbid!), what would chance to Elizabeth, her
brothers, her children?"

"Her children would mount the throne that our right hands built," said
Montagu, sullenly.

"Ah, think you so?--you rejoice me!  I had feared that the barons
might, that the commons would, that the Church must, pronounce the
unhappy truth, that--but you look amazed, my lord!  Alas, my boyish
years are too garrulous!"

"I catch not your Highness's meaning."

"Pooh, pooh!  By Saint Paul, your seeming dulness proves your loyalty;
but with me, the king's brother, frankness were safe.  Thou knowest
well that the king was betrothed before to the Lady Eleanor Talbot;
that such betrothal, not set aside by the Pope, renders his marriage
with Elizabeth against law; that his children may (would to Heaven it
were not so!) be set aside as bastards, when Edward's life no longer
shields them from the sharp eyes of men."

"Ah," said Montagu, thoughtfully; "and in that case, George of
Clarence would wear the crown, and his children reign in England."

"Our Lord forefend," said Richard, "that I should say that Warwick
thought of this when he deemed George worthy of the hand of Isabel.
Nay, it could not be so; for, however clear the claim, strong and
powerful would be those who would resist it, and Clarence is not, as
you will see, the man who can wrestle boldly,--even for a throne.
Moreover, he is too addicted to wine and pleasure to bid fair to
outlive the king."

Montagu fixed his penetrating eyes on Richard, but dropped them,
abashed, before that steady, deep, unrevealing gaze, which seemed to
pierce into other hearts, and show nothing of the heart within.

"Happy Clarence!" resumed the prince, with a heavy sigh, and after a
brief pause,--"a Nevile's husband and a Warwick's son--what can the
saints do more for men?  You must excuse his errors--all our errors--
to your brother.  You may not know, peradventure, sweet Montagu, how
deep an interest I have in maintaining all amity between Lord Warwick
and the king.  For methinks there is one face fairer than fair
