shall not be hopeless?  It is almost the other day that the Bonapartists
were in a minority that their adversaries called hopeless, and the
majority for the Emperor is now so preponderant that I tremble for his
safety.  When a majority becomes so vast that intellect disappears in the
crowd, the date of its destruction commences; for by the law of reaction
the minority is installed against it.  It is the nature of things that
minorities are always more intellectual than multitudes, and intellect is
ever at work in sapping numerical force.  What your party want is hope;
because without hope there is no energy.  I remember hearing my father
say that when he met the Count de Chambord at Ems, that illustrious
personage delivered himself of a _belle phrase_ much admired by his
partisans.  The Emperor was then President of the Republic, in a very
doubtful and dangerous position.  France seemed on the verge of another
convulsion.  A certain distinguished politician recommended the Count de
Chambord to hold himself ready to enter at once as a candidate for the
throne.  And the Count, with a benignant smile on his handsome face,
answered, 'All wrecks come to the shore: the shore does not go to the
wrecks.'"

"Beautifully said!" exclaimed the Marquis.

"Not if 'Le beau est toujours le vrai.'  My father, no inexperienced nor
unwise politician, in repeating the royal words, remarked: 'The fallacy
of the Count's argument is in its metaphor.  A man is not a shore.  Do
you not think that the seamen on board the wrecks would be more grateful
to him who did not complacently compare himself to a shore, but
considered himself a human being like themselves, and risked his own life
in a boat, even though it were a cockleshell, in the chance of saving
theirs?"

Alain de Rochebriant was a brave man, with that intense sentiment of
patriotism which characterizes Frenchmen of every rank and persuasion,
unless they belong to the Internationalists; and, without pausing to
consider, he cried, "Your father was right."

The Englishman resumed: "Need I say, my dear Marquis, that I am not a
Legitimist?  I am not an Imperialist, neither am I an Orleanist nor a
Republican.  Between all those political divisions it is for Frenchmen
to make their choice, and for Englishmen to accept for France that
government which France has established.  I view things here as a simple
observer.  But it strikes me that if I were a Frenchman in your position,
I should think myself unworthy my ancestors if I consented to be an
insignificant looker-on."

"You are not in my position," said the Marquis, half mournfully, half
haughtily, "and you can scarcely judge of it even in imagination."

"I need not much task my imagination; I judge of it by analogy.  I was
very much in your position when I entered upon what I venture to call my
career; and it is the curious similarity between us in circumstances,
that made me wish for your friendship when that similarity was made known
to me by Lemercier, who is not less garrulous than the true Parisian
usually is.  Permit me to say that, like you, I was reared in some pride
of no inglorious ancestry.  I was reared also in the expectation of great
wealth.  Those expectations were not realized: my father had the fault of
noble natures,--generosity pushed to imprudence: he died poor and in
debt.  You retain the home of your ancestors; I had to resign mine."

The Marquis had felt deeply interested in this narrative, and as Graham
now paused, took his hand and pressed it.  "One of our most eminent
personages said to me about that time, 'Whatever a clever man of your age
determines to do or to be, the odds are twenty to one that he has only to
live on in order to do or to be it.'  Don't you think he spoke truly?  I
think so."

"I scarcely know what to think," said Rochebriant; "I feel as if you had
given me so rough a shake when I was in the midst of a dull dream, that I
am not yet quite sure whether I am asleep or awake."

Just as he said this, and towards the Paris end of the Champs Elysees,
there was a halt, a sensation among the loungers round them; many of them
uncovered in salute.

A man on the younger side of middle age, somewhat inclined to corpulence,
with a very striking countenance, was riding slowly by.  He returned the
salutations he received with the careless dignity of a Personage
accustomed to respect, and then reined in his horse by the side of a
barouche, and exchanged some words with a portly gentleman who was its
sole occupant.  The loungers, still halting, seemed to contemplate this
parley--between him on horseback and him in the carriage--with very eager
interest.  Some put their hands behind their ears and pressed forward, as
if trying to overhear what was said.

"I wonder," quoth Graham, "whether, with all his cleverness, the Prince
has in any way decided what he means to do or to be."

"The Prince!" said Rochebriant, rousing himself from revery; "what
Prince?"

"Do you not recognize him by his wonderful likeness to the first
Napoleon,--him on horseback talking to Louvier, the great financier."

"Is that stout bourgeois in the carriage Louvier,--my mortgagee,
Louvier?"

"Your mortgagee, my dear Marquis?  Well, he is rich enough to be a very
lenient one upon pay-day."

"_Hein_!--I doubt his leniency," said Alain.  "I have promised my _avoue_
to meet him at dinner.  Do you think I did wrong?"

"Wrong! of course not; he is likely to overwhelm you with civilities.
Pray don't refuse if he gives you an invitation to his soiree next
Saturday; I am going to it.  One meets there the notabilities most
interesting to study,--artists, authors, politicians, especially those
who call themselves Republicans.  He and the Prince agree in one thing;
namely, the cordial reception they give to the men who would destroy the
state of things upon which Prince and financier both thrive.  Hillo!
here comes Lemercier on return from the Bois."

Lemercier's _coupe_ stopped beside the footpath.  "What tidings of the
_Belle Inconnue_?" asked the Englishman.  "None; she was not there.  But
I am rewarded: such an adventure! a dame of the _haute volee_; I believe
she is a duchess.  She was walking with a lap-dog, a pure Pomeranian.  A
strange poodle flew at the Pomeranian, I drove off the poodle, rescued
the Pomeranian, received the most gracious thanks, the sweetest smile:
_femme superbe_, middle aged.  I prefer women of forty. _Au revoir_, I am
due at the club."

Alain felt a sensation of relief that Lemercier had not seen the lady in
the pearl-coloured dress, and quitted the Englishman with a lightened
heart.




CHAPTER IV.

"_Piccola, piccola! com e cortese_!  another invitation from M. Louvier
for next Saturday,--conversazione."  This was said in Italian by an
elderly lady bursting noisily into the room,--elderly, yet with a
youthful expression of face, owing perhaps to a pair of very vivacious
black eyes.  She was dressed, after a somewhat slatternly fashion, in a
wrapper of crimson merino much the worse for wear, a blue handkerchief
twisted turban-like round her head, and her feet encased in list
slippers.  The person to whom she addressed herself was a young lady with
dark hair, which, despite its evident repugnance, was restrained into
smooth glossy braids over the forehead, and at the crown of the small
graceful head into the simple knot which Horace has described as
"Spartan."  Her dress contrasted the speaker's by an exquisite neatness.

We have seen her before as the lady in the pearl-coloured robe; but seen
now at home she looks much younger.  She was one of those whom,
encountered in the streets or in society, one might guess to be married,
--probably a young bride; for thus seen there was about her an air of
dignity and of self-possession which suits well with the ideal of chaste
youthful matronage; and in the expression of the face there was a pensive
thoughtfulness beyond her years.  But as she now sat by the open window
arranging flowers in a glass bowl, a book lying open on her lap, you
would never have said, "What a handsome woman!" you would have said,
"What a charming girl!"  All about her was maidenly, innocent, and fresh.
The dignity of her bearing was lost in household ease, the pensiveness of
her expression in an untroubled serene sweetness.

Perhaps many of my readers may have known friends engaged in some
absorbing cause of thought, and who are in the habit when they go out,
especially if on solitary walks, to take that cause of thought with them.
The friend may be an orator meditating his speech, a poet his verses, a
lawyer a difficult case, a physician an intricate malady.  If you have
such a friend, and you observe him thus away from his home, his face will
seem to you older and graver.  He is absorbed in the care that weighs on
him.  When you see him in a holiday moment at his own fireside, the care
is thrown aside; perhaps he mastered while abroad the difficulty that had
troubled him; he is cheerful, pleasant, sunny.  This appears to be very
much the case with persons of genius.  When in their own houses we
usually find them very playful and childlike.  Most persons of real
genius, whatever they may seem out of doors, are very sweet-tempered at
home, and sweet temper is sympathizing and genial in the intercourse of
private life.  Certainly, observing this girl as she now bends over the
flowers, it would be difficult to believe her to be the Isaura Cicogna
whose letters to Madame de Grantinesnil exhibit the doubts and struggles
of an unquiet, discontented, aspiring mind.  Only in one or two passages
in those letters would you have guessed at the writer in the girl as we
now see her.  It is in those passages where she expresses her love of
harmony, and her repugnance to contest: those were characteristics you
might have read in her face.

Certainly the girl is very lovely: what long dark eyelashes! what soft,
tender, dark-blue eyes! now that she looks up and smiles, what a
bewitching smile it is! by what sudden play of rippling dimples the smile
is enlivened and redoubled!  Do you notice one feature?  In very showy
beauties it is seldom noticed; but I, being in my way a physiognomist,
consider that it is always worth heeding as an index of character.  It is
the ear.  Remark how delicately it is formed in her: none of that
heaviness of lobe which is a sure sign of sluggish intellect and coarse
perception.  Hers is the artist's ear.  Note next those hands: how
beautifully shaped! small, but not doll-like hands,--ready and nimble,
firm and nervous hands, that could work for a helpmate.  By no means very
white, still less red, but somewhat embrowned as by the sun, such as you
may see in girls reared in southern climes, and in her perhaps betokening
an impulsive character which had not accustomed itself, when at sport in
the open air, to the thraldom of gloves,--very impulsive people even in
cold climates seldom do.

In conveying to us by a few bold strokes an idea of the sensitive, quick-
moved, warm-blooded Henry II., the most impulsive of the Plantagenets,
his contemporary chronicler tells us that rather than imprison those
active hands of his, even in hawking-gloves, he would suffer his falcon
to fix its sharp claws into his wrist.  No doubt there is a difference as
to what is befitting between a burly bellicose creature like Henry II.
and a delicate young lady like Isaura Cicogna; and one would not wish to
see those dainty wrists of hers seamed and scarred by a falcon's claws.
But a girl may not be less exquisitely feminine for slight heed of
artificial prettiness.  Isaura had no need of pale bloodless hands to
seem one of Nature's highest grade of gentlewomen even to the most
fastidious eyes.  About her there was a charm apart from her mere beauty,
and often disturbed instead of heightened by her mere intellect: it
consisted in a combination of exquisite artistic refinement, and of a
generosity of character by which refinement was animated into vigour and
warmth.

The room, which was devoted exclusively to Isaura, had in it much that
spoke of the occupant.  That room, when first taken furnished, had a good
deal of the comfortless showiness which belongs to ordinary furnished
apartments in France, especially in the Parisian suburbs, chiefly let
for the summer: thin limp muslin curtains that decline to draw; stiff
mahogany chairs covered with yellow Utrecht velvet; a tall secretaire in
a dark corner; an oval buhl-table set in tawdry ormolu, islanded in the
centre of a poor but gaudy Scotch carpet; and but one other table of dull
walnut-wood, standing clothless before a sofa to match the chairs; the
eternal ormolu clock flanked by the two eternal ormolu candelabra on the
dreary mantelpiece.  Some of this garniture had been removed, others
softened into cheeriness and comfort.  The room somehow or other--thanks
partly to a very moderate expenditure in pretty twills with pretty
borders, gracefully simple table-covers, with one or two additional small
tables and easy-chairs, two simple vases filled with flowers; thanks
still more to a nameless skill in re-arrangement, and the disposal of the
slight knick-knacks and well-bound volumes, which, even in travelling,
women who have cultivated the pleasures of taste carry about them--had
been coaxed into that quiet harmony, that tone of consistent subdued
colour, which corresponded with the characteristics of the inmate.  Most
people might have been puzzled where to place the piano, a semi-grand,
so as not to take up too much space in the little room; but where it was
placed it seemed so at home that you might have supposed the room had
been built for it.

There are two kinds of neatness,--one is too evident, and makes
everything about it seem trite and cold and stiff; and another kind of
neatness disappears from our sight in a satisfied sense of completeness,
--like some exquisite, simple, finished style of writing, an Addison's or
a St. Pierre's.

This last sort of neatness belonged to Isaura, and brought to mind the
well-known line of Catullus when on recrossing his threshold he invokes
its welcome,--a line thus not inelegantly translated by Leigh Hunt,

               "Smile every dimple on the cheek of Home."

I entreat the reader's pardon for this long descriptive digression; but
Isaura is one of those characters which are called many-sided, and
therefore not very easy to comprehend.  She gives us one side of her
character in her correspondence with Madame de Grantmesnil, and another
side of it in her own home with her Italian companion,--half nurse, half
chaperon.

"Monsieur Louvier is indeed very courteous," said Isaura, looking up from
the flowers with the dimpled smile we have noticed.  "But I think, Madre,
that we should do well to stay at home on Saturday,--not peacefully, for
I owe you your revenge at Euchre."

"You can't mean it, Piecola!" exclaimed the Signora, in evident
consternation.  "Stay at home!--why stay at home?  Euchre is very well
when there is nothing else to do: but change is pleasant; le bon Dieu
likes it,

                       "'Ne caldo ne gelo
