than they do the Prussians.  Victor, it is enough to make one despair of
his country!  All beyond the hour seems anarchy and ruin."

"Not so!" exclaimed De Mauleon.  "Everything comes to him who knows how
to wait.  The Empire is destroyed; the usurpation that follows it has no
roots.  It will but serve to expedite the establishment of such a
condition as we have meditated and planned--a constitution adapted to our
age and our people, not based wholly on untried experiments, taking the
best from nations that do not allow Freedom and Order to be the sport of
any popular breeze.  From the American Republic we must borrow the only
safeguards against the fickleness of the universal suffrage which, though
it was madness to concede in any ancient community, once conceded cannot
be safely abolished,--viz., the salutary law that no article of the
Constitution, once settled, can be altered without the consent of two-
thirds of the legislative body.  By this law we insure permanence, and
that concomitant love for institutions which is engendered by time and
custom.  Secondly, the formation of a senate on such principles as may
secure to it in all times of danger a confidence and respect which
counteract in public opinion the rashness and heat of the popular
assembly.  On what principles that senate should be formed, with what
functions invested, what share of the executive--especially in foreign
affairs, declarations of war, or treaties of peace--should be accorded to
it, will no doubt need the most deliberate care of the ablest minds.  But
a senate I thus sketch has alone rescued America from the rashness of
counsel incident to a democratic Chamber; and it is still more essential
to France, with still more favourable elements for its creation.  From
England we must borrow the great principle that has alone saved her from
revolution--that the head of the State can do no wrong.  He leads no
armies, he presides over no Cabinet.  All responsibility rests with
his advisers; and where we upset a dynasty, England changes an
administration.  Whether the head of the State should have the title of
sovereign or president, whether he be hereditary or elected, is a
question of minor importance impossible now to determine, but on which I
heartily concur with you that hereditary monarchy is infinitely better
adapted to the habits of Frenchmen, to their love of show and of honours
--and infinitely more preservative from all the dangers which result from
constant elections to such a dignity, with parties so heated, and
pretenders to the rank so numerous--than any principle by which a popular
demagogue or a successful general is enabled to destroy the institutions
he is elected to guard.  On these fundamental doctrines for the
regeneration of France I think we are agreed.  And I believe when the
moment arrives to promulgate them, through an expounder of weight like
yourself, they will rapidly commend themselves to the intellect of
France.  For they belong to common sense; and in the ultimate prevalence
of common-sense I have a faith which I refuse to medievalists who would
restore the right divine; and still more to fanatical quacks, who imagine
that the worship of the Deity, the ties of family, and the rights of
property are errors at variance with the progress of society. _Qui
vivera, verra_."

INCOGNITO.--"In the outlines of the policy you so ably enunciate I
heartily concur.  But if France is, I will not say to be regenerated, but
to have fair play among the nations of Europe, I add one or two items to
the programme.  France must be saved from Paris, not by subterranean
barracks and trains, the impotence of which we see to-day with a general
in command of the military force, but by conceding to France its
proportionate share of the power now monopolised by Paris.  All this
system of centralisation, equally tyrannical and corrupt, must be
eradicated.  Talk of examples from America, of which I know little--from
England, of which I know much,--what can we more advantageously borrow
from England than that diffusion of all her moral and social power which
forbids the congestion of blood in one vital part?  Decentralise!
decentralise! decentralise! will be my incessant cry, if ever the time
comes when my cry will be heard.  France can never be a genuine France
until Paris has no more influence over the destinies of France than
London has over those of England.  But on this theme I could go on till
midnight.  Now to the immediate point: what do you advise me to do in
this crisis, and what do you propose to do yourself?"

De Mauleon put his hand to his brow, and remained a few moments silent
and thoughtful.  At last he looked up with that decided expression of
face which was not the least among his many attributes for influence over
those with whom he came into contact.

"For you, on whom so much of the future depends, my advice is brief--have
nothing to do with the present.  All who join this present mockery of a
Government will share the fall that attends it--a fall from which one or
two of their body may possibly recover by casting blame on their
confreres,--you never could.  But it is not for you to oppose that
Government with an enemy on its march to Paris.  You are not a soldier;
military command is not in your rode.  The issue of events is uncertain;
but whatever it be, the men in power cannot conduct a prosperous war nor
obtain an honourable peace.  Hereafter you may be the _Deus ex machina_.
No personage of that rank and with that mission appears till the end of
the play: we are only in the first act.  Leave Paris at once, and abstain
from all action."

INCOGNITO (dejectedly).--"I cannot deny the soundness of your advice,
though in accepting it I feel unutterably saddened.  Still you, the
calmest and shrewdest observer among my friends, think there is cause for
hope, not despair.  Victor, I have more than most men to make life
pleasant, but I would lay down life at this moment with you.  You know me
well enough to be sure that I utter no melodramatic fiction when I say
that I love my country as a young man loves the ideal of his dreams--with
my whole mind and heart and soul! and the thought that I cannot now aid
her in the hour of her mortal trial is--is--"

The man's voice broke down, and he turned aside, veiling his face with a
hand that trembled.

DE MAULEON--"Courage--patience!  All Frenchmen have the first; set them
an example they much need in the second.  I, too, love my country, though
I owe to it little enough, heaven knows.  I suppose love of country is
inherent in all who are not Internationalists.  They profess only to love
humanity, by which, if they mean anything practical, they mean a rise in
wages."

INCOGNITO (rousing himself, and with a half smile).  "Always cynical,
Victor--always belying yourself.  But now that you have advised my
course, what will be your own?  Accompany me, and wait for better times."

"No, noble friend; our positions are different.  Yours is made--mine yet
to make.  But for this war I think I could have secured a seat in the
Chamber.  As I wrote you, I found that my kinsfolk were of much influence
in their department, and that my restitution to my social grade, and the
repute I had made as an Orleanist, inclined them to forget my youthful
errors and to assist my career.  But the Chamber ceases to exist.  My
journal I shall drop.  I cannot support the Government; it is not a
moment to oppose it.  My prudent course is silence."

INCOGNITO.--"But is not your journal essential to your support?"

DE MAULEON.--"Fortunately not.  Its profits enabled me to lay by for the
rainy day that has come; and having reimbursed you and all friends the
sums necessary to start it, I stand clear of all debt, and, for my
slender wants, a rich man.  If I continued the journal I should be
beggared; for there would be no readers to Common Sense in this interval
of lunacy.  Nevertheless, during this interval, I trust to other ways for
winning a name that will open my rightful path of ambition whenever we
again have a legislature in which Common Sense can be heard."

INCOGNITO.--"But how win that name, silenced as a writer?"

DE MAULEON.--"You forget that I have fought in Algeria.  In a few days
Paris will be in a state of siege; and then--and then," he added, and
very quietly dilated on the renown of a patriot or the grave of a
soldier.

"I envy you the chance of either," said the Incognito; and after a few
more brief words he departed, his hat drawn over his brows, and entering
a hired carriage which he had left at the corner of the quiet street, was
consigned to the station du --------, just in time for the next train.




CHAPTER XI.

Victor dressed and went out.  The streets were crowded.  Workmen were
everywhere employed in the childish operation of removing all insignia,
and obliterating all names that showed where an Empire had existed.  One
greasy citizen, mounted on a ladder, was effacing the words "Boulevard
Haussman," and substituting for Haussman, "Victor Hugo."

Suddenly De Mauleon came on a group of blouses, interspersed with women
holding babies and ragged boys holding stones, collected round a well-
dressed slender man, at whom they were hooting and gesticulating, with
menaces of doing something much worse.  By an easy effort of his strong
frame the Vicomte pushed his way through the tormentors, and gave his arm
to their intended victim.

"Monsieur, allow me to walk home with you."  Therewith the shrieks and
shouts and gesticulations increased.  "Another impertinent!  Another
traitor!  Drown him!  Drown them both!  To the Seine!  To the Seine!"
A burly fellow rushed forward, and the rest made a plunging push.  The
outstretched arm of De Mauleon kept the ringleader at bay.  "Mes enfans,"
cried Victor with a calm clear voice, "I am not an Imperialist.  Many of
you have read the articles signed Pierre Firmin, written against the
tyrant Bonaparte when he was at the height of his power.  I am Pierre
Firmin--make way for me."  Probably not one in the crowd had ever read a
word written by Pierre Firmin, nor even heard of the name.  But they did
not like to own ignorance; and that burly fellow did not like to
encounter that arm of iron which touched his throat.  So he cried out,
"Oh! if you are the great Pierre Firmin, that alters the case.  Make way
for the patriot Pierre!"  "But," shrieked a virago, thrusting her baby
into De Mauleon's face, "the other is the Imperialist, the capitalist,
the vile Duplessis.  At least we will have him."  De Mauleon suddenly
snatched the baby from her, and said, with imperturbable good temper,
"Exchange of prisoners.  I resign the man, and I keep the baby."

No one who does not know the humours of a Parisian mob can comprehend the
suddenness of popular change, or the magical mastery over crowds which is
effected by quiet courage and a ready joke.  The group was appeased at
once.  Even the virago laughed; and when De Mauleon restored the infant
to her arms, with a gold piece thrust into its tiny clasp, she eyed the
gold, and cried, "God bless you, citizen!" The two gentlemen made their
way safely now.

"M. de Mauleon," said Duplessis, "I know not how to thank you.  Without
your seasonable aid I should have been in great danger of life; and--
would you believe it?--the woman who denounced and set the mob on me was
one of the objects of a charity which I weekly dispense to the poor."

"Of course I believe that.  At the Red clubs no crime is more denounced
than that of charity.  It is the 'fraud against _Egalite_'--a vile trick
of the capitalist to save to himself the millions he ought to share with
all by giving a sou to one.  Meanwhile, take my advice, M. Duplessis, and
quit Paris with your young daughter.  This is no place for rich
Imperialists at present."

"I perceived that before to-day's adventure.  I distrust the looks of my
very servants, and shall depart with Valerie this evening for Bretagne."

"Ah! I heard from Louvier that you propose to pay off his mortgage on
Rochebriant, and make yourself sole proprietor of my young kinsman's
property."

"I trust you only believe half what you hear.  I mean to save Rochebriant
from Louvier, and consign it, free of charge, to your kinsman, as the dot
of his bride, my daughter."

"I rejoice to learn such good news for the head of my house.  But Alain
himself--is he not with the prisoners of war?"

"No, thank heaven.  He went forth an officer of a regiment of Parisian
Mobiles--went full of sanguine confidence; he came back with his regiment
in mournful despondency.  The undiscipline of his regiment, of the
Parisian Mobiles generally, appears incredible.  Their insolent
disobedience to their officers, their ribald scoffs at their general
--oh, it is sickening to speak of it!  Alain distinguished himself by
repressing a mutiny and is honoured by a signal compliment from the
commander in a letter of recommendation to Palikao.  But Palikao is
nobody now.  Alain has already been sent into Bretagne, commissioned to
assist in organising a corps of Mobiles in his neighbourhood.  Trochu, as
you know, is a Breton.  Alain is confident of the good conduct of the
Bretons.  What will Louvier do?  He is an arch Republican; is he pleased
now he has got what he wanted?"

"I suppose he is pleased, for he is terribly frightened.  Fright is one
of the great enjoyments of a Parisian.  Good day.  Your path to your
hotel is clear now.  Remember me kindly to Alain."

De Mauleon continued his way through streets sometimes deserted,
sometimes thronged.  At the commencement of the Rue de Florentin he
encountered the brothers Vandemar walking arm in arm.

"Ha, De Mauleon!" cried Enguerrand; "what is the last minute's news?"

"I can't guess.  Nobody knows at Paris how soon one folly swallows up
another.  Saturn here is always devouring one or other of his children."

"They say that Vinoy, after a most masterly retreat, is almost at our
gates with 80,000 men."

"And this day twelvemonth we may know what he does with them."

Here Raoul, who seemed absorbed in gloomy reflections, halted before the
hotel in which the Contessa di Rimini lodged, and with a nod to his
brother, and a polite, if not cordial salutation to Victor, entered the
_porte cochere_.

"Your brother seems out of spirits,--a pleasing contrast to the
uproarious mirth with which Parisians welcome the advance of calamity."

"Raoul, as you know, is deeply religious.  He regards the defeat we have
sustained, and the peril that threatens us, as the beginning of a divine
chastisement, justly incurred by our sins--I mean, the sins of Paris.  In
vain my father reminds him of Voltaire's story, in which the ship goes
down with a _fripon_ on board.  In order to punish the _fripon_, the
honest folks are drowned."

"Is your father going to remain on board the ship, and share the fate of
the other honest folks?"

"_Pas si bete_.  He is off to Dieppe for sea-bathing.  He says that Paris
has grown so dirty since the 4th September, that it is only fit for the
feet of the Unwashed.  He wished my mother to accompany him; but she
replies, 'No; there are already too many wounded not to need plenty of
nurses.'  She is assisting to inaugurate a society of ladies in aid of
the _Soeurs de Charite_.  Like Raoul, she is devout, but she has not his
superstitions.  Still his superstitions are the natural reaction of a
singularly earnest and pure nature from the frivolity and corruption
which, when kneaded well up together with a slice of sarcasm, Paris calls
philosophy."

"And what, my dear Enguerrand, do you propose to do?"

"That depends on whether we are really besieged.  If so, of course I
become a soldier."

"I hope not a National Guard?"

"I care not in what name I fight, so that I fight for France."


As Enguerrand said these simple words, his whole countenance, seemed
changed.  The crest rose; his eyes sparkled; the fair and delicate beauty
which had made him the darling of women--the joyous sweetness of
expression and dainty grace of high breeding which made him the most
popular companion to men,--were exalted in a masculine nobleness of
aspect, from which a painter might have taken hints for a study of the
young Achilles separated for ever from effeminate companionship at the
sight of the weapons of war.  De Mauleon gazed on him admiringly.  We
have seen that he shared the sentiments uttered--had resolved on the same
course of action.  But it was with the tempered warmth of a man who seeks
to divest his thoughts and his purpose of the ardour of romance, and who,
in serving his country, calculates on the gains to his own ambition.
Nevertheless he admired in Enguerrand the image of his own impulsive and
fiery youth.

"And you, I presume," resumed Enguerrand, "will fight too, but rather
with pen than with sword."

"Pens will now only be dipped in red ink, and commonsense never writes in
that colour; as for the sword, I have passed the age of forty-five, at
which military service halts.  But if some experience in active service,
some knowledge of the art by which soldiers are disciplined and led, will
be deemed sufficient title to a post of command, however modest the grade
be, I shall not be wanting among the defenders of Paris."

"My brave dear Vicomte, if you are past the age to serve, you are in the
ripest age to command; and with the testimonials and the cross you won in
Algeria, your application for employment will be received with gratitude
by any general so able as Trochu."

"I don't know whether I shall apply to Trochu.  I would rather be elected
to command even by the Mobiles or the National Guard, of whom I have just
spoken disparagingly; and no doubt both corps will soon claim and win the
right to choose their officers.  But if elected, no matter by whom, I
shall make a preliminary condition; the men under me shall train, and
drill, and obey,--soldiers of a very different kind from the youthful
Pekins nourished on absinthe and self-conceit, and applauding that
Bombastes Furioso, M. Hugo, when he assures the enemy that Paris will
draw an idea from its scabbard.  But here comes Savarin. _Bon jour_, my
dear poet."

"Don't say good day.  An evil day for journalists and writers who do not
out-Herod Blanqui and Pyat.  I know not how I shall get bread and cheese.
My poor suburban villa is to be pulled down by way of securing Paris; my
journal will be suppressed by way of establishing the liberty of the
press.  I ventured to suggest that the people of France should have some
choice in the form of their government."

"That was very indiscreet, my poor Savarin," said Victor; "I wonder your
printing-office has not been pulled down.  We are now at the moment when
wise men hold their tongues."

"Perhaps so, M. de Mauleon.  It might have been wiser for all of us, you
as well as myself, if we had not allowed our tongues to be so free before
this moment arrived.  We live to learn; and if we ever have what may be
called a passable government again, in which we may say pretty much what
we like, there is one thing I will not do, I will not undermine that
government without seeing a very clear way to the government that is to
follow it.  What say you, Pierre Firmin?"

"Frankly, I say that I deserve your rebuke," answered De Mauleon
thoughtfully.  "But, of course, you are going to take or send Madame
Savarin out of Paris."

"Certainly.  We have made a very pleasant party for our hegira this
evening-among others the Morleys.  Morley is terribly disgusted.  A Red
Republican slapped him on the shoulder and said, 'American, we have a
republic as well as you.'  'Pretty much you know about republics,'
growled Morley; 'a French republic is as much like ours as a baboon is
like a man.'  On which the Red roused the mob, who dragged the American
off to the nearest station of the National Guard, where he was accused of
being a Prussian spy.  With some difficulty, and lots of brag about the
sanctity of the stars and stripes, he escaped with a reprimand, and
caution how to behave himself in future.  So he quits a city in which
there no longer exists freedom of speech.  My wife hoped to induce
Mademoiselle Cicogna to accompany us; I grieve to say she refuses.  You
know she is engaged in marriage to Gustave Rameau; and his mother dreads
the effect that these Red Clubs and his own vanity may have upon his
excitable temperament if the influence of Mademoiselle Cicogna be
withdrawn."

"How could a creature so exquisite as Isaura Cicogna ever find
fascination in Gustave Rameau!" exclaimed Enguerrand.

"A woman like her," answered De Mauleon, "always finds a fascination in
self-sacrifice."

"I think you divine the truth," said Savarin, rather mournfully.  "But I
must bid you good-bye.  May we live to shake hands _reunis sons des
meilleurs auspices_."

Here Savarin hurried off, and the other two men strolled into the Champs
Elysees, which were crowded with loungers, gay and careless, as if there
had been no disaster at Sedan, no overthrow of an Empire, no enemy on its
road to Paris.

In fact the Parisians, at once the most incredulous and the most
credulous of all populations, believed that the Prussians would never be
so impertinent as to come in sight of the gates.  Something would occur
to stop them!  The king had declared he did not war on Frenchmen, but on
the Emperor: the Emperor gone, the war was over.  A democratic republic
was instituted.  A horrible thing in its way, it is true; but how could
the Pandour tyrant brave the infection of democratic doctrines among his
own barbarian armies?  Were not placards, addressed to our "German
brethren," posted upon the walls of Paris, exhorting the Pandours to
fraternise with their fellow-creatures?  Was not Victor Hugo going to
publish "a letter to the German people"?  Had not Jules Favre graciously
offered peace, with the assurance that "France would not cede a stone of
her fortresses--an inch of her territory?  She would pardon the invaders
and not march upon Berlin!"  To all these, and many more such
incontestable proofs, that the idea of a siege was moonshine, did
Enguerrand and Victor listen as they joined group after group of their
fellow-countrymen: nor did Paris cease to harbour such pleasing
illusions, amusing itself with piously laying crowns at the foot of the
