Isaura's breast heaved beneath her robe, she sighed softly.

"And then how sweet the fame of which the one we love is proud! how
trifling becomes the pang of some malignant depreciation, which a word
from the beloved one can soothe!  O Signorina!  O Isaura! are we not made
for each other?  Kindred pursuits, hopes, and fears in common; the same
race to run, the same goal to win!  I need a motive stronger than I have
yet known for the persevering energy that insures success: supply to me
that motive.  Let me think that whatever I win in the strife of the world
is a tribute to Isaura.  No, do not seek to withdraw this hand, let me
claim it as mine for life.  I love you as man never loved before--do not
reject my love."

They say the woman who hesitates is lost.  Isaura hesitated, but was not
yet lost.  The words she listened to moved her deeply.  Offers of
marriage she had already received: one from a rich middle-aged noble,
a devoted musical virtuoso; one from a young avocat fresh from the
provinces, and somewhat calculating on her dot; one from a timid but
enthusiastic admirer of her genius and her beauty, himself rich,
handsome, of good birth, but with shy manners and faltering tongue.

But these had made their proposals with the formal respect habitual to
French decorum in matrimonial proposals.  Words so eloquently impassioned
as Gustave Rameau's had never before thrilled her ears;  Yes, she was
deeply moved; and yet, by that very emotion she knew that it was not to
the love of this wooer that her heart responded.

There is a circumstance in the history of courtship familiar to the
experience of many women, that while the suitor is pleading his cause,
his language may touch every fibre in the heart of his listener, yet
substitute, as it were, another presence for his own.  She may be saying
to herself, "Oh that another had said those words!" and be dreaming of
the other, while she hears the one.  Thus it was with Isaura, and not
till Rameau's voice had ceased did that dream pass away, and with a
slight shiver she turned her face towards the wooer sadly and pityingly.
"It cannot be," she said, in a low whisper; "I were not worthy of your
love could I accept it.  Forget that you have so spoken; let me still be
a friend admiring your genius, interested in your career.  I cannot be
more.  Forgive me if I unconsciously led you to think I could, I am so
grieved to pain you."

"Am I to understand," said Rameau, coldly, for his _amour propre_ was
resentful, "that the proposals of another have been more fortunate than
mine?" And he named the youngest and comeliest of those whom she had
rejected.  "Certainly not," said Isaura.

Rameau rose and went to the window, turning his face from her.  In
reality he was striving to collect his thoughts and decide on the course
it were most prudent for him now to pursue.  The fumes of the absinthe
which had, despite his previous forebodings, emboldened him to hazard his
avowal, had now subsided into the languid reaction which is generally
consequent on that treacherous stimulus, a reaction not unfavourable to
passionless reflection.  He knew that if he said he could not conquer his
love, he would still cling to hope, and trust to perseverance and time,
he should compel Isaura to forbid his visits and break off their familiar
intercourse.  This would be fatal to the chance of yet winning her, and
would also be of serious disadvantage to his more worldly interests.  Her
literary aid might become essential to the journal on which his fortunes
depended; and at all events, in her conversation, in her encouragement,
in her sympathy with the pains and joys of his career, he felt a support,
a comfort, nay, an inspiration.  For the spontaneous gush of her fresh
thoughts and fancies served to recruit his own jaded ideas, and enlarge
his own stinted range of invention.  No, he could not commit himself to
the risk of banishment from Isaura.

And mingled with meaner motives for discretion, there was one of which he
was but vaguely conscious, purer and nobler.  In the society of this
girl, in whom whatever was strong and high in mental organisation became
so sweetened into feminine grace by gentleness of temper and kindliness
of disposition, Rameau felt himself a better man.  The virgin-like
dignity with which she moved, so untainted by a breath of scandal, amid
salons in which the envy of virtues doubted sought to bring innocence
itself into doubt, warmed into a genuine reverence the cynicism of his
professed creed.

While with her, while under her chastening influence, he was sensible of
a poetry infused within him far more true to the Camoenae than all he had
elaborated into verse.  In these moments he was ashamed of the vices he
had courted as distractions.  He imagined that with her all his own, it
would be easy to reform.

No; to withdraw wholly from Isaura was to renounce his sole chance of
redemption.

While these thoughts, which it takes so long to detail, passed rapidly
through his brain, he felt a soft touch on his arm, and, turning his face
slowly, encountered the tender, compassionate eyes of Isaura.

"Be consoled, dear friend," she said, with a smile, half cheering, half
mournful.  "Perhaps for all true artists the solitary lot is the best."

"I will try to think so," answered Rameau; "and meanwhile I thank you
with a full heart for the sweetness with which you have checked my
presumption--the presumption shall not be repeated.  Gratefully I accept
the friendship you deign to tender me.  You bid me forget the words I
uttered.  Promise in turn that you will forget them--or at least consider
them withdrawn.  You will receive me still as friend?"

"As friend, surely: yes.  Do we not both need friends?" She held out her
hand as she spoke; he bent over it, kissed it with respect, and the
interview thus closed.




CHAPTER V.

It was late in the evening that day when a man who had the appearance of
a decent bourgeois, in the lower grades of that comprehensive class,
entered one of the streets in the Faubourg Montmartre, tenanted chiefly
by artisans.  He paused at the open doorway of a tall narrow house, and
drew back as he heard footsteps descending a very gloomy staircase.

The light from a gas lamp on the street fell full on the face of the
person thus quitting the house--the face of a young and handsome man,
dressed with the quiet elegance which betokened one of higher rank or
fashion than that neighbourhood was habituated to find among its
visitors.  The first comer retreated promptly into the shade, and,
as by sudden impulse, drew his hat low down over his eyes.

The other man did not, however, observe him, went his way with a quick
step along the street, and entered another house some yards distant.

"What can that pious Bourbonite do here?" muttered the first comer.
"Can he be a conspirator?  Diable! 'tis as dark as Erebus on that
staircase."

Taking cautious hold of the banister, the man now ascended the stairs.
On the landing of the first floor there was a gas lamp which threw upward
a faint ray that finally died at the third story.  But at that third
story the man's journey ended; he pulled a bell at the door to the right,
and in another moment or so the door was opened by a young woman of
twenty-eight or thirty, dressed very simply, but with a certain neatness
not often seen in the wives of artisans in the Faubourg Montmartre.  Her
face, which, though pale and delicate, retained much of the beauty of
youth, became clouded as she recognised the visitor; evidently the visit
was not welcome to her.

"Monsieur Lebeau again!" she exclaimed, shrinking back.

"At your service, _chere dame_.  The goodman is of course at home?  Ah,
I catch sight of him," and sliding by the woman, M. Lebeau passed the
narrow lobby in which she stood, through the open door conducting into
the room in which Armand Monnier was seated, his chin propped on his
hand, his elbow resting on a table, looking abstractedly into space.  In
a corner of the room two small children were playing languidly with a set
of bone tablets, inscribed with the letters of the alphabet.  But
whatever the children were doing with the alphabet, they were certainly
not learning to read from it.

The room was of fair size and height, and by no means barely or shabbily
furnished.  There was a pretty clock on the mantelpiece.  On the wall
were hung designs for the decoration of apartments, and shelves on which
were ranged a few books.

The window was open, and on the sill were placed flowerpots; you could
scent the odour they wafted into the room.  Altogether it was an
apartment suited to a skilled artisan earning high wages.  From the room
we are now in, branched on one side a small but commodious kitchen; on
the other side, on which the door was screened by a portiere, with a
border prettily worked by female hands--some years ago, for it was faded
now--was a bedroom, communicating with one of less size in which the
children slept.  We do not enter those additional rooms, but it may be
well here to mention them as indications of the comfortable state of an
intelligent skilled artisan of Paris, who thinks he can better that state
by some revolution which may ruin his employer.

Monnier started up at the entrance of Lebeau, and his face showed that he
did not share the dislike to the visit which that of the female partner
of his life had evinced.  On the contrary, his smile was cordial, and
there was a hearty ring in the voice which cried out--

"I am glad to see you--something to do?  Eh!"

"Always ready to work for liberty, _mon brave_."

"I hope so: what's in the wind now?"

"O Armand, be prudent--be prudent!" cried the woman, piteously.  "Do not
lead him into further mischief, Monsieur Lebeau;" as she faltered forth
the last words, she bowed her head over the two little ones, and her
voice died in sobs.

"Monnier," said Lebeau, gravely, "Madame is right.  I ought not to lead
you into further mischief; there are three in the room who have better
claims on you than--"

"The cause of millions," interrupted Monnier.

"No."

He approached the woman and took up one of the children very tenderly,
stroking back its curls and kissing the face, which, if before surprised
and saddened by the mother's sob, now smiled gaily under the father's
kiss.
