
Martin had no mind to let the priest into the secret of the state of
their finances.

"And tell him," continued Hereward, "that if I fall in this battle I
give him all that money, that he may part it among the poor for the good
of my soul."

"Pish!" said Martin to his lord; "that is paying him for having you
killed. You should pay him for keeping you alive." And without waiting
for the answer, he spoke in Latin,--

"And if he comes back safe from this battle, he will give you ten
pennies for yourself and your church, Priest, and therefore expects you
to pray your very loudest while he is gone."

"I will pray, I will pray," said the holy man; "I will wrestle in
prayer. Ah that he could slay the wicked, and reward the proud according
to his deservings! Ah that he could rid me and my master, and my young
lady, of this son of Belial,--this devourer of widows and orphans,--this
slayer of the poor and needy, who fills this place with innocent
blood,--him of whom it is written, 'They stretch forth their mouth unto
the heaven, and their tongue goeth through the world. Therefore fall
the people unto them, and thereout suck they no small advantage.' I will
shrive him, shrive him of all save robbing the priest, and for that he
must go to the bishop, if he live; and if not, the Lord have mercy on
his soul."

And so, weeping and trembling, the good old man pronounced the words of
absolution.

Hereward rose, thanked him, and then hurried out in silence.

"You will pray your very loudest, Priest," said Martin, as he followed
his young lord.

"I will, I will," quoth he, and kneeling down began to chant that noble
seventy-third Psalm, "Quam bonus Israel," which he had just so fitly
quoted.

"Thou gavest him the bag, Martin?" said Hereward, as they hurried on.

"You are not dead yet. 'No pay, no play,' is as good a rule for priest
as for layman."

"Now then, Martin Lightfoot, good-bye. Come not with me. It must never
be said, even slanderously, that I brought two into the field against
one; and if I die, Martin--"

"You won't die!" said Lightfoot, shutting his teeth.

"If I die, go back to my people somehow, and tell them that I died like
a true earl's son."

Hereward held out his hand; Martin fell on his knees and kissed it;
watched him with set teeth till he disappeared in the wood; and then
started forward and entered the bushes at a different spot.

"I must be nigh at hand to see fair play," he muttered to himself, "in
case any of his ruffians be hanging about. Fair play I'll see, and
fair play I'll give, too, for the sake of my lord's honor, though I be
bitterly loath to do it. So many times as I have been a villain when it
was of no use, why mayn't I be one now, when it would serve the purpose
indeed? Why did we ever come into this accursed place? But one thing I
will do," said he, as he ensconced himself under a thick holly, whence
he could see the meeting of the combatants upon an open lawn some twenty
yards away; "if that big bull-calf kills my master, and I do not jump on
his back and pick his brains out with this trusty steel of mine, may my
right arm--"

And Martin Lightfoot swore a fearful oath, which need not here be
written.

The priest had just finished his chant of the seventy-third Psalm, and
had betaken himself in his spiritual warfare, as it was then called, to
the equally apposite fifty-second, "Quid gloriaris?"

"Why boastest thou thyself, thou tyrant, that thou canst do mischief,
whereas the goodness of God endureth yet daily?"

"Father! father!" cried a soft voice in the doorway, "where are you?"

And in hurried the Princess.

"Hide this," she said, breathless, drawing from beneath her mantle a
huge sword; "hide it, where no one dare touch it, under the altar behind
the holy rood: no place too secret."

"What is it?" asked the priest, springing up from his knees.

"His sword,--the Ogre's,--his magic sword, which kills whomsoever it
strikes. I coaxed the wretch to let me have it last night when he was
tipsy, for fear he should quarrel with the young stranger; and I have
kept it from him ever since by one excuse or another; and now he has
sent one of his ruffians in for it, saying, that if I do not give it up
at once he will come back and kill me."

"He dare not do that," said the priest.

"What is there that he dare not?" said she. "Hide it at once; I know
that he wants it to fight with this Hereward."

"If he wants it for that," said the priest, "it is too late; for half an
hour is past since Hereward went to meet him."

"And you let him go? You did not persuade him, stop him? You let him go
hence to his death?"

In vain the good man expostulated and explained that it was no fault of
his.

"You must come with me this instant to my father,--to them; they must
be parted. They shall be parted. If you dare not, I dare. I will throw
myself between them, and he that strikes the other shall strike me."

And she hurried the priest out of the house, down the knoll, and across
the yard. There they found others on the same errand. The news that a
battle was toward had soon spread, and the men-at-arms were hurrying
down to the fight; kept back, however, by Alef, who strode along at
their head.

Alef was sorely perplexed in mind. He had taken, as all honest men did,
a great liking to Hereward. Moreover, he was his kinsman and his guest.
Save him he would if he could but how to save him without mortally
offending his tyrant Ironhook he could not see. At least he would exert
what little power he had, and prevent, if possible, his men-at-arms from
helping their darling leader against the hapless lad.

Alef's perplexity was much increased when his daughter bounded towards
him, seizing him by the arm, and hurried him on, showing by look and
word which of the combatants she favored, so plainly that the ruffians
behind broke into scornful murmurs. They burst through the bushes.
Martin Lightfoot, happily, heard them coming, and had just time to slip
away noiselessly, like a rabbit, to the other part of the cover.

The combat seemed at the first glance to be one between a grown man and
a child, so unequal was the size of the combatants. But the second look
showed that the advantage was by no means with Ironhook. Stumbling to
and fro with the broken shaft of a javelin sticking in his thigh, he
vainly tried to seize and crush Hereward in his enormous arms. Hereward,
bleeding, but still active and upright, broke away, and sprang
round him, watching for an opportunity to strike a deadly blow. The
housecarles rushed forward with yells. Alef shouted to the combatants to
desist; but ere the party could reach them, Hereward's opportunity had
come. Ironhook, after a fruitless lunge, stumbled forward. Hereward
leapt aside, and spying an unguarded spot below the corslet, drove his
sword deep into the giant's body, and rolled him over upon the sward.
Then arose shouts of fury.

"Foul play!" cried one.

And others taking up the cry, called out, "Sorcery!" and "Treason!"

Hereward stood over Ironhook as he lay writhing and foaming on the
ground.

"Killed by a boy at last!" groaned he. "If I had but had my own
sword,--my Brain-biter which that witch stole from me but last
night!"--and amid foul curses and bitter tears of shame his mortal
spirit fled to its doom.

The housecarles rushed in on Hereward, who had enough to do to keep them
at arm's length by long sweeps of his sword.

Alef entreated, threatened, promised a fair trial if the men would give
fair play; when, to complete the confusion, the Princess threw herself
upon the corpse, shrieking and tearing her hair; and to Hereward's
surprise and disgust, bewailed the prowess and the virtues of the dead,
calling upon all present to avenge his murder.

Hereward vowed inwardly that he would never again trust woman's fancy
or fight in woman's quarrel. He was now nigh at his wits' end; the
housecarles had closed round him in a ring with the intention of seizing
him; and however well he might defend his front, he might be crippled
at any moment from behind: but in the very nick of time Martin Lightfoot
burst through the crowd, set himself heel to heel with his master, and
broke out, not with threats, but with a good-humored laugh.

"Here is a pretty coil about a red-headed brute of a Pict! Danes,
Ostmen," he cried, "are you not ashamed to call such a fellow your lord,
when you have such a true earl's son as this to lead you if you will?"

The Ostmen in the company looked at each other. Martin Lightfoot saw
that his appeal to the antipathies of race had told, and followed it up
by a string of witticisms upon the Pictish nation in general, of
which the only two fit for modern ears to be set down were the two old
stories, that the Picts had feet so large that they used to lie upon
their backs and hold up their legs to shelter them from the sun; and
that when killed, they could not fall down, but died as they were, all
standing.

"So that the only foul play I can see is, that my master shoved the
fellow over after he had stabbed him, instead of leaving him to stand
upright there, like one of your Cornish Dolmens, till his flesh should
fall off his bones."

Hereward saw the effect of Martin's words, and burst out in Danish
likewise.

"Look at me!" he said; "I am Hereward the outlaw, I am the champion, I
am the Berserker, I am the Viking, I am the land thief, the sea
thief, the ravager of the world, the bear-slayer, the ogre-killer, the
raven-fattener, the darling of the wolf, the curse of the widow. Touch
me, and I will give you to the raven and to the wolf, as I have this
ogre. Be my men, and follow me over the swan's road, over the whale's
bath, over the long-snake's leap, to the land where the sea meets the
sun, and golden apples hang on every tree; and we will freight our ships
with Moorish maidens, and the gold of Cadiz and Algiers."

"Hark to the Viking! Hark to the right earl's son!" shouted some of
the Danes, whose blood had been stirred many a time before by such wild
words, and on whom Hereward's youth and beauty had their due effect. And
now the counsels of the ruffians being divided, the old priest gained
courage to step in. Let them deliver Hereward and his serving man into
his custody. He would bring them forth on the morrow, and there should
be full investigation and fair trial. And so Hereward and Martin, who
both refused stoutly to give up their arms, were marched back into the
town, locked in the little church, and left to their meditations.

Hereward sat down on the pavement and cursed the Princess. Martin
Lightfoot took off his master's corslet, and, as well as the darkness
would allow, bound up his wounds, which happily were not severe.

"Were I you," said he at last, "I should keep my curses till I saw the
end of this adventure."

"Has not the girl betrayed me shamefully?"

"Not she. I saw her warn you, as far as looks could do, not to quarrel
with the man."

"That was because she did not know me. Little she thought that I
could--"

"Don't hollo till you are out of the wood. This is a night for praying
rather than boasting."

"She cannot really love that wretch," said Hereward, after a pause. "You
saw how she mocked him."

"Women are strange things, and often tease most where they love most."

"But such a misbegotten savage."

"Women are strange things, say I, and with some a big fellow is a pretty
fellow, be he uglier than seven Ironhooks. Still, just because women are
strange things, have patience, say I."

The lock creaked, and the old priest came in. Martin leapt to the
open door; but it was slammed in his face by men outside with scornful
laughter.

The priest took Hereward's head in his hands, wept over him, blessed him
for having slain Goliath like young David, and then set food and drink
before the two; but he answered Martin's questions only with sighs and
shakings of the head.

"Let us eat and drink, then," said Martin, "and after that you, my lord,
sleep off your wounds while I watch the door. I have no fancy for these
fellows taking us unawares at night."

Martin lay quietly across the door till the small hours, listening to
every sound, till the key creaked once more in the lock. He started at
the sound, and seizing the person who entered round the neck, whispered,
"One word, and you are dead."

"Do not hurt me," half shrieked a stifled voice; and Martin Lightfoot,
to his surprise, found that he had grasped no armed man, but the slight
frame of a young girl.

"I am the Princess," she whispered; "let me in."

"A very pretty hostage for us," thought Martin, and letting her go
seized the key, locking the door in the inside.

"Take me to your master," she cried, and Martin led her up the church
wondering, but half suspecting some further trap.

"You have a dagger in your hand," said he, holding her wrist.

"I have. If I had meant to use it, it would have been used first on you.
Take it, if you like."

She hurried up to Hereward, who lay sleeping quietly on the altar-steps;
knelt by him, wrung his hands, called him her champion, her deliverer.

"I am not well awake yet," said he, coldly, "and don't know whether this
may not be a dream, as more that I have seen and heard seems to be."

"It is no dream. I am true. I was always true to you. Have I not put
myself in your power? Am I not come here to deliver you, my deliverer?"

"The tears which you shed over your ogre's corpse seem to have dried
quickly enough."

"Cruel! What else could I do? You heard him accuse me to those ruffians
of having stolen his sword. My life, my father's life, were not safe
a moment, had I not dissembled, and done the thing I loathed. Ah!" she
went on, bitterly, "you men, who rule the world and us by cruel steel,
you forget that we poor women have but one weapon left wherewith to hold
our own, and that is cunning; and are driven by you day after day to
tell the lie which we detest."

"Then you really stole his sword?"

"And hid it here, for your sake!" and she drew the weapon from behind
the altar.

"Take it. It is yours now. It is magical. Whoever smites with it, need
never smite again. Now, quick, you must be gone. But promise one thing
before you go."

"If I leave this land safe, I will do it, be it what it may. Why not
come with me, lady, and see it done?"

She laughed. "Vain boy, do you think that I love you well enough for
that?"

"I have won you, and why should I not keep you?" said Hereward,
sullenly.

"Do you not know that I am betrothed to your kinsman? And--though that
you cannot know--that I love your kinsman?"

"So I have all the blows, and none of the spoil."

"Tush! you have the glory,-and the sword,--and the chance, if you will
do my bidding, of being called by all ladies a true and gentle knight,
who cared not for his own pleasure, but for deeds of chivalry. Go to my
betrothed,--to Waterford over the sea. Take him this ring, and tell
him by that token to come and claim me soon, lest he run the danger of
losing me a second time, and lose me then forever; for I am in hard
case here, and were it not for my father's sake, perhaps I might be weak
enough, in spite of what men might say, to flee with you to your kinsman
across the sea."

"Trust me and come," said Hereward, whose young blood kindled with a
sudden nobleness,--"trust me, and I will treat you like my sister, like
my queen. By the holy rood above I will swear to be true to you."

"I do trust you, but it cannot be. Here is money for you in plenty to
hire a passage if you need: it is no shame to take it from me. And now
one thing more. Here is a cord,--you must bind the hands and feet of the
old priest inside, and then you must bind mine likewise."

"Never," quoth Hereward.

"It must be. How else can I explain your having got the key? I made them
give me the key on the pretence that with one who had most cause to hate
you, it would be safe; and when they come and find us in the morning I
shall tell them how I came here to stab you with my own hands,--you must
lay the dagger by me,--and how you and your man fell upon us and bound
us, and you escaped. Ah! Mary Mother," continued the maiden with a sigh,
"when shall we poor weak women have no more need of lying?"

She lay down, and Hereward, in spite of himself, gently bound her hands
and feet, kissing them as he bound them.

"I shall do well here upon the altar steps," said she. "How can I spend
my time better till the morning light than to lie here and pray?"

The old priest, who was plainly in the plot, submitted meekly to the
same fate; and Hereward and Martin Lightfoot stole out, locking the
door, but leaving the key in it outside. To scramble over the old
earthwork was an easy matter; and in a few minutes they were hurrying
down the valley to the sea, with a fresh breeze blowing behind them from
the north.

"Did I not tell you, my lord," said Martin Lightfoot, "to keep your
curses till you had seen the end of this adventure?"

Hereward was silent. His brain was still whirling from the adventures
of the day, and his heart was very deeply touched. His shrift of the
morning, hurried and formal as it had been, had softened him. His
danger--for he felt how he had been face to face with death--had
softened him likewise; and he repented somewhat of his vainglorious and
bloodthirsty boasting over a fallen foe, as he began to see that there
was a purpose more noble in life than ranging land and sea, a ruffian
among ruffians, seeking for glory amid blood and flame. The idea of
chivalry, of succoring the weak and the opprest, of keeping faith and
honor not merely towards men who could avenge themselves, but towards
women who could not; the dim dawn of purity, gentleness, and the
conquest of his own fierce passions,--all these had taken root in his
heart during his adventure with the fair Cornish girl. The seed was
sown. Would it he cut down again by the bitter blasts of the rough
fighting world, or would it grow and bear the noble fruit of "gentle
very perfect knighthood"?

They reached the ship, clambered on hoard without ceremony, at the risk
of being taken and killed as robbers, and told their case. The merchants
had not completed their cargo of tin. Hereward offered to make up their
loss to them if they would set sail at once; and they, feeling that the
place would be for some time to come too hot to hold them, and being
also in high delight, like honest Ostmen, with Hereward's prowess,
agreed to sail straight for Waterford, and complete their cargo there.
But the tide was out. It was three full hours before the ship could
float; and for three full hours they waited in fear and trembling,
expecting the Cornishmen to be down upon them in a body every moment,
under which wholesome fear some on board prayed fervently who had never
been known to pray before.




CHAPTER IV.

HOW HEREWARD TOOK SERVICE WITH RANALD, KING OF WATERFORD.


The coasts of Ireland were in a state of comparative peace in the middle
of the eleventh century. The ships of Loghlin, seen far out at sea, no
longer drove the population shrieking inland. Heathen Danes, whether
fair-haired Fiongall from Norway, or brown-haired Dubgall from Denmark
proper, no longer burned convents, tortured monks for their gold, or (as
at Clonmacnoise) set a heathen princess, Oda, wife of Thorgill, son of
Harold Harfager, aloft on the high altar to receive the homage of the
conquered. The Scandinavian invaders had become Christianized, and
civilized also,--owing to their continual intercourse with foreign
nations,--more highly than the Irish whom they had overcome. That was
easy; for early Irish civilization seems to have existed only in
the convents and for the religious; and when they were crushed, mere
barbarism was left behind. And now the same process went on in the
east of Ireland, which went on a generation or two later in the east
of Scotland. The Danes began to settle down into peaceful colonists and
traders. Ireland was poor; and the convents plundered once could not be
plundered again. The Irish were desperately brave. Ill-armed and almost
naked, they were as perfect in the arts of forest warfare as those
modern Maories whom they so much resembled; and though their black
skenes and light darts were no match for the Danish swords and
battle-axes which they adopted during the middle age, or their plaid
trousers and felt capes for the Danish helmet and chain corslet, still
an Irishman was so ugly a foe, that it was not worth while to fight with
him unless he could be robbed afterwards. The Danes, who, like their
descendants of Northumbria, the Lowlands, and Ulster, were canny
common-sense folk, with a shrewd eye to interest, found, somewhat to
their regret, that there were trades even more profitable than robbery
and murder. They therefore concentrated themselves round harbors and
river mouths, and sent forth their ships to all the western seas, from
Dublin, Waterford, Wexford, Cork, or Limerick. Every important seaport
in Ireland owes its existence to those sturdy Vikings' sons. In each of
these towns they had founded a petty kingdom, which endured until,
and even in some cases after, the conquest of Ireland by Henry II. and
Strongbow. They intermarried in the mean while with the native Irish.
Brian Boru, for instance, was so connected with Danish royalty, that
it is still a question whether he himself had not Danish blood in his
veins. King Sigtryg Silkbeard, who fought against him at Clontarf,
was actually his step-son,--and so too, according to another Irish
chronicler, was King Olaff Kvaran, who even at the time of the battle of
Clontarf was married to Brian Boru's daughter,--a marriage which (if a
fact) was startlingly within the prohibited degrees of consanguinity.
But the ancient Irish were sadly careless on such points; and as
Giraldus Cambrensis says, "followed the example of men of old in their
vices more willingly than in their virtues."

More than forty years had elapsed since that famous battle of Clontarf,
and since Ragnvald, Reginald, or Ranald, son of Sigtryg the Norseman,
had been slain therein by Brian Boru. On that one day, so the Irish
sang, the Northern invaders were exterminated, once and for all, by the
Milesian hero, who had craftily used the strangers to fight his battles,
and then, the moment they became formidable to himself, crushed them,
till "from Howth to Brandon in Kerry there was not a threshing-floor
without a Danish slave threshing thereon, or a quern without a Danish
woman grinding thereat."

Nevertheless, in spite of the total annihilation of the Danish power in
the Emerald isle, Ranald seemed to the eyes of men to be still a hale
old warrior, ruling constitutionally--that is, with a wholesome fear
of being outlawed or murdered if he misbehaved--over the Danes in
Waterford; with five hundred fair-haired warriors at his back, two-edged
axe on shoulder and two-edged sword on thigh. His ships drove a thriving
trade with France and Spain in Irish fish, butter, honey, and furs. His
workmen coined money in the old round tower of Dundory, built by his
predecessor and namesake about the year 1003, which stands as Reginald's
tower to this day. He had fought many a bloody battle since his death at
Clontarf, by the side of his old leader Sigtryg Silkbeard. He had been
many a time to Dublin to visit his even more prosperous and formidable
friend; and was so delighted with the new church of the Holy Trinity,
which Sigtryg and his bishop Donatus had just built, not in the Danish
or Ostman town, but in the heart of ancient Celtic Dublin, (plain proof
of the utter overthrow of the Danish power,) that he had determined to
build a like church in honor of the Holy Trinity, in Waterford itself.
A thriving, valiant old king he seemed, as he sat in his great house
of pine logs under Reginald's Tower upon the quay, drinking French and
Spanish wines out of horns of ivory and cups of gold; and over his head
hanging, upon the wall, the huge doubled-edged axe with which, so his
flatterers had whispered, Brian Boru had not slain him, but he Brian
Boru.

Nevertheless, then as since, alas! the pleasant theory was preferred by
the Milesian historians to the plain truth. And far away inland, monks
wrote and harpers sung of the death of Ranald, the fair-haired Fiongall,
and all his "mailed swarms."

One Teague MacMurrough, indeed, a famous bard of those parts, composed
unto his harp a song of Clontarf, the fame whereof reached Ranald's
ears, and so amused him that he rested not day or night till he had
caught the hapless bard and brought him in triumph into Waterford. There
he compelled him, at sword's point, to sing, to him and his housecarles
the Milesian version of the great historical event: and when the harper,
in fear and trembling, came to the story of Ranald's own death at Brian
Boru's hands, then the jolly old Viking laughed till the tears ran down
his face; and instead of cutting off Teague's head, gave him a cup of
goodly wine, made him his own harper thenceforth, and bade him send for
his wife and children, and sing to him every day, especially the song of
Clontarf and his own death; treating him very much, in fact, as English
royalty, during the last generation, treated another Irish bard whose
song was even more sweet, and his notions of Irish history even more
grotesque, than those of Teague MacMurrough.

It was to this old king, or rather to his son Sigtryg, godson of Sigtryg
Silkbeard, and distant cousin of his own, that Hereward now took his
way, and told his story, as the king sat in his hall, drinking "across
the fire," after the old Norse fashion. The fire of pine logs was in the
midst of the hall, and the smoke went out through a louver in the roof.
On one side was a long bench, and in the middle of it the king's high
arm-chair; right and left of him sat his kinsmen and the ladies, and his
sea-captains and men of wealth. Opposite, on the other side of the fire,
was another bench. In the middle of that sat his marshal, and right and
left all his housecarles. There were other benches behind, on which sat
more freemen, but of lesser rank.

And they were all drinking ale, which a servant poured out of a bucket
into a great bull's horn, and the men handed round to each other.

Then Hereward came in, and sat down on the end of the hindermost bench,
and Martin stood behind him, till one of the ladies said,--

"Who is that young stranger, who sits behind there so humbly, though,
he looks like an earl's son, more fit to sit here with us on the high
bench?"

"So he does," quoth King Ranald. "Come forward hither, young sir, and
drink."

And when Hereward came forward, all the ladies agreed that he must be an
earl's son; for he had a great gold torc round his neck, and gold
rings on his wrists; and a new scarlet coat, bound with gold braid; and
scarlet stockings, cross-laced with gold braid up to the knee; and shoes
trimmed with martin's fur; and a short blue silk cloak over all, trimmed
with martin's fur likewise; and by his side, in a broad belt with gold
studs, was the Ogre's sword Brain-biter, with its ivory hilt and velvet
sheath; and all agreed that if he had but been a head taller, they had
never seen a properer man.

"Aha! such a gay young sea-cock does not come hither for naught. Drink
first, man, and tell us thy business after," and he reached the horn to
Hereward.

Hereward took it, and sang,--

 "In this Braga-beaker,
  Brave Ranald I pledge;
  In good liquor, which lightens
  Long labor on oar-bench;
  Good liquor, which sweetens
  The song of the scald."

"Thy voice is as fine as thy feathers, man. Nay, drink it all. We
ourselves drink here by the peg at midday; but a stranger is welcome to
fill his inside all hours of the day."

Whereon Hereward finished the horn duly; and at Ranald's bidding, sat
him down on the high settle. He did not remark, that as he sat down two
handsome youths rose and stood behind him.

"Now then, Sir Priest," quoth the king, "go on with your story."

A priest, Irish by his face and dress, who sat on the high bench, rose,
and renewed an oration which Hereward's entrance had interrupted.

"So, O great King, as says Homerus, this wise king called his earls,
knights, sea-captains, and housecarles, and said unto them, 'Which of
these two kings is in the right, who can tell? But mind you, that this
king of the Enchanters lives far away in India, and we never heard of
him more than his name; but this king Ulixes and his Greeks live hard
by; and which of the two is it wiser to quarrel with, him that lives
hard by or him that lives far off? Therefore, King Ranald, says, by the
mouth of my humility, the great O'Brodar, Lord of Ivark, 'Take example
by Alcinous, the wise king of Fairy, and listen not to the ambassadors
of those lying villains, O'Dea Lord of Slievardagh, Maccarthy King of
Cashel, and O'Sullivan Lord of Knockraffin, who all three between them
could not raise kernes enough to drive off one old widow's cow. Make
friends with me, who live upon your borders; and you shall go peaceably
through my lands, to conquer and destroy them, who live afar off; as
they deserve, the sons of Belial and Judas.'"

And the priest crost himself, and sat down. At which speech Hereward was
seen to laugh.

"Why do you laugh, young sir? The priest seems to talk like a wise man,
and is my guest and an ambassador."

Then rose up Hereward, and bowed to the king. "King Ranald Sigtrygsson,
it was not for rudeness that I laughed, for I learnt good manners long
ere I came here, but because I find clerks alike all over the world."

"How?"

"Quick at hiding false counsel under learned speech. I know nothing of
Ulixes, king, nor of this O'Brodar either; and I am but a lad, as you
see: but I heard a bird once in my own country who gave a very different
counsel from the priest's."

"Speak on, then. This lad is no fool, my merry men all."

"There were three copses, King, in our country, and each copse stood on
a hill. In the first there built an eagle, in the second there built a
sparhawk, in the third there built a crow.

"Now the sparhawk came to the eagle, and said, 'Go shares with me, and
we will kill the crow, and have her wood to ourselves.'

"'Humph!' says the eagle, 'I could kill the crow without your help;
however, I will think of it.'

"When the crow heard that, she came to the eagle herself. 'King Eagle,'
says she, 'why do you want to kill me, who live ten miles from you, and
never flew across your path in my life? Better kill that little rogue
of a sparhawk who lives between us, and is always ready to poach on your
marches whenever your back is turned. So you will have her wood as well
as your own.'

"'You are a wise crow,' said the eagle; and he went out and killed the
sparhawk, and took his wood."

Loud laughed King Ranald and his Vikings all. "Well spoken, young man!
We will take the sparhawk, and let the crow bide."

"Nay, but," quoth Hereward, "hear the end of the story. After a while
the eagle finds the crow beating about the edge of the sparhawk's wood.

"'Oho!' says he, 'so you can poach as well as that little hooknosed
rogue?' and he killed her too.

"'Ah!' says the crow, when she lay a-dying, 'my blood is on my own head.
If I had but left the sparhawk between me and this great tyrant!'

"And so the eagle got all three woods to himself."

At which the Vikings laughed more loudly than ever; and King Ranald,
chuckling at the notion of eating up the hapless Irish princes one by
one, sent back the priest (not without a present for his church, for
Ranald was a pious man) to tell the great O'Brodar, that unless he sent
into Waterford by that day week two hundred head of cattle, a hundred
pigs, a hundredweight of clear honey, and as much of wax, Ranald would
not leave so much as a sucking-pig alive in Ivark.

The cause of quarrel, of course, was too unimportant to be mentioned.
Each had robbed and cheated the other half a dozen times in the last
twenty years. As for the morality of the transaction, Ranald had this
salve for his conscience,--that as he intended to do to O'Brodar, so
would O'Brodar have gladly done to him, had he been living peaceably in
Norway, and O'Brodar been strong enough to invade and rob him. Indeed,
so had O'Brodar done already, ever since he wore beard, to every
chieftain of his own race whom he was strong enough to ill-treat. Many
a fair herd had he driven off, many a fair farm burnt, many a fair woman
carried off a slave, after that inveterate fashion of lawless feuds
which makes the history of Celtic Ireland from the earliest times one
dull and aimless catalogue of murder and devastation, followed by famine
and disease; and now, as he had done to others, so it was to be done to
him.

"And now, young sir, who seem as witty as you are good looking, you
