and the nymph Harmonia, who bare to Ares war-loving maids, wedded to him
in the glens of the Acmonian wood had not the breezes of Argestes come
again from Zeus; and with the wind they left the rounded beach, where
the Themiscyreian Amazons were arming for war. For they dwelt not
gathered together in one city, but scattered over the land, parted into
three tribes. In one part dwelt the Themiscyreians, over whom at that
time Hippolyte reigned, in another the Lycastians, and in another the
dart-throwing Chadesians. And the next day they sped on and at nightfall
they reached the land of the Chalybes.

(ll. 1002-1008) That folk have no care for ploughing with oxen or for
any planting of honey-sweet fruit; nor yet do they pasture flocks in
the dewy meadow. But they cleave the hard iron-bearing land and exchange
their wages for daily sustenance; never does the morn rise for them
without toil, but amid bleak sooty flames and smoke they endure heavy
labour.

(ll. 1009-1014) And straightway thereafter they rounded the headland of
Genetaean Zeus and sped safely past the land of the Tibareni. Here when
wives bring forth children to their husbands, the men lie in bed and
groan with their heads close bound; but the women tend them with food,
and prepare child-birth baths for them.

(ll. 1015-1029) Next they reached the sacred mount and the land where
the Mossynoeci dwell amid high mountains in wooden huts, [1207] from
which that people take their name. And strange are their customs and
laws. Whatever it is right to do openly before the people or in the
market place, all this they do in their homes, but whatever acts we
perform at home, these they perform out of doors in the midst of
the streets, without blame. And among them is no reverence for the
marriage-bed, but, like swine that feed in herds, no whit abashed in
others' presence, on the earth they lie with the women. Their king sits
in the loftiest hut and dispenses upright judgments to the multitude,
poor wretch! For if haply he err at all in his decrees, for that day
they keep him shut up in starvation.

(ll. 1030-1046) They passed them by and cleft their way with oars over
against the island of Ares all day long; for at dusk the light breeze
left them. At last they spied above them, hurtling through the air, one
of the birds of Ares which haunt that isle. It shook its wings down over
the ship as she sped on and sent against her a keen feather, and it fell
on the left shoulder of goodly Oileus, and he dropped his oar from his
hands at the sudden blow, and his comrades marvelled at the sight of the
winged bolt. And Eribotes from his seat hard by drew out the feather,
and bound up the wound when he had loosed the strap hanging from his
own sword-sheath; and besides the first, another bird appeared swooping
down; but the hero Clytius, son of Eurytus--for he bent his curved bow,
and sped a swift arrow against the bird--struck it, and it whirled round
and fell close to the ship. And to them spake Amphidamas, son of Aleus:

(ll. 1047-1067) "The island of Ares is near us; you know it yourselves
now that ye have seen these birds. But little will arrows avail us, I
trow, for landing. But let us contrive some other device to help us, if
ye intend to land, bearing in mind the injunction of Phineus. For not
even could Heracles, when he came to Arcadia, drive away with bow and
arrow the birds that swam on the Stymphalian lake. I saw it myself. But
he shook in his hand a rattle of bronze and made a loud clatter as
he stood upon a lofty peak, and the birds fled far off, screeching in
bewildered fear. Wherefore now too let us contrive some such device, and
I myself will speak, having pondered the matter beforehand. Set on your
heads your helmets of lofty crest, then half row by turns, and half
fence the ship about with polished spears and shields. Then all together
raise a mighty shout so that the birds may be scared by the unwonted
din, the nodding crests, and the uplifted spears on high. And if we
reach the island itself, then make mighty noise with the clashing of
shields."

(ll. 1068-1089) Thus he spake, and the helpful device pleased all. And
on their heads they placed helmets of bronze, gleaming terribly, and the
blood-red crests were tossing. And half of them rowed in turn, and the
rest covered the ship with spears and shields. And as when a man roofs
over a house with tiles, to be an ornament of his home and a defence
against rain, and one the fits firmly into another, each after each; so
they roofed over the ship with their shields, locking them together. And
as a din arises from a warrior-host of men sweeping on, when lines of
battle meet, such a shout rose upward from the ship into the air. Now
they saw none of the birds yet, but when they touched the island and
clashed upon their shields, then the birds in countless numbers rose in
flight hither and thither. And as when the son of Cronos sends from the
clouds a dense hailstorm on city and houses, and the people who dwell
beneath hear the din above the roof and sit quietly, since the stormy
season has not come upon them unawares, but they have first made strong
their roofs; so the birds sent against the heroes a thick shower of
feather-shafts as they darted over the sea to the mountains of the land
opposite.

(ll. 1090-1092) What then was the purpose of Phineus in bidding the
divine band of heroes land there? Or what kind of help was about to meet
their desire?

(ll. 1093-1122) The sons of Phrixus were faring towards the city of
Orchomenus from Aea, coming from Cytaean Aeetes, on board a Colchian
ship, to win the boundless wealth of their father; for he, when dying,
had enjoined this journey upon them. And lo, on that day they were very
near that island. But Zeus had impelled the north wind's might to blow,
marking by rain the moist path of Arcturus; and all day long he was
stirring the leaves upon the mountains, breathing gently upon the
topmost sprays; but at night he rushed upon the sea with monstrous
force, and with his shrieking blasts uplifted the surge; and a dark mist
covered the heavens, nor did the bright stars anywhere appear from among
the clouds, but a murky gloom brooded all around. And so the sons of
Phrixus, drenched and trembling in fear of a horrible doom, were borne
along by the waves helplessly. And the force of the wind had snatched
away their sails and shattered in twain the hull, tossed as it was by
the breakers. And hereupon by heaven's prompting those four clutched a
huge beam, one of many that were scattered about, held together by sharp
bolts, when the ship broke to pieces. And on to the island the waves and
the blasts of wind bore the men in their distress, within a little of
death. And straightway a mighty rain burst forth, and rained upon the
sea and the island, and all the country opposite the island, where the
arrogant Mossynoeci dwelt. And the sweep of the waves hurled the sons of
Phrixus, together with their massy beam, upon the beach of the island,
in the murky night; and the floods of rain from Zeus ceased at sunrise,
and soon the two bands drew near and met each other, and Argus spoke
first:

(ll. 1123-1133) "We beseech you, by Zeus the Beholder, whoever ye are,
to be kindly and to help us in our need. For fierce tempests, falling
on the sea, have shattered all the timbers of the crazy ship in which
we were cleaving our path on business bent. Wherefore we entreat you, if
haply ye will listen, to grant us just a covering for our bodies, and
to pity and succour men in misfortune, your equals in age. Oh, reverence
suppliants and strangers for Zeus' sake, the god of strangers and
suppliants. To Zeus belong both suppliants and strangers; and his eye,
methinks, beholdeth even us."

(ll. 1134-1139) And in reply the son of Aeson prudently questioned him,
deeming that the prophecies of Phineus were being fulfilled: "All these
things will we straightway grant you with right good will. But come tell
me truly in what country ye dwell and what business bids you sail across
the sea, and tell me your own glorious names and lineage."

(ll. 1140-1156) And him Argus, helpless in his evil plight, addressed:
"That one Phrixus an Aeolid reached Aea from Hellas you yourselves have
clearly heard ere this, I trow; Phrixus, who came to the city of Aeetes,
bestriding a ram, which Hermes had made all gold; and the fleece ye may
see even now. The ram, at its own prompting, he then sacrificed to
Zeus, son of Cronos, above all, the god of fugitives. And him did Aeetes
receive in his palace, and with gladness of heart gave him his daughter
Chalciope in marriage without gifts of wooing. [1208] From those two are
we sprung. But Phrixus died at last, an aged man, in the home of
Aeetes; and we, giving heed to our father's behests, are journeying to
Orehomenus to take the possessions of Athamas. And if thou dost desire
to learn our names, this is Cytissorus, this Phrontis, and this Melas,
and me ye may call Argus."

(ll. 1157-1159) Thus he spake, and the chieftains rejoiced at the
meeting, and tended them, much marvelling. And Jason again in turn
replied, as was fitting, with these words:

(ll. 1160-1178) "Surely ye are our kinsmen on my father's side, and ye
pray that with kindly hearts we succour your evil plight. For Cretheus
and Athamas were brothers. I am the grandson of Cretheus, and with
these comrades here I am journeying from that same Hellas to the city of
Aeetes. But of these things we will converse hereafter. And do ye first
put clothing upon you. By heaven's devising, I ween, have ye come to my
hands in your sore need."

(ll. 1168-1178) He spake, and out of the ship gave them raiment to put
on. Then all together they went to the temple of Ares to offer sacrifice
of sheep; and in haste they stood round the altar, which was outside the
roofless temple, an altar built of pebbles; within a black stone stood
fixed, a sacred thing, to which of yore the Amazons all used to pray.
Nor was it lawful for them, when they came from the opposite coast, to
burn on this altar offerings of sheep and oxen, but they used to slay
horses which they kept in great herds. Now when they had sacrificed and
eaten the feast prepared, then Aeson's son spake among them and thus
began:

(ll. 1179-1195) "Zeus' self, I ween, beholds everything; nor do we men
escape his eye, we that be god-fearing and just, for as he rescued your
father from the hands of a murderous step-dame and gave him measureless
wealth besides; even so hath he saved you harmless from the baleful
storm. And on board this ship ye may sail hither and thither, where ye
will, whether to Aea or to the wealthy city of divine Orthomenus. For
our ship Athena built and with axe of bronze cut her timbers near the
crest of Pelion, and with the goddess wrought Argus. But yours the
fierce surge hath shattered, before ye came nigh to the rocks which
all day long clash together in the straits of the sea. But come, be
yourselves our helpers, for we are eager to bring to Hellas the golden
fleece, and guide us on our voyage, for I go to atone for the intended
sacrifice of Phrixus, the cause of Zeus' wrath against the sons of
Aeolus."

(ll. 1196-1199) He spake with soothing words; but horror seized them
when they heard. For they deemed that they would not find Aeetes
friendly if they desired to take away the ram's fleece. And Argus spake
as follows, vexed that they should busy themselves with such a quest:

(ll. 1200-1215) "My friends, our strength, so far as it avails, shall
never cease to help you, not one whit, when need shall come. But Aeetes
is terribly armed with deadly ruthlessness; wherefore exceedingly do I
dread this voyage. And he boasts himself to be the son of Helios;
and all round dwell countless tribes of Colchians; and he might match
himself with Ares in his dread war-cry and giant strength. Nay, to seize
the fleece in spite of Aeetes is no easy task; so huge a serpent keeps
guard round and about it, deathless and sleepless, which Earth herself
brought forth on the sides of Caucasus, by the rock of Typhaon, where
Typhaon, they say, smitten by the bolt of Zeus, son of Cronos, when he
lifted against the god his sturdy hands, dropped from his head hot gore;
and in such plight he reached the mountains and plain of Nysa, where to
this day he lies whelmed beneath the waters of the Serbonian lake."

(ll. 1216-1218) Thus he spake, and straightway many a cheek grew pale
when they heard of so mighty an adventure. But quickly Peleus answered
with cheering words, and thus spake:

(ll. 1219-1225) "Be not so fearful in spirit, my good friend. For we
are not so lacking in prowess as to be no match for Aeetes to try his
strength with arms; but I deem that we too are cunning in war, we that
go thither, near akin to the blood of the blessed gods. Wherefore if he
will not grant us the fleece of gold for friendship's sake, the tribes
of the Colchians will not avail him, I ween."

(ll. 1226-1230) Thus they addressed each other in turn, until again,
satisfied with their feast, they turned to rest. And when they rose
at dawn a gentle breeze was blowing; and they raised the sails, which
strained to the rush of the wind, and quickly they left behind the
island of Ares.

(ll. 1231-1241) And at nightfall they came to the island of Philyra,
where Cronos, son of Uranus, what time in Olympus he reigned over the
Titans, and Zeus was yet being nurtured in a Cretan cave by the Curetes
of Ida, lay beside Philyra, when he had deceived Rhea; and the goddess
found them in the midst of their dalliance; and Cronos leapt up from the
couch with a rush in the form of a steed with flowing mane, but Ocean's
daughter, Philyra, in shame left the spot and those haunts, and came
to the long Pelasgian ridges, where by her union with the transfigured
deity she brought forth huge Cheiron, half like a horse, half like a
god.

(ll. 1242-1261) Thence they sailed on, past the Macrones and the
far-stretching land of the Becheiri and the overweening Sapeires, and
after them the Byzeres; for ever forward they clave their way, quickly
borne by the gentle breeze. And lo, as they sped on, a deep gulf of the
sea was opened, and lo, the steep crags of the Caucasian mountains rose
up, where, with his limbs bound upon the hard rocks by galling fetters
of bronze, Prometheus fed with his liver an eagle that ever rushed back
to its prey. High above the ship at even they saw it flying with a loud
whirr, near the clouds; and yet it shook all the sails with the fanning
of those huge wings. For it had not the form of a bird of the air but
kept poising its long wing-feathers like polished oars. And not long
after they heard the bitter cry of Prometheus as his liver was being
torn away; and the air rang with his screams until they marked the
ravening eagle rushing back from the mountain on the self-same track.
And at night, by the skill of Argus, they reached broad-flowing Phasis,
and the utmost bourne of the sea.

(ll. 1262-1276) And straightway they let down the sails and the yard-arm
and stowed them inside the hollow mast-crutch, and at once they lowered
the mast itself till it lay along; and quickly with oars they entered
the mighty stream of the river; and round the prow the water surged as
it gave them way. And on their left hand they had lofty Caucasus and
the Cytaean city of Aea, and on the other side the plain of Ares and the
sacred grove of that god, where the serpent was keeping watch and ward
over the fleece as it hung on the leafy branches of an oak. And Aeson's
son himself from a golden goblet poured into the river libations of
honey and pure wine to Earth and to the gods of the country, and to the
souls of dead heroes; and he besought them of their grace to give kindly
aid, and to welcome their ship's hawsers with favourable omen. And
straightway Ancaeus spake these words:

(ll. 1277-1280) "We have reached the Colchian land and the stream of
Phasis; and it is time for us to take counsel whether we shall make
trial of Aeetes with soft words, or an attempt of another kind shall be
fitting."

(ll. 1281-1285) Thus he spake, and by the advice of Argus Jason bade
them enter a shaded backwater and let the ship ride at anchor off shore;
and it was near at hand in their course and there they passed the night.
And soon the dawn appeared to their expectant eyes.




BOOK III

(ll. 1-5) Come now, Erato, stand by my side, and say next how Jason
brought back the fleece to Iolcus aided by the love of Medea. For thou
sharest the power of Cypris, and by thy love-cares dost charm unwedded
maidens; wherefore to thee too is attached a name that tells of love.

(ll. 6-10) Thus the heroes, unobserved, were waiting in ambush amid the
thick reed-beds; but Hera and Athena took note of them, and, apart
from Zeus and the other immortals, entered a chamber and took counsel
together; and Hera first made trial of Athena:

(ll. 11-16) "Do thou now first, daughter of Zeus, give advice. What must
be done? Wilt thou devise some scheme whereby they may seize the golden
fleece of Aeetes and bear it to Hellas, or can they deceive the king
with soft words and so work persuasion? Of a truth he is terribly
overweening. Still it is right to shrink from no endeavour."

(ll. 17-21) Thus she spake, and at once Athena addressed her: "I too
was pondering such thoughts in my heart, Hera, when thou didst ask me
outright. But not yet do I think that I have conceived a scheme to aid
the courage of the heroes, though I have balanced many plans."

(ll. 22-29) She ended, and the goddesses fixed their eyes on the ground
at their feet, brooding apart; and straightway Hera was the first to
speak her thought: "Come, let us go to Cypris; let both of us accost her
and urge her to bid her son (if only he will obey) speed his shaft at
the daughter of Aeetes, the enchantress, and charm her with love for
Jason. And I deem that by her device he will bring back the fleece to
Hellas."

(ll. 30-31) Thus she spake, and the prudent plan pleased Athena, and she
addressed her in reply with gentle words:

(ll. 32-35) "Hera, my father begat me to be a stranger to the darts of
love, nor do I know any charm to work desire. But if the word pleases
thee, surely I will follow; but thou must speak when we meet her."

(ll. 36-51) So she said, and starting forth they came to the mighty
palace of Cypris, which her husband, the halt-footed god, had built for
her when first he brought her from Zeus to be his wife. And entering the
court they stood beneath the gallery of the chamber where the goddess
prepared the couch of Hephaestus. But he had gone early to his forge and
anvils to a broad cavern in a floating island where with the blast
of flame he wrought all manner of curious work; and she all alone
was sitting within, on an inlaid seat facing the door. And her white
shoulders on each side were covered with the mantle of her hair and
she was parting it with a golden comb and about to braid up the long
tresses; but when she saw the goddesses before her, she stayed and
called them within, and rose from her seat and placed them on couches.
Then she herself sat down, and with her hands gathered up the locks
still uncombed. And smiling she addressed them with crafty words:

(ll. 52-54) "Good friends, what intent, what occasion brings you here
after so long? Why have ye come, not too frequent visitors before, chief
among goddesses that ye are?"

(ll. 55-75) And to her Hera replied: "Thou dost mock us, but our hearts
are stirred with calamity. For already on the river Phasis the son of
Aeson moors his ship, he and his comrades in quest of the fleece. For
all their sakes we fear terribly (for the task is nigh at hand) but most
for Aeson's son. Him will I deliver, though he sail even to Hades to
free Ixion below from his brazen chains, as far as strength lies in
my limbs, so that Pelias may not mock at having escaped an evil
doom--Pelias who left me unhonoured with sacrifice. Moreover Jason was
greatly loved by me before, ever since at the mouth of Anaurus in flood,
as I was making trial of men's righteousness, he met me on his return
from the chase; and all the mountains and long ridged peaks were
sprinkled with snow, and from them the torrents rolling down were
rushing with a roar. And he took pity on me in the likeness of an old
crone, and raising me on his shoulders himself bore me through the
headlong tide. So he is honoured by me unceasingly; nor will Pelias pay
the penalty of his outrage, unless thou wilt grant Jason his return."

(ll. 76-82) Thus she spake, and speechlessness seized Cypris. And
beholding Hera supplicating her she felt awe, and then addressed her
with friendly words: "Dread goddess, may no viler thing than Cypris ever
be found, if I disregard thy eager desire in word or deed, whatever my
weak arms can effect; and let there be no favour in return."

(ll. 83-89) She spake, and Hera again addressed her with prudence:
"It is not in need of might or of strength that we have come. But just
quietly bid thy boy charm Aeetes' daughter with love for Jason. For if
she will aid him with her kindly counsel, easily do I think he will win
the fleece of gold and return to Iolcus, for she is full of wiles."

(ll. 90-99) Thus she spake, and Cypris addressed them both: "Hera and
Athena, he will obey you rather than me. For unabashed though he is,
there will be some slight shame in his eyes before you; but he has no
respect for me, but ever slights me in contentious mood. And, overborne
by his naughtiness, I purpose to break his ill-sounding arrows and his
bow in his very sight. For in his anger he has threatened that if I
shall not keep my hands off him while he still masters his temper, I
shall have cause to blame myself thereafter."

(ll. 100-105) So she spake, and the goddesses smiled and looked at each
other. But Cypris again spoke, vexed at heart: "To others my sorrows are
a jest; nor ought I to tell them to all; I know them too well myself.
But now, since this pleases you both, I will make the attempt and coax
him, and he will not say me nay."

(ll. 106-110) Thus she spake, and Hera took her slender hand and gently
smiling, replied: "Perform this task, Cytherea, straightway, as
thou sayest; and be not angry or contend with thy boy; he will cease
hereafter to vex thee."

(ll. 111-128) She spake, and left her seat, and Athena accompanied her
and they went forth both hastening back. And Cypris went on her way
through the glens of Olympus to find her boy. And she found him apart,
in the blooming orchard of Zeus, not alone, but with him Ganymedes, whom
once Zeus had set to dwell among the immortal gods, being enamoured of
his beauty. And they were playing for golden dice, as boys in one house
are wont to do. And already greedy Eros was holding the palm of his left
hand quite full of them under his breast, standing upright; and on
the bloom of his cheeks a sweet blush was glowing. But the other sat
crouching hard by, silent and downcast, and he had two dice left which
he threw one after the other, and was angered by the loud laughter of
Eros. And lo, losing them straightway with the former, he went off empty
handed, helpless, and noticed not the approach of Cypris. And she stood
before her boy, and laying her hand on his lips, addressed him:

(ll. 129-144) "Why dost thou smile in triumph, unutterable rogue? Hast
thou cheated him thus, and unjustly overcome the innocent child? Come,
be ready to perform for me the task I will tell thee of, and I will
give thee Zeus' all-beauteous plaything--the one which his dear nurse
Adrasteia made for him, while he still lived a child, with childish
ways, in the Idaean cave--a well-rounded ball; no better toy wilt thou
get from the hands of Hephaestus. All of gold are its zones, and round
each double seams run in a circle; but the stitches are hidden, and a
dark blue spiral overlays them all. But if thou shouldst cast it with
thy hands, lo, like a star, it sends a flaming track through the sky.
This I will give thee; and do thou strike with thy shaft and charm the
daughter of Aeetes with love for Jason; and let there be no loitering.
For then my thanks would be the slighter."

(ll. 145-150) Thus she spake, and welcome were her words to the
listening boy. And he threw down all his toys, and eagerly seizing her
robe on this side and on that, clung to the goddess. And he implored
her to bestow the gift at once; but she, facing him with kindly words,
touched his cheeks, kissed him and drew him to her, and replied with a
smile:

(ll. 151-153) "Be witness now thy dear head and mine, that surely I will
give thee the gift and deceive thee not, if thou wilt strike with thy
shaft Aeetes' daughter."

(ll. 154-166) She spoke, and he gathered up his dice, and having
well counted them all threw them into his mother's gleaming lap. And
straightway with golden baldric he slung round him his quiver from where
it leant against a tree-trunk, and took up his curved bow. And he fared
forth through the fruitful orchard of the palace of Zeus. Then he passed
through the gates of Olympus high in air; hence is a downward path from
heaven; and the twin poles rear aloft steep mountain tops the highest
crests of earth, where the risen sun grows ruddy with his first beams.
And beneath him there appeared now the life-giving earth and cities of
men and sacred streams of rivers, and now in turn mountain peaks and the
ocean all around, as he swept through the vast expanse of air.

(ll. 167-193) Now the heroes apart in ambush, in a back-water of the
river, were met in council, sitting on the benches of their ship. And
Aeson's son himself was speaking among them; and they were listening
silently in their places sitting row upon row: "My friends, what pleases
myself that will I say out; it is for you to bring about its fulfilment.
For in common is our task, and common to all alike is the right of
speech; and he who in silence withholds his thought and his counsel, let
him know that it is he alone that bereaves this band of its home-return.
Do ye others rest here in the ship quietly with your arms; but I will
go to the palace of Aeetes, taking with me the sons of Phrixus and two
comrades as well. And when I meet him I will first make trial with
words to see if he will be willing to give up the golden fleece for
friendship's sake or not, but trusting to his might will set at nought
our quest. For so, learning his frowardness first from himself, we will
consider whether we shall meet him in battle, or some other plan shall
avail us, if we refrain from the war-cry. And let us not merely
by force, before putting words to the test, deprive him of his own
possession. But first it is better to go to him and win his favour by
speech. Oftentimes, I ween, does speech accomplish at need what prowess
could hardly catty through, smoothing the path in manner befitting. And
he once welcomed noble Phrixus, a fugitive from his stepmother's wiles
and the sacrifice prepared by his father. For all men everywhere, even
the most shameless, reverence the ordinance of Zeus, god of strangers,
and regard it."

(ll. 194-209) Thus he spake, and the youths approved the words of
Aeson's son with one accord, nor was there one to counsel otherwise.
And then he summoned to go with him the sons of Phrixus, and Telamon and
Augeias; and himself took Hermes' wand; and at once they passed forth
from the ship beyond the reeds and the water to dry land, towards the
rising ground of the plain. The plain, I wis, is called Circe's; and
here in line grow many willows and osiers, on whose topmost branches
hang corpses bound with cords. For even now it is an abomination with
the Colchians to burn dead men with fire; nor is it lawful to place
them in the earth and raise a mound above, but to wrap them in untanned
oxhides and suspend them from trees far from the city. And so earth has
an equal portion with air, seeing that they bury the women; for that is
the custom of their land.

(ll. 210-259) And as they went Hera with friendly thought spread a thick
mist through the city, that they might fare to the palace of Aeetes
unseen by the countless hosts of the Colchians. But soon when from
the plain they came to the city and Aeetes' palace, then again Hera
dispersed the mist. And they stood at the entrance, marvelling at the
king's courts and the wide gates and columns which rose in ordered lines
round the walls; and high up on the palace a coping of stone rested on
brazen triglyphs. And silently they crossed the threshold. And close by
garden vines covered with green foliage were in full bloom, lifted
high in air. And beneath them ran four fountains, ever-flowing, which
Hephaestus had delved out. One was gushing with milk, one with wine,
while the third flowed with fragrant oil; and the fourth ran with water,
which grew warm at the setting of the Pleiads, and in turn at their
rising bubbled forth from the hollow rock, cold as crystal. Such then
were the wondrous works that the craftsman-god Hephaestus had fashioned
in the palace of Cytaean Aeetes. And he wrought for him bulls with feet
of bronze, and their mouths were of bronze, and from them they breathed
out a terrible flame of fire; moreover he forged a plough of unbending
adamant, all in one piece, in payment of thanks to Helios, who had taken
the god up in his chariot when faint from the Phlegraean fight. [1301]
And here an inner-court was built, and round it were many well-fitted
doors and chambers here and there, and all along on each side was
a richly-wrought gallery. And on both sides loftier buildings stood
obliquely. In one, which was the loftiest, lordly Aeetes dwelt with his
queen; and in another dwelt Apsyrtus, son of Aeetes, whom a Caucasian
nymph, Asterodeia, bare before he made Eidyia his wedded wife, the
youngest daughter of Tethys and Oceanus. And the sons of the Colchians
called him by the new name of Phaethon, [1302] because he outshone
all the youths. The other buildings the handmaidens had, and the two
daughters of Aeetes, Chalciope and Medea. Medea then [they found] going
from chamber to chamber in search of her sister, for Hera detained her
within that day; but beforetime she was not wont to haunt the palace,
but all day long was busied in Hecate's temple, since she herself was
the priestess of the goddess. And when she saw them she cried aloud,
and quickly Chalciope caught the sound; and her maids, throwing down at
their feet their yarn and their thread, rushed forth all in a throng.
And she, beholding her sons among them, raised her hands aloft through
joy; and so they likewise greeted their mother, and when they saw her
embraced her in their gladness; and she with many sobs spoke thus:

(ll. 260-267) "After all then, ye were not destined to leave me in
your heedlessness and to wander far; but fate has turned you back. Poor
wretch that I am! What a yearning for Hellas from some woeful madness
seized you at the behest of your father Phrixus. Bitter sorrows for
my heart did he ordain when dying. And why should ye go to the city of
Orchomenus, whoever this Orchomenus is, for the sake of Athamas' wealth,
leaving your mother alone to bear her grief?"

(ll. 268-274) Such were her words; and Aeetes came forth last of all
and Eidyia herself came, the queen of Aeetes, on hearing the voice of
Chalciope; and straightway all the court was filled with a throng. Some
of the thralls were busied with a mighty bull, others with the axe were
cleaving dry billets, and others heating with fire water for the baths;
nor was there one who relaxed his toil, serving the king.

(ll. 275-298) Meantime Eros passed unseen through the grey mist, causing
confusion, as when against grazing heifers rises the gadfly, which
oxherds call the breese. And quickly beneath the lintel in the porch
he strung his bow and took from the quiver an arrow unshot before,
messenger of pain. And with swift feet unmarked he passed the threshold
and keenly glanced around; and gliding close by Aeson's son he laid the
arrow-notch on the cord in the centre, and drawing wide apart with both
hands he shot at Medea; and speechless amazement seized her soul. But
the god himself flashed back again from the high-roofed hall, laughing
loud; and the bolt burnt deep down in the maiden's heart like a flame;
and ever she kept darting bright glances straight up at Aeson's son, and
within her breast her heart panted fast through anguish, all remembrance
left her, and her soul melted with the sweet pain. And as a poor woman
heaps dry twigs round a blazing brand--a daughter of toil, whose task is
the spinning of wool, that she may kindle a blaze at night beneath her
roof, when she has waked very early--and the flame waxing wondrous great
from the small brand consumes all the twigs together; so, coiling round
her heart, burnt secretly Love the destroyer; and the hue of her soft
cheeks went and came, now pale, now red, in her soul's distraction.

(ll. 299-303) Now when the thralls had laid a banquet ready before
them, and they had refreshed themselves with warm baths, gladly did they
please their souls with meat and drink. And thereafter Aeetes questioned
the sons of his daughter, addressing them with these words:

(ll. 304-316) "Sons of my daughter and of Phrixus, whom beyond all
strangers I honoured in my halls, how have ye come returning back to
Aea? Did some calamity cut short your escape in the midst? Ye did not
listen when I set before you the boundless length of the way. For I
marked it once, whirled along in the chariot of my father Helios, when
he was bringing my sister Circe to the western land and we came to the
shore of the Tyrrhenian mainland, where even now she abides, exceeding
far from Colchis. But what pleasure is there in words? Do ye tell
me plainly what has been your fortune, and who these men are, your
companions, and where from your hollow ship ye came ashore."

(ll. 317-319) Such were his questions, and Argus, before all his
brethren, being fearful for the mission of Aeson's son, gently replied,
for he was the elder-born:

(ll. 320-366) "Aeetes, that ship forthwith stormy blasts tore asunder,
and ourselves, crouching on the beams, a wave drove on to the beach of
the isle of Enyalius [1303] in the murky night; and some god preserved
us. For even the birds of Ares that haunted the desert isle beforetime,
not even them did we find. But these men had driven them off, having
landed from their ship on the day before; and the will of Zeus taking
pity on us, or some fate, detained them there, since they straightway
gave us both food and clothing in abundance, when they heard the
illustrious name of Phrixus and thine own; for to thy city are they
faring. And if thou dost wish to know their errand, I will not hide it
from time. A certain king, vehemently longing to drive this man far from
his fatherland and possessions, because in might he outshone all the
sons of Aeolus, sends him to voyage hither on a bootless venture; and
asserts that the stock of Aeolus will not escape the heart-grieving
wrath and rage of implacable Zeus, nor the unbearable curse and
vengeance due for Phrixus, until the fleece comes back to Hellas. And
their ship was fashioned by Pallas Athena, not such a one as are the
ships among the Colchians, on the vilest of which we chanced. For the
fierce waves and wind broke her utterly to pieces; but the other holds
firm with her bolts, even though all the blasts should buffet her. And
with equal swiftness she speedeth before the wind and when the crew ply
the oar with unresting hands. And he hath gathered in her the mightiest
heroes of all Achaea, and hath come to thy city from wandering far
through cities and gulfs of the dread ocean, in the hope that thou wilt
grant him the fleece. But as thou dost please, so shall it be, for he
cometh not to use force, but is eager to pay thee a recompense for the
gift. He has heard from me of thy bitter foes the Sauromatae, and he
will subdue them to thy sway. And if thou desirest to know their names
and lineage I will tell thee all. This man on whose account the rest
were gathered from Hellas, they call Jason, son of Aeson, whom Cretheus
begat. And if in truth he is of the stock of Cretheus himself, thus he
