
"Boabdil," replied the Israelite, "is aroused against both his army
and their leader, Muza; the king will not quit the Alhambra; and this
morning, ere I left the city, Muza himself was in the prisons of the
palace."

"How!" cried the king, starting from his seat.

"This is my work," pursued the Hebrew coldly. "It is these hands that
are shaping for Ferdinand of Spain the keys of Granada."

"And right kingly shall be your guerdon," said the Spanish monarch:
"meanwhile, accept this earnest of our favour." So saying, he took from
his breast a chain of massive gold, the links of which were curiously
inwrought with gems, and extended it to the Israelite. Almamen moved
not. A dark flush upon his countenance bespoke the feelings he with
difficulty restrained.

"I sell not my foes for gold, great king," said he, with a stern smile:
"I sell my foes to buy the ransom of my friends."

"Churlish!" said Ferdinand, offended: "but speak on, man, speak on!"

"If I place Granada, ere two weeks are past, within thy power, what
shall be my reward?"

"Thou didst talk to me, when last we met, of immunities to the Jews."

The calm Dominican looked up as the king spoke, crossed himself, and
resumed his attitude of humility.

"I demand for the people of Israel," returned Almamen, "free leave to
trade and abide within the city, and follow their callings, subjected
only to the same laws and the same imposts as the Christian population."

"The same laws, and the same imposts! Humph! there are difficulties in
the concession. If we refuse?"

"Our treaty is ended. Give me back the maiden--you will have no further
need of the hostage you demanded: I return to the city, and renew our
interviews no more."

Politic and cold-blooded as was the temperament of the great Ferdinand,
he had yet the imperious and haughty nature of a prosperous and
long-descended king; and he bit his lip in deep displeasure at the tone
of the dictatorial and stately stranger.

"Thou usest plain language, my friend," said he; "my words can be as
rudely spoken. Thou art in my power, and canst return not, save at my
permission."

"I have your royal word, sire, for free entrance and safe egress,"
answered Almamen. "Break it, and Granada is with the Moors till the
Darro runs red with the blood of her heroes, and her people strew the
vales as the leaves in autumn."

"Art thou then thyself of the Jewish faith?" asked the king. "If thou
art not, wherefore are the outcasts of the world so dear to thee?"

"My fathers were of that creed, royal Ferdinand; and if I myself desert
their creed, I do not desert their cause. O king! are my terms scorned
or accepted?"

"I accept them: provided, first, that thou obtainest the exile or death
of Muza; secondly, that within two weeks of this date thou bringest me,
along with the chief councillors of Granada, the written treaty of the
capitulation, and the keys of the city. Do this: and though the sole
king in Christendom who dares the hazard, I offer to the Israelites
throughout Andalusia the common laws and rights of citizens of Spain;
and to thee I will accord such dignity as may content thy ambition."

The Hebrew bowed reverently, and drew from his breast a scroll, which
he placed on the table before the king. "This writing, mighty Ferdinand,
contains the articles of our compact."

"How, knave! wouldst thou have us commit our royal signature to
conditions with such as thou art, to the chance of the public eye? The
king's word is the king's bond!"

The Hebrew took up the scroll with imperturbable composure, "My child!"
said he; "will your majesty summon back my child? we would depart."

"A sturdy mendicant this, by the Virgin!" muttered the king; and then,
speaking aloud, "Give me the paper, I will scan it."

Running his eyes hastily over the words, Ferdinand paused a moment, and
then drew towards him the implements of writing, signed the scroll, and
returned it to Almamen.

The Israelite kissed it thrice with oriental veneration, and replaced it
in his breast.

Ferdinand looked at him hard and curiously. He was a profound reader of
men's characters; but that of his guest baffled and perplexed him.

"And how, stranger," said he, gravely,--"how can I trust that man who
thus distrusts one king and sells another?"

"O king!" replied Almamen (accustomed from his youth to commune with and
command the possessors of thrones yet more absolute),--"O king! if thou
believest me actuated by personal and selfish interests in this our
compact, thou has but to make, my service minister to my interest, and
the lore of human nature will tell thee that thou hast won a ready and
submissive slave. But if thou thinkest I have avowed sentiments less
abject, and developed qualities higher than those of the mere bargainer
for sordid power, oughtest thou not to rejoice that chance has thrown
into thy way one whose intellect and faculties may be made thy tool? If
I betray another, that other is my deadly foe. Dost not thou, the lord
of armies, betray thine enemy? The Moor is an enemy bitterer to myself
than to thee. Because I betray an enemy, am I unworthy to serve a
friend? If I, a single man, and a stranger to the Moor, can yet command
the secrets of palaces, and render vain the counsels of armed men, have
I not in that attested that I am one of whom a wise king can make an
able servant?"

"Thou art a subtle reasoner, my friend," said Ferdinand, smiling gently.
"Peace go with thee! our conference for the time is ended. What ho,
Perez!" The attendant appeared.

"Thou hast left the maiden with the queen?"

"Sire, you have been obeyed."

"Conduct this stranger to the guard who led him through the camp. He
quits us under the same protection. Farewell! yet stay--thou art assured
that Muza Ben Abil Gazan is in the prisons of the Moor?"

"Yes."

"Blessed be the Virgin!"

"Thou hast heard our conference, Father Tomas?" said the king,
anxiously, when the Hebrew had withdrawn.

"I have, son."

"Did thy veins freeze with horror?"

"Only when my son signed the scroll. It seemed to me then that I saw the
cloven foot of the tempter."

"Tush, father, the tempter would have been more wise than to reckon upon
a faith which no ink and no parchment can render valid, if the Church
absolve the compact. Thou understandest me, father?"

"I do. I know your pious heart and well-judging mind."

"Thou wert right," resumed the king, musingly, "when thou didst tell
us that these caitiff Jews were waxing strong in the fatness of their
substance. They would have equal laws--the insolent blasphemers!"

"Son!" said the Dominican, with earnest adjuration, "God, who has
prospered your arms and councils, will require at your hands an account
of the power intrusted to you. Shall there be no difference between His
friends and His foes--His disciples and His crucifiers?"

"Priest," said the king, laying his hand on the monk's shoulder, and
with a saturnine smile upon his countenance, "were religion silent in
this matter, policy has a voice loud enough to make itself heard. The
Jews demand equal rights; when men demand equality with their masters,
treason is at work, and justice sharpens her sword. Equality! these
wealthy usurers! Sacred Virgin! they would be soon buying up our
kingdoms."

The Dominican gazed hard on the king. "Son, I trust thee," he said, in a
low voice, and glided from the tent.




CHAPTER II. THE AMBUSH, THE STRIFE, AND THE CAPTURE.

The dawn was slowly breaking over the wide valley of Granada, as Almamen
pursued his circuitous and solitary path back to the city. He was now in
a dark and entangled hollow, covered with brakes and bushes, from
amidst which tall forest trees rose in frequent intervals, gloomy and
breathless in the still morning air. As, emerging from this jungle, if
so it may be called, the towers of Granada gleamed upon him, a human
countenance peered from the shade; and Almamen started to see two dark
eyes fixed upon his own.

He halted abruptly, and put his hand on his dagger, when a low sharp
whistle from the apparition before him was answered around--behind; and,
ere he could draw breath, the Israelite was begirt by a group of Moors,
in the garb of peasants.

"Well, my masters," said Almamen, calmly, as he encountered the wild
savage countenances that glared upon him, "think you there is aught to
fear from the solitary santon?"

"It is the magician," whispered one man to his neighbour--"let him
pass."

"Nay," was the answer, "take him before the captain; we have orders to
seize upon all we meet."

This counsel prevailed; and gnashing his teeth with secret rage, Almamen
found himself hurried along by the peasants through the thickest part of
the copse. At length, the procession stopped in a semicircular patch of
rank sward, in which several head of cattle were quietly grazing, and a
yet more numerous troop of peasants reclined around upon the grass.

"Whom have we here?" asked a voice which startled back the dark blood
from Almamen's cheek; and a Moor of commanding presence rose from the
midst of his brethren. "By the beard of the prophet, it is the false
santon! What dost thou from Granada at this hour?"

"Noble Muza," returned Almamen--who, though indeed amazed that one whom
he had imagined his victim was thus unaccountably become his judge,
retained, at least, the semblance of composure--"my answer is to be
given only to my lord the king; it is his commands that I obey."

"Thou art aware," said Muza, frowning, "that thy life is forfeited
without appeal? Whatsoever inmate of Granada is found without the walls
between sunrise and sunset, dies the death of a traitor and deserter."

"The servants of the Alhambra are excepted," answered the Israelite,
without changing countenance.

"Ah!" muttered Muza, as a painful and sudden thought seemed to cross
him, "can it be possible that the rumour of the city has truth, and that
the monarch of Granada is in treaty with the foe?" He mused a little;
and then, motioning the Moors to withdraw, he continued aloud, "Almamen,
answer me truly: hast thou sought the Christian camp with any message
from the king?"

"I have not."

"Art thou without the walls on the mission of the king?"

"If I be so, I am a traitor to the king should I reveal his secret."

"I doubt thee much, santon," said Muza, after a pause; "I know thee for
my enemy, and I do believe thy counsels have poisoned the king's ear
against me, his people and his duties. But no matter, thy life is spared
a while; thou remainest with us, and with us shalt thou return to the
king."

"But, noble Muza----"

"I have said! Guard the santon; mount him upon one of our chargers; he
shall abide with us in our ambush." While Almamen chafed in vain at his
arrest, all in the Christian camp was yet still. At length, as the sun
began to lift himself above the mountains, first a murmur, and then a
din, betokened warlike preparations. Several parties of horse, under
gallant and experienced leaders, formed themselves in different
quarters, and departed in different ways, on expeditions of forage, or
in the hope of skirmish with the straggling detachments of the enemy. Of
these, the best equipped, was conducted by the Marquess de Villena, and
his gallant brother Don Alonzo de Pacheco. In this troop, too, rode many
of the best blood of Spain; for in that chivalric army, the officers
vied with each other who should most eclipse the meaner soldiery in
feats of personal valour; and the name of Villena drew around him
the eager and ardent spirits that pined at the general inactivity of
Ferdinand's politic campaign.

The sun, now high in heaven, glittered on the splendid arms and gorgeous
pennons of Villena's company, as, leaving the camp behind, it entered a
rich and wooded district that skirts the mountain barrier of the
Vega. The brilliancy of the day, the beauty of the scene, the hope and
excitement of enterprise, animated the spirits of the whole party.
In these expeditions strict discipline was often abandoned, from the
certainty that it could be resumed at need. Conversation, gay and loud,
interspersed at times with snatches of song, was heard amongst the
soldiery; and in the nobler group that rode with Villena, there was even
less of the proverbial gravity of Spaniards.

"Now, marquess," said Don Estevon de Suzon, "what wager shall be between
us as to which lance this day robs Moorish beauty of the greatest number
of its worshippers?"

"My falchion against your jennet," said Don Alonzo de Pacheco, taking up
the challenge.

"Agreed. But, talking of beauty, were you in the queen's pavilion last
night, noble marquess? it was enriched by a new maiden, whose strange
and sudden apparition none can account for. Her eyes would have eclipsed
the fatal glance of Cava; and had I been Rodrigo, I might have lost a
crown for her smile."

"Ay," said Villena, "I heard of her beauty; some hostage from one of the
traitor Moors, with whom the king (the saints bless him!) bargains for
the city. They tell me the prince incurred the queen's grave rebuke for
his attentions to the maiden."

"And this morning I saw that fearful Father Tomas steal into the
prince's tent. I wish Don Juan well through the lecture. The monk's
advice is like the algarroba;--[The algarroba is a sort of leguminous
plant common in Spain]--when it is laid up to dry it may be reasonably
wholesome, but it is harsh and bitter enough when taken fresh."

At this moment one of the subaltern officers rode up to the marquess,
and whispered in his ear.

"Ha!" said Villena, "the Virgin be praised! Sir knights, booty is at
hand. Silence! close the ranks." With that, mounting a little eminence,
and shading his eyes with his hand, the marquess surveyed the plain
below; and, at some distance, he beheld a horde of Moorish peasants
driving some cattle into a thick copse. The word was hastily given, the
troop dashed on, every voice was hushed, and the clatter of mail, and
the sound of hoofs, alone broke the delicious silence of the noon-day
landscape.

Ere they reached the copse, the peasants had disappeared within it. The
marquess marshalled his men in a semicircle round the trees, and sent
on a detachment to the rear, to cut off every egress from the wood. This
done the troop dashed within. For the first few yards the space was more
open than they had anticipated: but the ground soon grew uneven, rugged,
and almost precipitous, and the soil, and the interlaced trees, alike
forbade any rapid motion to the horse. Don Alonzo de Pacheco, mounted
on a charger whose agile and docile limbs had been tutored to every
description of warfare, and himself of light weight and incomparable
horsemanship--dashed on before the rest. The trees hid him for a moment;
when suddenly, a wild yell was heard, and as it ceased uprose the
solitary voice of the Spaniard, shouting, "_Santiago, y cierra_, Espana;
St. Jago, and charge, Spain!"

Each cavalier spurred forward; when suddenly, a shower of darts and
arrows rattled on their armour; and upsprung from bush and reeds, and
rocky clift, a number of Moors, and with wild shouts swarmed around the
Spaniards.

"Back for your lives!" cried Villena; "we are beset--make for the level
ground!"

He turned-spurred from the thicket, and saw the Paynim foe emerging
through the glen, line after line of man and horse; each Moor leading
his slight and fiery steed by the bridle, and leaping on it as he issued
from the wood into the plain. Cased in complete mail, his visor down,
his lance in its rest, Villena (accompanied by such of his knights as
could disentangle themselves from the Moorish foot) charged upon the
foe. A moment of fierce shock passed: on the ground lay many a Moor,
pierced through by the Christian lance; and on the other side of the foe
was heard the voice of Villena--"St. Jago to the rescue!" But the brave
marquess stood almost alone, save his faithful chamberlain, Solier.
Several of his knights were dismounted, and swarms of Moors, with lifted
knives, gathered round them as they lay, searching for the joints of the
armour, which might admit a mortal wound. Gradually, one by one, many of
Villena's comrades joined their leader, and now the green mantle of
Don Alonzo de Pacheco was seen waving without the copse, and Villena
congratulated himself on the safety of his brother. Just at that moment,
a Moorish cavalier spurred from his troop, and met Pacheco in full
