discovery, the wrath of thy parents!"

"But what are my perils to thine? Oh, Heaven! if my father found thee
here thou wouldst die!"

"He would think it then so great a humiliation, that thou, beautiful
Nina, who mightst match with the haughtiest names of Rome, shouldst
waste thy love on a plebeian--even though the grandson of an emperor!"

The proud heart of Nina could sympathize well with the wounded pride of
her lover: she detected the soreness which lurked beneath his answer,
carelessly as it was uttered.

"Hast thou not told me," she said, "of that great Marius, who was no
noble, but from whom the loftiest Colonna would rejoice to claim his
descent? and do I not know in thee one who shall yet eclipse the power
of Marius, unsullied by his vices?"

"Delicious flattery! sweet prophet!" said Rienzi, with a melancholy
smile; "never were thy supporting promises of the future more welcome to
me than now; for to thee I will say what I would utter to none else--my
soul half sinks beneath the mighty burthen I have heaped upon it. I want
new courage as the dread hour approaches; and from thy words and looks I
drink it."

"Oh!" answered Nina, blushing as she spoke, "glorious is indeed the lot
which I have bought by my love for thee: glorious to share thy schemes,
to cheer thee in doubt, to whisper hope to thee in danger."

"And give grace to me in triumph!" added Rienzi, passionately. "Ah!
should the future ever place upon these brows the laurel-wreath due to
one who has saved his country, what joy, what recompence, to lay it
at thy feet! Perhaps, in those long and solitary hours of languor and
exhaustion which fill up the interstices of time,--the dull space for
sober thought between the epochs of exciting action,--perhaps I should
have failed and flagged, and renounced even my dreams for Rome, had they
not been linked also with my dreams for thee!--had I not pictured to
myself the hour when my fate should elevate me beyond my birth; when thy
sire would deem it no disgrace to give thee to my arms; when thou,
too, shouldst stand amidst the dames of Rome, more honoured, as more
beautiful, than all; and when I should see that pomp, which my own soul
disdains, ('Quem semper abhorrui sicut cenum' is the expression used by
Rienzi, in his letter to his friend at Avignon, and which was probably
sincere. Men rarely act according to the bias of their own tastes.) made
dear and grateful to me because associated with thee! Yes, it is these
thoughts that have inspired me, when sterner ones have shrunk back
appalled from the spectres that surround their goal. And oh! my Nina,
sacred, strong, enduring must be, indeed, the love which lives in the
same pure and elevated air as that which sustains my hopes of liberty
and fame!"

This was the language which, more even than the vows of fidelity and the
dear adulation which springs from the heart's exuberance, had bound the
proud and vain soul of Nina to the chains that it so willingly wore.
Perhaps, indeed, in the absence of Rienzi, her weaker nature pictured to
herself the triumph of humbling the highborn signoras, and eclipsing the
barbarous magnificence of the chiefs of Rome; but in his presence,
and listening to his more elevated and generous ambition, as yet all
unsullied by one private feeling save the hope of her, her higher
sympathies were enlisted with his schemes, her mind aspired to raise
itself to the height of his, and she thought less of her own rise than
of his glory. It was sweet to her pride to be the sole confidante of his
most secret thoughts, as of his most hardy undertakings; to see bared
before her that intricate and plotting spirit; to be admitted even to
the knowledge of its doubts and weakness, as of its heroism and power.

Nothing could be more contrasted than the loves of Rienzi and Nina,
and those of Adrian and Irene: in the latter, all were the dreams, the
phantasies, the extravagance, of youth; they never talked of the future;
they mingled no other aspirations with those of love. Ambition, glory,
the world's high objects, were nothing to them when together; their love
had swallowed up the world, and left nothing visible beneath the sun,
save itself. But the passion of Nina and her lover was that of more
complicated natures and more mature years: it was made up of a thousand
feelings, each naturally severed from each, but compelled into one focus
by the mighty concentration of love; their talk was of the world; it was
from the world that they drew the aliment which sustained it; it was of
the future they spoke and thought; of its dreams and imagined glories
they made themselves a home and altar; their love had in it more of the
Intellectual than that of Adrian and Irene; it was more fitted for this
hard earth; it had in it, also, more of the leaven of the later and iron
days, and less of poetry and the first golden age.

"And must thou leave me now?" said Nina, her cheek no more averted from
his lips, nor her form from his parting embrace. "The moon is high yet;
it is but a little hour thou hast given me."

"An hour! Alas!" said Rienzi, "it is near upon midnight--our friends
await me."

"Go, then, my soul's best half! Go; Nina shall not detain thee one
moment from those higher objects which make thee so dear to Nina.
When--when shall we meet again!"

"Not," said Rienzi, proudly, and with all his soul upon his brow, "not
thus, by stealth! no! nor as I thus have met thee, the obscure and
contemned bondsman! When next thou seest me, it shall be at the head of
the sons of Rome! her champion! her restorer! or--" said he, sinking his
voice--

"There is no or!" interrupted Nina, weaving her arms round him, and
catching his enthusiasm; "thou hast uttered thine own destiny!"

"One kiss more!--farewell!--the tenth day from the morrow shines upon
the restoration of Rome!"



Chapter 1.XII. The Strange Adventures that Befel Walter de Montreal.

It was upon that same evening, and while the earlier stars yet shone
over the city, that Walter de Montreal, returning, alone, to the convent
then associated with the church of Santa Maria del Priorata (both of
which belonged to the Knights of the Hospital, and in the first of which
Montreal had taken his lodgment), paused amidst the ruins and desolation
which lay around his path. Thou little skilled in the classic memories
and associations of the spot, he could not but be impressed with the
surrounding witnesses of departed empire; the vast skeleton, as it were,
of the dead giantess.

"Now," thought he, as he gazed around upon the roofless columns and
shattered walls, everywhere visible, over which the starlight shone,
ghastly and transparent, backed by the frowning and embattled fortresses
of the Frangipani, half hid by the dark foliage that sprung up amidst
the very fanes and palaces of old--Nature exulting over the frailer
Art; "now," thought he, "bookmen would be inspired, by this scene, with
fantastic and dreaming visions of the past. But to me these monuments of
high ambition and royal splendour create only images of the future. Rome
may yet be, with her seven-hilled diadem, as Rome has been before, the
prize of the strongest hand and the boldest warrior,--revived, not by
her own degenerate sons, but the infused blood of a new race. William
the Bastard could scarce have found the hardy Englishers so easy a
conquest as Walter the Well-born may find these eunuch Romans. And which
conquest were the more glorious,--the barbarous Isle, or the Metropolis
of the World? Short step from the general to the podesta--shorter step
from the podesta to the king!"

While thus revolving his wild, yet not altogether chimerical ambition,
a quick light step was heard amidst the long herbage, and, looking up,
Montreal perceived the figure of a tall female descending from that
part of the hill then covered by many convents, towards the base of the
Aventine. She supported her steps with a long staff, and moved with such
elasticity and erectness, that now, as her face became visible by the
starlight, it was surprising to perceive that it was the face of one
advanced in years,--a harsh, proud countenance, withered, and deeply
wrinkled, but not without a certain regularity of outline.

"Merciful Virgin!" cried Montreal, starting back as that face gleamed
upon him: "is it possible? It is she:--it is--"

He sprung forward, and stood right before the old woman, who seemed
equally surprised, though more dismayed, at the sight of Montreal.

"I have sought thee for years," said the Knight, first breaking the
silence; "years, long years,--thy conscience can tell thee why."

"Mine, man of blood!" cried the female, trembling with rage or fear;
"darest thou talk of conscience? Thou, the dishonourer--the robber--the
professed homicide! Thou, disgrace to knighthood and to birth! Thou,
with the cross of chastity and of peace upon thy breast! Thou talk of
conscience, hypocrite!--thou?"

"Lady--lady!" said Montreal, deprecatingly, and almost quailing beneath
the fiery passion of that feeble woman, "I have sinned against thee and
thine. But remember all my excuses!--early love--fatal obstacles--rash
vow--irresistible temptation! Perhaps," he added, in a more haughty
tone, "perhaps, yet, I may have the power to atone my error, and wring,
with mailed hand, from the successor of St Peter, who hath power to
loose as to bind--"

"Perjured and abandoned!" interrupted the female; "dost thou dream that
violence can purchase absolution, or that thou canst ever atone the
past?--a noble name disgraced, a father's broken heart and dying curse!
Yes, that curse, I hear it now! it rings upon me thrillingly, as when I
watched the expiring clay! it cleaves to thee--it pursues thee--it shall
pierce thee through thy corselet--it shall smite thee in the meridian of
thy power! Genius wasted--ambition blasted--penitence deferred--a life
of brawls, and a death of shame--thy destruction the offspring of thy
crime!--To this, to this, an old man's curse hath doomed thee!--AND THOU
ART DOOMED!"

These words were rather shrieked than spoken: and the flashing eye, the
lifted hand, the dilated form of the speaker--the hour--the solitude of
the ruins around--all conspired to give to the fearful execration the
character of prophecy. The warrior, against whose undaunted breast a
hundred spears had shivered in vain, fell appalled and humbled to the
ground. He seized the hem of his fierce denouncer's robe, and cried, in
a choked and hollow voice, "Spare me! spare me!"

"Spare thee!" said the unrelenting crone; "hast thou ever spared
man in thy hatred, or woman in thy lust? Ah, grovel in the
dust!--crouch--crouch!--wild beast as thou art! whose sleek skin and
beautiful hues have taught the unwary to be blind to the talons that
rend, and the grinders that devour;--crouch, that the foot of the old
and impotent may spurn thee!"

"Hag!" cried Montreal, in the reaction of sudden fury and maddened
pride, springing up to the full height of his stature. "Hag! thou hast
passed the limits to which, remembering who thou art, my forbearance
gave thee licence. I had well-nigh forgot that thou hadst assumed my
part--I am the Accuser! Woman!--the boy!--shrink not! equivocate not!
lie not!--thou wert the thief!"

"I was. Thou taughtest me the lesson how to steal a--"

"Render--restore him!" interrupted Montreal, stamping on the ground with
such force that the splinters of the marble fragments on which he stood
shivered under his armed heel.

The woman little heeded a violence at which the fiercest warrior of
Italy might have trembled; but she did not make an immediate answer. The
character of her countenance altered from passion into an expression
of grave, intent, and melancholy thought. At length she replied to
Montreal; whose hand had wandered to his dagger-hilt, with the instinct
of long habit, whenever enraged or thwarted, rather than from any design
of blood; which, stern and vindictive as he was, he would have been
incapable of forming against any woman,--much less against the one then
before him.

"Walter de Montreal," said she, in a voice so calm that it almost
sounded like that of compassion, "the boy, I think, has never known
brother or sister: the only child of a once haughty and lordly race, on
both sides, though now on both dishonoured--nay, why so impatient? thou
wilt soon learn the worst--the boy is dead!"

"Dead!" repeated Montreal, recoiling and growing pale; "dead!--no,
no--say not that! He has a mother,--you know he has!--a fond,
meekhearted, anxious, hoping mother!--no!--no, he is not dead!"

"Thou canst feel, then, for a mother?" said the old woman, seemingly
touched by the tone of the Provencal. "Yet, bethink thee; is it not
better that the grave should save him from a life of riot, of bloodshed,
and of crime? Better to sleep with God than to wake with the fiends!"

"Dead!" echoed Montreal; "dead!--the pretty one!--so young!--those
eyes--the mother's eyes--closed so soon?"

"Hast thou aught else to say? Thy sight scares my very womanhood from my
soul!--let me be gone."

"Dead!--may I believe thee? or dost thou mock me? Thou hast uttered thy
curse, hearken to my warning:--If thou hast lied in this, thy last hour
shall dismay thee, and thy death-bed shall be the death-bed of despair!"

"Thy lips," replied the female, with a scornful smile, "are better
adapted for lewd vows to unhappy maidens, than for the denunciations
which sound solemn only when coming from the good. Farewell!"

"Stay! inexorable woman! stay!--where sleeps he? Masses shall be sung!
priests shall pray!--the sins of the father shall not be visited on that
young head!"

"At Florence!" returned the woman, hastily. "But no stone records the
departed one!--The dead boy had no name!"

Waiting for no further questionings, the woman now passed on,--pursued
her way;--and the long herbage, and the winding descent, soon snatched
her ill-omened apparition from the desolate landscape.

Montreal, thus alone, sunk with a deep and heavy sigh upon the ground,
covered his face with his hands, and burst into an agony of grief; his
chest heaved, his whole frame trembled, and he wept and sobbed aloud,
with all the fearful vehemence of a man whose passions are strong and
fierce, but to whom the violence of grief alone is novel and unfamiliar.

He remained thus, prostrate and unmanned, for a considerable time,
growing slowly and gradually more calm as tears relieved his emotion;
and, at length, rather indulging a gloomy reverie than a passionate
grief. The moon was high and the hour late when he arose, and then few
traces of the past excitement remained upon his countenance; for Walter
de Montreal was not of that mould in which woe can force a settlement,
or to which any affliction can bring the continued and habitual
melancholy that darkens those who feel more enduringly, though with
emotions less stormy. His were the elements of the true Franc character,
though carried to excess: his sternest and his deepest qualities
were mingled with fickleness and caprice; his profound sagacity often
frustrated by a whim; his towering ambition deserted for some frivolous
temptation; and his elastic, sanguine, and high-spirited nature,
faithful only to the desire of military glory, to the poetry of a daring
and stormy life, and to the susceptibilities of that tender passion
without whose colourings no portrait of chivalry is complete, and in
which he was capable of a sentiment, a tenderness, and a loyal devotion,
which could hardly have been supposed compatible with his reckless
levity and his undisciplined career.

"Well," said he, as he rose slowly, folded his mantle round him, and
resumed his way, "it was not for myself I grieved thus. But the pang is
past, and the worst is known. Now, then, back to those things that never
die--restless projects and daring schemes. That hag's curse keeps my
blood cold still, and this solitude has something in it weird and awful.
Ha!--what sudden light is that?"

The light which caught Montreal's eye broke forth almost like a star,
scarcely larger, indeed, but more red and intense in its ray. Of itself
it was nothing uncommon, and might have shone either from convent or
cottage. But it streamed from a part of the Aventine which contained
no habitations of the living, but only the empty ruins and shattered
porticoes, of which even the names and memories of the ancient
inhabitants were dead. Aware of this, Montreal felt a slight awe (as the
beam threw its steady light over the dreary landscape); for he was
not without the knightly superstitions of the age, and it was now the
witching hour consecrated to ghost and spirit. But fear, whether of
this world or the next, could not long daunt the mind of the hardy
freebooter; and, after a short hesitation, he resolved to make a
digression from his way, and ascertain the cause of the phenomenon.
Unconsciously, the martial tread of the barbarian passed over the site
of the famed, or infamous, Temple of Isis, which had once witnessed
those wildest orgies commemorated by Juvenal; and came at last to a
thick and dark copse, from an opening in the centre of which gleamed the
mysterious light. Penetrating the gloomy foliage, the Knight now found
himself before a large ruin, grey and roofless, from within which came,
indistinct and muffled, the sound of voices. Through a rent in the wall,
forming a kind of casement, and about ten feet from the ground, the
light now broke over the matted and rank soil, embedded, as it were, in
vast masses of shade, and streaming through a mouldering portico hard at
hand. The Provencal stood, though he knew it not, on the very place once
consecrated by the Temple: the Portico and the Library of Liberty (the
first public library instituted in Rome). The wall of the ruin was
covered with innumerable creepers and wild brushwood, and it required
but little agility on the part of Montreal, by the help of these, to
raise himself to the height of the aperture, and, concealed by the
luxuriant foliage, to gaze within. He saw a table, lighted with tapers,
in the centre of which was a crucifix; a dagger, unsheathed; an open
scroll, which the event proved to be of sacred character; and a brazen
bowl. About a hundred men, in cloaks, and with black vizards, stood
motionless around; and one, taller than the rest, without disguise or
mask--whose pale brow and stern features seemed by that light yet
paler and yet more stern--appeared to be concluding some address to his
companions.

"Yes," said he, "in the church of the Lateran I will make the last
appeal to the people. Supported by the Vicar of the Pope, myself an
officer of the Pontiff, it will be seen that Religion and Liberty--the
heroes and the martyrs--are united in one cause. After that time, words
are idle; action must begin. By this crucifix I pledge my faith, on this
blade I devote my life, to the regeneration of Rome! And you (then no
need for mask or mantle!), when the solitary trump is heard, when the
solitary horseman is seen,--you, swear to rally round the standard of
the Republic, and resist--with heart and hand, with life and soul,
in defiance of death, and in hope of redemption--the arms of the
oppressor!"

"We swear--we swear!" exclaimed every voice: and, crowding toward cross
and weapon, the tapers were obscured by the intervening throng, and
Montreal could not perceive the ceremony, nor hear the muttered
formula of the oath: but he could guess that the rite then common to
conspiracies--and which required each conspirator to shed some drops
of his own blood, in token that life itself was devoted to the
enterprise--had not been omitted, when, the group again receding, the
same figure as before had addressed the meeting, holding on high the
bowl with both hands,--while from the left arm, which was bared,
the blood weltered slowly, and trickled, drop by drop, upon the
ground,--said, in a solemn voice and upturned eyes:

"Amidst the ruins of thy temple, O Liberty! we, Romans, dedicate to
thee this libation! We, befriended and inspired by no unreal and fabled
idols, but by the Lord of Hosts, and Him who, descending to earth,
appealed not to emperors and to princes, but to the fisherman and the
peasant,--giving to the lowly and the poor the mission of Revelation."
Then, turning suddenly to his companions, as his features, singularly
varying in their character and expression, brightened, from solemn awe,
into a martial and kindling enthusiasm, he cried aloud, "Death to
the Tyranny! Life to the Republic!" The effect of the transition was
startling. Each man, as by an involuntary and irresistible impulse, laid
his hand upon his sword, as he echoed the sentiment; some, indeed, drew
forth their blades, as if for instant action.

"I have seen enow: they will break up anon," said Montreal to himself:
"and I would rather face an army of thousands, than even half-a-dozen
enthusiasts, so inflamed,--and I thus detected." And, with this thought,
he dropped on the ground, and glided away, as, once again, through the
still midnight air, broke upon his ear the muffled shout--"DEATH TO THE
TYRANNY!--LIFE TO THE REPUBLIC!"




BOOK II. THE REVOLUTION

     "Ogni Lascivia, ogni male, nulla giustizia, nullo freno.
     Non c'era piu remedia, ogni persona periva.  Allora Cola di
     Rienzi." &c.--"Vita di Cola di Rienzi", lib. i. chap. 2.

     "Every kind of lewdness, every form of evil; no justice, no
     restraint. Remedy there was none; perdition fell on all.
     Then Cola di Rienzi," &c.--"Life of Cola di Rienzi".



Chapter 2.I. The Knight of Provence, and his Proposal.

It was nearly noon as Adrian entered the gates of the palace of Stephen
Colonna. The palaces of the nobles were not then as we see them now,
receptacles for the immortal canvas of Italian, and the imperishable
sculpture of Grecian Art; but still to this day are retained the massive
walls, and barred windows, and spacious courts, which at that time
protected their rude retainers. High above the gates rose a lofty and
solid tower, whose height commanded a wide view of the mutilated remains
of Rome: the gate itself was adorned and strengthened on either side by
columns of granite, whose Doric capitals betrayed the sacrilege that
had torn them from one of the many temples that had formerly crowded
the sacred Forum. From the same spoils came, too, the vast fragments of
travertine which made the walls of the outer court. So common at that
day were these barbarous appropriations of the most precious monuments
of art, that the columns and domes of earlier Rome were regarded by all
classes but as quarries, from which every man was free to gather the
materials, whether for his castle or his cottage,--a wantonness of
outrage far greater than the Goths', to whom a later age would fain have
attributed all the disgrace, and which, more perhaps than even heavier
offences, excited the classical indignation of Petrarch, and made him
sympathise with Rienzi in his hopes of Rome. Still may you see
the churches of that or even earlier dates, of the most shapeless
architecture, built on the sites, and from the marbles, consecrating
(rather than consecrated by) the names of Venus, of Jupiter, of Minerva.
The palace of the Prince of the Orsini, duke of Gravina, is yet reared
above the graceful arches (still visible) of the theatre of Marcellus;
then a fortress of the Savelli.

As Adrian passed the court, a heavy waggon blocked up the way, laden
with huge marbles, dug from the unexhausted mine of the Golden House
of Nero: they were intended for an additional tower, by which Stephen
Colonna proposed yet more to strengthen the tasteless and barbarous
edifice in which the old noble maintained the dignity of outraging the
law.

The friend of Petrarch and the pupil of Rienzi sighed deeply as he
passed this vehicle of new spoliations, and as a pillar of fluted
alabaster, rolling carelessly from the waggon, fell with a loud crash
upon the pavement. At the foot of the stairs grouped some dozen of the
bandits whom the old Colonna entertained: they were playing at dice upon
an ancient tomb, the clear and deep inscription on which (so different
from the slovenly character of the later empire) bespoke it a memorial
of the most powerful age of Rome, and which, now empty even of ashes,
and upset, served for a table to these foreign savages, and was strewn,
even at that early hour, with fragments of meat and flasks of wine. They
scarcely stirred, they scarcely looked up, as the young noble passed
them; and their fierce oaths and loud ejaculations, uttered in a
northern patois, grated harsh upon his ear, as he mounted, with a slow
step, the lofty and unclean stairs. He came into a vast ante-chamber,
which was half-filled with the higher class of the patrician's
retainers: some five or six pages, chosen from the inferior noblesse,
congregated by a narrow and deep-sunk casement, were discussing the
grave matters of gallantry and intrigue; three petty chieftains of the
band below, with their corselets donned, and their swords and casques
beside them, were sitting, stolid and silent, at a table, in the middle
of the room, and might have been taken for automatons, save for
the solemn regularity with which they ever and anon lifted to their
moustachioed lips their several goblets, and then, with a complacent
grunt, re-settled to their contemplations. Striking was the contrast
which their northern phlegm presented to a crowd of Italian clients, and
petitioners, and parasites, who walked restlessly to and fro, talking
loudly to each other, with all the vehement gestures and varying
physiognomy of southern vivacity. There was a general stir and sensation
as Adrian broke upon this miscellaneous company. The bandit captains
nodded their heads mechanically; the pages bowed, and admired the
fashion of his plume and hose; the clients, and petitioners, and
parasites, crowded round him, each with a separate request for interest
with his potent kinsman. Great need had Adrian of his wonted urbanity
and address, in extricating himself from their grasp; and painfully
did he win, at last, the low and narrow door, at which stood a tall
servitor, who admitted or rejected the applicants, according to his
interest or caprice.

"Is the Baron alone?" asked Adrian.

"Why, no, my Lord: a foreign signor is with him--but to you he is of
course visible."

"Well, you may admit me. I would inquire of his health."

The servitor opened the door--through whose aperture peered many a
jealous and wistful eye--and consigned Adrian to the guidance of a page,
who, older and of greater esteem than the loiterers in the ante-room,
was the especial henchman of the Lord of the Castle. Passing another,
but empty chamber, vast and dreary, Adrian found himself in a small
cabinet, and in the presence of his kinsman.

Before a table, bearing the implements of writing, sate the old Colonna:
a robe of rich furs and velvet hung loose upon his tall and stately
frame; from a round skull-cap, of comforting warmth and crimson hue, a
few grey locks descended, and mixed with a long and reverent beard. The
countenance of the aged noble, who had long passed his eightieth year,
still retained the traces of a comeliness for which in earlier manhood
he was remarkable. His eyes, if deep-sunken, were still keen and lively,
and sparkled with all the fire of youth; his mouth curved upward in a
pleasant, though half-satiric, smile; and his appearance on the whole
was prepossessing and commanding, indicating rather the high blood, the
shrewd wit, and the gallant valour of the patrician, than his craft,
hypocrisy, and habitual but disdainful spirit of oppression.

Stephen Colonna, without being absolutely a hero, was indeed far braver
than most of the Romans, though he held fast to the Italian maxim--never
to fight an enemy while it is possible to cheat him. Two faults,
however, marred the effect of his sagacity: a supreme insolence of
disposition, and a profound belief in the lights of his experience. He
was incapable of analogy. What had never happened in his time, he was
perfectly persuaded never could happen. Thus, though generally esteemed
an able diplomatist, he had the cunning of the intriguant, and not
the providence of a statesman. If, however, pride made him arrogant
in prosperity, it supported him in misfortune. And in the earlier
vicissitudes of a life which had partly been consumed in exile, he
had developed many noble qualities of fortitude, endurance, and real
greatness of soul; which showed that his failings were rather acquired
by circumstance than derived from nature. His numerous and highborn race
were proud of their chief; and with justice; for he was the ablest and
most honoured, not only of the direct branch of the Colonna, but also,
perhaps, of all the more powerful barons.

Seated at the same table with Stephen Colonna was a man of noble
presence, of about three or four and thirty years of age, in whom Adrian
instantly recognised Walter de Montreal. This celebrated knight was
scarcely of the personal appearance which might have corresponded with
the terror his name generally excited. His face was handsome, almost to
the extreme of womanish delicacy. His fair hair waved long and freely
over a white and unwrinkled forehead: the life of a camp and the suns of
Italy had but little embrowned his clear and healthful complexion, which
retained much of the bloom of youth. His features were aquiline
and regular; his eyes, of a light hazel, were large, bright, and
penetrating; and a short, but curled beard and moustachio, trimmed
with soldier-like precision, and very little darker than the hair, gave
indeed a martial expression to his comely countenance, but rather the
expression which might have suited the hero of courts and tournaments,
than the chief of a brigand's camp. The aspect, manner, and bearing, of
the Provencal were those which captivate rather than awe,--blending,
as they did, a certain military frankness with the easy and graceful
dignity of one conscious of gentle birth, and accustomed to mix, on
equal terms, with the great and noble. His form happily contrasted and
elevated the character of a countenance which required strength and
stature to free its uncommon beauty from the charge of effeminacy,
being of great height and remarkable muscular power, without the least
approach to clumsy and unwieldy bulk: it erred, indeed, rather to the
side of leanness than flesh,--at once robust and slender. But the chief
personal distinction of this warrior, the most redoubted lance of Italy,
was an air and carriage of chivalric and heroic grace, greatly set off
at this time by his splendid dress, which was of brown velvet sown with
pearls, over which hung the surcoat worn by the Knights of the Hospital,
whereon was wrought, in white, the eight-pointed cross that made
the badge of his order. The Knight's attitude was that of earnest
conversation, bending slightly forward towards the Colonna, and resting
both his hands--which (according to the usual distinction of the old
Norman race, (Small hands and feet, however disproportioned to the rest
of the person, were at that time deemed no less a distinction of the
well-born, than they have been in a more refined age. Many readers
will remember the pain occasioned to Petrarch by his tight shoes. The
supposed beauty of this peculiarity is more derived from the feudal than
the classic time.) from whom, though born in Provence, Montreal boasted
his descent) were small and delicate, the fingers being covered with
jewels, as was the fashion of the day--upon the golden hilt of an
enormous sword, on the sheath of which was elaborately wrought the
silver lilies that made the device of the Provencal Brotherhood of
Jerusalem.

"Good morrow, fair kinsman!" said Stephen. "Seat thyself, I pray; and
know in this knightly visitor the celebrated Sieur de Montreal."

"Ah, my Lord," said Montreal, smiling, as he saluted Adrian; "and how is
my lady at home?"

"You mistake, Sir Knight," quoth Stephen; "my young kinsman is not yet
married: faith, as Pope Boniface remarked, when he lay stretched on a
sick bed, and his confessor talked to him about Abraham's bosom, 'that
is a pleasure the greater for being deferred.'"

"The Signor will pardon my mistake," returned Montreal.

"But not," said Adrian, "the neglect of Sir Walter in not ascertaining
the fact in person. My thanks to him, noble kinsman, are greater than
you weet of; and he promised to visit me, that he might receive them at
leisure."

"I assure you, Signor," answered Montreal, "that I have not forgotten
the invitation; but so weighty hitherto have been my affairs at Rome,
that I have been obliged to parley with my impatience to better our
acquaintance."

"Oh, ye knew each other before?" said Stephen. "And how?"

"My Lord, there is a damsel in the case!" replied Montreal. "Excuse my
silence."

"Ah, Adrian, Adrian! when will you learn my continence!" said Stephen,
solemnly stroking his grey beard. "What an example I set you! But a
truce to this light conversation,--let us resume our theme. You must
know, Adrian, that it is to the brave band of my guest I am indebted for
those valiant gentlemen below, who keep Rome so quiet, though my poor
habitation so noisy. He has called to proffer more assistance, if need
be; and to advise me on the affairs of Northern Italy. Continue, I pray
thee, Sir Knight; I have no disguises from my kinsman."

"Thou seest," said Montreal, fixing his penetrating eyes on Adrian,
"thou seest, doubtless, my Lord, that Italy at this moment presents to
us a remarkable spectacle. It is a contest between two opposing powers,
which shall destroy the other. The one power is that of the unruly and
turbulent people--a power which they call 'Liberty;' the other power is
that of the chiefs and princes--a power which they more appropriately
call 'Order.' Between these parties the cities of Italy are divided.
In Florence, in Genoa, in Pisa, for instance, is established a Free
State--a Republic, God wot! and a more riotous, unhappy state of
government, cannot well be imagined."

"That is perfectly true," quoth Stephen; "they banished my own first
cousin from Genoa."

"A perpetual strife, in short," continued Montreal, "between the
great families; an alternation of prosecutions, and confiscations, and
banishments: today, the Guelfs proscribe the Ghibellines--tomorrow, the
Ghibellines drive out the Guelfs. This may be liberty, but it is the
liberty of the strong against the weak. In the other cities, as Milan,
as Verona, as Bologna, the people are under the rule of one man,--who
calls himself a prince, and whom his enemies call a tyrant. Having more
force than any other citizen, he preserves a firm government; having
more constant demand on his intellect and energies than the other
citizens, he also preserves a wise one. These two orders of government
are enlisted against each other: whenever the people in the one rebel
against their prince, the people of the other--that is, the Free
States--send arms and money to their assistance."

"You hear, Adrian, how wicked those last are," quoth Stephen.

"Now it seems to me," continued Montreal, "that this contest must end
some time or other. All Italy must become republican or monarchical. It
is easy to predict which will be the result."

"Yes, Liberty must conquer in the end!" said Adrian, warmly.

"Pardon me, young Lord; my opinion is entirely the reverse. You perceive
that these republics are commercial,--are traders; they esteem wealth,
they despise valour, they cultivate all trades save that of the
armourer. Accordingly, how do they maintain themselves in war: by their
own citizens? Not a whit of it! Either they send to some foreign chief,
and promise, if he grant them his protection, the principality of the
city for five or ten years in return; or else they borrow from some
hardy adventurer, like myself, as many troops as they can afford to pay
for. Is it not so, Lord Adrian?"

Adrian nodded his reluctant assent.

"Well, then, it is the fault of the foreign chief if he do not make his
power permanent; as has been already done in States once free by the
Visconti and the Scala: or else it is the fault of the captain of the
mercenaries if he do not convert his brigands into senators, and himself
into a king. These are events so natural, that one day or other
they will occur throughout all Italy. And all Italy will then become
monarchical. Now it seems to me the interest of all the powerful
families--your own, at Rome, as that of the Visconti, at Milan--to
expedite this epoch, and to check, while you yet may with ease, that
rebellious contagion amongst the people which is now rapidly spreading,
and which ends in the fever of licence to them, but in the corruption of
death to you. In these free States, the nobles are the first to suffer:
first your privileges, then your property, are swept away. Nay, in
Florence, as ye well know, my Lords, no noble is even capable of holding
the meanest office in the State!"

"Villains!" said Colonna, "they violate the first law of nature!"

"At this moment," resumed Montreal, who, engrossed with his subject,
little heeded the interruptions he received from the holy indignation of
the Baron: "at this moment, there are many--the wisest, perhaps, in the
free States--who desire to renew the old Lombard leagues, in defence of
their common freedom everywhere, and against whosoever shall aspire to
be prince. Fortunately, the deadly jealousies between these
merchant States--the base plebeian jealousies--more of trade than of
glory--interpose at present an irresistible obstacle to this design; and
Florence, the most stirring and the most esteemed of all, is happily so
reduced by reverses of commerce as to be utterly unable to follow out
so great an undertaking. Now, then, is the time for us, my Lords; while
these obstacles are so great for our foes, now is the time for us to
form and cement a counter-league between all the princes of Italy. To
you, noble Stephen, I have come, as your rank demands,--alone, of all
the barons of Rome,--to propose to you this honourable union. Observe
what advantages it proffers to your house. The popes have abandoned Rome
for ever; there is no counterpoise to your ambition,--there need be none
