
"He was buried in one of the crowded cemeteries of London," said
Grandfather. "As he left no children, his estate was inherited by his
nephew, from whom is descended the present Marquis of Normandy. The noble
Marquis is not aware, perhaps, that the prosperity of his family
originated in the successful enterprise of a New England ship carpenter."




Chapter III


"At the death of Sir William Phips," proceeded Grandfather, "our chair was
bequeathed to Mr. Ezekiel Cheever, a famous school-master in Boston. This
old gentleman came from London in 1637, and had been teaching school ever
since; so that there were now aged men, grandfathers like myself, to whom
Master Cheever had taught their alphabet. He was a person of venerable
aspect, and wore a long white beard.

"Was the chair placed in his school?" asked Charley.

"Yes, in his school," answered Grandfather; "and we may safely say that it
had never before been regarded with such awful reverence--no, not even when
the old governors of Massachusetts sat in it. Even you, Charley, my boy,
would have felt some respect for the chair, if you had seen it occupied by
this famous school-master."

And here Grandfather endeavored to give his auditors an idea how matters
were managed in schools above a hundred years ago. As this will probably
be an interesting subject to our readers, we shall make a separate sketch
of it, and call it



THE OLD-FASHIONED SCHOOL


Now imagine yourselves, my children, in Master Ezekiel Cheever's
school-room. It is a large, dingy room, with a sanded floor, and is
lighted by windows that turn on hinges, and have little diamond shaped
panes of glass. The scholars sit on long benches, with desks before them.
At one end of the room is a great fire-place, so very spacious, that there
is room enough for three or four boys to stand in each of the chimney
corners. This was the good old fashion of fire-places, when there was wood
enough in the forests to keep people warm, without their digging into the
bowels of the earth for coal.

It is a winter's day when we take our peep into the school-room. See what
great logs of wood have been rolled into the fire-place, and what a broad,
bright blaze goes leaping up the chimney! And every few moments, a vast
cloud of smoke is puffed into the room, which sails slowly over the heads
of the scholars, until it gradually settles upon the walls and ceiling.
They are blackened with the smoke of many years already.

                                [Image #2]

Next, look at our old historic chair! It is placed, you perceive, in the
most comfortable part of the room, where the generous glow of the fire is
sufficiently felt, without being too intensely hot. How stately the old
chair looks, as if it remembered its many famous occupants, but yet were
conscious that a greater man is sitting in it now! Do you see the
venerable school-master, severe in aspect, with a black scull-cap on his
head, like an ancient Puritan, and the snow of his white beard drifting
down to his very girdle? What boy would dare to play, or whisper, or even
glance aside from his book, while Master Cheever is on the look-out,
behind his spectacles! For such offenders, if any such there be, a rod of
birch is hanging over the fire-place, and a heavy ferule lies on the
master's desk.

And now school is begun. What a murmur of multitudinous tongues, like the
whispering leaves of a wind-stirred oak, as the scholars con over their
various tasks! Buz, buz, buz! Amid just such a murmur has Master Cheever
spent above sixty years: and long habit has made it as pleasant to him as
the hum of a bee-hive, when the insects are busy in the sunshine.

Now a class in Latin is called to recite. Forth steps a row of
queer-looking little fellows, wearing square-skirted coats, and small
clothes, with buttons at the knee. They look like so many grandfathers in
their second childhood. These lads are to be sent to Cambridge, and
educated for the learned professions. Old Master Cheever has lived so
long, and seen so many generations of school-boys grow up to be men, that
now he can almost prophesy what sort of a man each boy will be. One urchin
shall hereafter be a doctor, and administer pills and potions, and stalk
gravely through life, perfumed with assaf[oe]tida. Another shall wrangle
at the bar, and fight his way to wealth and honors, and in his declining
age, shall be a worshipful member of his Majesty's council. A third--and he
is the Master's favorite--shall be a worthy successor to the old Puritan
ministers, now in their graves; he shall preach with great unction and
effect, and leave volumes of sermons, in print and manuscript, for the
benefit of future generations.

But, as they are merely school-boys now, their business is to construe
Virgil. Poor Virgil, whose verses, which he took so much pains to polish,
have been mis-scanned, and mis-parsed, and mis-interpreted, by so many
generations of idle school-boys! There, sit down, ye Latinists. Two or
three of you, I fear, are doomed to feel the master's ferule.

Next comes a class in Arithmetic. These boys are to be the merchants,
shop-keepers, and mechanics, of a future period. Hitherto, they have
traded only in marbles and apples. Hereafter, some will send vessels to
England for broadcloths and all sorts of manufactured wares, and to the
West Indies for sugar, and rum, and coffee. Others will stand behind
counters, and measure tape, and ribbon, and cambric, by the yard. Others
will upheave the blacksmith's hammer, or drive the plane over the
carpenter's bench, or take the lapstone and the awl, and learn the trade
of shoe-making. Many will follow the sea, and become bold, rough
sea-captains.

This class of boys, in short, must supply the world with those active,
skilful hands, and clear, sagacious heads, without which the affairs of
life would be thrown into confusion, by the theories of studious and
visionary men. Wherefore, teach them their multiplication table, good
Master Cheever, and whip them well, when they deserve it; for much of the
country's welfare depends on these boys!

But, alas! while we have been thinking of other matters, Master Cheever's
watchful eye has caught two boys at play. Now we shall see awful times!
The two malefactors are summoned before the master's chair, wherein he
sits, with the terror of a judge upon his brow. Our old chair is now a
judgment-seat. Ah, Master Cheever has taken down that terrible birch-rod!
Short is the trial--the sentence quickly passed--and now the judge prepares
to execute it in person. Thwack! thwack! thwack! In those good old times,
a school-master's blows were well laid on.

See! the birch-rod has lost several of its twigs, and will hardly serve
for another execution. Mercy on us, what a bellowing the urchins make! My
ears are almost deafened, though the clamor comes through the far length
of a hundred and fifty years. There, go to your seats, poor boys; and do
not cry, sweet little Alice; for they have ceased to feel the pain, a long
time since.

And thus the forenoon passes away. Now it is twelve o'clock. The master
looks at his great silver watch, and then with tiresome deliberation, puts
the ferule into his desk. The little multitude await the word of
dismissal, with almost irrepressible impatience.

"You are dismissed," says Master Cheever.

The boys retire, treading softly until they have passed the threshold;
but, fairly out of the school-room, lo, what a joyous shout!--what a
scampering and trampling of feet!--what a sense of recovered freedom,
expressed in the merry uproar of all their voices! What care they for the
ferule and birch-rod now? Were boys created merely to study Latin and
Arithmetic? No; the better purposes of their being are to sport, to leap,
to run, to shout, to slide upon the ice, to snow-ball!

Happy boys! Enjoy your play-time now, and come again to study, and to feel
the birch-rod and the ferule, to-morrow; not till to-morrow, for to-day is
Thursday-lecture; and ever since the settlement of Massachusetts, there
has been no school on Thursday afternoons. Therefore, sport, boys, while
you may; for the morrow cometh, with the birch-rod and the ferule; and
after that, another Morrow, with troubles of its own.

Now the master has set every thing to rights, and is ready to go home to
dinner. Yet he goes reluctantly. The old man has spent so much of his life
in the smoky, noisy, buzzing school-room, that, when he has a holiday, he
feels as if his place were lost, and himself a stranger in the world. But,
forth he goes; and there stands our old chair, vacant and solitary, till
good Master Cheever resumes his seat in it to-morrow morning.



"Grandfather," said Charley, "I wonder whether the boys did not use to
upset the old chair, when the school-master was out?"

"There is a tradition," replied Grandfather, "that one of its arms was
dislocated, in some such manner. But I cannot believe that any school-boy
would behave so naughtily."

As it was now later than little Alice's usual bedtime, Grandfather broke
off his narrative, promising to talk more about Master Cheever and his
scholars, some other evening.




Chapter IV


Accordingly the next evening, Grandfather resumed the history of his
beloved chair.

"Master Ezekiel Cheever," said he, "died in 1707, after having taught
school about seventy years. It would require a pretty good scholar in
arithmetic to tell how many stripes he had inflicted, and how many
birch-rods he had worn out, during all that time, in his fatherly
tenderness for his pupils. Almost all the great men of that period, and
for many years back, had been whipt into eminence by Master Cheever.
Moreover, he had written a Latin Accidence, which was used in schools more
than half a century after his death; so that the good old man, even in his
grave, was still the cause of trouble and stripes to idle school-boys."

Grandfather proceeded to say, that, when Master Cheever died, he
bequeathed the chair to the most learned man that was educated at his
school, or that had ever been born in America. This was the renowned
Cotton Mather, minister of the Old North Church in Boston.

"And author of the Magnalia, Grandfather, which we sometimes see you
reading," said Laurence.

"Yes, Laurence," replied Grandfather. "The Magnalia is a strange, pedantic
history, in which true events and real personages move before the reader,
with the dreamy aspect which they wore in Cotton Mather's singular mind.
This huge volume, however, was written and published before our chair came
into his possession. But, as he was the author of more books than there
are days in the year, we may conclude that he wrote a great deal, while
sitting in this chair."

"I am tired of these school-masters and learned men," said Charley. "I
wish some stirring man, that knew how to do something in the world, like
Sir William Phips, would set in the chair."

"Such men seldom have leisure to sit quietly in a chair," said
Grandfather. "We must make the best of such people as we have."

As Cotton Mather was a very distinguished man, Grandfather took some pains
to give the children a lively conception of his character. Over the door
of his library were painted these words--BE SHORT--as a warning to visitors
that they must not do the world so much harm, as needlessly to interrupt
this great man's wonderful labors. On entering the room you would probably
behold it crowded, and piled, and heaped with books. There were huge,
ponderous folios and quartos, and little duodecimos, in English, Latin,
Greek, Hebrew, Chaldaic, and all other languages, that either originated
at the confusion of Babel, or have since come into use.

All these books, no doubt, were tossed about in confusion, thus forming a
visible emblem of the manner in which their contents were crowded into
Cotton Mather's brain. And in the middle of the room stood a table, on
which, besides printed volumes, were strewn manuscript sermons, historical
tracts, and political pamphlets, all written in such a queer, blind,
crabbed, fantastical hand, that a writing-master would have gone raving
mad at the sight of them. By this table stood Grandfather's chair, which
seemed already to have contracted an air of deep erudition, as if its
cushion were stuffed with Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and other hard
matters.

In this chair, from one year's end to another, sat that prodigious
book-worm, Cotton Mather, sometimes devouring a great book, and sometimes
scribbling one as big. In Grandfather's younger days, there used to be a
wax figure of him in one of the Boston museums, representing a solemn,
dark-visaged person, in a minister's black gown, and with a black-letter
volume before him.

"It is difficult, my children," observed Grandfather, "to make you
understand such a character as Cotton Mather's, in whom there was so much
good, and yet so many failings and frailties. Undoubtedly, he was a pious
man. Often he kept fasts; and once, for three whole days, he allowed
himself not a morsel of food, but spent the time in prayer and religious
meditation. Many a live-long night did he watch and pray. These fasts and
vigils made him meagre and haggard, and probably caused him to appear as
if he hardly belonged to the world."

"Was not the witchcraft delusion partly caused by Cotton Mather?" inquired
Laurence.

"He was the chief agent of the mischief," answered Grandfather; "but we
will not suppose that he acted otherwise than conscientiously. He believed
that there were evil spirits all about the world. Doubtless he imagined
that they were hidden in the corners and crevices of his library, and that
they peeped out from among the leaves of many of his books, as he turned
them over, at midnight. He supposed that these unlovely demons were
everywhere, in the sunshine as well as in the darkness, and that they were
hidden in men's hearts, and stole into their most secret thoughts."

Here Grandfather was interrupted by little Alice, who hid her face in his
lap, and murmured a wish that he would not talk any more about Cotton
Mather and the evil spirits. Grandfather kissed her, and told her that
angels were the only spirits whom she had any thing to do with. He then
spoke of the public affairs of the period.

A new war between France and England had broken out in 1702, and had been
raging ever since. In the course of it, New England suffered much injury
from the French and Indians, who often came through the woods from Canada,
and assaulted the frontier towns. Villages were sometimes burnt, and the
inhabitants slaughtered, within a day's ride of Boston. The people of New
England had a bitter hatred against the French, not only for the mischief
which they did with their own hands, but because they incited the Indians
to hostility.

The New Englanders knew that they could never dwell in security, until the
provinces of France should be subdued, and brought under the English
government. They frequently, in time of war, undertook military
expeditions against Acadia and Canada, and sometimes besieged the
fortresses, by which those territories were defended. But the most earnest
wish of their hearts was, to take Quebec, and so get possession of the
whole province of Canada. Sir William Phips had once attempted it, but
without success.

Fleets and soldiers were often sent from England, to assist the colonists
in their warlike undertakings. In 1710, Port Royal, a fortress of Acadia,
was taken by the English. The next year, in the month of June, a fleet,
commanded by Admiral Sir Hovenden Walker, arrived in Boston Harbor. On
board of this fleet was the English General Hill, with seven regiments of
soldiers, who had been fighting under the Duke of Marlborough, in
Flanders. The government of Massachusetts was called upon to find
provisions for the army and fleet, and to raise more men to assist in
taking Canada.

What with recruiting and drilling of soldiers, there was now nothing but
warlike bustle in the streets of Boston. The drum and fife, the rattle of
arms, and the shouts of boys, were heard from morning till night. In about
a month, the fleet set sail, carrying four regiments from New England and
New York, besides the English soldiers. The whole army amounted to at
least seven thousand men. They steered for the mouth of the river St.
Lawrence.

"Cotton Mather prayed most fervently for their success," continued
Grandfather, "both in his pulpit, and when he kneeled down in the solitude
of his library, resting his face on our old chair. But Providence ordered
the result otherwise. In a few weeks, tidings were received, that eight or
nine of the vessels had been wrecked in the St. Lawrence, and that above a
thousand drowned soldiers had been washed ashore, on the banks of that
mighty river. After this misfortune, Sir Hovenden Walker set sail for
England; and many pious people began to think it a sin, even to wish for
the conquest of Canada."

"I would never give it up so," cried Charley.

"Nor did they, as we shall see," replied Grandfather. "However, no more
attempts were made during this war, which came to a close in 1713. The
people of New England were probably glad of some repose; for their young
men had been made soldiers, till many of them were fit for nothing else.
And those, who remained at home, had been heavily taxed to pay for the
arms, ammunition, fortifications, and all the other endless expenses of a
war. There was great need of the prayers of Cotton Mather, and of all
pious men, not only on account of the sufferings of the people, but
because the old moral and religious character of New England was in danger
of being utterly lost."

"How glorious it would have been," remarked Laurence, "if our forefathers
could have kept the country unspotted with blood."

"Yes," said Grandfather; "but there was a stern warlike spirit in them,
from the beginning. They seem never to have thought of questioning either
the morality or piety of war."

The next event, which Grandfather spoke of, was one that Cotton Mather, as
well as most of the other inhabitants of New England, heartily rejoiced
at. This was the accession of the Elector of Hanover to the throne of
England, in 1714, on the death of Queen Anne. Hitherto, the people had
been in continual dread that the male line of the Stuarts, who were
descended from the beheaded King Charles and the banished King James,
would be restored to the throne. In that case, as the Stuart family were
Roman Catholics, it was supposed that they would attempt to establish
their own religion throughout the British dominions. But the Elector of
Hanover, and all his race, were Protestants; so that now the descendants
of the old Puritans were relieved from many fears and disquietudes.

"The importance of this event," observed Grandfather, "was a thousand
times greater than that of a Presidential Election, in our own days. If
the people dislike their president, they may get rid of him in four years;
whereas, a dynasty of kings may wear the crown for an unlimited period."

The German elector was proclaimed king from the balcony of the town-house,
in Boston, by the title of George the First, while the trumpets sounded,
and the people cried Amen. That night, the town was illuminated; and
Cotton Mather threw aside book and pen, and left Grandfather's chair
vacant, while he walked hither and thither to witness the rejoicings.




Chapter VI


"Cotton Mather," continued Grandfather, "was a bitter enemy to Governor
Dudley; and nobody exulted more than he, when that crafty politician was
removed from the government, and succeeded by Colonel Shute. This took
place in 1716. The new governor had been an officer in the renowned Duke
of Marlborough's army, and had fought in some of the great battles in
Flanders."

"Now, I hope," said Charley, "we shall hear of his doing great things."

"I am afraid you will be disappointed, Charley," answered Grandfather. "It
is true, that Colonel Shute had probably never led so unquiet a life while
fighting the French, as he did now, while governing this province of
Massachusetts Bay. But his troubles consisted almost entirely of
dissensions with the legislature. The king had ordered him to lay claim to
a fixed salary; but the representatives of the people insisted upon paying
him only such sums, from year to year, as they saw fit."

Grandfather here explained some of the circumstances, that made the
situation of a colonial governor so difficult and irksome. There was not
the same feeling towards the chief magistrate, now, that had existed,
while he was chosen by the free suffrages of the people. It was felt,
that, as the king appointed the governor, and as he held his office during
the king's pleasure, it would be his great object to please the king. But
the people thought, that a governor ought to have nothing in view, but the
best interests of those whom he governed.

"The governor," remarked Grandfather, "had two masters to serve--the king,
who appointed him, and the people, on whom he depended for his pay. Few
men, in this position, would have ingenuity enough to satisfy either
party. Colonel Shute, though a good-natured, well-meaning man, succeeded
so ill with the people, that in 1722, he suddenly went away to England,
and made complaint to King George. In the mean time, Lieutenant-Governor
Dummer directed the affairs of the province, and carried on a long and
bloody war with the Indians."

"But where was our chair, all this time?" asked Clara.

"It still remained in Cotton Mather's library," replied Grandfather; "and
I must not omit to tell you an incident, which is very much to the honor
of this celebrated man. It is the more proper, too, that you should hear
it, because it will show you what a terrible calamity the small pox was to
our forefathers. The history of the province, (and, of course, the history
of our chair,) would be incomplete, without particular mention of it."
Accordingly, Grandfather told the children a story, to which, for want of
a better title, we shall give that of



THE REJECTED BLESSING


One day, in 1721, Doctor Cotton Mather sat in his library, reading a book
that had been published by the Royal Society of London. But, every few
moments, he laid the book upon the table, and leaned back in Grandfather's
chair, with an aspect of deep care and disquietude. There were certain
things which troubled him exceedingly, so that he could hardly fix his
thoughts upon what he read.

It was now a gloomy time in Boston. That terrible disease, the small pox,
had recently made its appearance in the town. Ever since the first
settlement of the country, this awful pestilence had come, at intervals,
and swept away multitudes of the inhabitants. Whenever it commenced its
ravages, nothing seemed to stay its progress, until there were no more
victims for it to seize upon. Oftentimes, hundreds of people, at once, lay
groaning with its agony; and when it departed, its deep footsteps were
always to be traced in many graves.

The people never felt secure from this calamity. Sometimes, perhaps, it
was brought into the country by a poor sailor, who had caught the
infection in foreign parts, and came hither to die, and to be the cause of
many deaths. Sometimes, no doubt, it followed in the train of the pompous
governors, when they came over from England. Sometimes, the disease lay
hidden in the cargoes of ships, among silks and brocades, and other costly
merchandise, which was imported for the rich people to wear. And,
sometimes, it started up, seemingly of its own accord; and nobody could
tell whence it came. The physician, being called to attend the sick
person, would look at him, and say,--"It is the small pox! let the patient
be carried to the hospital."

