(1607)

I

BY CAPTAIN JOHN SMITH[1]


Captaine Bartholomew Gosnoll, one of the first movers of this
plantation, having many yeares solicited many of his friends, but
found small assistants; at last prevailed with some Gentlemen, as
Captaine Iohn Smith, Master Edward-maria Wingfield, Master Robert
Hunt, and divers others, who depended a yeare vpon his proiects, but
nothing could be effected, till by their great charge and industrie,
it came to be apprehended by certaine of the Nobilitie, Gentry, and
Marchants, so that his Maiestie by his letters patents, gaue
commission for establishing Councels, to direct here; and to governe,
and to execute there. To effect this, was spent another yeare, and by
that, three ships were provided, one of 100 Tuns, another of 40, and a
Pinnace of 20. The transportation of the company was committed to
Captaine Christopher Newport, a Marriner well practised for the
Westerne parts of America. But their orders for government were put in
a box, not to be opened, nor the governours knowne vntill they arrived
in Virginia.... On the 19 of December, 1606, we set sayle from
Blackwell, but by vnprosperous winds, were kept six weekes in the
sight of England; all which time, Master Hunt our Preacher, was so
weake and sicke, that few expected his recovery.

We watered at the Canaries, we traded with the Salvages at Dominica;
three weekes we spent in refreshing our selues amongst these
west-India Isles; in Gwardalupa we found a bath so hot, as in it we
boyled Porck as well as over the fire. And a little Isle called
Monica, we tooke from the bushes with our hands, neare two hogsheads
full of Birds in three or foure houres. In Mevis, Mona, and the Virgin
Isles, we spent some time; where, with a lothsome beast like a
Crocodil, called a Gwayn, Tortoises, Pellicans, Parrots, and fishes,
we daily feasted.

Gone from thence in search of Virginia, the company was not a little
discomforted, seeing the Marrinershad 3 dayes passed their reckoning
and found no land; so that Captaine Ratliffe (Captaine of the Pinnace)
rather desired to beare vp the helms to returns for England, then make
further search. But God the guider of all good actions, forcing them
by an extreame storme to hull all night, did driue them by his
providence to their desired Port, beyond all their expectations; for
never any of them had seene that coast.

The first land they made they called Cape Henry; where thirtie of them
recreating themselues on shore, were assaulted by fiue Salvages, who
hurt two of the English very dangerously.

That night was the box opened, and the orders read, in which
Bartholomew Gosnoll, Iohn Smith, Edward Wingfield, Christopher
Newport, Iohn Ratliffe, Iohn Martin, and George Kendall, were named to
be the Councell, and to choose a President amongst them for a year,
who with the Councell should governs. Matters of moment were to be
examined by a Iury, but determined by the maior part of the Councell,
in which the President had two voyces.

Untill the 13 of May they sought a place to plant in; then the
Councell was sworne, Master Wingfield was chosen President, and an
Oration made, why Captain Smith was not admitted of the Councell as
the rest.

Now falleth every man to works, the Councell contriue the Fort, the
rest cut downe trees to make place to pitch their Tents; some provide
clapbord to relade the ships, some make gardens, some nets, &c. The
Salvages often visited vs kindly. The Presidents overweening iealousie
would admit no exercise at armes, or fortification but the boughs of
trees cast together in the forms of a halfe moons by the extraordinary
paines and diligence of Captaine Kendall.

Newport, Smith, and twentie others, were sent to discover the head of
the river: by divers small habitations they passed, in six dayes they
arrived at a Towns called Powhatan, consisting of some twelue houses,
pleasantly seated on a hill; before it three fertile Iles, about it
many of their cornefields, the place is very pleasant, and strong by
nature, of this place the Prince is called Powhatan, and his people
Powhatans. To this place the river is navigable: but higher within a
myle, by reason of the Rocks and Isles, there is not passage for a
small Boat, this they call the Falles[2]. The people in all parts
kindly intreated them, till being returned within twentie myles of
Iames towns, they gaue iust cause of iealousie: but had God not
blessed the discoverers otherwise than those at the Fort, there had
then beene an end of that plantation; for at the Fort, where they
arrived the next day, they found 17 men hurt, and a boy slaine by the
Salvages, and had it not chanced a crosse barre shot from the Ships
strooke downe a bough from a tree amongst them, that caused them to
retire, our men had all beene slams, being securely all at works, and
their armes in dry fats.

Herevpon the President was contented the Fort should be pallisadoed,
the Ordnance mounted, his men armed and exercised: for many were the
assaults, and ambuscadoes of the Salvages, and our men by their
disorderly stragling were often hurt, when the Salvages by the
nimblenesse of their heels well escaped.

What toyle we had, with so small a power to guard our workemen adayes,
watch all night, resist our enemies, and effect our businesse, to
relade the ships, cut downe trees, and prepare the ground to plant our
Corne, &c. I referre to the Readers consideration. Six weekes being
spent in this manner, Captaine Newport (who was hired onely for our
transportation) was to returne with the ships....

Being thus left to our fortunes, it fortuned that within ten days
scarce ten amongst vs could either goe, or well stand, such extreame
weaknes and moknes oppressed vs. And thereat none need marvaile, if
they consider the cause and reason, which was this.

Whilst the ships stayed, our allowance was somewhat bettered, by a
daily proportion of Bisket, which the sailers would pilfer to sell,
giue, or exchange with vs, for money, Saxefras, furres, or loue. But
when they departed, there remained neither taverne, beere house, nor
place of reliefe, but the common Kettell. Had we beene as free from
all sinnes as gluttony, and drunkennesse, we might haue beene
canonized for Saints; But our President would never haue beene
admitted, for ingrossing to his private, Oatmeale, Sacks, Oyle,
_Aquavitoe_, Beefs, Egges, or what not, but the Kettell; that indeed
he allowed equally to be distributed, and that was halfe a pint of
wheat, and as much barley boyled with water for a man a day, and this
having fryed some 6 weekes in the ships hold, contained as many wormes
as graines; so that we might trudy call it rather so much bran than
corns, our drinks was water, our lodgings Castles in the ayre.

With this lodging and dyet, our extreame toils in bearing and planting
Pallisadoes, so strained and bruised vs, and our continuall labour in
the extremitie of the heat had so weakened vs, as were cause
sufficient to haue made vs as miserable in our natiue Countrey, or any
other place in the world.

From May, to September, those that escaped, lined vpon Sturgeon, and
Sea-crabs, fiftie in this time we buried, the rest seeing the
Presidents projects to escape these miseries in our Pinnace by flight
(who all this time had neither felt want nor sicknes) so moved our
dead spirits, as we deposed him; and established Ratcliffe in his
place, (Gosnoll being dead) Kendall deposed. Smith newly recovered,
Martin and Ratcliffe was by his care preserved and relieued, and the
most of the souldiers recovered with the skilfull diligence of Master
Thomas Wotton our Chirurgian generall.

But now was all our provision spent, the Sturgeon gone, all helps
abandoned, each houre expecting the fury of the Salvages; when God the
patron of all good indevours, in that desperate extremitie so changed
the hearts of the Salvages, that they brought such plenty of their
fruits, and provision, as no man wanted....

The new President, and Martin, being little beloved, of weake
iudgement in dangers, and lesse industrie in peace, committed the
managing of all things abroad to Captaine Smith: who by his owne
example, good words, and faire promises, set some to mow, others to
binde thatch, some to build houses, others to thatch them, himselfe
alwayes bearing the greatest tasks for his owns share, so that in
short time, he provided most of them lodgings, neglecting any for
himselfe.

This done, seeing the Salvages superfluitie beginne to decrease (with
some of his workmen) shipped himselfe in the Shallop to search the
Country for trade. The want of the language, knowledge to mannage his
boat without sailes, the want of a sufficient power (knowing the
multitude of the Salvages), apparell for his men, and other
necessaries, were infinite impediments.

Being but six or seauen in company he went downe the river to
Kecoughtan: where at first they scorned him, as a famished man; and
would in derision offer him a handfull of Corne, a peece of bread, for
their swords and muskets, and such like proportions also for their
apparell. But seeing by trade and courtesie there was nothing to be
had, he made bold to try such conclusions as necessitie inforced,
though contrary to his Commission: Let fly his muskets, ran his boat
on shore; whereat they all fled into the woods.

So marching towards their houses, they might see great heapes of
corne: much adoe he had to restraine his hungry souldiers from present
taking of it, expecting as it hapned that the Salvages would assault
them, as not long after they did with a most hydeous noyse. Sixtie or
seaventie of them, some blacke, some red, some white, some
party-coloured, came in a square order, singing and dauncing out of
the woods, with their Okee (which was an Idoll made of skinnes,
stuffed with mosse, all painted and hung with chaines and copper)
borne before them: and in this manner, being well armed with Clubs,
Targets, Bowes and Arrowes, they charged the English, that so kindly
receiued them with their muskets loaden with Pistoll shot, that downe
fell their God, and divers lay sprauling on the ground; the rest fled
againe to the woods, and ere long sent one of their Quiyoughkasoucks
to offer peace, and redeeme their Okee.

Smith told them, if onely six of them would come vnarmed and loade his
boat, he would not only be their friend, but restore them their Okee,
and gins them Beads, Copper, and Hatchets besides: which on both sides
was to their contents performed: and then they brought him Venison,
Turkies, wild foule, bread, and what they had; singing and dauncing in
signs of friendship till they departed.

In his returns he discovered the Towne and Country of Warraskoyack.

  Thus God vnboundlesse by his power,
  Made them thus kind, would vs deuour.

Smith perceiving (notwithstanding their late miserie) not any regarded
but from hand to mouth: (the company being well recovered) caused the
Pinnace to be provided with things fitting to get provision for the
years following; but in the interim he made 3, or 4, iournies and
discovered the people of Chickahamania: yet what he carefully provided
the rest carelesly spent.

Wingfield and Kendall liuing in disgrace, seeing all things at randome
in the absence of Smith, the companies dislike of their Presidents
weaknes, and their small loue to Martins never mending sicknes,
strengthened themselues with the sailers and other confederates, to
regaine their former credit and authority, or at least such meanes
abord the Pinnace, (being fitted to saile as Smith had appointed for
trade) to alter her course and to goe for England.

Smith vnexpectedly returning had the plot discovered to him, much
trouble he had to prevent it, till with store of sakre and musket shot
he forced them stay or sinke in the riuer: which action cost the life
of captaine Kendall.

These brawles are so disgustful, as some will say they were better
forgotten, yet all men of good iudgement will conclude it were better
their basenes should be manifest to the world, then the busines beare
the scorne and shame of their excused disorders.

The President and captaine Archer not long after intended also to haue
abandoned the country, which project also was curbed, and suppressed
by Smith. The Spaniard never more greedily desired gold than he
victuall; nor his souldiers more to abandon the Country, then he to
keepe it. But finding plentis of Corns in the riuer of Chickahamania,
where hundreds of Salvages in diuers places stood with baskets
expecting his comming.

And now the winter approaching, the rivers became so covered with
swans, geese, duckes, and cranes, that we daily feasted with good
bread. Virginia pease, pumpions, and putchamins, fish, fowls, and
diverse sorts of wild beasts as fat as we could eate them: so that
none of our Tuftaffaty humorists desired to goe for England.

But our Comoedies never endured long without a Tragedie; some idle
exceptions being muttered against Captaine Smith, for not discovering
the head of Chickahamania river, and taxed by the Councell, to be slow
in so worthy an attempt. The next voyage hee proceeded so farre that
with much labour by cutting of trees insunder he made his passage; but
when his Barge could passe no farther, he left her in a broad bay out
of danger of shot, commanding none should goe a shore till his
returne; himselfe with two English and two Salvages went vp higher in
a Canowe; but hee was not long absent, but his men went a shore, whose
want of government gaue both occasion and opportunity to the Salvages
to surprise one George Cassen, whom they slew, and much failed not to
have cut of the boat and all the rest.

Smith, little dreaming of that accident, being got to the marshes at
the rivers head, twentie myles in the desert, had his two men slaine
(as is supposed) sleping by the Canowe, whilst himselfe by fowling
sought them victuall: who finding he was beset with 200 Salvages, two
of them hee slew still defending himselfe with the ayd of a Salvage
his guid, whom he bound to his arme with his garters, and vsed him as
a buckler, yet he was shot in his thikh a little, and had many arrowes
that stucke in his cloathes but no great hurt, till at last they tooke
him prisoner.

When this newes came to Iames towne, much was their sorrow for his
losse, fewe expecting what ensued. Sixe or seuen weekes those
Barbarians kept him prisoner, many strange triumphes and coniurations
they made of him, yet hee so demeaned himselfe amongst them, as he not
onely diverted them from surprising the Fort, but procured his owns
libertie, and got himselfe and his company such estimation amongst
them, that those Salvages admired him more than their owns
Quiyouckosucks.

At last they brought him to Meronocomoco, where was Powhatan their
Emperor. Here more than two hundred of those grim Courtiers stood
wondering at him, as he had beene a monster; till Powhatan and his
trayne had put themselues in their greatest braveries. Before a fire
vpon a seat like a bedsted, he sat covered with a great robe, made of
Rarowcun skinnes, and all the tayles hanging by. On either hand did
sit a young wench of 15 or 18 yeares, and along on each side the
house, two rowes of men, and behind them as many women, with all their
heads and shoulders painted red: many of their heads bedecked with the
white downe of Birds; but every one with something: and a great chayne
of white beads about their necks.

At his entrance before the king, all the people gaue a great shout.
The Queene of Appamatuck was appointed to bring him water to wash his
hands, and another brought him a bunch of feathers, in stead of a
Towell to ry them: having feasted him after their best barbarous
manner they could, a long consultation was held, but the conclusion
was, two great stones were brought before Powhatan; then as many as
could layd hands on him, dragged him to them, and thereon laid his
head, and being ready with their clubs, to beate out his braines,
Pocohontas, the King's dearest daughter, when no intreaty could
prevaile, got his head in her armes, and laide her owne vpon his to
saue him from death: whereat the Emperour was contented he should liue
to make him hatchets, and her bells, beads, and copper; for they
thought him aswell of all occupations as themselues. For the King
himselfe will make his owne robes, shooes, bowes, arrowes, pots;
plant, hunt, or doe any thing so well as the rest.

  They say he bore a pleasant shew,
  But sure his heart was sad.
  For who can pleasant be, and rest,
  That lives in fears and dreads:
  And having life suspected, doth
  It still suspected lead.

Two dayes after, Powhatan having disguised himselfe in the most
fearefullest manner he could, caused Captain Smith to be brought forth
to a great house in the woods, and there vpon a mat by the fire to be
left alone. Not long after from behinde a mat that divided the house,
was made the most dolefullsst noyse he ever heard; then Powhatan more
like a devill than a man, with some two hundred more as blacke as
himselfe, came vnto him and told him now they were friends, and
presently he should goe to Iames towns, to send him two great gunnes,
