barberries--which, being preserved in bottles in the spring and
summer, were always ready to hand in Mistress Susan's cookery. From
the open door of the kitchen proceeded a villainous smell of
herrings, which caused Cherry to turn up her pretty nose in a
grimace that set Keziah laughing. Both these elder damsels, who
were neither blooming nor pretty nor graceful, like their youngest
sister, though they bid fair to be excellent housewives and docile
and tractable spouses, delighted in the beauty and wit and
freshness of Cherry. They had never envied her her pretty ways and
charming face, but had taken the same pleasure in both that a
mother or affectionate aunt might do. They spoke of her and thought
of her as "the child," and if any hard or disagreeable piece of
work had to be done, they both vied with each other in contriving
that it should not fall to Cherry's lot.

Cherry, although she dearly loved her homely sisters, as well she
might, never could quite realize that they were her sisters, and
not her aunts. Although Keziah was only six years her senior, it
seemed more like ten, and Jemima had three years' start of Keziah.
They treated her with an indulgence rare between sisters, and from
the fact of their being so staid and grave for their years, Cherry
could scarcely be blamed for feeling as though she was the only
young thing in the house. Her father talked of grave matters with
her aunt and sisters, whilst she sat gaping in weariness or got a
book in which to lose herself. They understood those mysterious
theological and political discussions which were a constant source
of perplexity and irritation to Cherry.

"As if it mattered one way or another," she would say to herself.
"I can't see that one way is a bit better than another! I wonder
folks can care to make such a coil about it."

"Hast come to help us with the pie, Cherry?" asked Jemima kindly.
"There, then, take my place with the paste; 'tis almost ready, but
would do with a trifle more beating. And there be fowls to draw and
get ready for the oven, and I know thou lovest not such a task."

Cherry shuddered at the thought, and gladly took Jemima's place,
tasting the almond with an air of relish, and going about her tasks
with a dainty air that would have angered Aunt Susan, but which
honest Keziah regarded with admiration.

"How many be coming to supper tonight?" asked Cherry. "Is it to be
a gathering?"

"Nay, I scarce know. I have only heard what aunt said to thee.
Father spoke of guests without saying the number, and she said our
uncle would be there, and Master Anthony Cole and his son. Whether
there be any others I know not; belike Rachel and Jacob may come
too."

"Now I am sore puzzled anent this Anthony Cole," said Cherry, as
she beat her paste and leaned towards Keziah, so that her voice
might not carry as far as the kitchen.

"And wherefore art thou puzzled, child?"

"Marry, because it was but a short while ago that we were forbid
even to speak with him or any in his house, neighbours though we
be; and now he comes oft, and father gives him good welcome, and
bids him to sup with us. It fairly perplexes me to know why."

Keziah also lowered her voice as she replied:

"We were forbid his house because that he and his household be all
Papists."

"Ay, verily, that I know. But they be none the less Papists now,
and yet we give them good day when we meet, and sit at the same
board with them in all amity. Are they turning Protestant then, or
what?"

Keziah shook her head.

"It is not that," she said.

Nay, then, what is it?"

"Marry, methinks it is that we are companions in distress, and that
a common trouble draws us the closer together. Thou must have
heard--"

"Oh, I hear words, words, words! but I heed them not. It is like
eating dust and ashes."

"Nay, thou art but a child, and these things are not for children,"
answered Keziah, indulgently. "And, indeed, they are hard to be
understood, save by the wise and learned. But this much I gather:
When the King came to the throne, all men hoped for better
days--liberty to think each according to his conscience, liberty
each to follow his own priest or pastor, and join without fear in
his own form of worship. The Papists believed that the son of Mary
Stuart would scarce show severity to them. The Puritans were
assured that one bred up by the Presbyterians of Scotland would
surely incline to their ways of worship and thought. But the King
has disappointed both, and has allied himself heart and soul with
the Episcopal faction and the Church of the Establishment; and, not
content with that, is striving to enforce the penal statutes
against all who do not conform as they were never enforced in the
Queen's time. Wherefore, as thou mayest understand, the Papists and the
Puritans alike suffer, and so suffering are something drawn together as
friends, albeit in doctrine they are wide asunder--wider than we from
the Establishment or they from it. But trouble drives even foes to
make common cause sometimes."

Cherry sighed impatiently.

"I would that men would e'en forget all these vexed doctrines and
dry dogmas, and learn to enjoy life as it might be enjoyed. Why are
we for ever lamenting evils which none may put right? What does it
matter whether we pray to God in a fine church or a homely room? I
would fain go to church with the fine folk, since the King will
have it so, and strive to find God there as well as in the bare
barn where Master Baker holds his meeting. They bid us read our
Bibles, but they will not let us obey the commands laid down--"

"Nay, hush, Cherry! hush, hush! What and if Aunt Susan heard?"

"Let her hear!" cried the defiant Cherry, though she lowered her
voice instinctively at the warning; "I am saying naught to be
ashamed of. I know naught about these matters of disputing; I only
know that the Bible bids folks submit themselves to the powers that
be, whether they be kings, or rulers, or magistrates, because the
powers that be are of God. So that I see not why we go not to
church as the King bids us. And again I read that wherever two or
three are gathered together in Christ's name, there will He be in
the midst of them. So why we cannot go peacefully to church, since
He will be there with us, I for one cannot see. I trow even the
boldest Papist or Puritan would not dare deny that He was as much
in the midst of those congregations as in ours. If they do they be
worse than Pagans, for every one that goes to church goes to pray
to God and to Jesus Christ."

Keziah looked flustered and scared. Cherry's words, though spoken
in some temper and despite, contained certain elements of shrewd
insight and sound common sense, which she had doubtless inherited
from her father. She had something of the boldness and independence
of mind that a spoiled child not unfrequently acquires, and she was
not accustomed to mince her words when speaking with her sisters.

Hush! oh hush, child! Father would not list to hear such words from
a daughter of his. It is for women to learn, and not to teach; to
listen, but not to speak."

"Oh yes, well do I know that. Have I not listened, and listened,
and listened, till I have well nigh fallen asleep; and what sense
is there in all the wranglings and disputations? Why cannot men
think as they like, and let other folks alone? What harm does it do
any that another should have a different opinion of his own?"

"I trow that is what father really thinks," said Keziah,
thoughtfully; "but all men declare that it is needful for there to
be outward uniformity of worship. And I trow that father would be
willing to conform if they would but let our preachers and teachers
alone to hold private meetings in peace. But so long as they badger
and persecute and imprison them, he will have naught to do with the
bishops and clergy who set them on, nor will he attend their
churches, be the law what it may. He says it is like turning back
in the hour of peril: that is not his way."

"I like that feeling," answered Cherry, with kindling eyes. "If
that be so, I mind it less. Father is a good man, and full of
courage; but I grow full weary of these never-ending talks. Kezzie,
thinkest thou that he will be put in prison for keeping from church
with his whole house? Some men have been sent to prison for less."

"I know not how that may be," answered Keziah, gravely. "He is a
useful citizen, and a man of substance; and by what I hear, such as
these are left alone so long as they abide quiet and peaceable.
Just now the Papists are being worse treated than we. Methinks that
is why father is so sorry for them."

"Too much talk! too much talk!" cried Aunt Susan's voice from the
adjoining kitchen. "Hands lag when tongues wag; wherefore do your
work in silence. Is that almond paste ready, Keren Happuch? Then
bring it quickly hither; and your manchet and sugar, Keziah, for
the skins are ready to be stuffed."

And as the girls obediently brought the required ingredients, they
found themselves in a long, low room, at the end of which a huge
fire burned in a somewhat primitive stove, whilst a tall, angular,
and powerful-looking dame, with her long upper robe well tucked up,
and her gray hair pushed tightly away beneath a severe-looking
coif, was superintending a number of culinary tasks, Jemima and a
serving wench obeying the glance of her eye and the turn of her
hand with the precision of long practice.

Certainly it was plain that Martin Holt's guests would not starve
that night. The herring pie was only the crowning delicacy of the
board, which was to groan beneath a variety of appetizing dishes.
The Puritans were a temperate race, and the baneful habit of sack
drinking at all hours, of perpetual pledgings and toastings, and
the large consumption of fiery liquors, was at a discount in their
houses; but they nevertheless liked a good table as well as the
rest of their kind, and saw no hurt in sitting down to a generously
supplied board, whilst they made up for their abstemiousness in the
matter of liquor by the healthy and voracious appetite which
speedily caused the good cheer to melt away.

Mistress Susan was so intent on her preparations that she scarcely
let her nieces pause to eat their frugal midday dinner. Martin
himself was out on business, and would dine abroad that day, and
nothing better pleased the careful housewife than to dispense with
any formal dinner when there was a company supper to be cooked, and
thus save the attendant labour of washing up as well as the time
wasted in the consumption of the meal.

Jemima and Keziah never dreamed of disputing their aunt's will; but
Cherry pouted and complained that it was hard to work all day
without even the dinner hour as a relief. Mistress Susan gave her a
sharp rebuke that silenced without subduing her; and she kept
throwing wistful glances out of the window, watching the play of
sunshine on the water, and longing to be out in the fresh air--for
such a day as this was too good to be wasted indoors. Tomorrow
belike the sun would not shine, and the wind would be cold and
nipping.

Jemima and Keziah saw the wistful glances, and longed to interpose
on behalf of their favourite; but Mistress Susan was not one it was
well to interfere with, and Cherry was not in favour that day. But
an inspiration came over Jemima at last, and she suddenly
exclaimed:

"Sure, but how badly we need some fresh rushes for the parlour
floor! There be not enough to cover it, and they all brown and old.
There has been scarce any frost as yet. I trow the river rushes
will be yet green, and at least they will be fresh. Could not the
child be spared to run out to try and get some? She is a better
hand at that than at her cooking. I will finish her pastry if thou
wilt spare her to get the reeds. I love not a floor like you, and
methinks father will chide an he sees."

Mistress Susan cast a quick glance at the rush-strewn floor, and
could not but agree with her niece. She had all the true
housewife's instinct of neatness and cleanliness in every detail.
The filthy habit of letting rushes rot on the floor, and only
piling fresh ones on the top as occasion demanded, found no favour
in this house. It was part of Cherry's work and delight to cut them
fresh as often as there was need, but a spell of wet weather had
hindered her from her river-side rambles of late, with the
consequence that the supply was unwontedly low.

"Oh, any one can do Keren Happuch's work and feel nothing added to
her toil," was the sharp response. "Small use are her hands in any
kitchen. We had better make up our minds to wed her to a fine
gentleman, who wants naught of his wife but to dress up in grand
gowns, and smirk and simper over her fan; for no useful work will
he get out of her. If rushes are wanted, she had better go quickly
and cut them--

"And mind, do not stray too far along the banks, child; and watch
the sky, and be in before the sun is down. The evenings draw in so
quick now; and I would not have you abroad after nightfall for all
the gold of Ophir."

Cherry had no desire for such a thing to happen either. London in
the darkness of the night was a terrible place. Out from all the
dens of Whitefriars and other like places swarmed the ruffian and
criminal population that by day slunk away like evil beasts of
night into hiding. The streets were made absolutely perilous by the
bands of cutthroats and cutpurses who prowled about, setting upon
belated pedestrians or unwary travellers, and robbing, insulting,
and maltreating them--not unfrequently leaving the wretched victim
dead or dying, to be found later by the cowardly watchman, who
generally took good care not to be near the spot at the time of the
affray. Ladies of quality never went abroad unattended even by day;
but Cherry was no fine lady, and Martin Holt had no notion of
encouraging the child's native vanity by making any difference
betwixt her and her sisters. Jemima and Keziah had been always
accustomed to go about in the neighbourhood of their home
unmolested, and thought nothing of it; and though Cherry's rosy
cheeks, slim, graceful figure, and bright, laughing eyes might
chance to take the fancy of some bold roisterer or dandy, and lead
to an address which might frighten or annoy the maid, her father
considered this the less danger than bringing her up to think
herself too captivating to go about unguarded; and up till now she
had met with no unwelcome admiration or annoyance of any kind in
her limited rovings.

So she set forth blithely this afternoon, her cloak and hood
muffling well both face and figure, her clogs on her feet, since
the river bank would be muddy and treacherous at this time of year,
and a long, open basket on her arm, thinking of nothing but the
delights of escaping from the weary monotony of pastry making and
herb shredding, and from the overpowering odour of that mysterious
herring pie. Cherry liked well enough to eat of it when it was
placed upon the board, but she always wished she had not known
anything of the process; she thought she should enjoy it so much
the more.

Crossing the bridge, and exchanging many greetings as she tripped
along, for every neighbour was in some sort a friend, and
bright-eyed Cherry was a favourite with all--she turned to the
right as she quitted the bridge, and walked in a westerly direction
along the river bank, towards the great beds of reeds and rushes
that stretched away in endless succession so soon as the few houses
and gardens springing up on this side the river had been passed by.

Certainly there was no lack of green rushes. The autumn had been
mild, and though the past few days had been chill and biting, it
had not told to any great extent upon the rushes yet. Cherry
plunged eagerly amongst them, selecting and cutting with a
precision and rapidity that told of long practice. She was resolved
to take home as many as ever she could carry, and these all of the
best, since the supply would soon cease, and she knew the
difference in the lasting power of the full, thick rushes and the
little flimsy ones.

But it was later than she had known when she left home. The
brightness of the sunshine had deceived her, and she had been
detained a few minutes upon the bridge, first by one and then by
another, all asking kindly questions of her. Then her fastidious
selection of her rushes caused her to wander further and further
along the banks in search of prizes; and when at last her big
basket was quite full, and correspondingly heavy, she looked round
her with a start almost of dismay; for the gray twilight was
already settling down over the dark river, and she was full a mile
away from home, with a heavy load to carry.

Cherry's heart fluttered a little, but it was rather in fear of her
aunt's displeasure than of any mischance likely to happen to
herself. She had been often to these osier beds, and had never
encountered a living soul there, and she would soon reach the
region of walls and gardens that adjoined the southern end of the
bridge. So taking her basket on her arm, she pushed her way upwards
from the river to the path along which lay her road, and turning
her face homeward, made all the haste she could to get back.

But how dark it looked to the eastward! Did ever evening close in
so fast? And how black and cold the river looked! She never
remembered to have seen it quite so cheerless and gloomy before. A
thick white fog was rising from the marshy lands, and she could not
see the friendly twinkling lights upon the bridge. Despite her
exertions, which were great, she felt chill and shivery; and when
at last she heard the sound of a lusty shout behind her, her heart
seemed to stand still with terror, and she stopped short and gazed
wildly back, to see whence the noise came.

What she saw by no means reassured her. Some fifty yards behind,
but mounted on fine horses, were two young gentlemen, plainly in a
state of tipsy merriment, and by no means disposed to allow any
prey, in the shape of a woman old or young, to escape them without
some sort of pleasantry on their part. Cherry heard their laughter
and their coarse words without understanding what it all meant; but
a great terror took hold of her, and leaving her basket in the
middle of the path, in the vain hope of tripping up the tipsy
riders, she fled wildly along in the direction of home. Her hood
falling back, disclosed her pretty floating curls beneath, and so
gave greater zest to the pursuit. Fleet of foot she might be, but
what availed that against the speed of the two fine horses? She
heard their galloping hoofs closer and closer behind her. She knew
that they were almost up with her now. Even the osier beds would
afford her no protection from horsemen, and she feared to trust
herself to the slippery ooze when the daylight had fled. With a
short, sharp cry she sank upon the ground, exhausted and half dead
with terror, and she heard the brutal shout of triumph with which
the roisterers hailed this sight.

In another moment they would be upon her. She heard them shouting
to their horses as they pulled them up. But was there not another
sound, too? What was the meaning of that fierce demand in a very
different voice? She lifted her head to see a third rider spurring
up at a hand gallop, and before she had time to make up her mind
whether or not this was a third foe, or a defender suddenly arisen
as it were from the very heart of the earth, she felt herself
covered as by some protecting presence, and heard a firm voice
above her saying:

"The first man who dares attempt to touch her I shoot dead!"

There was a great deal of blustering and swearing and hectoring.
Cherry, still crouched upon the ground, shivered at the hideous
imprecations levelled at her protector, and feared every moment
to see him struck to the ground. But he held his position
unflinchingly, and the tipsy gallants contented themselves with
vituperation and hard words. Perhaps they thought the game not
worth the candle. Perhaps they deemed a simple city maid not worth
the trouble of an encounter. Perhaps they were too unsteady on
their legs to desire to provoke the hostile overtures of this tall,
dark-faced stripling, who appeared ready to do battle with the pair
of them, and that without the least fear. At any rate, after much
hard swearing, the estimable comrades mounted their horses again,
and rode on in the gathering darkness; whilst Cherry felt herself
lifted up with all courtesy and reverence, and a pleasant voice
asked in bashful accents, very unlike the firm, defiant tones
addressed to her persecutors, whether she were hurt.

"Not hurt, only frightened, fair sir," answered Cherry, beginning
to recover her breath and her self possession, as she divined that
her protector was now more embarrassed at the situation than she
was herself. "How can I thank you for your timely help? I was well
nigh dead with terror till I heard your voice holding them at bay.
Right bold it was of you to come to my assistance when you had two
foes against you."

"Nay, fair lady, I were less than a man had I stayed for twenty."

"I like you none the less for your brave words, sir, and I believe
that you have courage to face an army. But I may not linger here
even to speak my thanks. I shall be in sore disgrace at home for
tarrying out thus long in the dark."

"But you will grant to me to see you safe to your door, lady?"

"Ay, truly will I, an you will," answered Cherry, as much from real
nervous fear as from the coquetry which made such companionship
pleasant. "But I would fain go back a few paces for my poor reeds,
that I go not home empty handed. And you must catch your steed, Sir
Knight; he seems disposed to wander away at his own will."

"My steed will come at a call. He is a faithful beast, and not
addicted to errant moods. Let us fetch your basket, lady, and then
to your home.

"Is this it? Prithee, let me carry it; its weight is too much for
you. See, I will place it so on Dobbin's broad back, and then we
can jog along easily together."

Cherry, her fears allayed, and her imaginative fancy pleased by the
termination to this adventure, chatted gaily to her tall companion;
and as they neared the bridge with its many twinkling lights, she
pointed out one of the houses in the middle, and told her companion
that she dwelt there. His face turned eagerly upon her at hearing
that.

"I am right glad to hear it, for perchance you can then direct me
to the dwelling of Master Martin Holt, the wool stapler, if he yet
plies his trade there as his father did before him."

"Martin Holt!" cried Cherry, eagerly interrupting. "Why, good sir,
Martin Holt is my father."

The young man stopped short in amaze, and then said slowly,
"Verily, this is a wondrous hap, for Martin Holt is mine own uncle.
I am Cuthbert Trevlyn, the son of his sister Bridget."



Chapter 6: Martin Holt's Supper Party.


Six o'clock was the almost universal hour for supper amongst the
well-to-do classes, both gentle and simple, and Martin Holt's
family sat down to the well-spread board punctually to the minute
every day of their lives. But though there was no eating before
that hour, the invited guests who were intimate at the house
generally arrived about dusk, and were served with hot ginger wine
with lumps of butter floating in it, or some similar concoction
accounted a delicacy in those days of coarse feeding, and indulged
in discussion and conversation which was the preliminary to the
serious business of supper.

At four o'clock, then, Mistress Susan's table was set, the homespun
cloth of excellent texture and whiteness spread upon the board,
which was further adorned by plates and tankards, knives and even
forks, though these last-named articles were quite a novelty, and
rather lightly esteemed by Mistress Susan, who was a rigid
conservative in all domestic matters. All the cold provisions had
been laid upon the table. The serving woman in the kitchen had
received full instruction as to those that remained in or about the
stove. The ladies had doffed their big aprons, and had donned their
Sunday coifs and kerchiefs and better gowns, and were now assembled
in the upper parlour, where the spinning wheels stood, ready to
receive the guests when they should come.

Cherry's absence had not yet excited any uneasiness, although her
aunt had made one or two severe remarks as to her love for
junketing abroad, and frivolity in general. Her sisters had laid
out her dress in readiness for her, and had taken her part with
their accustomed warmth and goodwill. They were not at all afraid
of her not turning up safe and sound. Cherry had many friends, and
it was just as likely as not that she would stop and gossip all
along the bridge as she came home. She took something of the
privilege of a spoiled child, despite her aunt's rigid training.
She knew her sisters never looked askance at her; that her father
found it hard to scold severely, however grave he might try to look
to please Aunt Susan; and it was perfectly well known in the house
that she had no liking for those grave debates that formed the
prelude to the supper downstairs. It was like enough she would
linger without as long as she dared, and then spend as much time as
possible strewing her rushes and dressing herself, so that she
should not have long to listen to the talk of the elders.

Jemima and Keziah had long since trained themselves to that perfect
stillness and decorous silence that was deemed fitting for women,
and especially young women, in presence of their elders, They had
even begun to take a certain interest in the questions discussed.
But to Cherry it was simple penance to have to sit for one hour or
more, her tongue and her active limbs alike chained, and her
sisters were quite prepared for the absence of the younger girl
when the guests dropped in one by one.

Their uncle, Abraham Dyson, was the first arrival, and behind him
followed his son and daughter, Jacob and Rachel. Rachel was a buxom
young woman of five-and-twenty, shortly to be advanced to the
dignity of a wedded wife. She would have been married before but
for the feeble health of her mother; but the ceremony was not to be
postponed much longer on that account, for fear the bridegroom, a
silk mercer in thriving way of business, should grow weary of
delay, and seek another partner for his hand and home. But Abraham
Dyson saw another way of getting his sick wife properly looked to,
and had whispered his notion in the ear of his brother-in-law. The
Dysons and the Holts had had intimate business dealing with each
other for generations, and there had been many matrimonial
connections between them in times past. Martin himself had married
Abraham's sister, and he listened with equanimity and pleasure to
the proposal to ally one of his daughters with the solid and stolid
Jacob.

Jacob was not much to look at, but he would be a man of
considerable substance in time, and he had a shrewd head enough for
business. As it had not pleased Providence to bless Martin Holt
with sons, the best he could do was to find suitable husbands for
his daughters, and seek amongst his sons-in-law for one into whose
hands his business might worthily be intrusted. Daughters were
still, and for many generations later, looked upon very much in the
light of chattels to be disposed of at will by their parents and
guardians, and it had not entered honest Martin's head that his
wilful little Cherry would dare to set up her will in opposition to
his.

Jacob, who had been taken into the confidence of his elders, had
expressed his preference for the youngest of his three cousins; and
though not a word had been spoken to the girl upon the subject as
yet, Martin looked upon the matter as settled.

Scarcely had the bustle of the first arrivals died down before the
remaining two guests arrived--a tall, bent man with the face of a
student and book lover, followed by his son, also a man of rather
distinguished appearance for his station in life. The two Coles,
father and son, were amongst those many Roman Catholic sufferers
who had been ruined on account of their religion during the last
reign; and now they gained a somewhat scanty livelihood by keeping
a second-hand book shop on the bridge, selling paper and parchment
and such like goods, and acting as scriveners to any who should
desire to avail themselves of their skill in penmanship.
