Halifax, to be commenced within six months after the Union."

     _Teacher._--Did you notice the two places that were to be connected
     by the road?

     _Pupil._--They were Halifax and the St. Lawrence River.

     _T._--Why do you think Halifax was chosen as one terminus?

     _P._--Because it is near the sea.

     _T._--Well, Quebec is not far from the sea either.

     _P._--It is the nearest port for ocean-going steamers.

     _T._--Do you know what happens to the St. Lawrence every winter?

     _P._--It freezes up.

     _T._--Yes. It is frozen over for about four months in the winter,
     and ocean-going vessels cannot use the river then, so Halifax was
     chosen as a good winter port on the Atlantic. Now, what place on
     the St. Lawrence would be chosen as the other terminus?

     _P._--Most likely either Quebec or Montreal.

     _T._--We can tell better a little later which one was actually
     chosen. Here is a thing that I want you to think about. Why should
     they build the railway just to the St. Lawrence? Were there many
     people living in Upper Canada fifty years ago?

     _P._--Yes, as many people as there were in Quebec province.

     _T._--Really there were about 250,000 more here than in Quebec. How
     would the people here ship their goods in the winter? How do we
     send our goods to Europe now in winter?

     (Several suggestions were made. Finally it was stated that we could
     ship by water in summer, and by rail in winter.)

     _T._--You know that there are some rapids on the St. Lawrence
     before we reach Montreal. How do we manage about them?

     _P._--By using the canals.

     _T._--How can we ship by rail?

     _P._--By using the Grand Trunk or the Canadian Pacific Railway.

     _T._--Now, I shall have to tell you something about the canals and
     the first railway from Upper Canada. There were several canals
     already built on the St. Lawrence: the Lachine, Welland, and
     others. In fact, we had spent about $1,500,000 on canals before
     Confederation. The Grand Trunk Railway was running from Sarnia to
     Quebec city by 1856, just eleven years before Confederation. (Have
     a pupil trace the line from Sarnia to Quebec, so that the class may
     see how much of Upper Canada was served by the Grand Trunk.) Can
     you tell me now what place on the St. Lawrence would be taken as
     the western terminus of the new railway?

     _P._--Yes, Quebec would be the one.

     _T._--Why?

     _P._--Because the people of Upper Canada had ways already for
     sending their goods as far as Quebec city.

     _T._--The next point to think about is--How had Canada been
     shipping her goods across the sea in winter before this?

     (Several suggestions were made. "We would have to keep everything
     till the next summer." "We would have to use ice-boats." Objections
     were raised to these methods to show that they were impossible.
     Finally one pupil thought that we could send our freight through
     the United States.)

     _T._--Well, why did the people not continue doing that, instead of
     wanting to build a railway of their own?

     _P._--The United States would likely make them pay for doing it.

     _T._--Let me explain about that. In 1854, a treaty had been made
     between Canada and the United States, called the Reciprocity
     Treaty, by which the two countries exchanged their goods freely.
     This treaty was ended in 1866, and the people of Canada had to
     depend more on themselves. Besides, there was a good deal of
     trouble between Britain and the United States, arising out of the
     Civil War in the latter country, which had just ended. (The pupils
     are told here about the "Trent" and "Alabama" affairs, and the
     Fenian raids of 1866.) The people at that time were afraid that
     there might be war between the two countries and, of course, that
     would bring Canada into the trouble. Do you see now why a railway
     was needed from Quebec to Halifax?

     _P._--Because there was danger of war, and because the United
     States might interfere with Canadian trade.

     _T._--There were both military and commercial reasons. We have
     found now why the road was to run from Halifax to Quebec, and why
     it had to be built at that time. The next thing to find out
     is--Where it was to be built. If you were a railway contractor and
     had to build the road without thinking of anything but getting it
     done, what route would you be likely to follow?

     _P._--I think I should take the shortest way.

     _T._--Where would the road go then?

     (Have a pupil place a ruler on the map from Quebec to Halifax.)

     Tell where it would run.

     _P._--Through Quebec Province, the State of Maine, New Brunswick,
     and Nova Scotia.

     _T._--Would the people build it along that line? Don't forget the
     reasons for building it at all.

     _P._--They wouldn't go through the State of Maine, because that is
     in the United States.

     _T._--What is the next way they might think of?

     _P._--The next shortest way so as to keep in Canada.

     _T._--Where would that be? (Pupil comes up and tells from the map.)

     _P._--From Quebec city through Quebec, along the edge of Maine,
     into New Brunswick and Nova Scotia.

     _T._--Would they take that way?

     _P._--No, because it is too near the border of the United States.

     _T._--Why do you say "too near"?

     _P._--If there was war, soldiers from the United States might come
     over and wreck the railway. They might dynamite the bridges or tear
     up the rails.

     _T._--As a matter of fact, they did not take that way. What route
     could be taken to prevent any trouble of that kind?

     _P._--They would stay as far from the border as possible.

     _T._--Where would that be? (Pupil comes to the map to find out.)

     _P._--They would have to follow the St. Lawrence for some distance.

     _T._--How far?

     _P._--Right down to the other side of New Brunswick. Then down to
     Halifax.

     _T._--Would that be the cheapest line to build?

     _P._--It would cost more, because it is longer than the others.

     _T._--It is really 138 miles longer than the next shortest. Which
     of the reasons we have mentioned would make them want to keep as
     far from the border as they could?

     _P._--The military reason.

     _T._--Which country, Canada or Britain, would be the most
     interested in the military considerations?

     _P._--Britain, because Canada depended on her for protection.

     _T._--Is there any other reason, one connected with the cost? Where
     would the money come from?

     _P._--Britain would likely have to supply a good part of it.

     _T._--Why?

     _P._--Because there were not very many people here then.

     _T._--Yes, we have to borrow a good deal of money for such purposes
     even yet. The British Government was to supply the money for the
     railway, and would want to have something to say as to where it was
     to be built.

The pupils could now be asked to discover from the map the chief places
on the line of the railway. Have them written on the board. The teacher
would add some information about the length of the line (1,450 miles),
and the total cost ($80,000,000). He might also refer to the fact that
the fear of war that caused that route to be followed was not realized,
that the Intercolonial did good service in bringing the provinces closer
together, and that other railways have since been built on the two
rejected routes, namely, the Canadian Pacific Railway and the Grand
Trunk Pacific.

The facts of the lesson should then be gone over again, following the
black-board outline that has been made as the lesson proceeds.


BLACK-BOARD OUTLINE

     1. Provision in the British North America Act for the building of
     the road

     2. Reasons for building the road

          (_a_) Military
          (_b_) Commercial

     3. Selection of the route

          (_a_) Routes that were possible
          (_b_) Reasons for the final choice

     4. Facts about the road

          (_a_) Principal places on the road
          (_b_) Branches of the road
          (_c_) Length and cost

     5. Value of the road to the new Dominion

The class may be asked afterwards to draw a map showing the route and
the chief commercial centres served by the railway.


INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION IN ENGLAND, 1760-1800.

     NOTE.--This lesson should be preceded by an information
     lesson on the making of cotton goods--the material, how and where
     the raw material is grown, how it is harvested, the difference
     between spinning and weaving, the meaning of warp and woof.

The aim of this lesson is to show how a remarkable series of inventions
changed completely the processes of manufacturing, made England the
greatest manufacturing nation in the world, and gave her a source of
wealth that enabled her to carry on the costly wars against Napoleon.
The half century of this revolution is one of the most important in
English history, on account of the results in methods of transportation,
in agriculture, in social conditions, etc., and it is almost impossible
to have a satisfactory knowledge of succeeding history without
understanding this period. It is for this reason that it is treated at
such length.

This may be divided into as many lessons as the teacher wishes. The
dates given are not intended to be memorized by the pupils; they are
introduced simply to emphasize the order of the inventions. To emphasize
further the sequence, the class may be asked at each step what invention
would be needed next. The oral method--both pure narrative, and
development--is supposed to be used.

1. _Domestic System of Manufacture._--Before 1760 the manufacture of
cotton goods was carried on in the homes of the people. A spinner would
procure a supply of raw cotton from the dealer and carry it home, where,
with the help of his family, he would spin it into threads or yarn and
return it to the dealer. The spinning was all done by hand or foot-power
on a wheel that required one person to run it, and that would make only
one thread at a time. The weaving was also done at home. Because of the
use of Kay's flying shuttle (1732), the demand of the weavers for yarn
was greater than the spinners could supply, because one weaver could use
the product of many spinners, and there was great need of finding some
way of producing yarn more rapidly, to keep the weavers busy.

2. _Hargreaves' Spinning-jenny._--The first important invention of the
period was the spinning-jenny of Hargreaves (1764). This man was an
ordinary spinner, and the story is told that one day, when he was
returning from the dealer with a fresh supply of cotton, he came home
before his wife expected him. Supper was not ready, and in her haste to
rise to prepare it, she overturned the wheel when it was still in
motion. Hargreaves, entering at that moment, noticed that the spindle,
usually horizontal, was now revolving in an upright position. This gave
him the idea, and a short time afterwards he invented a machine with
which one person could spin several threads at once (at first eight).
From it has been developed the complicated machinery for spinning used
to-day.

3. _Arkwright's Spinning-frame or Water-frame._ Sir Richard Arkwright
invented, in 1771, a machine that accomplished the whole process of
spinning, the worker merely feeding the machine and tying breaks in the
thread. This machine was run by water-power, thus doing away with
hand-power and allowing the operator to attend entirely to the spinning.

4. _The Mule._ In 1779, Crompton invented a mule, by which threads of a
finer and stronger quality could be spun, and thus made it possible to
weave any grade of cloth.

5. _The Power-loom._ The spinners were now able to keep ahead of the
weavers, till Cartwright invented, in 1785, a power-loom that enabled
the weavers to work faster and use all the thread that the spinners
could make.

6. _The Steam-engine._ These machines were run by hand or water-power.
In 1785, Watts' steam-engine, invented several years before this, was
used in the manufacture of cotton, and manufacturers were now able to
use all the raw material they could get. The use of steam instead of
water-power led to the building of factories in cities, where labour was
plentiful and transportation facilities good. This meant large cities.

7. _The Cotton-gin._ Cotton had to be cleaned of its seeds before it
could be used in the factory. This had to be done by hand, which greatly
hindered the supply of raw material. A good deal of the raw cotton came
from the United States, and the planters there grew no more than could
be cleaned and sold. In 1792, Eli Whitney, an American, invented the
cotton-gin, by which the cotton could be cleaned of its seed very
quickly. Formerly a workman could clean by hand only five pounds of
cotton a week; by the saw-gin five hundred pounds could be cleaned in an
hour. (If a cotton-boll can be procured, the pupils will soon discover
how difficult it is to separate the seeds from the cotton.) More cotton
was then grown, because it could be sold to the factories, and England
was able to get all she required to keep the factories going. It may be
added here that the increase in cotton growing required more hands for
its cultivation; at that time, this meant more slaves; the cotton-gin
was therefore a large factor in the slave troubles in the Southern
States that led to the Civil War.

8. _Coal-mining and Smelting._ These machines were made of iron, and
coal was needed to run the engines and to smelt the iron. There was
plenty of coal in England, but very little was mined until the steam
pump was brought into use to keep the mines clear of water. When this
was done, more men went to work in the mines to get out the greater
amount of coal that was now needed. There was also plenty of iron ore in
England, and before this it had been smelted by means of charcoal, which
is made from wood. This slow and wasteful method was followed until
Roebuck invented a process of smelting by coal, and thus made possible a
plentiful supply of iron for the manufacture of the machines.

9. _The Safety Lamp._ Coal-mining was a dangerous occupation, because of
the fire-damp that is generated in mines. The open lamps used by the
miners often caused this gas to explode and many men lost their lives
thereby. To remedy this, Sir Humphrey Davy invented the safety lamp in
1815, which gave the miners the light they needed and prevented these
explosions.

10. _Transportation._ Now that there was so much manufacturing carried
on, people turned their attention to ways of transporting the goods to
where they were needed. The roads were generally wretched, and in many
parts of the country goods had to be carried on the backs of horses, as
the roads were not fit for wheels. Macadam, by using broken stone to
form the road-crust or surface, brought about a great improvement in
road-making. (Show pictures of old-time roads and of the roads to-day.)

Transportation by water was difficult by reasons of the obstructions in
rivers. To overcome these, canals were dug. The first one was made in
1761 between some coal-mines and the town of Manchester. Before 1800
many more were dug, and transportation became much easier.

11. _Agriculture._ The number of people engaged in the factories was
increasing and these could not grow their own food. This made it
necessary for the farmers to increase their output. Farms became larger;
better methods of cultivation were used; winter roots were grown, making
it possible to raise better cattle; fertilizers were used in greater
quantities, and the rotation of crops was introduced to prevent the
exhaustion of the soil.

12. _Social Conditions._ Out of the factory system grew the division of
classes into capital and labour, the struggle between which is the great
problem of to-day. It was then that labour unions came into existence.

We see, as a result of these inventions, that England was changed from
an agricultural country to a land of large manufacturing cities, and
became the chief manufacturing centre of the world, able to supply money
to defeat Napoleon Bonaparte, who is credited with the statement that it
was not England's armies that defeated him, but her "spindles."

     NOTE.--The teacher may refer to some of the modern social
     problems resulting in large part from this industrializing of the
     country: overcrowding in cities, bad housing and slums, urban and
     suburban transportation, educational problems, intemperance,
     decrease in physique, etc. (For the history of this period, see _A
     History of the British Nation_, by A.D. Innes, T.C. & E.C. Jack,
     Edinburgh.)


THE ROAD TO CATHAY

The aim of this lesson is to show how the desire of certain European
nations to find a western route to the rich countries of the
East--India, Cathay, and Cipango (India, China, and Japan)--led to the
discovery and subsequent exploration of America. It can be used as a
review lesson on the exploration of Canada. It will also give the pupil
practice in collecting information from various sources so as to show
the development of history along a certain line.

The subject-matter may be divided into as many lessons as the teacher
thinks best, and the oral method should be used. All the dates given are
not intended to be memorized; they are used to show the historical
sequence; only three or four of the most important need be committed to
memory by the class at their present stage. The map should be used
frequently.


THE LESSON

One of the results of the Crusades was to reveal to the European nations
the wealth of the East. Trade between the East and West grew, and Venice
became one of the wealthiest and most powerful of the states of Europe.

In 1295, a Venetian traveller named Marco Polo returned from Cathay
after an absence of twenty-five years. His stories of the wealth in
silks, spices, pearls, etc., of those eastern countries intensified the
desire of the West to trade with them. A great commerce soon grew up,
carried on principally by the great Italian cities--Venice, Florence,
Genoa, Pisa, Milan--and as these cities controlled the Mediterranean,
the only route to Asia then known, they had a monopoly of the Eastern
trade, and kept for a time the other western nations--Spain, Portugal,
France, and England--from sharing in it. These nations, animated by the
hope of gain and by the spirit of adventure and exploration, could not
long be denied their share. This spirit was stimulated by the
introduction of the mariner's compass, which afforded sailors a safer
guide than landmarks and stars; by the invention of gunpowder and the
use of cannon, which, through lessening the strength of the mediaeval
castle, tended to increase the power of the middle classes; and by the
invention of printing, which aided greatly in the diffusion of
knowledge.

The problem was to find a route by which to trade with India and China.

     Place the map of the world before the pupils and inquire how men
     travel to-day from Great Britain to India. Show that these routes
     were not feasible then. The route through the Mediterranean to Asia
     Minor and thence overland, or through the Red Sea to India, was
     closed by the Turks, who captured Constantinople in 1453. The Suez
     Canal was not opened till 1869. The way round the Cape of Good
     Hope was not discovered till 1497. The western route across the
     Atlantic and the Pacific was unknown.

Not till the closing years of the fifteenth century were the attempts to
solve this problem successful. The discovery of the route to India by
Vasco de Gama in 1497 first opened the way to the East, though the still
earlier discovery by Columbus was to afford, in later years, a much more
complete solution.

Christopher Columbus was a native of Genoa in Italy. An eager student of
geography, he became convinced that the earth was a sphere or globe and
not a flat surface. He believed that he could reach India and Cathay by
sailing west, as well as by going east through the Mediterranean--a
route that had been closed since the capture of Constantinople by the
Turks in 1453. "This grand idea, together with his services in carrying
it out, he offered first to his motherland of Genoa. But Genoa did not
want a new route to the East. Then he turned, but in vain, to Portugal.
The hopes of Portugal were set upon a passage around the south of
Africa. To England and to France Columbus held out his wondrous offer;
but these countries were slow and unbelieving. It was to Spain he made
his most persistent appeal; and Spain, to his imperishable glory, gave
ear." Through the self-denial and devotion of Queen Isabella of Castile
he was enabled to put his dream to the test.

     A special lesson should be given on the life of Columbus--his
     efforts, perseverance, courage, failures, successes. The teacher
     may add at will to the facts given here. Read Joaquin Miller's
     Poem, "Columbus," _High School Reader_, pp. 143-145.

When Columbus landed on the island-fringe of America in 1492, he thought
he had found what he had set out to find--the eastern country of India;
and he believed it all his life. This idea survived for several
generations, partly because of the great wealth of Mexico and Peru. When
Europeans were at last convinced that it was not India, they began again
to seek a way to the East, and looked on the continent of America merely
as an obstacle in their path. To find the road to Cathay was still their
chief ambition.

In 1497, John Cabot, under a charter from Henry VII of England, set out
to find a way to the East, and landed on North America; in 1498, his
son, Sebastian Cabot, explored the coast from Labrador to South
Carolina, with the same object.

In 1534, on his first voyage, Cartier thought, when he arrived at Gaspe
and saw the great river coming from the west, that he had discovered the
gateway to the East.

With the same object in view, Champlain, in 1609, explored the Richelieu
River and Lake Champlain. In 1613, he listened, only to be deceived, to
the story of Vignau about a way to the East up the Ottawa River to a
large lake and into another river that would lead to the Western Sea.

Henry Hudson made four voyages in search of a way through or round the
continent. On the first, second, and fourth, he tried to go round by a
North-west or a North-east passage. On the third voyage, in 1609, he
sailed up the Hudson River for 150 miles, only to find his way blocked.
A curious fact is that on this voyage he must, at one time, have been
only about twenty leagues from Champlain, when the latter was exploring
Lake Champlain on the same errand. (Show this on the map.) On his fourth
voyage, in 1610, Hudson discovered the bay that now bears his name, and
he must have thought, when he saw that great stretch of water to the
West, that he was at last successful. He wintered there, and when the
ice broke up in the spring, his men mutinied and set him, his young son,
and two companions, adrift in a boat, and they were never heard of
again. (See _The Story of the British People_ pp. 234-235.)

The Mississippi was long looked upon as a possible way to the Pacific
Ocean. La Salle explored the great lakes and the Ohio, Illinois, and
Mississippi Rivers. This last he found to flow south into the Gulf of
Mexico, instead of west into the Pacific Ocean. His settlement on
Montreal Island was called _La Chine_ (the French word for China), in
allusion to his desire to find the way to that country.

Later, others were led by the same desire to explore the western part of
what is now Canada. Verendrye, in 1731, travelled from Lake Nepigon by
way of Rainy Lake, the Winnipeg River, and the Red River, to the
junction of the latter with the Assiniboine, where Winnipeg now stands;
also up the Saskatchewan River to the Forks. His son, in 1742, explored
the Missouri River and came within sight of the Rocky Mountains.

Men of the Hudson's Bay Company and of the North-West
Company--Mackenzie, Fraser, Thompson, Simpson, Hearne--amid great
hardships and through thrilling adventures, continued the work of
exploring the waterways of the West to find an opening to the Pacific.

It has remained to the people of Canada to conquer the passes of the
Rockies and Selkirks, build great transcontinental railways and
steamship lines, and thus afford a direct short route from Europe to
Cathay. What men had striven for during more than four hundred years it
has been our lot to accomplish.

Other topics of interest suggested by the lesson may be taken up
afterwards; for example, the opening of the Suez Canal and its effect
on trade--why it did not restore supremacy to the Italian cities; the
opening of the Panama Canal and its probable effect on commerce; the
reasons why merchants prefer water routes to land routes, etc.


TOPICAL ANALYSIS OF LESSON ON THE ARMADA

The purpose of this lesson is to show how to construct a topical outline
of an important event in history. It is assumed that the teacher will
use, in preparing similar lessons, a larger history of Britain than the
Public School text-book, in order that the class may be asked, after the
lesson is taught, to read in their text-books an account somewhat
different in treatment from that of the teacher. The headings should
show the sequence of events and should be concise. The smaller print
indicates the facts that the brief headings should recall to the pupils
after the lesson. The events preceding the coming of the Armada are
suggested here among the causes. These headings may be placed on the
black-board as the lesson proceeds; they may be suggested by either
teacher or pupils. The actual teaching should be by both narrative and
development methods.

For the teacher's use a very interesting and trustworthy book is _A
History of the British Nation_, by A.D. Innes, T.C. & E.C. Jack,
Edinburgh.


I. CAUSES

1. _Political._--(_a_) Ambition of Philip to rule Europe; chief
obstacles were England, France, The Netherlands.

     (The opposition of France was overcome by a treaty and by the
     marriage of Philip and Isabella of France after Elizabeth had
     refused Philip's offer of marriage. The Netherlands were in full
     revolt and could not be conquered even by the cruelties of Alva and
     the destruction of their commerce. England was the chief Protestant
     power in Europe and, as such, was the chief opponent of Spain.)

(_b_) The marriage trouble; Elizabeth's religious policy broke off
negotiations of marriage with Philip.

(_c_) Philip received as a legacy the rights of Mary Queen, of Scots to
the English throne.

2. _Commercial_.--Interference of the English in the New World, to which
Spain claimed sole right.

     (This includes the English settlements as well as the capture of
     Spanish treasure ships. Recall stories of Drake, Hawkins, etc.)

3. _Religious._--Philip was the chief supporter of Roman Catholicism in
Europe, and wished to impose his religion on England.
