quicker to read the signs of treachery than the French.  There were
rumors of one hundred Mohawks lying in ambush at the Thousand Islands
to massacre the coming Hurons.  On the morning of August 3 four Huron
warriors and two women seized a canoe, and to the great astonishment of
the encampment launched out before they could be stopped.  Heading the
canoe back for Montreal, they broke out in a war chant of defiance to
the Iroquois.

The Onondagas made no sign, but they evidently took council to delay no
longer.  Again, when they embarked, they allowed no two whites in one
canoe.  The boats spread out.  Nothing was said to indicate anything
unusual.  The lake lay like a silver mirror in the August sun.  The
water was so clear that the Indians frequently paused to spear fish
lying below on the stones.  At places the canoes skirted close to the
wood-fringed shore, and braves landed to shoot wild-fowl.  Radisson and
Ragueneau seemed simultaneously to have noticed the same thing.
Without any signal, at about four in the afternoon, the Onondagas
steered their canoes for a wooded island in the middle of the St.
Lawrence.  With Radisson were three Iroquois and a Huron.  As the canoe
grated shore, the bowman loaded his musket and sprang into the thicket.
Naturally, the Huron turned to gaze after the disappearing hunter.
Instantly, the Onondaga standing directly behind buried his hatchet in
the Huron's head.  The victim fell quivering across Radisson's feet and
was hacked to pieces by the other Iroquois.  Not far along the shore
from Radisson, the priest was landing.  He noticed an Iroquois chief
approach a Christian Huron girl.  If the Huron had not been a convert,
she might have saved her life by becoming one of the chief's many
slaves; but she had repulsed the Onondaga pagan.  As Ragueneau looked,
the girl fell dead with her skull split by the chief's war-axe.  The
Hurons on the lake now knew what awaited them; and a cry of terror
arose from the children.  Then a silence of numb horror settled over
the incoming canoes.  The women were driven ashore like lambs before
wolves; but the valiant Hurons would not die without striking one blow
at their inveterate and treacherous enemies.  They threw themselves
together back to back, prepared to fight.  For a moment this show of
resistance drove off the Iroquois.  Then the Onondaga chieftain rushed
forward, protesting that the two murders had been a personal quarrel.
Striking back his own warriors with a great show of sincerity, he bade
the Hurons run for refuge to the top of the hill.  No sooner had the
Hurons broken rank, than there rushed from the woods scores of
Iroquois, daubed in war-paint and shouting their war-cry.  This was the
hunt to which the young braves had dashed from the canoes to be in
readiness behind the thicket.  Before the scattered Hurons could get
together for defence, the Onondagas had closed around the hilltop in a
cordon.  The priest ran here, there, everywhere,--comforting the dying,
stopping mutilation, defending the women.  All the Hurons were
massacred but one man, and the bodies were thrown into the river.  With
blankets drawn over their heads that they might not see, the women
huddled together, dumb with terror.  When the Onondagas turned toward
the women, the Frenchmen stood with muskets levelled.  The Onondagas
halted, conferred, and drew off.

[Illustration: Paddling past Hostiles.]

The fight lasted for four hours.  Darkness and the valor of the little
French band saved the women for the time.  The Iroquois kindled a fire
and gathered to celebrate their victory.  Then the old priest took his
life in his hands.  Borrowing three belts of wampum, he left the
huddling group of Huron women and Frenchmen and marched boldly into the
circle of hostiles.  The lives of all the French and Hurons hung by a
thread.  Ragueneau had been the spiritual guide of the murdered tribe
for twenty years; and he was now sobbing like a child.  The Iroquois
regarded his grief with sardonic scorn; but they misjudged the manhood
below the old priest's tears.  Ragueneau asked leave to speak.  They
grunted permission.  Springing up, he broke into impassioned, fearless
reproaches of the Iroquois for their treachery.  Casting one belt of
wampum at the Onondaga chief's feet, the priest demanded pledges that
the massacre cease.  A second belt was given to register the Onondaga's
vow to conduct the women and children safely to the Iroquois country.
The third belt was for the safety of the French at Onondaga.

The Iroquois were astonished.  They had looked for womanish pleadings.
They had heard stern demands coupled with fearless threats of
punishment.  When Ragueneau sat down, the Onondaga chief bestirred
himself to counteract the priest's powerful impression.  Lounging to
his feet, the Onondaga impudently declared that the governor of Quebec
had instigated the massacre.  Ragueneau leaped up with a denial that
took the lie from the scoundrel's teeth.  The chief sat down abashed.
The Council grunted "Ho, ho!" accepting the wampum and promising all
that the Jesuit had asked.


Among the Thousand Islands, the French who had remained behind to
gather up the baggage again joined the Onondagas.  They brought with
them from the Isle of Massacres a poor Huron woman, whom they had found
lying insensible on a rock.  During the massacre she had hidden in a
hollow tree, where she remained for three days.  In this region,
Radisson almost lost his life by hoisting a blanket sail to his canoe.
The wind drifted the boat so far out that Radisson had to throw all
ballast overboard to keep from being swamped.  As they turned from the
St. Lawrence and Lake Ontario up the Oswego River for Onondaga, they
met other warriors of the Iroquois nation.  In spite of pledges to the
priest, the meeting was celebrated by torturing the Huron women to
entertain the newcomers.  Not the sufferings of the early Christians in
Rome exceeded the martyrdom of the Christian Hurons among the
Onondagas.  As her mother mounted the scaffold of tortures, a little
girl who had been educated by the Ursulines of Quebec broke out with
loud weeping.  The Huron mother turned calmly to the child:--

"Weep not my death, my little daughter!  We shall this day be in
heaven," said she; "God will pity us to all eternity.  The Iroquois
cannot rob us of that."

As the flames crept about her, her voice was heard chanting in the
crooning monotone of Indian death dirge: "Jesu--have pity on us!
Jesu--have pity on us!"  The next moment the child was thrown into the
flames, repeating the same words.

The Iroquois recognized Radisson.  He sent presents to his Mohawk
parents, who afterwards played an important part in saving the French
of Onondaga.  Having passed the falls, they came to the French fort
situated on the crest of a hill above a lake.  Two high towers
loopholed for musketry occupied the centre of the courtyard.  Double
walls, trenched between, ran round a space large enough to enable the
French to keep their cattle inside the fort.  The _voyageurs_ were
welcomed to Onondaga by Major Dupuis, fifty Frenchmen, and several
Jesuits.


The pilgrims had scarcely settled at Onondaga before signs of the
dangers that were gathering became too plain for the blind zeal of the
Jesuits to ignore.  Cayugas, Onondagas, and Senecas, togged out in
war-gear, swarmed outside the palisades.  There was no more dissembling
of hunger for the Jesuits' evangel.  The warriors spoke no more soft
words, but spent their time feasting, chanting war-songs, heaving up
the war-hatchet against the kettle of sagamite--which meant the rupture
of peace.  Then came four hundred Mohawks, who not only shouted their
war-songs, but built their wigwams before the fort gates and
established themselves for the winter like a besieging army.  That the
intent of the entire Confederacy was hostile to Onondaga could not be
mistaken; but what was holding the Indians back?  Why did they delay
the massacre?  Then Huron slaves brought word to the besieged fort of
the twelve Iroquois hostages held at Quebec.  The fort understood what
stayed the Iroquois blow.  The Confederacy dared not attack the
isolated fort lest Quebec should take terrible vengeance on the
hostages.

[Illustration: Jogues, the Jesuit missionary, who was tortured by the
Mohawks.  From a painting in Chateau de Ramezay, Montreal.]

The French decided to send messengers to Quebec for instructions before
closing navigation cut them off for the winter.  Thirteen men and one
Jesuit left the fort the first week of September.  Mohawk spies knew of
the departure and lay in ambush at each side of the narrow river to
intercept the party; but the messengers eluded the trap by striking
through the forests back from the river directly to the St. Lawrence.
Then the little fort closed its gates and awaited an answer from
Quebec.  Winter settled over the land, blocking the rivers with ice and
the forest trails with drifts of snow; but no messengers came back from
Quebec.  The Mohawks had missed the outgoing scouts: but they caught
the return coureurs and destroyed the letters.  Not a soul could leave
the fort but spies dogged his steps.  The Jesuits continued going from
lodge to lodge, and in this way Onondaga gained vague knowledge of the
plots outside the fort.  The French could venture out only at the risk
of their lives, and spent the winter as closely confined as prisoners
of war.  Of the ten drilled soldiers, nine threatened to desert.  One
night an unseen hand plunged through the dark, seized the sentry, and
dragged him from the gate.  The sentry drew his sword and shouted, "To
arms!"  A band of Frenchmen sallied from the gates with swords and
muskets.  In the tussle the sentry was rescued, and gifts were sent out
in the morning to pacify the wounded Mohawks.  Fortunately the besieged
had plenty of food inside the stockades; but the Iroquois knew there
could be no escape till the ice broke up in spring, and were quite
willing to exchange ample supplies of corn for tobacco and firearms.
The Huron slaves who carried the corn to the fort acted as spies among
the Mohawks for the French.

In the month of February the vague rumors of conspiracy crystallized
into terrible reality.  A dying Mohawk confessed to a Jesuit that the
Iroquois[4] Council had determined to massacre half the company of
French and to hold the other half till their own Mohawk hostages were
released from Quebec.  Among the hostiles encamped before the gates was
Radisson's Indian father.  This Mohawk was still an influential member
of the Great Council.  He, too, reported that the warriors were bent on
destroying Onondaga.[5]  What was to be done?  No answer had come from
Quebec, and no aid could come till the spring.  The rivers were still
blocked with ice; and there were not sufficient boats in the fort to
carry fifty men down to Quebec.  "What could we do?" writes Radisson.
"We were in their hands.  It was as hard to get away from them as for a
ship in full sea without a pilot."

They at once began constructing two large flat-bottomed boats of light
enough draft to run the rapids in the flood-tide of spring.  Carpenters
worked hidden in an attic; but when the timbers were mortised together,
the boats had to be brought downstairs, where one of the Huron slaves
caught a glimpse of them.  Boats of such a size he had never before
seen.  Each was capable of carrying fifteen passengers with full
complement of baggage.  Spring rains were falling in floods.  The
convert Huron had heard the Jesuits tell of Noah's ark in the deluge.
Returning to the Mohawks, he spread a terrifying report of an impending
flood and of strange arks of refuge built by the white men.  Emissaries
were appointed to visit the French fort; but the garrison had been
forewarned.  Radisson knew of the coming spies from his Indian father;
and the Jesuits had learned of the Council from their converts.  Before
the spies arrived, the French had built a floor over their flatboats,
and to cover the fresh floor had heaped up a dozen canoes.  The spies
left the fort satisfied that neither a deluge nor an escape was
impending.  Birch canoes would be crushed like egg-shells if they were
run through the ice jams of spring floods.  Certain that their victims
were trapped, the Iroquois were in no haste to assault a double-walled
fort, where musketry could mow them down as they rushed the hilltop.
The Indian is bravest under cover; so the Mohawks spread themselves in
ambush on each side of the narrow river and placed guards at the falls
where any boats must be _portaged_.

Of what good were the boats?  To allay suspicion of escape, the Jesuits
continued to visit the wigwams.[6]  The French were in despair.  They
consulted Radisson, who could go among the Mohawks as with a charmed
life, and who knew the customs of the Confederacy so well.  Radisson
proposed a way to outwit the savages.  With this plan the priests had
nothing to do.  To the harum-scarum Radisson belong the sole credit and
discredit of the escapade.  On his device hung the lives of fifty
innocent men.  These men must either escape or be massacred.  Of
bloodshed, Radisson had already seen too much; and the youth of
twenty-one now no more proposed to stickle over the means of victory
than generals who wear the Victoria cross stop to stickle over means
to-day.

Radisson knew that the Indians had implicit faith in dreams; so
Radisson had a dream.[7]  He realized as critics of Indian customs fail
to understand that the fearful privations of savage life teach the
crime of waste.  The Indian will eat the last morsel of food set before
him if he dies for it.  He believes that the gods punish waste of food
by famine.  The belief is a religious principle and the
feasts--_festins a tout manger_--are a religious act; so Radisson
dreamed--whether sleeping or waking--that the white men were to give a
great festival to the Iroquois.  This dream he related to his Indian
father.  The Indian like his white brother can clothe a vice under
religious mantle.  The Iroquois were gluttonous on a religious
principle.  Radisson's dream was greeted with joy.  _Coureurs_ ran
through the forest, bidding the Mohawks to the feast.  Leaving ambush
of forest and waterfall, the warriors hastened to the walls of
Onondaga.  To whet their appetite, they were kept waiting outside for
two whole days.  The French took turns in entertaining the waiting
guests.  Boisterous games, songs, dances, and music kept the Iroquois
awake and hilarious to the evening of the second day.  Inside the fort
bedlam reigned.  Boats were dragged from floors to a sally-port at the
rear of the courtyard.  Here firearms, ammunition, food, and baggage
were placed in readiness.  Guns which could not be taken were burned or
broken.  Ammunition was scattered in the snow.  All the stock but one
solitary pig, a few chickens, and the dogs was sacrificed for the
feast, and in the barracks a score of men were laboring over enormous
kettles of meat.  Had an Indian spy climbed to the top of a tree and
looked over the palisades, all would have been discovered; but the
French entertainers outside kept their guests busy.

[Illustration: Chateau de Ramezay, Montreal, for years the residence of
the governor, and later the storehouse of the fur companies.]

On the evening of the second day a great fire was kindled in the outer
enclosure, between the two walls.  The trumpets blew a deafening blast.
The Mohawks answered with a shout.  The French clapped their hands.
The outer gates were thrown wide open, and in trooped several hundred
Mohawk warriors, seating themselves in a circle round the fire.
Another blare of trumpets, and twelve enormous kettles of mincemeat
were carried round the circle of guests.  A Mohawk chief rose solemnly
and gave his deities of earth, air, and fire profuse thanks for having
brought such generous people as the French among the Iroquois.  Other
chiefs arose and declaimed to their hearers that earth did not contain
such hosts as the French.  Before they had finished speaking there came
a second and a third and a fourth relay of kettles round the circle of
feasters.  Not one Iroquois dared to refuse the food heaped before him.
By the time the kettles of salted fowl and venison and bear had passed
round the circle, each Indian was glancing furtively sideways to see if
his neighbor could still eat.  He who was compelled to forsake the
feast first was to become the butt of the company.  All the while the
French kept up a din of drums and trumpets and flageolets, dancing and
singing and shouting to drive off sleep.  The eyes of the gorging
Indians began to roll.  Never had they attempted to demolish such a
banquet.  Some shook their heads and drew back.  Others fell over in
the dead sleep that results from long fasting and overfeeding and fresh
air.  Radisson was everywhere, urging the Iroquois to "Cheer up! cheer
up!  If sleep overcomes you, you must awake!  Beat the drum!  Blow the
trumpet!  Cheer up!  Cheer up!"

But the end of the repulsive scene was at hand.  By midnight the
Indians had--in the language of the white man--"gone under the
mahogany."  They lay sprawled on the ground in sodden sleep.  Perhaps,
too, something had been dropped in the fleshpots to make their sleep
the sounder.  Radisson does not say no, neither does the priest, and
they two were the only whites present who have written of the
episode.[8]  But the French would hardly have been human if they had
not assured their own safety by drugging the feasters.  It was a common
thing for the fur traders of a later period to prevent massacre and
quell riot by administering a quietus to Indians with a few drops of
laudanum.

The French now retired to the inner court.  The main gate was bolted
and chained.  Through the loophole of this gate ran a rope attached to
a bell that was used to summon the sentry.  To this rope the
mischievous Radisson tied the only remaining pig, so that when the
Indians would pull the rope for admission, the noise of the disturbed
pig would give the impression of a sentry's tramp-tramp on parade.
Stuffed effigies of soldiers were then stuck about the barracks.  If a
spy climbed up to look over the palisades, he would see Frenchmen still
in the fort.  While Radisson was busy with these precautions to delay
pursuit, the soldiers and priests, led by Major Dupuis, had broken open
the sally-port, forced the boats through sideways, and launched out on
the river.  Speaking in whispers, they stowed the baggage in the
flat-boats, then brought out skiffs--dugouts to withstand the ice
jam--for the rest of the company.  The night was raw and cold.  A skim
of ice had formed on the margins of the river.  Through the pitchy
darkness fell a sleet of rain and snow that washed out the footsteps of
the fugitives.  The current of mid-river ran a noisy mill-race of ice
and log drift; and the _voyageurs_ could not see one boat length ahead.

To men living in savagery come temptations that can neither be measured
nor judged by civilization.  To the French at Onondaga came such a
temptation now.  Their priests were busy launching the boats.  The
departing soldiers seemed simultaneously to have become conscious of a
very black suggestion.  Cooped up against the outer wall in the dead
sleep of torpid gluttony lay the leading warriors of the Iroquois
nation.  Were these not the assassins of countless Frenchmen, the
murderers of women, the torturers of children?  Had Providence not
placed the treacherous Iroquois in the hands of fifty Frenchmen?  If
these warriors were slain, it would be an easy matter to march to the
villages of the Confederacy, kill the old men, and take prisoners the
women.  New France would be forever free of her most deadly enemy.
Like the Indians, the white men were trying to justify a wrong under
pretence of good.  By chance, word of the conspiracy was carried to the
Jesuits.  With all the authority of the church, the priests forbade the
crime.  "Their answer was," relates Radisson, "that they were sent to
instruct in the faith of Jesus Christ and not to destroy, and that the
cross must be their sword."

Locking the sally-port, the company--as the Jesuit father
records--"shook the dust of Onondaga from their feet," launched out on
the swift-flowing, dark river and escaped "as the children of Israel
escaped by night from the land of Egypt."  They had not gone far
through the darkness before the roar of waters told them of a cataract
ahead.  They were four hours carrying baggage and boats over this
_portage_.  Sleet beat upon their backs.  The rocks were slippery with
glazed ice; and through the rotten, half-thawed snow, the men sank to
mid-waist.  Navigation became worse on Lake Ontario; for the wind
tossed the lake like a sea, and ice had whirled against the St.
Lawrence in a jam.  On the St. Lawrence, they had to wait for the
current to carry the ice out.  At places they cut a passage through the
honeycombed ice with their hatchets, and again they were compelled to
_portage_ over the ice.  The water was so high that the rapids were
safely ridden by all the boats but one, which was shipwrecked, and
three of the men were drowned.

They had left Onondaga on the 20th of March, 1658.  On the evening of
April 3d they came to Montreal, where they learned that New France had
all winter suffered intolerable insolence from the Iroquois, lest
punishment of the hostiles should endanger the French at Onondaga.  The
fleeing colonists waited twelve days at Montreal for the ice to clear,
