of which there is no other recorded evidence. It is not likely that it
will ever be possible to determine whether the settlement owed its final
destruction to the irruptions of the Eskimos, "to the ravages of
pestilence, to the enforced neglect of the mother country--itself during
the fifteenth century too often in sore straits--to the iniquitous
restrictions in commerce imposed by the home government, or to a
combination of several of these evils." There was a regular succession of
bishops from 1124 to the end of the fourteenth, or perhaps the beginning
of the fifteenth century.

[73-1] Addressed to the two bishops of Skalholt and Holar, in Iceland.

[73-2] The Archbishop of Drontheim in Norway.

[73-3] Alexander VI. was pope from 1492 to 1503.

[74-1] Evidently this is only an approximate statement.

[74-2] There are no records that this man ever reached either Greenland
or Iceland. The Greenland colony was not entirely forgotten by the home
government (Denmark-Norway). In the beginning of the sixteenth century,
Archbishop Valkendorf of Drontheim had agitated the question of searching
for the Greenland colony. During the reign of Frederick II. of
Denmark-Norway, Mogens Heinesen was in 1579 sent out, but he did not
reach the island. The Englishman John Davis, in 1585, visited the western
coast of Greenland, but found no Europeans.




ORIGINAL NARRATIVES OF THE VOYAGES OF COLUMBUS




ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE LORDS THE CATHOLIC SOVEREIGNS AND
CRISTOBAL COLON[77-1]


The things prayed for, and which Your Highnesses give and grant to Don
Cristobal Colon[77-2] as some recompense for what he is to discover in
the Oceans, and for the voyage which now, with the help of God, he has
engaged to make therein in the service of Your Highnesses, are the
following:

Firstly, that Your Highnesses, as actual Lords of the said Oceans,
appoint from this date the said Don Cristobal Colon to be your Admiral in
all those islands and mainlands which by his activity and industry shall
be discovered or acquired in the said oceans, during his lifetime, and
likewise, after his death, his heirs and successors one after another in
perpetuity, with all the pre-eminences and prerogatives appertaining to
the said office, and in the same manner as Don Alfonso Enriques, your
High Admiral of Castile,[78-1] and his predecessors in the said office
held it in their districts.--It so pleases their Highnesses. Juan de
Coloma.

Likewise, that Your Highnesses appoint the said Don Cristobal Colon to be
your Viceroy and Governor General in all the said islands and mainlands
and in the islands which, as aforesaid, he may discover and acquire[78-2]
in the said seas; and that for the government of each and any of them he
may make choice of three persons for each office, and that Your
Highnesses may select and choose the one who shall be most serviceable to
you; and thus the lands which our Lord shall permit him to discover and
acquire for the service of Your Highnesses, will be the better
governed.--It so pleases their Highnesses. Juan de Coloma.

Item, that of all and every kind of merchandise, whether pearls, precious
stones, gold, silver, spices, and other objects and merchandise
whatsoever, of whatever kind, name and sort, which may be bought,
bartered, discovered, acquired and obtained within the limits of the said
Admiralty, Your Highnesses grant from now henceforth to the said Don
Cristobal, and will that he may have and take for himself, the tenth part
of the whole, after deducting all the expenses which may be incurred
therein, so that of what shall remain clear and free he may have and take
the tenth part for himself, and may do therewith as he pleases, the other
nine parts being reserved for Your Highnesses.--It so pleases their
Highnesses. Juan de Coloma.

Likewise, that if on account of the merchandise which he might bring from
the said islands and lands which thus, as aforesaid, may be acquired or
discovered, or of that which may be taken in exchange for the same from
other merchants here, any suit should arise in the place where the said
commerce and traffic shall be held and conducted; and if by the
pre-eminence of his office of Admiral it appertains to him to take
cognizance of such suit; it may please Your Highnesses that he or his
deputy, and not another judge, shall take cognizance thereof and give
judgment in the same from henceforth.--It so pleases their Highnesses, if
it appertains to the said office of Admiral, according as it was held by
Admiral Don Alfonso Enriques, and others his successors in their
districts, and if it be just. Juan de Coloma.

Item, that in all the vessels which may be equipped for the said traffic
and business, each time and whenever and as often as they may be
equipped, the said Don Cristobal Colon may, if he chooses, contribute and
pay the eighth part of all that may be spent in the equipment, and that
likewise he may have and take the eighth part of the profits that may
result from such equipment.--It so pleases their Highnesses. Juan de
Coloma.

These are granted and despatched, with the replies of Your Highnesses at
the end of each article, in the town of Santa Fe de la Vega of Granada,
on the seventeenth day of April in the year of the nativity of our
Saviour Jesus Christ, one thousand four hundred and ninety-two. I the
King. I the Queen. By command of the King and of the Queen. Juan de
Coloma. Registered, Calcena.

FOOTNOTES:

[77-1] The Spanish text is that printed by Navarrete in his _Coleccion de
los Viages y Descubrimientos_, etc. (Madrid, 1825), II. 7-8, and taken
from the Archives of the Duke of Veragua. The translation is that of
George F. Barwick printed by Benjamin Franklin Stevens in his
_Christopher Columbus His Own Book of Privileges_, 1502, etc. (London,
1893), pp. 42-45, with such slight changes (chiefly of tenses) as were
necessary to bring it into conformity with the text of Navarrete. This
document is also given in English translation in _Memorials of Columbus_
(London, 1823), pp. 40-43. That volume is a translation of G.B. Spotorno,
_Codice Diplomatico Colombo-Americano_ (Genoa, 1823).

[77-2] In this edition of the Narratives of the Voyages of Columbus his
name in the translation of the original documents will be given in the
form used in the originals. During his earlier years in Spain Columbus
was known as Colomo, the natural Spanish form corresponding to the
Italian Colombo. At some time prior to 1492 he adopted the form Colon,
apparently to make more probable his claim to be descended from a Roman
general, Colonius, and to be related to the French admiral, Coullon,
called in contemporary Italian sources Colombo, and Columbus in Latin. In
modern texts of Tacitus the Roman general's name is Cilonius, and modern
research has shown that the French admiral's real name was Caseneuve and
that Coullon was a sobriquet added for some unknown reason. On the two
French naval commanders known as Colombo or Coullon and the baselessness
of Columbus's alleged relationship see Vignaud, _Etudes Critiques sur la
Vie de Colomb_ pp. 131 ff.

[78-1] In 1497 Columbus at his own request was supplied with a copy of
the ordinances establishing the admiralty of Castile so that he might
have a documentary enumeration of his prerogatives in the Indies. This
official copy he preserved in the collection of his papers known as the
_Book of Privileges_, and the translation of the documents relating to
the Admiralty of Castile is given in Stevens's edition of the _Book of
Privileges_, pp. 14 ff. This dignity of Admiral comprised supreme or
vice-regal authority on the sea and the general range of legal
jurisdiction in determining suits of law that is enjoyed by modern courts
of admiralty. A translation of Columbus's exposition of his rights
derived from his admiralty of the islands in the Ocean may be found in
P.L. Ford, _Writings of Columbus_ (New York, 1892), pp. 177-198, taken
from _Memorials of Columbus_ (London, 1823), pp. 205-223. For a summary
of these powers _cf._ the _Titulo_ that follows.

[78-2] It is a remarkable fact that nothing is said in this patent of
discovering a route to the Indies. It is often said that the sole purpose
of Columbus was to discover such a route, yet it is clear that he
expected to make some new discoveries, and that if he did not, the
sovereigns were under no specified obligations to him. Patents are
usually drawn on the lines indicated by the petitioner. Can we conclude
that the complete silence of the articles as to the Indies means that
Ferdinand and Isabella refused to make any promises if Columbus only
succeeded in reaching the known East Indies and could gain for them no
new possessions?




TITLE GRANTED BY THE CATHOLIC SOVEREIGNS TO CRISTOBAL COLON OF ADMIRAL,
VICEROY AND GOVERNOR OF THE ISLANDS AND MAINLAND THAT MAY BE
DISCOVERED[81-1]


Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, by the grace of God King and Queen of
Castile, Leon, Aragon, Sicily, Granada, Toledo, Valencia, Galicia,
Majorca, Seville, Sardinia, Cordova, Corsica, Murcia, Jaen, Algarbe,
Algeciras, Gibraltar, and the Canary Islands; Count and Countess of
Barcelona; Lords of Biscay and Molina; Dukes of Athens and Neopatria;
Counts of Roussillon and Cerdagne, Marquises of Oristano and Goziano;
Forasmuch as you, Cristobal Colon, are going by our command, with some of
our ships and with our subjects, to discover and acquire certain islands
and mainland in the ocean, and it is hoped that, by the help of God, some
of the said islands and mainland in the said ocean will be discovered and
acquired by your pains and industry; and as it is a just and reasonable
thing that since you incur the said danger for our service you should be
rewarded for it, and since we desire to honor and favor you on account of
what is aforesaid, it is our will and pleasure that you, the said
Cristobal Colon, after you have discovered and acquired the said islands
and mainland in the said ocean, or any of them whatsoever, shall be our
Admiral of the said islands and mainland which you may thus discover and
acquire, and shall be our Admiral and Viceroy and Governor therein, and
shall be empowered from that time forward to call and entitle yourself
Don Cristobal Colon, and that your sons and successors in the said office
and charge may likewise entitle and call themselves Don, and Admiral and
Viceroy and Governor thereof; and that you may have power to use and
exercise the said office of Admiral, together with the said office of
Viceroy and Governor of the said islands and mainland which you may thus
discover and acquire, by yourself or by your lieutenants, and to hear and
determine all the suits and causes civil and criminal appertaining to the
said office of Admiralty, Viceroy, and Governor according as you shall
find by law, and as the Admirals of our kingdoms are accustomed to use
and exercise it; and may have power to punish and chastise delinquents,
and exercise the said offices of Admiralty, Viceroy, and Governor, you
and your said lieutenants, in all that concerns and appertains to the
said offices and to each of them; and that you shall have and levy the
fees and salaries annexed, belonging and appertaining to the said offices
and to each of them, according as our High Admiral in the Admiralty of
our kingdoms levies and is accustomed to levy them. And by this our
patent, or by the transcript thereof signed by a public scrivener, we
command Prince Don Juan, our very dear and well beloved son, and the
Infantes, dukes, prelates, marquises, counts, masters of orders, priors,
commanders, and members of our council, and auditors of our audiencia,
alcaldes, and other justices whomsoever of our household, court, and
chancery, and sub-commanders, alcaldes of castles and fortified and
unfortified houses, and all councillors, assistants, regidores, alcaldes,
bailiffs, judges, veinticuatros, jurats, knights, esquires, officers, and
liege men[82-1] of all the cities, towns, and places of our kingdoms and
dominions, and of those which you may conquer and acquire, and the
captains, masters, mates, officers, mariners, and seamen, our natural
subjects who now are or hereafter shall be, and each and any of them,
that upon the said islands and mainland in the said ocean being
discovered and acquired by you, and the oath and formality requisite in
such case having been made and done by you or by him who may have your
procuration,[83-1] they shall have and hold you from thenceforth for the
whole of your life, and your son and successor after you, and successor
after successor for ever and ever, as our Admiral of the said ocean, and
as Viceroy and Governor of the said islands and mainland, which you, the
said Don Cristobal Colon, may discover and acquire; and they shall treat
with you, and with your said lieutenants whom you may place in the said
offices of Admiral, Viceroy, and Governor, about everything appertaining
thereto, and shall pay and cause to be paid to you the salary, dues and
other things annexed and appertaining to the said offices, and shall
observe and cause to be observed toward you all the honors, graces,
favors, liberties, pre-eminences, prerogatives, exemptions, immunities,
and all other things, and each of them, which in virtue of the said
offices of Admiral, Viceroy, and Governor you shall be entitled to have
and enjoy, and which ought to be observed towards you in every respect
fully and completely so that nothing may be diminished therefrom; and
that neither therein nor in any part thereof shall they place or consent
to place hindrance or obstacle against you; for we by this our patent
from now henceforth grant to you the said offices of Admiralty, Viceroy,
and Governor, by right of inheritance for ever and ever, and we give you
actual and prospective possession thereof, and of each of them, and power
and authority to use and exercise it, and to collect the dues and
salaries annexed and appertaining to them and to each of them, according
to what is aforesaid. Concerning all that is aforesaid, if it should be
necessary and you should require it of them, we command our chancellor
and notaries and the other officers who are at the board of our seals to
give, deliver, pass, and seal for you our patent of privilege with the
circle of signatures, in the strongest, firmest, and most sufficient
manner that you may request and may find needful, and neither one nor the
other of you or them shall do contrary hereto in any manner, under
penalty of our displeasure and of ten thousand maravedis[84-1] to our
chamber, upon every one who shall do to the contrary. And further we
command the man who shall show them this our patent, to cite them to
appear before us in our court, wheresoever we may be, within fifteen days
from the day of citation, under the said penalty, under which we command
every public scrivener who may be summoned for this purpose, to give to
the person who shall show it to him a certificate thereof signed with his
signature, whereby we may know in what manner our command is executed.
Given in our city of Granada, on the thirtieth day of the month of April,
in the year of the nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ one thousand four
hundred and ninety-two. I the King. I the Queen. I, Juan de Coloma,
Secretary of the King and of the Queen, our Lords, caused this to be
written by their command. Granted in form, Roderick, Doctor. Registered,
Sebastian de Olano. Francisco de Madrid, Chancellor.

FOOTNOTES:

[81-1] Spanish text in Navarrete, II. 9-11. We omit the long preamble.
Spanish text and facsimile of Paris Codex in Stevens, _Christopher
Columbus His Own Book of Privileges_, pp. 49 ff. The translation is that
of George F. Barwick. This document is also to be found in English in
_Memorials of Columbus_ (London, 1823), pp. 52-57.

[82-1] Audiencia means the king's court of justice; regidores are roughly
equivalent to members of a town council. The Navarrete text has
_corregidores_, town governors appointed by the king. Veinticuatros were
town councillors, so called because commonly 24 in number. Jurats were
municipal executive officers in Aragon. The original which is translated
"liege men" is _Homes-Buenos_. Further explanations of these offices may
be found in Hume, _Spain, Its Greatness and Decay_, pp. 18 ff., and in
_The Cambridge Modern History_, I. 348 ff.

[83-1] Procuration=power of attorney.

[84-1] The maravedi at this time was equal in coin value to about
two-thirds of a cent.




JOURNAL OF THE FIRST VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS




INTRODUCTION


The contents of Columbus's Journal of his first voyage were first made
known to the public in the epitome incorporated in Ferdinand Columbus's
life of the Admiral, which has come down to us only in the Italian
translation of Alfonso Ulloa, the _Historie del S.D. Fernando Colombo
nelle quali s'ha particolare e vera relazione della vita e de' fatti
dell' Ammiraglio D. Christoforo Colombo suo padre_, etc. (Venice, 1571).
This account is accessible in English in Churchill's _Voyages_, Vol. II.,
and in Pinkerton's _Voyages_, Vol. XII.

Another epitome was prepared by Bartolome de Las Casas and inserted in
his _Historia de las Indias_. This account was embodied in the main by
Antonio de Herrera in his _Historia General de las Indias Occidentales_
(Madrid, 1601). It is accessible in English in John Stevens's translation
of Herrera (London, 1725-1726).

These independent epitomes of the original were supplemented in 1825 by
the publication by the Spanish archivist Martin Fernandez de Navarrete in
his _Coleccion de los Viages y Descubrimientos que hicieron por mar los
Espanoles desde fines del siglo XV._ of a considerably more detailed
narrative (likewise independently abridged from the original) which
existed in two copies in the archives of the Duke del Infantado.
Navarrete says that the handwriting of the older copy is that of Las
Casas and that Las Casas had written some explanatory notes in the
margin. This longer narrative, here reprinted, was first translated by
Samuel Kettell of Boston and published in 1827 under the title _Personal
Narrative of the First Voyage of Columbus_. The next translation was
that of Clements R. Markham for the Hakluyt Society in 1893. A third and
very exact rendering appeared in 1903 in John Boyd Thacher's _Christopher
Columbus_, Vol. I.

The translation given here is that of Sir Clements R. Markham with some
slight revisions. When we recall the very scanty and fragmentary
knowledge which we have of the Cabot voyages, and how few in fact of the
great discoverers of this era left personal narratives of their
achievements, we realize our singular good fortune in possessing so full
a daily record from the hand of Columbus himself which admits us as it
were "into the very presence of the Admiral to share his thoughts and
impressions as the strange panorama of his experiences unfolded before
him."[88-1] Sir Clements R. Markham declares the Journal "the most
important document in the whole range of the history of geographical
discovery, because it is a record of the enterprise which changed the
whole face, not only of that history, but of the history of
mankind."[88-2]

EDWARD G. BOURNE.

FOOTNOTES:

[88-1] Bourne, _Spain in America_, p. 22.

[88-2] _Journal of Christopher Columbus_, p. viii.

[Illustration: The Four Voyages of Columbus 1492-1503.]




JOURNAL OF THE FIRST VOYAGE OF COLUMBUS


_This is the first voyage and the routes and direction taken by the
Admiral Don Cristobal Colon when he discovered the Indies, summarized;
except the prologue made for the Sovereigns, which is given word for word
and commences in this manner_

In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ

Because, O most Christian, and very high, very excellent, and puissant
Princes, King and Queen of the Spains and of the islands of the Sea, our
Lords, in this present year of 1492, after your Highnesses had given an
end to the war with the Moors who reigned in Europe, and had finished it
in the very great city of Granada, where in this present year, on the
second day of the month of January, by force of arms, I saw the royal
banners of your Highnesses placed on the towers of Alfambra,[89-1] which
is the fortress of that city, and I saw the Moorish King come forth from
the gates of the city and kiss the royal hands of your Highnesses, and of
the Prince my Lord, and presently in that same month, acting on the
information that I had given to your Highnesses touching the lands of
India, and respecting a Prince who is called Gran Can, which means in our
language King of Kings, how he and his ancestors had sent to Rome many
times to ask for learned men[89-2] of our holy faith to teach him, and
how the Holy Father had never complied, insomuch that many people
believing in idolatries were lost by receiving doctrine of perdition:
YOUR HIGHNESSES, as Catholic Christians and Princes who love the holy
Christian faith, and the propagation of it, and who are enemies to the
sect of Mahoma and to all idolatries and heresies, resolved to send me,
Cristobal Colon, to the said parts of India to see the said princes, and
the cities and lands, and their disposition, with a view that they might
be converted to our holy faith;[90-1] and ordered that I should not go by
land to the eastward, as had been customary, but that I should go by way
of the west, whither up to this day, we do not know for certain that any
one has gone.

Thus, after having turned out all the Jews from all your kingdoms and
lordships, in the same month of January,[90-2] your Highnesses gave
orders to me that with a sufficient fleet I should go to the said parts
of India, and for this they made great concessions to me, and ennobled
me, so that henceforward I should be called Don, and should be Chief
Admiral of the Ocean Sea, perpetual Viceroy and Governor of all the
islands and continents that I should discover and gain, and that I might
hereafter discover and gain in the Ocean Sea, and that my eldest son
should succeed, and so on from generation to generation for ever.

I left the city of Granada on the 12th day of May, in the same year of
1492, being Saturday, and came to the town of Palos, which is a seaport;
where I equipped three vessels well suited for such service; and departed
from that port, well supplied with provisions and with many sailors, on
the 3d day of August of the same year, being Friday, half an hour before
sunrise, taking the route to the islands of Canaria, belonging to your
Highnesses, which are in the said Ocean Sea, that I might thence take my
departure for navigating until I should arrive at the Indies, and give
the letters of your Highnesses to those princes, so as to comply with my
orders. As part of my duty I thought it well to write an account of all
the voyage very punctually, noting from day to day all that I should do
and see, and that should happen, as will be seen further on. Also, Lords
Princes, I resolved to describe each night what passed in the day, and to
note each day how I navigated at night. I propose to construct a new
chart for navigating, on which I shall delineate all the sea and lands of
the Ocean in their proper positions under their bearings; and further, I
propose to prepare a book, and to put down all as it were in a picture,
by latitude from the equator, and western longitude. Above all, I shall
have accomplished much, for I shall forget sleep, and shall work at the
business of navigation, that so the service may be performed; all which
will entail great labor.


_Friday, 3d of August_

We departed on Friday, the 3d of August, in the year 1492, from the bar
of Saltes, at 8 o'clock, and proceeded with a strong sea breeze until
sunset, towards the south, for 60 miles, equal to 15 leagues;[91-1]
afterwards S.W. and W.S.W., which was the course for the Canaries.


_Saturday, 4th of August_

They steered S.W. 1/4 S.


_Sunday, 5th of August_

They continued their course day and night more than 40 leagues.


_Monday, 6th of August_

The rudder of the caravel _Pinta_ became unshipped, and Martin Alonso
Pinzon, who was in command, believed or suspected that it was by
contrivance of Gomes Rascon and Cristobal Quintero, to whom the caravel
belonged, for they dreaded to go on that voyage. The Admiral says that,
before they sailed, these men had been displaying a certain backwardness,
so to speak. The Admiral was much disturbed at not being able to help the
said caravel without danger, and he says that he was eased of some
anxiety when he reflected that Martin Alonso Pinzon was a man of energy
and ingenuity. They made, during the day and night, 29 leagues.


_Tuesday, 7th of August_

The rudder of the _Pinta_ was shipped and secured, and they proceeded on
a course for the island of Lanzarote, one of the Canaries. They made,
during the day and night, 25 leagues.


_Wednesday, 8th of August_

Opinions respecting their position varied among the pilots of the three
caravels; but that of the Admiral proved to be nearer the truth. He
wished to go to Gran Canaria, to leave the caravel _Pinta_, because she
was disabled by the faulty hanging of her rudder, and was making water.
He intended to obtain another there if one could be found. They could not
reach the place that day.


_Thursday, 9th of August_

The Admiral was not able to reach Gomera until the night of Sunday, while
Martin Alonso remained on that coast of Gran Canaria by order of the
Admiral, because his vessel could not be navigated. Afterwards the
Admiral took her to Canaria, and they repaired the _Pinta_ very
thoroughly through the pains and labor of the Admiral, of Martin Alonso,
and of the rest. Finally they came to Gomera. They saw a great fire issue
from the mountain of the island of Tenerife, which is of great height.
They rigged the _Pinta_ with square sails, for she was lateen rigged; and
the Admiral reached Gomera on Sunday, the 2nd of September, with the
_Pinta_ repaired.

The Admiral says that many honorable Spanish gentlemen who were at Gomera
with Dona Ines Peraza, mother of Guillen Peraza (who was afterwards the
first Count of Gomera), and who were natives of the island of Hierro,
declared that every year they saw land to the west of the Canaries; and
others, natives of Gomera, affirmed the same on oath. The Admiral here
says that he remembers, when in Portugal in the year 1484, a man came to
the King from the island of Madeira, to beg for a caravel to go to this
land that was seen, who swore that it could be seen every year, and
always in the same way.[93-1] He also says that he recollects the same
thing being affirmed in the islands of the Azores; and all these lands
were described as in the same direction, and as being like each other,
and of the same size. Having taken in water, wood, and meat, and all else
that the men had who were left at Gomera by the Admiral when he went to
the island of Canaria to repair the caravel _Pinta_, he finally made sail
from the said island of Gomera, with his three caravels, on Thursday, the
6th day of September.


_Thursday, 6th of September_

He departed on that day from the port of Gomera in the morning, and
shaped a course to go on his voyage; having received tidings from a
caravel that came from the island of Hierro that three Portuguese
caravels were off that island with the object of taking him. (This must
have been the result of the King's annoyance that Colon should have gone
to Castile.) There was a calm all that day and night, and in the morning
he found himself between Gomera and Tenerife.


_Friday, 7th of September_

The calm continued all Friday and Saturday, until the third hour of the
night.


_Saturday, 8th of September_

At the third hour of Saturday night[94-1] it began to blow from the N.E.,
and the Admiral shaped a course to the west. He took in much sea over the
bows, which retarded progress, and 9 leagues were made in that day and
night.


_Sunday, 9th of September_

This day the Admiral made 19 leagues, and he arranged to reckon less than
the number run, because if the voyage was of long duration, the people
would not be so terrified and disheartened. In the night he made 120
miles, at the rate of 12 miles an hour, which are 30 leagues. The sailors
steered badly, letting the ship fall off to N.E., and even more,
respecting which the Admiral complained many times.[94-2]


_Monday, 10th of September_

In this day and night he made 60 leagues, at the rate of 10 miles an
hour, which are 2-1/2 leagues; but he only counted 48 leagues, that the
people might not be alarmed if the voyage should be long.


_Tuesday, 11th of September_

That day they sailed on their course, which was west, and made 20 leagues
and more. They saw a large piece of the mast of a ship of 120 tons, but
were unable to get it. In the night they made nearly 20 leagues, but only
counted 16, for the reason already given.


_Wednesday, 12th of September_

That day, steering their course, they made 33 leagues during the day and
night, counting less.


_Thursday, 13th of September_

That day and night, steering their course, which was west, they made 33
leagues, counting 3 or 4 less. The currents were against them. On this
day, at the commencement of the night, the needles turned a half point to
north-west, and in the morning they turned somewhat more
north-west.[95-1]


_Friday, 14th of September_

That day they navigated, on their westerly course, day and night, 20
leagues, counting a little less. Here those of the caravel _Nina_
reported that they had seen a tern[96-1] and a boatswain bird,[96-2] and
these birds never go more than 25 leagues from the land.[96-3]


_Saturday, 15th of September_

That day and night they made 27 leagues and rather more on their west
course; and in the early part of the night there fell from heaven into
the sea a marvellous flame of fire, at a distance of about 4 or 5 leagues
from them.


_Sunday, 16th of September_

That day and night they steered their course west, making 39 leagues, but
the Admiral only counted 36. There were some clouds and small rain. The
Admiral says that on that day, and ever afterwards, they met with very
temperate breezes, so that there was great pleasure in enjoying the
mornings, nothing being wanted but the song of nightingales. He says that
the weather was like April in Andalusia. Here they began to see many
tufts of grass which were very green, and appeared to have been quite
recently torn from the land. From this they judged that they were near
some island, but not the main land, according to the Admiral, "because,"
as he says, "I make the main land to be more distant."


_Monday, 17th of September_
