Spanish ships, with all sails set, were a mile and a half astern,
but a good deal nearer in shore.

"The sun will be down in another five minutes," Captain Reuben
said, "and in half an hour it will be dark. The Spaniards can run
quite as fast as we can--a bit faster, I think; but we can beat
them, close hauled. The wind is falling lighter and lighter. If it
was not for that, we would haul our wind and be off on the other
tack, and throw all of them out. But it will be a dead calm before
long, and they will be either lowering all their boats to attack
us, or towing their ships up to us. If we were close under the land
they might miss us, but they will be able to make us out, here. At
any rate, we must hold on as we are, until the wind drops
altogether."

After sunset the breeze died away rapidly and, by the time night
had fully set in, the sails dropped motionless, and the Swan ceased
to move through the water. The captain at once ordered all the
boats to be lowered, and the men swarmed into them, double banking
the oars. Hawsers were handed into them, and the vessel's head
swept round in the direction from which she had come, but somewhat
farther seaward.

"Now, lads," the captain said, "pull with a will. There will be a
good supper, and an allowance of strong ale, when you come on
board."

After rowing for half an hour, the captain ordered them to cease,
and to keep silence. Listening attentively, he could hear in the
still night air the sound of oars; but whether the boats were
towing the ships, or rowing independently, he could not tell. Again
the men set to work.

"I hope they are towing," he said to the first mate. "They would
have no chance whatever of catching us, for our strong crew can
take a vessel like the Swan through the water at twice the rate
they could row their big ships. I can't see the fellows in shore,
can you?"

"No, Captain. They are hid in the shadow of the land. I can make
out the others, but they are a long way farther off than when we
started."

"I expect we shall have the boats after us, Standing. Both lots can
make us out, and can see that we are gaining on them.

"Ah! I felt a breath of wind. I did not expect it for an hour or
two yet; but if the breeze springs up, we shall soon run away from
them."

Stopping and listening again, they could hear the sound of oars,
from two directions.

"They are coming," the captain said. "The beat is quicker than it
would be if they were towing; besides, it is a great deal more
distinct than it was. I don't think they are more than a mile
behind us.

"Ah! There is the wind again."

There was a deep flapping sound, and a rattling of blocks, as the
sails bellied out for a moment, and then fell against the masts
again. Captain Reuben went to the forecastle:

"Keep it up, lads. You won't have much longer to row, for the wind
is coming. The Spaniards are after us, but they won't be up for a
quarter of an hour, and I hope we shall get it before that.
Remember, every yard we can keep away from them is of importance.
Put your backs to it, lads."

The Swan carried four boats and, strongly manned as these were, she
was gliding through the water at a fair rate. It was five minutes
before another breath of wind came, but this lasted three or four
minutes, and greatly relieved the strain from the hawsers.

"She is going through the water now," the captain said. "They
cannot be gaining very much upon us, at present.

"Confound it!" he added, a minute later. "There is an end of it
again."

The boats were now but half a mile away, and the voices of the
officers, urging the rowers to exert themselves, could be plainly
heard, On the Swan the officers were all gazing in the direction
from which the wind was to come. The yards were all braced sharply
aft. Presently there was an exclamation of relief, as they felt the
wind in their faces, and the vessel heeled a little over. The boats
behind were but a quarter of a mile away now, while those from the
vessels inshore were perhaps twice that distance.

"If this is the true breeze we are safe," the captain said. "If
not, we shall have to fight for it."

The men had already, without orders, cast loose the guns, and armed
themselves with pike and cutlass.

"Now listen, lads," the captain said, as he went forward to the
poop rail, "if these fellows come up and try to board us, let no
man utter a word. Fight like bulldogs, and as silently. We shall
beat them off, never fear. No doubt they believe that we are their
countrymen, who have broken their trading regulations, and are
afraid of being overhauled. But if there is a word spoken they will
know that we are foreigners, and we shall be chased wherever we
go."

Then he went to the forecastle, and bade all the men in the boats
cast off the hawsers and come on board. They were, indeed, no
longer of any use, as the vessel was going through the water almost
as fast as they could row ahead of her. As they gained the deck he
repeated the orders he had given--that strict silence should be
observed, in case the Spaniards came alongside.

Everything now depended on continuance of breeze, and those on
board the boats saw that the vessel was now holding her own with
them. Orders to throw the ship up into the wind and heave to were
shouted and, as no attention was paid to these, several musket
shots were fired at her; but the wind held and, faster and faster,
the Swan made her way through the water. At last the boats fell
behind, and were lost to sight.

"We are safe now," Reuben said, exultantly. "We are to windward of
them all, and shall have them well out of sight, before morning."

When day broke, indeed, the topsails of three of the Spanish ships
could be seen on the horizon; but in two or three hours these sank
out of sight, and the Swan was headed on her course west.



Chapter 5: Shipwrecked.


For six days the Swan sailed westward before a gentle wind. Then
clouds were seen rising in the north, and spreading with great
rapidity across the horizon.

"We are in for a tempest," Captain Reuben said. "Never have I seen
the clouds rising more rapidly.

"Get her sail off her, Standing, as quickly as possible."

The crew fell to work, and in a very few minutes the Swan was
stripped of the greater part of her canvas. But quickly as the men
worked, the storm came up more rapidly, and the crew had but half
finished their work when, with a roar and turmoil that almost
bewildered them, the gale struck the vessel. Her head had been laid
to the south, so that the wind should take her astern; and it was
well that it was so, for had it struck her on the beam, she would
assuredly have been capsized, even had not a rag of canvas been
shown, for the wind would have caught her lofty forecastle and
poop. As it was she plunged heavily forward, quivering as if from a
blow. Then her bluff bows bore her up and, with a leap, she sprang
forward and sped along before the gale.

"I have seen as sudden a squall among the Greek islands," Captain
Reuben shouted in the mate's ear; "but never elsewhere. I hope that
this may prove as short as do the gales in that quarter."

"I hope so," the mate replied, "for we know not how far the land
may be distant."

But though the captain knew it not, they had been caught in one of
those furious gales that were, afterwards, the terror of the
Spaniards; blowing for a week or ten days without intermission, and
being the cause of the wreck of many a stout ship. The sea got up
rapidly, and the wind seemed to increase in fury as night fell, and
for three days the ship ran before it. The waist was frequently
deluged with water, and it required six men at the helm to keep her
straight before the wind.

The crew were worn out with fatigue and want of sleep, for running
as they were in this unknown sea, none could say what might happen,
or when land might be sighted ahead. The captain never left the
poop--he and the mates taking their places, by turn, with the men
at the helm; for the slightest error in steering might have caused
the vessel to broach to, in which case nothing could have saved
her. Sheltered as was the caboose, it was found impossible to keep
a fire alight, and officers and men, alike, had to content
themselves with biscuit and draughts of ale.

The vessel rolled till her bulwarks were under water, and the
yardarms at times dipped into the sea, and the men on deck were
forced to lash themselves to some standing object, to retain their
footing. The captain occasionally made his way forward to the
forecastle, where the men not on duty were huddled together, and
spoke cheeringly to them, saying that the gale could not last much
longer, and that as the Swan had weathered it so far, she would
hold on to the end.

At the commencement of the storm a tremendous rain had fallen, but
when this had ceased the sky had cleared up, and for the last two
days the sun had shone out brightly, and not a cloud had been seen.

When morning broke on the fourth day a cry of dismay broke from the
wearied men on deck, for ahead could be seen land, stretching away
on both bows. The news brought the crew from below, and they
clustered on the forecastle, gazing in the direction of this new
danger.

"We must try and get some sail on her mizzen, Standing," the
captain said. "Our only chance is to bring her head to wind."

"We can try, Captain, but I fear that you will never bring her
round."

"It is our only chance," the captain repeated, and with a loud
shout, he called for some hands to come aft.

The mizzen was shaken out and, as soon as the sheets were hauled
aft, the helm was put down. A cry burst from the crew as she came
round, for as the wind took her on the beam she lay farther and
farther over. A great wave struck her broadside, sweeping the
bulwarks away as if they had been paper, and carrying a number of
the crew off the forecastle into the sea. Still farther over she
went, and all thought that she would capsize; when there were a
series of reports, like musket shots, as the lashings of the
shrouds parted. This was followed instantly by a crash, as the
mizzen mast snapped off, two feet above the deck.

Relieved of the strain, the Swan righted somewhat. Another great
wave swept over her forecastle, still further diminishing the
number of the crew, but it carried her head round. She came up onto
an even keel, and again started on her mad course before the wind.

"Go forward, Pengarvan, and see how many hands we have lost," the
captain said. "Not that it makes much difference, for they have but
gone a short time before the rest of us, for nothing short of a
miracle can save us, now."

It could now be seen that the coast was steep and rocky, and that
the waves were breaking with tremendous force upon it. It was but
about four miles distant, and in less than half an hour they would
be upon it.

"We must try to anchor, Standing."

The first mate shook his head.

"We will try, Captain, but our anchors will never hold her in the
teeth of this gale. If they did, the hawsers would go like pack
thread."

"I am afraid so, Standing; but there is nothing else to do."

The first mate went forward, and he and Pengarvan saw the anchors
got in readiness, and the cables ranged along, so as to run out
with perfect freedom. Then Pengarvan made his way aft again to the
poop.

"Do you mean to cut away the mast, Captain?"

The captain nodded.

"I wouldn't, sir," the mate went on. "She will never hold, mast or
no mast; and if it stands, we make a shift to run her head foremost
on the rocks, and this will give us a better chance than if she
drifts broadside on."

"You are right, Pengarvan. Yes, it will be better to leave it
standing."

When within a quarter of a mile of the shore, the helm was again
put down and, as the vessel came partly round, the the anchors were
let go. The hawsers ran out rapidly, and the topsail, which was the
only sail on her, was let go, the wind catching it and tearing it
into ribbons as it was loosed. There was a jerk and a surge as the
anchors brought her up, but at the same moment a great wave struck
her head. The cables parted, and she again swung round towards the
shore.

"It is all over with us, my lad," the captain said to Roger, who
was standing quietly beside him. "God forgive me, I have brought
you all here to die."

"It is not your fault, father. It was all for the best, and we knew
when we started that there were perils before us."

"Goodbye, my lads! We will die as we have lived--brave men--and may
God have mercy on us all.

"Now, Roger, obey my last orders. Go forward, and climb up to the
end of the bowsprit. It may be that, if she strikes, you may be
able to leap forward onto the rocks. They are somewhat lower, just
ahead, than elsewhere."

"But I do not want to be saved, if no one else is, father," Roger
cried passionately.

"You have always obeyed me heretofore," the captain said, quietly,
"and you will do so now. Go forward at once, and do as I say. God
bless you, my boy."

He clasped Roger in his arms, in a moment's close embrace, and then
pointed forward.

Roger's eyes were blinded with tears as he obeyed the order. The
bowsprit in those days did not, as now, run out almost horizontally
from the ship's bow; but stood up like a mast, leaning somewhat
over the bow, and carried a yard and small square sail upon it.
Roger climbed up as far as the yard and then, aiding himself by the
halyards, swarmed up until he reached the cap. When he did so the
vessel was but little more than a hundred yards from the shore.

The water was deep up to the rocks, for the waves struck on these
unbroken, flying up in masses of spray which flew far over the
land. On his lofty post, thirty feet above the forecastle and
forty-five above the water, Roger was nearly level with the top of
the rock ahead; and as the vessel rose on the waves, could see a
flat land, extending far inland.

He looked down. Two or three of the sailors had followed him as
high as the yard, and many others were gathered on the forecastle.
Some were kneeling in prayer, others had thrown themselves down
despairingly on the deck, but most were standing, looking forward
with set faces at the rocky barrier so close at hand.

Roger looked aft. The men at the tiller had quitted it now, and
gone forward. Standing and Pengarvan were standing, one on each
side of the captain. The latter took off his cap and waved it to
his son, and the mates lifted their hands in token of adieu.

A cry from below caused Roger, as he returned the salute, to look
round. They were but a ship's length from the rocks. Another moment
a great wave lifted the vessel, and on its crest she went
thundering forward. The rocks seemed to leap up against the spar to
which Roger clung. It snapped off just below his feet, then a great
volume of water and spray shot up from below, and he was thrown
high into the air. The wind caught him and carried him away inland,
and he fell, with a crash that left him senseless.

It was long before he recovered consciousness. As soon as he did
so, he crawled on his hands and knees to the edge of the cliff, and
looked down. The Swan had disappeared. Not a sign of her remained,
not so much as a floating timber showed on the surface of the
water.

Roger crawled back again for some distance, and then threw himself
down, and wept despairingly. He lay there for hours, until the heat
of the sun, blazing almost vertically down, roused him. Then he got
on to his feet and looked round.

In front of him stretched a slightly undulating country. Patches of
maize, here and there, showed that it was cultivated; and in the
distance he saw a large village, with buildings of a size that
proved that the people had made some advance towards civilization.
Slowly and painfully, for he was greatly bruised by his fall, he
made his way to the nearest maize patch, and ate several heads of
green corn. Then he started for the village.

When within a few hundred yards of it, he came upon three women,
who were coming out with baskets on their heads. They paused as he
approached them, and then, with a cry of astonishment and fear,
turned and ran towards the village.

Their cries brought a number of people to the doors. Among these
were many men, who had caught up spears, and bows and arrows, at
the alarm. Seeing but one person approaching, in a garb altogether
strange to them, they stood in surprise. As he came up their wonder
heightened, at perceiving that his color was altogether different
from their own; and they dropped their threatening weapons, and
stood as if paralyzed by wonder.

Roger had not faltered in his step, as he saw them issue out. Death
had no terror for him, now his father and all his friends were
gone; and he was altogether reckless of what befell him. The
fearlessness of his demeanor added to the effect produced by his
appearance. His cap was gone, and the rays of the sun, falling upon
his fair hair, added to the effect produced by his white skin.

The natives, taking him for a supernatural being, bowed themselves
to the ground before him in an attitude of adoration. The cries and
uproar that but a minute before had sounded in the village suddenly
ceased, and were succeeded by the hush of deep awe.

Roger walked on between the prostrate natives, and seated himself
on a stone at the door of a hut. The natives gradually rose to
their feet and approached him timidly. He made signs that he wanted
to drink, for a raging thirst had been induced by the heat.

One of the natives ran into a hut and reappeared with a bowl,
filled with a liquid, which he humbly presented to Roger. The
latter patted his head in token of thanks, and then took a long
drink of the contents of the bowl. These were totally unlike
anything he had before tasted; being pulque, a slightly fermented
drink obtained from the juice of the agave, most useful of all the
vegetable productions of Central America.

A native, who was distinguished by his dress from the rest, now
gave an order; and in a short time two women approached, bearing a
tray with some flat cakes of fine bread, and fruits of different
kinds. More to please the natives than because he was hungry, for
he felt little inclination for food, Roger partook of some of
these.

The chief then harangued him at considerable length. When he had
finished, Roger, who had stood up while he was addressing him,
said:

"I do not know a single word of what you are saying to me, but I
thank you for your kindness."

He then shook hands with the chief, to whom that form of greeting
was evidently new, and patted him on the shoulder.

The chief then conducted him to a large house. It was no higher
than the rest, but was built of stone, well fitted together. The
roof was roughly thatched, and could, Roger thought, afford but a
poor shelter in time of rain. He did not know that, except at the
commencement of a storm, rain was of comparatively rare occurrence
upon the coast.

Inside the house showed signs of comfort. There were some seats
decorated with carving. A finely woven mat covered the floor. Arms
and utensils hung from the walls.

Several of the natives, evidently persons of consideration in the
village, followed the chief in. Some girls and women came in from
an interior room, and saluted the stranger with the greatest
respect. They examined him timidly, one of the younger girls
touching his hand gently, as if to make sure that it was skin, and
not some strange covering, that gave it its color.

Roger took off his jacket, which was by this time dry, and turned
up the sleeve of his shirt. As he did so, a general exclamation of
surprise and admiration broke from the natives at the whiteness of
the skin; which was far more striking, to them, than the bronzed
hue of his face and hands.

The chief made various signs, which Roger at last understood to be
a question as to whence he had come. He pointed in the direction of
the sea, and tried to signify that he had arrived from a very long
distance.

An hour passed, and Roger was beginning to wonder what the next
move would be, when a native entered and, saluting the chief, said
something to him. The women and children at once retired. A few
minutes afterwards the chief went to the door, and motioned Roger
to accompany him.

Coming down the street of the village was a procession. At its head
walked two persons, evidently of high rank. They wore mantles,
falling from their shoulders nearly to the ground, ornamented with
designs executed in brightly colored feathers. They had circlets of
gold round their heads, and heavy necklaces and bracelets of the
same metal. Beneath the mantles they wore short petticoats of soft
white material. Their spears and their arms were carried behind
them, by attendants. Behind these came a number of men and women,
walking in regular order, carrying bowls of fruit, trays of cooked
food, and other offerings.

Roger saw at once that they must have come from a place of
importance; which must be near at hand, as they had doubtless set
out upon the receipt of a message, dispatched by his present
entertainer. He guessed that the report must have been a favorable
one of him, and that the natives were impressed with the idea that
he was a superior being. It was, therefore, needful for him to
comport himself so that this impression should be confirmed.

The chiefs bowed profoundly as they approached him, stooping so far
forward that one hand touched the earth, and was then carried to
their forehead. Roger did not understand the meaning of this, but
he bowed graciously, as if accepting the homage that was offered.

The bearers then advanced, and placed the offerings on the ground.
Among these was a mantle similar to that worn by the chiefs, but
more richly embroidered. It struck Roger that, as his white skin
excited so much admiration, it would be as well to show it. He was,
too, somewhat ashamed of his garments; which were much worn, had
turned a dingy hue from the sun and salt water, and had, moreover,
shrunk much from their recent immersion. Taking up the robe,
therefore, he motioned to the chiefs to stay where they were and,
returning into the room, stripped to his waist; and then, throwing
the mantle over his shoulders, returned to the entrance.

Something like a shout of welcome saluted him. The whiteness of his
skin, as seen through the open mantle, astonished the natives; and
they accepted his assumption of the garment, with which he had been
presented, as a sign of the benevolent intentions of this
supernatural visitor towards them.

The ambassadors now made signs in the direction from which they had
come, and seemed to ask if he were willing to accompany them. He
nodded his assent, and in a few minutes the procession again
started, the chiefs taking their places one on either side of him,
and the villagers falling in behind. The women struck up a sort of
chant, in which all except the chiefs joined. For an hour they kept
on their way and then, on ascending a small hill, a large town was
seen.

"Tabasco," the chief said, pointing towards it.

Roger repeated the word, and in doing so evidently gave much
pleasure to the chiefs. As they approached the town he could see
many lofty buildings rising above it; and, as they passed through a
line of long palisades that surrounded the place, a body of men
issued out to meet him.

As they approached, they formed in order on each side of the road.
All were armed with spears tipped with sharp, shiny stones, and
carried bows and arrows. They were dressed in doublets of thickly
quilted cotton, capable of turning an arrow or resisting the thrust
of a native spear; although they would offer but poor protection
against English arrows, or English weapons.

As they entered the town the streets were lined with similarly
dressed soldiers; behind whom stood a crowd of natives, men and
women saluting their strange visitor with loud cries of welcome.
The procession continued its way until it stopped before a large
building, at the entrance to which stood an aged chief. His mantle
was completely composed of feather work, and plumes of feathers
sprang from the golden fillet that encircled his head. Behind him
were clustered a number of inferior chiefs.

He welcomed Roger courteously but gravely; and Roger guessed, at
once, that he was superior to the superstitions of his people, and
that he viewed him with a certain amount of suspicion. Roger bowed
and, taking off the jackknife, which hung in its sheath from a
string at his waist, drew it out and presented it to the chief.

The latter was evidently greatly struck by the gift. Gold and
silver he knew, but this bright and shining metal was altogether
new to him. He examined it closely, felt the edge and point, and
then handed it to the chiefs behind him, to be examined by them.
Roger saw by his manner that he had been favorably impressed, for
the weapon was as strange and mysterious, to him, as the visitant.

The chief undid a large gold necklace that he wore, and offered it
to Roger, who bowed and clasped it round his neck. The chief now
led him inside the house, which was similar, but on a much larger
scale, to that which he had before entered. Refreshments were
placed before him. These he did not need, but thought it better to
eat of them. While he was so doing, an animated conversation was
maintained between the chief and his followers.
