diameter, with steps in its circumference like those of a treadmill,
and so weighted that by walking upon it, as if up a flight of stairs,
a person of eleven or twelve stone would draw up a bucket--two
buckets being so hung, at the ends of a rope surrounding the wheel,
that while one ascended, full of water, the other, which was empty,
sank down and was refilled.  These buckets being too heavy for a man
to overturn to pour out the water, he bored a hole in each, and
contrived to plug the holes so that the weight of the bucket as it
bumped upon the trough prepared for it at the well's edge jogged out
the plug and sent the water running down the trough into whatever
pail or vessel stood ready to catch it.  Nor is it astonishing that
he lost his temper when, after these preparations, he found the well
was not deep enough, and the water as much infected with brine as if
he had gathered it from the surface of the marsh.

It was on the day following this disappointment that, while walking
to and fro the length of his turfed garden, between three and four in
the afternoon (for his habits were methodical), he heard a child's
voice lifted on the far side of the party hedge:

"Dad!"

"Eh?  What is it?" answered the voice of Captain Barker, from his new
tulip-bed, across the garden.

"What thing is this?"

"A nymph."  Captain Runacles guessed by this that the four-year-old's
question had reference to one of the figure-heads disposed along the
hedge.

"What is a nymph?"

"A sort of girl."

"I don't like this sort of girl.  She's got no legs."

"Come over here and look at this tulip."

"There's a much better sort of girl next door," Tristram continued,
unheeding.

"What do you know about her?" sharply inquired his guardian.

"Oh, I see her often at the top window, and sometimes out walking.
Nurse says we're not to speak, so we put out our tongues at each
other."

"Tristram, come over here and look--"

"She's got funny curls, and puts her doll to bed in the window-seat
every night.  I like that sort of girl.  When I grow up," the young
bashaw proceeded, "I shall have lots of that sort of girl all over
the garden, instead of these wooden things."

Captain Barker treated this Oriental day-dream with silence.

"Dad--why am I worth more than all the girls in the world?"

"Who said you were?"

"Nurse.  She says you think so.  She says the big man next door would
give his eyes to have a boy like me; but he can't make nothing of a
girl, and don't try.  Narcissus--"

"Hallo!" replied the heavy voice of Mr. Swiggs.

"Have you got a boy?"

"No, sir: 'nmarried."

"What did you give your eye for, then?"

"Losh!"  ejaculated Narcissus, as Captain Barker pounced on the
youngster and haled him off to the tulip-bed.  The interrogatory was
stayed for a while.

Captain Runacles, who had caught every word, strode half a dozen
times up and down his grass-plot: then summoned Simeon.

"Tell nurse to send Miss Sophia down to me."

Five minutes later a small child of seven appeared in the doorway,
and, after hesitating there for a moment, stepped timidly across the
turf.  Her figure and movements were ungainly and her complexion
appeared unnaturally sallow against a dark grey frock.  A wet brush,
applied two minutes before with inconsiderate zeal, had taken all the
curl out of her dark hair and smoothed it in preposterous bands on
either side of her brow.  Her arms hung stiff and perpendicular, and
she fidgeted with her short skirt as she advanced.

Captain Runacles stopped short in his walk and surveyed her.

"H'm," he said.  "Don't shuffle."

The little girl looked up, dropped her eyes again quickly, and let
her hands hang limp beside her.  She was shaking from head to foot.

"You are a girl."

"Pardon, father," she mumbled in a low whisper.

"Next door there lives a small boy.  You are in the habit of putting
out your tongue at him.  Why?"

"I--I--"

Her voice wavered and she broke into a fit of sobbing.

"Tut, tut! Stop that noise; I haven't scolded you.  On the contrary,
I sent for you in the hope that you might always be able to put out
your tongue at that boy.  Sophia, dry your eyes and attend, please.
Would you like to be an accomplished woman?"

"If it please you, father."

"Now may the devil fly away with the whole sex!  If they _do_ happen
to desire anything good in itself, it's always to please some man or
another.  Sophia, I ask you if, for your own sake, and for the sake
of knowledge, you will be my pupil; if you care to pursue--"  Captain
Runacles checked himself, not because he had any idea that he was
talking over the head of a girl of seven, but because a general
proposition had occurred to him.

"Woman's notion of a pursuit," he said, clasping his hands behind him
and regarding his daughter's tear-stained face with severity--
"woman's notion of a pursuit is entirely passive.  Her only idea is
to be pursued, and even so her mind runs on ultimate capture.
Sophia," he continued, himself forgetting for the moment his view of
knowledge as _sui causa optandum_, "would you like to please me by
licking that boy across the hedge into a cocked-hat?"

"But--oh, father!"

"What is it?"

She could not answer for a moment.  Nor did he know that she besought
God every night to change her into a boy that she might find some
grace in his sight.

"You have one advantage," said her father coldly, as she struggled to
keep down her tears.  "Your rival across the hedge is in a fair way to
be turned into a fool.  We will begin to-morrow.  In a week or so I
shall be able to pronounce some opinion on your capacity.  Now run
indoors to your nurse--why, bless my soul!"

The child had trotted forward, and, taking his hand, kissed it
passionately.  He looked into her face, and, finding it white as a
sheet, lifted her in his arms and carried her into the pavilion.



CHAPTER IV.


THE TWO PAVILIONS (continued).

"We must have an apiarium," Captain Barker announced a week later.

"What's that?" Mr. Swiggs asked.

"Half a dozen beehives, at least."

"No room."

"There is nothing," pursued Captain Barker, "that gives such
character to a garden as an apiarium unless it be fishponds.
I will have both."

"No water."

"The fishponds shall be constantly supplied with running water.
I will have three ponds at different levels, connected with miniature
waterfalls and approached by an _allee verte_.  The glimpse of water
between green hedges will be extremely refreshing to the eye.
The apiarium shall stand close to these ponds--as Virgil commends:"

     At liquidi fontes et stagna virentia musco
     Adsint, et tenuis fugiens per gramina rivus

"--And shall be surrounded with beds of violets and lavender and such
blue flowers as bees especially love.  When, Narcissus, I glance over
the hedge at the back of the house and behold Captain Runacles' two
acres lying waste, cumbered like a mining country with the ruins of
his mechanical toys, I have a mind to--"

"He'll neither sell nor lend."

"I perceive that in time we must set about draining so much of the
marsh outside as belongs to me.  There, if anywhere, the fishponds
must lie.  In the meantime there is a full rood of ground beyond the
northern hedge that we may consider.  By cutting a path through the
privet there and enclosing this parcel, we gain for our bees a
quadrangle which will not only give them their proper seclusion, but
may be planted in the classical style without detriment to the
general effect of our garden.  The privet serving as a screen. . . ."

Invigorated by Mr. Swiggs's opposition, the little man continued for
twenty minutes to revel in details, and ended by rushing his
companion off to examine the ground.  In his hot fit he forgot all
about Tristram, who, tired of listening, had slipped away among the
gooseberry-bushes, with a half-eaten slice of bread and butter in his
hand.

The fruit proved green and hard--for it was now the third week of
May--and by the time his bread and butter was eaten the boy had a
fancy to explore farther.  He wandered through the strawberry-beds,
and, finding nothing there but disappointment, allowed himself to run
lazily after a white butterfly, which led him down to the front of
the pavilion, over the parterres of budding tulips and across to an
east border gay with heart's-ease, bachelor's buttons, forget-me-nots
and purple honesty.  The scent of budding yews met him here, blown
softly across from Captain Runacles' garden.  The white butterfly
balanced himself on this odorous breeze, and, rising against it,
skimmed suddenly over the hedge and dropped out of sight.

Now there was set, under an archway in this hedge, a blue door, the
chinks of which were veiled with cobwebs and the panels streaked with
the silvery tracks of snails.  By this _pervius usus_ (as Captain
Runacles called it) the two friends had been used to visit each
other, but since the quarrel it had never been opened.  No lock had
been fixed upon it, however.  Only the passions of two obstinate men
had kept it shut for four years and more.

The child contemplated this door for a minute, then lifted himself on
tip-toe and stretched his hand up towards the rusty latch.  It was a
good six inches above his reach.

He glanced back over his shoulder.  Nobody was in sight.  His eyes
fell on a stack of flower-pots left by Narcissus beside the path.
He fetched one, set it upside-down in front of the door and climbed
atop of it.

This time he reached the latch and lifted it with some difficulty.
His weight pressed the door open and he fell forward, sprawling on
hands and knees, into the next garden.

He picked himself up, and was on the point of fetching a prolonged
howl, but suddenly thought better of it and began to stare instead.

Barely six paces in front of him, and in the centre of a round
garden-bed, a small girl was kneeling.  She held a rusty table-knife,
the blade of which was covered with mould; and as she gazed back at
him the boy saw that her face was stained with weeping.

"Hallo!"

"Hallo!"

"I was just thinking of you, little boy, and beginning to despise
you, when plump--in you tumbled."

"But, I say--look here, you know--I've been told what despising is,
and if you despise me you ought to say why."

"Because I've been ordered to.  I'm going to do it out of this book
here.  Listen: 'A point is that which has no parts and no magnitude,'
and that's only the beginning.  Oh, my dear, I'll wither you up--you
just wait a bit!"

She dug the knife viciously into the earth.

"I don't care," said Tristram affably.

"P'r'aps you don't know what 'Don't Care' came to?"

"No, I don't."

"Well, he came to--a place.  It was a good deal deeper down than this
hole I'm digging."

"What's the hole for?"

"My doll, here.  I've got to put away childish things; so I'm going
to cover her right up and never see her face again.  Oh! oh!"

She began to sob as if her heart would break.

"I wouldn't cry if I were you.  I didn't cry just now when I tumbled
off the flower-pot."

"You don't know what it is to be a mother."

"No, but I can dig ever so much better than you.  Look here.
I've got a spade of my own, and I'll show you how to dig properly, if
you like."

He ran off and returned with it in less than a minute.  In another
minute they were engrossed in the burial rites, the girl still
playing at tragedy, but enjoying herself immensely.

"We must read something over the remains," she announced.

"Why?"

"Because it's always done, unless the dead person is buried with a
stake through his inside."

"Then we'd better take her out again and put a stake through her;
because I can't read."

"Haven't you begun to learn yet?"

