[Illustration: FIG. 479.--Ornamental use of fillets.]

Of the various classes of utensils associated closely with the ceramic
art, there are none so characteristically marked by constructional
features as nets and wicker baskets. The twisting, interlacing,
knotting, and stitching of filaments give relieved figures that by
contact in manufacture impress themselves upon the plastic clay. Such
impressions come in time to be regarded as pleasing features, and when
free-hand methods of reproducing are finally acquired they and their
derivatives become essentials of decoration. At a later stage these
characters of basketry influence ceramic decoration in a somewhat
different way. By the use of variously-colored fillets the woven surface
displays figures in color corresponding to those in relief and varying
with every new combination. Many striking patterns are thus produced,
and the potter who has learned to decorate his wares by the stylus or
brush reproduces these patterns by free-hand methods. We find pottery in
all countries ornamented with patterns, painted, incised, stamped, and
relieved, certainly derived from this source. So well is this fact known
that I need hardly go into details.

In the higher stages of art the constructional characters of
architecture give rise to many notions of decoration which afterwards
descend to other arts, taking greatly divergent forms. Aboriginal
architecture in some parts of America had reached a development capable
of wielding a strong influence. This is not true, however, of any part
of the United States.


+SUGGESTIONS OF ACCIDENTS.+

Besides the suggestions of surface features impressed in manufacture or
intentionally copied as indicated above, we have also those of
accidental imprints of implements or of the fingers in manufacture. From
this source there are necessarily many suggestions of ornament, at first
of indented figures, but later, after long employment, extending to the
other modes of representation.


+IDEOGRAPHIC AND PICTORIAL SUBJECTS.+

Non-ideographic forms of ornament may originate in ideographic features,
mnemonic, demonstrative, or symbolic. Such significant figures are
borrowed by decorators from other branches of art. As time goes on they
lose their significance and are subsequently treated as purely
decorative elements. Subjects wholly pictorial in character, when such
come to be made, may also be used as simple decoration, and by long
processes of convention become geometric.

The exact amount of significance still attached to significant figures
after adoption into decoration cannot be determined except in cases of
actual identification by living peoples, and even when the signification
is known by the more learned individuals the decorator may be wholly
without knowledge of it.





MODIFICATION OF ORNAMENT.


There are comparatively few elementary ideas prominently and generally
employed in primitive decorative art. New ideas are acquired, as already
shown, all along the pathway of progress. None of these ideas retain a
uniform expression, however, as they are subject to modification by
environment just as are the forms of living organisms. A brief
classification of the causes of modification is given in the following
synopsis:


                              /Through material.
Modification of ornament------|Through form.
                              \Through, methods of realization.


_Through material._--It is evident at a glance that _material_ must have
a strong influence upon the forms assumed by the various decorative
motives, however derived. Thus stone, clay, wood, bone, and copper,
although they readily borrow from nature and from each other,
necessarily show different decorative results. Stone is massive and
takes form slowly and by peculiar processes. Clay is more versatile and
decoration may be scratched, incised, painted, or modeled in relief with
equal facility, while wood and metal engender details having characters
peculiar to themselves, producing different results from the same
motives or elements. Much of the diversity displayed by the art products
of different countries and climates is due to this cause.

Peoples dwelling in arctic climates are limited, by their materials, to
particular modes of expression. Bone and ivory as shaped for use in the
arts of subsistence afford facilities for the employment of a very
restricted class of linear decoration, such chiefly as could be
scratched with a hard point upon small irregular, often cylindrical,
implements. Skins and other animal tissues are not favorable to the
development of ornament, and the textile arts--the greatest agents of
convention--do not readily find suitable materials in which to work.

Decorative art carried to a high stage under arctic environment would be
more likely to achieve unconventional and realistic forms than if
developed in more highly favored countries. The accurate geometric and
linear patterns would hardly arise.

_Through form._--Forms of decorated objects exercise a strong influence
upon the decorative designs employed. It would be more difficult to
tattoo the human face or body with straight lines or rectilinear
patterns than with curved ones. An ornament applied originally to a
vessel of a given form would accommodate itself to that form pretty much
as costume becomes adjusted to the individual. When it came to be
required for another form of vessel, very decided changes might be
necessary.

With the ancient Pueblo peoples rectilinear forms of meander patterns
were very much in favor and many earthen vessels are found in which
bands of beautiful angular geometric figures occupy the peripheral
zone, Fig. 480 _a_, but when the artist takes up a mug having a row of
hemispherical nodes about the body, _b_, he finds it very difficult to
apply his favorite forms and is almost compelled to run spiral curves
about the nodes in order to secure a neat adjustment.

[Illustration: FIG. 480.--Variations in a motive through the influence
of form.]

_Through methods of realisation_.--It will readily be seen that the
forms assumed by a motive depend greatly upon the character of the
mechanical devices employed. In the potter's art devices for holding and
turning the vessel under manipulation produce peculiar results.

In applying a given idea to clay much depends upon the method of
executing it. It will take widely differing forms when executed by
incising, by modeling, by painting, and by stamping.

Intimately associated with methods of execution are peculiarities of
construction, the two agencies working together in the processes of
modification and development of ornament.

I have previously shown how our favorite ornament, the scroll, in its
disconnected form may have originated in the copying of natural forms or
through the manipulation of coils of clay. I present here an example of
its possible origin through the modification of forms derived from
constructional features of basketry. An ornament known as the guilloche
is found in many countries. The combination of lines resembles that of
twisted or platted fillets of wood, cane, or rushes, as may be seen at a
glance, Fig. 481 _a_. An incised ornament of this character, possibly
derived from basketry by copying the twisted fillets or their
impressions in the clay, is very common on the pottery of the mounds of
