Instead of going into battle in royal dress, with his guards all around
him, as was his habit, he dressed himself like an ordinary soldier, and
went forward until he stood in the very first rank of the army. Then he
rushed boldly into the midst of the foe.

Of course, he was soon cut down; but the Athenians, seeing his courage,
and learning why he had thus risked his life, fought with such valor
that they defeated the Spar'tan forces, and forced them to retreat.

The victory had been won; but the Athenians were so sorry to lose their
beloved king, that they could not rejoice, and sadly returned home,
carrying the body of Codrus. Such was the admiration of all the people
for this act of royal courage, that they vowed they would never again
call any one by the name of king.

When Codrus had been buried, therefore, the Athenians gave his son and
heir the government of the city, calling him archon, or chief for
life,--a title which was borne by many rulers after him.

The Spartans, who had come into Attica to fight the Athenians, retreated
hastily after their defeat, and returned to their city, where they
settled, forcing all the people who dwelt in the neighborhood either to
leave the country or to serve them as their slaves.

The return of the Heraclidae into the Peloponnesus is the last event of
the Heroic Age, and now real history begins. After this, it is no longer
necessary to try to find out the truth hidden in the old tales which
were handed down from father to son, and which were the only fairy
stories the Greek children knew; for henceforth records were kept of all
the principal events.




XX. THE BLIND POET.


Three or four centuries after the siege of Troy, there lived a poor old
blind poet who wandered about from place to place, playing upon his
lyre, and reciting wonderful verses which told about the adventures of
the Greek heroes, and their great deeds during the Trojan War.

We are told that this old man, whose name was Ho'mer, had not always
been poor and blind, but that, having embarked by mistake upon a vessel
manned by pirates, he not only had been robbed of all his wealth, and
blinded, but had been left upon a lonely shore.

By some happy chance, poor blind Homer found his way to the inhabited
parts of the country, where he soon won many friends. Instead of
spending all his time in weeping over his troubles, Homer tried to think
of some way in which he could earn his living, and at the same time give
pleasure to others. He soon found such a way in telling the stories of
the past to all who cared to listen to them.

[Illustration: Homer.]

As the people in those days had no books, no schools, and no theaters,
these stories seemed very wonderful. Little by little Homer turned them
into verses so grand and beautiful that we admire them still; and these
he recited, accompanying himself on a lyre, which he handled with much
skill. As he wandered thus from place to place, old and young crowded
around him to listen to his tales; and some young men were so struck by
them that they followed him everywhere, until they too could repeat
them. This was quite easy to do, because Homer had put them into the
most beautiful and harmonious language the world has ever known. As soon
as these young men had learned a few of the tales, they too began to
travel from place to place, telling them to all they met; and thus
Homer's verses became well known throughout all Greece.

[Illustration: Telling Homer's Tales.]

The Greeks who could recite Homer's poems went next to the islands and
Asia Minor, stopping at every place where Greek was spoken, to tell
about the wrath of Achilles, the death of Patroclus, Hector, or old
Priam, the burning of Troy, the wanderings of Ulysses, and the return of
the Greeks. Other youths learned the poems; and so, although they were
not written down for many a year, they were constantly recited and sung,
and thus kept alive in the memory of the people.

As for Homer, their author, we know but little about him. We are told
that he lived to be very old, and that although he was poor as long as
he lived, and forced to earn his living by reciting his songs, he was
greatly honored after his death.

His two great heroic poems--the Iliad, telling all about the Trojan War,
and the Od'ys-sey, relating how Ulysses sailed about for ten years on
his way home from Troy--were finally written down, and kept so carefully
that they can still be read to-day. Such was the admiration felt for
these poems, that some years after Homer's death an attempt was made to
find out more about him, and about the place where he was born.

Fifty cities claimed the honor of giving him birth; but, although it was
never positively found out where he was born, most people thought the
Island of Chi'os was his birthplace. The Greek towns, wishing to show
how much they admired the works of Homer, used to send yearly gifts to
this place, the native land of the grandest poet the world has ever
known.




XXI. THE RISE OF SPARTA.


The city of Sparta, founded in the days of the Pelasgians, and once
ruled over by Menelaus and Helen, had fallen, as we have seen, into the
hands of the Heraclidae when they came back to the Peloponnesus after
their exile of a hundred years. It was first governed by
A-ris-to-de'mus, one of their three leaders; and, as records soon began
to be kept, we know a great deal about the early history of this famous
place.

As the town had formerly belonged to the Heraclidae, and had been ruled
by one of their ancestors, called Lac-e-dae'mon, they called it by his
name, and the country around it they named La-co'ni-a. Having won back
the town by fighting, the Heraclidae said that they would attend to war
and politics, and make the conquered people till the ground.

The old inhabitants of Laconia, therefore, went on living in the
country, where they sowed and harvested for the benefit of the Spartans.
All the prisoners of war, however, became real slaves. They were obliged
to serve the Spartans in every way, and were called He'lots.

When Aristodemus died, his twin sons were both made kings; and, as each
of them left his throne to his descendants, Sparta had two kings,
instead of one, from this time on. One member of the royal family,
although he never bore the name of king, is the most noted man in
Spartan history. This is Ly-cur'gus, the son of one ruler, the brother
of another, and the guardian of an infant king named Char-i-la'us.

Lycurgus was a thoroughly good and upright man. We are told that the
mother of the baby king once offered to put her child to death that
Lycurgus might reign. Fearing for the babe's safety, Lycurgus made
believe that he agreed to this plan, and asked that the child should be
given to him to kill as he saw fit.

Lycurgus, having thus obtained possession of the babe, carried him to
the council hall. There the child was named king; and Lycurgus promised
that he would watch carefully over him, educate him well, and rule for
him until he should be old and wise enough to reign alone.

While he was thus acting as ruler, Lycurgus made use of his power to
bring many new customs into Sparta, and to change the laws. As he was
one of the wisest men who ever lived, he knew very well that men must be
good if they would be happy. He also knew that health is far better than
riches; and, hoping to make the Spartans both good and healthy, he won
them over little by little to obey a new set of laws, which he had made
after visiting many of the neighboring countries, and learning all he
could.




XXII. THE SPARTAN TRAINING.


The laws which Lycurgus drew up for the Spartans were very strict. For
instance, as soon as a babe came into the world, the law ordered that
the father should wrap it up in a cloak, and carry it before a council
made up of some of the oldest and wisest men.

They looked at the child carefully, and if it seemed strong and healthy,
and was neither crippled nor in any way deformed, they said that it
might live. Then they gave it back to the father, and bade him bring up
the child for the honor of his country.

If the babe was sickly or deformed, it was carried off to a mountain
near by, and left alone; so that it soon died of hunger or thirst, or
was eaten up by the wild beasts.

The Spartan children staid under their father's roof and in their
mother's care until they were seven years old. While in the nursery,
they were taught all the beautiful old Greek legends, and listened with
delight to the stories of the ancient heroes, and especially to the
poems of Homer telling about the war of Troy and the adventures of
Ulysses.

As soon as the children had reached seven years of age, they were given
over to the care of the state, and allowed to visit their parents but
seldom. The boys were put in charge of chosen men, who trained them to
become strong and brave; while the girls were placed under some good and
wise woman, who not only taught them all they needed to know to keep
house well, but also trained them to be as strong and fearless as their
brothers. All Spartan boys were allowed but one rough woolen garment,
which served as their sole covering by night and by day, and was of the
same material in summer as in winter.

They were taught very little reading, writing, and arithmetic, but were
carefully trained to recite the poems of Homer, the patriotic songs, and
to accompany themselves skillfully on the lyre. They were also obliged
to sing in the public chorus, and to dance gracefully at all the
religious feasts.

As the Spartans were very anxious that their boys should be strong and
fearless, they were taught to stand pain and fatigue without a murmur;
and, to make sure that they could do so, their teachers made them go
through a very severe training.

Led by one of the older boys, the little lads were often sent out for
long tramps over rough and stony roads, under the hot sun; and the best
boy was the one who kept up longest, in spite of bleeding feet, burning
thirst, and great fatigue.

Spartan boys were allowed no beds to sleep in, lest they should become
lazy and hard to please. Their only couch was a heap of rushes, which
they picked on the banks of the Eu-ro'tas, a river near Sparta; and in
winter they were allowed to cover these with a layer of cat-tail down to
make them softer and warmer.




XXIII. THE BRAVE SPARTAN BOY.


As greedy and disobedient children were viewed at Sparta with the
contempt they deserved, all the boys were trained to obey at a word,
whatever the order given, and were allowed only the plainest and
scantiest food.

Strange to relate, the Spartans also trained their boys to steal. They
praised them when they succeeded in doing so without being found out,
and punished them only when caught in the act. The reason for this queer
custom was this: the people were often engaged in war, and as they had
no baggage wagons following their army, and no special officer to
furnish food, they had to depend entirely upon the provisions they could
get on their way.

Whenever an army came in sight, the people hid not only their wealth,
but also their food; and, had not the Spartan soldiers been trained to
steal, they would often have suffered much from hunger when they were at
war.

To test the courage of the Spartan boys, their teachers never allowed
them to have a light, and often sent them out alone in the middle of the
night, on errands which they had to do as best they could.

Then, too, once a year all the boys were brought to the Temple of Diana,
where their courage was further tried by a severe flogging; and those
who stood this whipping without a tear or moan were duly praised. The
little Spartan boys were so eager to be thought brave, that it is said
that some let themselves be flogged to death rather than complain.

The bravery of one of these boys was so wonderful that you will find it
mentioned in nearly every Greek history you read. This little fellow had
stolen a live fox, and hidden it in the bosom of his dress, on his way
to school.

The imprisoned fox, hoping to escape, began to gnaw a hole in the boy's
chest, and to tear his flesh with his sharp claws; but, in spite of the
pain, the lad sat still, and let the fox bite him to death.

It was only when he fell lifeless to the floor that the teachers found
the fox, and saw how cruelly he had torn the brave little boy to pieces.
Ever since then, when boys stand pain bravely and without wincing, they
have been called little Spartans, in memory of this lad.

In order that the boys should be taught to behave well under all
circumstances, they were never allowed to speak except when spoken to,
and then their answers were expected to be as short and exact as
possible.

This style of speaking, where much was said in few words, was so usual
in the whole country of Laconia, that it is still known as the laconic
style.

To train them in this mode of speech, the elders daily made the boys
pass an oral examination, asking them any questions they could think of.
The boys had to answer promptly, briefly, and carefully; and if they
failed to do so, it was considered a great disgrace.

These daily questionings were meant to sharpen their wits, strengthen
their memories, and teach them how to think and decide quickly and
correctly.

The Spartan youths were further taught to treat all their elders with
the greatest respect; and it must have been a pretty sight to see all
these manly fellows respectfully saluting all the old people they met,
and even stopping their play to make way for them when they came on the
street.

To strengthen their muscles, the boys were also carefully trained in
gymnastics. They could handle weapons, throw heavy weights, wrestle, run
with great speed, swim, jump, and ride, and were experts in all
exercises which tended to make them strong, active, and well.




XXIV. PUBLIC TABLES IN SPARTA.


The Spartan men prided themselves upon living almost as plainly as the
boys, and, instead of eating their meals at home with the women and
children, they had a common table. Each man gave a certain amount of
flour, oil, wine, vegetables, and money, just enough to provide for his
share of food.

Instead of having varied and delicate dishes, they always ate about the
same things; and their favorite food was a thick dark stew or soup,
which they called black broth. Rich and poor were treated alike, sat
side by side, and ate the same food, which was intended to make them
equally strong and able to serve their country.

The girls and women never came to these public tables; but the boys were
given a seat there as soon as they had learned their first and most
important lesson, obedience.
