they had come even to the Trojans and Achaians, they went down from the
chariots upon the bounteous earth, and marched into the midst of Trojans
and Achaians. Then forthwith rose up Agamemnon king of men, and up rose
Odysseus the man of wiles; and the lordly heralds gathered together the
holy oath-offerings of the gods, and mingled the wine in a bowl, and
poured water over the princes' hands. And Atreides put forth his hand
and drew his knife that hung ever beside his sword's great sheath, and
cut the hair from off the lambs' heads; and then the heralds portioned
it among the chief of the Trojans and Achaians. Then in their midst
Atreus' son lifted up his hands and prayed aloud: "Father Zeus, that
rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou Sun that seest all
things and hearest all things, and ye Rivers and thou Earth, and ye that
in the underworld punish men outworn, whosoever sweareth falsely; be ye
witnesses, and watch over the faithful oath. If Alexandros slay
Menelaos, then let him have Helen to himself and all her possessions;
and we will depart on our seafaring ships. But if golden-haired Menelaos
slay Alexandros, then let the Trojans give back Helen and all her
possessions and pay the Argives the recompense that is seemly, such as
shall live among men that shall be hereafter. But if so be that Priam
and Priam's sons will not pay the recompense unto me when Alexandros
falleth, then will I fight on thereafter for the price of sin, and abide
here till I compass the end of war."

So said he, and cut the lambs' throats with the pitiless knife. Them he
laid gasping upon the ground, failing of breath, for the knife had taken
their strength from them; and next they drew the wine from the bowl into
the cups, and poured it forth and prayed to the gods that live for ever.
And thus would say many an one of Achaians and Trojans: "Zeus most
glorious, most great, and all ye immortal gods, which folk soe'er be
first to sin against the oaths, may their brains be so poured forth upon
the earth even as this wine, theirs and their children's; and let their
wives be made subject unto strangers."

So spake they, but the son of Kronos vouchsafed not yet fulfilment. And
in their midst Priam of the seed of Dardanos uttered his saying:
"Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. I verily will return
back to windy Ilios, seeing that I can in no wise bear to behold with
mine eyes my dear son fighting with Menelaos dear to Ares. But Zeus
knoweth, and all the immortal gods, for whether of the twain the doom of
death is appointed."

So spake the godlike man, and laid the lambs in his chariot, and entered
in himself, and drew back the reins; and by his side Antenor mounted the
splendid chariot. So they departed back again to Ilios; and Hector son
of Priam and goodly Odysseus first meted out a space, and then they took
the lots, and shook them in a bronze-bound helmet, to know whether of
the twain should first cast his spear of bronze. And the people prayed
and lifted up their hands to the gods; and thus would say many an one of
Achaians and Trojans: "Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious,
most great; whichsoe'er it be that brought this trouble upon both
peoples, vouchsafe that he may die and enter the house of Hades; that so
for us peace may be assured and trusty oaths."

So said they; and great Hector of the glancing plume shook the helmet,
looking behind him; and quickly leapt forth the lot of Paris. Then the
people sat them down by ranks where each man's high-stepping horses and
inwrought armour lay. And upon his shoulders goodly Alexandros donned
his beauteous armour, even he that was lord to Helen of the lovely hair.
First upon his legs set he his greaves, beautiful, fastened with silver
ankle-clasps; next upon his breast he donned the corslet of his brother
Lykaon, and fitted it upon himself. And over his shoulders cast he his
silver-studded sword of bronze, and then a shield great and sturdy. And
on his mighty head he set a wrought helmet of horse-hair crest,
whereover the plume nodded terribly, and he took him a strong spear
fitted to his grasp. And in like wise warlike Menelaos donned his
armour.

So when they had armed themselves on either side in the throng, they
strode between Trojans and Achaians, fierce of aspect, and wonder came
on them that beheld, both on the Trojans tamers of horses and on the
well-greaved Achaians. Then took they their stand near together in the
measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath each against other.
First Alexandros hurled his far shadowing spear, and smote on Atreides'
round shield; but the bronze brake not through, for its point was turned
in the stout shield. Next Menelaos son of Atreus lifted up his hand to
cast, and made prayer to father Zeus: "King Zeus, grant me revenge on
him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly Alexandros, and subdue
thou him at my hands; so that many an one of men that shall be hereafter
may shudder to wrong his host that hath shown him kindness."

So said he, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled, and smote on
the round shield of the son of Priam. Through the bright shield went the
ponderous spear and through the inwrought breastplate it pressed on; and
straight beside his flank the spear rent the tunic, but he swerved and
escaped black death. Then Atreides drew his silver-studded sword, and
lifted up his hand and smote the helmet-ridge; but the sword shattered
upon it into three, yea four, and fell from his hand. Thereat Atreides
looked up to the wide heaven and cried: "Father Zeus, surely none of the
gods is crueller than thou. Verily I thought to have gotten vengeance on
Alexandros for his wickedness, but now my sword breaketh in my hand, and
my spear sped from my grasp in vain, and I have not smitten him."

So saying, he leapt upon him and caught him by his horse-hair crest, and
swinging him round dragged him towards the well-greaved Achaians; and he
was strangled by the embroidered strap beneath his soft throat, drawn
tight below his chin to hold his helm. Now would Menelaos have dragged
him away and won glory unspeakable, but that Zeus' daughter Aphrodite
was swift to mark, and tore asunder for him the strap of slaughtered
ox's hide; so the helmet came away empty in his stalwart hand. Thereat
Menelaos cast it with a swing toward the well-greaved Achaians, and his
trusty comrades took it up; and himself sprang back again eager to slay
him with spear of bronze. But Aphrodite snatched up Paris, very easily
as a goddess may, and hid him in thick darkness, and sent him down in
his fragrant perfumed chamber; and herself went to summon Helen. Her she
found on the high tower, and about her the Trojan women thronged. So
with her hand she plucked her perfumed raiment and shook it and spake to
her in the likeness of an aged dame, a wool-comber that was wont to work
for her fair wool when she dwelt in Lakedaimon, whom too she greatly
loved. Even in her likeness fair Aphrodite spake: "Come hither;
Alexandros summoneth thee to go homeward. There is he in his chamber and
inlaid bed, radiant in beauty and vesture; nor wouldst thou deem him to
be come from fighting his foe, but rather to be faring to the dance, or
from the dance to be just resting and set down."

So said she, and stirred Helen's soul within her breast; and when now
she marked the fair neck and lovely breast and sparkling eyes of the
goddess, she marvelled straightway and spake a word and called upon her
name: "Strange queen, why art thou desirous now to beguile me? Verily
thou wilt lead me further on to some one of the people cities of Phrygia
or lovely Maionia, if there too thou hast perchance some other darling
among mortal men, because even now Menelaos hath conquered goodly
Alexandros, and will lead me, accursed me, to his home. Therefore thou
comest hither with guileful intent. Go and sit thou by his side and
depart from the way of the gods; neither let thy feet ever bear thee
back to Olympus, but still be vexed for his sake and guard him till he
make thee his wife or perchance his slave. But thither will I not go--
that were a sinful thing--to array the bed of him; all the women of Troy
will blame me thereafter; and I have griefs untold within my soul."

Then in wrath bright Aphrodite spake to her: "Provoke me not, rash
woman, lest in mine anger I desert thee, and hate thee even as now I
love thee beyond measure, and lest I devise grievous enmities between
both, even betwixt Trojans and Achaians, and so thou perish in evil
wise."

So said she, and Helen sprung of Zeus was afraid, and went wrapped in
her bright radiant vesture, silently, and the Trojan women marked her
not; and the goddess led the way.

Now when they were come to the beautiful house of Alexandros the
handmaidens turned straightway to their tasks, and the fair lady went to
the high-roofed chamber; and laughter-loving Aphrodite took for her a
chair and brought it, even she the goddess, and set it before the face
of Paris. There Helen took her seat, the child of aegis-bearing Zeus,
and with eyes turned askance spake and chode her lord: "Thou comest back
from battle; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished of that great
warrior that was my former husband. Verily it was once thy boast that
thou wast a better man than Menelaos dear to Ares, in the might of thine
arm and thy spear. But go now, challenge Menelaos, dear to Ares to fight
thee again face to face. Nay, but I, even I, bid thee refrain, nor fight
a fight with golden-haired Menelaos man to man, neither attack him
recklessly, lest perchance thou fall to his spear anon."

And Paris made answer to her and said: "Chide not my soul, lady, with
cruel taunts. For now indeed hath Menelaos vanquished me with Athene's
aid, but another day may I do so unto him; for we too have gods with us.
But come now, let us have joy of love upon our couch; for never yet hath
love so enwrapped my heart--not even then when first I snatched thee
from lovely Lakedaimon and sailed with thee on my sea-faring ships, and
in the isle of Kranae had converse with thee upon thy couch in love--as
I love thee now and sweet desire taketh hold upon me." So saying he led
the way to the couch, and the lady followed with him.

Thus laid they them upon their fretted couch; but Atreides the while
strode through the host like to a wild beast, if anywhere he might set
eyes on godlike Alexandros. But none of the Trojans or their famed
allies could discover Alexandros to Menelaos dear to Ares. Yet surely
did they in no wise hide him for kindliness, could any have seen him;
for he was hated of all even as black death. So Agamemnon king of men
spake among them there: "Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and
allies. Now is victory declared for Menelaos dear to Ares; give ye back
Helen of Argos and the possessions with her, and pay ye the recompense
such as is seemly, that it may live even among men that shall be
hereafter." So said Atreides, and all the Achaians gave assent.



BOOK IV.

    How Pandaros wounded Menelaos by treachery; and Agamemnon
    exhorted his chief captains to battle.

Now the gods sat by Zeus and held assembly on the golden floor, and in
the midst the lady Hebe poured them their nectar: they with golden
goblets pledged one another, and gazed upon the city of the Trojans.
Then did Kronos' son essay to provoke Hera with vexing words, and spake
maliciously: "Twain goddesses hath Menelaos for his helpers, even Hera
of Argos and Alalkomenean Athene. Yet these sit apart and take there
pleasure in beholding; but beside that other ever standeth
laughter-loving Aphrodite and wardeth off fate from him, and now hath
she saved him as he thought to perish. But of a truth the victory is to
Menelaos dear to Ares; so let us take thought how these things shall be;
whether once more we shall arouse ill war and the dread battle-din, or
put friendship between the foes. Moreover if this were welcome to all
and well pleasing, may the city of king Priam yet be an habitation, and
Menelaos take back Helen of Argos."

So said he, but Athene and Hera murmured thereat, who were sitting by
him and devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace and
said not anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold
upon her: But Hera's breast contained not her anger, and she spake:
"Most dread son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? How hast
thou the will to make my labour void and of none effect, and the sweat
of my toil that I sweated, when my horses were wearied with my summoning
of the host, to be the plague of Priam and his sons? Do as thou wilt;
but we other gods do not all approve thee."

Then in sore anger Zeus the cloud-gatherer spake to her: "Good lack, how
have Priam and Priam's sons done thee such great wrong that thou art
furiously minded to sack the established citadel of Ilios? Perchance
wert thou to enter within the gates and long walls and devour Priam raw,
and Priam's sons and all the Trojans, then mightest thou assuage thine
anger. Do as thou art minded, only let not this quarrel hereafter be to
me and thee a sore strife between us both. And this moreover will I say
to thee, and do thou lay it to they heart; whene'er I too be of eager
mind to lay waste to a city where is the race of men that are dear to
thee, hinder thou not my wrath, but let me be, even as I yield to thee
of free will, yet with soul unwilling. For all cities beneath sun and
starry heaven that are the dwelling of mortal men, holy Ilios was most
honoured of my heart, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear. For never did mine altar lack the seemly feast, even
drink-offering and burnt-offering, the worship that is our due."

Then Helen the ox-eyed queen made answer to him: "Of a surety three
cities are there that are dearest far to me, Argos and Sparta and
wide-wayed Mykene; these lay thou waste whene'er they are found hateful
to thy heart; not for them will I stand forth, nor do I grudge thee
them. For even if I be jealous and would forbid thee to overthrow them,
yet will my jealousy not avail, seeing that thou art stronger far than
I. Still must my labour too not be made of none effect; for I also am a
god, and my lineage is even as thine, and Kronos the crooked counsellor
begat me to the place of honour in double wise, by birthright, and
because I am named thy spouse, and thou art king among all the
immortals. Let us indeed yield each to other herein, I to thee and thou
to me, and the rest of the immortal gods will follow with us; and do
thou with speed charge Athene to betake her to the fierce battle din of
Trojans and Achaians, and to essay that the Trojans may first take upon
them to do violence to the Achaians in their triumph, despite the
oaths."

So said she, and the father of men and gods disregarded not; forthwith
he spake to Athene winged words: "Betake thee with all speed to the
host, to the midst of Trojans and Achaians, and essay that the Trojans
may first take upon them to do violence to the Achaians in their
triumph, despite the oaths."

So spake he, and roused Athene that already was set thereon; and from
Olympus' heights she darted down. Even as the son of Kronos the crooked
counsellor sendeth a star, a portent for mariners or a wide host of
men, bright shining, and therefrom are scattered sparks in multitude;
even in such guise sped Pallas Athene to earth, and leapt into their
midst; and astonishment came on them that beheld, on horse-taming
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. And thus would many an one say,
looking at his neighbor: "Of a surety either shall sore war and the
fierce battle din return again; or else Zeus doth stablish peace between
the foes, even he that is men's dispenser of battle."

Thus would many an one of Achaians and Trojans say. Then the goddess
entered the throng of Trojans in the likeness of a man, even Antenor's
son Laodokos, a stalwart warrior, and sought for godlike Pandaros, if
haply she might find him. Lykaon's son found she, the noble and
stalwart, standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from the streams of Aisepos. So
she came near and spake winged words: "Wilt thou now hearken to me, thou
wise son of Lykaon? Then wouldst thou take heart to shoot a swift arrow
at Menelaos, and wouldst win favour and glory before all the Trojans,
and before king Alexandros most of all. Surely from him first of any
wouldst thou receive glorious gifts, if perchance he see Menelaos,
Atreus' warrior son, vanquished by thy dart and brought to the grievous
pyre. Go to now, shoot at glorious Menelaos, and vow to Apollo, the son
of light [Or, perhaps, "the Wolf-born"], the lord of archery, to
sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when thou art returned to
thy home, in the city of holy Zeleia."

So spake Athene, and persuaded his fool's heart. Forthwith he unsheathed
his polished bow of horn of a wild ibex that he himself had erst smitten
beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, the while he awaited in
a lurking-place; and had pierced it in the chest, so that it fell
backward on the rock. Now from its head sprang there horns of sixteen
palms; these the artificer, even the worker in horn, joined cunningly
together, and polished them all well and set the top of gold thereon. So
he laid it down when he had well strung it, by resting it upon the
ground; and his staunch comrades held their shields before him, lest the
warrior sons of the Achaians should first set on them, ere Menelaos,
Atreus' son, were smitten. Then opened he the lid of his quiver and took
forth a feathered arrow, never yet shot, a source of grievous pangs; and
anon he laid the bitter dart upon the string and vowed to Apollo, the
son of light, the lord of archery, to sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of
firstling lambs when he should have returned to his home in the city of
holy Zeleia. Then he took the notch and string of oxes' sinew together,
and drew, bringing to his breast the string, and to the bow the iron
head. So when he had now bent the great bow into a round, the horn
twanged, and the string sang aloud, and the keen arrow leapt eager to
wing his way amid the throng.

But the blessed gods immortal forgat not thee, Menelaos; and before all
the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil, who stood before thee and
warded off the piercing dart. She turned it just aside from the flesh,
even as a mother driveth a fly from her child that lieth in sweet
slumber; and with her own hand guided it where the golden buckles of the
belt were clasped and the doubled breastplate met them. So the bitter
arrow lighted upon the firm belt; through the inwrought belt it sped and
through the curiously wrought breastplate it pressed on and through the
taslet [and apron or belt set with metal, worn below the corslet] he
wore to shield his flesh, a barrier against darts; and this best
shielded him, yet it passed on even through this. Then did the arrow
graze the warrior's outermost flesh, and forthwith the dusky blood
flowed from the wound.

As when some woman of Maionia or Karia staineth ivory with purple, to
make a cheek-piece for horses, and it is laid up in the treasure
chamber, and many a horseman prayeth for it to wear; but it is laid up
to be a king's boast, alike an adornment for his horse and a glory for
his charioteer; even in such wise, Menelaos, were thy shapely thighs
stained with blood and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.

Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men when he saw the black blood
flowing from the wound. And Menelaos dear to Ares likewise shuddered;
but when he saw how thread [by which the iron head was attached to the
shaft] and bards were without, his spirit was gathered in his breast
again. Then lord Agamemnon moaned deep, and spake among them, holding
Menelaos by the hand; and his comrades made moan the while: "Dear
brother, to thy death, meseemeth, pledged I these oaths, setting thee
forth to fight the Trojans alone before the face of the Achaians; seeing
that the Trojans have so smitten thee, and trodden under floor the trusty
oaths. Yet in no wise is an oath of none effect, and the blood of lambs
and pure drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we
trusted. For even if the Olympian bring not about the fulfilment
forthwith, yet doth he fulfil at last, and men make dear amends, even
with their own heads and their wives and little ones. Yea of a surety I
know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be
laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear; and
Zeus the son of Kronos enthroned on high, that dwelleth in the heaven,
himself shall brandish over them all his lowring aegis, in indignation
at this deceit. Then shall all this not be void; yet shall I have sore
sorrow for thee, Menelaos, if thou die and fulfil the lot of life. Yea
in utter shame should I return to thirsty Argos, seeing that the
Achaians will forthwith bethink them of their native land, and so should
we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos. And
the earth shall rot thy bones as thou liest in Troy with thy task
unfinished: and thus shall many an overweening Trojan say as he leapeth
upon the tomb of glorious Menelaos: 'Would to God Agamemnon might so
fulfil his wrath in every matter, even as now he led hither the host of
the Achaians for naught, and hath gone home again to his dear native
land with empty ships, and hath left noble Menelaos behind.' Thus shall
men say hereafter: in that day let the wide earth gape for me."

But golden-haired Menelaos encouraged him and said: "Be of good courage,
neither dismay at all the host of the Achaians. The keen dart lighted
not upon a deadly spot; my glistening belt in front stayed it, and the
kirtle of mail beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned."

Then lord Agamemnon answered him and said: "Would it may be so, dear
Menelaos. But the leech shall feel the wound, and lay thereon drugs that
shall assuage thy dire pangs."

So saying he spake to godlike Talthybios, his herald: "Talthybios, with
all speed call Machaon hither, the hero son of Asklepios the noble
leech, to see Menelaos, Atreus' warrior son, whom one well skilled in
archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath wounded with a bow-shot, to his
glory and our grief."

So said he, and the herald heard him and disregarded not, and went his
way through the host of mail-clad Achaians to spy out the hero Machaon.
Him he found standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from Trike, pasture land of
horses. So he came near and spake his winged words: "Arise, thou son of
Asklepios. Lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see Menelaos, captain of the
Achaians, whom one well skilled in archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath
wounded with a bow-shot, to his glory and our grief."

So saying he aroused his spirit in his breast, and they went their way
amid the throng, through the wide host of the Achaians. And when they
were now come where was golden-haired Menelaos wounded, and all as many
as were chieftains gathered around him in a circle, the godlike hero
came and stood in their midst, and anon drew forth the arrow from the
clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the keen barbs were broken
backwards. Then he loosed the glistering belt and kirtle of mail beneath
and taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned; and when he saw the wound
where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood and
cunningly spread thereon soothing drugs, such as Cheiron of his good
will had imparted to his sire.

While these were tending Menelaos of the loud war-cry, the ranks of
shield-bearing Trojans came on; so the Achaians donned their arms again,
and bethought them of the fray. Now wouldest thou not see noble
Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, unready to fight, but very eager for
glorious battle. He left his horses and his chariot adorned with bronze;
and his squire, even Eurymedon son of Ptolemaios Peiraieus' son, kept
apart the snorting steeds; and he straitly charged him to have them at
hand whenever weariness should come upon his limbs with marshalling so
many; and thus on foot ranged he through the ranks of warriors. And
whomsoever of all the fleet-horsed Danaans he found eager, he stood by
them and by his words encouraged them: "Ye Argives, relax not in any
wise your impetuous valour; for father Zeus will be no helper of liars,
but as these were first to transgress against the oaths, so shall their
own tender flesh be eaten of the vultures, and we shall bear away their
dear wives and little children in our ships, when once we take the
stronghold."

But whomsoever he found shrinking from hateful battle, these he chode
sore with angry words: "Ye Argives, warriors of the bow, ye men of
dishonour, have ye no shame? Why stand ye thus dazed like fawns that are
weary with running over the long plain and so stand still, and no valour
is found in their hearts at all? Even thus stand ye dazed, and fight
not. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your good
ships' sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, to see if
Kronion will stretch his arm over you indeed?"

So masterfully ranged he through the ranks of warriors. Then came he to
the Cretans as he went through the throng of warriors; and these were
taking arms around wise Idomeneus; Idomeneus amid the foremost, valiant
as a wild boar, and Meriones the while was hastening his hindermost
battalions. Then Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to see them, and anon
spake to Idomeneus with kindly words: "Idomeneus, more than all the
fleet-horsed Danaans do I honour thee, whether in war or in task of
