Soon the dear little Poinsett was singing, much gratified by being
invited to the instrument by Mr Egremont, who for a few minutes hung
over her, and then evidently under the influence of her tones, walked up
and down the room, and only speaking to beg that she would continue her
charming performances. Lady Marney was engrossed with her embroidery;
her lord and the captain with their game.

And what was Egremont thinking of? Of Mowbray be you sure. And of Lady
Joan or Lady Maud? Not exactly. Mowbray was the name of the town to
which the strangers he had met with in the Abbey were bound. It was the
only piece of information that he had been able to obtain of them; and
that casually.

When the fair vision of the starlit arch, about to descend to her two
companions, perceived that they were in conversation with a stranger,
she hesitated, and in a moment withdrew. Then the elder of the
travellers, exchanging a glance with his friend, bid good even to
Egremont.

"Our way perhaps lies the same," said Egremont.

"I should deem not," said the stranger, "nor are we alone."

"And we must be stirring, for we have far to go," said he who was
dressed in black.

"My journey is very brief," said Egremont, making a desperate effort to
invite communication; "and I am on horseback!"

"And we on foot," said the elder; "nor shall we stop till we reach
Mowbray;" and with a slight salute, they left Egremont alone. There
was something in the manner of the elder stranger which repressed the
possibility of Egremont following him. Leaving then the cloister garden
in another direction, he speculated on meeting them outside the abbey.
He passed through the Lady's chapel. The beautiful Religious was not
there. He gained the west front; no one was visible. He took a rapid
survey of each side of the abbey; not a being to be recognized. He
fancied they must have advanced towards the Abbey Farm; yet they might
have proceeded further on in the dale. Perplexed, he lost time. Finally
he proceeded towards the farm, but did not overtake them; reached it,
but learned nothing of them; and arrived at his brother's full of a
strange yet sweet perplexity.




Book 2 Chapter 7



In a commercial country like England, every half century developes some
new and vast source of public wealth, which brings into national notice
a new and powerful class. A couple of centuries ago, a Turkey merchant
was the great creator of wealth; the West Indian Planter followed him.
In the middle of the last century appeared the Nabob. These characters
in their zenith in turn merged in the land, and became English
aristocrats; while the Levant decaying, the West Indies exhausted, and
Hindostan plundered, the breeds died away, and now exist only in our
English comedies from Wycherly and Congreve to Cumberland and Morton.
The expenditure of the revolutionary war produced the Loanmonger,
who succeeded the Nabob; and the application of science to industry
developed the Manufacturer, who in turn aspires to be "large-acred,"
and always will, as long as we have a territorial constitution; a better
security for the preponderance of the landed interest than any corn law,
fixed or fluctuating.

Of all these characters, the one that on the whole made the largest
fortunes in the most rapid manner,--and we do not forget the marvels of
the Waterloo loan, or the miracles of Manchester during the continental
blockade--was the Anglo-East Indian about the time that Hastings was
first appointed to the great viceroyalty. It was not unusual for men in
positions so obscure that their names had never reached the public in
this country, and who yet had not been absent from their native land for
a longer period than the siege of Troy, to return with their million.

One of the most fortunate of this class of obscure adventurers was a
certain John Warren. A very few years before the breaking out of the
American war, he was a waiter at a celebrated club in St James's Street:
a quick yet steady young fellow; assiduous, discreet, and very civil.
In this capacity, he pleased a gentleman who was just appointed to the
government of Madras, and who wanted a valet. Warren, though prudent,
was adventurous; and accepted the opening which he believed fortune
offered him. He was prescient. The voyage in those days was an affair
of six months. During this period, Warren still more ingratiated himself
with his master. He wrote a good hand, and his master a very bad one.
He had a natural talent for accounts; a kind of information which was
useful to his employer. He arrived at Madras, no longer a valet, but a
private secretary.

His master went out to make a fortune; but he was indolent, and had
indeed none of the qualities for success, except his great position.
Warren had every quality but that. The basis of the confederacy
therefore was intelligible; it was founded on mutual interests and
cemented by reciprocal assistance. The governor granted monopolies to
the secretary, who apportioned a due share to his sleeping partner.
There appeared one of those dearths not unusual in Hindostan; the
population of the famished province cried out for rice; the stores of
which, diminished by nature, had for months mysteriously disappeared. A
provident administration it seems had invested the public revenue in its
benevolent purchase; the misery was so excessive that even pestilence
was anticipated, when the great forestallers came to the rescue of the
people over whose destinies they presided; and at the same time fed and
pocketed millions.

This was the great stroke of the financial genius of Warren. He was
satisfied. He longed once more to see St James's Street, and to become
a member of the club, where he had once been a waiter. But he was
the spoiled child of fortune, who would not so easily spare him. The
governor died, and had appointed his secretary his sole executor. Not
that his excellency particularly trusted his agent, but he dared not
confide the knowledge of his affairs to any other individual. The estate
was so complicated, that Warren offered the heirs a good round sum
for his quittance, and to take the settlement upon himself. India so
distant, and Chancery so near--the heirs accepted the proposition.
Winding up this estate, Warren avenged the cause of plundered provinces;
and the House of Commons itself, with Burke and Francis at its head,
could scarcely have mulcted the late governor more severely.

A Mr Warren, of whom no one had ever heard except that he was a nabob,
had recently returned from India and purchased a large estate in the
north of England, was returned to Parliament one of the representatives
of a close borough which he had purchased: a quiet, gentlemanlike,
middle-aged man, with no decided political opinions; and, as parties
were then getting very equal, of course very much courted. The throes of
Lord North's administration were commencing. The minister asked the new
member to dine with him, and found the new member singularly free from
all party prejudices. Mr Warren was one of those members who announced
their determination to listen to the debates and to be governed by the
arguments. All complimented him, all spoke to him. Mr Fox declared that
he was a most superior man; Mr Burke said that these were the men who
could alone save the country. Mrs Crewe asked him to supper; he was
caressed by the most brilliant of duchesses.

At length there arrived one of those fierce trials of strength, which
precede the fall of a minister, but which sometimes from peculiar
circumstances, as in the instances of Walpole and Lord North, are
not immediate in their results. How would Warren vote? was the great
question. He would listen to the arguments. Burke was full of confidence
that he should catch Warren. The day before the debate there was a
levee, which Mr Warren attended. The sovereign stopped him, spoke to
him, smiled on him, asked him many questions: about himself, the House
of Commons, how he liked it, how he liked England. There was a flutter
in the circle; a new favourite at court.

The debate came off, the division took place. Mr Warren voted for the
minister. Burke denounced him; the king made him a baronet.

Sir John Warren made a great alliance, at least for him; he married the
daughter of an Irish earl; became one of the king's friends; supported
Lord Shelburne, threw over Lord Shelburne, had the tact early to
discover that Mr Pitt was the man to stick to, stuck to him. Sir John
Warren bought another estate, and picked up another borough. He was
fast becoming a personage. Throughout the Indian debates he kept himself
extremely quiet; once indeed in vindication of Mr Hastings, whom he
greatly admired, he ventured to correct Mr Francis on a point of fact
with which he was personally acquainted. He thought that it was safe,
but he never spoke again. He knew not the resources of vindictive genius
or the powers of a malignant imagination. Burke owed the Nabob a turn
for the vote which had gained him a baronetcy. The orator seized the
opportunity and alarmed the secret conscience of the Indian adventurer
by his dark allusions, and his fatal familiarity with the subject.

Another estate however and another borough were some consolation for
this little misadventure; and in time the French Revolution, to Sir
John's great relief, turned the public attention for ever from Indian
affairs. The Nabob from the faithful adherent of Mr Pitt had become even
his personal friend. The wits indeed had discovered that he had been a
waiter; and endless were the epigrams of Fitzpatrick and the jokes of
Hare; but Mr Pitt cared nothing about the origin of his supporters. On
the contrary, Sir John was exactly the individual from whom the minister
meant to carve out his plebeian aristocracy; and using his friend as
a feeler before he ventured on his greater operations, the Nabob one
morning was transformed into an Irish baron.

The new Baron figured in his patent as Lord Fitz-Warene, his Norman
origin and descent from the old barons of this name having been
discovered at Herald's college. This was a rich harvest for Fitzpatrick
and Hare; but the public gets accustomed to everything, and has an easy
habit of faith. The new Baron cared nothing for ridicule, for he was
working for posterity. He was compensated for every annoyance by the
remembrance that the St James's Street waiter was ennobled, and by his
determination that his children should rank still higher in the proud
peerage of his country. So he obtained the royal permission to resume
the surname and arms of his ancestors, as well as their title.

There was an ill-natured story set afloat, that Sir John owed this
promotion to having lent money to the minister; but this was a calumny.
Mr Pitt never borrowed money of his friends. Once indeed, to save his
library, he took a thousand pounds from an individual on whom he had
conferred high rank and immense promotion: and this individual, who
had the minister's bond when Mr Pitt died, insisted on his right,
and actually extracted the 1,000 l. from the insolvent estate of his
magnificent patron. But Mr Pitt always preferred an usurer to a friend;
and to the last day of his life borrowed money at fifty per cent.

The Nabob departed this life before the Minister, but he lived long
enough to realize his most aspiring dream. Two years before his death
the Irish baron was quietly converted into an English peer; and without
exciting any attention, all the squibs of Fitzpatrick, all the jokes of
Hare, quite forgotten, the waiter of the St James's Street club took his
seat in the most natural manner possible in the House of Lords.

The great estate of the late Lord Fitz-Warene was situated at Mowbray, a
village which principally belonged to him, and near which he had raised
a gothic castle, worthy of his Norman name and ancestry. Mowbray was one
of those places which during the long war had expanded from an almost
unknown village to a large and flourishing manufacturing town; a
circumstance, which, as Lady Marney observed, might have somewhat
deteriorated the atmosphere of the splendid castle, but which had
nevertheless doubled the vast rental of its lord. He who had succeeded
to his father was Altamont Belvidere (named after his mother's family)
Fitz-Warene, Lord Fitz-Warene. He was not deficient in abilities,
though he had not his father's talents, but he was over-educated for his
intellect; a common misfortune. The new Lord Fitz-Warene was the
most aristocratic of breathing beings. He most fully, entirely, and
absolutely believed in his pedigree; his coat of arms was emblazoned
on every window, embroidered on every chair, carved in every corner.
Shortly after his father's death he was united to the daughter of a
ducal house, by whom he had a son and two daughters, chrisened by names
which the ancient records of the Fitz-Warenes authorised. His son, who
gave promise of abilities which might have rendered the family really
distinguished, was Valence; his daughters, Joan and Maud. All that
seemed wanting to the glory of the house was a great distinction of
which a rich peer, with six seats in the House of Commons, could not
ultimately despair. Lord Fitz-Warene aspired to rank among the earls
of England. But the successors of Mr Pitt were strong; they thought the
Fitz-Warenes had already been too rapidly advanced; it was whispered
that the king did not like the new man; that his majesty thought him
pompous, full of pretence, in short, a fool. But though the successors
of Mr Pitt managed to govern the country for twenty years and were
generally very strong, in such an interval of time however good their
management or great their luck, there were inevitably occasions
when they found themselves in difficulties, when it was necessary to
conciliate the lukewarm or to reward the devoted. Lord Fitz-Warene well
understood how to avail himself of these occasions; it was astonishing
how conscientious and scrupulous he became during Walcheren expeditions,
Manchester massacres, Queen's trials. Every scrape of the government was
a step in the ladder to the great borough-monger. The old king too had
disappeared from the stage; and the tawdry grandeur of the great Norman
peer rather suited George the Fourth. He was rather a favourite at the
Cottage; they wanted his six votes for Canning; he made his terms; and
one of the means by which we got a man of genius for a minister, was
elevating Lord Fitz-Warene in the peerage, by the style and title of
Earl de Mowbray of Mowbray Castle.




Book 2 Chapter 8



We must now for a while return to the strangers of the Abbey ruins. When
the two men had joined the beautiful Religious, whose apparition had so
startled Egremont, they all three quitted the Abbey by a way which led
them by the back of the cloister garden, and so on by the bank of the
river for about a hundred yards, when they turned up the winding glen of
a dried-up tributary stream. At the head of the glen, at which they soon
arrived, was a beer-shop, screened by some huge elms from the winds that
blew over the vast moor, which, except in the direction of Mardale, now
extended as far as the eye could reach. Here the companions stopped, the
beautiful Religious seated herself on a stone bench beneath the trees,
while the elder stranger calling out to the inmate of the house to
apprise him of his return, himself proceeded to a neighbouring shed,
whence he brought forth a very small rough pony with a rude saddle, but
one evidently intended for a female rider.

"It is well," said the taller of the men "that I am not a member of a
temperance society like you, Stephen, or it would be difficult to reward
this good man for his care of our steed. I will take a cup of the drink
of Saxon kings." Then leading up the pony to the Religious, he placed
her on its back with gentleness and much natural grace, saying at the
same time in a subdued tone, "And you--shall I bring you a glass of
nature's wine?"

"I have drank of the spring of the Holy Abbey," said the Religious, "and
none other must touch my lips this eve."

"Come, our course must be brisk," said the elder of the men as he gave
up his glass to their host and led off the pony, Stephen walking on its
other side.

Though the sun had fallen, the twilight was still glowing, and even on
this wide expanse the air was still. The vast and undulating surface of
the brown and purple moor, varied occasionally by some fantastic rocks,
gleamed in the shifting light. Hesperus was the only star that yet was
visible, and seemed to move before them and lead them on their journey.

"I hope," said the Religious, turning to the elder stranger, "that if
ever we regain our right, my father, and that we ever can save by the
interposition of divine will seems to me clearly impossible, that you
will never forget how bitter it is to be driven from the soil; and that
you will bring back the people to the land."

"I would pursue our right for no other cause," said the father. "After
centuries of sorrow and degradation, it should never be said, that we
had no sympathy with the sad and the oppressed."

"After centuries of sorrow and degradation," said Stephen, "let it
not be said that you acquired your right only to create a baron or a
squire."

"Nay, thou shalt have thy way, Stephen," said his companion, smiling,
"if ever the good hour come. As many acres as thou choosest for thy new
Jerusalem."

"Call it what you will, Walter," replied Stephen; "but if I ever gain
the opportunity of fully carrying the principle of association into
practice, I will sing 'Nunc me dimittas.'"

"'Nunc me dimittas,'" burst forth the Religious in a voice of thrilling
melody, and she pursued for some minutes the divine canticle. Her
companions gazed on her with an air of affectionate reverence as she
sang; each instant the stars becoming brighter, the wide moor assuming a
darker hue.

"Now, tell me, Stephen," said the Religious, turning her head and
looking round with a smile, "think you not it would be a fairer lot to
bide this night at some kind monastery, than to be hastening now to that
least picturesque of all creations, a railway station."

"The railways will do as much for mankind as the monasteries did," said
Stephen.

"Had it not been for the railway, we should never have made our visit to
Marney Abbey," said the elder of the travellers.

"Nor seen its last abbot's tomb," said the Religious. "When I marked
your name upon the stone, my father;--woe is me, but I felt sad indeed,
that it was reserved for our blood to surrender to ruthless men that
holy trust."

"He never surrendered," said her father. "He was tortured and hanged."

"He is with the communion of saints," said the Religious.

"I would I could see a communion of Men," said Stephen, "and then there
would be no more violence, for there would be no more plunder."

"You must regain our lands for us, Stephen," said the Religious;
"promise me my father that I shall raise a holy house for pious women,
if that ever hap."

"We will not forget our ancient faith," said her father, "the only old
thing that has not left us."

"I cannot understand," said Stephen, "why you should ever have lost
sight of these papers, Walter."

"You see, friend, they were never in my possession; they were never
mine when I saw them. They were my father's; and he was jealous of all
interference. He was a small yeoman, who had risen in the war time, well
to do in the world, but always hankering after the old tradition that
the lands were ours. This Hatton got hold of him; he did his work well,
I have heard;--certain it is my father spared nothing. It is twenty-five
years come Martinmas since he brought his writ of right; and though
baffled, he was not beaten. But then he died; his affairs were in great
confusion; he had mortgaged his land for his writ, and the war prices
were gone. There were debts that could not be paid. I had no capital for
a farm. I would not sink to be a labourer on the soil that had once been
our own. I had just married; it was needful to make a great exertion. I
had heard much of the high wages of this new industry; I left the land."

"And the papers?"

"I never thought of them, or thought of them with disgust, as the cause
of my ruin. Then when you came the other day, and showed me in the
book that the last abbot of Marney was a Walter Gerard, the old feeling
stirred again; and I could not help telling you that my fathers fought
at Azincourt, though I was only the overlooker at Mr Trafford's mill."

"A good old name of the good old faith," said the Religious; "and a
blessing be on it."

"We have cause to bless it," said Gerard. "I thought it then something
to serve a gentleman; and as for my daughter, she, by their goodness,
was brought up in holy walls, which have made her what she is."

"Nature made her what she is," said Stephen in a low voice, and speaking
not without emotion. Then he continued, in a louder and brisker tone,
"But this Hatton--you know nothing of his whereabouts?"

"Never heard of him since. I had indeed about a year after my father's
death, cause to enquire after him; but he had quitted Mowbray, and none
could give me tidings of him. He had lived I believe on our law-suit,
and vanished with our hopes."

After this, there was silence; each was occupied with his thoughts,
while the influence of the soft night and starry hour induced to
contemplation.

"I hear the murmur of the train," said the Religious.

"'Tis the up-train," said her father. "We have yet a quarter of an hour;
we shall be in good time."

So saying, he guided the pony to where some lights indicated the station
of the railway, which here crossed the moor. There was just time to
return the pony to the person at the station from whom it had been
borrowed, and obtain their tickets, when the bell of the down-train
sounded, and in a few minutes the Religious and her companions were on
their way to Mowbray, whither a course of two hours carried them.

It was two hours to midnight when they arrived at Mowbray station, which
was about a quarter of a mile from the town. Labour had long ceased; a
beautiful heaven, clear and serene, canopied the city of smoke and toil;
in all directions rose the columns of the factories, dark and defined
in the purple sky; a glittering star sometimes hovering by the crest of
their tall and tapering forms.

The travellers proceeded in the direction of a suburb and approached the
very high wall of an extensive garden. The moon rose as they reached it,
tipped the trees with light, and revealed a lofty and centre portal,
by the side of it a wicket at which Gerard rang. The wicket was quickly
opened.

"I fear, holy sister," said the Religious, "that I am even later than I
promised."

"Those that come in our lady's name are ever welcome," was the reply.

"Sister Marion," said Gerard to the porteress, "we have been to visit a
holy place."

"All places are holy with holy thoughts, my brother."

"Dear father, good night," said the Religious; "the blessings of all the
saints be on thee,--and on thee, Stephen, though thou dost not kneel to
them."

"Good night, mine own child," said Gerard.

"I could believe in saints when I am with thee," murmured Stephen; "Good
night,--SYBIL."




Book 2 Chapter 9



When Gerard and his friend quitted the convent they proceeded at a brisk
pace, into the heart of the town. The streets were nearly empty; and
with the exception of some occasional burst of brawl or merriment from
a beer-shop, all was still. The chief street of Mowbray, called
Castle Street after the ruins of the old baronial stronghold in its
neighbourhood, was as significant of the present civilization of this
community as the haughty keep had been of its ancient dependence. The
dimensions of Castle Street were not unworthy of the metropolis: it
traversed a great portion of the town, and was proportionately wide; its
broad pavements and its blazing gas-lights indicated its modern order
and prosperity; while on each side of the street rose huge warehouses,
not as beautiful as the palaces of Venice, but in their way not less
remarkable; magnificent shops; and here and there, though rarely, some
ancient factory built among the fields in the infancy of Mowbray by some
mill-owner not sufficiently prophetic of the future, or sufficiently
confident in the energy and enterprise of his fellow-citizens, to
foresee that the scene of his labours would be the future eye-sore of a
flourishing posterity.

Pursuing their course along Castle Street for about a quarter of a mile,
Gerard and Stephen turned down a street which intersected it, and so
on, through a variety of ways and winding lanes, till they arrived at an
open portion of the town, a district where streets and squares and even
rows, disappeared, and where the tall chimneys and bulky barrack-looking
buildings that rose in all directions, clustering yet isolated,
announced that they were in the principal scene of the industry of
Mowbray. Crossing this open ground they gained a suburb, but one of
a very different description to that in which was situate the convent
where they had parted with Sybil. This one was populous, noisy, and
lighted. It was Saturday night; the streets were thronged; an infinite
population kept swarming to and fro the close courts and pestilential
cul-de-sacs that continually communicated with the streets by narrow
archways, like the entrance of hives, so low that you were obliged to
stoop for admission: while ascending to these same streets, from their
dank and dismal dwellings by narrow flights of steps the subterraneous
nation of the cellars poured forth to enjoy the coolness of the summer
night, and market for the day of rest. The bright and lively shops were
crowded; and groups of purchasers were gathered round the stalls, that
by the aid of glaring lamps and flaunting lanthorns, displayed their
wares.

"Come, come, it's a prime piece," said a jolly looking woman, who was
presiding at a stall which, though considerably thinned by previous
purchasers, still offered many temptations to many who could not
purchase.

"And so it is widow," said a little pale man, wistfully.

"Come, come, it's getting late, and your wife's ill; you're a good soul,
we'll say fi'pence a pound, and I'll throw you the scrag end in for
love."

"No butcher's meat to-morrow for us, widow," said the man.

"And why not, neighbour? With your wages, you ought to live like a
prize-fighter, or the mayor of Mowbray at least."

"Wages!" said the man, "I wish you may get 'em. Those villains, Shuffle
and Screw, have sarved me with another bate ticket: and a pretty figure
too."

"Oh! the carnal monsters!" exclaimed the widow. "If their day don't
come, the bloody-minded knaves!"

"And for small cops, too! Small cops be hanged! Am I the man to send up
a bad-bottomed cop, Widow Carey?"

"You sent up for snicks! I have known you man and boy John Hill these
twenty summers, and never heard a word against you till you got into
Shuffle and Screw's mill. Oh! they are a bad yarn, John."

"They do us all, widow. They pretends to give the same wages as the
rest, and works it out in fines. You can't come, and you can't go, but
there's a fine; you're never paid wages, but there's a bate ticket. I've
heard they keep their whole establishment on factory fines."

"Soul alive, but those Shuffle and Screw are rotten, snickey, bad
yarns," said Mistress Carey. "Now ma'am, if you please; fi'pence
ha'penny; no, ma'am, we've no weal left. Weal, indeed! you look very
like a soul as feeds on weal," continued Mrs Carey in an under tone as
her declining customer moved away. "Well, it gets late," said the widow,
"and if you like to take this scrag end home to your wife neighbour
Hill, we can talk of the rest next Saturday. And what's your will, sir?"
said the widow with a stern expression to a youth who now stopped at her
stall.

He was about sixteen, with a lithe figure, and a handsome, faded,
impudent face. His long, loose, white trousers gave him height; he had
no waistcoat, but a pink silk handkerchief was twisted carelessly round
his neck, and fastened with a very large pin, which, whatever were
its materials, had unquestionably a very gorgeous appearance. A loose
frock-coat of a coarse white cloth, and fastened by one button round his
waist, completed his habiliments, with the addition of the covering to
his head, a high-crowned dark-brown hat, which relieved his complexion,
and heightened the effect of his mischievous blue eye.

"Well, you need not be so fierce, Mother Carey," said the youth with an
affected air of deprecation.

"Don't mother me," said the jolly widow with a kindling eye; "go to your
own mother, who is dying in a back cellar without a winder, while you've
got lodgings in a two pair."

"Dying; she's only drunk," said the youth.

"And if she is only drunk," rejoined Mrs Carey in a passion, "what makes
her drink but toil; working from five o'clock in the morning to seven
o'clock at night, and for the like of such as you."

"That's a good one," said the youth; "I should like to know what my
mother ever did for me, but give me treacle and laudanum when I was a
babby to stop my tongue and fill my stomach; by the token of which,
as my gal says, she stunted the growth of the prettiest figure in all
Mowbray." And here the youth drew himself up, and thrust his hands in
the side pockets of his pea-jacket.

"Well, I never," said Mrs Carey. "No; I never heard a thing like that!"

"What, not when you cut up the jackass and sold it for veal cutlets,
mother."

"Hold your tongue, Mr Imperence," said the widow. "It's very well known
you're no Christian, and who'll believe what you say?"

"It's very well known that I'm a man what pays his way," said the boy,
"and don't keep a huckster's stall to sell carrion by star-light; but
live in a two pair, if you please, and has a wife and family, or as
good."

"O! you aggravating imp!" exclaimed the widow in despair, unable to
wreak her vengeance on one who kept in a secure position, and whose
movements were as nimble as his words.

"Why, Madam Carey, what has Dandy Mick done to thee?" said a
good-humoured voice, it came from one of two factory girls who were
passing her stall and stopped. They were gaily dressed, a light
handkerchief tied under the chin, their hair scrupulously arranged; they
wore coral neck-laces and earrings of gold.

"Ah! is it you, my child," said the widow, who was a good-hearted
creature. "The dandy has been giving me some of his imperence."

"But I meant nothing, dame," said Mick. "It was a joke,--only a joke."

"Well, let it pass," said Mrs Carey. "And where have you been this long
time, my child; and who's your friend?" she added in a lower tone.

"Well, I have left Mr Trafford's mill," said the girl.

"That's a bad job," said Mrs Carey; "for those Traffords are kind to
their people. It's a great thing for a young person to be in their
mill."

"So it is," said the girl, "but then it was so dull. I can't stand a
country life, Mrs Carey. I must have company."

"Well, I do love a bit of gossip myself," said Mrs Carey, with great
frankness.

"And then I'm no scholar," said the girl, "and never could take to
learning. And those Traffords had so many schools."

"Learning is better than house and land," said Mrs Carey; "though I'm
no scholar myself; but then, in my time, things was different. But young
persons--"

"Yes," said Mick; "I don't think I could get through the day, if it
