Prince with regard to his brother's troop.

"Take command yourself," said Edward.  "You surely have some Esquire or
man-at-arms who can supply your own want of experience."

"My brother's Squire, Gaston d'Aubricour, is well learned in chivalry,
my Lord," said Eustace, "and I will do my best, with his aid, to fulfil
my trust."

"It is well," said Edward.  "The Lances of Lynwood are too well trained
easily to forget their duty, and I fear not but that you will do well.
How old is your brother's young heir?"

"Eight years, my Lord."

"We will soon have him at Bordeaux," said Edward, "that he may grow up
with my boys in the same friendship as their fathers.  And now," added
he, turning from Eustace to the assembled nobles around him, "let us
part, and prepare for our further journey.  In an hour's time the
bugles shall summon you to depart for Burgos."

The Prince walked away towards his tent with the Captal de Buch, and
Eustace looked round for his horse, which he saw at no great distance
with Ingram, but Leonard Ashton was nowhere in sight. Eustace mounted,
and rode towards his own tent, desiring the yeoman to seek Ashton out,
while he himself proceeded slowly, musing, with feelings of
considerable disappointment and vexation, on the reception he had met
from Sir John Chandos, the man in the whole camp whose good opinion he
would have most valued.  "This is folly," thought he, however, rousing
himself after a minute or two of such meditations.  "What said the good
old Baron but what I know full well myself, that I am far from meriting
my new honours? On whom does it depend, but myself to win his praise?
And by our Lady's grace, I will make him confess at last, that, young
as I am, I can show that I deserve my spurs.  What, ho! Ingram, where
is Master Ashton?"

"Where you will little like to hear of him, Sir Knight," said the
yeoman, galloping up on his tall Flemish horse.  "At the wine-shop,
yonder, in the village, with that ill-favoured, one-eyed Squire that
you wot of.  I called him as you desired, and all that I got for an
answer was, that he would come at his own time, and not at your
bidding."

"Said he so? the ungracious, headstrong fellow!" said Eustace, looking
back wistfully.  "And what to do!  To ride back myself might be the
means of getting the whole troop late in starting, and disorderly--yet,
to leave him!"  Eustace looked at John Ingram's comely and stolid face,
and then almost smiled at himself for seeking counsel from him.  "Ride
you on, John," said he; "tell Master d'Aubricour of the order to
depart--let all be in readiness by the time I return."

Then turning his horse quickly, Eustace rode back to the village. All
was haste and confusion there--horses were being led forth and saddled,
pages, grooms, and men-at-arms hurrying to and fro--bugles
sounding--everything in the bustle incident to immediate departure.  He
could only make his way through the press slowly, and with difficulty,
which ill suited with his impatience and perplexity.  In front of the
venta, a low white cottage, with a wooden balcony overspread with
vines, there was a still closer press, and loud vehement voices, as of
disputants, were heard, while the various men-at-arms crowded in so
closely to see the fray, if such it were, as to be almost regardless of
the horse, which Eustace was pressing forward upon them.  He looked
over their heads to see Leonard, but in vain.  He thought of retreat,
but found himself completely entangled in the throng.  At that moment,
a cry was heard, "The Provost Marshal!"  The crowd suddenly, he knew
not how, seemed to melt away from around him, in different directions,
and he found himself left, on horseback, in the midst of the little
village green, amongst scattered groups of disreputable-looking yeomen,
archers, and grooms, who were making what speed they could to depart,
as from the other side the Provost, the archers of the guard, and Sir
John Chandos entered upon the scene.

"Ha!  What is all this?  Whom have we here?" exclaimed the old Baron.
"Sir Eustace Lynwood!  By my life, a fair commencement for your dainty
young knighthood!"

"On my word, my Lord Chandos," said Eustace, colouring deeply, "I am no
loiterer here; I came but to seek my Squire, Leonard Ashton, and found
myself entangled in the crowd."

"Ay, ay!  I understand," said Chandos, without listening to him; "I see
how it will be.  Off to your troop instantly, Master Knight. I suppose
they are all seeking Squires in the wine-shops!"

"You do me wrong, my Lord," said Eustace; "but you shall be obeyed."

The bugles had already sounded before he reached his own quarters,
where he found that, thanks to Gaston, all was right.  The tent had
been taken down and packed on the baggage mules, the men were mounted,
and drawn up in full array, with his banner floating above their heads;
and Gaston himself was only waiting his appearance to mount a stout
mule, which Martin, the horse-boy, was leading up and down.

"This is well.  Thanks, good Gaston," said Eustace, with a sigh of
relief, as he took off his heavy helmet, which had become much heated
during his hasty ride in the hot sun.

"No news of the truant?" asked Gaston.  "Who but you would have thought
of going after him?  Well did I know you would never prosper without me
at your elbow."

Eustace smiled, but he was too much heated and vexed to give a very
cheerful assent.  He had only time to load Ferragus with his armour,
and mount a small pony, before the signal for the march was given, and
all set forth.  Early in the year as it was, the sun already possessed
great force, and the dry rocky soil of Castile reflected his beams, so
that, long before noon, it seemed to Eustace almost as if their march
lay through an oven.  Nor were his perplexities by any means at an end;
the thirst, occasioned by the heat, was excessive, and at every venta,
in the villages through which they passed, the men called loudly for
liquor; but the hot, fiery Spanish wine was, as Eustace had already
been cautioned by Father Waleran, only fit to increase the evil, by
inflaming their blood.  It was the Holy Week, which was to him a
sufficient reason for refraining entirely, contenting himself with a
drink of water, when it could be procured, which, however, was but
rarely.  He would willingly have persuaded his men to do the same, but
remonstrance was almost without effect, and his dry lips refused to
utter a prohibition, which would have been esteemed at once cruel and
unreasonable.  In his persuasions to Gaston he was, however, more in
earnest, representing to him that he was increasing the fever of his
wound; but the Squire was perfectly impracticable.  At first, he
answered in his usual gay, careless manner, that the scratch was
nothing, and that, be what it might, he had as soon die of a wound as
of thirst; but as the day wore on, it seemed as if the whole nature of
the man were becoming changed. Sometimes he was boisterously loud in
his merriment, sometimes sullen and silent; and when Eustace,
unwearied, reiterated his arguments, he replied to him, not only with
complete want of the deference he was usually so scrupulous in paying
to his dignity, but with rude and scurril taunts and jests on his
youth, his clerkly education, and his inexperience.  Eustace's patience
would scarcely have held out, but that he perceived that d'Aubricour
was by no means master of himself, and he saw in his flushed brow, and
blood-shot eye, reason to fear for the future effect of the present
excess.  There was suppressed laughter among the men at some of his
sallies.  Without being positively in disorder, the troop did not
display the well-arrayed aspect which had always hitherto distinguished
the Lances of Lynwood; and poor Eustace, wearied and worn out, his
right-hand man failing him, dispirited by Chandos's reproach, and
feeling all the cares of the world on his shoulders, had serious
thoughts of going to the Prince, and resigning the command for which he
was unfit.

At last he beheld the Cathedral of Burgos rising in the midst of the
Moorish fortifications of the town, and, halting his men under the
shade of a few trees, he rode on in search of the marshals of the camp,
and as soon as the open space for his tents had been assigned, he
returned to see them raised.  Gaston, who had of late become more
silent, was lifted from his mule, and assisted into the tent, where he
was laid on his couch, and soon after, Eustace was relieved from his
anxiety on Leonard Ashton's account, by his appearance.  He came
stumbling in without one word of apology, only declaring himself as
weary as a dog, and, throwing himself down on a deer-skin on his own
side of the tent, was fast asleep in another minute.




CHAPTER VI


Leonard Ashton was awakened the next morning by the light of the rising
sun streaming in where the curtain of the tent had been raised to admit
the fresh dewy morning air.  The sunbeams fell on the hair and face of
Eustace as he leant over Gaston, who lay stretched on the couch, and
faintly spoke: "I tell you it is more. Such fever as this would not be
caused by this trifling cut.  There is sickness abroad in the camp, and
why should it not be my turn as well as another man's.  Take care of
yourself, Sir Eustace."

No sooner did Leonard understand the sense of these words, than he
sprang up, rushed out of the tent, and never rested till he thought
himself at a safe distance, when he shouted to Eustace to come to him.

"Has he got this fever on him?" exclaimed he, as Eustace approached.

"He is very ill at ease," replied Eustace, "but to my mind it is caused
by yesterday's fatigue and heat, added to the wine which he would
drink."

"It is the fever, I say," replied Ashton; "I am sure it is.  Come away,
Eustace, or we shall all be infected."

"I cannot leave him," said Eustace.

"What?  You do not mean to peril yourself by going near him?" said
Ashton.

"I think not that there is peril in so doing," answered Eustace; "and
even if there were, I could not leave him in sickness, after all his
kindness to me and patience with my inexperience."

"He is no brother nor cousin to us," said Leonard.  "I see not why we
should endanger our lives for a stranger.  I will not, for my own part;
and, as your old friend and comrade, I would entreat you not."

These were kinder words than Eustace had heard from Ashton since the
beginning of his jealousy, and he answered, as he thought they were
meant, in a friendly tone, "Thanks, Leonard, but I cannot look on
Gaston d'Aubricour as a stranger; and had I fewer causes for attachment
to him, I could not leave my post."

"Only you do not expect me to do the same," said Leonard; "my father
sent me here to gain honour and wealth, not to be poisoned with the
breath of a man in a fever."

"Assuredly not," said Eustace.  "I will arrange matters so that you
shall no longer sleep in our tent.  But let me ask of you, Leonard,
what was the meaning of your conduct of yesterday?"

"You may ask yourself," said Leonard, sullenly; "it is plain enough,
methinks."

"Have a care, Leonard.  Remember that my brother's authority is given
to me."

"Much good may it do you," said Leonard; "but that is nothing to me. I
am no vassal of yours, to come at your call.  I have my own friends,
and am not going to stay in this infected part of the camp with men who
keep a fever among them.  Give me but my sword and mantle from the
tent, and I will trouble you no more."

"Wait, Leonard, I will take all measures for your safety; but remember
that I am answerable to the Prince for my brother's followers."

"Answer for your own serfs," retorted Leonard, who had nearly succeeded
in working himself into a passion.  "My father might be willing to
grace Sir Reginald by letting me follow him, but by his death I am my
own man, and not to move at your beck and call, because the Prince laid
his sword on your shoulder.  Knave Jasper," he called to one of the
men-at-arms, "bring my sword and cloak from the tent; I enter it no
more."

"I know not how far you may be bound to me," said Eustace, "and must
inquire from some elder Knight, but I fear that your breaking from me
may be attended with evil effects to your name and fame."

Leonard had put on his dogged expression, and would not listen. He had
already set his mind on joining _le Borgne Basque_, and leaving the
service which his own envious service rendered galling; and the panic
excited in his mind by Gaston's illness determined him to depart
without loss of time, or listening to the representations which he
could not answer.  He turned his back on Eustace, and busied himself
with the fastenings of his sword, which had by this time been brought
to him.  Even yet Eustace was not rebuffed.  "One more hint, Leonard.
From what I am told, there is more peril to thy health in revelry than
in the neighbourhood of poor Gaston.  If you will quit one who wishes
you well, take heed to your ways."

Still the discourteous Squire made no reply, and walked off in all the
dignity of ill-humour.  The young Knight, who really had a warm feeling
of affection for him, stood looking after him with a sigh, and then
returned to his patient, whom he found in an uneasy sleep. After a few
moments' consideration, he summoned old Guy to take the part of nurse,
and walked to the tent of Sir Richard Ferrars, to ask his counsel.

The old Knight, who was standing at the door of his tent, examining
into some hurt which his steed had received the day before, kindly and
cordially greeted Eustace on his approach.  "I am glad you are not
above taking advice," he said, "as many a youth might be after such
fresh honours."

"I feel but too glad to find some one who will bestow advice on me,"
said Eustace; and he proceeded to explain his difficulties with regard
to Leonard Ashton.

"Let him go! and a good riddance," said Sir Richard; "half your cares
go with him."

"Yet I am unwilling not to attempt to hinder my old comrade from
running to ruin."

"You have quite enough on your own hands already," said the old Knight;
"he would do far more harm in your troop than out of it, and try your
patience every hour."

"He is my old playfellow," said Eustace, still dissatisfied.

"More shame for him," said Sir Richard; "waste not another thought on
so cross-grained a slip, who, as I have already feared, might prove a
stumbling-block to you, so young in command as you are.  Let him get
sick of his chosen associates, and no better hap can befall him.  And
for yourself, what shall you do with this sick Squire?"

"What can I do, save to give the best attendance I may?"

"Nay, I am not the man to gainsay it.  'Tis no more than you ought. And
yet--"  He surveyed the young Knight's slender form and slightly
moulded limbs, his cheeks pale with watching and the oppressive heat of
the night, and the heavy appearance of the eyelids that shaded his dark
blue thoughtful eyes.  "Is your health good, young man?"

"As good as that of other men," said Eustace.

"Men!" said Sir Richard; "boys, you mean!  But be a man, since you
will, only take as good care of yourself as consists with duty.  I had
rather have you safe than a dozen of these black-visaged Gascons."

Eustace further waited to mention to Sir Richard his untoward encounter
with Sir John Chandos, and to beg him to explain it to the old Baron.

"I will," said Sir Richard; "and don't take old Chandos's uncourtliness
too much to heart, young Eustace.  He means you no ill.  Do your duty,
and he will own it in time."

Eustace thanked the old Knight, and with spirits somewhat cheered,
returned to his tent, there to devote himself to the service of his
sick Squire.  The report that the fever was in his tent made most
persons willing to avoid him, and he met little interruption in his
cares.  Of Leonard, all that he heard was from a man-at-arms, who made
his appearance in his tent to demand Master Ashton's arms, horse, and
other property, he having entered the service of Sir William Felton;
and Eustace was too much engaged with his own cares to make further
inquiry after him.

For a day or two Gaston d'Aubricour's fever ran very high, and just
when its violence was beginning to diminish, a fresh access was
occasioned by the journey from Burgos to Valladolid, whither he was
carried in a litter, when the army, by Pedro's desire, marched thither
to await his promised subsidy.  The unwholesome climate was of most
pernicious effect to the whole of the English army, and in especial to
the Black Prince, who there laid the foundation of the disorder which
destroyed his health.  Week after week passed on, each adding heat to
the summer, and increasing the long roll of sick and dying in the camp,
while Gaston still lay, languid and feeble by day, and fevered by
night; there were other patients among the men-at-arms, requiring
scarcely less care; and the young Knight himself, though, owing to his
temperate habits, he had escaped the prevailing sickness, was looking
thin and careworn with the numerous troubles and anxieties that were
pressing on him.

Still he had actually lost not one of his men, and after the first week
or two, began to have more confidence in himself, and to feel his place
as their commander more than he would have done had Gaston been able to
