all the lunatics on earth?"

"Quite useless, I fear.  Good-night."

Ammiani charged one of the men at an outer barricade to follow the white
umbrella and pass it on.

He returned to the Countess d'Isorella, who was awaiting him, and alone.

This glorious head had aroused his first boyish passion.  Scandal was
busy concerning the two, when Violetta d'Asola, the youthfullest widow in
Lombardy and the loveliest woman, gave her hand to Count d'Isorella, who
took it without question of the boy Ammiani.  Carlo's mother assisted in
that arrangement; a maternal plot, for which he could thank her only
after he had seen Vittoria, and then had heard the buzz of whispers at
Violetta's name.  Countess d'Isorella proved her friendship to have
survived the old passion, by travelling expressly from Turin to obtain
leave to visit him in prison.  It was a marvellous face to look upon
between prison walls.  Rescued while the soldiers were marching him to
the citadel that day, he was called by pure duty to pay his respects to
the countess as soon as he had heard from his mother that she was in the
city.  Nor was his mother sorry that he should go.  She had patiently
submitted to the fact of his betrothal to Vittoria, which was his
safeguard in similar perils; and she rather hoped for Violetta to wean
him from his extreme republicanism.  By arguments?  By influence,
perhaps.  Carlo's republicanism was preternatural in her sight, and she
presumed that Violetta would talk to him discreetly and persuasively of
the noble designs of the king.

Violetta d'Isorella received him with a gracious lifting of her fingers
to his lips; congratulating him on his escape, and on the good fortune of
the day.  She laughed at the Lenkensteins and the singular Englishman;
sat down to a little supper-tray, and pouted humorously as she asked him
to feed on confects and wine; the huge appetites of the insurgents had
devoured all her meat and bread.

"Why are you here?"  he said.

She did well in replying boldly, "For the king."

"Would you tell another that it is for the king?"

"Would I speak to another as I speak to you?"

Ammiani inclined his head.

They spoke of the prospects of the insurrection, of the expected outbreak
in Venice, the eruption of Paris and Vienna, and the new life of Italy;
touching on Carlo Alberto to explode the truce in a laughing dissension.
At last she said seriously, "I am a born Venetian, you know; I am not
Piedmontese.  Let me be sure that the king betrays the country, and I
will prefer many heads to one.  Excuse me if I am more womanly just at
present.  The king has sent his accredited messenger Tartini to the
Provisional Government, requesting it to accept his authority.  Why not?
why not?  on both sides.  Count Medole gives his adhesion to the king,
but you have a Council of War that rejects the king's overtures--a revolt
within a revolt.

"It is deplorable.  You must have an army.  The Piedmontese once over the
Ticino, how can you act in opposition to it?  You must learn to take a
master.  The king is only, or he appears, tricksy because you compel him
to wind and counterplot.  I swear to you, Italy is his foremost thought.
The Star of Italy sits on the Cross of Savoy."

Ammiani kept his eyelids modestly down.  "Ten thousand to plead for him,
such as you!" he said.  "But there is only one!"

"If you had been headstrong once upon a time, and I had been weak, you
see, my Carlo, you would have been a domestic tyrant, I a rebel.  You
will not admit the existence of a virtue in an opposite opinion.  Wise
was your mother when she said 'No' to a wilful boy!"

Violetta lit her cigarette and puffed the smoke lightly.

"I told you in that horrid dungeon, my Carlo Amaranto--I call you by the
old name--the old name is sweet!--I told you that your Vittoria is
enamoured of the king.  She blushes like a battle-flag for the king.
I have heard her 'Viva il Re!' It was musical."

"So I should have thought."

"Ay, but my amaranto-innamorato, does it not foretell strife?  Would you
ever--ever take a heart with a king's head stamped on it into your arms?"

"Give me the chance!"

He was guilty of this ardent piece of innocence though Violetta had
pitched her voice in the key significant of a secret thing belonging to
two memories that had not always flowed dividedly.

"Like a common coin?" she resumed.

"A heart with a king's head stamped on it like a common coin."

He recollected the sentence.  He had once, during the heat of his grief
for Giacomo Piaveni, cast it in her teeth.

Violetta repeated it, as to herself, tonelessly; a method of making an
old unkindness strike back on its author with effect.

"Did we part good friends?  I forget," she broke the silence.

"We meet, and we will be the best of friends," said Ammiani.

"Tell your mother I am not three years older than her son,--I am thirty.
Who will make me young again?  Tell her, my Carlo, that the genius for
intrigue, of which she accuses me, develops at a surprising rate.  As
regards my beauty," the countess put a tooth of pearl on her soft under
lip.

Ammiani assured her that he would find words of his own for her beauty.

"I hear the eulogy, I know the sonnet," said Violetta, smiling, and
described the points of a brunette: the thick black banded hair, the full
brown eyes, the plastic brows couching over them;--it was Vittoria's
face: Violetta was a flower of colour, fair, with but one shade of dark
tinting on her brown eye-brows and eye-lashes, as you may see a strip of
night-cloud cross the forehead of morning.  She was yellow-haired, almost
purple-eyed, so rich was the blue of the pupils.  Vittoria could be
sallow in despondency; but this Violetta never failed in plumpness and
freshness.  The pencil which had given her aspect the one touch of
discord, endowed it with a subtle harmony, like mystery; and Ammiani
remembered his having stood once on the Lido of Venice, and eyed the dawn
across the Adriatic, and dreamed that Violetta was born of the loveliness
and held in her bosom the hopes of morning.  He dreamed of it now,
feeling the smooth roll of a torrent.

A cry of "Arms!" rang down the length of the Corso.

He started to his feet thankfully.

"Take me to your mother," she said.  "I loathe to hear firing and be
alone."

Ammiani threw up the window.  There was a stir of lamps and torches
below, and the low sky hung red.  Violetta stood quickly thick-shod and
hooded.

"Your mother will admit my companionship, Carlo?"

"She desires to thank you."

"She has no longer any fear of me?"

"You will find her of one mind with you."

"Concerning the king!"

"I would say, on most subjects."

"But that you do not know my mind!  You are modest.  Confess that you are
thinking the hour you have passed with me has been wasted."

"I am, now I hear the call to arms."

"If I had all the while entertained you with talk of your Vittoria!  It
would not have been wasted then, my amaranto.  It is not wasted for me.
If a shot should strike you--"

"Tell her I died loving her with all my soul!"  cried Ammiani.

Violetta's frame quivered as if he had smitten her.

They left the house.  Countess Ammiani's door was the length of a
barricade distant: it swung open to them, like all the other house-doors
which were, or wished to be esteemed, true to the cause, and hospitable
toward patriots.

"Remember, when you need a refuge, my villa is on Lago Maggiore,"
Violetta said, and kissed her finger-tips to him.

An hour after, by the light of this unlucky little speech, he thought of
her as a shameless coquette.  "When I need a refuge?  Is not Milan in
arms?--Italy alive?  She considers it all a passing epidemic; or,
perhaps, she is to plead for me to the king!"

That set him thinking moodily over the things she had uttered of
Vittoria's strange and sudden devotion to the king.

Rainy dawn and the tongues of the churches ushered in the last day of
street fighting.  Ammiani found Romara and Colonel Corte at the head of
strong bodies of volunteers, well-armed, ready to march for the Porta
'rosa.  All three went straight to the house where the Provisional
Government sat, and sword in hand denounced Count Medole as a traitor who
sold his country to the king.  Corte dragged him to the window to hear
the shouts for the Republic.  Medole wrote their names down one by one,
and said, "Shall I leave the date vacant?"  They put themselves at the
head of their men, and marched in the ringing of the bells.  The bells
were their sacro-military music.  Barto Rizzo was off to make a spring at
the Porta Ticinese.  Students, peasants, noble youths of the best blood,
old men and young women, stood ranged in the drenching rain, eager to
face death for freedom.  At mid-day the bells were answered by cannon and
the blunt snap of musketry volleys; dull, savage responses, as of a
wounded great beast giving short howls and snarls by the interminable
over-roaring of a cataract.  Messengers from the gates came running to
the quiet centre of the city, where cool men discoursed and plotted.
Great news, big lies, were shouted:--Carlo Alberto thundered in the
plains; the Austrians were everywhere retiring; the Marshal was a
prisoner; the flag of surrender was on the citadel!  These things were
for the ears of thirsty women, diplomatists, and cripples.

Countess Ammiani and Countess d'Isorella sat together throughout the
agitation of the day.

The life prayed for by one seemed a wisp of straw flung on this humming
furnace.

Countess Ammiani was too well used to defeat to believe readily in
victory, and had shrouded her head in resignation too long to hope for
what she craved.  Her hands were joined softly in her lap.  Her visage
had the same unmoved expression when she conversed with Violetta as when
she listened to the ravings of the Corso.

Darkness came, and the bells ceased not rolling by her open windows: the
clouds were like mists of conflagration.

She would not have the windows closed.  The noise of the city had become
familiar and akin to the image of her boy.  She sat there cloaked.

Her heart went like a time-piece to the two interrogations to heaven:
"Alive?--or dead?"

The voice of Luciano Romara was that of an angel's answering.  He entered
the room neat and trim as a cavalier dressed for social evening duty,
saying with his fine tact, "We are all well;" and after talking like a
gazette of the Porta Tosa taken by the volunteers, Barto Rizzo's
occupation of the gate opening on the Ticino, and the bursting of the
Porta Camosina by the freebands of the plains, he handed a letter to
Countess Ammiani.

"Carlo is on the march to Bergamo and Brescia, with Corte, Sana, and
about fifty of our men," he said.

"And is wounded--where?"  asked Violetta.

"Slightly in the hand--you see, he can march," Romara said, laughing at
her promptness to suspect a subterfuge, until he thought, "Now, what does
this mean, madam?"

A lamp was brought to Countess Ammiani.  She read:

     "MY MOTHER!

     "Cotton-wool on the left fore-finger.  They deigned to give me no
     other memorial of my first fight.  I am not worthy of papa's two
     bullets.  I march with Corte and Sana to Brescia.  We keep the
     passes of the Tyrol.  Luciano heads five hundred up to the hills
     to-morrow or next day.  He must have all our money.  Then go from
     door to door and beg subscriptions.  Yes, my Chief!  it is to be
     like God, and deserving of his gifts to lay down all pride, all
     wealth.  This night send to my betrothed in Turin.  She must be with
     no one but my mother.  It is my command.  Tell her so.  I hold
     imperatively to it.

     "I breathe the best air of life.  Luciano is a fine leader in
     action, calm as in a ball-room.  What did I feel?  I will talk of it
     with you by-and-by;--my father whispered in my ears; I felt him at
     my right hand.  He said, 'I died for this day.'  I feel now that I
     must have seen him.  This is imagination.  We may say that anything
     is imagination.  I certainly heard his voice.  Be of good heart, my
     mother, for I can swear that the General wakes up when I strike
     Austrian steel.  He loved Brescia; so I go there.  God preserve my
     mother!  The eyes of heaven are wide enough to see us both.
     Vittoria by your side, remember!  It is my will.

                                             "CARLO."

Countess Ammiani closed her eyes over the letter, as in a dead sleep.
"He is more his father than himself, and so suddenly!" she said.  She was
tearless.  Violetta helped her to her bed-room under the pretext of a
desire to hear the contents of the letter.
