"We will see if the other streets are similarly guarded."

This was found to be so, sentries being placed in every street running
down to the wall in this quarter.

"So far so good, Paolo. I do not think that matters could have been
better for us. The next thing is to buy a tool with which we can wrench
open a door or the shutter of a window; but a door will be best, because
we could not work at a shutter without running the risk of being seen by
a sentinel, while in a doorway we should be screened from observation.
These houses in the Strada Vecchia are old, and the doors ought not to
give us much trouble."

"Some of these old locks are very strong, master. I should think that
it would be easier to cut out one of the panels than to force the door
open."

"Possibly it would, but it is not an easy thing to get the saw to work.
We should have to bore a hole large enough for the saw to go through
before we could use it. However, we will buy both a saw and a crowbar;
as they are both things that are useful to woodcutters, your buying them
will not appear suspicious, nor will the purchase of an auger, but we
had better get them at different shops."

Leaving that part of the town they re-entered the streets where business
was being carried on as usual.

"We won't buy the things until late in the afternoon, Paolo. There would
be no advantage in dragging them about all day."

They sauntered about the streets for some hours, then Paolo went into a
small baker's and bought two loaves of coarse bread. At another shop he
purchased some cheese, and with these they sat down on a stone bench in
the principal square and leisurely ate their food and looked on at the
crowd, which consisted principally of soldiers, Spanish veterans, stiff
in carriage and haughty in manner, together with others, horse and
foot, belonging to the contingent of the Duke of Milan, an ally of the
Spanish. Among these were townspeople, the younger ones chatting with
each other or with ladies of their acquaintance; the middle aged and
older men talking gravely together as they walked up and down.

Among these there was an air of gloom and depression. The state of panic
in which the troops of Prince Thomas, who had marched out confident
that they were about to annihilate the French, had returned, and the
knowledge that the Marquis of Leganez had also failed, had created a
feeling of the deepest disquiet among that portion of the population who
had taken a leading part in throwing off the authority of the duchess
and in acknowledging that of Prince Thomas. They had regarded her cause
as lost, but the vigorous steps that France was taking to assist her had
caused uneasiness; and if, while as yet a comparatively small force had
arrived, these had shown so bold a front, had captured Chieri in the
face of a powerful army, had revictualled Casale, had defeated Prince
Thomas and forced their way past the array of Leganez, it might well be
that in the spring, when reinforcements reached them, they might even
defeat the Spaniards and lay siege to Turin itself. The boys remained
where they were until it began to grow dusk, when, after buying at
three shops a saw, a crowbar, and an auger, they went and sat down on a
doorway in a quiet street until eight o'clock. Then they took their way
to the Strada Vecchia. It was entirely deserted. Lights showed in one
or two of the windows, but, except that they could hear the tread of the
nearest sentry, all was silent. Taking off their wooden shoes they moved
cautiously along, keeping close to the houses. The fourth they came to
had an unusually deep doorway, and they decided at once that this would
suit their purpose. First they tried with the crowbar, but the lock held
firmly.

"We will try another way, Paolo. If the door yields, it will go with a
crash, and the sentry might come down to see what had caused the noise.
We had better take out this lower panel; we shall want four holes bored
touching each other to make one large enough for the saw to enter."

The wood was of oak, and it took Paolo fully five minutes to make the
holes.

"Now give me the auger," Hector said when it was found that the hole was
large enough for the saw to pass through.

"I will begin at the bottom of the panel while you saw away at the top."

Paolo had done his share by the time the holes along the bottom were
ready for the saw.

"Now you take the auger again," Hector said. "We have not done half our
work yet. The holes must be made on each side. There is no turning the
saw."

It took them an hour and a half of hard work before the last cut was
completed and the panel fell forward.

"You go in first, Paolo. I will follow you, and will wedge the panel
into its place again with some of the chips that the auger has cut out.
No one has passed since we began, and if anyone did come along before
morning he would not be likely to notice that the panel was gone. Still
it is as well to avoid all risk."

As soon as the panel was replaced they mounted the stairs. Before
beginning they had seen that there were no lights in any of the windows,
and feeling sure that the house was deserted they groped their way
upstairs without hesitation until they reached the attics in the sloping
roof. They entered one of these facing the street, opened the casement,
in which oiled paper took the place of glass, and stepped down on to
the parapet. Their course was now easy. The divisions between the houses
were marked by walls some six feet high extending from the edge of the
parapet over the roof. They were able to climb these, however, without
having to use their cord, one helping the other up and then being
assisted by him. They had left the cooking pan and their tools, with
the exception of the crowbar, behind them, and had fastened their wooden
shoes round their necks. The sun during the day had melted the snow that
had fallen in the morning, but light flakes were again beginning to come
down fast.

"I don't care how hard it snows as long as it keeps on," Hector said in
a low voice in answer to an exclamation from Paolo when the first flake
fell upon his face. "The harder the better, for in that case no sentry
could see us half a dozen paces away. There is another advantage. The
wind is from the north, and we have only to keep the driving snow on our
right cheeks to make our way straight to the fortress, whereas with an
overcast sky on such a dark night as this we should very soon lose all
idea of the direction that we were going in."

Being obliged to use great caution to avoid noise while getting over the
walls, it took them half an hour to reach the end of the street. They
had, while waiting before commencing their operations, twisted one of
their sashes, and then wound it round the hook so thickly that this
would fall almost noiselessly upon the ground. The snow prevented them
from seeing six feet below them, but they felt sure that there must be
a narrow lane between the house and the wall. They had during the day
bought a length, equal to that of their rope, of strong string.

"I have got it as you ordered it, master," Paolo said as they came out
of the shop, "but it would never bear our weight."

"I think it might do in case of necessity," Hector said. "In fact, I am
sure it would. It does not require a great thickness of new cord to hold
a man's weight; but I don't want it for that."

Paolo walked silently along for some time, and then said: "If it is not
wanted to carry our weight, master, I cannot think what it is wanted
for."

"It is wanted to get the hook down with. You see when we get down into
the street there would be little chance of getting the hook off its
hold. We shall most likely want it again, and certainly we shall want
the rope. I have been puzzling over it, and I think I have found a way
at last. My idea is to fasten this thin rope to the point of the hook,
then, on pulling upon it the point will rise until it gets level with
the top of the wall on which it is fixed, and we can then shake it down
without difficulty. I don't know whether it will act, but I think that
it ought to do so; an upward pull at the point must, I should think,
lift it as far as the edge."


"I should think that it must," Paolo agreed. "I should never have
thought of that."

"We will try it on this last division wall. I have no doubt about it
myself, because even if it did not pull it quite to the top the thing
would be so canted over that I think it would fall from its own weight."

They now attached the string to the point, fixed the hook to the top
of the wall, and then pulled upon the string. The hook at once fell to
their feet.

"That is capital," Hector said. "Now we can go to work. We need carry
this crowbar no farther. In the first place we will cross this roof and
other roofs as far as we can go; the sentry at the corner is probably
standing up for shelter in a doorway, and we may as well get as far as
we can from him, and at the same time not go far enough to get near the
one at the next corner."

After one or two attempts the hook became fixed on the ridge of the
roof, and they at once climbed up, unfastened the hook, and slid down on
the now snow covered tiles. Two more roofs were crossed in the same
way, and then they prepared to descend. They had, when they put on their
disguises, tied knots in the rope at a distance of a foot apart. They
now adjusted the hook on the parapet.

"Shall I go first, master, or will you?"

"I will go first, though in fact it matters little which of us does it;
but first I must warm my fingers. I don't think that I could trust to
them at present."

He gathered a handful of snow, made it into a ball, and held it in his
hands until the cold pained him, then he dropped the snow and thrust his
hands up the sleeves of his doublet. Paolo looked on in astonishment,
but having great faith in his master imitated his example.

"That is a curious way of warming the hands," he said.

"I daresay you have made snowballs in your time, Paolo, and if you have
you will remember that, although it made your hands bitterly cold at
first, after you had done they soon became almost as hot as fire."

"I do remember that, master, but I should never have thought of it as a
way of warming our hands."

For a minute or two there was a sharp pain as the blood began to rush
into the fingers, and when this passed off their hands were in a glow.
Hector took the rope, lowered himself over the parapet, and then began
to descend. When halfway down the darkness became more intense than
before, and he knew that he was now below the level of the outer wall.
When he reached the ground he shook the rope as a signal, and then,
stretching his arms before him, crossed the lane. It was but a step, for
the house stood but five feet back from the wall. He waited until Paolo
joined him, then he drew on the thin rope and, to his satisfaction, he
felt it yield.

"Stand aside," he said, "it is heavy enough to give one a nasty thump."

Paolo withdrew a few paces, then Hector gave another pull. The rope gave
way at once. He flattened himself against the house, and the hook fell
with a dull thud a foot or two away.

"Coil up the rope, Paolo, and then feel along the wall to the right;
don't go too far. I will go to the left, there may be some steps up to
the rampart."

This proved to be the case, and together they made their way up quietly,
but even had they had their shoes on, the snow was already sufficiently
deep to deaden their footsteps. On reaching the top they stood silent
for a minute or two. Presently they heard the sound of heavy stamping of
feet. They turned at once to descend, if necessary, the steps they
had mounted, then Hector put his hand upon the other's shoulder and
whispered, "It is the sentry trying to warm his feet; no doubt he is
standing up somewhere to shelter himself from the snow; let us go on at
once."

They crossed the rampart, fastened the hook on the top of the wall, and
descended, and were again successful in bringing the rope down after
them.

"Go carefully, Paolo; no doubt there is a moat somewhere here." There
was, however, no necessity for caution, for the white surface of the
snow was soon broken by a black line.

"It will be awfully cold," Paolo said, with teeth that chattered at the
prospect.

"Of course you can swim, Paolo?"

"Not very well, master."

"Then I will go first. You fasten the rope under your arms, and I will
haul you across. Be sure you do not make a noise in getting into the
water. But first of all take off your doublet, I will carry it and mine
across on my head. It cannot be many yards across. The wind will soon
dry the rest of our things, and once our work is done we can warm
ourselves by running. I would say strip altogether, but we may have to
do another swim; for, as we agreed, there is no chance of our being able
to return by the way we came."

Fastening the two doublets on his head, Hector lowered himself into the
water, which was three feet below the level on which they stood. He
had fastened the rope across his shoulder. As he expected, he found the
water out of his depth, and at once struck out to the opposite side. It
was about forty feet across. He found, on reaching the other side, that
the wall was there nearly five feet above the water. He undid the rope
and threw up the hook. At the second attempt it caught, and he climbed
the side, and then in a low voice told Paolo to start. Presently he
heard a slight splash, followed by a gasp. He hauled away rapidly on the
rope, and in a couple of minutes Paolo stood beside him, shivering and
gasping.

"Put your doublet on. Now let us go forward as fast as we can." They
climbed the steep slope to the top of the glacis, and then ran down
until they were brought to a standstill by another moat.

"This is the one marked in the plan as dividing the fortifications of
the town from those of the citadel. Now we have another swim before
us. It is wider than the last, but is really no distance. Give me your
doublet again."

"I don't mind this so much," Paolo said. "I cannot be colder than I am."

"Don't try to swim, Paolo; lie on your back, with your mouth just out of
water. I will have you over in no time."

It was fully fifty yards across; but, accustomed to bathe in almost icy
cold water, the swim was nothing to Hector, who was soon across, and
who then towed Paolo over as before. They mounted another glacis, and
presently reached the edge of a third moat.

"We need go no farther. I know that this moat is but some fifteen yards
from the foot of the fortifications. Now, get the arrows out. Cut off
a foot or two of the thin cord, and unravel it. I must warm my fingers
again first, I cannot use them at all."

"Mine are pretty cold, too." And both lads warmed them as before. Paolo
then set to work to string the bow, which required all his strength to
accomplish. While he was doing so, Hector drew from his pouch the six
little pellets, and taking the arrows, straightened out each pellet,
wrapped it round an arrow, and secured it firmly with a small strand
from the string. When he had done this, he took the bow from Paolo,
fitted an arrow to the string, drew it with his full strength, and then,
pointing the arrow high, loosed it. The six arrows were sent off. Just
as the last was discharged there was a shout of "Who is there? Speak,
or I fire!" It was a sentry on the wall, who had caught the sound of the
twang of the bow.

"I am a friend, a messenger from the French general," Hector replied.
"I have just shot six arrows into the fortress; a message is attached to
each for the governor. Report to the officer, and have a search made for
them in the morning.

"That is a piece of good luck," he went on as they turned away. "I
thought of shouting, but we might have got a shot in reply, and I made
sure that one or other of the arrows would be picked up. Still, this
makes certain of it."

"I think I would rather stop out here until morning," Paolo said, "then
they will take me in. I am afraid I shall never get across the river."

"Nonsense! The water is low, and we are not likely to have to swim
farther than we did in crossing the last moat. Getting through the part
of the town between us and the river is a more serious matter. However,
it is not very far across, and they are not likely to be very vigilant."

They turned to the right, and kept along at the edge of the moat, until
Hector considered that they had made a fourth of the circuit of the
walls, and were now facing the river. They had decided before that this
would be the easiest side on which to leave the town. The sentinels
would not expect that anyone attempting to enter or leave the citadel
would try to do so here; as, in addition to passing the wall facing the
fortress and that bordering the river, they would be obliged to swim
the river itself. The snow was falling as quickly as ever, and the wind
blowing fiercely.

"There is no fear of their seeing us, unless we happen to run into the
very arms of the sentry," Hector said encouragingly; "we shall only have
the moat to swim; and as, according to the plan, it is nothing like so
wide as that we passed before, we shall have no trouble with it."

"Ah! here it is," Paolo groaned.

"Nonsense!" Hector said. "One cold bath more or less makes no difference
now. There, give me your coat again, and I will take it over."

The moat was indeed but some twelve yards across, and in two or three
minutes Paolo stood shivering on the other side.

"The edge is not far from the wall, not much more than the breadth of
the moat. Give me the cord."

A few steps and they reached the wall. After two attempts the hook
caught, and Hector climbed up. He was looking back to watch Paolo when
he was suddenly seized from behind, and a deep voice in Italian said,
"If you move I will kill you. Who are you?"

With a sudden effort Hector twisted himself round and seized the
disengaged wrist of his opponent, which he doubted not held a dagger.
The man loosened his hold of his doublet and tried to grasp his neck,
but Hector in a moment leapt forward and threw his arm round the man's
waist. They wrestled backwards and forwards, but the soldier was a
powerful man, and Hector found that he could not long retain a grasp of
his wrist. Suddenly he felt his antagonist collapse; the dagger dropped
from his hand, the other arm relaxed its hold, and he fell a lifeless
mass.

"Thank you, Paolo. You were but just in time. The fellow was too strong
for me. Now let us slip down the inside of the wall as quickly as
possible."

A minute later they both stood at the foot of the wall, the hook was
shaken off, and they proceeded along the wall until they came to a
street.

"It is not more than two or three hundred yards to the outer wall,"
Hector whispered.

Whether there were sentinels or not in the street they knew not. If so,
they had withdrawn themselves into deep doorways to avoid the blinding
snow, and the wind drowned the slight sound made by their feet on the
soft snow.

In a short time they reached the outer wall, crept along it until they
found the steps leading up, crossed it in safety, fixed their hook, and
rapidly descended. A run of fifty yards brought them to the edge of the
river bank.

"We will try to find a boat," Hector said. "There are sure to be some
along here."

They walked across the dry bed of the river till they reached the
water's edge, and then followed this. In a few minutes, to their
delight, they came upon a boat. The bow was hauled a few feet out of
water, and a rope, doubtless attached to a heavy stone anchor, stretched
from its bows. This they cut, put their shoulders to the gunwale,
and soon had her afloat. Then they scrambled in, put the oars out
cautiously, and began to row. Both had had some practice at the
exercise, and it was not long before the boat grounded on the opposite
shore.

"Pull it up a bit," Hector said. "No doubt it belongs to some poor
fisherman to whom its loss would be serious. Now we must keep along the
bank for some distance, until quite sure that we are well beyond any
patrols the enemy may have on the road. Let us get into a run, Paolo,
and see if we can't get our blood in motion again, for I own that I feel
half frozen."

They set off at a brisk trot, which they kept up for half an hour, and
then they struck off from the river and soon found the road. Following
this, after an hour's walking they came upon a little shed by the
roadside, and in one corner found a pile of old sacks.

"We are in luck again!" Hector exclaimed joyfully. "Tired as I am, I
don't think that I could have slept in these wet clothes, if one can
call them wet--at present they are frozen stiff. These sacks are the
very thing. We can strip now and wring out our clothes thoroughly. There
are enough sacks here to lay under us and cover us too. After wringing
out the shirts we will put them in under the sacks next to us. The heat
of our bodies will dry them to some extent, and they will be warm to
put on in the morning. The other things we can pile over us. There is no
chance of their getting dry; but I am so pleased with our success that I
am not disposed to grumble at trifles."



CHAPTER V: THE RELIEF OF THE CITADEL


As soon as the first gleam of daylight showed itself Hector and his
companion were on their feet again.

The operation of dressing was by no means a comfortable one, for the
frost had set in in earnest during the night, and their clothes, with
the exception of the shirts, were as stiff as boards. The snow had
ceased and the sky was clear.

"It is going to be a fine day, master," Paolo said as they left the hut.

"That is better than battling with a snowstorm such as that of yesterday
evening. Come on, Paolo, let us trot for a bit. The snow is four inches
deep, and we shall soon get warm running through it."

In a quarter of an hour they broke into a walk again, panting from their
exertions.
