     [It was most probably usual for each guest to have his own little
     table; but we read even in Homer of large tables on which the meals
     were served up.  In the time of Homer people sat at table, but the
     recumbent position became universal in later times.]

Rich nosegays adorned this table, and on it were placed large joints of
roast meat, glasses and dishes of various shapes filled with dates, figs,
pomegranates, melons and grapes, little silver beehives containing honey,
and plates of embossed copper, on which lay delicate cheese from the
island of Trinakria.  In the midst was a silver table-ornament, something
similar to an altar, from which arose fragrant clouds of incense.

At the extreme end of the table stood the glittering silver cup in which
the wine was to be mixed.

     [The Greeks were not accustomed to drink unmingled wine.  Zaleukus
     forbade to all citizens the pure juice of the grape under penalty of
     death, and Solon under very severe penalties, unless required as
     medicine.  The usual mixture was composed of three-fifths water to
     two-fifths wine.]

This was of beautiful AEginetan workmanship, its crooked handles
representing two giants, who appeared ready to sink under the weight of
the bowl which they sustained.

Like the altar, it was enwreathed with flowers, and a garland of roses or
myrtle had been twined around the goblet of each guest.

The entire floor was strewed with rose-leaves, and the room lighted by
many lamps which were hung against the smooth, white, stucco walls.

No sooner were the guests reclining on their cushions, than the fair-
haired boys reappeared, wound garlands of ivy and myrtle around the heads
and shoulders of the revellers, and washed their feet in silver basins.
The Sybarite, though already scented with all the perfumes of Arabia,
would not rest until he was completely enveloped in roses and myrtle, and
continued to occupy the two boys even after the carver had removed the
first joints from the table in order to cut them up; but as soon as the
first course, tunny-fish with mustard-sauce, had been served, he forgot
all subordinate matters, and became absorbed in the enjoyment of the
delicious viands.

Rhodopis, seated on a chair at the head of the table, near the wine-bowl,
not only led the conversation, but gave directions to the slaves in
waiting.

     [The women took their meals sitting.  The Greeks, like the
     Egyptians, had chairs with backs and arms.  The form of the solia or
     throne has become familiar to us from the discoveries at Pompeii and
     the representations of many gods and distinguished persons.  It had
     a high, almost straight back, and supports for the arms.]

She gazed on her cheerful guests with a kind of pride, and seemed to be
devoting her attention to each exclusively, now asking the Delphian how
he had succeeded in his mission, then the Sybarite whether he was content
with the performances of her cook, and then listening eagerly to Ibykus,
as he told how the Athenian, Phrynichus, had introduced the religious
dramas of Thespis of Ikaria into common life, and was now representing
entire histories from the past by means of choruses, recitative and
answer.

Then she turned to the Spartan, remarking, that to him alone of all her
guests, instead of an apology for the simplicity of the meal, she felt
she owed one for its luxury.  The next time he came, her slave Knakias,
who, as an escaped Helot, boasted that he could cook a delicious blood-
soup (here the Sybarite shuddered), should prepare him a true
Lacedaemonian repast.

When the guests had eaten sufficiently they again washed their hands; the
plates and dishes were removed, the floor cleansed, and wine and water
poured into the bowl.

     [The Symposium began after the real meal.  Not till that was over
     did the guests usually adorn themselves with wreaths, wash their
     hands with Smegma or Smema (a kind of soap) and begin to drink.]

At last, when Rhodopis had convinced herself that the right moment was
come, she turned to Phanes, who was engaged in a discussion with the
Milesians, and thus addressed him:

"Noble friend, we have restrained our impatience so long that it must
surely now be your duty to tell us what evil chance is threatening to
snatch you from Egypt and from our circle.  You may be able to leave us
and this country with a light heart, for the gods are wont to bless you
Ionians with that precious gift from your very birth, but we shall
remember you long and sadly.  I know of no worse loss than that of a
friend tried through years, indeed some of us have lived too long on the
Nile not to have imbibed a little of the constant, unchanging Egyptian
temperament.  You smile, and yet I feel sure that long as you have
desired to revisit your dear Hellas, you will not be able to leave us
quite without regret.  Ah, you admit this?  Well, I knew I had not been
deceived.  But now tell us why you are obliged to leave Egypt, that we
may consider whether it may not be possible to get the king's decree
reversed, and so keep you with us."

Phanes smiled bitterly, and replied: "Many thanks, Rhodopis, for these
flattering words, and for the kind intention either to grieve over my
departure, or if possible, to prevent it.  A hundred new faces will soon
help you to forget mine, for long as you have lived on the Nile, you are
still a Greek from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, and may
thank the gods that you have remained so.  I am a great friend of
constancy too, but quite as great an enemy of folly, and is there one
among you who would not call it folly to fret over what cannot be undone?
I cannot call the Egyptian constancy a virtue, it is a delusion.  The men
who treasure their dead for thousands of years, and would rather lose
their last loaf than allow a single bone belonging to one of their
ancestors to be taken from them, are not constant, they are foolish.  Can
it possibly make me happy to see my friends sad?  Certainly not!  You
must not imitate the Egyptians, who, when they lose a friend, spend
months in daily-repeated lamentations over him.  On the contrary, if you
will sometimes think of the distant, I ought to say, of the departed,
friend, (for as long as I live I shall never be permitted to tread
Egyptian ground again), let it be with smiling faces; do not cry, 'Ah!
why was Phanes forced to leave us?' but rather, 'Let us be merry, as
Phanes used to be when he made one of our circle!'  In this way you must
celebrate my departure, as Simonides enjoined when he sang:

              "If we would only be more truly wise,
               We should not waste on death our tears and sighs,
               Nor stand and mourn o'er cold and lifeless clay
               More than one day.

               For Death, alas!  we have no lack of time;
               But Life is gone, when scarcely at its prime,
               And is e'en, when not overfill'd with care
               But short and bare!"

"If we are not to weep for the dead, how much less ought we to grieve for
absent friends! the former have left us for ever, but to the latter we
say at parting, 'Farewell, until we meet again'"

Here the Sybarite, who had been gradually becoming more and more
impatient, could not keep silent any longer, and called out in the most
woe begone tone: Will you never begin your story, you malicious fellow?
I cannot drink a single drop till you leave off talking about death.  I
feel cold already, and I am always ill, if I only think of, nay, if I
only hear the subject mentioned, that this life cannot last forever."
The whole company burst into a laugh, and Phanes began to tell his story:

"You know that at Sais I always live in the new palace; but at Memphis,
as commander of the Greek body-guard which must accompany the king
everywhere, a lodging was assigned me in the left wing of the old palace.

"Since Psamtik the First, Sais has always been the royal residence, and
the other palaces have in consequence become somewhat neglected.  My
dwelling was really splendidly situated, and beautifully furnished; it
would have been first-rate, if, from the first moment of my entrance, a
fearful annoyance had not made its appearance.

"In the day-time, when I was seldom at home, my rooms were all that could
be wished, but at night it was impossible to sleep for the tremendous
noise made by thousands of rats and mice under the old floors, and
couches, and behind the hangings.

"Even in the first night an impudent mouse ran over my face.

"I was quite at a loss what to do, till an Egyptian soldier sold me two
large cats, and these, in the course of many weeks, procured me some rest
from my tormentors.

"Now, you are probably all aware that one of the charming laws of this
most eccentric nation, (whose culture and wisdom, you, my Milesian
friends, cannot sufficiently praise), declares the cat to be a sacred
animal.  Divine honors are paid to these fortunate quadrupeds as well as
to many other animals, and he who kills a cat is punished with the same
severity as the murderer of a human being."

Till now Rhodopis had been smiling, but when she perceived that Phanes'
banishment had to do with his contempt for the sacred animals, her face
became more serious.  She knew how many victims, how many human lives,
had already been sacrificed to this Egyptian superstition, and how, only
a short time before, the king Amasis himself had endeavored in vain to
rescue an unfortunate Samian, who had killed a cat, from the vengeance of
the enraged populace.

     [The cat was probably the most sacred of all the animals worshipped
     by the Egyptians. Herod tells that when a house was on fire the
     Egyptians never thought of extinguishing the fire until their cats
     were all saved, and that when a cat died, they shaved their heads in
     sign of mourning.  Whoever killed one of these animals, whether
     intentionally or by accident, suffered the penalty, of death,
     without any chance of mercy.  Diod. (I. 81.) himself witnessed the
     murder of a Roman citizen who had killed a cat, by the Egyptian
     people; and this in spite of the authorities, who in fear of the
     powerful Romans, endeavored to prevent the deed.  The bodies of the
     cats were carefully embalmed and buried, and their mummies are to be
     found in every museum.  The embalmed cat, carefully wrapped in linen
     bandages, is oftener to be met with than any other of the many
     animals thus preserved by the Egyptians.  In spite of the great care
     bestowed on cats, there can have been no lack of mice in Egypt.  In
     one nomos or province the shrew-mouse was sacred, and a satirical,
     obscene papyrus in Turin shows us a war between the cats and mice;
     the Papyrus Ebers contains poisons for mice.  We ourselves possess a
     shrew-mouse exquisitely wrought in bronze.]

"Everything was going well," continued the officer, "when we left Memphis
two years ago.

"I confided my pair of cats to the care of one of the Egyptian servants
at the palace, feeling sure that these enemies of the rats would keep my
dwelling clear for the future; indeed I began to feel a certain
veneration for my deliverers from the plague of mice.

"Last year Amasis fell ill before the court could adjourn to Memphis, and
we remained at Sais.

"At last, about six week ago, we set out for the city of the Pyramids.
I betook me to my old quarters; not the shadow of a mouse's tail was to
be seen there, but instead, they swarmed with another race of animals not
one whit dearer to me than their predecessors.  The pair of cats had,
during my two years' absence, increased twelve-fold.  I tried all in my
power to dislodge this burdensome brood of all ages and colors, but in
vain; every night my sleep was disturbed by horrible choruses of four-
footed animals, and feline war-cries and songs.

"Every year, at the period of the Bubastis festival, all superfluous cats
may be brought to the temple of the cat-headed goddess Pacht, where they
are fed and cared for, or, as I believe, when they multiply too fast,
quietly put out of the way.  These priests are knaves!

"Unfortunately the journey to the said temple" did not occur during the
time of our stay in Memphis; however, as I really could not tolerate this
army of tormentors any longer, I determined at least to get rid of two
families of healthy kittens with which their mothers had just presented
me.  My old slave Mus, from his very name a natural enemy of cats, was
told to kill the little creatures, put them into a sack, and throw them
into the Nile.

"This murder was necessary, as the mewing of the kittens would otherwise
have betrayed the contents of the sack to the palace-warders.  In the
twilight poor Muss betook himself to the Nile through the grove of
Hathor, with his perilous burden.  But alas! the Egyptian attendant who
was in the habit of feeding my cats, had noticed that two families of
kittens were missing, and had seen through our whole plan.

"My slave took his way composedly through the great avenue of Sphinxes,
and by the temple of Ptah, holding the little bag concealed under his
