peace, and I was a king before I became a father!"




CHAPTER V.

The other members of the Persian embassy had returned to Sais from their
excursion up the Nile to the pyramids.  Prexaspes alone, the ambassador
from Cambyses, had already set out for Persia, in order to inform the
king of the successful issue of his suit.

The palace of Amasis was full of life and stir.  The huge building was
filled in all parts by the followers of the embassy, nearly three hundred
in number, and by the high guests themselves, to whom every possible
attention was paid.  The courts of the palace swarmed with guards and
officials, with young priests and slaves, all in splendid festal raiment.

On this day it was the king's intention to make an especial display of
the wealth and splendor of his court, at a festival arranged in honor of
his daughter's betrothal.

The lofty reception-hall opening on to the gardens, with its ceiling sown
with thousands of golden stars and supported by gaily-painted columns,
presented a magic appearance.  Lamps of colored papyrus hung against the
walls and threw a strange light on the scene, something like that when
the sun's rays strike through colored glass.  The space between the
columns and the walls was filled with choice plants, palms, oleanders,
pomegranates, oranges and roses, behind which an invisible band of harp
and flute-players was stationed, who received the guests with strains of
monotonous, solemn music.

The floor of this hall was paved in black and white, and in the middle
stood elegant tables covered with dishes of all kinds, cold roast meats,
sweets, well-arranged baskets of fruit and cake, golden jugs of wine,
glass drinking-cups and artistic flower-vases.

A multitude of richly-dressed slaves under direction of the high-steward,
busied themselves in handing these dishes to the guests, who, either
standing around, or reclining on sumptuous seats, entertained themselves
in conversation with their friends.

Both sexes and all ages were to be found in this assembly.  As the women
entered, they received charming little nosegays from the young priests
in the personal service of the king, and many a youth of high degree
appeared in the hall with flowers, which he not only offered to her he
loved best, but held up for her to smell.

The Egyptian men, who were dressed as we have already seen them at the
reception of the Persian embassy, behaved towards the women with a
politeness that might almost be termed submissive.  Among the latter few
could pretend to remarkable beauty, though there were many bewitching
almond-shaped eyes, whose loveliness was heightened by having their lids
dyed with the eye-paint called "mestem."  The majority wore their hair
arranged in the same manner; the wealth of waving brown locks floated
back over the shoulders and was brushed behind the ears, one braid being
left on each side to hang over the temples to the breast.  A broad diadem
confined these locks, which as the maids knew, were quite as often the
wig-maker's work as Nature's.  Many ladies of the court wore above their
foreheads a lotus-flower, whose stem drooped on the hair at the back.

They carried fans of bright feathers in their delicate hands.  These were
loaded with rings; the finger-nails were stained red, according to
Egyptian custom, and gold or silver bands were worn above the elbow, and
at the wrists and ankles.

     [This custom (of staining finger-nails) is still prevalent in the
     East; the plant Shenna, Laosonia spinosa, called by Pliny XIII.
     Cyprus, being used for the purpose.  The Egyptian government has
     prohibited the dye, but it will be difficult to uproot the ancient
     custom.  The pigment for coloring the eyelids, mentioned in the
     text, is also still employed.  The Papyrus Ebers alludes to the
     Arabian kohl or antimony, which is frequently mentioned under the
     name of "mestem" on monuments belonging to the time of the
     Pharaohs.]

Their robes were beautiful and costly, and in many cases so cut as to
leave the right breast uncovered.  Bartja, the young Persian prince,
among the men, and Nitetis, the Pharaoh's daughter, among the women, were
equally conspicuous for their superior beauty, grace and charms.  The
royal maiden wore a transparent rose-colored robe, in her black hair were
fresh roses, she walked by the side of her sister, the two robed alike,
but Nitetis pale as the lotus-flower in her mother's hair.

Ladice, the queen, by birth a Greek, and daughter of Battus of Cyrene,
walked by the side of Amasis and presented the young Persians to her
children.  A light lace robe was thrown over her garment of purple,
embroidered with gold; and on her beautiful Grecian head she wore the
Urmus serpent, the ornament peculiar to Egyptian queens.

Her countenance was noble yet charming, and every movement betrayed the
grace only to be imparted by a Greek education.

Amasis, in making choice of this queen, after the death of his second
wife, (the Egyptian Tentcheta, mother of Psamtik the heir to the throne,)
had followed his prepossession in favor of the Greek nation and defied
the wrath of the priests.

The two girls at Ladice's side, Tachot and Nitetis, were called twin-
sisters, but showed no signs of that resemblance usually to be found in
twins.

Tachot was a fair, blue-eyed girl, small, and delicately built; Nitetis,
on the other hand, tall and majestic, with black hair and eyes, evinced
in every action that she was of royal blood.

"How pale thou look'st, my child!"  said Ladice, kissing Nitetis' cheek.
"Be of good courage, and meet thy future bravely.  Here is the noble
Bartja, the brother of thy future husband."

Nitetis raised her dark, thoughtful eyes and fixed them long and
enquiringly on the beautiful youth.  He bowed low before the blushing
maiden, kissed her garment, and said:

"I salute thee, as my future queen and sister!  I can believe that thy
heart is sore at parting from thy home, thy parents, brethren and
sisters; but be of good courage; thy husband is a great hero, and a
powerful king; our mother is the noblest of women, and among the Persians
the beauty and virtue of woman is as much revered as the life-giving
light of the sun.  Of thee, thou sister of the lily Nitetis, whom, by her
side I might venture to call the rose, I beg forgiveness, for robbing
thee of thy dearest friend."

As he said these words he looked eagerly into Tachot's beautiful blue
eyes; she bent low, pressing her hand upon her heart, and gazed on him
long after Amasis had drawn him away to a seat immediately opposite the
dancing-girls, who were just about to display their skill for the
entertainment of the guests.  A thin petticoat was the only clothing of
these girls, who threw and wound their flexible limbs to a measure played
on harp and tambourine.  After the dance appeared Egyptian singers and
buffoons for the further amusement of the company.

At length some of the courtiers forsook the hall, their grave demeanor
being somewhat overcome by intoxication.

     [Unfortunately women, as well as men, are to be seen depicted on the
     monuments in an intoxicated condition.  One man is being carried
     home, like a log of wood, on the heads of his servants.  Wilkinson
     II. 168.  Another is standing on his head II. 169. and several
     ladies are in the act of returning the excessive quantity which they
     have drunk.  Wilkinson II. 167.  At the great Techu-festival at
     Dendera intoxication seems to have been as much commanded as at the
     festivals of Dionysus under the Ptolemies, one of whom (Ptolemy
     Dionysus) threatened those who remained sober with the punishment of
     death.  But intoxication was in general looked upon by the Egyptians
     as a forbidden and despicable vice.  In the Papyrus Anastasi IV.,
     for instance, we read these words on a drunkard: "Thou art as a
     sanctuary without a divinity, as a house without bread," and
     further: "How careftilly should men avoid beer (hek)."  A number of
     passages in the Papyrus denounce drunkards.]

The women were carried home in gay litters by slaves with torches; and
only the highest military commanders, the Persian ambassadors and a few
officials, especial friends of Amasis, remained behind.  These were
retained by the master of the ceremonies, and conducted to a richly-
ornamented saloon, where a gigantic wine-bowl standing on a table adorned
in the Greek fashion, invited to a drinking-bout.

Amasis was seated on a high arm-chair at the head of the table; at his
left the youthful Bartja, at his right the aged Croesus.  Besides these
and the other Persians, Theodorus and Ibykus, the friends of Polykrates,
already known to us, and Aristomachus, now commander of the Greek body-
guard, were among the king's guests.

Amasis, whom we have just heard in such grave discourse with Croesus, now
indulged in jest and satire.  He seemed once more the wild officer, the
bold reveller of the olden days.

His sparkling, clever jokes, at times playful, at times scornful, flew
round among the revellers.  The guests responded in loud, perhaps often
artificial laughter, to their king's jokes, goblet after goblet was
emptied, and the rejoicings had reached their highest point, when
suddenly the master of the ceremonies appeared, bearing a small gilded
mummy; and displaying it to the gaze of the assembly, exclaimed.  "Drink,
jest, and be merry, for all too soon ye shall become like unto this!"

     [Wilkinson gives drawings of these mummies (II. 410.) hundreds of
     which were placed in the tombs, and have been preserved to us.
     Lucian was present at a banquet, when they were handed round.  The
     Greeks seem to have adopted this custom, but with their usual talent
     for beautifying all they touched, substituted a winged figure of
     death for the mummy. Maxims similar to the following one are by no
     means rare.  "Cast off all care; be mindful only of pleasure until
     the day cometh when then must depart on the journey, whose goal is
     the realm of silence!"  Copied from the tomb of Neferhotep to Abd-
     el-Qurnah.]

"Is it your custom thus to introduce death at all your banquets?"  said
Bartja, becoming serious, "or is this only a jest devised for to-day by
your master of the ceremonies?"

"Since the earliest ages," answered Amasis, "it has been our custom to
display these mummies at banquets, in order to increase the mirth of the
revellers, by reminding them that one must enjoy the time while it is
here.  Thou, young butterfly, hast still many a long and joyful year
before thee; but we, Croesus, we old men, must hold by this firmly.  Fill
the goblets, cup-bearer, let not one moment of our lives be wasted!  Thou
canst drink well, thou golden-haired Persian!  Truly the great gods have
endowed thee not only with beautiful eyes, and blooming beauty, but with
a good throat!  Let me embrace thee, thou glorious youth, thou rogue!
What thinkest thou Croesus? my daughter Tachot can speak of nothing else
than of this beardless youth, who seems to have quite turned her little
head with his sweet looks and words.  Thou needest not to blush, young
