
After a long silence Cambyses raised his eyes, fixed a withering look on
his fettered brother, and said in a dull hollow voice: "High-priest, tell
us what awaits the man who deceives his brother, dishonors and offends
his king, and darkens his own heart by black lies."

Oropastes came forward and answered: "As soon as such a one is proved
guilty, a death full of torment awaits him in this world, and an awful
sentence on the bridge Chinvat; for he has transgressed the highest
commands, and, by committing three crimes, has forfeited the mercy of our
law, which commands that his life shall be granted to the man who has
sinned but once, even though he be only a slave."

     [On the third day after death, at the rising of the bright sun, the
     souls are conducted by the Divs to the bridge Chinvat, where they
     are questioned as to their past lives and conduct.  Vendid.
     Fargard. XIX. 93.  On that spot the two supernatural powers fight
     for the soul.]

"Then Bartja has deserved death.  Lead him away, guards, and strangle
him!  Take him away!  Be silent, wretch! never will I listen to that
smooth, hypocritical tongue again, or look at those treacherous eyes.
They come from the Divs and delude every one with their wanton glances.
Off with him, guards!"

Bischen, the captain, came up to obey the order, but in the same moment
Croesus threw himself at the king's feet, touched the floor with his
forehead, raised his hands and cried: "May thy days and years bring
nought but happiness and prosperity; may Auramazda pour down all the
blessings of this life upon thee, and the Amescha cpenta be the guardians
of thy throne!

     [The Amescha cpenta, "holy immortal ones," maybe compared to the
     archangels of the Hebrews.  They surround the throne of Auramazda
     and symbolize the highest virtues.  Later we find their number fixed
     at six.]

Do not close thine ear to the words of the aged, but remember that thy
father Cyrus appointed me to be thy counsellor.  Thou art about to slay
thy brother; but I say unto thee, do not indulge anger; strive to control
it.  It is the duty of kings and of the wise, not to act without due
enquiry.  Beware of shedding a brother's blood; the smoke thereof will
rise to heaven and become a cloud that must darken the days of the
murderer, and at last cast down the lightnings of vengeance on his head.
But I know that thou desirest justice, not murder.  Act then as those who
have to pronounce a sentence, and hear both sides before deciding.  When
this has been done, if the criminal is proved guilty and confesses his
crime, the smoke of his blood will rise to heaven as a friendly shadow,
instead of a darkening cloud, and thou wilt have earned the fame of a
just judge instead of deserving the divine judgments."

Cambyses listened in silence, made a sign to Bischen to retire, and
commanded Boges to repeat his accusation.

The eunuch made an obeisance, and began: "I was ill and obliged to leave
the Egyptian and the Hanging-gardens in the care of my colleague
Kandaules, who has paid for his negligence with his life.  Finding myself
better towards evening, I went up to the hanging-gardens to see if
everything was in order there, and also to look at the rare flower which
was to blossom in the night.  The king, (Auramazda grant him victory!)
had commanded that the Egyptian should be more strictly watched than
usual, because she had dared to send the noble Bartja  .  .  ."

"Be silent," interrupted the king, "and keep to the matter in hand."

"Just as the Tistar-star was rising, I came into the garden, and staid
some time there with these noble Achaemenidae, the high-priest and the
king Croesus, looking at the blue lily, which was marvellously beautiful.
I then called my colleague Kandaules and asked him, in the presence of
these noble witnesses, if everything was in order.  He affirmed that this
was the case and added, that he had just come from Nitetis, that she had
wept the whole day, and neither tasted food nor drink.  Feeling anxious
lest my noble mistress should become worse, I commissioned Kandaules to
fetch a physician, and was just on the point of leaving the noble
Achaemenidae, in order in person to ascertain my mistress's state of
health, when I saw in the moon-light the figure of a man.  I was so ill
and weak, that I could hardly stand and had no one near to help me,
except the gardener.

"My men were on guard at the different entrances, some distance from us.

"I clapped my hands to call some of them, but, as they did not come, I
went nearer to the house myself, under the protection of these noblemen.
--The man was standing by the window of the Egyptian Princess's
apartment, and uttered a low whistle when he heard us coming up.  Another
figure appeared directly--clearly recognizable in the bright moonlight--
sprang out of the sleeping-room window and came towards us with her
companion.

"I could hardly believe my eyes on discovering that the intruder was no
other than the noble Bartja.  A fig-tree concealed us from the fugitives,
but we could distinctly see them, as they passed us at a distance of not
more than four steps.  While I was thinking whether I should be justified
in arresting a son of Cyrus, Croesus called to Bartja, and the two
figures suddenly disappeared behind a cypress.  No one but your brother
himself can possibly explain the strange way in which he disappeared.  I
went at once to search the house, and found the Egyptian lying
unconscious on the couch in her sleeping-room."

Every one listened to this story in the greatest suspense.  Cambyses
ground his teeth and asked in a voice of great emotion: "Can you testify
to the words of the eunuch, Hystaspes?"

"Yes."

"Why did you not lay hands on the offender?"

"We are soldiers, not policemen."

"Or rather you care for every knave more than for your king."

"We honor our king, and abhor the criminal just as we formerly loved the
innocent son of Cyrus."

"Did you recognize Bartja distinctly?"

"Yes."

"And you, Croesus, can you too give no other answer?"

"No!  I fancied I saw your brother in the moonlight then, as clearly as I
see him now; but I believe we must have been deceived by some remarkable
likeness."  Boges grew pale at these words; Cambyses, however, shook his
head as if the idea did not please him, and said: "Whom am I to believe
then, if the eyes of my best warriors fail them? and who would wish to be
a judge, if testimony such as yours is not to be considered valid?"

"Evidence quite as weighty as ours, will prove that we must have been in
error."

"Will any one dare to give evidence in favor of such an outrageous
criminal?"  asked Cambyses, springing up and stamping his foot.

"We will,"  "I,"  "we," shouted Araspes, Darius, Gyges and Zopyrus with
one voice.

"Traitors, knaves!"  cried the king.  But as he caught sight of Croesus'
warning eye fixed upon him, he lowered his voice, and said: "What have
you to bring forward in favor of this fellow?  Take care what you say,
and consider well what punishment awaits perjurers."

"We know that well enough," said Araspes, "and yet we are ready to swear
by Mithras, that we have not left Bartja or his garden one moment since
we came back from hunting."

"As for me," said Darius, "I, the son of Hystaspes, have especially
convincing evidence to give in favor of your brother's innocence; I
watched the rising of the Tistar-star with him; and this, according to
Boges, was the very star that shone on his flight."

Hystaspes gazed on his son in astonishment and doubt at hearing these
words, and Cambyses turned a scrutinizing eye first on the one and then
on the other party of these strange witnesses, who wished so much, and
yet found it so impossible, to believe one another, himself unable to
come to a decision.

Bartja, who till now had remained perfectly silent, looking down sadly at
his chained hands, took advantage of the silence to say, making at the
same time a deep obeisance: "May I be allowed to speak a few words, my
King?"

"Speak!"

"From our father we learnt to strive after that which was pure and good
only; so up to this time my life has been unstained.  If you have ever
known me take part in an evil deed, you have a right not to believe me,
but if you find no fault in me then trust to what I say, and remember
that a son of Cyrus would rather die than tell a lie.  I confess that no
judge was ever placed in such a perplexing position.  The best men in
your kingdom testify against one another, friend against friend, father
against son.  But I tell you that were the entire Persian nation to rise
up against you, and swear that Cambyses had committed this or that evil
deed, and you were to say, 'I did not commit it,' I, Bartja, would give
all  Persia the lie and exclaim, 'Ye are all false witnesses; sooner
could the sea cast up fire than a son of Cyrus allow his mouth to deal in
lies.'  No, Cambyses, you and I are so high-born that no one but yourself
can bear evidence against me; and you can only be judged out of your own
mouth."

Cambyses' looks grew a little milder on hearing these words, and his
brother went on: "So I swear to you by Mithras, and by all pure spirits,
that I am innocent.  May my life become extinct and my race perish from
off the earth, if I tell you a lie, when I say that I have not once set
foot in the hanging-gardens since my return!"

Bartja's voice was so firm and his tone so full of assurance, as he
uttered this oath that Cambyses ordered his chains to be loosened, and,
after a few moments' thought, said: "I should like to believe you, for I
cannot bear to imagine you the worst and most abandoned of men.  To-
morrow we will summon the astrologers, soothsayers and priests.  Perhaps
they may be able to discover the truth.  Can you see any light in this
darkness, Oropastes?"

"Thy servant supposes, that a Div has taken upon him the form of Bartja,
in order to ruin the king's brother and stain thine own royal soul with
the blood of thy father's son."

Cambyses and every one present nodded their assent to this proposition,
and the king was just going to offer his hand to Bartja, when a staff-
bearer came in and gave the king a dagger.  A eunuch had found it under
the windows of Nitetis' sleeping-apartment.

Cambyses examined the weapon carefully.  Its costly hilt was thickly set
with rubies and turquoises.  As he looked he turned pale, and dashed the
dagger on the ground before Bartja with such violence, that the stones
fell out of their setting.

"This is your dagger, you wretch!"  he shrieked, seized by the same
violent passion as before.  "This very morning you used it to give the
last thrust to the wild boar, that I had mortally wounded.  Croesus, you
ought to know it too, for my father brought it from your treasure-house
at Sardis.  At last you are really convicted, you liar!--you impostor!
The Divs require no weapons, and such a dagger as this is not to be
picked up everywhere.  Ah, ha!  you are feeling in your girdle!  You may
well turn pale; your dagger is gone!"

"Yes, it is gone.  I must have lost it, and some enemy .  .  ."

"Seize him, Bischen, put on his fetters!  Take him to prison--the
traitor, the perjurer!  He shall be strangled to-morrow.  Death is the
penalty of perjury.  Your heads for theirs, you guards, if they escape.
Not one word more will I hear; away with you, you perjured villains!
Boges, go at once to the hanging-gardens and bring the Egyptian to me.
Yet no, I won't see that serpent again.  It is very near dawn now, and at
noon she shall be flogged through the streets.  Then I'll .  .  ."

But here he was stopped by another fit of epilepsy, and sank down on to
the marble floor in convulsions.  At this fearful moment Kassandane was
led into the hall by the old general Megabyzus.  The news of what
had happened had found its way to her solitary apartments, and,
notwithstanding the hour, she had risen in order to try and discover the
truth and warn her son against pronouncing a too hasty decision.  She
believed firmly that Bartja and Nitetis were innocent, though she could
not explain to herself what had happened.  Several times she had tried to
put herself in communication with Nitetis, but without avail.  At last
she had been herself to the hanging-gardens, but the guards had actually
had the hardihood to refuse her admission.

Croesus went at once to meet her, told her what had happened, suppressing
as many painful details as possible, confirmed her in her belief of the
innocence of the accused, and then took her to the bedside of the king.

The convulsions had not lasted long this time.  He lay on his golden bed
under purple silk coverlets, pale and exhausted.  His blind mother seated
herself at his side, Croesus and Oropastes took their station at the foot
of the bell, and in another part of the room, four physicians discussed
the patient's condition in low whispers.

     [It was natural, that medicine should be carefully studied among a
     people who set such a high value upon life as did the Persians.
     Pliny indeed, (XXX.  I.) maintains, that the whole of Zoroaster's
     religion was founded on the science of medicine, and it is true that
     there are a great many medical directions to be found in the Avesta.
     In the Vendidad, Farg. VII. there is a detailed list of medical
     fees.  "The physician shall treat a priest for a pious blessing or
     spell, the master of a house for a small draught animal, etc., the
     lord of a district for a team of four oxen.  If the physician cures
     the mistress of the house, a female ass shall be his fee, etc.,
     etc."  We read in the same Fargard, that the physician had to pass a
