
Hastily forming his resolution, he again turned to his friend, saying:

"You have shown yourself a father to me.  Imagine that I am indeed your
son, and, as such wished to confess that a woman had become dear to my
heart, and to ask whether you would be glad to greet her as a daughter."

Here Archibius interrupted him with the exclamation: "A ray of light
amid all this gloom?  Grasp what you have too long neglected as soon as
possible!  It befits a good citizen to marry.  The Greek does not attain
full manhood till he becomes husband and father.  If I have remained
unwedded, there was a special reason for it, and how often I have envied
the cobbler whom I saw standing before his shop in the evening, holding
his child in his arms, or the pilot, to whom large and small hands were
stretched in greeting when he returned home!  When I enter my dwelling
only my dogs rejoice.  But you, whose beautiful palace stands empty,
to whose proud family it is due that you should provide for its
continuance--"

"That is just what brings me into a state of indecision, which is usually
foreign to my nature," interrupted Dion.  "You know me and my position in
the world, and you have also known from her earliest childhood the woman
to whom I allude."

"Iras?"  asked  his  companion, hesitatingly.  His sister, Charmian, had
told him of the love felt by the Queen's younger waiting-woman.

But Dion eagerly denied this, adding  I am speaking of Barine, the
daughter of your dead friend Leonax.  I love her, yet my pride is
sensitive, and I know that it will extend to my future wife.  The
contemptuous glances which others might cast at her I should scorn,
for I know her worth.  Surely you remember my mother: she was a very
different woman.  Her house, her child, the slaves, her loom, were
everything to her.  She rigidly exacted from other women the chaste
reserve which was a marked trait in her own character.  Yet she was
gentle, and loved me, her only son, beyond aught else.  I think she would
have opened her arms to Barine, had she believed that she was necessary
to my happiness.  But would the young beauty, accustomed to gay
intercourse with distinguished men, have been able to submit to her
demands?  When I consider that she cannot help taking into her married
life the habit of being surrounded and courted; when I think that the
imprudence of a woman accustomed to perfect freedom might set idle
tongues in motion, and cast a shadow upon the radiant purity of my name;
when I even--" and he raised his clenched right hand.  But Archibius
answered soothingly:

"That anxiety is groundless if Barine warmly and joyfully gives you her
whole heart.  It is a sunny, lovable, true woman's heart, and therefore
capable of a great love.  If she bestows it on you--and I believe she
will--go and offer sacrifices in your gratitude; for the immortals
desired your happiness when they guided your choice to her and not to
Iras, my own sister's child.  If you were really my son, I would now
exclaim, 'You could not bring me a dearer daughter, if--I repeat it--
if you are sure of her love.'"

Dion gazed into vacancy a short time, and then cried firmly: "I am!"




CHAPTER VIII.

The Epicurus anchored before the Temple of Poseidon.  The crew had been
ordered to keep silence, though they knew nothing, except that a letter
from Antony, commanding the erection of a wall, had been found on board
the pirate.  This might be regarded as a good omen, for people do not
think of building unless they anticipate a time of peace.

The light rain had ceased, but the wind blew more strongly from the
north, and the air had grown cool.  A dense throng still covered the quay
from the southern end of the Heptastadium to the promontory of Lochias.
The strongest pressure was between the peninsula of the Choma and the
Sebasteum; for this afforded a view of the sea, and the first tidings
must reach the residence of the Regent, which was connected with the
palace.

A hundred contradictory rumours had been in circulation that morning; and
when, at the third hour in the afternoon, the Epicurus arrived, it was
surrounded by a dense multitude eager to hear what news the ship had
brought from without.

Other vessels shared the same fate, but none could give reliable tidings.

Two swift galleys from the royal fleet reported meeting a Samian trireme,
which had given news of a great victory gained by Antony on the land and
Cleopatra on the sea, and, as men are most ready to believe what they
desire, throngs of exulting men and women moved to and fro along the
shore, strengthening by their confidence many a timorous spirit.  Prudent
people, who had regarded the long delay of the first ships of the fleet
with anxiety, had opened their ears to the tales of evil, and looked
forward to the future with uneasiness.  But they avoided giving
expression to their fears, for the overseer of an establishment for
gold embroidery, who had ventured to warn the people against premature
rejoicing, had limped home badly beaten, and two other pessimists who had
been flung in the sea had just been dragged out dripping wet.

Nor could the multitude be blamed for this confidence; for at the
Serapeum, the theatre of Dionysus, the lofty pylons of the Sebasteum, the
main door of the museum, in front of the entrance of the palace in the
Bruchium, and before the fortress-like palaces in the Lochias, triumphal
arches had been erected, adorned with gods of victory and trophies
hastily constructed of plaster, inscriptions of congratulations and
thanks to the deities, garlands of foliage and flowers.  The wreathing of
the Egyptian pylons and obelisks, the principal temple, and the favourite
statues in the city had been commenced during the night.  The last
touches were now being given to the work.

Gorgias, like his friend Dion, had not closed his eyes since the night
before; for he had had charge of all the decorations of the Bruchium,
where one superb building adjoined another.

Sleep had also fled from the couches of the occupants of the Sebasteum,
the royal palace where Iras lived during the absence of the Queen, and
the practorium, facing its southern front, which contained the official
residence of the Regent.

When Archibius was conducted to the Queen's waiting-woman, her appearance
fairly startled him.  She had been his guest in Kanopus only the day
before yesterday, and how great was the alteration within this brief
time!  Her oval face seemed to have lengthened, the features to have
grown sharper; and this woman of seven-and-twenty years, who had hitherto
retained all the charms of youth, appeared suddenly to have aged a
decade.  There was a feverish excitement in her manner, as, holding out
her hand to her uncle, in greeting, she exclaimed hastily, "You, too,
bring no good tidings?"

"Nor any evil ones," he answered quietly.  "But, child, I do not like
your appearance--the dark circles under your keen eyes.  You have had
news which rouses your anxiety?"

"Worse than that," she answered in a low tone.

"Well?"

"Read!" gasped  Iras, her lips and nostrils quivering as she handed
Archibius a small tablet.  With a gesture of haste very unusual in him,
he snatched it from her hand and, as his eyes ran over the words traced
upon it, every vestige of colour vanished from his cheeks and lips.

They were written by Cleopatra's own hand, and contained the following
lines:

"The naval battle was lost--and by my fault.  The land forces might
still save us, but not under his command.  He is with me, uninjured, but
apparently exhausted; like a different being, bereft of courage, listless
as if utterly crushed.  I foresee the beginning of the end.  As soon as
this reaches you, arrange to have some unpretending litters ready for us
every evening at sunset.  Make the people believe that we have conquered
until trustworthy intelligence arrives concerning the fate of Canidius
and the army.  When you kiss the children in my name, be very tender with
them.  Who knows how soon they may be orphaned?  They already have an
unhappy mother; may they be spared the memory of a cowardly one!  Trust
no one except those whom I left in authority, and Archibius, not even
Caesarion or Antyllus.  Provide for having every one whose aid may be
valuable to me within reach when I come.  I cannot close with the
familiar 'Rejoice'--the 'Fresh Courage' placed on many a tombstone seems
more appropriate.  You who did not envy me in my happiness will help me
to bear misfortune.  Epicurus, who believes that the gods merely watch
the destiny of men inactively from their blissful heights, is right.
Were it otherwise, how could the love and loyalty which cleave to the
hapless, defeated woman, be repaid with anguish of heart and tears?  Yet
continue to love her."

Archibius, pale and silent, let the tablet fall.  It was long ere he
gasped hoarsely: "I foresaw it; yet now that it is here--" His voice
failed, and violent, tearless sobs shook his powerful frame.

Sinking on a couch he buried his face amid the cushions.

Iras gazed at the strong man and shook her head.  She, too, loved the
Queen; the news had brought tears to her eyes also; but even while she
wept, a host of plans coping with this disaster had darted through her
restless brain.  A few minutes after the arrival of the message of
misfortune she had consulted with the members of Cleopatra's council, and
adopted measures for sustaining the people's belief in the naval victory.

What was she, the delicate, by no means courageous girl, compared to this
man of iron strength who, she was well aware, had braved the greatest
perils in the service of the Queen?  Yet there he lay with his face
hidden in the pillows as if utterly overwhelmed.

Did a woman's soul rebound more quickly after being crushed beneath the
burdens of the heaviest suffering, or was hers of a special character,
and her slender body the casket of a hero's nature?

She had reason to believe so when she recalled how the Regent and the
