give a warning-signal in case of approaching clanger.  Each house
resembled a citadel, for it was built of strong masonry, and the younger
men were all well exercised bowmen.  The more distinguished families
dwelt near the church-hill, and there too stood the houses of the Bishop
Agapitus, and of the city councillors of Pharan.

Among these the Senator Petrus enjoyed the greatest respect, partly by
reason of his solid abilities, and of his possessions in quarries,
garden-ground, date palms, and cattle; partly in consequence of the rare
qualities of his wife, the deaconess Dorothea, the granddaughter of the
long-deceased and venerable Bishop Chaeremon, who had fled hither with
his wife during the persecution of the Christians under Decius, and who
had converted many of the Pharanites to the knowledge of the Redeemer.

The house of Petrus was of strong and well-joined stone, and the palm
garden adjoining was carefully tended.  Twenty slaves, many camels, and
even two horses belonged to him, and the centurion in command of the
Imperial garrison, the Gaul Phoebicius, and his wife Sirona, lived as
lodgers under his roof; not quite to the satisfaction of the councillor,
for the centurion was no Christian, but a worshipper of Mithras, in whose
mysteries the wild Gaul had risen to the grade of a 'Lion,' whence his
people, and with them the Pharanites in general, were wont to speak of
him as "the Lion."

His predecessor had been an officer of much lower rank but a believing
Christian, whom Petrus had himself requested to live in his house, and
when, about a year since, the Lion Phoebicius had taken the place of the
pious Pankratius, the senator could not refuse him the quarters, which
had become a right.

Hermas went shyly and timidly towards the court of Petrus' house, and his
embarrassment increased when he found himself in the hall of the stately
stone-house, which he had entered without let or hindrance, and did not
know which way to turn.  There was no one there to direct him, and he
dared not go up the stairs which led to the upper story, although it
seemed that Petrus must be there.  Yes, there was no doubt, for he heard
talking overhead and clearly distinguished the senator's deep voice.
Hermas advanced, and set his foot on the first step of the stairs; but he
had scarcely begun to go up with some decision, and feeling ashamed of
his bashfulness, when he heard a door fly open just above him, and from
it there poured a flood of fresh laughing children's voices, like a pent
up stream when the miller opens the sluice gate.

He glanced upwards in surprise, but there was no time for consideration,
for the shouting troop of released little ones had already reached the
stairs.  In front of all hastened a beautiful young woman with golden
hair; she was laughing gaily, and held a gaudily-dressed doll high above
her head.  She came backwards towards the steps, turning her fair face
beaming with fun and delight towards the children, who, full of their
longing, half demanding, half begging, half laughing, half crying,
shouted in confusion, "Let us be, Sirona,"  "Do not take it away again,
Sirona,"  "Do stay here, Sirona," again and again, "Sirona--Sirona."

A lovely six year old maiden stretched up as far as she could to reach
the round white arm that held the play-thing; with her left hand, which
was free, she gaily pushed away three smaller children, who tried to
cling to her knees and exclaimed, still stepping backwards, "No, no; you
shall not have it till it has a new gown; it shall be as long and as gay
as the Emperors's robe.  Let me go, Caecilia, or you will fall down as
naughty Nikon did the other day."

By this time she had reached the steps; she turned suddenly, and with
outstretched arms she stopped the way of the narrow stair on which Hermas
was standing, gazing open-mouthed at the merry scene above his head.
Just as Sirona was preparing to run down, she perceived him and started;
but when she saw that the anchorite from pure embarrassment could find no
words in which to answer her question as to what he wanted, she laughed
heartily again and called out: "Come up, we shall not hurt you--shall we
children?"

Meanwhile Hermas had found courage enough to give utterance to his wish
to speak with the senator, and the young woman, who looked with
complacency on his strong and youthful frame, offered to conduct him to
him.

Petrus had been talking to his grown up elder sons; they were tall men,
but their father was even taller than they, and of unusual breadth of
shoulder.

While the young men were speaking, he stroked his short grey beard and
looked down at the ground in sombre gravity, as it might have seemed to
the careless observer; but any one who looked closer might quickly
perceive that not seldom a pleased smile, though not less often a
somewhat bitter one, played upon the lips of the prudent and judicious
man.  He was one of those who can play with their children like a young
mother, take the sorrows of another as much to heart as if they were
their own, and yet who look so gloomy, and allow themselves to make such
sharp speeches, that only those who are on terms of perfect confidence
with them, cease to misunderstand them and fear them.  There was
something fretting the soul of this man, who nevertheless possessed all
that could contribute to human happiness.  His was a thankful nature,
and yet he was conscious that he might have been destined to something
greater than fate had permitted him to achieve or to be.  He had remained
a stone-cutter, but his sons had both completed their education in good
schools in Alexandria.  The elder, Antonius, who already had a house of
his own and a wife and children, was an architect and artist-mechanic;
the younger, Polykarp, was a gifted young sculptor.  The noble church of
the oasis-city had been built under the direction of the elder; Polykarp,
who had only come home a month since, was preparing to establish and
carry on works of great extent in his father's quarries, for he had
received a commission to decorate the new court of the Sebasteion or
Caesareum, as it was called--a grand pile in Alexandria--with twenty
granite lions.  More than thirty artists had competed with him for this
work, but the prize was unanimously adjudged to his models by qualified
judges.  The architect whose function it was to construct the colonnades
and pavement of the court was his friend, and had agreed to procure the
blocks of granite, the flags and the columns which he required from
Petrus' quarries, and not, as had formerly been the custom, from those
of Syene by the first Cataract.

Antonius and Polykarp were now standing with their father before a large
table, explaining to him a plan which they had worked out together and
traced on the thin wax surface of a wooden tablet.  The young architect's
proposal was to bridge over a deep but narrow gorge, which the beasts of
burden were obliged to avoid by making a wide circuit, and so to make a
new way from the quarries to the sea, which should be shorter by a third
than the old one.  The cost of this structure would soon be recouped by
the saving in labor, and with perfect certainty, if only the transport-
ships were laden at Clysma with a profitable return freight of
Alexandrian manufactures, instead of returning empty as they had hitherto
done.  Petrus, who could shine as a speaker in the council-meetings, in
private life spoke but little.  At each of his son's new projects he
raised his eyes to the speaker's face, as if to see whether the young man
had not lost his wits, while his mouth, only half hidden by his grey
beard, smiled approvingly.

When Antonius began to unfold his plan for remedying the inconvenience of
the ravine that impeded the way, the senator muttered, "Only get feathers
to grow on the slaves, and turn the black ones into ravens and the white
ones into gulls, and then they might fly across.  What do not people
learn in the metropolis!"

When he heard the word 'bridge' he stared at the young artist.  "The only
question," said he, "is whether Heaven will lend us a rainbow."  But when
Polykarp proposed to get some cedar trunks from Syria through his friend
in Alexandria, and when his elder son explained his drawings of the arch
with which he promised to span the gorge and make it strong and safe, he
followed their words with attention; at the same time he knit his
eyebrows as gloomily and looked as stern as if he were listening to some
narrative of crime.  Still, he let them speak on to the end, and though
at first he only muttered that it was mere "fancy-work" or "Aye, indeed,
if I were the emperor;" he afterwards asked clear and precise questions,
to which he received positive and well considered answers.  Antonius
proved by figures that the profit on the delivery of material for the
Caesareum only would cover more than three quarters of the outlay.
Then Polykarp began to speak and declared that the granite of the Holy
Mountain was finer in color and in larger blocks than that from Syene.

"We work cheaper here than at the Cataract," interrupted Antonius.
"And the transport of the blocks will not come too dear when we have the
bridge and command the road to the sea, and avail ourselves of the canal
of Trajan, which joins the Nile to the Red Sea, and which in a few months
will again be navigable."

"And if my lions are a success," added Polykarp, "and if Zenodotus is
satisfied with our stone and our work, it may easily happen that we
outstrip Syene in competition, and that some of the enormous orders
that now flow from Constantine's new residence to the quarries at Syene,
may find their way to us."

"Polykarp is not over sanguine," continued Antonius, "for the emperor is
beautifying and adding to Byzantium with eager haste.  Whoever erects a
new house has a yearly allowance of corn, and in order to attract folks
of our stamp--of whom he cannot get enough--he promises entire exemption
from taxation to all sculptors, architects, and even to skilled laborers.
If we finish the blocks and pillars here exactly to the designs, they
will take up no superfluous room in the ships, and no one will be able to
deliver them so cheaply as we."

"No, nor so good," cried Polykarp, "for you yourself are an artist,
father, and understand stone-work as well as any man.  I never saw a
finer or more equally colored granite than the block you picked out for
my first lion.  I am finishing it here on the spot, and I fancy it will
make a show.  Certainly it will be difficult to take a foremost place
among the noble works of the most splendid period of art, which already
fill the Caesareum, but I will do my best."

"The Lions will be admirable," cried Antonius with a glance of pride at
his brother.  "Nothing like them has been done by any one these ten
years, and I know the Alexandrians.  If the master's work is praised that
is made out of granite from the Holy Mountain, all the world will have
granite from thence and from no where else.  It all depends on whether
the transport of the stone to the sea can be made less difficult and
costly."

"Let us try it then," said Petrus, who during his son's talk had walked
up and down before them in silence.  "Let us try the building of the
bridge in the name of the Lord.  We will work out the road if the
municipality will declare themselves ready to bear half the cost; not
otherwise, and I tell you frankly, you have both grown most able men."

The younger son grasped his father's hand and pressed it with warm
affection to his lips.  Petrus hastily stroked his brown locks, then he
offered his strong right hand to his eldest-born and said: We must
increase the number of our slaves.  Call your mother, Polykarp."  The
youth obeyed with cheerful alacrity, and when Dame Dorothea--who was
sitting at the loom with her daughter Marthana and some of her female
slaves--saw him rush into the women's room with a glowing face, she rose
with youthful briskness in spite of her stout and dignified figure, and
called out to her son:

"He has approved of your plans?"

"Bridge and all, mother, everything," cried the young man.  "Finer
granite for my lions, than my father has picked out for me is nowhere to
be found, and how glad I am for Antonius! only we must have patience
about the roadway.  He wants to speak to you at once."

Dorothea signed to her son to moderate his ecstasy, for he had seized her
hand, and was pulling her away with him, but the tears that stood in her
kind eyes testified how deeply she sympathized in her favorite's
excitement.

"Patience, patience, I am coming directly," cried she, drawing away her
hand in order to arrange her dress and her grey hair, which was abundant
and carefully dressed, and formed a meet setting for her still pleasing
and unwrinkled face.

"I knew it would be so; when you have a reasonable thing to propose to
your father, he will always listen to you and agree with you without my
intervention; women should not mix themselves up with men's work.  Youth
draws a strong bow and often shoots beyond the mark.  It would be a
