'It will come all right!'--So it must be done somehow."

A flood of tears streamed down Mary's burning cheeks but, freely as they
flowed, she did not sob and her bosom did not heave.  Nor did she speak,
but such pure and fervent gratitude and joy shone from her glistening
eyes that Orion felt his own grow moist.  He was glad to find some way of
concealing his emotion when Mary seized his hand and, pressing a long
kiss on it, wetted it with her tears.

"See!"  he exclaimed.  "All wet! as if I had just taken it out of the
fountain."

But he said no more, for the bedroom door was suddenly thrown open and
Eudoxia's high, thin voice was heard saying:

"But why make any fuss?  Mary will be enchanted!  Here, Child, here is
your long-lost friend!  Such a surprise!"  And the water-wagtail, pushed
forward by no gentle hand, appeared within the doorway.  Eudoxia was as
radiant as though she had achieved some heroic deed; but she drew back a
little when she found that Orion was still in the room.  The divided
couple stood face to face.  What was done could not be undone; but,
though he greeted her with only a calm bow, and she fluttered her fan
with abrupt little jerks to conceal her embarrassment, nothing took place
which could surprise the bystander; indeed, Katharina's pretty features
assumed a defiant expression when he enquired how the little white dog
was, and she coldly replied that she had had him chained up in the
poultry-yard, for that the patriarch, who was their guest, could not
endure dogs.

"He honors a good many men with the same sentiments," replied Orion, but
Katharina retorted, readily enough.

"When they deserve it."

The dialogue went on in this key for some few minutes; but the young man
was not in the humor either to take the young girl's pert stings or to
repay her in the same coin; he rose to go but, before he could take
leave, Katharina, observing from the window how low the sun was, cried:
"Mercy on me! how late it is--I must be off; I must not be absent at
supper time.  My boat is lying close to yours in the fishing-cove.  I
only hope the gate of the treasurer's house is still open."

Orion, too, looked at the sun and then remarked: "To-day is Sanutius."

"I know," said Katharina.  "That is why Anubis was free at noon."

"And for the same reason," added Orion, "there is not a soul at work now
in the office."

This was awkward.  Not for worlds would she have been seen in the house;
and knowing, as she did from her games with Mary, every nook and corner
of it, she began to consider her position.  Her delicate features assumed
a sinister expression quite new to Orion, which both displeased him and
roused his anxiety--not for himself but for Mary, who could certainly get
no good from such a companion as this.  These visits must not be repeated
very often; he would not allude to the subject in the child's presence,
but Katharina should at once have a hint.  She could not get out of the
place without his assistance; so he intruded on her meditations to inform
her that he had the key of the office about him.  Then he went to see if
the hall were empty, and led her at once to the treasurer's office
through the various passages which connected it with the main buildings.
The office at this hour was as lonely as the grave, and when Orion found
himself standing with her, close to the door which opened on the road to
the harbor, and had already raised the key to unlock it, he paused and
for the first time broke the silence they had both preserved during their
unpleasant walk, saying:

"What brought you to see Mary, Katharina?  Tell me honestly."  Her heart,
which had been beating high since she had found herself alone with him in
the silent and deserted house, began to throb wildly; a great terror, she
knew not of what, came over her.

"She had come to the house for several reasons, but one had outweighed
all the rest: Mary must be told that her young uncle and Paula were
betrothed; for she knew by experience that the child could keep nothing
of importance from her grandmother, and that Neforis had no love for
Paula was an open secret.  As yet she certainly could know nothing of her
son's formal suit, but if once she were informed of it she would do
everything in her power--of this Katharina had not a doubt--to keep Orion
and Paula apart.  So the girl had told Mary that it was already reported
that they were a betrothed and happy pair, and that she herself had
watched them making love in her neighbor's garden.  To her great
annoyance, however, Mary took this all very coolly and without any
special excitement.

"So, when Orion enquired of his companion what had brought her to the
governor's house, she could only reply that she longed so desperately to
see little Mary.

"Of course," said Orion.  "But I must beg of you not to yield again to
your affectionate impulse.  Your mother makes a public display of her
grudge against mine, and her ill-feeling will only be increased if she
is told that we are encouraging you to disregard her wishes.  Perhaps you
may, ere long, have opportunities of seeing Mary more frequently; but,
if that should be the case, I must especially request you not to talk of
things that may agitate her.  You have seen for yourself how excitable
she is and how fragile she looks.  Her little heart, her too precocious
brain and feelings must have rest, must not be stirred and goaded by
fresh incitements such as you are in a position to apply.  The patriarch
is my enemy, the enemy of our house, and you--I do not say it to offend
you--you overheard what he was saying last night, and probably gathered
much important information, some of which may concern me and my family."

Katharina stood looking at her companion, as pale as death.  He knew that
she had played the listener, and when, and where!  The shock it gave her,
and the almost unendurable pang of feeling herself lowered in his eyes,
quite dazed her.  She felt bewildered, offended, menaced; however, she
retained enough presence of mind to reply in a moment to her antagonist:

"Do not be alarmed!  I will come no more.  I should not have come at all,
if I could have foreseen. . ."

"That you would meet me?"

"Perhaps.--But do not flatter yourself too much on that account!--As to
my listening...  Well, yes; I was standing at the window.  Inside the
room I could only half hear, and who does not want to hear what great men
have to say to each other?  And, excepting your father, I have met none
such in Memphis since Memnon left the city.  We women have inherited some
curiosity from our mother Eve; but we rarely indulge it so far as to hunt
for a necklace in our neighbor's trunk!  I have no luck as a criminal, my
dear Orion.  Twice have I deserved the name.  Thanks to the generous and
liberal use you made of my inexperience I sinned--sinned so deeply that
it has ruined my whole life; and now, again, in a more venial way; but I
was caught out, you see, in both cases."

"Your taunts are merited," said Orion sadly.  "And yet, Child, we may
both thank Providence, which did not leave us to wander long on the wrong
road.  Once already I have besought your forgiveness, and I do so now
again.  That does not satisfy you I see--and I can hardly blame you.
Perhaps you will be better pleased, when I assure you once more that
no sin was ever more bitterly or cruelly punished than mine has been."

"Indeed!"  said Katharina with a drawl; then, with a flutter of her fan,
she went on airily: "And yet you look anything rather than crushed; and
have even succeeded in winning 'the other'--Paula, if I am not mistaken."

"That will do!"  said Orion decisively, and he raised the key to the
lock.  Katharina, however, placed herself in his way, raised a
threatening finger, and exclaimed:

"So I should think!--Now I am certain.  However, you are right with your
insolent 'That will do!'  I do not care a rush for your love affairs;
still, there is one thing I should like to know, which concerns myself
alone; how could you see over our garden hedge?  Anubis is scarcely a
head shorter than you are. . . ."

"And you made him try?"  interrupted Orion, who could not forbear
smiling, perceiving that his honestly meant gravity was thrown away on
Katharina.  "Notwithstanding such a praiseworthy experiment, I may beg
you to note for future cases that what is true of him is not true of
every one, and that, besides foot-passengers, a tall man sometimes mounts
a tall horse?"

"It was you, then, who rode by last night?"

"And who could not resist glancing up at your window."

At these words she drew back in surprise, and her eyes lighted up, but
only for an instant; then, clenching the feathers of her fan in both
hands, she sharply asked:

"Is that in mockery?"

"Certainly not," said Orion coolly; "for though you have reason enough to
be angry with me......"

"I, at any rate, have, so far given you none," she petulantly broke in.
"No, I have not.  It is I, and I alone, who have been insulted and ill-
used; you must confess that you owe me some amends, and that I have a
right to ask them."

"Do so," replied he.  "I am yours to command."  She looked him straight
in the face.

"First of all," she began, "have you told any one else that I was. . ."

"That you were listening?  No--not a living soul."

"And will you promise never to betray me?"

"Willingly.  Now, what is the 'secondly' to this 'first of all?'"

But there was no immediate answer; the water-wagtail evidently found it
difficult.  However, she presently said, with downcast eyes:

"I want....  You will think me a greater fool than I am....
nevertheless, yes, I will ask you, though it will involve me in fresh
humiliation.--I want to know the truth; and if there is anything you hold
sacred, before I ask, you must swear by what is holiest to answer me, not
as if I were a silly girl, but as if I were the Supreme judge at the last
day.--Do you hear?"

"This is very solemn," said Orion.  "And you must allow me to observe
that there are some questions which do not concern us alone, and if yours
is such......"

"No, no," replied Katharina, "what I mean concerns you and me alone."
