coincidence that very afternoon Montalvo, also seeking rest and change
of air, appeared at the inn of this village, giving it out that he
proposed to lodge there for a while.

As he walked upon the beach next day, whom should he chance to meet but
the Vrouw Clara van Ziel, and never did the worthy Clara spend a more
pleasant morning. So at least she declared to Lysbeth when she brought
her cavalier back to dinner.

The reader may guess the rest. Montalvo paid his court, and in due
course Montalvo was refused. He bore the blow with a tender resignation.

"Confess, dear lady," he said, "that there is some other man more
fortunate."

Lysbeth did not confess, but, on the other hand, neither did she deny.

"If he makes you happy I shall be more than satisfied," the Count
murmured, "but, lady, loving you as I do, I do not wish to see you
married to a heretic."

"What do you mean, Senor?" asked Lysbeth, bridling.

"Alas!" he answered, "I mean that, as I fear, the worthy Heer Dirk van
Goorl, a friend of mine for whom I have every respect, although he has
outstripped me in your regard, has fallen into that evil net."

"Such accusations should not be made," said Lysbeth sternly, "unless
they can be proved. Even then----" and she stopped.

"I will inquire further," replied the swain. "For myself I accept the
position, that is until you learn to love me, if such should be my
fortune. Meanwhile I beg of you at least to look upon me as a friend, a
true friend who would lay down his life to serve you."

Then, with many a sigh, Montalvo departed home to Leyden upon his
beautiful black horse, but not before he had enjoyed a few minutes'
earnest conversation with the worthy Tante Clara.

"Now, if only this old lady were concerned," he reflected as he rode
away, "the matter might be easy enough, and the Saints know it would be
one to me, but unhappily that obstinate pig of a Hollander girl has all
the money in her own right. In what labours do not the necessities of
rank and station involve a man who by disposition requires only ease and
quiet! Well, my young friend Lysbeth, if I do not make you pay for
these exertions before you are two months older, my name is not Juan de
Montalvo."



Three days later the ladies returned to Leyden. Within an hour of their
arrival the Count called, and was admitted.

"Stay with me," said Lysbeth to her Aunt Clara as the visitor was
announced, and for a while she stayed. Then, making an excuse, she
vanished from the room, and Lysbeth was left face to face with her
tormentor.

"Why do you come here?" she asked; "I have given you my answer."

"I come for your own sake," he replied, "to give you my reasons
for conduct which you may think strange. You remember a certain
conversation?"

"Perfectly," broke in Lysbeth.

"A slight mistake, I think, Jufvrouw, I mean a conversation about an
excellent friend of yours, whose spiritual affairs seem to interest
you."

"What of it, Senor?"

"Only this; I have made inquiries and----"

Lysbeth looked up unable to conceal her anxiety.

"Oh! Jufvrouw, let me beg of you to learn to control your expression;
the open face of childhood is so dangerous in these days."

"He is my cousin."

"I know; were he anything more, I should be so grieved, but we can most
of us spare a cousin or two."

"If you would cease amusing yourself, Senor----"

"And come to the point? Of course I will. Well, the result of my
inquiries has been to find out that this worthy person _is_ a heretic of
the most pernicious sort. I said inquiries, but there was no need for me
to make any. He has been----"

"Not denounced," broke in Lysbeth.

"Oh! my dear lady, again that tell-tale emotion from which all sorts of
things might be concluded. Yes--denounced--but fortunately to myself as
a person appointed under the Edict. It will, I fear, be my duty to have
him arrested this evening--you wish to sit down, allow me to hand you a
chair--but I shall not deal with the case myself. Indeed, I propose
to pass him over to the worthy Ruard Tapper, the Papal Inquisitor, you
know--every one has heard of the unpleasant Tapper--who is to visit
Leyden next week, and who, no doubt, will make short work of him."

"What has he done?" asked Lysbeth in a low voice, and bending down her
head to hide the working of her features.

"Done? My dear lady, it is almost too dreadful to tell you. This
misguided and unfortunate young man, with another person whom the
witnesses have not been able to identify, was seen at midnight reading
the Bible."

"The Bible! Why should that be wrong?"

"Hush! Are you also a heretic? Do you not know that all this heresy
springs from the reading of the Bible? You see, the Bible is a very
strange book. It seems that there are many things in it which, when
read by an ordinary layman, appear to mean this or that. When read by a
consecrated priest, however, they mean something quite different. In the
same way, there are many doctrines which the layman cannot find in the
Bible that to the consecrated eye are plain as the sun and the moon.
The difference between heresy and orthodoxy is, in short, the difference
between what can actually be found in the letter of this remarkable
work, and what is really there--according to their holinesses."

"Almost thou persuadest me----" began Lysbeth bitterly.

"Hush! lady--to be, what you are, an angel."

There came a pause.

"What will happen to him?" asked Lysbeth.

"After--after the usual painful preliminaries to discover accomplices,
I presume the stake, but possibly, as he has the freedom of Leyden, he
might get off with hanging."

"Is there no escape?"

Montalvo walked to the window, and looking out of it remarked that
he thought it was going to snow. Then suddenly he wheeled round, and
staring hard at Lysbeth asked,

"Are you really interested in this heretic, and do you desire to save
him?"

Lysbeth heard and knew at once that the buttons were off the foils. The
bantering, whimsical tone was gone. Now her tormentor's voice was stern
and cold, the voice of a man who was playing for great stakes and meant
to win them.

She also gave up fencing.

"I am and I do," she answered.

"Then it can be done--at a price."

"What price?"

"Yourself in marriage within three weeks."

Lysbeth quivered slightly, then sat still.

"Would not my fortune do instead?" she asked.

"Oh! what a poor substitute you offer me," Montalvo said, with a return
to his hateful banter. Then he added, "That offer might be considered
were it not for the abominable laws which you have here. In practice it
would be almost impossible for you to hand over any large sum, much of
which is represented by real estate, to a man who is not your husband.
Therefore I am afraid I must stipulate that you and your possessions
shall not be separated."

Again Lysbeth sat silent. Montalvo, watching her with genuine interest,
saw signs of rebellion, perchance of despair. He saw the woman's mental
and physical loathing of himself conquering her fears for Dirk. Unless
he was much mistaken she was about to defy him, which, as a matter of
fact, would have proved exceedingly awkward, as his pecuniary resources
were exhausted. Also on the very insufficient evidence which he
possessed he would not have dared to touch Dirk, and thus to make
himself a thousand powerful enemies.

"It is strange," he said, "that the irony of circumstances should reduce
me to pleading for a rival. But, Lysbeth van Hout, before you answer
I beg you to think. Upon the next movements of your lips it depends
whether that body you love shall be stretched upon the rack, whether
those eyes which you find pleasant shall grow blind with agony in the
darkness of a dungeon, and whether that flesh which you think desirable
shall scorch and wither in the furnace. Or, on the other hand, whether
none of these things shall happen, whether this young man shall go free,
to be for a month or two a little piqued--a little bitter--about the
inconstancy of women, and then to marry some opulent and respected
heretic. Surely you could scarcely hesitate. Oh! where is the
self-sacrificing spirit of the sex of which we hear so much? Choose."

Still there was no answer. Montalvo, playing his trump card, drew from
his vest an official-looking document, sealed and signed.

"This," he said, "is the information to be given to the incorruptible
Ruard Trapper. Look, here written on it is your cousin's name. My
servant waits for me in your kitchen. If you hesitate any longer, I call
him and in your presence charge him to hand that paper to the messenger
who starts this afternoon for Brussels. Once given it cannot be recalled
and the pious Dirk's doom is sealed."

Lysbeth's spirit began to break. "How can I?" she asked. "It is true
that we are not affianced; perhaps for this very reason which I now
learn. But he cares for me and knows that I care for him. Must I then,
in addition to the loss of him, be remembered all his life as little
better than a light-of-love caught by the tricks and glitter of such a
man as you? I tell you that first I will kill myself."

Again Montalvo went to the window, for this hint of suicide was most
disconcerting. No one can marry a dead woman, and Lysbeth was scarcely
likely to leave a will in his favour. It seemed that what troubled her
particularly was the fear lest the young man should think her conduct
light. Well, why should she not give him a reason which he would be the
first to acknowledge as excellent for breaking with him? Could she, a
Catholic, be expected to wed a heretic, and could he not be made to tell
her that he was a heretic?

Behold an answer to his question! The Saints themselves, desiring that
this pearl of price should continue to rest in the bosom of the true
Church, had interfered in his behalf, for there in the street below was
Dirk van Goorl approaching Lysbeth's door. Yes, there he was dressed
in his best burgher's suit, his brow knit with thought, his step
hesitating; a very picture of the timid, doubtful lover.

"Lysbeth van Hout," said the Count, turning to her, "as it chances the
Heer Dirk van Goorl is at your door. You will admit him, and this matter
can be settled one way or the other. I wish to point out to you how
needless it is that the young man should be left believing that you have
treated him ill. All which is necessary is that you should ask whether
or no he is of your faith. If I know him, he will not lie to you. Then
it remains only for you to say--for doubtless the man comes here to seek
your hand--that however much it may grieve you to give such an answer,
you can take no heretic to husband. Do you understand?"

Lysbeth bowed her head.

"Then listen. You will admit your suitor; you will allow him to make
his offer to you now--if he is so inclined; you will, before giving any
answer, ask him of his faith. If he replies that he is a heretic, you
will dismiss him as kindly as you wish. If he replies that he is a true
servant of the Church, you will say that you have heard a different tale
and must have time to make inquiries. Remember also that if by one jot
you do otherwise than I have bid you, when Dirk van Goorl leaves the
room you see him for the last time, unless it pleases you--to attend
his execution. Whereas if you obey and dismiss him finally, as the door
shuts behind him I put this Information in the fire and satisfy you that
the evidence upon which it is based is for ever deprived of weight and
done with."

Lysbeth looked a question.

"I see you are wondering how I should know what you do or do not do.
It is simple. I shall be the harmless but observant witness of your
interview. Over this doorway hangs a tapestry; you will grant me the
privilege--not a great one for a future husband--of stepping behind it."

"Never, never," said Lysbeth, "I cannot be put to such a shame. I defy
you."

As she spoke came the sound of knocking at the street door. Glancing up
at Montalvo, for the second time she saw that look which he had worn
at the crisis of the sledge race. All its urbanity, its careless
_bonhomie_, had vanished. Instead of these appeared a reflection of the
last and innermost nature of the man, the rock foundation, as it were,
upon which was built the false and decorated superstructure that he
showed to the world. There were the glaring eyes, there the grinning
teeth of the Spanish wolf; a ravening brute ready to rend and tear, if
so he might satisfy himself with the meat his soul desired.

"Don't play tricks with me," he muttered, "and don't argue, for there
is no time. Do as I bid you, girl, or on your head will be this
psalm-singing fellow's blood. And, look you, don't try setting him on
me, for I have my sword and he is unarmed. If need be a heretic may be
killed at sight, you know, that is by one clothed with authority. When
the servant announces him go to the door and order that he is to be
admitted," and picking up his plumed hat, which might have betrayed him,
Montalvo stepped behind the arras.

For a moment Lysbeth stood thinking. Alas! she could see no possible
escape, she was in the toils, the rope was about her throat. Either
she must obey or, so she thought, she must give the man she loved to a
dreadful death. For his sake she would do it, for his sake and might God
forgive her! Might God avenge her and him!

Another instant and there came a knock upon the door. She opened it.

"The Heer van Goorl stands below," said the voice of Greta, "wishing to
see you, madam."

"Admit him," answered Lysbeth, and going to a chair almost in the centre
of the room, she seated herself.

Presently Dirk's step sounded on the stair, that known, beloved step for
which so often she had listened eagerly. Again the door opened and
Greta announced the Heer van Goorl. That she could not see the Captain
Montalvo evidently surprised the woman, for her eyes roamed round the
room wonderingly, but she was too well trained, or too well bribed, to
show her astonishment. Gentlemen of this kidney, as Greta had from time
to time remarked, have a faculty for vanishing upon occasion.

So Dirk walked into the fateful chamber as some innocent and
unsuspecting creature walks into a bitter snare, little knowing that
the lady whom he loved and whom he came to win was set as a bait to ruin
him.

"Be seated, cousin," said Lysbeth, in a voice so forced and strained
that it caused him to look up. But he saw nothing, for her head was
turned away from him, and for the rest his mind was too preoccupied to
be observant. By nature simple and open, it would have taken much
to wake Dirk into suspicion in the home and presence of his love and
cousin, Lysbeth.

"Good day to you, Lysbeth," he said awkwardly; "why, how cold your hand
is! I have been trying to find you for some time, but you have always
been out or away, leaving no address."

"I have been to the sea with my Aunt Clara," she answered.

Then for a while--five minutes or more--there followed a strained and
stilted conversation.

"Will the booby never come to the point?" reflected Montalvo, surveying
him through a join in the tapestry. "By the Saints, what a fool he
looks!"

"Lysbeth," said Dirk at last, "I want to speak to you."

"Speak on, cousin," she answered.

"Lysbeth, I--I--have loved you for a long while, and I--have come to ask
you to marry me. I have put it off for a year or more for reasons which
I hope to tell you some day, but I can keep silent no longer, especially
now when I see that a much finer gentleman is trying to win you--I mean
the Spanish Count, Montalvo," he added with a jerk.

She said nothing in reply. So Dirk went on pouring out all his honest
passion in words that momentarily gathered weight and strength, till at
length they were eloquent enough. He told her how since first they met
he had loved her and only her, and how his one desire in life was to
make her happy and be happy with her. Pausing at length he began to
speak of his prospects--then she stopped him.

"Your pardon, Dirk," she said, "but I have a question to ask of you,"
and her voice died away in a kind of sob. "I have heard rumours about
you," she went on presently, "which must be cleared up. I have heard,
Dirk, that by faith you are what is called a heretic. Is it true?"

He hesitated before answering, feeling that much depended on that
answer. But it was only for an instant, since Dirk was far too honest a
man to lie.

"Lysbeth," he said, "I will tell to you what I would not tell to any
other living creature, not being one of my own brotherhood, for whether
you accept me or reject me, I know well that I am as safe in speaking
to you as when upon my knees I speak to the God I serve. I _am_ what you
call a heretic. I am a member of that true faith to which I hope to draw
you, but which if you do not wish it I should never press upon you. It
is chiefly because I am what I am that for so long I have hung back from
speaking to you, since I did not know whether it would be right--things
being thus--to ask you to mix your lot with mine, or whether I ought to
marry you, if you would marry me, keeping this secret from you. Only the
other night I sought counsel of--well, never mind of whom--and we prayed
together, and together searched the Word of God. And there, Lysbeth, by
some wonderful mercy, I found my prayer answered and my doubts solved,
for the great St. Paul had foreseen this case, as in that Book all cases
are foreseen, and I read how the unbelieving wife may be sanctified by
the husband, and the unbelieving husband by the wife. Then everything
grew clear to me, and I determined to speak. And now, dear, I have
spoken, and it is for you to answer."

"Dirk, dear Dirk," she replied almost with a cry, "alas! for the answer
which I must give you. Renounce the error of your ways, make confession,
and be reconciled to the Church and--I will marry you. Otherwise I
cannot, no, and although I love you, you and no other man"--here she put
an energy into her voice that was almost dreadful--"with all my heart
and soul and body; I cannot, I cannot, I cannot!"

Dirk heard, and his ruddy face turned ashen grey.

"Cousin," he replied, "you seek of me the one thing which I must not
give. Even for your sake I may not renounce my vows and my God as
I behold Him. Though it break my heart to bid you farewell and live
without you, here I pay you back in your own words--I cannot, I cannot,
I cannot!"

Lysbeth looked at him, and lo! his short, massive form and his
square-cut, honest countenance in that ardour of renunciation had
suffered a change to things almost divine. At that moment--to her sight
at least--this homely Hollander wore the aspect of an angel. She ground
her teeth and pressed her hands upon her heart. "For his sake--to save
him," she muttered to herself--then she spoke.

"I respect you for it, I love you for it more than ever; but, Dirk, it
is over between us. One day, here or hereafter, you will understand and
you will forgive."

"So be it," said Dirk hastily, stretching out his hand to find his hat,
for he was too blind to see. "It is a strange answer to my prayer, a
very strange answer; but doubtless you are right to follow your lights
as I am sure that I am right to follow mine. We must carry our cross,
dear Lysbeth, each of us; you see that we must carry our cross. Only I
beg of you--I don't speak as a jealous man, because the thing has gone
further than jealousy--I speak as a friend, and come what may while I
live you will always find me that--I beg of you, beware of the Spaniard,
Montalvo. I know that he followed you to the coast; I have heard too he
boasts that he will marry you. The man is wicked, although he took me
in at first. I feel it--his presence seems to poison the air, yes, this
very air I breathe. But oh! and I should like him to hear me say it,
because I am sure that he is at the bottom of all this, his hour will
come. For whatever he does he will be paid back; he will be paid back
here and hereafter. And now, good-bye. God bless you and protect you,
dear Lysbeth. If you think it wrong you are quite right not to marry me,
and I know that you will keep my secret. Good-bye, again," and lifting
her hand Dirk kissed it. Then he stumbled from the room.

As for Lysbeth she cast herself at full length, and in the bitterness of
her heart beat her brow upon the boards.



When the front door had shut behind Dirk, but not before, Montalvo
emerged from his hiding place and stood over the prostrate Lysbeth. He
tried to adopt his airy and sarcastic manner, but he was shaken by the
scene which he had overheard, shaken and somewhat frightened also, for
he felt that he had called into being passions of which the force and
fruits could not be calculated.

"Bravo! my little actress," he began, then gave it up and added in his
natural voice, "you had best rise and see me burn this paper."

Lysbeth struggled to her knees and watched him thrust the document
between two glowing peats.

"I have fulfilled my promise," he said, "and that evidence is done with,
but in case you should think of playing any tricks and not fulfilling
yours, please remember that I have fresh evidence infinitely more
valuable and convincing, to gain which, indeed, I condescended to a
stratagem not quite in keeping with my traditions. With my own ears I
heard this worthy gentleman, who is pleased to think so poorly of me,
admit that he is a heretic. That is enough to burn him any day, and
I swear that if within three weeks we are not man and wife, burn he
shall."

While he was speaking Lysbeth had risen slowly to her feet. Now she
confronted him, no longer the Lysbeth whom he had known, but a new being
filled like a cup with fury that was the more awful because it was so
quiet.

"Juan de Montalvo," she said in a low voice, "your wickedness has won
and for Dirk's sake my person and my goods must pay its price. So be it
since so it must be, but listen. I make no prophecies about you; I do
not say that this or that shall happen to you, but I call down upon you
the curse of God and the execration of men."

Then she threw up her hands and began to pray. "God, Whom it has pleased
that I should be given to a fate far worse than death; O God, blast
the mind and the soul of this monster. Let him henceforth never know
a peaceful hour; let misfortune come upon him through me and mine; let
fears haunt his sleep. Let him live in heavy labour and die in blood and
misery, and through me; and if I bear children to him, let the evil be
upon them also."

She ceased. Montalvo looked at her and tried to speak. Again he looked
and again he tried to speak, but no words would come.

Then the fear of Lysbeth van Hout fell upon him, that fear which was to
haunt him all his life. He turned and crept from the room, and his face
was like the face of an old man, nor, notwithstanding the height of his
immediate success, could his heart have been more heavy if Lysbeth
had been an angel sent straight from Heaven to proclaim to him the
unalterable doom of God.



CHAPTER VII

HENDRIK BRANT HAS A VISITOR

Nine months had gone by, and for more then eight of them Lysbeth had
been known as the Countess Juan de Montalvo. Indeed of this there could
be no doubt, since she was married with some ceremony by the Bishop in
the Groote Kerk before the eyes of all men. Folk had wondered much at
these hurried nuptials, though some of the more ill-natured shrugged
their shoulders and said that when a young woman had compromised
herself by long and lonely drives with a Spanish cavalier, and was in
consequence dropped by her own admirer, why the best thing she could do
was to marry as soon as possible.

So the pair, who looked handsome enough before the altar, were wed,
and went to taste of such nuptial bliss as was reserved for them in
Lysbeth's comfortable house in the Bree Straat. Here they lived almost
alone, for Lysbeth's countrymen and women showed their disapproval
of her conduct by avoiding her company, and, for reasons of his own,
Montalvo did not encourage the visiting of Spaniards at his house.
Moreover, the servants were changed, while Tante Clara and the girl
Greta had also disappeared. Indeed, Lysbeth, finding out the false
part which they had played towards her, dismissed them both before her
marriage.

It will be guessed that after the events that led to their union Lysbeth
took little pleasure in her husband's society. She was not one of those
women who can acquiesce in marriage by fraud or capture, and even learn
to love the hand which snared them. So it came about that to Montalvo
she spoke very seldom; indeed after the first week of marriage she only
saw him on rare occasions. Very soon he found out that his presence was
hateful to her, and turned her detestation to account with his usual
cleverness. In other words, Lysbeth bought freedom by parting with her
property--in fact, a regular tariff was established, so many guilders
for a week's liberty, so many for a month's.

This was an arrangement that suited Montalvo well enough, for in his
heart he was terrified of this woman, whose beautiful face had frozen
into a perpetual mask of watchful hatred. He could not forget that
frightful curse which had taken deep root in his superstitious mind, and
already seemed to flourish there, for it was true that since she spoke
it he had never known a quiet hour. How could he when he was haunted
night and day by the fear lest his wife should murder him?

Surely, if ever Death looked out of a woman's eyes it looked out of
hers, and it seemed to him that such a deed might trouble her conscience
little; that she might consider it in the light of an execution, and not
as a murder. Bah! he could not bear to think of it. What would it be
to drink his wine one day and then feel a hand of fire gripping at his
vitals because poison had been set within the cup; or, worse still,
if anything could be worse, to wake at night and find a stiletto point
grating against his backbone? Little wonder that Montalvo slept alone
and was always careful to lock his door.

He need not have taken such precautions; whatever her eyes might say,
Lysbeth had no intention of killing this man. In that prayer of hers she
had, as it were, placed the matter in the hand of a higher Power, and
there she meant to leave it, feeling quite convinced that although
vengeance might tarry it would fall at last. As for her money, he could
have it. From the beginning her instinct told her that her husband's
object was not amorous, but purely monetary, a fact of which she soon
had plentiful proof, and her great, indeed her only hope was that when
the wealth was gone he would go too. An otter, says the Dutch proverb,
does not nest in a dry dyke.

But oh! what months those were, what dreadful months! From time to time
she saw her husband--when he wanted cash--and every night she heard him
returning home, often with unsteady steps. Twice or thrice a week also
she was commanded to prepare a luxurious meal for himself and some six
or eight companions, to be followed by a gambling party at which the
stakes ruled high. Then in the morning, before he was up, strange people
would arrive, Jews some of them, and wait till they could see him, or
catch him as he slipped from the house by a back way. These men, Lysbeth
discovered, were duns seeking payment of old debts. Under such constant
calls her fortune, which if substantial was not great, melted rapidly.
Soon the ready money was gone, then the shares in certain ships were
sold, then the land and the house itself were mortgaged.

So the time went on.



Almost immediately after his refusal by Lysbeth, Dirk van Goorl had left
Leyden, and returned to Alkmaar, where his father lived. His cousin and
friend, however, Hendrik Brant, remained there studying the jeweller's
art under the great master of filigree work, who was known as Petrus.
One morning, as Hendrik was sitting at breakfast in his lodging, it was
announced that a woman who would not give her name, wished to see him.
Moved more by curiosity than by any other reason, he ordered her to be
admitted. When she entered he was sorry, for in the gaunt person and
dark-eyed face he recognised one against whom he had been warned by the
elders of his church as a spy, a creature who was employed by the papal
inquisitors to get up cases against heretics, and who was known as Black
Meg.

"What is your business with me?" Brant asked sternly.

"Nothing to your hurt, worthy Heer, believe me, nothing to your hurt.
Oh! yes, I know that tales are told against me, who only earn an honest
living in an honest way, to keep my poor husband, who is an imbecile.
