than to a' the border-riders ever wore Saint Andrew's cross--I reckon
their skelping back and forward, and lifting honest men's gear, has been
a main cause of a' the breach between us and England, and I am sure that
cost me a kind goodman. They spoke about the wedding of the Prince and
our Queen, but it's as like to be the driving of the Cumberland folk's
stocking that brought them down on us like dragons." Tibb would not have
failed in other circumstances to answer what she thought reflections
disparaging to her country folk; but she recollected that Dame Elspeth
was mistress of the family, curbed her own zealous patriotism, and
hastened to change the subject.

"And is it not strange," she said, "that the heiress of Avenel should
have seen her father this blessed night?"

"And ye think it was her father, then?" said Elspeth Glendinning.

"What else can I think?" said Tibb.

"It may hae been something waur, in his likeness," said Dame
Glendinning.

"I ken naething about that," said Tibb,--"but his likeness it was, that
I will be sworn to, just as he used to ride out a-hawking; for having
enemies in the country, he seldom laid off the breast-plate; and for my
part," added Tibb, "I dinna think a man looks like a man unless he has
steel on his breast, and by his side too."

"I have no skill of your harness on breast or side either," said Dame
Glendinning; "but I ken there is little luck in Hallowe'en sights, for I
have had ane myself."

"Indeed, Dame Elspeth?" said old Tibb, edging her stool closer to the
huge elbow-chair occupied by her friend, "I should like to hear about
that."

"Ye maun ken, then, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "that when I was a
hempie of nineteen or twenty, it wasna my fault if I wasna at a' the
merry-makings time about."

"That was very natural," said Tibb; "but ye hae sobered since that, or
ye wadna haud our braw gallants sae lightly."

"I have had that wad sober me or ony ane," said the matron, "Aweel,
Tibb, a lass like me wasna to lack wooers, for I wasna sae ill-favoured
that the tikes wad bark after me."

"How should that be," said Tibb, "and you sic a weel-favoured woman to
this day?"

"Fie, fie, cummer," said the matron of Glendearg, hitching her seat of
honour, in her turn, a little nearer to the cuttle-stool on which Tibb
was seated; "weel-favoured is past my time of day; but I might pass
then, for I wasna sae tocherless but what I had a bit land at my
breast-lace. My father was portioner of Little-dearg."

"Ye hae tell'd me that before," said Tibb; "but anent the Hallowe'en?"

"Aweel, aweel, I had mair joes than ane, but I favoured nane o' them;
and sae, at Hallowe'en, Father Nicolas the cellarer--he was cellarer
before this father, Father Clement, that now is--was cracking his nuts
and drinking his brown beer with us, and as blithe as might be, and they
would have me try a cantrip to ken wha suld wed me: and the monk said
there was nae ill in it, and if there was, he would assoil me for
it. And wha but I into the barn to winnow my three weights o'
naething--sair, sair my mind misgave me for fear of wrang-doing and
wrang-suffering baith; but I had aye a bauld spirit. I had not winnowed
the last weight clean out, and the moon was shining bright upon the
floor, when in stalked the presence of my dear Simon Glendinning, that
is now happy. I never saw him plainer in my life than I did that moment;
he held up an arrow as he passed me, and I swarf'd awa wi' fright.
Muckle wark there was to bring me to mysell again, and sair they tried
to make me believe it was a trick of Father Nicolas and Simon between
them, and that the arrow was to signify Cupid's shaft, as the Father
called it; and mony a time Simon wad threep it to me after I was
married--gude man, he liked not it should be said that he was seen out
o' the body!--But mark the end o' it, Tibb; we were married, and the
gray-goose wing was the death o' him after a'!"

"As it has been of ower mony brave men," said Tibb; "I wish there wasna
sic a bird as a goose in the wide warld, forby the clecking that we hae
at the burn-side."

"But tell me, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, "what does your leddy aye do
reading out o' that thick black book wi' the silver clasps?--there are
ower mony gude words in it to come frae ony body but a priest--An it
were about Robin Hood, or some o' David Lindsay's ballants, ane wad ken
better what to say to it. I am no misdoubting your mistress nae way,
but I wad like ill to hae a decent house haunted wi' ghaists and
gyrecarlines."

"Ye hae nae reason to doubt my leddy, or ony thing she says or does,
Dame Glendinning," said the faithful Tibb, something offended; "and
touching the bairn, it's weel kend she was born on Hallowe'en, was nine
years gane, and they that are born on Hallowe'en whiles see mair than
ither folk."

"And that wad be the cause, then, that the bairn didna mak muckle din
about what it saw?--if it had been my Halbert himself, forby Edward, who
is of softer nature, he wad hae yammered the haill night of a constancy.
But it's like Mistress Mary hae sic sights mair natural to her."

"That may weel be," said Tibb; "for on Hallowe'en she was born, as I
tell ye, and our auld parish priest wad fain hae had the night ower,
and All-Hallow day begun. But for a' that, the sweet bairn is just like
ither bairns, as ye may see yourself; and except this blessed night,
and ance before when we were in that weary bog on the road here, I kenna
that it saw mair than ither folk."

"But what saw she in the bog, then," said Dame Glendinning, "forby
moor-cocks and heather-blutters?"

"The wean saw something like a white leddy that weised us the gate,"
said Tibb; "when we were like to hae perished in the moss-hags--certain
it was that Shagram reisted, and I ken Martin thinks he saw something."

"And what might the white leddy be?" said Elspeth; "have ye ony guess o'
that?"

"It's weel kend that, Dame Elspeth," said Tibb; "if ye had lived under
grit folk, as I hae dune, ye wadna be to seek in that matter."

"I hae aye keepit my ain ha' house abune my head," said Elspeth, not
without emphasis, "and if I havena lived wi' grit folk, grit folk have
lived wi' me."

"Weel, weel, dame," said Tibb, "your pardon's prayed, there was nae
offence meant. But ye maun ken the great ancient families canna be just
served wi' the ordinary saunts, (praise to them!) like Saunt Anthony,
Saunt Cuthbert, and the like, that come and gang at every sinner's
bidding, but they hae a sort of saunts or angels, or what not, to
themsells; and as for the White Maiden of Avenel, she is kend ower the
haill country. And she is aye seen to yammer and wail before ony o' that
family dies, as was weel kend by twenty folk before the death of Walter
Avenel, haly be his cast!"

"If she can do nae mair than that," said Elspeth, somewhat scornfully,
"they needna make mony vows to her, I trow. Can she make nae better fend
for them than that, and has naething better to do than wait on them?"

"Mony braw services can the White Maiden do for them to the boot of
that, and has dune in the auld histories," said Tibb, "but I mind o'
naething in my day, except it was her that the bairn saw in the bog."

"Aweel, aweel, Tibb," said Dame Glendinning, rising and lighting the
iron lamp, "these are great privileges of your grand folk. But our Lady
and Saunt Paul are good eneugh saunts for me, and I'se warrant them
never leave me in a bog that they can help me out o', seeing I send four
waxen candles to their chapels every Candlemas; and if they are not seen
to weep at my death, I'se warrant them smile at my joyful rising again,
whilk Heaven send to all of us, Amen."

"Amen," answered Tibb, devoutly; "and now it's time I should hap up the
wee bit gathering turf, as the fire is ower low."

Busily she set herself to perform this duty. The relict of Simon
Glendinning did but pause a moment to cast a heedful and cautious glance
all around the hall, to see that nothing was out of its proper place;
then, wishing Tibb good-night, she retired to repose.

"The deil's in the carline," said Tibb to herself, "because she was
the wife of a cock-laird, she thinks herself grander, I trow, than the
bower-woman of a lady of that ilk!" Having given vent to her suppressed
spleen in this little ejaculation, Tibb also betook herself to slumber.




Chapter the Fifth.


  A priest, ye cry, a priest!--lame shepherds they,
  How shall they gather in the straggling flock?
  Dumb dogs which bark not--how shall they compel
  The loitering vagrants to the Master's fold?
  Fitter to bask before the blazing fire,
  And snuff the mess neat-handed Phillis dresses,
  Than on the snow-wreath battle with the wolf.
                           REFORMATION.


The health of the Lady of Avenel had been gradually decaying ever since
her disaster. It seemed as if the few years which followed her husband's
death had done on her the work of half a century. She lost the fresh
elasticity of form, the colour and the mien of health, and became
wasted, wan, and feeble. She appeared to have no formed complaint;
yet it was evident to those who looked on her, that her strength waned
daily. Her lips at length became blenched and her eye dim; yet she spoke
not of any desire to see a priest, until Elspeth Glendinning in her zeal
could not refrain from touching upon a point which she deemed essential
to salvation. Alice of Avenel received her hint kindly, and thanked her
for it.

"If any good priest would take the trouble of such a journey," she said,
"he should be welcome; for the prayers and lessons of the good must be
at all times advantageous."

This quiet acquiescence was not quite what Elspeth Glendinning wished
or expected. She made up, however, by her own enthusiasm, for the lady's
want of eagerness to avail herself of ghostly counsel, and Martin was
despatched with such haste as Shagram would make, to pray one of
the religious men of Saint Mary's to come up to administer the last
consolations to the widow of Walter Avenel.

When the Sacristan had announced to the Lord Abbot, that the Lady of
the umquhile Walter de Avenel was in very weak health in the Tower of
Glendearg, and desired the assistance of a father confessor, the lordly
monk paused on the request.

"We do remember Walter de Avenel," he said; "a good knight and
a valiant: he was dispossessed of his lands, and slain by the
Southron--May not the lady come hither to the sacrament of confession?
the road is distant and painful to travel."

"The lady is unwell, holy father," answered the Sacristan, "and unable
to bear the journey."

"True--ay,--yes--then must one of our brethren go to her--Knowest thou
if she hath aught of a jointure from this Walter de Avenel?"

"Very little, holy father," said the Sacristan; "she hath resided at
Glendearg since her husband's death, well-nigh on the charity of a poor
widow, called Elspeth Glendinning."

"Why, thou knowest all the widows in the country-side!" said the Abbot.
"Ho! ho! ho!" and he shook his portly sides at his own jest.

"Ho! ho! ho!" echoed the Sacristan, in the tone and tune in which
an inferior applauds the jest of his superior.--Then added, with a
hypocritical shuffle, and a sly twinkle of his eye, "It is our duty,
most holy father, to comfort the widow--He! he! he!"

This last laugh was more moderate, until the Abbot should put his
sanction on the jest.

"Ho! ho!" said the Abbot; "then, to leave jesting, Father Philip, take
thou thy riding gear, and go to confess this Dame Avenel."

"But," said the Sacristan----

"Give me no _Buts;_ neither But nor If pass between monk and Abbot,
Father Philip; the bands of discipline must not be relaxed--heresy
gathers force like a snow-ball--the multitude expect confessions and
preachings from the Benedictine, as they would from so many beggarly
friars--and we may not desert the vineyard, though the toil be grievous
unto us."

"And with so little advantage to the holy monastery," said the
Sacristan.

"True, Father Philip; but wot you not that what preventeth harm doth
good? This Julian de Avenel lives a light and evil life, and should we
neglect the widow of his brother, he might foray our lands, and we never
able to show who hurt us--moreover it is our duty to an ancient family,
who, in their day, have been benefactors to the Abbey. Away with thee
instantly, brother; ride night and day, an it be necessary, and let men
see how diligent Abbot Boniface and his faithful children are in the
execution of their spiritual duty--toil not deterring them, for the glen
is five miles in length--fear not withholding them, for it is said to be
haunted of spectres--nothing moving them from pursuit of their spiritual
calling; to the confusion of calumnious heretics, and the comfort and
edification of all true and faithful sons of the Catholic Church. I
wonder what our brother Eustace will say to this?"

Breathless with his own picture of the dangers and toil which he was to
encounter, and the fame which he was to acquire, (both by proxy,) the
Abbot moved slowly to finish his luncheon in the refectory, and the
Sacristan, with no very good will, accompanied old Martin in his return
to Glendearg; the greatest impediment in the journey being the trouble
of restraining his pampered mule, that she might tread in something like
an equal pace with poor jaded Shagram.

After remaining an hour in private with his penitent, the monk returned
moody and full of thought. Dame Elspeth, who had placed for the honoured
guest some refreshment in the hall, was struck with the embarrassment
which appeared in his countenance. Elspeth watched him with great
anxiety. She observed there was that on his brow which rather resembled
a person come from hearing the confession of some enormous crime, than
the look of a confessor who resigns a reconciled penitent, not to earth,
but to heaven. After long hesitating, she could not at length refrain
from hazarding a question. She was sure she said, the leddy had made an
easy shrift. Five years had they resided together, and she could safely
say, no woman lived better.

"Woman," said the Sacristan, sternly, "thou speakest thou knowest not
what--What avails clearing the outside of the platter, if the inside be
foul with heresy?"

"Our dishes and trenchers are not so clean as they could be wished,
holy father," said Elspeth, but half understanding what he said, and
beginning with her apron to wipe the dust from the plates, of which she
supposed him to complain.

"Forbear, Dame Elspeth" said the monk; "your plates are as clean as
wooden trenchers and pewter flagons can well be; the foulness of which
I speak is of that pestilential heresy which is daily becoming ingrained
in this our Holy Church of Scotland, and as a canker-worm in the
rose-garland of the Spouse."

"Holy Mother of Heaven!" said Dame Elspeth, crossing herself, "have I
kept house with a heretic?"

"No, Elspeth, no," replied the monk; "it were too strong a speech for me
to make of this unhappy lady, but I would I could say she is free
from heretical opinions. Alas! they fly about like the pestilence by
noon-day, and infect even the first and fairest of the flock! For it
is easy to see of this dame, that she hath been high in judgment as in
rank."

"And she can write and read, I had almost said, as weel as your
reverence" said Elspeth.

"Whom doth she write to, and what doth she read?" said the monk,
eagerly.

"Nay," replied Elspeth, "I cannot say I ever saw her write at all, but
her maiden that was--she now serves the family--says she can write--And
for reading, she has often read to us good things out of a thick black
volume with silver clasps."

"Let me see it," said the monk, hastily, "on your allegiance as a true
vassal--on your faith as a Catholic Christian--instantly--instantly let
me see it."

The good woman hesitated, alarmed at the tone in which the confessor
took up her information; and being moreover of opinion, that what so
good a woman as the Lady of Avenel studied so devoutly, could not be of
a tendency actually evil. But borne down by the clamour, exclamations,
and something like threats used by Father Philip, she at length brought
him the fatal volume. It was easy to do this without suspicion on the
part of the owner, as she lay on her bed exhausted with the fatigue of a
long conference with her confessor, and as the small _round_, or turret
closet, in which was the book and her other trifling property, was
accessible by another door. Of all her effects the book was the last she
would have thought of securing, for of what use or interest could it be
in a family who neither read themselves, nor were in the habit of
seeing any who did? so that Dame Elspeth had no difficulty in possessing
herself of the volume, although her heart all the while accused her of
an ungenerous and an inhospitable part towards her friend and inmate.
The double power of a landlord and a feudal superior was before her
eyes; and to say truth, the boldness, with which she might otherwise
have resisted this double authority, was, I grieve to say it, much
qualified by the curiosity she entertained, as a daughter of Eve, to
have some explanation respecting the mysterious volume which the lady
cherished with so much care, yet whose contents she imparted with such
caution. For never had Alice of Avenel read them any passage from the
book in question until the iron door of the tower was locked, and all
possibility of intrusion prevented. Even then she had shown, by the
selection of particular passages, that she was more anxious to impress
on their minds the principles which the volume contained, than to
introduce them to it as a new rule of faith.

When Elspeth, half curious, half remorseful, had placed the book in the
monk's hands, he exclaimed, after turning over the leaves, "Now, by mine
order, it is as I suspected!--My mule, my mule!--I will abide no longer
here--well hast thou done, dame, in placing in my hands this perilous
volume."

"Is it then witchcraft or devil's work?" said Dame Elspeth, in great
agitation.

"Nay, God forbid!" said the monk, signing himself with the cross, "it
is the Holy Scripture. But it is rendered into the vulgar tongue, and
therefore, by the order of the Holy Catholic Church, unfit to be in the
hands of any lay person."

"And yet is the Holy Scripture communicated for our common salvation,"
said Elspeth. "Good Father, you must instruct mine ignorance better; but
lack of wit cannot be a deadly sin, and truly, to my poor thinking, I
should be glad to read the Holy Scripture."

"I dare say thou wouldst," said the monk; "and even thus did our mother
Eve seek to have knowledge of good and evil, and thus Sin came into the
world, and Death by Sin."

"I am sure, and it is true," said Elspeth. "Oh, if she had dealt by the
counsel of Saint Peter and Saint Paul!"

"If she had reverenced the command of Heaven," said the monk, "which,
as it gave her birth, life, and happiness, fixed upon the grant such
conditions as best corresponded with its holy pleasure. I tell thee,
Elspeth, _the Word slayeth_--that is, the text alone, read with
unskilled eye and unhallowed lips, is like those strong medicines which
sick men take by the advice of the learned. Such patients recover and
thrive; while those dealing in them at their own hand, shall perish by
their own deed."

"Nae doubt, nae doubt," said the poor woman, "your reverence knows
best."

"Not I," said Father Philip, in a tone as deferential as he thought
could possibly become the Sacristan of Saint Mary's,--"Not I, but the
Holy Father of Christendom, and our own holy father, the Lord Abbot,
know best. I, the poor Sacristan of Saint Mary's, can but repeat what I
hear from others my superiors. Yet of this, good woman, be assured,--the
Word, the mere Word, slayetlh. But the church hath her ministers to
gloze and to expound the same unto her faithful congregation; and this
I say, not so much, my beloved brethren--I mean my beloved sister," (for
the Sacristan had got into the end of one of his old sermons,)--"This I
speak not so much of the rectors, curates, and secular clergy, so called
because they live after the fashion of the _seculum_ or age, unbound by
those ties which sequestrate us from the world; neither do I speak
this of the mendicant friars, whether black or gray, whether crossed or
uncrossed; but of the monks, and especially of the monks Benedictine,
reformed on the rule of Saint Bernard of Clairvaux, thence called
Cistercian, of which monks, Christian brethren--sister, I would
say--great is the happiness and glory of the country in possessing the
holy ministers of Saint Mary's, whereof I, though an unworthy brother,
may say it hath produced more saints, more bishops, more popes--may
our patrons make us thankful!--than any holy foundation in Scotland.
Wherefore--But I see Martin hath my mule in readiness, and I will but
salute you with the kiss of sisterhood, which maketh not ashamed, and so
betake me to my toilsome return, for the glen is of bad reputation for
the evil spirits which haunt it. Moreover, I may arrive too late at the
bridge, whereby I may be obliged to take to the river, which I observed
to be somewhat waxen."

Accordingly, he took his leave of Dame Elspeth, who was confounded by
the rapidity of his utterance, and the doctrine he gave forth, and by no
means easy on the subject of the book, which her conscience told her she
should not have communicated to any one, without the knowledge of its
owner.

Notwithstanding the haste which the monk as well as the mule made to
return to better quarters than they had left at the head of Glendearg;
notwithstanding the eager desire Father Philip had to be the very first
who should acquaint the Abbot that a copy of the book they most
dreaded had been found within the Halidome, or patrimony of the Abbey;
notwithstanding, moreover, certain feelings which induced him to hurry
as fast as possible through the gloomy and evil-reputed glen, still
the difficulties of the road, and the rider's want of habitude of quick
motion, were such, that twilight came upon him ere he had nearly cleared
the narrow valley. It was indeed a gloomy ride. The two sides of the
vale were so near, that at every double of the river the shadows from
the western sky fell upon, and totally obscured, the eastern bank; the
thickets of copsewood seemed to wave with a portentous agitation of
boughs and leaves, and the very crags and scaurs seemed higher and
grimmer than they had appeared to the monk while he was travelling in
daylight, and in company. Father Philip was heartily rejoiced, when,
emerging from the narrow glen, he gained the open valley of the Tweed,
which held on its majestic course from current to pool, and from pool
stretched away to other currents, with a dignity peculiar to itself
amongst the Scottish rivers; for whatever may have been the drought
of the season, the Tweed usually fills up the space between its banks,
seldom leaving those extensive sheets of shingle which deform the
margins of many of the celebrated Scottish streams.

The monk, insensible to beauties which the age had not regarded as
deserving of notice, was, nevertheless, like a prudent general, pleased
to find himself out of the narrow glen in which the enemy might have
stolen upon him unperceived. He drew up his bridle, reduced his mule
to her natural and luxurious amble, instead of the agitating and
broken trot at which, to his no small inconvenience, she had hitherto
proceeded, and, wiping his brow, gazed forth at leisure on the broad
moon, which, now mingling with the lights of evening, was rising over
field and forest, village and fortalice, and, above all, over the
stately Monastery, seen far and dim amid the vellow light.

The worst part of the magnificent view, in the monk's apprehension, was,
that the Monastery stood on the opposite side of the river, and that of
the many fine bridges which have since been built across that classical
stream, not one then existed. There was, however, in recompense, a
bridge then standing which has since disappeared, although its ruins may
still be traced by the curious.

It was of a very peculiar form. Two strong abutments were built on
either side of the river, at a part where the stream was peculiarly
contracted. Upon a rock in the centre of the current was built a solid
piece of masonry, constructed like the pier of a bridge, and presenting,
like a pier, an angle to the current of the stream. The masonry
continued solid until the pier rose to a level with the two abutments
upon either side, and from thence the building rose in the form of a
tower. The lower story of this tower consisted only of an archway or
passage through the building, over either entrance to which hung a
drawbridge with counterpoises, either of which, when dropped, connected
the archway with the opposite abutment, where the farther end of the
drawbridge rested. When both bridges were thus lowered, the passage over
the river was complete.

The bridge-keeper, who was the dependant of a neighbouring baron,
resided with his family in the second and third stories of the tower,
which, when both drawbridges were raised, formed an insulated fortalice
in the midst of the river. He was entitled to a small toll or custom
for the passage, concerning the amount of which disputes sometimes
arose between him and the passengers. It is needless to say, that the
bridge-ward had usually the better in these questions, since he could at
pleasure detain the traveller on the opposite side; or, suffering him
to pass half way, might keep him prisoner in his tower till they were
agreed on the rate of pontage.

[Footnote: A bridge of the very peculiar construction described in the
text, actually existed at a small hamlet about a mile and a half above
Melrose, called from the circumstance Bridge-end. It is thus noticed in
Gordon's _Iter Septentrionale_:--

"In another journey through the south parts of Scotland, about a mile
and a half from Melrose, in the shire of Teviotdale, I saw the remains
of a curious bridge over the river Tweed, consisting of three octangular
pillars, or rather towers, standing within the water, without any arches
to join them. The middle one, which is the most entire, has a door
towards the north, and I suppose another opposite one toward the south,
which I could not see without crossing the water. In the middle of this
tower is a projection or cornice surrounding it: the whole is hollow
from the door upwards, and now open at the top, near which is a small
window. I was informed that not long agro a countryman and his family
lived in this tower--and got his livelihood by laying out planks from
pillar to pillar, and conveying passengers over the river. Whether this
be ancient or modern, I know not; but as it is singular in its kind I
have thought fit to exhibit it."

The vestiges of this uncommon species of bridge still exist, and the
author has often seen the foundations of the columns when drifting down
the Tweed at night for the purpose of killing salmon by torch-light.
Mr. John Mercer of Bridge-end recollects, that about fifty years ago the
pillars were visible above water; and the late Mr. David Kyle, of the
George Inn, Melrose, told the author that he saw a stone taken from the
river bearing this inscription:--

"I, Sir John Pringle of Palmer stede, Give an hundred markis of gowd sae
reid, To help to bigg my brigg ower Tweed."

Pringle of Galashiels, afterwards of Whytbank, was the Baron to whom the
bridge belonged.]

But it was most frequently with the Monks of Saint Mary's that the
warder had to dispute his perquisites. These holy men insisted for, and
at length obtained, a right of gratuitous passage to themselves, greatly
to the discontent of the bridge-keeper. But when they demanded the
same immunity for the numerous pilgrims who visited the shrine, the
bridge-keeper waxed restive, and was supported by his lord in his
resistance. The controversy grew animated on both sides; the Abbot
menaced excommunication, and the keeper of the bridge, though unable to
retaliate in kind, yet made each individual monk who had to cross and
recross the river, endure a sort of purgatory, ere he would accommodate
them with a passage. This was a great inconvenience, and would have
proved a more serious one, but that the river was fordable for man and
horse in ordinary weather.

It was a fine moonlight night, as we have already said, when Father
Philip approached this bridge, the singular construction of which gives
a curious idea of the insecurity of the times. The river was not in
flood, but it was above its ordinary level--_a heavy water_, as it
is called in that country, through which the monk had no particular
inclination to ride, if he could manage the matter better.

"Peter, my good friend," cried the Sacristan, raising his voice; "my
very excellent friend, Peter, be so kind as to lower the drawbridge.
Peter, I say, dost thou not hear?--it is thy gossip, Father Philip, who
calls thee."

Peter heard him perfectly well, and saw him into the bargain; but as he
had considered the Sacristan as peculiarly his enemy in his dispute
with the convent, he went quietly to bed, after reconnoitring the monk
through his loop-hole, observing to his wife, that "riding the water in
a moonlight night would do the Sacristan no harm, and would teach him
the value of a brig the neist time, on whilk a man might pass high and
dry, winter and summer, flood and ebb."

After exhausting his voice in entreaties and threats, which were equally
unattended to by Peter of the Brig, as he was called, Father Philip at
length moved down the river to take the ordinary ford at the head of
the next stream. Cursing the rustic obstinacy of Peter, he began,
nevertheless, to persuade himself that the passage of the river by the
ford was not only safe, but pleasant. The banks and scattered trees were
so beautifully reflected from the bosom of the dark stream, the whole
cool and delicious picture formed so pleasing a contrast to his late
agitation, to the warmth occasioned by his vain endeavours to move the
relentless porter of the bridge, that the result was rather agreeable
than otherwise.

As Father Philip came close to the water's edge, at the spot where
he was to enter it, there sat a female under a large broken scathed
oak-tree, or rather under the remains of such a tree, weeping, wringing
her hands, and looking earnestly on the current of the river. The monk
was struck with astonishment to see a female there at that time of
night. But he was, in all honest service,--and if a step farther, I put
it upon his own conscience,--a devoted squire of dames. After observing
the maiden for a moment, although she seemed to take no notice of
his presence, he was moved by her distress, and willing to offer his
assistance. "Damsel," said he, "thou seemest in no ordinary distress;
peradventure, like myself, thou hast been refused passage at the bridge
by the churlish keeper, and thy crossing may concern thee either for
performance of a vow, or some other weighty charge."

The maiden uttered some inarticulate sounds, looked at the river, and
then in the face of the Sacristan. It struck Father Philip at that
instant, that a Highland chief of distinction had been for some time
expected to pay his vows at the shrine of Saint Mary's; and that
possibly this fair maiden might be one of his family, travelling alone
for accomplishment of a vow, or left behind by some accident, to whom,
therefore, it would be but right and prudent to use every civility
in his power, especially as she seemed unacquainted with the Lowland
tongue. Such at least was the only motive the Sacristan was ever known
to assign for his courtesy; if there was any other, I once more refer it
to his own conscience.

To express himself by signs, the common language of all nations, the
cautious Sacristan first pointed to the river, then to his mule's
crupper, and then made, as gracefully as he could, a sign to induce the
fair solitary to mount behind him. She seemed to understand his meaning,
for she rose up as if to accept his offer; and while the good monk, who,
as we have hinted, was no great cavalier, laboured, with the pressure of
the right leg and the use of the left rein, to place his mule with her
side to the bank in such a position that the lady might mount with ease,
she rose from the ground with rather portentous activity, and at one
bound sate behind the monk upon the animal, much the firmer rider of the
two. The mule by no means seemed to approve of this double burden; she
bounded, bolted, and would soon have thrown Father Philip over her head,
had not the maiden with a firm hand detained him in the saddle.

At last the restive brute changed her humour; and, from refusing to
budge off the spot, suddenly stretched her nose homeward, and dashed
into the ford as fast as she could scamper. A new terror now invaded
the monk's mind--the ford seemed unusually deep, the water eddied off in
strong ripple from the counter of the mule, and began to rise upon her
side. Philip lost his presence of mind,--which was at no time his most
ready attribute, the mule yielded to the weight of the current, and as
the rider was not attentive to keep her head turned up the river, she
drifted downward, lost the ford and her footing at once, and began to
swim with her head down the stream. And what was sufficiently strange,
