you, and four or five of your fellows, go to the armoury and slip
on coats-of-mail; our Netherlandish corslets do not appal them so
much. Then let the Welsh thief be blindfolded and brought in
amongst us--Do you hold up your heads and keep silence--leave me
to deal with him--only have a care there be no English among us."

The monk, who in his travels had acquired some slight knowledge of
the Flemish language, had well-nigh started when he heard the last
article in Wilkin's instructions to his countryman, but commanded
himself, although a little surprised, both at this suspicious
circumstance, and at the readiness and dexterity with which the
rough-hewn Fleming seemed to adapt his preparations to the rules
of war and of sound policy.

Wilkin, on his part, was not very certain whether the monk had not
heard and understood more of what he said to his countryman, than
what he had intended. As if to lull asleep any suspicion which
Father Aldrovand might entertain, he repeated to him in English
most of the directions which he had given, adding, "Well, good
father, what think you of it?"

"Excellent well," answered the father, "and done as if you had
practised war from the cradle, instead of weaving broad-cloth."

"Nay, spare not your jibes, father," answered Wilkin.--"I know
full well that you English think that Flemings have nought in
their brainpan but sodden beef and cabbage; yet you see there goes
wisdom to weaving of webs."

"Right, Master Wilkin Flammock," answered the father; "but, good
Fleming, wilt thou tell me what answer thou wilt make to the Welsh
Prince's summons?"

"Reverend father, first tell me what the summons will be," replied
the Fleming.

"To surrender this castle upon the instant," answered the monk.
"What will be your reply?"

"My answer will be, Nay--unless upon good composition."

"How, Sir Fleming! dare you mention composition and the castle of
the Garde Doloureuse in one sentence?" said the monk.

"Not if I may do better," answered the Fleming. "But would your
reverence have me dally until the question amongst the garrison
be, whether a plump priest or a fat Fleming will be the better
flesh to furnish their shambles?"

"Pshaw!" replied Father Aldrovand, "thou canst not mean such
folly. Relief must arrive within twenty-four hours at farthest.
Raymond Berenger expected it for certain within such a space."

"Raymond Berenger has been deceived this morning in more matters
than one," answered the Fleming.

"Hark thee, Flanderkin," answered the monk, whose retreat from the
world had not altogether quenched his military habits and
propensities, "I counsel thee to deal uprightly in this matter, as
thou dost regard thine own life; for here are as many English left
alive, notwithstanding the slaughter of to-day, as may well
suffice to fling the Flemish bull-frogs into the castle-ditch,
should they have cause to think thou meanest falsely, in the
keeping of this castle, and the defence of the Lady Eveline."

"Let not your reverence be moved with unnecessary and idle fears,"
replied Wilkin Flammock--"I am castellane in this house, by
command of its lord, and what I hold for the advantage of mine
service, that will I do."

"But I," said the angry monk, "I am the servant of the Pope--the
chaplain of this castle, with power to bind and unloose. I fear me
thou art no true Christian, Wilkin Flammock, but dost lean to the
heresy of the mountaineers. Thou hast refused to take the blessed
cross--thou hast breakfasted, and drunk both ale and wine, ere
thou hast heard mass. Thou art not to be trusted, man, and I will
not trust thee--I demand to be present at the conference betwixt
thee and the Welshman."

"It may not be, good father," said Wilkin, with the same smiling,
heavy countenance, which he maintained on all occasions of life,
however urgent. "It is true, as thou sayest, good father, that I
have mine own reasons for not marching quite so far as the gates
of Jericho at present; and lucky I have such reasons, since I had
not else been here to defend the gate of the Garde Doloureuse. It
is also true that I may have been sometimes obliged to visit my
mills earlier than the chaplain was called by his zeal to the
altar, and that my stomach brooks not working ere I break my fast.
But for this, father, I have paid a mulet even to your worshipful
reverence, and methinks since you are pleased to remember the
confession so exactly, you should not forget the penance and the
absolution."

The monk, in alluding to the secrets of the confessional, had gone
a step beyond what the rules of his order and of the church
permitted. He was baffled by the Fleming's reply, and finding him
unmoved by the charge of heresy, he could only answer, in some
confusion, "You refuse, then, to admit me to the conference with
the Welshman?"

"Reverend father," said Wilkin, "it altogether respecteth secular
matters. If aught of religious tenor should intervene, you shall
be summoned without delay."

"I will be there in spite of thee, thou Flemish ox," muttered the
monk to himself, but in a tone not to be heard by the by-standers;
and so speaking he left the battlements.

Wilkin Flammock, a few minutes afterwards, having first seen that
all was arranged on the battlements, so as to give an imposing
idea of a strength which did not exist, descended to a small
guard-room, betwixt the outer and inner gate, where he was
attended by half-a-dozen of his own people, disguised in the
Norman armour which they had found in the armoury of the castle,--
their strong, tall, and bulky forms, and motionless postures,
causing them to look rather like trophies of some past age, than
living and existing soldiers. Surrounded by these huge and
inanimate figures, in a little vaulted room which almost excluded
daylight, Flammock received the Welsh envoy, who was led in
blindfolded betwixt two Flemings, yet not so carefully watched but
that they permitted him to have a glimpse of the preparations on
the battlements, which had, in fact, been made chiefly for the
purpose of imposing on him. For the same purpose an occasional
clatter of arms was made without; voices were heard as if officers
were going their rounds; and other sounds of active preparation
seemed to announce that a numerous and regular garrison was
preparing to receive an attack.

When the bandage was removed from Jorworth's eyes,--for the same
individual who had formerly brought Gwenwyn's offer of alliance,
now bare his summons of surrender,--he looked haughtily around him
and demanded to whom he was to deliver the commands of his master,
the Gwenwyn, son of Cyvelioc, Prince of Powys.

"His highness," answered Flammock, with his usual smiling
indifference of manner, "must be contented to treat with Wilkin
Flammock of the Fulling-mills, deputed governor of the Garde
Doloureuse."

"Thou deputed governor!" exclaimed Jorworth; "thou?--a Low-country
weaver!--it is impossible. Low as they are, the English Crogan
[Footnote: This is a somewhat contumelious epithet applied by the
Welsh to the English.] cannot have sunk to a point so low, as to
be commanded by _thee!_--these men seem English, to them I
will deliver my message."

"You may if you will," replied Wilkin, "but if they return you any
answer save by signs, you shall call me _schelm_."

"Is this true?" said the Welsh envoy, looking towards the men-at-
arms, as they seemed, by whom Flammock was attended; "are you
really come to this pass? I thought that the mere having been born
on British earth, though the children of spoilers and invaders,
had inspired you with too much pride to brook the yoke of a base
mechanic. Or, if you are not courageous, should you not be
cautious?--Well speaks the proverb, Wo to him that will trust a
stranger! Still mute--still silent?--answer me by word or sign--Do
you really call and acknowledge him as your leader?"

The men in armour with one accord nodded their casques in reply to
Jorworth's question, and then remained motionless as before.

The Welshman, with the acute genius of his country, suspected
there was something in this which he could not entirely
comprehend, but, preparing himself to be upon his guard, he
proceeded as follows: "Be it as it may, I care not who hears the
message of my sovereign, since it brings pardon and mercy to the
inhabitants of this Castell an Carrig, [Footnote: Castle of the
Craig.] which you have called the Garde Doloureuse, to cover the
usurpation of the territory by the change of the name. Upon
surrender of the same to the Prince of Powys, with its
dependencies, and with the arms which it contains, and with the
maiden Eveline Berenger, all within the castle shall depart
unmolested, and have safe-conduct wheresoever they will, to go
beyond the marches of the Cymry."

"And how, if we obey not this summons?" said the imperturbable
Wilkin Flammock.

"Then shall your portion be with Raymond Berenger, your late
leader," replied Jorworth, his eyes, while he was speaking,
glancing with the vindictive ferocity which dictated his answer.
"So many strangers as be here amongst ye, so many bodies to the
ravens, so many heads to the gibbet!--It is long since the kites
have had such a banquet of lurdane Flemings and false Saxons."

"Friend Jorworth," said Wilkin, "if such be thy only message, bear
mine answer back to thy master, That wise men trust not to the
words of others that safety, which they can secure by their own
deeds. We have walls high and strong enough, deep moats, and
plenty of munition, both longbow and arblast. We will keep the
castle, trusting the castle will keep us, till God shall send us
succour."

"Do not peril your lives on such an issue," said the Welsh
emissary, changing his language to the Flemish, which, from
occasional communication with those of that nation in
Pembrokeshire, he spoke fluently, and which he now adopted, as if
to conceal the purport of his discourse from the supposed English
in the apartment. "Hark thee hither," he proceeded, "good Fleming.
Knowest thou not that he in whom is your trust, the Constable De
Lacy, hath bound himself by his vow to engage in no quarrel till
he crosses the sea, and cannot come to your aid without perjury?
He and the other Lords Marchers have drawn their forces far
northward to join the host of Crusaders. What will it avail you to
put us to the toil and trouble of a long siege, when you can hope
no rescue?"

"And what will it avail me more," said Wilkin, answering in his
native language and looking at the Welshman fixedly, yet with a
countenance from which all expression seemed studiously banished,
and which exhibited, upon features otherwise tolerable, a
remarkable compound of dulness and simplicity, "what will it avail
me whether your trouble be great or small?"

"Come, friend Flammock," said the Welshman, "frame not thyself
more unapprehensive than nature hath formed thee. The glen is
dark, but a sunbeam can light the side of it. Thy utmost efforts
cannot prevent the fall of this castle; but thou mayst hasten it,
and the doing so shall avail thee much." Thus speaking, he drew
close up to Wilkin, and sunk his voice to an insinuating whisper,
as he said, "Never did the withdrawing of a bar, or the raising of
a portcullis, bring such vantage to Fleming as they may to thee,
if thou wilt."

"I only know," said Wilkin, "that the drawing the one, and the
dropping the other, have cost me my whole worldly subsistence."

"Fleming, it shall be compensated to thee with an overflowing
measure. The liberality of Gwenwyn is as the summer rain."

"My whole mills and buildings have been this morning burnt to the
earth--"

"Thou shalt have a thousand marks of silver, man, in the place of
thy goods," said the Welshman; but the Fleming continued, without
seeming to hear him, to number up his losses.

"My lands are forayed, twenty kine driven off, and--"

"Threescore shall replace them," interrupted Jorworth, "chosen
from the most bright-skinned of the spoil."

"But my daughter--but the Lady Eveline"--said the Fleming, with
some slight change in his monotonous voice, which seemed to
express doubt and perplexity--"You are cruel conquerors, and--"

"To those who resist us we are fearful," said Jorworth, "but not
to such as shall deserve clemency by surrender. Gwenwyn will
forget the contumelies of Raymond, and raise his daughter to high
honour among the daughters of the Cymry. For thine own child, form
but a wish for her advantage, and it shall be fulfilled to the
uttermost. Now, Fleming, we understand each other."

"I understand thee, at least," said Flammock.

"And I thee, I trust?" said Jorworth, bending his keen, wild blue
eye on the stolid and unexpressive face of the Netherlander, like
an eager student who seeks to discover some hidden and mysterious
meaning in a passage of a classic author, the direct import of
which seems trite and trivial.

"You believe that you understand me," said Wilkin; "but here lies
the difficulty,--which of us shall trust the other?"

"Darest thou ask?" answered Jorworth. "Is it for thee, or such as
thee, to express doubt of the purposes of the Prince of Powys?"

"I know them not, good Jorworth, but through thee; and well I wot
thou art not one who will let thy traffic miscarry for want of aid
from the breath of thy mouth."

"As I am a Christian man," said Jorworth, hurrying asseveration on
asseveration--"by the soul of my father--by the faith of my
mother--by the black rood of--"

"Stop, good Jorworth--thou heapest thine oaths too thickly on each
other, for me to value them to the right estimate," said Flammock;
"that which is so lightly pledged, is sometimes not thought worth
redeeming. Some part of the promised guerdon in hand the whilst,
were worth an hundred oaths."

"Thou suspicious churl, darest thou doubt my word?"

"No--by no means," answered Wilkin;--"nevertheless, I will believe
thy deed more readily."

"To the point, Fleming," said Jorworth--"What wouldst thou have of
me?"

"Let me have some present sight of the money thou didst promise,
and I will think of the rest of thy proposal."

"Base silver-broker!" answered Jorworth, "thinkest thou the Prince
of Powys has as many money-bags, as the merchants of thy land of
sale and barter? He gathers treasures by his conquests, as the
waterspout sucks up water by its strength, but it is to disperse
them among his followers, as the cloudy column restores its
contents to earth and ocean. The silver that I promise thee has
yet to be gathered out of the Saxon chests--nay, the casket of
Berenger himself must be ransacked to make up the tale."

"Methinks I could do that myself, (having full power in the
castle,) and so save you a labour," said the Fleming.

"True," answered Jorworth, "but it would be at the expense of a
cord and a noose, whether the Welsh took the place or the Normans
relieved it--the one would expect their booty entire--the other
their countryman's treasures to be delivered undiminished."

"I may not gainsay that," said the Fleming. "Well, say I were
content to trust you thus far, why not return my cattle, which are
in your own hands, and at your disposal? If you do not pleasure me
in something beforehand, what can I expect of you afterwards?"

"I would pleasure you in a greater matter," answered the equally
suspicious Welshman. "But what would it avail thee to have thy
cattle within the fortress? They can be better cared for on the
plain beneath."

"In faith," replied the Fleming, "thou sayst truth--they will be
but a trouble to us here, where we have so many already provided
for the use of the garrison.--And yet, when I consider it more
closely, we have enough of forage to maintain all we have, and
more. Now, my cattle are of a peculiar stock, brought from the
rich pastures of Flanders, and I desire to have them restored ere
your axes and Welsh hooks be busy with their hides."

"You shall have them this night, hide and horn," said Jorworth;
"it is but a small earnest of a great boon."

"Thanks to your munificence," said the Fleming; "I am a simple-
minded man, and bound my wishes to the recovery of my own
property."

"Thou wilt be ready, then, to deliver the castle?" said Jorworth.

"Of that we will talk farther to-morrow," said Wilkin Flammock;
"if these English and Normans should suspect such a purpose, we
should have wild work--they must be fully dispersed ere I can hold
farther communication on the subject. Meanwhile, I pray thee,
depart suddenly, and as if offended with the tenor of our
discourse."

"Yet would I fain know something more fixed and absolute," said
Jorworth.

"Impossible--impossible," said the Fleming: "see you not yonder
tall fellow begins already to handle his dagger--Go hence in
haste, and angrily--and forget not the cattle."

"I will not forget them," said Jorworth; "but if thou keep not
faith with us--"

So speaking, he left the apartment with a gesture of menace,
partly really directed to Wilkin himself, partly assumed in
consequence of his advice. Flammock replied in English, as if that
all around might understand, what he said,

"Do thy worst, Sir Welshman! I am a true man; I defy the proposals
of rendition, and will hold out this castle to thy shame and thy
master's!--Here--let him be blindfolded once more, and returned in
safety to his attendants without; the next Welshman who appears
before the gate of the Garde Doloureuse, shall be more sharply
received."

The Welshman was blindfolded and withdrawn, when, as Wilkin
Flammock himself left the guardroom, one of the seeming men-at-
arms, who had been present at this interview, said in his ear, in
English, "Thou art a false traitor, Flammock, and shalt die a
traitor's death!"

Startled at this, the Fleming would have questioned the man
farther, but he had disappeared so soon as the words were uttered.
Flammock was disconcerted by this circumstance, which showed him
that his interview with Jorworth had been observed, and its
purpose known or conjectured, by some one who was a stranger to
his confidence, and might thwart his intentions; and he quickly
after learned that this was the case.




CHAPTER THE SIXTH


  Blessed Mary, mother dear,
  To a maiden bend thine ear,
  Virgin undefiled, to thee
  A wretched virgin bends the knee.
    HYMN TO THE VIRGIN.


The daughter of the slaughtered Raymond had descended from the
elevated station whence she had beheld the field of battle, in the
agony of grief natural to a child whose eyes have beheld the death
of an honoured and beloved father. But her station, and the
principles of chivalry in which she had been trained up, did not
permit any prolonged or needless indulgence of inactive sorrow. In
raising the young and beautiful of the female sex to the rank of
princesses, or rather goddesses, the spirit of that singular
system exacted from them, in requital, a tone of character, and a
line of conduct, superior and something contradictory to that of
natural or merely human feeling. Its heroines frequently resembled
portraits shown by an artificial light--strong and luminous, and
which placed in high relief the objects on which it was turned;
but having still something of adventitious splendour, which,
compared with that of the natural day, seemed glaring and
exaggerated.

It was not permitted to the orphan of the Garde Doloureuse, the
daughter of a line of heroes, whose stem was to be found in the
race of Thor, Balder, Odin, and other deified warriors of the
North, whose beauty was the theme of a hundred minstrels, and her
eyes the leading star of half the chivalry of the warlike marches
of Wales, to mourn her sire with the ineffectual tears of a
village maiden. Young as she was, and horrible as was the incident
which she had but that instant witnessed, it was not altogether so
appalling to her as to a maiden whose eye had not been accustomed
to the rough, and often fatal sports of chivalry, and whose
residence had not been among scenes and men where war and death
had been the unceasing theme of every tongue, whose imagination
had not been familiarized with wild and bloody events, or,
finally, who had not been trained up to consider an honourable
"death under shield," as that of a field of battle was termed, as
a more desirable termination to the life of a warrior, than that
lingering and unhonoured fate which comes slowly on, to conclude
the listless and helpless inactivity of prolonged old age.
Eveline, while she wept for her father, felt her bosom glow when
she recollected that he died in the blaze of his fame, and amidst
heaps of his slaughtered enemies; and when she thought of the
exigencies of her own situation, it was with the determination to
defend her own liberty, and to avenge her father's death, by every
means which Heaven had left within her power.

The aids of religion were not forgotten; and according to the
custom of the times, and the doctrines of the Roman church, she
endeavoured to propitiate the favour of Heaven by vows as well as
prayers. In a small crypt, or oratory, adjoining to the chapel,
was hung over an altar-piece, on which a lamp constantly burned, a
small picture of the Virgin Mary, revered as a household and
peculiar deity by the family of Berenger, one of whose ancestors
had brought it from the Holy Land, whither he had gone upon
pilgrimage. It was of the period of the Lower Empire, a Grecian
painting, not unlike those which in Catholic countries are often
imputed to the Evangelist Luke. The crypt in which it was placed
was accounted a shrine of uncommon sanctity--nay, supposed to have
displayed miraculous powers; and Eveline, by the daily garland of
flowers which she offered before the painting, and by the constant
prayers with which they were accompanied, had constituted herself
the peculiar votaress of Our Lady of the Garde Doloureuse, for so
the picture was named.

Now, apart from others, alone, and in secrecy, sinking in the
extremity of her sorrow before the shrine of her patroness, she
besought the protection of kindred purity for the defence of her
freedom and honour, and invoked vengeance on the wild and
treacherous chieftain who had slain her father, and was now
beleaguering her place of strength. Not only did she vow a large
donative in lands to the shrine of the protectress whose aid she
implored; but the oath passed her lips, (even though they
faltered, and though something within her remonstrated against the
vow,) that whatsoever favoured knight Our Lady of the Garde
Doloureuse might employ for her rescue, should obtain from her in
guerdon whatever boon she might honourably grant, were it that of
her virgin hand at the holy altar. Taught as she was to believe,
by the assurances of many a knight, that such a surrender was the
highest boon which Heaven could bestow, she felt as discharging a
debt of gratitude when she placed herself entirely at the disposal
of the pure and blessed patroness in whose aid she confided.
Perhaps there lurked in this devotion some earthly hope of which
she was herself scarce conscious, and which reconciled her to the
indefinite sacrifice thus freely offered. The Virgin, (this
flattering hope might insinuate,) kindest and most benevolent of
patronesses, will use compassionately the power resigned to her,
and _he_ will be the favoured champion of Maria, upon whom
her votaress would most willingly confer favour.

But if there was such a hope, as something selfish will often
mingle with our noblest and purest emotions, it arose unconscious
of Eveline herself, who, in the full assurance of implicit faith,
and fixing on the representative of her adoration, eyes in which
the most earnest supplication, the most humble confidence,
struggled with unbidden tears, was perhaps more beautiful than
when, young as she was, she was selected to bestow the prize of
chivalry in the lists of Chester. It was no wonder that, in such a
moment of high excitation, when prostrated in devotion before a
being of whose power to protect her, and to make her protection
assured by a visible sign, she doubted nothing, the Lady Eveline
conceived she saw with her own eyes the acceptance of her vow. As
she gazed on the picture with an over-strained eye, and an
imagination heated with enthusiasm, the expression seemed to alter
from the hard outline, fashioned by the Greek painter; the eyes
appeared to become animated, and to return with looks of
compassion the suppliant entreaties of the votaress, and the mouth
visibly arranged itself into a smile of inexpressible sweetness.
It even seemed to her that the head made a gentle inclination.

Overpowered by supernatural awe at appearances, of which her faith
permitted her not to question the reality, the Lady Eveline folded
her arms on her bosom, and prostrated her forehead on the
pavement, as the posture most fitting to listen to divine
communication.
