private, it is necessary that I know precisely to what number that army
amounts which I have to rely upon. Reserve your eloquence till some
fitter time, and let me know what you, at this present moment, mean by
the word _innumerable?_"

The Grand Domestic paused, and hesitated for a short space; but as he
became aware that the moment was one in which the Emperor could not be
trifled with, (for Alexius Comnenus was at times dangerous,) he
answered thus, but not without hesitation. "Imperial master and lord,
none better knows that such an answer cannot be hastily made, if it is
at the same time to be correct in its results. The number of the
imperial host betwixt this city and the western frontier of the empire,
deducting those absent on furlough, cannot be counted upon as amounting
to more than twenty-five thousand men, or thirty thousand at most."

Alexius struck his forehead with his hand; and the counsellors, seeing
him give way to such violent expressions of grief and surprise, began
to enter into discussions, which they would otherwise have reserved for
a fitter place and time.

"By the trust your Highness reposes in me," said the Logothete, "there
has been drawn from your Highness's coffers during the last year, gold
enough to pay double the number of the armed warriors whom the Grand
Domestic now mentions."

"Your Imperial Highness," retorted the impeached minister, with no
small animation, "will at once remember the stationary garrisons, in
addition to the movable troops, for which this figure-caster makes no
allowance."

"Peace, both of you!" said Alexius, composing himself hastily; "our
actual numbers are in truth less than we counted on, but let us not by
wrangling augment the difficulties of the time. Let those troops be
dispersed in valleys, in passes, behind ridges of hills, and in
difficult ground, where a little art being used in the position, can
make few men supply the appearance of numbers, between this city and
the western frontier of the empire. While this disposal is made, we
will continue to adjust with these crusaders, as they call themselves,
the terms on which we will consent to let them pass through our
dominions; nor are we without hope of negotiating with them, so as to
gain great advantage to our kingdom. We will insist that they pass
through our country only by armies of perhaps fifty thousand at once,
whom we will successively transport into Asia, so that no greater
number shall, by assembling beneath our walls, ever endanger the safety
of the metropolis of the world.

"On their way towards the banks of the Bosphorus, we will supply them
with provisions, if they march peaceably, and in order; and if any
straggle from their standards, or insult the country by marauding, we
suppose our valiant peasants will not hesitate to repress their
excesses, and that without our giving positive orders, since we would
not willingly be charged with any thing like a breach of engagement. We
suppose, also, that the Scythians, Arabs, Syrians, and other
mercenaries in our service, will not suffer our subjects to be
overpowered in their own just defence; as, besides that there is no
justice in stripping our own country of provisions, in order to feed
strangers, we will not be surprised nor unpardonably displeased to
learn, that of the ostensible quantity of flour, some sacks should be
found filled with chalk, or lime, or some such substance. It is,
indeed, truly wonderful, what the stomach of a Frank will digest
comfortably. Their guides, also, whom you shall choose with reference
to such duty, will take care to conduct the crusaders by difficult and
circuitous routes; which will be doing them a real service, by inuring
them to the hardships of the country and climate, which they would
otherwise have to face without seasoning.

"In the meantime, in your intercourse with their chiefs, whom they call
counts, each of whom thinks himself as great as an Emperor, you will
take care to give no offence to their natural presumption, and omit no
opportunity of informing them of the wealth and bounty of our
government. Sums of money may be even given to persons of note, and
largesses of less avail to those under them. You, our Logothete, will
take good order for this, and you, our Grand Domestic, will take care
that such soldiers as may cut off detached parties of the Franks shall
be presented, if possible, in savage dress, and under the show of
infidels. In commending these injunctions to your care, I purpose that,
the crusaders having found the value of our friendship, and also in
some sort the danger of our enmity, those whom we shall safely
transport to Asia, shall be, however unwieldy, still a smaller and more
compact body, whom we may deal with in all Christian prudence. Thus, by
using fair words to one, threats to another, gold to the avaricious,
power to the ambitious, and reasons to those that are capable of
listening to them, we doubt not but to prevail upon those Franks, met
as they are from a thousand points, and enemies of each other, to
acknowledge us as their common superior, rather than choose a leader
among themselves, when they are made aware of the great fact, that
every village in Palestine, from Dan to Beersheba, is the original
property of the sacred Roman empire, and that whatever Christian goes
to war for their recovery, must go as our subject, and hold any
conquest which he may make, as our vassal. Vice and virtue, sense and
folly, ambition and disinterested devotion, will alike recommend to the
survivors of these singular-minded men, to become the feudatories of
the empire, not its foe, and the shield, not the enemy, of your
paternal Emperor."

There was a general inclination of the head among the courtiers, with
the Eastern acclamation of,--"Long live the Emperor!"

When the murmur of this applausive exclamation had subsided, Alexius
proceeded:--"Once more, I say, that my faithful Grand Domestic, and
those who act under him, will take care to commit the execution of such
part of these orders as may seem aggressive, to troops of foreign
appearance and language, which, I grieve to say, are more numerous in
our imperial army than our natural-born and orthodox subjects."

The Patriarch here interposed his opinion.--"There is a consolation,"
he said,"in the thought, that the genuine Romans in the imperial army
are but few, since a trade so bloody as war, is most fitly prosecuted
by those whose doctrines, as well as their doings, on earth, merit
eternal condemnation in the next world."

"Reverend Patriarch," said the Emperor, "we would not willingly hold
with the wild infidels, that Paradise is to be gained by the sabre;
nevertheless, we would hope that a Roman dying in battle for his
religion and his Emperor, may find as good hope of acceptation, after
the mortal pang is over, as a man who dies in peace, and with unblooded
hand."

"It is enough for me to say," resumed the Patriarch, "that the Church's
doctrine is not so indulgent: she is herself peaceful, and her promises
of favour are for those who have been men of peace. Yet think not I bar
the gates of Heaven against a soldier, as such, if believing all the
doctrines of our Church, and complying with all our observances; far
less would I condemn your Imperial Majesty's wise precautions, both for
diminishing the power and thinning the ranks of those Latin heretics,
who come hither to despoil us, and plunder perhaps both church and
temple, under the vain pretext that Heaven would permit them, stained
with so many heresies, to reconquer that Holy Land, which true orthodox
Christians, your Majesty's sacred predecessors, have not been enabled
to retain from the infidel. And well I trust that no settlement made
under the Latins will be permitted by your Majesty to establish itself,
in which the Cross shall not be elevated with limbs of the same length,
instead of that irregular and most damnable error which prolongs, in
western churches, the nether limb of that most holy emblem."

"Reverend Patriarch," answered the Emperor, "do not deem that we think
lightly of your weighty scruples; but the question is now, not in what
manner we may convert these Latin heretics to the true faith, but how
we may avoid being overrun by their myriads, which resemble those of
the locusts by which their approach was preceded and intimated."

"Your Majesty," said the Patriarch, "will act with your usual wisdom;
for my part, I have only stated my doubts, that I may save my own soul
alive."

"Our construction," said the Emperor, "does your sentiments no wrong,
most reverend Patriarch; and you," addressing himself to the other
counsellors, "will attend to these separate charges given out for
directing the execution of the commands which have been generally
intimated to you. They are written out in the sacred ink, and our
sacred subscription is duly marked with the fitting tinge of green and
purple. Let them, therefore, be strictly obeyed. Ourselves will assume
the command of such of the Immortal Bands as remain in the city, and
join to them the cohorts of our faithful Varangians. At the head of
these troops, we will await the arrival of these strangers under the
walls of the city, and, avoiding combat while our policy can postpone
it, we will be ready, in case of the worst, to take whatsoever chance
it shall please the Almighty to send us."

Here the council broke up, and the different chiefs began to exert
themselves in the execution of their various instructions, civil and
military, secret or public, favourable or hostile to the crusaders. The
peculiar genius of the Grecian people was seen upon this occasion.
Their loud and boastful talking corresponded with the ideas which the
Emperor wished to enforce upon the crusaders concerning the extent of
his power and resources. Nor is it to be disguised, that the wily
selfishness of most of those in the service of Alexius, endeavoured to
find some indirect way of applying the imperial instruction, so as
might best suit their own private ends.

Meantime, the news had gone abroad in Constantinople of the arrival of
the huge miscellaneous army of the west upon the limits of the Grecian
empire, arid of their purpose to pass to Palestine. A thousand reports
magnified, if that was possible, an event so wonderful. Some said, that
their ultimate view was the conquest of Arabia, the destruction of the
Prophet's tomb, and the conversion of his green banner into a
horse-cloth for the King of France's brother. Others supposed that the
ruin and sack of Constantinople was the real object of the war. A third
class thought it was in order to compel the Patriarch to submit himself
to the Pope, adopt the Latin form of the cross, and put an end to the
schism.

The Varangians enjoyed an addition to this wonderful news, seasoned as
it everywhere was with something peculiarly suited to the prejudices of
the hearers. It was gathered originally from what our friend Hereward,
who was one of their inferior officers, called sergeants or constables,
had suffered to transpire of what he had heard the preceding evening.
Considering that the fact must be soon matter of notoriety, he had no
hesitation to give his comrades to understand that a Norman army was
coming hither under Duke Robert, the son of the far-famed William the
Conqueror, and with hostile intentions, he concluded, against them in
particular. Like all other men in peculiar circumstances, the
Varangians adopted an explanation applicable to their own condition.
These Normans, who hated the Saxon nation, and had done so much to
dishonour and oppress them, were now following them, they supposed, to
the foreign capital where they had found refuge, with the purpose of
making war on the bountiful prince who protected their sad remnant.
Under this belief, many a deep oath was sworn in Norse and Anglo-Saxon,
that their keen battle-axes should avenge the slaughter of Hastings,
and many a pledge, both in wine and ale, was quaffed who should most
deeply resent, and most effectually revenge, the wrongs which the
Anglo-Saxons of England had received at the hand of their oppressors.

Hereward, the author of this intelligence, began soon to be sorry that
he had ever suffered it to escape him, so closely was he cross-examined
concerning its precise import, by the enquiries of his comrades, from
whom he thought himself obliged to keep concealed the adventures of the
preceding evening, and the place in which he had gained his information.

About noon, when he was effectually tired with returning the same
answer to the same questions, and evading similar others which were
repeatedly put to him, the sound of trumpets announced the presence of
the Acolyte, Achilles Tatius, who came immediately, it was
industriously whispered, from the sacred Interior, with news of the
immediate approach of war.

The Varangians, and the Roman bands called Immortal, it was said, were
to form a camp under the city, in order to be prompt to defend it at
the shortest notice. This put the whole barracks into commotion, each
man making the necessary provision for the approaching campaign. The
noise was chiefly that of joyful bustle and acclamation; and it was so
general, that Hereward, whose rank permitted him to commit to a page or
esquire the task of preparing his equipments, took the opportunity to
leave the barracks, in order to seek some distant place apart from his
comrades, and enjoy his solitary reflections upon the singular
connexion into which he had been drawn, and his direct communication
with the Imperial family.

Passing through the narrow streets, then deserted, on account of the
heat of the sun, he reached at length one of those broad terraces,
which, descending as it were by steps, upon the margin of the
Bosphorus, formed one of the most splendid walks in the universe, and
still, it is believed, preserved as a public promenade for the pleasure
of the Turks, as formerly for that of the Christians. These graduated
terraces were planted with many trees, among which the cypress, as
usual, was most generally cultivated. Here bands of the inhabitants
were to be seen: some passing to and fro, with business and anxiety in
their faces; some standing still in groups, as if discussing the
strange and weighty tidings of the day, and some, with the indolent
carelessness of an eastern climate, eating their noontide refreshment
in the shade, and spending their time as if their sole object was to
make much of the day as it passed, and let the cares of to-morrow
answer for themselves.

While the Varangian, afraid of meeting some acquaintance in this
concourse, which would have been inconsistent with the desire of
seclusion which had brought him thither, descended or passed from one
terrace to another, all marked him with looks of curiosity and enquiry,
considering him to be one, who, from his arms and connexion with the
court, must necessarily know more than others concerning the singular
invasion by numerous enemies, and from various quarters, which was the
news of the day.

None, however, had the hardihood to address the soldier of the guard,
though all looked at him with uncommon interest. He walked from the
lighter to the darker alleys, from the more closed to the more open
terraces, without interruption from any one, yet not without a feeling
that he must not consider himself as alone.

The desire that he felt to be solitary rendered him at last somewhat
watchful, so that he became sensible that he was dogged by a black
slave, a personage not so unfrequent in the streets of Constantinople
as to excite any particular notice. His attention, however, being at
length fixed on this individual, he began to be desirous to escape his
observation; and the change of place which he had at first adopted to
avoid society in general, he had now recourse to, in order to rid
himself of this distant, though apparently watchful attendant. Still,
however, though he by change of place had lost sight of the negro for a
few minutes, it was not long ere he again discovered him at a distance
too far for a companion, but near enough to serve all the purposes of a
spy. Displeased at this, the Varangian turned short in his walk, and
choosing a spot where none was in sight but the object of his
resentment, walked suddenly up to him, and demanded wherefore, and by
whose orders, he presumed to dog his footsteps. The negro answered in a
jargon as bad as that in which he was addressed though of a different
kind, "that he had orders to remark whither he went."

"Orders from whom?" said the Varangian.

"From my master and yours," answered the negro, boldly.

"Thou infidel villain!" exclaimed the angry soldier, "when was it that
we became fellow-servants, and who is it that thou darest to call my
master?"

"One who is master of the world," said the slave, "since he commands
his own passions."

"I shall scarce command mine," said the Varangian, "if thou repliest to
my earnest questions with thine affected quirks of philosophy. Once
more, what dost thou want with me? and why hast thou the boldness to
watch me?"

"I have told thee already," said the slave, "that I do my master's
commands."

"But I must know who thy master is," said Hereward.

"He must tell thee that himself," replied the negro; "he trusts not a
poor slave like me with the purpose of the errands on which he sends
me."

"He has left thee a tongue, however," said the Varangian, "which some
of thy countrymen would. I think, be glad to possess. Do not provoke me
to abridge it by refusing me the information which I have a right to
demand."

The black meditated, as it seemed from the grin on his face, further
evasions, when Hereward cut them short by raising the staff of his
battle-axe. "Put me not" he said, "to dishonour myself by striking thee
with this weapon, calculated for a use so much more noble."

"I may not do so, valiant sir," said the negro, laying aside an
impudent, half-gibing tone which he had hitherto made use of, and
betraying personal fear in his manner. "If you beat the poor slave to
death, you cannot learn what his master hath forbid him to tell. A
short walk will save your honour the stain, and yourself the trouble,
of beating what cannot resist, and me the pain of enduring what I can
neither retaliate nor avoid."

"Lead on then," said the Varangian. "Be assured thou shalt not fool me
by thy fair words, and I will know the person who is impudent enough to
assume the right of watching my motions."

The black walked on with a species of leer peculiar to his physiognomy,
which might be construed as expressive either of malice or of mere
humour. The Varangian followed him with some suspicion, for it happened
that he had had little intercourse with the unhappy race of Africa, and
had not totally overcome the feeling of surprise with which he had at
first regarded them, when he arrived a stranger from the north. So
often did this man look back upon him during their walk, and with so
penetrating and observing a cast of countenance, that Hereward felt
irresistibly renewed in his mind the English prejudices, which assigned
to the demons the sable colour and distorted cast of visage of his
conductor. The scene into which he was guided, strengthened an
association which was not of itself unlikely to occur to the ignorant
and martial islander.

The negro led the way from the splendid terraced walks which we have
described, to a path descending to the sea-shore, when a place
appeared, which, far from being trimmed, like other parts of the coast,
into walks of embankments, seemed, on the contrary, abandoned to
neglect, and was covered with the mouldering ruins of antiquity, where
these had not been overgrown by the luxuriant vegetation of the
climate. These fragments of building, occupying a sort of recess of the
bay, were hidden by steep banks on each side, and although in fact they
formed part of the city, yet they were not seen from any part of it,
and, embosomed in the manner we have described, did not in turn command
any view of the churches, palaces, towers, and fortifications, amongst
which they lay. The sight of this solitary, and apparently deserted
spot, encumbered with ruins, and overgrown with cypress and other
trees, situated as it was in the midst of a populous city, had
something in it impressive and awful to the imagination. The ruins were
of an ancient date, and in the style of a foreign people. The gigantic
remains of a portico, the mutilated fragments of statues of great size,
but executed in a taste and attitude so narrow and barbaric as to seem
perfectly the reverse of the Grecian, and the half-defaced
hieroglyphics which could be traced on some part of the decayed
sculpture, corroborated the popular account of their origin, which we
shall briefly detail.

According to tradition, this had been a temple dedicated to the
Egyptian goddess Cybele, built while the Roman Empire was yet heathen,
and while Constantinople was still called by the name of Byzantium. It
is well known that the superstition of the Egyptians--vulgarly gross in
its literal meaning as well as in its mystical interpretation, and
peculiarly the foundation of many wild doctrines,--was disowned by the
principles of general toleration, and the system of polytheism received
by Rome, and was excluded by repeated laws from the respect paid by the
empire to almost every other religion, however extravagant or absurd.
Nevertheless, these Egyptian rites had charms for the curious and the
superstitious, and had, after long opposition, obtained a footing in
the empire.

Still, although tolerated, the Egyptian priests were rather considered
as sorcerers than as pontiffs, and their whole ritual had a nearer
relation, to magic in popular estimation, than to any regular system of
devotion.

Stained with these accusations, even among the heathen themselves, the
worship of Egypt was held in more mortal abhorrence by the Christians,
than the other and more rational kinds of heathen devotion; that is, if
any at all had a right to be termed so. The brutal worship of Apis and
Cybele was regarded, not only as a pretext for obscene and profligate
pleasures, but as having a direct tendency to open and encourage a
dangerous commerce with evil spirits, who were supposed to take upon
themselves, at these unhallowed altars, the names and characters of
these foul deities. Not only, therefore, the temple of Cybele, with its
gigantic portico, its huge and inelegant statues, and its fantastic
hieroglyphics, was thrown down and defaced when the empire was
converted to the Christian faith, but the very ground on which it stood
was considered as polluted and unhallowed; and no Emperor having yet
occupied the site with a Christian church, the place still remained
neglected and deserted as we have described it.

The Varangian Hereward was perfectly acquainted with the evil
reputation of the place; and when the negro seemed disposed to advance
into the interior of the ruins, he hesitated, and addressed his guide
thus:--"Hark thee, my black friend, these huge fantastic images, some
having dogs' heads, some cows' heads, and some no heads at all, are not
held reverently in popular estimation. Your own colour, also, my
comrade, is greatly too like that of Satan himself, to render you an
unsuspicious companion amid ruins, in which the false spirit, it is
said, daily walks his rounds. Midnight and Noon are the times, it is
rumoured, of his appearance. I will go no farther with you, unless you
assign me a fit reason for so doing."

"In making so childish a proposal" said the negro, "you take from me,
in effect, all desire to guide you to my master. I thought I spoke to a
man of invincible courage, and of that good sense upon which courage is
best founded. But your valour only emboldens you to beat a black slave,
who has neither strength nor title to resist you; and your courage is
not enough to enable you to look without trembling on the dark side of
a wall, even when the sun is in the heavens."

"Thou art insolent," said Hereward, raising his axe.

"And thou art foolish," said the negro, "to attempt to prove thy
manhood and thy wisdom by the very mode which gives reason for calling
them both in question. I have already said there can be little valour
in beating a wretch like me; and no man, surely, who wishes to discover
his way, would begin by chasing away his guide."

"I follow thee" said Hereward, stung with the insinuation of cowardice;
"but if thou leadest me into a snare, thy free talk shall not save thy
bones, if a thousand of thy complexion, from earth or hell, were
standing ready to back thee."

"Thou objectest sorely to my complexion," said the negro; "how knowest
thou that it is, in fact, a thing to be counted and acted upon as
matter of reality? Thine own eyes daily apprize thee, that the colour
of the sky nightly changes from bright to black, yet thou knowest that
this is by no means owing to any habitual colour of the heavens
themselves. The same change that takes place in the hue of the heavens,
has existence in the tinge of the deep sea--How canst thou tell, but
what the difference of my colour from thine own may be owing to some
deceptions change of a similar nature--not real in itself, but only
creating an apparent reality?"

"Thou mayst have painted thyself, no doubt," answered the Varangian,
upon reflection, "and thy blackness, therefore, may be only apparent;
but I think thy old friend himself could hardly have presented these
grinning lips, with the white teeth and flattened nose, so much to the
life, unless that peculiarity of Nubian physiognomy, as they call it,
had accurately and really an existence; and to save thee some trouble,
my dark friend, I will tell thee, that though thou speakest to an
uneducated Varangian, I am not entirely unskilled in the Grecian art of
making subtle words pass upon the hearers instead of reason."

"Ay?" said the negro, doubtfully, and somewhat surprised; "and may the
slave Diogenes--for so my master has christened me--enquire into the
means by which you reached knowledge so unusual?"

"It is soon told," replied Hereward. "My countryman, Witikind, being a
constable of our bands, retired from active service, and spent the end
of a long life in this city of Constantinople. Being past all toils of
battle, either those of reality, as you word it, or the pomp and
fatigue of the exercising ground, the poor old man, in despair of
something to pass his time, attended the lectures of the philosophers."

"And what did he learn there?" said the negro; "for a barbarian, grown
grey under the helmet, was not, as I think, a very hopeful student in
our schools."

"As much though, I should think, as a menial slave, which I understand
to be thy condition," replied the soldier. "But I have understood from
him, that the masters of this idle science make it their business to
substitute, in their argumentations, mere words instead of ideas; and
as they never agree upon the precise meaning of the former, their
disputes can never arrive at a fair or settled conclusion, since they
do not agree in the language in which they express them. Their
theories, as they call them, are built on the sand, and the wind and
tide shall prevail against them."

"Say so to my master," answered the black, in a serious tone.

"I will," said the Varangian; "and he shall know me as an ignorant
soldier, having but few ideas, and those only concerning my religion
and my military duty. But out of these opinions I will neither be
beaten by a battery of sophisms, nor cheated by the arts or the terrors
of the friends of heathenism, either in this world or the next."

"You may speak your mind to him then yourself," said Diogenes. He
stepped aside as if to make way for the Varangian, to whom he motioned
to go forward.

Hereward advanced accordingly, by a half-worn and almost imperceptible
path leading through the long rough grass, and, turning round a
half-demolished shrine, which exhibited the remains of Apis, the bovine
deity, he came immediately in front of the philosopher, Agelastes, who,
sitting among the ruins, reposed his limbs on the grass.




CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.

     Through the vain webs which puzzle sophists' skill,
     Plain sense and honest meaning work their way;
     So sink the varying clouds upon the hill,
     When the clear dawning--brightens into day.
                                     DR. WATTS.


The old man rose from the ground with alacrity, as Hereward approached.
"My bold Varangian" he said, "thou who valuest men and things not
according to the false estimate ascribed to them in this world, but to
their real importance and actual value, thou art welcome, whatever has
brought thee hither--thou art welcome to a place, where it is held the
best business of philosophy to strip man of his borrowed ornaments, and
reduce him to the just value of his own attributes of body and mind,
singly considered."

"You are a courtier, sir," said the Saxon, "and as a permitted
companion of the Emperor's Highness, you must be aware, that there are
twenty times more ceremonies than such a man as I can be acquainted
with, for regulating the different ranks in society; while a plain man
like myself may be well excused from pushing himself into the company
of those above him, where he does not exactly know how he should
comport himself."

"True," said the philosopher; "but a man like yourself, noble Hereward,
merits more consideration in the eyes of a real philosopher, than a
thousand of those mere insects, whom the smiles of a court call into
life, and whom its frowns reduce to annihilation."

"You are yourself, grave sir, a follower of the court," said Hereward.

"And a most punctilious one," said Agelastes. "There is not, I trust, a
subject in the empire who knows better the ten thousand punctilios
exigible from those of different ranks, and clue to different
authorities. The man is yet to be born who has seen me take advantage
of any more commodious posture than that of standing in presence of the
royal family. But though I use those false scales in society, and so
far conform to its errors, my real judgment is of a more grave
character, and more worthy of man, as said to be formed in the image of
his Creator."

"There can be small occasion," said the Varangian, "to exercise your
judgment in any respect upon me, nor am I desirous that any one should
think of me otherwise than I am; a poor exile, namely, who endeavours
to fix his faith upon Heaven, and to perform his duty to the world he
lives in, and to the prince in whose service he is engaged. And now,
grave sir, permit me to ask, whether this meeting is by your desire,
and for what is its purpose? An African slave, whom I met in the public
walks, and who calls himself Diogenes, tells me that you desired to
speak with me; he hath somewhat the humour of the old scoffer, and so
he may have lied. If so, I will even forgive him the beating which I
owe his assurance, and make my excuse at the same time for having
broken in upon your retirement, which I am totally unfit to share."

"Diogenes has not played you false," answered Agelastes; "he has his
humours, as you remarked even now, and with these some qualities also
that put him upon a level with those of fairer complexion and better
features."

"And for what," said the Varangian, "have you so employed him? Can your
wisdom possibly entertain a wish to converse with me?"

"I am an observer of nature and of humanity," answered the philosopher;
"is it not natural that I should tire of those beings who are formed
entirely upon artifice, and long to see something more fresh from the
hand of nature?"

"You see not that in me," said the Varangian; "the rigour of military
discipline, the camp--the centurion--the armour--frame a man's
sentiments and limbs to them, as the sea-crab is framed to its shell.
See one of us, and you see us all."

"Permit me to doubt that," said Agelastes; "and to suppose that in
Hereward, the son of Waltheoff, I see an extraordinary man, although he
himself may be ignorant, owing to his modesty, of the rarity of his own
good qualities."

"The son of Waltheoff!" answered the Varangian, somewhat startled.--"Do
you know my father's name?"

"Be not surprised," answered the philosopher, "at my possessing so
simple a piece of information. It has cost me but little trouble to
attain it, yet I would gladly hope that the labour I have taken in that
matter may convince you of my real desire to call you friend."

"It was indeed an unusual compliment," said Hereward, "that a man of
your knowledge and station should be at the trouble to enquire, among
the Varangian cohorts, concerning the descent of one of their
constables. I scarcely think that my commander, the Acolyte himself,
would think such knowledge worthy of being collected or preserved."

"Greater men than he," said Agelastes, "certainly would not-----You
know one in high office, who thinks the names of his most faithful
soldiers of less moment than those of his hunting dogs or his hawks,
and would willingly save himself the trouble of calling them otherwise
than by a whistle."

"I may not hear this," answered the Varangian.

"I would not offend you," said the philosopher, "I would not even shake
your good opinion of the person I allude to; yet it surprises me that
such should be entertained by one of your great qualities."

"A truce with this, grave sir, which is in fact trifling in a person of
your character and appearance," answered the Anglo-Saxon. "I am like
the rocks of my country; the fierce winds cannot shake me, the soft
rains cannot melt me; flattery and loud words are alike lost upon me."

"And it is even for that inflexibility of mind," replied Agelastes,
"that steady contempt of every thing that approaches thee, save in the
light of a duty, that I demand, almost like a beggar, that personal
acquaintance, which thou refusest like a churl."

"Pardon me," said Hereward, "if I doubt this. Whatever stories you may
have picked up concerning me, not unexaggerated probably--since the
Greeks do not keep the privilege of boasting so entirely to themselves
but the Varangians have learned a little of it--you can have heard
nothing of me which can authorise your using your present language,
excepting in jest."

"You mistake, my son," said Agelastes; "believe me not a person to mix
in the idle talk respecting you, with your comrades at the ale-cup.
Such as I am, I can strike on this broken image of Anubis"--(here he
touched a gigantic fragment of a statue by his side)--"and bid the
spirit who long prompted the oracle, descend, and once more reanimate
the trembling mass. We that are initiated enjoy high privileges--we
stamp upon those ruined vaults, and the echo which dwells there answers
to our demand. Do not think, that although I crave thy friendship, I
Heed therefore supplicate thee for information either respecting
thyself or others."

"Your words are wonderful," said the Anglo-Saxon; "but by such
promising words I have heard that many souls have been seduced from the
path of heaven. My grandsire, Kenelm, was wont to say, that the fair
words of the heathen philosophy were more hurtful to the Christian
faith than the menaces of the heathen tyrants."

"I know him," said Agelastes. "What avails it whether it was in the
body or in the spirit?--He was converted from the faith of Woden by a
noble monk, and died a priest at the shrine of saint Augustin."
[Footnote: At Canterbury.]

"True"--said Hereward; "all this is certain--and I am the rather bound
to remember his words now that he is dead and gone. When I hardly knew
his meaning, he bid me beware of the doctrine which causeth to err,
which is taught by false prophets, who attest their doctrine by unreal
miracles."

"This," said Agelastes, "is mere superstition. Thy grandsire was a good
and excellent man, but narrow-minded, like other priests; and, deceived
by their example, he wished but to open a small wicket in the gate of
truth, and admit the world only on that limited scale. Seest thou,
Hereward, thy grandsire and most men of religion would fain narrow our
intellect to the consideration of such parts of the Immaterial world as
are essential to our moral guidance here, and our final salvation
hereafter; but it is not the less true, that man has liberty, provided
he has wisdom and courage, to form intimacies with beings more powerful
than himself, who can defy the bounds of space by which he is
circumscribed, and overcome, by their metaphysical powers, difficulties
which, to the timid and unlearned, may appear wild and impossible."

"You talk of a folly," answered Hereward, "at which childhood gapes and
manhood smiles."

"On the contrary," said the sage, "I talk of a longing wish which every
man feels at the bottom of his heart, to hold communication with beings
more powerful than himself, and who are not naturally accessible to our
organs. Believe me, Hereward, so ardent and universal an aspiration had
not existed in our bosoms, had there not also been means, if steadily
and wisely sought, of attaining its accomplishment. I will appeal to
thine own heart, and prove to thee even by a single word, that what I
say is truth. Thy thoughts are even now upon a being long absent or
dead, and with the name of BERTHA, a thousand emotions rush to thy
heart, which in thy ignorance thou hadst esteemed furled up for ever,
like spoils of the dead hung above a tombstone!--Thou startest and
changest thy colour--I joy to see by these signs, that the firmness and
indomitable courage which men ascribe to thee, have left the avenues of
the heart as free as ever to kindly and to generous affections, while
they have barred them against those of fear, uncertainty, and all the
caitiff tribe of meatier sensations. I have proffered to esteem thee,
and I have no hesitation in proving it. I will tell thee, If thou
desirest to know it, the fate of that very Bertha, whose memory thou
hast cherished in thy breast in spite of thee, amidst the toil of the
day and the repose of the night, in the battle and in the truce, when
sporting with thy companions in fields of exercise, or attempting to
prosecute the study of Greek learning, in which if thou wouldst
advance, I can teach it by a short road."

While Agelastes thus spoke, the Varangian in some degree recovered his
composure, and made answer, though his voice was somewhat
tremulous,--"Who thou art, I know not--what thou wouldst with me, I
cannot tell--by what means thou hast gathered intelligence of such
consequence to me, and of so little to another, I have no
conception--But this I know, that by intention or accident, thou hast
pronounced a name which agitates my heart to its deepest recesses; yet
am I a Christian and Varangian, and neither to my God nor to my adopted
prince will I willingly stagger in my faith. What is to be wrought by
idols or by false deities, must be a treason to the real divinity. Nor
is it less certain that thou hast let glance some arrows, though the
rules of thy allegiance strictly forbid it, at the Emperor himself.
Henceforward, therefore, I refuse to communicate with thee, be it for
weal or woe. I am the Emperor's waged soldier, and although I affect
not the nice precisions of respect and obedience, which are exacted in
so many various cases, and by so many various rules, yet I am his
defence, and my battle-axe is his body-guard."

"No one doubts it," said the philosopher. "But art not thou also bound
to a nearer dependence upon' the great Acolyte, Achilles Tatius?"

"No. He is my general, according to the rules of our service," answered
the Varangian; "to me he has always shown himself a kind and
good-natured man, and, his dues of rank apart, I may say has deported
himself as a friend rather than a commander. He is, however, my
master's servant as well as I am; nor do I hold the difference of great
amount, which the word of a man can give or take away at pleasure."

"It is nobly spoken," said Agelastes; "and you yourself are surely
entitled to stand erect before one whom you supersede in courage and in
the art of war."

"Pardon me," returned the Briton, "if I decline the attributed
compliment, as what in no respect belongs to me. The Emperor chooses
his own officers, in respect of their power of serving him as he
desires to be served. In this it is likely I might fail; I have said
already, I owe my Emperor my obedience, my duty, and my service, nor
does it seem to me necessary to carry our explanation farther."

"Singular man!" said Agelastes; "is there nothing than can move thee
but things that are foreign to thyself? The name of thy Emperor and thy
commander are no spell upon thee, and even that of the object thou has
loved"--

Here the Varangian interrupted him.

"I have thought," he said, "upon the words thou hast spoken--thou hast
found the means to shake my heart-strings, but not to unsettle my
principles. I will hold no converse with thee on a matter in which thou
canst not have interest.--Necromancers, it is said, perform their
spells by means of the epithets of the Holiest; no marvel, then, should
they use the names of the purest of his creation to serve their
unhallowed purposes. I will none of such truckling, disgraceful to the
dead perhaps as to the living. Whatever has been thy purpose, old
man--for, think not thy strange words have passed unnoticed--be thou
assured I bear that in my heart which defies alike the seduction of men
and of fiends."

With this the soldier turned, and left the ruined temple, after a
slight inclination of his head to the philosopher.

Agelastes, after the departure of the soldier, remained alone,
apparently absorbed in meditation, until he was suddenly disturbed by
the entrance, into the ruins, of Achilles Tatius. The leader of the
Varangians spoke not until he had time to form some result from the
philosopher's features. He then said, "Thou remainest, sage Agelastes,
confident in the purpose of which we have lately spoke together?"

"I do," said Agelastes, with gravity and firmness.

"But," replied Achilles Tatius, "thou hast not gained to our side that
proselyte, whose coolness and courage would serve us better in our hour
of need than the service of a thousand cold-hearted slaves?"

"I have not succeeded," answered the philosopher.

"And thou dost not blush to own it?" said the imperial officer in reply.

"Thou, the wisest of those who yet pretend to Grecian wisdom, the most
powerful of those who still assert the skill by words, signs, names,
periapts, and spells, to exceed the sphere to which thy faculties
belong, hast been foiled in thy trade of persuasion, like an infant
worsted in debate with its domestic tutor? Out upon thee, that thou
canst not sustain in argument the character which thou wouldst so fain,
assume to thyself!"

"Peace!" said the Grecian. "I have as yet gained nothing, it is true,
over this obstinate and inflexible man; but, Achilles Tatius, neither
have I lost. We both stand where yesterday we did, with this advantage
on my side, that I have suggested to him such an object of interest as
he shall never be able to expel from his mind, until he hath had
recourse to me to obtain farther knowledge concerning it.--And now let
this singular person remain for a time unmentioned; yet, trust me,
though flattery, avarice, and ambition may fail to gain him, a bait
nevertheless remains, that shall make him as completely our own as any
that is bound within our mystic and inviolable contract. Tell me then,
how go on the affairs of the empire? Does this tide of Xiatin warriors,
so strangely set aflowing, still rush on to the banks of the Bosphorus?
and does Alexius still entertain hopes to diminish and divide the
strength of numbers, which he could in vain hope to defy?"

"Something further of intelligence has been gained, even within a very
few hours," answered Achilles Tatius. "Bohemond came to the city with
some six or eight light horse, and in a species of disguise.
Considering how often he had been the Emperor's enemy, his project was
a perilous one. But when is it that these Franks draw back on account
of danger? The Emperor perceived at once that the Count was come to see
what he might obtain, by presenting himself as the very first object of
his liberality, and by offering his assistance as mediator with Godfrey
of Bouillon and the other princes of the crusade."

"It is a species of policy," answered the sage, "for which he would
receive full credit from the Emperor."

Achilles Tatius proceeded:--"Count Bohemond was discovered to the
imperial court as if it were by mere accident, and he was welcomed with
marks of favour and splendour which had never been even mentioned as
being fit for any one of the Frankish race. There was no word of
ancient enmity or of former wars, no mention of Bohemond as the ancient
usurper of Antioch, and the encroacher upon the empire. But thanks to
Heaven were returned on all sides, which had sent a faithful ally to
the imperial assistance at a moment of such imminent peril."

"And what said Bohemond?" enquired the philosopher.

"Little or nothing," said the captain of the Varangians, "until, as I
learned from the domestic slave Narses, a large sum of gold had been
abandoned to him. Considerable districts were afterwards agreed to be
ceded to him, and other advantages granted, on condition he should
stand on this occasion the steady friend of the empire and its master.
Such was the Emperor's munificence towards the greedy barbarian, that a
chamber in the palace was, by chance, as it were, left exposed to his
view, containing large quantities of manufactured silks, of jewellers'
work, of gold and silver, and other articles of great value. When the
rapacious Frank could not forbear some expressions of admiration, he
was assured, that the contents of the treasure-chamber were his own,
provided he valued them as showing forth the warmth and sincerity of
his imperial ally towards his friends; and these precious articles were
accordingly conveyed to the tent of the Norman leader. By such
measures, the Emperor must make himself master of Bohemond, both body
and soul, for the Franks themselves say it is strange to see a man of
undaunted bravery, and towering ambition, so infected, nevertheless,
with avarice, which they term a mean and unnatural vice."

"Bohemond," said Agelastes, "is then the Emperor's for life and
death--always, that is, till the recollection of the royal munificence
be effaced by a greater gratuity. Alexius, proud as he naturally is of
his management with this important chieftain, will no doubt expect to
prevail by his counsels, on most of the other crusaders, and even on
Godfrey of Bouillon himself, to take an oath of submission and fidelity
to the Emperor, which, were it not for the sacred nature of their
warfare, the meanest gentleman among them would not submit to, were it
to be lord of a province. There, then, we rest. A few days must
determine what we have to do. An earlier discovery would be
destruction."

"We meet not then to-night?" said the Acolyte.

"No," replied the sage; "unless we are summoned to that foolish
stage-play or recitation; and then we meet as playthings in the hand of
a silly woman, the spoiled child of a weak-minded parent."

Tatius then took his leave of the philosopher, and, as if fearful of
being seen in each other's company, they left their solitary place of
meeting by different routes. The Varangian, Hereward, received, shortly
after, a summons from his superior, who acquainted him, that he should
not, as formerly intimated, require his attendance that evening.

Achilles then paused, and added,--"Thou hast something on thy lips thou
wouldst say to me, which, nevertheless hesitates to break forth."

"It is only this," answered the soldier: "I have had an interview with
the man called Agelastes, and he seems something so different from what
he appeared when we last spoke of him, that I cannot forbear mentioning
to you what I have seen. He is not an insignificant trifler, whose
object it is to raise a laugh at his own expense, or that of any other.
He is a deep-thinking and far-reaching man, who, for some reason or
other, is desirous of forming friends, and drawing a party to himself.
Your own wisdom will teach you to beware of him."

"Thou art an honest fellow, my poor Hereward," said Achilles Tatius,
with an affectation of good-natured contempt. "Such men as Agelastes do
often frame their severest jests in the shape of formal gravity--they
will pretend to possess the most unbounded power over elements and
elemental spirits--they will make themselves masters of the names and
anecdotes best known to those whom they make their sport; and any one
who shall listen to them, shall, in the words of the Divine Homer, only
expose himself to a flood of inextinguishable laughter. I have often
known him select one of the rawest and most ignorant persons in
presence, and to him for the amusement of the rest, he has pretended to
cause the absent to appear, the distant to draw near, and the dead
themselves to burst the cerements of the grave. Take care, Hereward,
that his arts make not a stain on the credit of one of my bravest
Varangians."

"There is no danger," answered Hereward. "I shall not be fond of being
often with this man. If he jests upon one subject which he hath
mentioned to me, I shall be but too likely to teach him seriousness
after a rough manner. And if he is serious in his pretensions in such
mystical matters, we should, according to the faith of my grandfather,
Kenelm, do insult to the deceased, whose name is taken in the mouth of
a soothsayer, or impious enchanter. I will not, therefore, again go
near this Agelastes, be he wizard, or be he impostor."

"You apprehend me not," said the Acolyte, hastily; "you mistake my
meaning. He is a man from whom, if he pleases to converse with such as
you, you may derive much knowledge; keeping out of the reach of those
pretended secret arts, which he will only use to turn thee into
ridicule." With these words, which he himself would perhaps have felt
it difficult to reconcile, the leader and his follower parted.




CHAPTER THE NINTH.

     Between the foaming jaws of the white torrent,
     The skilful artist draws a sudden mound;
     By level long he subdivides their strength,
     Stealing the waters from their rocky bed,
     First to diminish what he means to conquer;
     Then, for the residue he forms a road,
     Easy to keep, and painful to desert,
     And guiding to the end the planner aim'd at.
                     THE ENGINEER


It would have been easy for Alexius, by a course of avowed suspicion,
or any false step in the manner of receiving this tumultuary invasion
of the European nations, to have blown into a flame the numerous but
smothered grievances under which they laboured; and a similar
catastrophe would not have been less certain, had he at once abandoned
all thoughts of resistance, and placed his hope of safety in
surrendering to the multitudes of the west whatsoever they accounted
worth taking. The Emperor chose a middle course; and, unquestionably,
in the weakness of the Greek empire, it was the only one which would
have given him at once safety, and a great degree of consequence in the
eyes of the Frank invaders and those of his own subjects. The means
with, which he acted were of various kinds, and, rather from policy
than inclination, were often stained with falsehood or meanness;
therefore it follows that the measures of the Emperor resembled those
of the snake, who twines himself through the grass, with the purpose of
stinging insidiously those whom he fears to approach with the step of
the bold and generous lion. We are not, however, writing the History of
the Crusades, and what we have already said of the Emperor's
precautions on the first appearance of Godfrey of Bouillon, and his
associates, may suffice for the elucidation of our story.

About four weeks had now passed over, marked by quarrels and
reconcilements between the crusaders and the Grecians of the empire.
The former were, as Alexius's policy dictated, occasionally and
individually, received with extreme honour, and their leaders loaded
with respect and favour; while, from time to time, such bodies of them
