Isabel's, and one man more to be envied than even Clarence.  Fairest
face to me in the wide world is the Lady Anne's! happiest man between
the cradle and the grave is he whom the Lady Anne shall call her lord!
and if I--oh, look you, Montagu, let there be no breach between
Warwick and the king!  Fare you well, dear lord and cousin,--I go to
Baynard's Castle till these feasts are over."

"Does not your Grace," said Montagu, recovering from the surprise into
which one part of Gloucester's address had thrown him--"does not your
Grace--so skilled in lance and horsemanship--preside at the lists?"

"Montagu, I love your brother well enough to displease my king.  The
great earl shall not say, at least, that Richard Plantagenet in his
absence forgot the reverence due to loyalty and merit.  Tell him that;
and if I seem (unlike Clarence) to forbear to confront the queen and
her kindred, it is because you should make no enemies,--not the less
for that should princes forget no friends."

Richard said this with a tone of deep feeling, and, folding his arms
within his furred surcoat, walked slowly on to a small postern
admitting to the river; but there, pausing by a buttress which
concealed him till Montagu had left the yard, instead of descending to
his barge, he turned back into the royal garden.  Here several of the
court of both sexes were assembled, conferring on the event of the
day.  Richard halted at a distance, and contemplated their gay dresses
and animated countenances with something between melancholy and scorn
upon his young brow.  One of the most remarkable social
characteristics of the middle ages is the prematurity at which the
great arrived at manhood, shared in its passions, and indulged its
ambitions.  Among the numerous instances in our own and other
countries that might be selected from history, few are more striking
than that of this Duke of Gloucester, great in camp and in council at
an age when nowadays a youth is scarcely trusted to the discipline of
a college.  The whole of his portentous career was closed, indeed,
before the public life of modern ambition usually commences.  Little
could those accustomed to see on our stage "the elderly ruffian"
[Sharon Turner] our actors represent, imagine that at the opening of
Shakspeare's play of "Richard the Third" the hero was but in his
nineteenth year; but at the still more juvenile age in which he
appears in this our record, Richard of Gloucester was older in
intellect, and almost in experience, than many a wise man at the date
of thirty-three,--the fatal age when his sun set forever on the field
of Bosworth!

The young prince, then, eyed the gaudy, fluttering, babbling
assemblage before him with mingled melancholy and scorn.  Not that he
felt, with the acuteness which belongs to modern sentiment, his bodily
defects amidst that circle of the stately and the fair, for they were
not of a nature to weaken his arm in war or lessen his persuasive
influences in peace.  But it was rather that sadness which so often
comes over an active and ambitious intellect in early youth, when it
pauses to ask, in sorrow and disdain, what its plots and counterplots,
its restlessness and strife, are really worth.  The scene before him
was of pleasure,--but in pleasure neither the youth nor the manhood of
Richard III. was ever pleased; though not absolutely of the rigid
austerity of Amadis or our Saxon Edward, he was comparatively free
from the licentiousness of his times.  His passions were too large for
frivolous excitements.  Already the Italian, or, as it is falsely
called, the Machiavelian policy, was pervading the intellect of
Europe, and the effects of its ruthless, grand, and deliberate
statecraft are visible from the accession of Edward IV. till the close
of Elizabeth's reign.  With this policy, which reconciled itself to
crime as a necessity of wisdom, was often blended a refinement of
character which disdained vulgar vices.  Not skilled alone in those
knightly accomplishments which induced Caxton, with propriety, to
dedicate to Richard "The Book of the Order of Chivalry," the Duke of
Gloucester's more peaceful amusements were borrowed from severer
Graces than those which presided over the tastes of his royal
brothers.  He loved, even to passion, the Arts, Music,--especially of
the more Doric and warlike kind,--Painting and Architecture; he was a
reader of books, as of men,--the books that become princes,--and hence
that superior knowledge of the principles of law and of commerce which
his brief reign evinced.  More like an Italian in all things than the
careless Norman or the simple Saxon, Machiavel might have made of his
character a companion, though a contrast to that of Castruccio
Castrucani.

The crowd murmured and rustled at the distance, and still with folded
arms Richard gazed aloof, when a lady, entering the garden from the
palace, passed by him so hastily that she brushed his surcoat, and,
turning round in surprise, made a low reverence, as she exclaimed,
"Prince Richard! and alone amidst so many!"

"Lady," said the duke, "it was a sudden hope that brought me into this
garden,--and that was the hope to see your fair face shining above the
rest."

"Your Highness jests," returned the lady, though her superb
countenance and haughty carriage evinced no opinion of herself so
humble as her words would imply.

"My Lady of Bonville," said the young duke, laying his hand on her
arm, "mirth is not in my thoughts at this hour."

"I believe your Highness; for the Lord Richard Plantagenet is not one
of the Woodvilles.  The mirth is theirs to-day."

"Let who will have mirth,--it is the breath of a moment.  Mirth cannot
tarnish glory,--the mirror in which the gods are glassed."

"I understand you, my lord," said the proud lady; and her face, before
stern and high, brightened into so lovely a change, so soft and
winning a smile, that Gloucester no longer marvelled that that smile
had rained so large an influence on the fate and heart of his
favourite Hastings.  The beauty of this noble woman was indeed
remarkable in its degree, and peculiar in its character.  She bore a
stronger likeness in feature to the archbishop than to either of her
other brothers; for the prelate had the straight and smooth outline of
the Greeks,--not like Montagu and Warwick, the lordlier and manlier
aquiline of the Norman race,--and his complexion was feminine in its
pale clearness.  But though in this resembling the subtlest of the
brethren, the fair sister shared with Warwick an expression, if
haughty, singularly frank and candid in its imperious majesty; she had
the same splendid and steady brilliancy of eye, the same quick quiver
of the lip, speaking of nervous susceptibility and haste of mood.  The
hateful fashion of that day which pervaded all ranks, from the highest
to the lowest, was the prodigal use of paints and cosmetics, and all
imaginable artificial adjuncts of a spurious beauty.  This extended
often even to the men, and the sturdiest warrior deemed it no shame to
recur to such arts of the toilet as the vainest wanton in our day
would never venture to acknowledge.  But the Lady Bonville, proudly
confident of her beauty, and possessing a purity of mind that revolted
from the littleness of courting admiration, contrasted forcibly in
this the ladies of the court.  Her cheek was of a marble whiteness,
though occasionally a rising flush through the clear, rich,
transparent skin showed that in earlier youth the virgin bloom had not
been absent from the surface.  There was in her features, when they
reposed, somewhat of the trace of suffering,--of a struggle, past it
may be, but still remembered.  But when she spoke, those features
lighted up and undulated in such various and kindling life as to
dazzle, to bewitch, or to awe the beholder, according as the impulse
moulded the expression.  Her dress suited her lofty and spotless
character.  Henry VI. might have contemplated with holy pleasure its
matronly decorum; the jewelled gorget ascended to the rounded and
dimpled chin; the arms were bare only at the wrists, where the blue
veins were seen through a skin of snow; the dark glossy locks, which
her tirewoman boasted, when released, swept the ground, were gathered
into a modest and simple braid, surmounted by the beseeming coronet
that proclaimed her rank.  The Lady Bonville might have stood by the
side of Cornelia, the model of a young and high-born matron, in whose
virtue the honour of man might securely dwell.

"I understand you, my lord," she said, with her bright, thankful
smile; "and as Lord Warwick's sister, I am grateful."

"Your love for the great earl proves you are noble enough to forgive,"
said Richard, meaningly.  "Nay, chide me not with that lofty look; you
know that there are no secrets between Hastings and Gloucester."

"My lord duke, the head of a noble House hath the right to dispose of
the hands of the daughters; I know nothing in Lord Warwick to
forgive."

But she turned her head as she spoke, and a tear for a moment trembled
in that haughty eye.

"Lady," said Richard, moved to admiration, "to you let me confide my
secret.  I would be your nephew.  Boy though I be in years, my heart
beats as loudly as a man's; and that heart beats for Anne."

"The love of Richard Plantagenet honours even Warwick's daughter!"

"Think you so?  Then stand my friend; and, being thus my friend,
intercede with Warwick, if he angers at the silly holiday of this
Woodville pageant."

"Alas, sir! you know that Warwick listens to no interceders between
himself and his passions.  But what then?  Grant him wronged,
aggrieved, trifled with,--what then?  Can he injure the House of
York?"

Richard looked in some surprise at the fair speaker.

"Can he injure the House of York?--Marry, yes," he replied bluntly.

"But for what end?  Whom else should he put upon the throne?"

"What if he forgive the Lancastrians?  What if--"

"Utter not the thought, prince, breathe it not," exclaimed the Lady
Bonville, almost fiercely.  "I love and honour my brave brother,
despite--despite--"  She paused a moment, blushed, and proceeded
rapidly, without concluding the sentence.  "I love him as a woman of
his House must love the hero who forms its proudest boast. But if, for
any personal grudge, any low ambition, any rash humour, the son of my
father Salisbury could forget that Margaret of Anjou placed the gory
head of that old man upon the gates of York, could by word or deed
abet the cause of usurping and bloody Lancaster,--I would--I would--
Out upon my sex!  I could do nought but weep the glory of Nevile and
Monthermer gone forever."

Before Richard could reply, the sound of musical instruments, and a
procession of heralds and pages proceeding from the palace, announced
the approach of Edward.  He caught the hand of the dame of Bonville,
lifted it to his lips, and saying, "May fortune one day permit me to
face as the earl's son the earl's foes," made his graceful reverence,
glided from the garden, gained his barge, and was rowed to the huge
pile of Baynard's Castle, lately reconstructed, but in a gloomy and
barbaric taste, and in which, at that time, he principally resided
with his mother, the once peerless Rose of Raby.

The Lady of Bonville paused a moment, and in that pause her
countenance recovered its composure.  She then passed on, with a
stately step, towards a group of the ladies of the court, and her eye
noted with proud pleasure that the highest names of the English
knighthood and nobility, comprising the numerous connections of her
family, formed a sullen circle apart from the rest, betokening, by
their grave countenances and moody whispers, how sensitively they felt
the slight to Lord Warwick's embassy in the visit of the Count de la
Roche, and how little they were disposed to cringe to the rising sun
of the Woodvilles.  There, collected into a puissance whose discontent
hard sufficed to shake a firmer throne (the young Raoul de Fulke, the
idolater of Warwick, the impersonation in himself of the old Norman
seignorie, in their centre), with folded arms and lowering brows,
stood the earl's kinsmen, the Lords Fitzhugh and Fauconberg: with
them, Thomas Lord Stanley, a prudent noble, who rarely sided with a
malcontent, and the Lord St. John, and the heir of the ancient
Bergavennies, and many another chief, under whose banner marched an
army.  Richard of Gloucester had shown his wit in refusing to mingle
in intrigues which provoked the ire of that martial phalanx.  As the
Lady of Bonville swept by these gentlemen, their murmur of respectful
homage, their profound salutation, and unbonneted heads, contrasted
forcibly with the slight and grave, if not scornful, obeisance they
had just rendered to one of the queen's sisters, who had passed a
moment before in the same direction.  The lady still moved on, and
came suddenly across the path of Hastings, as, in his robes of state,
he issued from the palace.  Their eyes met, and both changed colour.

"So, my lord chamberlain," said the dame, sarcastically, "the Count de
la Roche is, I hear, consigned to your especial charge."

"A charge the chamberlain cannot refuse, and which William Hastings
does not covet."

"A king had never asked Montagu and Warwick to consider amongst their
duties any charge they had deemed dishonouring."

"Dishonouring, Lady Bonville!" exclaimed Hastings, with a bent brow
and a flushed cheek,--"neither Montagu nor Warwick had, with safety,
applied to me the word that has just passed your lips."

"I crave your pardon," answered Katherine, bitterly.  "Mine articles
of faith in men's honour are obsolete or heretical.  I had deemed it
dishonouring in a noble nature to countenance insult to a noble enemy
in his absence.  I had deemed it dishonouring in a brave soldier, a
well-born gentleman (now from his valiantness, merit, and wisdom
become a puissant and dreaded lord), to sink into that lackeydom and
varletaille which falsehood and cringing have stablished in these
walls, and baptized under the name of 'courtiers.'  Better had
Katherine de Bonville esteemed Lord Hastings had he rather fallen
under a king's displeasure than debased his better self to a
Woodville's dastard schemings."

"Lady, you are cruel and unjust, like all your haughty race; and idle
were reply to one who, of all persons, should have judged me better.
For the rest, if this mummery humbles Lord Warwick, gramercy! there is
nothing in my memory that should make my share in it a gall to my
conscience; nor do I owe the Neviles so large a gratitude, that rather
than fret the pile of their pride, I should throw down the scaffolding
on which my fearless step hath clomb to as fair a height, and one
perhaps that may overlook as long a posterity, as the best baron that
ever quartered the Raven Eagle and the Dun Bull.  But," resumed
Hastings, with a withering sarcasm, "doubtless the Lady de Bonville
more admires the happy lord who holds himself, by right of pedigree,
superior to all things that make the statesman wise, the scholar
learned, and the soldier famous.  Way there--back, gentles,"--and
Hastings turned to the crowd behind,--"way there, for my lord of
Harrington and Bonville!"

The bystanders smiled at each other as they obeyed; and a heavy,
shambling, graceless man, dressed in the most exaggerated fopperies of
the day, but with a face which even sickliness, that refines most
faces, could not divest of the most vacant dulness, and a mien and
gait to which no attire could give dignity, passed through the group,
bowing awkwardly to the right and left, and saying, in a thick, husky
voice, "You are too good, sirs,--too good: I must not presume so
overmuch on my seignorie.  The king would keep me,--he would indeed,
sirs; um--um--why, Katherine--dame--thy stiff gorget makes me ashamed
of thee.  Thou wouldst not think, Lord Hastings, that Katherine had a
white skin,--a parlous white skin.  La, you now, fie on these
mufflers!"  The courtiers sneered; Hastings, with a look of malignant
and pitiless triumph, eyed the Lady of Bonville.  For a moment the
colour went and came across her transparent cheek; but the confusion
passed, and returning the insulting gaze of her ancient lover with an
eye of unspeakable majesty, she placed her arm upon her lord's, and
saying calmly, "An English matron cares but to be fair in her
husband's eyes," drew him away; and the words and the manner of the
lady were so dignified and simple, that the courtiers hushed their
laughter, and for the moment the lord of such a woman was not only
envied but respected.

While this scene had passed, the procession preceding Edward had filed
into the garden in long and stately order.  From another entrance
Elizabeth, the Princess Margaret, and the Duchess of Bedford, with
their trains, had already issued, and were now ranged upon a flight of
marble steps, backed by a columned alcove, hung with velvet striped
into the royal baudekin, while the stairs themselves were covered with
leathern carpets, powdered with the white rose and the fleur de lis;
either side lined by the bearers of the many banners of Edward,
displaying the white lion of March, the black bull of Clare, the cross
of Jerusalem, the dragon of Arragon, and the rising sun, which he had
assumed as his peculiar war-badge since the battle of Mortimer's
Cross.  Again, and louder, came the flourish of music; and a murmur
through the crowd, succeeded by deep silence, announced the entrance
of the king.  He appeared, leading by the hand the Count de la Roche,
and followed by the Lords Scales, Rivers, Dorset, and the Duke of
Clarence.  All eyes were bent upon the count, and though seen to
disadvantage by the side of the comeliest and stateliest and most
gorgeously-attired prince in Christendom, his high forehead, bright
sagacious eye, and powerful frame did not disappoint the expectations
founded upon the fame of one equally subtle in council and redoubted
in war.

The royal host and the princely guest made their way where Elizabeth,
blazing in jewels and cloth-of-gold, shone royally, begirt by the
ladies of her brilliant court.  At her right hand stood her mother, at
her left, the Princess Margaret.

"I present to you, my Elizabeth," said Edward, "a princely gentleman,
to whom we nevertheless wish all ill-fortune,--for we cannot desire
that he may subdue our knights, and we would fain hope that he may be
conquered by our ladies."

"The last hope is already fulfilled," said the count, gallantly, as on
his knee he kissed the fair hand extended to him.  Then rising, and
gazing full and even boldly upon the young Princess Margaret, he
added, "I have seen too often the picture of the Lady Margaret not to
be aware that I stand in that illustrious presence."

"Her picture!  Sir Count," said the queen; "we knew not that it had
been ever limned."

"Pardon me, it was done by stealth."

"And where have you seen it?"

"Worn at the heart of my brother the Count of Charolois!" answered De
la Roche, in a whispered tone.

Margaret blushed with evident pride and delight; and the wily envoy,
leaving the impression his words had made to take their due effect,
addressed himself, with all the gay vivacity he possessed, to the fair
queen and her haughty mother.

After a brief time spent in this complimentary converse, the count
then adjourned to inspect the menagerie, of which the king was very
proud.  Edward, offering his hand to his queen, led the way, and the
Duchess of Bedford, directing the count to Margaret by a shrewd and
silent glance of her eye, so far smothered her dislike to Clarence as
to ask his highness to attend herself.

"Ah, lady," whispered the count, as the procession moved along, "what
thrones would not Charolois resign for the hand that his unworthy
envoy is allowed to touch!"

"Sir," said Margaret, demurely looking down, "the Count of Charolois
is a lord who, if report be true, makes war his only mistress."

"Because the only loving mistress his great heart could serve is
denied to his love!  Ah, poor lord and brother, what new reasons for
eternal war to Burgundy, when France, not only his foe, becomes his
rival!"

Margaret sighed, and the count continued till by degrees he warmed the
royal maiden from her reserve; and his eye grew brighter, and a
triumphant smile played about his lips, when, after the visit to the
menagerie, the procession re-entered the palace, and the Lord Hastings
conducted the count to the bath prepared for him, previous to the
crowning banquet of the night.  And far more luxurious and more
splendid than might be deemed by those who read but the general
histories of that sanguinary time, or the inventories of furniture in
the houses even of the great barons, was the accommodation which
Edward afforded to his guest. His apartments and chambers were hung
with white silk and linen, the floors covered with richly-woven
carpets; the counterpane of his bed was cloth-of-gold, trimmed with
ermine; the cupboard shone with vessels of silver and gold; and over
two baths were pitched tents of white cloth of Rennes fringed with
silver.  [See Madden's Narrative of the Lord Grauthuse; Archaelogia,
1830.]

Agreeably to the manners of the time, Lord Hastings assisted to
disrobe the count; and, the more to bear him company, afterwards
undressed himself and bathed in the one bath, while the count
