She paused a moment, and, looking away, added in a low tone, "Didst
thou hear, sister Anne, if the Duke of Clarence visited my father the
forenoon?"

"Ah, Isabel, Isabel!"

"Ah, sister Anne, sister Anne! Wilt thou know all my secrets ere I know
them myself?"--and Isabel, with something of her father's playfulness,
put her hands to Anne's laughing lips.

Meanwhile Warwick, after walking musingly a few moments along the
garden, which was formed by plots of sward, bordered with fruit-trees,
and white rose-trees not yet in blossom, turned to his silent kinsman,
and said, "Forgive me, cousin mine, my mannerless burst against thy
brave father's faction; but when thou hast been a short while at court,
thou wilt see where the sore is. Certes, I love this king!" Here his
dark face lighted up. "Love him as a king,--ay, and as a son! And
who would not love him; brave as his sword, gallant, and winning, and
gracious as the noonday in summer? Besides, I placed him on his throne;
I honour myself in him!"

The earl's stature dilated as he spoke the last sentence, and his
hand rested on his dagger hilt. He resumed, with the same daring and
incautious candour that stamped his dauntless, soldier-like nature, "God
hath given me no son. Isabel of Warwick had been a mate for William the
Norman; and my grandson, if heir to his grandsire's soul, should have
ruled from the throne of England over the realms of Charlemagne! But it
hath pleased Him whom the Christian knight alone bows to without shame,
to order otherwise. So be it. I forgot my just pretensions,--forgot
my blood, and counselled the king to strengthen his throne with the
alliance of Louis XI. He rejected the Princess Bona of Savoy, to marry
widow Elizabeth Gray; I sorrowed for his sake, and forgave the slight to
my counsels. At his prayer I followed the train of his queen, and hushed
the proud hearts of our barons to obeisance. But since then, this Dame
Woodville, whom I queened, if her husband mated, must dispute this
roiaulme with mine and me,--a Nevile, nowadays, must vail his plume to a
Woodville! And not the great barons whom it will suit Edward's policy
to win from the Lancastrians--not the Exeters and the Somersets--but the
craven varlets and lackeys and dross of the camp--false alike to Henry
and to Edward--are to be fondled into lordships and dandled into power.
Young man, I am speaking hotly--Richard Nevile never lies nor conceals;
but I am speaking to a kinsman, am I not? Thou hearest,--thou wilt not
repeat?"

"Sooner would I pluck forth my tongue by the roots."

"Enough!" returned the earl, with a pleased smile. "When I come from
France, I will speak more to thee. Meanwhile be courteous to all men,
servile to none. Now to the king."

So speaking, he shook back his surcoat, drew his cap over his brow,
and passed to the broad stairs, at the foot of which fifty rowers, with
their badges on their shoulders, waited in the huge barge, gilt richly
at prow and stern, and with an awning of silk, wrought with the earl's
arms and cognizance. As they pushed off, six musicians, placed towards
the helm, began a slow and half Eastern march, which, doubtless, some
crusader of the Temple had brought from the cymbals and trumps of
Palestine.




CHAPTER II. KING EDWARD THE FOURTH.

The Tower of London, more consecrated to associations of gloom and blood
than those of gayety and splendour, was, nevertheless, during the reign
of Edward IV., the seat of a gallant and gorgeous court. That king,
from the first to the last so dear to the people of London, made it his
principal residence when in his metropolis; and its ancient halls and
towers were then the scene of many a brawl and galliard. As Warwick's
barge now approached its huge walls, rising from the river, there was
much that might either animate or awe, according to the mood of the
spectator. The king's barge, with many lesser craft reserved for the
use of the courtiers, gay with awnings and streamers and painting and
gilding, lay below the wharfs, not far from the gate of St. Thomas, now
called the Traitor's Gate. On the walk raised above the battlemented
wall of the inner ward, not only paced the sentries, but there dames and
knights were inhaling the noonday breezes, and the gleam of their rich
dresses of cloth-of-gold glanced upon the eye at frequent intervals from
tower to tower. Over the vast round turret, behind the Traitor's Gate,
now called "The Bloody Tower," floated cheerily in the light wind the
royal banner. Near the Lion's Tower, two or three of the keepers of the
menagerie, in the king's livery, were leading forth, by a strong chain,
the huge white bear that made one of the boasts of the collection, and
was an especial favourite with the king and his brother Richard. The
sheriffs of London were bound to find this grisly minion his chain and
his cord, when he deigned to amuse himself with bathing or "fishing" in
the river; and several boats, filled with gape-mouthed passengers, lay
near the wharf, to witness the diversions of Bruin. These folks set up
a loud shout of--"A Warwick! a Warwick!" "The stout earl, and God
bless him!" as the gorgeous barge shot towards the fortress. The earl
acknowledged their greeting by vailing his plumed cap; and passing the
keepers with a merry allusion to their care of his own badge, and a
friendly compliment to the grunting bear, he stepped ashore, followed
by his kinsman. Now, however, he paused a moment; and a more thoughtful
shade passed over his countenance, as, glancing his eye carelessly aloft
towards the standard of King Edward, he caught sight of the casement in
the neighbouring tower, of the very room in which the sovereign of his
youth, Henry the Sixth, was a prisoner, almost within hearing of the
revels of his successor; then, with a quick stride, he hurried on
through the vast court, and, passing the White Tower, gained the royal
lodge. Here, in the great hall, he left his companion, amidst a group of
squires and gentlemen, to whom he formally presented the Nevile as his
friend and kinsman, and was ushered by the deputy-chamberlain (with an
apology for the absence of his chief, the Lord Hastings, who had gone
abroad to fly his falcon) into the small garden, where Edward was idling
away the interval between the noon and evening meals,--repasts to which
already the young king inclined with that intemperate zest and ardour
which he carried into all his pleasures, and which finally destroyed the
handsomest person and embruted one of the most vigorous intellects of
the age.

The garden, if bare of flowers, supplied their place by the various
and brilliant-coloured garbs of the living beauties assembled on its
straight walks and smooth sward. Under one of those graceful cloisters,
which were the taste of the day, and had been recently built and gayly
decorated, the earl was stopped in his path by a group of ladies playing
at closheys (ninepins) of ivory; [Narrative of Louis of Bruges, Lord
Grauthuse. Edited by Sir F. Madden, "Archaelogia," 1836.] and one of
these fair dames, who excelled the rest in her skill, had just bowled
down the central or crowned pin,--the king of the closheys. This lady,
no less a person than Elizabeth, the Queen of England, was then in her
thirty-sixth year,--ten years older than her lord; but the peculiar
fairness and delicacy of her complexion still preserved to her beauty
the aspect and bloom of youth. From a lofty headgear, embroidered with
fleur-de-lis, round which wreathed a light diadem of pearls, her hair,
of the pale yellow considered then the perfection of beauty, flowed so
straight and so shining down her shoulders, almost to the knees, that
it seemed like a mantle of gold. The baudekin stripes (blue and gold) of
her tunic attested her royalty. The blue courtpie of satin was bordered
with ermine, and the sleeves, sitting close to an arm of exquisite
contour, shone with seed pearls. Her features were straight and regular,
yet would have been insipid, but for an expression rather of cunning
than intellect; and the high arch of her eyebrows, with a slight curve
downward of a mouth otherwise beautiful, did not improve the expression,
by an addition of something supercilious and contemptuous, rather than
haughty or majestic.

"My lord of Warwick," said Elizabeth, pointing to the fallen closhey,
"what would my enemies say if they heard I had toppled down the king?"

"They would content themselves with asking which of your Grace's
brothers you would place in his stead," answered the hardy earl, unable
to restrain the sarcasm.

The queen blushed, and glanced round her ladies with an eye which never
looked direct or straight upon its object, but wandered sidelong with
a furtive and stealthy expression, that did much to obtain for her the
popular character of falseness and self-seeking. Her displeasure was yet
more increased by observing the ill-concealed smile which the taunt had
called forth.

"Nay, my lord," she said, after a short pause, "we value the peace of
our roiaulme too much for so high an ambition. Were we to make a brother
even the prince of the closheys, we should disappoint the hopes of a
Nevile."

The earl disdained pursuing the war of words, and answering coldly, "The
Neviles are more famous for making ingrates than asking favours. I leave
your Highness to the closheys"--turned away, and strode towards the
king, who, at the opposite end of the garden, was reclining on a bench
beside a lady, in whose ear, to judge by her downcast and blushing
cheek, he was breathing no unwelcome whispers.

"Mort-Dieu!" muttered the earl, who was singularly exempt, himself, from
the amorous follies of the day, and eyed them with so much contempt that
it often obscured his natural downright penetration into character, and
never more than when it led him afterwards to underrate the talents of
Edward IV.,--"Mort-Dieu! if, an hour before the battle of Towton, some
wizard had shown me in his glass this glimpse of the gardens of the
Tower, that giglet for a queen, and that squire of dames for a king, I
had not slain my black destrier (poor Malech!), that I might conquer or
die for Edward Earl of March."

"But see!" said the lady, looking up from the enamoured and conquering
eyes of the king, "art thou not ashamed, my lord?--the grim earl comes
to chide thee for thy faithlessness to thy queen, whom he loves so
well."

"Pasque-Dieu! as my cousin Louis of France says or swears," answered
the king, with an evident petulance in his altered voice, "I would that
Warwick could be only worn with one's armour! I would as lief try to
kiss through my vizor as hear him talk of glory and Towton, and King
John and poor Edward II., because I am not always in mail. Go! leave
us, sweet bonnibel! we must brave the bear alone!" The lady inclined her
head, drew her hood round her face, and striking into the contrary path
from that in which Warwick was slowly striding, gained the group round
the queen, whose apparent freedom from jealousy, the consequence of
cold affections and prudent calculation, made one principal cause of the
empire she held over the powerful mind, but the indolent temper, of the
gay and facile Edward.

The king rose as Warwick now approached him; and the appearance of these
two eminent persons was in singular contrast. Warwick, though richly and
even gorgeously attired,--nay, with all the care which in that age
was considered the imperative duty a man of station and birth owed to
himself,--held in lofty disdain whatever vagary of custom tended to
cripple the movements or womanize the man. No loose flowing robes, no
shoon half a yard long, no flaunting tawdriness of fringe and aiglet,
characterized the appearance of the baron, who, even in peace, gave his
address a half-martial fashion.

But Edward, who, in common with all the princes of the House of York,
carried dress to a passion, had not only reintroduced many of the most
effeminate modes in vogue under William the Red King, but added to them
whatever could tend to impart an almost oriental character to the old
Norman garb. His gown (a womanly garment which had greatly superseded,
with men of the highest rank, not only the mantle but the surcoat)
flowed to his heels, trimmed with ermine, and broidered with large
flowers of crimson wrought upon cloth-of-gold. Over this he wore a
tippet of ermine, and a collar or necklace of uncut jewels set in
filigree gold; the nether limbs were, it is true, clad in the more manly
fashion of tight-fitting hosen, but the folds of the gown, as the day
was somewhat fresh, were drawn around so as to conceal the only part of
the dress which really betokened the male sex. To add to this unwarlike
attire, Edward's locks of a rich golden colour, and perfuming the whole
air with odours, flowed not in curls, but straight to his shoulders, and
the cheek of the fairest lady in his court might have seemed less fair
beside the dazzling clearness of a complexion at once radiant with
health and delicate with youth. Yet, in spite of all this effeminacy,
the appearance of Edward IV. was not effeminate. From this it was
preserved, not only by a stature little less commanding than that of
Warwick himself, and of great strength and breadth of shoulder, but also
by features, beautiful indeed, but pre-eminently masculine,--large
and bold in their outline, and evincing by their expression all the
gallantry and daring characteristic of the hottest soldier, next to
Warwick, and without any exception the ablest captain, of the age.

"And welcome,--a merry welcome, dear Warwick, and cousin mine," said
Edward, as Warwick slightly bent his proud knee to his king; "your
brother, Lord Montagu, has but left us. Would that our court had the
same, joyaunce for you as for him."

"Dear and honoured my liege," answered Warwick, his brow smoothing at
once,--for his affectionate though hasty and irritable nature was
rarely proof against the kind voice and winning smile of his young
sovereign,--"could I ever serve you at the court as I can with the
people, you would not complain that John of Montagu was a better
courtier than Richard of Warwick. But each to his calling. I depart
to-morrow for Calais, and thence to King Louis. And, surely, never envoy
or delegate had better chance to be welcome than one empowered to treat
of an alliance that will bestow on a prince deserving, I trust, his
fortunes, the sister of the bravest sovereign in Christian Europe."

"Now, out on thy flattery, my cousin; though I must needs own I provoked
it by my complaint of thy courtiership. But thou hast learned only half
thy business, good Warwick; and it is well Margaret did not hear thee.
Is not the prince of France more to be envied for winning a fair lady
than having a fortunate soldier for his brother-in-law?"

"My liege," replied Warwick, smiling, "thou knowest I am a poor judge of
a lady's fair cheek, though indifferently well skilled as to the valour
of a warrior's stout arm. Algates, the Lady Margaret is indeed worthy in
her excellent beauties to become the mother of brave men."

"And that is all we can wring from thy stern lip, man of iron? Well,
that must content us. But to more serious matters." And the king,
leaning his hand on the earl's arm, and walking with him slowly to and
fro the terrace, continued: "Knowest thou not, Warwick, that this French
alliance, to which thou hast induced us, displeases sorely our good
traders of London?"

"Mort-Dieu!" returned Warwick, bluntly, "and what business have the
flat-caps with the marriage of a king's sister? Is it for them to
breathe garlic on the alliances of Bourbons and Plantagenets? Faugh!
You have spoiled them, good my lord king,--you have spoiled them by your
condescensions. Henry IV. staled not his majesty to consultations with
the mayor of his city. Henry V. gave the knighthood of the hath to the
heroes of Agincourt, not to the vendors of cloth and spices."

"Ah, my poor knights of the Bath!" said Edward, good-humouredly, "wilt
thou never let that sore scar quietly over? Ownest thou not that the men
had their merits?"

"What the merits were, I weet not," answered the earl,--"unless,
peradventure, their wives were comely and young."

"Thou wrongest me, Warwick," said the king, carelessly; "Dame Cook was
awry, Dame Philips a grandmother, Dame Jocelyn had lost her front teeth,
and Dame Waer saw seven ways at once! But thou forgettest, man, the
occasion of those honours,--the eve before Elizabeth was crowned,--and
it was policy to make the city of London have a share in her honours.
As to the rest," pursued the king, earnestly and with dignity, "I and my
House have owed much to London. When the peers of England, save thee and
thy friends, stood aloof from my cause, London was ever loyal and true.
Thou seest not, my poor Warwick, that these burgesses are growing up
into power by the decline of the orders above them. And if the sword
is the monarch's appeal for his right, he must look to contented and
honoured industry for his buckler in peace. This is policy,--policy,
Warwick; and Louis XI. will tell thee the same truths, harsh though they
grate in a warrior's ear."

The earl bowed his haughty head, and answered shortly, but with a
touching grace, "Be it ever thine, noble king, to rule as it likes thee,
and mine to defend with my blood even what I approve not with my brain!
But if thou doubtest the wisdom of this alliance, it is not too late
yet. Let me dismiss my following, and cross not the seas. Unless thy
heart is with the marriage, the ties I would form are threads and
cobwebs."

"Nay," returned Edward, irresolutely: "in these great state matters
thy wit is elder than mine; but men do say the Count of Charolois is a
mighty lord; and the alliance with Burgundy will be more profitable to
staple and mart."

"Then, in God's name, so conclude it!" said the earl, hastily, but with
so dark a fire in his eyes that Edward, who was observing him, changed
countenance; "only ask me not, my liege, to advance such a marriage. The
Count of Charolois knows me as his foe--shame were mine did I shun to
say where I love, where I hate. That proud dullard once slighted me when
we met at his father's court, and the wish next to my heart is to pay
back my affront with my battle-axe. Give thy sister to the heir of
Burgundy, and forgive me if I depart to my castle of Middleham."

Edward, stung by the sharpness of this reply, was about to answer as
became his majesty of king, when Warwick more deliberately resumed: "Yet
think well; Henry of Windsor is thy prisoner, but his cause lives in
Margaret and his son. There is but one power in Europe that can threaten
thee with aid to the Lancastrians; that power is France. Make Louis thy
friend and ally, and thou givest peace to thy life and thy lineage; make
Louis thy foe, and count on plots and stratagems and treason, uneasy
days and sleepless nights. Already thou hast lost one occasion to secure
that wiliest and most restless of princes, in rejecting the hand of the
Princess Bona. Happily, this loss now can be retrieved. But alliance
with Burgundy is war with France,--war more deadly because Louis is
a man who declares it not; a war carried on by intrigue and bribe, by
spies and minions, till some disaffection ripens the hour when young
Edward of Lancaster shall land on thy coasts, with the Oriflamme and
the Red Rose, with French soldiers and English malcontents. Wouldst thou
look to Burgundy for help?--Burgundy will have enough to guard its own
frontiers from the gripe of Louis the Sleepless. Edward, my king, my
pupil in arms, Edward, my loved, my honoured liege, forgive Richard
Nevile his bluntness, and let not his faults stand in bar of his
counsels."

"You are right, as you are ever, safeguard of England, and pillar of my
state," said the king, frankly, and pressing the arm he still held. "Go
to France and settle all as thou wilt."

Warwick bent low and kissed the hand of his sovereign. "And," said
he, with a slight, but a sad smile, "when I am gone, my liege will not
repent, will not misthink me, will not listen to my foes, nor suffer
merchant and mayor to sigh him back to the mechanics of Flanders?"

"Warwick, thou deemest ill of thy king's kingliness."

"Not of thy kingliness; but that same gracious quality of yielding to
counsel which bows this proud nature to submission often makes me fear
for thy firmness, when thy will is, won through thy heart. And now, good
my liege, forgive me one sentence more. Heaven forefend that I should
stand in the way of thy princely favours. A king's countenance is a sun
that should shine on all. But bethink thee well, the barons of England
are a stubborn and haughty race; chafe not thy most puissant peers by
too cold a neglect of their past services, and too lavish a largess to
new men."

"Thou aimest at Elizabeth's kin," interrupted Edward, withdrawing his
hand from his minister's arm, "and I tell thee once for all times, that
I would rather sink again to mine earldom of March, with a subject's
right to honour where he loves, than wear crown and wield sceptre
without a king's unquestioned prerogative to ennoble the line and blood
of one he has deemed worthy of his throne. As for the barons, with whose
wrath thou threatenest me, I banish them not. If they go in gloom from
my court, why, let them chafe themselves sleek again."

"King Edward," said Warwick, moodily, "tried services merit not this
contempt. It is not as the kith of the queen that I regret to see lands
and honours lavished upon men rooted so newly to the soil that the first
blast of the war-trump will scatter their greenness to the winds; but
what sorrows me is to mark those who have fought against thee preferred
to the stout loyalty that braved block and field for thy cause. Look
round thy court; where are the men of bloody York and victorious
Towton?--unrequited, sullen in their strongholds, begirt with their
yeomen and retainers. Thou standest--thou, the heir of York--almost
alone (save where the Neviles--whom one day thy court will seek also
to disgrace and discard--vex their old comrades in arms by their
defection)--thou standest almost alone among the favourites and minions
of Lancaster. Is there no danger in proving to men that to have served
thee is discredit, to have warred against thee is guerdon and grace?"

"Enough of this, cousin," replied the king, with an effort which
preserved his firmness. "On this head we cannot agree. Take what else
thou wilt of royalty,--make treaties and contract marriages, establish
peace or proclaim war; but trench not on my sweetest prerogative to give
and to forgive. And now, wilt thou tarry and sup with us? The ladies
grow impatient of a commune that detains from their eyes the stateliest
knight since the Round Table was chopped into fire-wood."

"No, my liege," said Warwick, whom flattery of this sort rather angered
than soothed, "I have much yet to prepare. I leave your Highness to
fairer homage and more witching counsels than mine." So saying, he
kissed the king's hand, and was retiring, when he remembered his
kinsman, whose humble interests in the midst of more exciting topics
he had hitherto forgotten, and added, "May I crave, since you are so
merciful to the Lancastrians, one grace for my namesake,--a Nevile whose
father repented the side he espoused, a son of Sir Guy of Arsdale?"

"Ah," said the king, smiling maliciously, "it pleaseth us much to find
that it is easier to the warm heart of our cousin Warwick to preach
sententiaries of sternness to his king than to enforce the same by his
own practice!"

"You misthink me, sire. I ask not that Marmaduke Nevile should supplant
his superiors and elders; I ask not that he should be made baron and
peer; I ask only that, as a young gentleman who hath taken no part
himself in the wars, and whose father repented his error, your Grace
should strengthen your following by an ancient name and a faithful
servant. But I should have remembered me that his name of Nevile would
have procured him a taunt in the place of advancement."

"Saw man ever so froward a temper?" cried Edward, not without reason.
"Why, Warwick, thou art as shrewish to a jest as a woman to advice. Thy
kinsman's fortunes shall be my care. Thou sayest thou hast enemies,--I
weet not who they be. But to show what I think of them, I make thy
namesake and client a gentleman of my chamber. When Warwick is false to
Edward, let him think that Warwick's kinsman wears a dagger within reach
of the king's heart day and night."

This speech was made with so noble and touching a kindness of voice and
manner, that the earl, thoroughly subdued, looked at his sovereign with
moistened eyes, and only trusting himself to say,--"Edward, thou art
king, knight, gentleman, and soldier; and I verily trow that I love thee
best when my petulant zeal makes me anger thee most,"--turned away with
evident emotion, and passing the queen and her ladies with a lowlier
homage than that with which he had before greeted them, left the garden.
Edward's eye followed him musingly. The frank expression of his face
vanished, and with the deep breath of a man who is throwing a weight
from his heart, he muttered,--

"He loves me,--yes; but will suffer no one else to love me! This must
end some day. I am weary of the bondage." And sauntering towards the
ladies, he listened in silence, but not apparently in displeasure, to
his queen's sharp sayings on the imperious mood and irritable temper of
the iron-handed builder of his throne.




CHAPTER III. THE ANTECHAMBER.

As Warwick passed the door that led from the garden, he brushed by a
young man, the baudekin stripes of whose vest announced his relationship
to the king, and who, though far less majestic than Edward, possessed
sufficient of family likeness to pass for a very handsome and comely
person; but his countenance wanted the open and fearless expression
which gave that of the king so masculine and heroic a character. The
features were smaller, and less clearly cut, and to a physiognomical
observer there was much that was weak and irresolute in the light blue
eyes and the smiling lips which never closed firmly over the teeth. He
did not wear the long gown then so much in vogue, but his light figure
was displayed to advantage by a vest, fitting it exactly, descending
half-way down the thigh, and trimmed at the border and the collar with
ermine. The sleeves of the doublet were slit, so as to show the white
lawn beneath, and adorned with aiglets and knots of gold.

Over the left arm hung a rich jacket of furs and velvet, something
like that adopted by the modern hussar. His hat, or cap, was high and
tiara-like, with a single white plume, and the ribbon of the Garter
bound his knee. Though the dress of this personage was thus far less
effeminate than Edward's, the effect of his appearance was infinitely
more so,--partly, perhaps, from a less muscular frame, and partly
from his extreme youth; for George Duke of Clarence was then, though
initiated not only in the gayeties, but all the intrigues of the court,
only in his eighteenth year. Laying his hand, every finger of which
sparkled with jewels, on the earl's shoulder--"Hold!" said the young
prince, in a whisper, "a word in thy ear, noble Warwick!"

The earl, who, next to Edward, loved Clarence the most of his princely
House, and who always found the latter as docile as the other (when
humour or affection seized him) was intractable, relaxed into a familiar
smile at the duke's greeting, and suffered the young prince to draw him
aside from the groups of courtiers with whom the chamber was filled, to
the leaning-places (as they were called) of a large mullion window.
In the mean while, as they thus conferred, the courtiers interchanged
looks, and many an eye of fear and hate was directed towards the stately
form of the earl. For these courtiers were composed principally of the
kindred or friends of the queen, and though they dared not openly
evince the malice with which they retorted Warwick's lofty scorn and
undisguised resentment at their new fortunes, they ceased not to hope
for his speedy humiliation and disgrace, reeking little what storm might
rend the empire, so that it uprooted the giant oak, which still in some
measure shaded their sunlight and checked their growth. True, however,
that amongst these were mingled, though rarely, men of a hardier stamp
and nobler birth,--some few of the veteran friends of the king's great
father; and these, keeping sternly and loftily aloof from the herd,
regarded Warwick with the same almost reverential and yet affectionate
admiration which he inspired amongst the yeomen, peasants, and
mechanics,--for in that growing but quiet struggle of the burgesses, as
it will often happen in more civilized times, the great Aristocracy and
the Populace were much united in affection, though with very different
objects; and the Middle and Trading Class, with whom the earl's desire
for French alliances and disdain of commerce had much weakened his
popularity, alone shared not the enthusiasm of their countrymen for the
lion-hearted minister.

Nevertheless, it must here be owned that the rise of Elizabeth's kindred
introduced a far more intellectual, accomplished, and literary race into
court favour than had for many generations flourished in so uncongenial
a soil: and in this ante-chamber feud, the pride of education and mind
retaliated with juster sarcasm the pride of birth and sinews.

Amongst those opposed to the earl, and fit in all qualities to be the
head of the new movement,--if the expressive modern word be allowed
us,--stood at that moment in the very centre of the chamber Anthony
Woodville, in right of the rich heiress he had married the Lord Scales.
As, when some hostile and formidable foe enters the meads where the
flock grazes, the gazing herd gather slowly round their leader,
so grouped the queen's faction slowly, and by degrees, round this
accomplished nobleman, at the prolonged sojourn of Warwick.

"Gramercy!" said the Lord Scales, in a somewhat affected intonation
of voice, "the conjunction of the bear and the young lion is a parlous
omen, for the which I could much desire we had a wise astrologer's
reading."

"It is said," observed one of the courtiers, "that the Duke of Clarence
much affects either the lands or the person of the Lady Isabel."

"A passably fair damozel," returned Anthony, "though a thought or so
too marked and high in her lineaments, and wholly unlettered, no doubt;
which were a pity, for George of Clarence has some pretty taste in the
arts and poesies. But as Occleve hath it--

    'Gold, silver, jewel, cloth, beddyng, array,'

would make gentle George amorous of a worse-featured face than
high-nosed Isabel; 'strange to spell or rede,' as I would wager my best
destrier to a tailor's hobby, the damozel surely is."

"Notest thou yon gaudy popinjay?" whispered the Lord of St. John to one
of his Towton comrades, as, leaning against the wall, they overheard the
sarcasms of Anthony, and the laugh of the courtiers, who glassed their
faces and moods to his. "Is the time so out of joint that Master Anthony
Woodville can vent his scurrile japes on the heiress of Salisbury and
Warwick in the king's chamber?"

"And prate of spelling and reading as if they were the cardinal
virtues?" returned his sullen companion. "By my halidame, I have two
fair daughters at home who will lack husbands, I trow, for they can
only spin and be chaste,--two maidenly gifts out of bloom with the White
Rose."

In the mean while, unwitting, or contemptuous, of the attention they
excited, Warwick and Clarence continued yet more earnestly to confer.

"No, George, no," said the earl, who, as the descendant of John of
Gaunt, and of kin to the king's blood, maintained, in private,
a father's familiarity with the princes of York, though on state
occasions, and when in the hearing of others, he sedulously marked his
deference for their rank--"no, George, calm and steady thy hot mettle,
for thy brother's and England's sake. I grieve as much as thou to hear
that the queen does not spare even thee in her froward and unwomanly
peevishness. But there is a glamour in this, believe me, that must melt
away soon or late, and our kingly Edward recover his senses."

"Glamour!" said Clarence; "thinkest thou, indeed, that her mother,
Jacquetta, has bewitched the king? One word of thy belief in such
spells, spread abroad amongst the people, would soon raise the same
storm that blew Eleanor Cobham from Duke Humphrey's bed, along London
streets in her penance-shift."

"Troth," said the earl, indifferently, "I leave such grave questions as
these to prelate and priest; the glamour I spoke of is that of a fair
face over a wanton heart; and Edward is not so steady a lover that this
should never wear out."

"It amates me much, noble cousin, that thou leavest the court in this
juncture. The queen's heart is with Burgundy, the city's hate is with
France; and when once thou art gone, I fear that the king will be teased
into mating my sister with the Count of Charolois."

"Ho!" exclaimed Warwick, with an oath so loud that it rung through the
chamber, and startled every ear that heard it. Then, perceiving his
indiscretion, he lowered his tone into a deep and hollow whisper, and
griped the prince's arm almost fiercely as he spoke.

"Could Edward so dishonour my embassy, so palter and juggle with my
faith, so flout me in the eyes of Christendom, I would--I would--" he
paused, and relaxed his hold of the duke, and added, with an altered
voice--"I would leave his wife and his lemans, and yon things of silk,
whom he makes peers (that is easy) but cannot make men, to guard his
throne from the grandson of Henry V. But thy fears, thy zeal, thy love
for me, dearest prince and cousin, make thee misthink Edward's kingly
honour and knightly faith. I go with the sure knowledge that by
alliance with France I shut the House of Lancaster from all hope of this
roiaulme."

"Hadst thou not better, at least, see my sister Margaret? She has a high
spirit, and she thinks thou mightest, at least, woo her assent, and tell
her of the good gifts of her lord to be!"

"Are the daughters of York spoiled to this by the manners and guise of
a court, in which beshrew me if I well know which the woman and whom
the man? Is it not enough to give peace to broad England, root to
her brother's stem? Is it not enough to wed the son of a king, the
descendant of Charlemagne and Saint Louis? Must I go bonnet in hand and
simper forth the sleek personals of the choice of her kith and House;
swear the bridegroom's side-locks are as long as King Edward's, and
that he bows with the grace of Master Anthony Woodville? Tell her this
thyself, gentle Clarence, if thou wilt: all Warwick could say would but
anger her ear, if she be the maid thou bespeakest her."

The Duke of Clarence hesitated a moment, and then, colouring slightly,
said, "If, then, the daughter's hand be the gift of her kith alone,
shall I have thy favour when the Lady Isabel--"

"George," interrupted Warwick, with a fond and paternal smile, "when we
have made England safe, there is nothing the son of Richard of York can
ask of Warwick in vain. Alas!" he added mournfully, "thy father and mine
were united in the same murtherous death, and I think they will smile
down on us from their seats in heaven when a happier generation cements
that bloody union with a marriage bond!"

Without waiting for further parlance, the earl turned suddenly away,
threw his cap on his towering head, and strode right through the centre
of the whispering courtiers, who shrunk, louting low, from his haughty
path, to break into a hubbub of angry exclamations or sarcastic jests
at his unmannerly bearing, as his black plume disappeared in the arch of
the vaulted door.

While such the scene in the interior chambers of the palace, Marmaduke,
with the frank simpleness which belonged to his youth and training, had
already won much favour and popularity, and he was laughing loud with a
knot of young men by the shovel-board when Warwick re-entered. The earl,
though so disliked by the courtiers more immediately about the person
of the king, was still the favourite of the less elevated knights and
gentry who formed the subordinate household and retainers; and with
these, indeed, his manner, so proud and arrogant to his foes and rivals,
relapsed at once into the ease of the manly and idolized chief. He was
pleased to see the way made by his young namesake, and lifting his cap,
as he nodded to the group and leaned his arm upon Marmaduke's shoulder,
he said, "Thanks, and hearty thanks, to you, knights and gentles, for
your courteous reception of an old friend's young son. I have our king's
most gracious permission to see him enrolled one of the court you grace.
Ah, Master Falconer, and how does thy worthy uncle?--braver knight never
trod. What young gentleman is yonder?--a new face and a manly one; by
your favour, present him. The son of a Savile! Sir, on my return, be
not the only Savile who shuns our table of Warwick Court. Master Dacres,
commend me to the lady, your mother; she and I have danced many a
measure together in the old time,--we all live again in our children.
Good den to you, sirs. Marmaduke, follow me to the office,--you lodge
in the palace. You are gentleman to the most gracious and, if Warwick
lives, to the most puissant of Europe's sovereigns. I shall see Montagu
at home; he shall instruct thee in thy duties, and requite thee for all
discourtesies on the archery-ground."




BOOK III. IN WHICH THE HISTORY PASSES FROM THE KING'S COURT TO THE
STUDENT'S CELL, AND RELATES THE PERILS THAT BEFELL A PHILOSOPHER FOR
MEDDLING WITH THE AFFAIRS OF THE WORLD.




CHAPTER I. THE SOLITARY SAGE AND THE SOLITARY MAID.

While such the entrance of Marmaduke Nevile into a court, that if far
less intellectual and refined than those of later days, was yet more
calculated to dazzle the fancy, to sharpen the wit, and to charm the
senses,--for round the throne of Edward IV. chivalry was magnificent,
intrigue restless, and pleasure ever on the wing,--Sibyll had ample
leisure in her solitary home to muse over the incidents that had
preceded the departure of the young guest. Though she had rejected
Marmaduke's proffered love, his tone, so suddenly altered, his abrupt,
broken words and confusion, his farewell, so soon succeeding his
passionate declaration, could not fail to wound that pride of woman
which never sleeps till modesty is gone. But this made the least cause
of the profound humiliation which bowed down her spirit. The meaning
taunt conveyed in the rhyme of the tymbesteres pierced her to the quick;
the calm, indifferent smile of the stranger, as he regarded her, the
beauty of the dame he attended, woke mingled and contrary feelings, but
those of jealousy were perhaps the keenest: and in the midst of all she
started to ask herself if indeed she had suffered her vain thoughts to
dwell too tenderly upon one from whom the vast inequalities of human
life must divide her evermore. What to her was his indifference?
Nothing,--yet had she given worlds to banish that careless smile from
her remembrance.

Shrinking at last from the tyranny of thoughts till of late unknown, her
eye rested upon the gipsire which Alwyn had sent her by the old servant.
The sight restored to her the holy recollection of her father, the sweet
joy of having ministered to his wants. She put up the little treasure,
intending to devote it all to Warner; and after bathing her heavy eyes,
that no sorrow of hers might afflict the student, she passed with a
listless step into her father's chamber.

There is, to the quick and mercurial spirits of the young, something of
marvellous and preternatural in that life within life, which the strong
passion of science and genius forms and feeds,--that passion so much
stronger than love, and so much more self-dependent; which asks no
sympathy, leans on no kindred heart; which lives alone in its works and
fancies, like a god amidst his creations.

The philosopher, too, had experienced a great affliction since they met
last. In the pride of his heart he had designed to show Marmaduke the
mystic operations of his model, which had seemed that morning to open
into life; and when the young man was gone, and he made the experiment
alone, alas! he found that new progress but involved him in new
difficulties. He had gained the first steps in the gigantic creation
of modern days, and he was met by the obstacle that baffled so long the
great modern sage. There was the cylinder, there the boiler; yet, work
as he would, the steam failed to keep the cylinder at work. And now,
patiently as the spider re-weaves the broken web, his untiring ardour
was bent upon constructing a new cylinder of other materials. "Strange,"
he said to himself, "that the heat of the mover aids not the movement;"
and so, blundering near the truth, he laboured on.

Sibyll, meanwhile, seated herself abstractedly on a heap of fagots piled
in the corner, and seemed busy in framing characters on the dusty floor
with the point of her tiny slipper. So fresh and fair and young she
seemed, in that murky atmosphere, that strange scene, and beside that
worn man, that it might have seemed to a poet as if the youngest of the
Graces were come to visit Mulciber at his forge.

The man pursued his work, the girl renewed her dreams, the dark evening
hour gradually stealing over both. The silence was unbroken, for the
forge and the model were now at rest, save by the grating of Adam's
file upon the metal, or by some ejaculation of complacency now and
then vented by the enthusiast. So, apart from the many-noised, gaudy,
babbling world without, even in the midst of that bloody, turbulent, and
semi-barbarous time, went on (the one neglected and unknown, the other
loathed and hated) the two movers of the ALL that continues the airy
life of the Beautiful from age to age,--the Woman's dreaming Fancy and
the Man's active Genius.




CHAPTER II. MASTER ADAM WARNER GROWS A MISER, AND BEHAVES SHAMEFULLY.

For two or three days nothing disturbed the outward monotony of the
recluse's household. Apparently all had settled back as before the
advent of the young cavalier. But Sibyll's voice was not heard singing,
as of old, when she passed the stairs to her father's room. She sat with
him in his work no less frequently and regularly than before; but
her childish spirits no longer broke forth in idle talk or petulant
movements, vexing the good man from his absorption and his toils.
The little cares and anxieties, which had formerly made up so much of
Sibyll's day by forethought of provision for the morrow, were suspended;
for the money transmitted to her by Alwyn in return for the emblazoned
manuscripts was sufficient to supply their modest wants for months to
come. Adam, more and more engrossed in his labours, did not appear to
perceive the daintier plenty of his board, nor the purchase of some
small comforts unknown for years. He only said one morning, "It is
strange, girl, that as that gathers in life (and he pointed to the
model), it seems already to provide, to my fantasy, the luxuries it will
one day give to us all in truth. Methought my very bed last night seemed
wondrous easy, and the coverings were warmer, for I woke not with the
cold."

"Ah," thought the sweet daughter, smiling through moist eyes, "while
my cares can smooth thy barren path through life, why should I cark and
pine?"

Their solitude was now occasionally broken in the evenings by the visits
of Nicholas Alwyn. The young goldsmith was himself not ignorant of the
simpler mathematics; he had some talent for invention, and took pleasure
in the construction of horologes, though, properly speaking, not a
part of his trade. His excuse for his visits was the wish to profit by
Warner's mechanical knowledge; but the student was so rapt in his
own pursuits, that he gave but little instruction to his visitor.
Nevertheless Alwyn was satisfied, for he saw Sibyll. He saw her in the
most attractive phase of her character,--the loving, patient, devoted
daughter; and the view of her household virtues affected more and more
his honest English heart. But, ever awkward and embarrassed, he gave
no vent to his feelings. To Sibyll he spoke little, and with formal
constraint; and the girl, unconscious of her conquest, was little less
indifferent to his visits than her abstracted father.

But all at once Adam woke to a sense of the change that had taken place;
all at once he caught scent of gold, for his works were brought to a
pause for want of some finer and more costly materials than the coins
in his own possession (the remnant of Marmaduke's gift) enabled him to
purchase. He had stolen out at dusk, unknown to Sibyll, and lavished
the whole upon the model; but in vain! The model in itself was, indeed,
completed; his invention had mastered the difficulty that it had
encountered. But Adam had complicated the contrivance by adding to it
experimental proofs of the agency it was intended to exercise. It was
necessary in that age, if he were to convince others, to show more
than the principle of his engine,--he must show also something of its
effects; turn a mill without wind or water, or set in motion some mimic
vehicle without other force than that the contrivance itself supplied.
And here, at every step, new obstacles arose. It was the misfortune
to science in those days, not only that all books and mathematical
instruments were enormously dear, but that the students, still
struggling into light, through the glorious delusions of alchemy and
mysticism, imagined that, even in simple practical operations, there
were peculiar virtues in virgin gold and certain precious stones. A link
in the process upon which Adam was engaged failed him; his ingenuity was
baffled, his work stood still; and in poring again and again over the
learned manuscripts--alas! now lost--in which certain German doctors
had sought to explain the pregnant hints of Roger Bacon, he found
it inculcated that the axle of a certain wheel must be composed of a
diamond. Now, in truth, it so happened that Adam's contrivance, which
(even without the appliances which were added in illustration of the
theory) was infinitely more complicated than modern research has found
necessary, did not even require the wheel in question, much less the
absent diamond; it happened, also, that his understanding, which, though
so obtuse in common life, was in these matters astonishingly clear,
could not trace any mathematical operations by which the diamond axle
would in the least correct the difficulty that had suddenly started up;
and yet the accursed diamond began to haunt him,--the German authority
was so positive on the point, and that authority had in many respects
been accurate. Nor was this all,--the diamond was to be no vulgar
diamond; it was to be endowed, by talismanic skill, with certain
properties and virtues; it was to be for a certain number of hours
exposed to the rays of the full moon; it was to be washed in a primitive
and wondrous elixir, the making of which consumed no little of the
finest gold. This diamond was to be to the machine what the soul is to
the body,--a glorious, all-pervading, mysterious principle of activity
and life. Such were the dreams that obscured the cradle of infant
science! And Adam, with all his reasoning powers, big lore in the hard
truths of mathematics, was but one of the giant children of the dawn.
The magnificent phrases and solemn promises of the mystic Germans got
firm hold of his fancy. Night and day, waking or sleeping, the diamond,
basking in the silence of the full moon, sparkled before his eyes.
Meanwhile all was at a stand. In the very last steps of his discovery he
was arrested. Then suddenly looking round for vulgar moneys to purchase
the precious gem, and the materials for the soluble elixir, he saw that
MONEY had been at work around him,--that he had been sleeping softly
and faring sumptuously. He was seized with a divine rage. How had Sibyll
dared to secrete from him this hoard; how presumed to waste upon
the base body what might have so profited the eternal mind? In his
relentless ardour, in his sublime devotion and loyalty to his abstract
idea, there was a devouring cruelty, of which this meek and gentle
scholar was wholly unconscious. The grim iron model, like a Moloch,
ate up all things,--health, life, love; and its jaws now opened for
his child. He rose from his bed,--it was daybreak,--he threw on his
dressing-robe, he strode into his daughter's room; the gray twilight
came through the comfortless, curtainless casement, deep sunk into the
wall. Adam did not pause to notice that the poor child, though she had
provoked his anger by refitting his dismal chamber, had spent nothing in
giving a less rugged frown to her own.

The scanty worm-worn furniture, the wretched pallet, the poor attire
folded decently beside,--nothing save that inexpressible purity and
cleanliness which, in the lowliest hovel, a pure and maiden mind gathers
round it; nothing to distinguish the room of her whose childhood had
passed in courts from the but of the meanest daughter of drudgery and
toil! No,--he who had lavished the fortunes of his father and big child
into the grave of his idea--no--he saw nothing of this self-forgetful
penury--the diamond danced before him! He approached the bed; and oh!
the contrast of that dreary room and peasant pallet to the delicate,
pure, enchanting loveliness of the sleeping inmate. The scanty covering
left partially exposed the snow-white neck and rounded shoulder; the
face was pillowed upon the arm, in an infantine grace; the face was
slightly flushed, and the fresh red lips parted into a smile,--for in
her sleep the virgin dreamed,--a happy dream! It was a sight to have
touched a father's heart, to have stopped his footstep, and hushed his
breath into prayer. And call not Adam hard--unnatural--that he was not
then, as men far more harsh than he--for the father at that moment was
not in his breast, the human man was gone--he himself, like his model,
was a machine of iron!--his life was his one idea!

"Wake, child, wake!" he said, in a loud but hollow voice. "Where is the
gold thou hast hidden from me? Wake! confess!"

Roused from her gracious dreams thus savagely, Sibyll started, and saw
the eager, darkened face of her father. Its expression was peculiar
and undefinable, for it was not threatening, angry, stern; there was a
vacancy in the eyes, a strain in the features, and yet a wild, intense
animation lighting and pervading all,--it was as the face of one walking
in his sleep, and, at the first confusion of waking, Sibyll thought
indeed that such was her father's state. But the impatience with which
he shook the arm he grasped, and repeated, as he opened convulsively
his other hand, "The gold, Sibyll, the gold! Why didst thou hide it
from me?" speedily convinced her that her father's mind was under the
influence of the prevailing malady that made all its weakness and all
its strength.

"My poor father!" she said pityingly, "wilt thou not leave thyself the
means whereby to keep strength and health for thine high hopes? Ah,
Father, thy Sibyll only hoarded her poor gains for thee!"

"The gold!" said Adam, mechanically, but in a softer voice,--"all--all
thou hast! How didst thou get it,--how?"

"By the labours of these hands. Ah, do not frown on me!"

"Thou--the child of knightly fathers--thou labour!" said Adam, an
instinct of his former state of gentle-born and high-hearted youth
flashing from his eyes. "It was wrong in thee!"

"Dost thou not labour too?"

"Ay, but for the world. Well, the gold!"

Sibyll rose, and modestly throwing over her form the old mantle which
lay on the pallet, passed to a corner of the room, and opening a chest,
took from it the gipsire, and held it out to her father.

"If it please thee, dear and honoured sir, so be it; and Heaven prosper
it in thy hands!"

Before Adam's clutch could close on the gipsire, a rude hand was laid
on his shoulder, the gipsire was snatched from Sibyll, and the gaunt,
half-clad form of old Madge interposed between the two.

"Eh, sir!" she said, in her shrill, cracked tone, "I thought when I
heard your door open, and your step hurrying down, you were after no
good deeds. Fie, master, fie! I have clung to you when all reviled, and
when starvation within and foul words without made all my hire; for I
ever thought you a good and mild man, though little better than stark
wode. But, augh! to rob your child thus, to leave her to starve and
pine! We old folks are used to it. Look round, look round! I remember
this chamber, when ye first came to your father's hall. Saints of
heaven! There stood the brave bed all rustling with damask of silk; on
those stone walls once hung fine arras of the Flemings,--a marriage gift
to my lady from Queen Margaret, and a mighty show to see, and good for
the soul's comforts, with Bible stories wrought on it. Eh, sir! don't
you call to mind your namesake, Master Adam, in his brave scarlet hosen,
and Madam Eve, in her bonny blue kirtle and laced courtpie? and now--now
look round, I say, and see what you have brought your child to!"
