English poet.  You cannot, you ought not, to devote yourself to the
splendid career to which your genius irresistibly impels you, without
that counsel, that support, that protection, which a husband alone can
give.  My dear child, as the wife myself of a man of letters, and
familiarised to all the gossip, all the scandal, to which they who give
their names to the public are exposed, I declare that if I had a daughter
who inherited Savarin's talents, and was ambitious of attaining to his
renown, I would rather shut her up in a convent than let her publish a
book that was in every one's hands until she had sheltered her name under
that of a husband; and if I say this of my child, with a father so wise
in the world's ways, and so popularly respected as my _bon homme_, what
must I feel to be essential to your safety, poor stranger in our land!
poor solitary orphan! with no other advice or guardian than the singing
mistress whom you touchingly call '_Madre_!'  I see how I distress and
pain you--I cannot help it.  Listen!  The other evening Savarin came back
from his favourite cafe in a state of excitement that made me think he
came to announce a revolution.  It was about you; he stormed, he wept--
actually wept--my philosophical laughing Savarin.  He had just heard of
that atrocious wager made by a Russian barbarian.  Every one praised you
for the contempt with which you had treated the savage's insolence.  But
that you should have been submitted to such an insult without one male
friend who had the right to resent and chastise it,--you cannot think how
Savarin was chafed and galled.  You know how he admires, but you cannot
guess how he reveres you; and since then he says to me every day: 'That
girl must not remain single.  Better marry any man who has a heart to
defend a wife's honour and the nerve to fire a pistol: every Frenchman
has those qualifications!'"

Here Isaura could no longer restrain her emotions; she burst into sobs so
vehement, so convulsive, that Madame Savarin became alarmed; but when she
attempted to embrace and soothe her, Isaura recoiled with a visible
shudder, and gasping out,  "Cruel, cruel!" turned to the door, and rushed
to her own room.

A few minutes afterwards a maid entered the salon with a message to
Madame Savarin that Mademoiselle was so unwell that she must beg Madame
to excuse her return to the salon.

Later in the day Mrs. Morley called, but Isaura would not see her.

Meanwhile poor Rameau was stretched on his sick-bed, and in sharp
struggle between life and death.  It is difficult to disentangle, one by
one, all the threads in a nature so complex as Rameau's; but if we may
hazard a conjecture, the grief of disappointed love was not the immediate
cause of his illness, and yet it had much to do with it.  The goad of
Isaura's refusal had driven him into seeking distraction in excesses
which a stronger frame could not have courted with impunity.  The man was
thoroughly Parisian in many things, but especially in impatience of any
trouble.  Did love trouble him--love could be drowned in absinthe; and
too much absinthe may be a more immediate cause of congested lungs than
the love which the absinthe had lulled to sleep.

His bedside was not watched by hirelings.  When first taken thus ill--too
ill to attend to his editorial duties--information was conveyed to the
publisher of the Sens Commun, and in consequence of that information,
Victor de Mauleon came to see the sick man.  By his bed he found Savarin,
who had called, as it were by chance, and seen the doctor, who had
said, "It is grave.  He must be well nursed."  Savarin whispered to De
Mauleon, "Shall we call in a professional nurse, or a _soeur de
charite_?"

De Mauleon replied, also in a whisper, "Somebody told me that the man had
a mother."

It was true--Savarin had forgotten it.  Rameau never mentioned his
parents--he was not proud of them.

They belonged to a lower class of the bourgeoisie, retired shopkeepers,
and a Red Republican is sworn to hate of the bourgeoisie, high or low;
while a beautiful young author pushing his way into the Chaussee d'Antin
does not proclaim to the world that his parents had sold hosiery in the
Rue St. Denis.

Nevertheless Savarin knew that Rameau had such parents still living, and
took the hint.  Two hours afterwards Rameau was leaning his burning
forehead on his mother's breast.

The next morning the doctor said to the mother, "You are worth ten of me.
If you can stay here we shall pull him through."

"Stay here!--my own boy!" cried indignantly the poor mother.




CHAPTER VIII.

The day which had inflicted on Isaura so keen an anguish was marked by a
great trial in the life of Alain de Rochebriant.

In the morning he received the notice "of _un commandement tendant a
saisie immobiliere,_" on the part of his creditor, M. Louvier; in plain
English, an announcement that his property at Rochebriant would be put up
to public sale on a certain day, in case all debts due to the mortgagee
were not paid before.  An hour afterwards came a note from Duplessis
stating that "he had returned from Bretagne on the previous evening, and
would be very happy to see the Marquis de Rochebriant before two o'clock,
if not inconvenient to call."

Alain put the "commandement" into his pocket, and repaired to the Hotel
Duplessis.

The financier received him with very cordial civility.  Then he began:
"I am happy to say I left your excellent aunt in very good health.  She
honoured the letter of introduction to her which I owe to your politeness
with the most amiable hospitalities; she insisted on my removing from the
_auberge_ at which I first put up and becoming a guest under your
venerable roof-tree--a most agreeable lady, and a most interesting
_chateau_."

"I fear your accommodation was in striking contrast to your comforts at
Paris; my _chateau_ is only interesting to an antiquarian enamoured of
ruins."

"Pardon me, 'ruins' is an exaggerated expression.  I do not say that the
_chateau_ does not want some repairs, but they would not be costly; the
outer walls are strong enough to defy time for centuries to come, and a
few internal decorations and some modern additions of furniture would
make the old manoir a home fit for a prince.  I have been over the whole
estate, too, with the worthy M. Hebert,--a superb property."

"Which M. Louvier appears to appreciate," said Alain, with a somewhat
melancholy smile, extending to Duplessis the menacing notice.

Duplessis glanced at it, and said drily: "M. Louvier knows what he is
about.  But I think we had better put an immediate stop to formalities
which must be painful to a creditor so benevolent.  I do not presume to
offer to pay the interest due on the security you can give for the
repayment.  If you refused that offer from so old a friend as Lemercier,
of course you could not accept it from me.  I make another proposal, to
which you can scarcely object.  I do not like to give my scheming rival
on the Bourse the triumph of so profoundly planned a speculation.  Aid me
to defeat him.  Let me take the mortgage on myself, and become sole
mortgagee--hush!--on this condition,--that there should be an entire
union of interests between us two; that I should be at liberty to make
the improvements I desire, and when the improvements be made, there
should be a fair arrangement as to the proportion of profits due to me as
mortgagee and improver, to you as original owner.  Attend, my dear
Marquis,--I am speaking as a mere man of business.  I see my way to
adding more than a third, I might even say a half--to the present
revenues of Rochbriant.  The woods have been sadly neglected, drainage
alone would add greatly to their produce.  Your orchards might be
rendered magnificent supplies to Paris with better cultivation.  Lastly,
I would devote to building purposes or to market gardens all the lands
round the two towns of ------ and ---------.  I think I can lay my hands
on suitable speculators for these last experiments.  In a word, though
the market value of Rochebriant, as it now stands, would not be
equivalent to the debt on it, in five or six years it could be made
worth--well, I will not say how much--but we shall be both well satisfied
with the result.  Meanwhile, if you allow me to find purchasers for your
timber, and if you will not suffer the Chevalier de Finisterre to
regulate your expenses, you need have no fear that the interest due to me
will not be regularly paid, even though I shall be compelled, for the
first year or two at least, to ask a higher rate of interest than Louvier
exacted--say a quarter per cent. more; and in suggesting that, you will
comprehend that this is now a matter of business between us, and not of
friendship."

Alain turned his head aside to conceal his emotion, and then, with the
quick affectionate impulse of the genuine French nature, threw himself on
the financier's breast and kissed him on both cheeks.

"You save me! you save the home and the tombs of my ancestors!  Thank you
I cannot; but I believe in God--I pray--I will pray for you as for a
father; and if ever," he hurried on in broken words, "I am mean enough to
squander on idle luxuries one franc that I should save for the debt due
to you, chide me as a father would chide a graceless son."

Moved as Alain was, Duplessis was moved yet more deeply.  "What father
would not be proud of such a son?  Ah, if I had such a one!" he said
softly.  Then, quickly recovering his wonted composure, he added, with
the sardonic smile which often chilled his friends and alarmed his foes,
"Monsieur Louvier is about to pass that which I ventured to promise him,
_a 'mauvais quart-d'heure.'  Lend me that _commandement tendant a
saisie_.  I must be off to my _avoue_ with instructions.  If you have no
better engagement, pray dine with me to-day and accompany Valerie and
myself to the opera."

I need not say that Alain accepted the invitation.  How happy Valerie was
that evening!




CHAPTER IX.

The next day Duplessis was surprised by a visit from M. Louvier--that
magnate of millionaires had never before set foot in the house of his
younger and less famous rival.

The burly man entered the room with a face much flushed, and with more
than his usual mixture of jovial brusquerie and opulent swagger.

"Startled to see me, I dare say," began Louvier, as soon as the door was
closed.  "I have this morning received a communication from your agent
containing a cheque for the interest due to me from M. Rochebriant, and a
formal notice of your intention to pay off the principal on behalf of
that popinjay prodigal.  Though we two have not hitherto been the best
friends in the world, I thought it fair to a man in your station to come
to you direct and say, 'Cher confrere, what swindler has bubbled you?
You don't know the real condition of this Breton property, or you would
never so throw away your millions.  The property is not worth the
mortgage I have on it by 30,000 louis."

"Then, M. Louvier, you will be 30,000 louis the richer if I take the
mortgage off your hands."

"I can afford the loss--no offence--better than you can; and I may have
fancies which I don't mind paying for, but which cannot influence
another.  See, I have brought with me the exact schedule of all details
respecting this property.  You need not question their accuracy; they
have been arranged by the Marquis's own agents, M. Gandrin and M. Hebert.
They contain, you will perceive, every possible item of revenue, down to
an apple-tree.  Now, look at that, and tell me if you are justified in
lending such a sum on such a property."

"Thank you very much for an interest in my affairs that I scarcely
ventured to expect M. Louvier to entertain; but I see that I have a
duplicate of this paper, furnished to me very honestly by M. Hebert
himself.  Besides, I, too, have fancies which I don't mind paying for,
and among them may be a fancy for the lands of Rochebriant."

"Look you, Duplessis, when a man like me asks a favour, you may be sure
that he has the power to repay it.  Let me have my whim here, and ask
anything you like from me in return!"

"_Desole_ not to oblige you, but this has become not only a whim of mine,
but a matter of honour; and honour you know, my dear M. Louvier, is the
first principle of sound finance.  I have myself, after careful
inspection of the Rochebriant property, volunteered to its owner to
advance the money to pay off your hypotheque; and what would be said on
the Bourse if Lucien Duplessis failed in an obligation?"

"I think I can guess what will one day be said of Lucien Duplessis if he
make an irrevocable enemy of Paul Louvier.  _Corbleu_! mon cher, a man of
thrice your capital, who watched every speculation of yours with a
hostile eye, might some _beau jour_ make even you a bankrupt!"

"Forewarned, forearmed!" replied Duplessis, imperturbably, "Fas est ab
hoste doceri,--I mean, 'It is right to be taught by an enemy;' and I
never remember the day when you were otherwise, and yet I am not a
bankrupt, though I receive you in a house which, thanks to you, is so
