have sustained me:"--and therewith he poured several pieces of gold and
silver on the table beside her chair.

"Gustave," then said Isaura, "I am well pleased that you thus prove that
I was not mistaken when I thought and said that, despite all appearances,
all errors, your heart was good.  Oh, do but follow its true impulses,
and--"

"Its impulses lead me ever to thy feet," interrupted Gustave, with a
fervour which sounded somewhat theatrical and hollow.

The girl smiled, not bitterly, not mockingly; but Gustave did not like
the smile.

"Poor Gustave," she said, with a melancholy pathos in her soft voice,
"do you not understand that the time has come when such commonplace
compliments ill suit our altered positions to each other?  Nay, listen to
me patiently; and let not my words in this last interview pain you to
recall.  If either of us be to blame in the engagement hastily
contracted, it is I.  Gustave, when you, exaggerating in your imagination
the nature of your sentiments for me, said with such earnestness that on
my consent to our union depended your health, your life, your career;
that if I withheld that consent you were lost, and in despair would seek
distraction from thought in all from which your friends, your mother, the
duties imposed upon Genius for the good of Man to the ends of God, should
withhold and save you--when you said all this, and I believed it, I felt
as if Heaven commanded me not to desert the soul which appealed to me in
the crisis of its struggle and peril.  Gustave, I repent; I was to
blame."

"How to blame?"

"I overrated my power over your heart: I overrated still more, perhaps,
my power over my own."

"Ah, your own!  I understand now.  You did not love me?"

"I never said that I loved you in the sense in which you use the word.
I told you that the love which you have described in your verse, and
which," she added, falteringly, with heightened colour and with hands
tightly clasped, "I have conceived possible in my dreams, it was not mine
to give.  You declared you were satisfied with such affection as I could
bestow.  Hush! let me go on.  You said that affection would increase,
would become love, in proportion as I knew you more.  It has not done so.
Nay, it passed away; even before this time of trial and of grief, I
became aware how different from the love you professed was the neglect
which needs no excuse, for it did not pain me."

"You are cruel indeed, Mademoiselle."

"No, indeed, I am kind.  I wish you to feel no pang at our parting.
Truly I had resolved, when the siege terminated, and the time to speak
frankly of our engagement came, to tell you that I shrank from the
thought of a union between us; and that it was for the happiness of both
that our promises should be mutually cancelled.  The moment has come
sooner than I thought.  Even had I loved you, Gustave, as deeply as--as
well as the beings of Romance love, I would not dare to wed one who calls
upon mortals to deny God, demolish His altars, treat His worship as a
crime.  No; I would sooner die of a broken heart, that I might the sooner
be one of those souls privileged to pray the Divine Intercessor for
merciful light on those beloved and left dark on earth."

"Isaura!" exclaimed Gustave, his mobile temperament impressed, not by the
words of Isaura, but by the passionate earnestness with which they were
uttered, and by the exquisite spiritual beauty which her face took from
the combined sweetness and fervour of its devout expression,--"Isaura, I
merit your censure, your sentence of condemnation; but do not ask me to
give back your plighted troth.  I have not the strength to do so.  More
than ever, more than when first pledged to me, I need the aid, the
companionship, of my guardian angel.  You were that to me once; abandon
me not now.  In these terrible times of revolution, excitable natures
catch madness from each other.  A writer in the heat of his passion says
much that he does not mean to be literally taken, which in cooler moments
he repents and retracts.  Consider, too, the pressure of want, of hunger.
It is the opinions that you so condemn which alone at this moment supply
bread to the writer.  But say you will yet pardon me,--yet give me trial
if I offend no more--if I withdraw my aid to any attacks on your views,
your religion--if I say, 'Thy God shall be my God, and thy people shall
be my people.'"

"Alas!" said Isaura, softly, "ask thyself if those be words which I can
believe again.  Hush!" she continued, checking his answer with a more
kindling countenance and more impassioned voice.  "Are they, after all,
the words that man should address to woman?  Is it on the strength of
Woman that Man should rely?  Is it to her that he should say, 'Dictate my
opinions on all that belongs to the Mind of man; change the doctrines
that I have thoughtfully formed and honestly advocate; teach me how to
act on earth, clear all my doubts as to my hopes of heaven'? No, Gustave;
in this task man never should repose on woman.  Thou are honest at this
moment, my poor friend; but could I believe thee to-day, thou wouldst
laugh tomorrow at what woman can be made to believe."

Stung to the quick by the truth of Isaura's accusation, Gustave exclaimed
with vehemence: "All that thou sayest is false, and thou knowest it.  The
influence of woman on man for good or for evil defies reasoning.  It does
mould his deeds on earth; it does either make or mar all that future
which lies between his life and his gravestone, and of whatsoever may lie
beyond the grave.  Give me up now, and thou art responsible for me, for
all I do, it may be against all that thou deemest holy.  Keep thy troth
yet awhile, and test me.  If I come to thee showing how I could have
injured, and how for thy dear sake I have spared, nay, aided, all that
thou dost believe and reverence, then wilt thou dare to say, 'Go thy ways
alone--I forsake thee!'"

Isaura turned aside her face, but she held out her hand--it was as cold
as death.  He knew that she had so far yielded, and his vanity exulted:
he smiled in secret triumph as he pressed his kiss on that icy hand and
was gone.

"This is duty--it must be duty," said Isaura to herself.  "But where is
the buoyant delight that belongs to a duty achieved?--where? oh where?"
And then she stole with drooping head and heavy step into her own room,
fell on her knees, and prayed.




CHAPTER VIII.

In vain persons, be they male or female, there is a complacent self-
satisfaction in any momentary personal success, however little that
success may conduce to--nay, however much it may militate against--the
objects to which their vanity itself devotes its more permanent desires.
A vain woman may be very anxious to win A------, the magnificent, as a
partner for life; and yet feel a certain triumph when a glance of her eye
has made an evening's conquest of the pitiful B-------, although by that
achievement she incurs the imminent hazard of losing A------ altogether.
So, when Gustave Rameau quitted Isaura, his first feeling was that of
triumph.  His eloquence had subdued her will; she had not finally
discarded him.  But as he wandered abstractedly in the biting air, his
self-complacency was succeeded by mortification and discontent.  He felt
that he had committed himself to promises which he was by no means
prepared to keep.  True, the promises were vague in words; but in
substance they were perfectly clear--"to spare, nay, to aid all that
Isaura esteemed and reverenced."  How was this possible to him?  How
could he suddenly change the whole character of his writings?--how become
the defender of marriage and property, of church and religion?--how
proclaim himself so utter an apostate?  If he did, how become a leader
of the fresh revolution? how escape being its victim?  Cease to write
altogether?

But then how live?  His pen was his sole subsistence, save 30 sous a-day
as a National Guard--30 sous a day to him, who, in order to be Sybarite
in tastes, was Spartan in doctrine.  Nothing better just at that moment
than Spartan doctrine, "Live on black broth and fight the enemy."  And
the journalists in vogue so thrived upon that patriotic sentiment, that
they were the last persons compelled to drink the black broth or to fight
the enemy.

"Those women are such idiots when they meddle in politics," grumbled
between his teeth the enthusiastic advocate of Woman's Rights on all
matters of love.  "And," he continued, soliloquising, "it is not as if
the girl had any large or decent dot; it is not as if she said, 'In
return for the sacrifice of your popularity, your prospects, your
opinions, I give you not only a devoted heart, but an excellent table and
a capital fire and plenty of pocket-money.' _Sacre bleu_! when I think of
that frozen salon, and possibly the leg of a mouse for dinner, and a
virtuous homily by way of grace, the prospect is not alluring; and the
girl herself is not so pretty as she was--grown very thin. _Sur mon ame_,
I think she asks too much--far more than she is worth.  No, No; I had
better have accepted her dismissal. _Elle n'est pas digne de moi_."

Just as he arrived at that conclusion, Gustave Rameau felt the touch of a
light, a soft, a warm, yet a firm hand, on his aria.  He turned, and
beheld the face of the woman whom, through so many dreary weeks, he had
sought to shun--the face of Julie Caumartin.  Julie was not, as Savarin
had seen her, looking pinched and wan, with faded robes, nor, as when met
in the cafe by Lemercier, in the faded robes of a theatre.  Julie never
looked more beautiful, more radiant, than she did now; and there was a
wonderful heartfelt fondness in her voice when she cried, "_Mon homme!
mon homme! seul homme au monde a mon coeur, Gustave, cheri adore_!  I
have found thee-at last--at last!"  Gustave gazed upon her, stupefied.
Involuntarily his eye glanced from the freshness of bloom in her face
which the intense cold of the atmosphere only seemed to heighten into
purer health, to her dress, which was new and handsome--black--he did
not know that it was mourning--the cloak trimmed with costly sables.
Certainly it was no mendicant for alms who thus reminded the shivering
Adonis of the claims of a pristine Venus.  He stammered out her naive,
"Julie!"--and then he stopped.

"_Oui, ta Julie!  Petit ingrat_!  how I have sought for thee! how I have
hungered for the sight of thee!  That monster Savarin! he would not give
me any news of thee.  That is ages ago.  But at least Frederic Lemercier,
whom I saw since, promised to remind thee that I lived still.  He did not
do so, or I should have seen thee--n'est ce, pas?"

"Certainly, certainly--only--_chere amie_--you know that--that--as I
before announced to thee, I--I--was engaged in marriage--and--and--"

"But are you married?"

"No, no.  Hark!  Take care--is not that the hiss of an obus?"

"What then?  Let it come!  Would it might slay us both while my hand is
in thine!"

"Ah!" muttered Gustave, inwardly, "what a difference!  This is love!  No
preaching here! _Elle est plus digne de moi que d'autre_."

"No," he said, aloud, "I am not married.  Marriage is at best a pitiful
ceremony.  But if you wished for news of me, surely you must have heard
of my effect as an orator not despised in the Salle Favre.  Since, I have
withdrawn from that arena.  But as a journalist I flatter myself that I
have had a _beau succes_."

"Doubtless, doubtless, my Gustave, my Poet!  Wherever thou art, thou must
be first among men.  But, alas it is my fault--my misfortune.  I have not
been in the midst of a world that perhaps rings of thy name."

"Not my name.  Prudence compelled me to conceal that.  Still, Genius
pierces under any name.  You might have discovered me under my nom de
plume."

"Pardon me--I was always _bete_.  But, oh!  for so many weeks I was so
poor--so destitute.  I could go nowhere, except--don't be ashamed of me--
except--"

"Yes?  Go on."

"Except where I could get some money.  At first to dance--you remember my
bolero.  Then I got a better engagement.  Do you not remember that you
taught me to recite verses?  Had it been for myself alone, I might have
been contented to starve.  Without thee, what was life?  But thou wilt
recollect Madeleine, the old _bonne_ who lived with me.  Well, she had
attended and cherished me since I was so high-lived with my mother.
Mother! no; it seems that Madame Surville was not my mother after all.
But, of course, I could not let my old Madeleine starve; and therefore,
with a heart as heavy as lead, I danced and declaimed.  My heart was not
so heavy when I recited thy songs."

"My songs! _Pauvre ange_!" exclaimed the Poet.

"And then, too, I thought, 'Ah, this dreadful siege!  He, too, may be
poor--he may know want and hunger;' and so all I could save from
Madeleine I put into a box for thee, in case thou shouldst come back to
me some day.  _Mon homme_, how could I go to the Salle Favre?  How could
I read journals, Gustave?  But thou art not married, Gustave?  _Parole
d'honneur_?"

"_Parole d'honneur_!  What does that matter?"

"Everything!  Ah! I am not so _mechante_, so _mauvaise tete_ as I was
some months ago.  If thou went married, I should say, 'Blessed and sacred
be thy wife!  Forget me.'  But as it is, one word more.  Dost thou love
the young lady, whoever she be? or does she love thee so well that it
would be sin in thee to talk trifles to Julie?  Speak as honestly as if
thou wert not a poet."

"Honestly, she never said she loved me.  I never thought she did.  But,
you see, I was very ill, and my parents and friends and my physician said
that it was right for me to arrange my life, and marry, and so forth.
And the girl had money, and was a good match.  In short, the thing was
settled.  But oh, Julie, she never learned my songs by heart!  She did
not love as thou mayst, and still dost.  And--ah! well--now that we meet
again--now that I look in thy face--now that I hear thy voice--No, I do
not love her as I loved, and might yet love thee.  But--but--"

"Well, but? oh, I guess.  Thou seest me well dressed, no longer dancing
and declaiming at cafes: and thou thinkest that Julie has disgraced
herself? she is unfaithful?"

Gustave had not anticipated that frankness, nor was the idea which it
expressed uppermost in his mind when he said, "but, but--"  There were
many buts all very confused, struggling through his mind as he spoke.
However, he answered as a Parisian sceptic, not ill-bred, naturally would
answer:

"My dear friend, my dear child" (the Parisian is very fond of the word
child or enfant in addressing a woman), "I have never seen thee so
beautiful as thou art now; and when thou tellest me that thou are no
longer poor, and the proof of what thou sayest is visible in the furs,
which, alas'.  I cannot give thee, what am I to think?"

"Oh, _mon homme, mon homme_! thou art very _spirituel_, and that is why I
loved thee.  I am very _bete_, and that is excuse enough for thee if thou
couldst not love me.  But canst thou look me in the face and not know
that my eyes could not meet thine as they do, if I had been faithless to
thee even in a thought, when I so boldly touched thine arm?  _Viens chez
moi_, come and let me explain all.  Only--only let me repeat, if another
has rights over thee which forbid thee to come, say so kindly, and I will
never trouble thee again."

Gustave had been hitherto walking slowly by the side of Julie, amidst the
distant boom of the besiegers' cannon, while the short day began to
close; and along the dreary boulevards sauntered idlers turning to look
at the young, beautiful, well-dressed woman who seemed in such contrast
to the capital whose former luxuries the "Ondine" of imperial Paris
represented.  He now offered his arm to Julie; and, quickening his pace,
said, "There is no reason why I should refuse to attend thee home, and
listen to the explanations thou dost generously condescend to volunteer."




CHAPTER IX.

"Ah, indeed! what a difference! what a difference!" said Gustave to
himself when he entered Julie's apartment.  In her palmier days, when he
had first made her acquaintance, the apartment no doubt had been
infinitely more splendid, more abundant in silks and fringes and flowers
and nicknacks; but never had it seemed so cheery and comfortable and
home-like as now.  What a contrast to Isaura's dismantled chilly salon!
She drew him towards the hearth, on which, blazing though it was, she
piled fresh billets, seated him in the easiest of easy-chairs, knelt
beside him, and chafed his numbed hands in hers; and as her bright eyes
fixed tenderly on his, she looked so young and so innocent!  You would
not then have called her the "Ondine of Paris."

But when, a little while after, revived by the genial warmth and moved by
the charm of her beauty, Gustave passed his arm round her neck and sought
to draw her on his lap, she slid from his embrace, shaking her head
gently, and seated herself, with a pretty air of ceremonious decorum, at
a little distance.

Gustave looked at her amazed.

"Causons," said she, gravely, "thou wouldst know why I am so well
dressed, so comfortably lodged, and I am longing to explain to thee all.
Some days ago I had just finished my performance at the cafe--, and was
putting on my shawl, when a tall Monsieur, _fort bel homme_, with the air
of a grand seigneur, entered the cafe, and approaching me politely, said,
'I think I have the honour to address Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin?'
'That is my name,' I said, surprised; and, looking at him more intently,
I recognised his face.  He had come into the cafe a few days before with
thine old acquaintance Frederic Lemercier, and stood by when I asked
Frederic to give me news of thee.  'Mademoiselle,' he continued, with a
serious melancholy smile, 'I shall startle you when I say that I am
appointed to act as your guardian by the last request of your mother.'
'Of Madame Surville?'  'Madame Surville adopted you, but was not your
mother.  We cannot talk at ease here.  Allow me to request that you will
accompany me to Monsieur  -----, the _avoue_.  It is not very far from
this--and by the way--I will tell you some news that may sadden, and some
news that may rejoice.'

"There was an earnestness in the voice and look of this Monsieur that
impressed me.  He did not offer me his arm; but I walked by his side in
the direction he chose.  As we walked he told me in very few words that
my mother had been separated from her husband, and for certain family
reasons had found it so difficult to rear and provide for me herself,
that she had accepted the offer of Madame Surville to adopt me as her own
child.  While he spoke, there came dimly back to me the remembrance of a
lady who had taken me from my first home, when I had been, as I
understood, at nurse, and left me with poor dear Madame Surville, saying,
'This is henceforth your mamma.'

"I never again saw that lady.  It seems that many years afterwards my true
mother desired to regain me.  Madame Surville was then dead.  She failed
to trace me out, owing, alas! to my own faults and change of name.  She
then entered a nunnery, but, before doing so, assigned a sum of 100,000
francs to this gentleman, who was distantly connected with her, with full
power to him to take it to himself, or give it to my use should he
discover me, at his discretion.  'I ask you,' continued the Monsieur,
'to go with me to Mons. N------'s, because the sum is still in his hands.
He will confirm my statement.  All that I have now to say is this, If you
accept my guardianship, if you obey implicitly my advice, I shall
consider the interest of this sum which has accumulated since deposited
with M.  ----- due to you; and the capital will be your dot on marriage,
if the marriage be with my consent.'"

