empty windows; but the remainder of the building had collapsed, and now
lay in a great cairn of ruin, grimed with fire.  Already in the interior
a few plants were springing green among the chinks.

"Now I bethink me," whispered Dick, "this must be Grimstone.  It was a
hold of one Simon Malmesbury; Sir Daniel was his bane!  'Twas Bennet
Hatch that burned it, now five years agone.  In sooth, 'twas pity, for it
was a fair house."

Down in the hollow, where no wind blew, it was both warm and still; and
Matcham, laying one hand upon Dick's arm, held up a warning finger.

"Hist!" he said.

Then came a strange sound, breaking on the quiet.  It was twice repeated
ere they recognised its nature.  It was the sound of a big man clearing
his throat; and just then a hoarse, untuneful voice broke into singing.

    "Then up and spake the master, the king of the outlaws:
    'What make ye here, my merry men, among the greenwood shaws?'
    And Gamelyn made answer--he looked never adown:
    'O, they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town!'"

The singer paused, a faint clink of iron followed, and then silence.

The two lads stood looking at each other.  Whoever he might be, their
invisible neighbour was just beyond the ruin.  And suddenly the colour
came into Matcham's face, and next moment he had crossed the fallen
rafter, and was climbing cautiously on the huge pile of lumber that
filled the interior of the roofless house.  Dick would have withheld him,
had he been in time; as it was, he was fain to follow.

Right in the corner of the ruin, two rafters had fallen crosswise, and
protected a clear space no larger than a pew in church.  Into this the
lads silently lowered themselves.  There they were perfectly concealed,
and through an arrow-loophole commanded a view upon the farther side.

Peering through this, they were struck stiff with terror at their
predicament.  To retreat was impossible; they scarce dared to breathe.
Upon the very margin of the ditch, not thirty feet from where they
crouched, an iron caldron bubbled and steamed above a glowing fire; and
close by, in an attitude of listening, as though he had caught some sound
of their clambering among the ruins, a tall, red-faced, battered-looking
man stood poised, an iron spoon in his right hand, a horn and a
formidable dagger at his belt.  Plainly this was the singer; plainly he
had been stirring the caldron, when some incautious step among the lumber
had fallen upon his ear.  A little further off, another man lay
slumbering, rolled in a brown cloak, with a butterfly hovering above his
face.  All this was in a clearing white with daisies; and at the extreme
verge, a bow, a sheaf of arrows, and part of a deer's carcase, hung upon
a flowering hawthorn.

Presently the fellow relaxed from his attitude of attention, raised the
spoon to his mouth, tasted its contents, nodded, and then fell again to
stirring and singing.

"'O, they must need to walk in wood that may not walk in town,'" he
croaked, taking up his song where he had left it.

    "O, sir, we walk not here at all an evil thing to do.
    But if we meet with the good king's deer to shoot a shaft into."

Still as he sang, he took from time to time, another spoonful of the
broth, blew upon it, and tasted it, with all the airs of an experienced
cook.  At length, apparently, he judged the mess was ready; for taking
the horn from his girdle, he blew three modulated calls.

The other fellow awoke, rolled over, brushed away the butterfly, and
looked about him.

"How now, brother?" he said.  "Dinner?"

"Ay, sot," replied the cook, "dinner it is, and a dry dinner, too, with
neither ale nor bread.  But there is little pleasure in the greenwood
now; time was when a good fellow could live here like a mitred abbot, set
aside the rain and the white frosts; he had his heart's desire both of
ale and wine.  But now are men's spirits dead; and this John Amend-All,
save us and guard us! but a stuffed booby to scare crows withal."

"Nay," returned the other, "y' are too set on meat and drinking, Lawless.
Bide ye a bit; the good time cometh."

"Look ye," returned the cook, "I have even waited for this good time sith
that I was so high.  I have been a grey friar; I have been a king's
archer; I have been a shipman, and sailed the salt seas; and I have been
in greenwood before this, forsooth! and shot the king's deer.  What
cometh of it?  Naught!  I were better to have bided in the cloister.
John Abbot availeth more than John Amend-All.  By 'r Lady! here they
come."

One after another, tall, likely fellows began to stroll into the lawn.
Each as he came produced a knife and a horn cup, helped himself from the
caldron, and sat down upon the grass to eat.  They were very variously
equipped and armed; some in rusty smocks, and with nothing but a knife
and an old bow; others in the height of forest gallantry, all in Lincoln
green, both hood and jerkin, with dainty peacock arrows in their belts, a
horn upon a baldrick, and a sword and dagger at their sides.  They came
in the silence of hunger, and scarce growled a salutation, but fell
instantly to meat.

There were, perhaps, a score of them already gathered, when a sound of
suppressed cheering arose close by among the hawthorns, and immediately
after five or six woodmen carrying a stretcher debauched upon the lawn.
A tall, lusty fellow, somewhat grizzled, and as brown as a smoked ham,
walked before them with an air of some authority, his bow at his back, a
bright boar-spear in his hand.

"Lads!" he cried, "good fellows all, and my right merry friends, y' have
sung this while on a dry whistle and lived at little ease.  But what said
I ever?  Abide Fortune constantly; she turneth, turneth swift.  And lo!
here is her little firstling--even that good creature, ale!"

There was a murmur of applause as the bearers set down the stretcher and
displayed a goodly cask.

"And now haste ye, boys," the man continued.  "There is work toward.  A
handful of archers are but now come to the ferry; murrey and blue is
their wear; they are our butts--they shall all taste arrows--no man of
them shall struggle through this wood.  For, lads, we are here some fifty
strong, each man of us most foully wronged; for some they have lost
lands, and some friends; and some they have been outlawed--all oppressed!
Who, then, hath done this evil?  Sir Daniel, by the rood!  Shall he then
profit? shall he sit snug in our houses? shall he till our fields? shall
he suck the bone he robbed us of?  I trow not.  He getteth him strength
at law; he gaineth cases; nay, there is one case he shall not gain--I
have a writ here at my belt that, please the saints, shall conquer him."

Lawless the cook was by this time already at his second horn of ale.  He
raised it, as if to pledge the speaker.

"Master Ellis," he said, "y' are for vengeance--well it becometh
you!--but your poor brother o' the greenwood, that had never lands to
lose nor friends to think upon, looketh rather, for his poor part, to the
profit of the thing.  He had liever a gold noble and a pottle of canary
wine than all the vengeances in purgatory."

"Lawless," replied the other, "to reach the Moat House, Sir Daniel must
pass the forest.  We shall make that passage dearer, pardy, than any
battle.  Then, when he hath got to earth with such ragged handful as
escapeth us--all his great friends fallen and fled away, and none to give
him aid--we shall beleaguer that old fox about, and great shall be the
fall of him.  'Tis a fat buck; he will make a dinner for us all."

"Ay," returned Lawless, "I have eaten many of these dinners beforehand;
but the cooking of them is hot work, good Master Ellis.  And meanwhile
what do we?  We make black arrows, we write rhymes, and we drink fair
cold water, that discomfortable drink."

"Y' are untrue, Will Lawless.  Ye still smell of the Grey Friars'
buttery; greed is your undoing," answered Ellis.  "We took twenty pounds
from Appleyard.  We took seven marks from the messenger last night.  A
day ago we had fifty from the merchant."

"And to-day," said one of the men, "I stopped a fat pardoner riding apace
for Holywood.  Here is his purse."

Ellis counted the contents.

"Five score shillings!" he grumbled.  "Fool, he had more in his sandal,
or stitched into his tippet.  Y' are but a child, Tom Cuckow; ye have
lost the fish."

But, for all that, Ellis pocketed the purse with nonchalance.  He stood
leaning on his boar-spear, and looked round upon the rest.  They, in
various attitudes, took greedily of the venison pottage, and liberally
washed it down with ale.  This was a good day; they were in luck; but
business pressed, and they were speedy in their eating.  The first-comers
had by this time even despatched their dinner.  Some lay down upon the
grass and fell instantly asleep, like boa-constrictors; others talked
together, or overhauled their weapons: and one, whose humour was
particularly gay, holding forth an ale-horn, began to sing:

    "Here is no law in good green shaw,
       Here is no lack of meat;
    'Tis merry and quiet, with deer for our diet,
       In summer, when all is sweet.

    Come winter again, with wind and rain--
       Come winter, with snow and sleet,
    Get home to your places, with hoods on your faces,
       And sit by the fire and eat."

All this while the two lads had listened and lain close; only Richard had
unslung his cross-bow, and held ready in one hand the windac, or
grappling-iron that he used to bend it.  Otherwise they had not dared to
stir; and this scene of forest life had gone on before their eyes like a
scene upon a theatre.  But now there came a strange interruption.  The
tall chimney which over-topped the remainder of the ruins rose right
above their hiding-place.  There came a whistle in the air, and then a
sounding smack, and the fragments of a broken arrow fell about their
ears.  Some one from the upper quarters of the wood, perhaps the very
sentinel they saw posted in the fir, had shot an arrow at the
chimney-top.

Matcham could not restrain a little cry, which he instantly stifled, and
even Dick started with surprise, and dropped the windac from his fingers.
But to the fellows on the lawn, this shaft was an expected signal.  They
were all afoot together, tightening their belts, testing their
bow-strings, loosening sword and dagger in the sheath.  Ellis held up his
hand; his face had suddenly assumed a look of savage energy; the white of
his eyes shone in his sun-brown face.

"Lads," he said, "ye know your places.  Let not one man's soul escape
you.  Appleyard was a whet before a meal; but now we go to table.  I have
three men whom I will bitterly avenge--Harry Shelton, Simon Malmesbury,
and"--striking his broad bosom--"and Ellis Duckworth, by the mass!"

Another man came, red with hurry, through the thorns.

"'Tis not Sir Daniel!" he panted.  "They are but seven.  Is the arrow
gone?"

"It struck but now," replied Ellis.

"A murrain!" cried the messenger.  "Methought I heard it whistle.  And I
go dinnerless!"

In the space of a minute, some running, some walking sharply, according
as their stations were nearer or farther away, the men of the Black Arrow
had all disappeared from the neighbourhood of the ruined house; and the
caldron, and the fire, which was now burning low, and the dead deer's
carcase on the hawthorn, remained alone to testify they had been there.



CHAPTER V--"BLOODY AS THE HUNTER"


The lads lay quiet till the last footstep had melted on the wind.  Then
they arose, and with many an ache, for they were weary with constraint,
clambered through the ruins, and recrossed the ditch upon the rafter.
Matcham had picked up the windac and went first, Dick following stiffly,
with his cross-bow on his arm.

"And now," said Matcham, "forth to Holywood."

"To Holywood!" cried Dick, "when good fellows stand shot?  Not I!  I
would see you hanged first, Jack!"

"Ye would leave me, would ye?" Matcham asked.

"Ay, by my sooth!" returned Dick.  "An I be not in time to warn these
lads, I will go die with them.  What! would ye have me leave my own men
that I have lived among.  I trow not!  Give me my windac."

But there was nothing further from Matcham's mind.

"Dick," he said, "ye sware before the saints that ye would see me safe to
Holywood.  Would ye be forsworn?  Would you desert me--a perjurer?"

"Nay, I sware for the best," returned Dick.  "I meant it too; but now!
But look ye, Jack, turn again with me.  Let me but warn these men, and,
if needs must, stand shot with them; then shall all be clear, and I will
on again to Holywood and purge mine oath."

"Ye but deride me," answered Matcham.  "These men ye go to succour are
the I same that hunt me to my ruin."

Dick scratched his head.

"I cannot help it, Jack," he said.  "Here is no remedy.  What would ye?
Ye run no great peril, man; and these are in the way of death.  Death!"
he added.  "Think of it!  What a murrain do ye keep me here for?  Give me
the windac.  Saint George! shall they all die?"

"Richard Shelton," said Matcham, looking him squarely in the face, "would
ye, then, join party with Sir Daniel?  Have ye not ears?  Heard ye not
this Ellis, what he said? or have ye no heart for your own kindly blood
and the father that men slew?  'Harry Shelton,' he said; and Sir Harry
Shelton was your father, as the sun shines in heaven."

"What would ye?" Dick cried again.  "Would ye have me credit thieves?"

"Nay, I have heard it before now," returned Matcham.  "The fame goeth
currently, it was Sir Daniel slew him.  He slew him under oath; in his
own house he shed the innocent blood.  Heaven wearies for the avenging
on't; and you--the man's son--ye go about to comfort and defend the
murderer!"

"Jack," cried the lad "I know not.  It may be; what know I?  But, see
here: This man hath bred me up and fostered me, and his men I have hunted
with and played among; and to leave them in the hour of peril--O, man, if
I did that, I were stark dead to honour!  Nay, Jack, ye would not ask it;
ye would not wish me to be base."

"But your father, Dick?" said Matcham, somewhat wavering.  "Your father?
and your oath to me?  Ye took the saints to witness."

"My father?" cried Shelton.  "Nay, he would have me go!  If Sir Daniel
slew him, when the hour comes this hand shall slay Sir Daniel; but
neither him nor his will I desert in peril.  And for mine oath, good
Jack, ye shall absolve me of it here.  For the lives' sake of many men
that hurt you not, and for mine honour, ye shall set me free."

"I, Dick?  Never!" returned Matcham.  "An ye leave me, y' are forsworn,
and so I shall declare it."

"My blood heats," said Dick.  "Give me the windac!  Give it me!"

"I'll not," said Matcham.  "I'll save you in your teeth."

"Not?" cried Dick.  "I'll make you!"

"Try it," said the other.

They stood, looking in each other's eyes, each ready for a spring.  Then
Dick leaped; and though Matcham turned instantly and fled, in two bounds
he was over-taken, the windac was twisted from his grasp, he was thrown
roughly to the ground, and Dick stood across him, flushed and menacing,
with doubled fist.  Matcham lay where he had fallen, with his face in the
grass, not thinking of resistance.

Dick bent his bow.

"I'll teach you!" he cried, fiercely.  "Oath or no oath, ye may go hang
for me!"
