loathe and shudder at his creed!  Alas! how will this end?  Fatal was the
hour when he first beheld me in yonder gardens; more fatal still the hour
in which he crossed the barrier, and told Leila that she was beloved by
the hero whose arm was the shelter, whose name is the blessing, of
Granada.  Ah, me!  Ah, me!"

The young maiden covered her face with her hands, and sank into a
passionate reverie, broken only by her sobs.  Some time had passed in
this undisturbed indulgence of her grief, when the arras was gently put
aside, and a man, of remarkable garb and mien, advanced into the chamber,
pausing as he beheld her dejected attitude, and gazing on her with a look
on which pity and tenderness seemed to struggle against habitual severity
and sternness.

"Leila!" said the intruder.

Leila started, and and a deep blush suffused her countenance; she dashed
the tears from her eyes, and came forward with a vain attempt to smile.

"My father, welcome!"

The stranger seated himself on the cushions, and motioned Leila to his
side.

"These tears are fresh upon thy cheek," said he, gravely; "they are the
witness of thy race! our daughters are born to weep, and our sons to
groan! ashes are on the head of the mighty, and the Fountains of the
Beautiful run with gall!  Oh that we could but struggle--that we could
but dare--that we could raise up, our heads, and unite against the
bondage of the evil doer!  It may not be--but one man shall avenge a
nation!"

The dark face of Leila's father, well fitted to express powerful emotion,
became terrible in its wrath and passion; his brow and lip worked
convulsively; but the paroxsym was brief; and scarce could she shudder
at its intensity ere it had subsided into calm.

"Enough of these thoughts, which thou, a woman and a child, art not
formed to witness.  Leila, thou hast been nurtured with tenderness, and
schooled with care.  Harsh and unloving may I have seemed to thee, but I
would have shed the best drops of my heart to have saved thy young years
from a single pang.  Nay, listen to me silently.  That thou mightest one
day be worthy of thy race, and that thine hours might not pass in
indolent and weary lassitude, thou hast been taught lessons of a
knowledge rarely to thy sex.  Not thine the lascivious arts of the
Moorish maidens; not thine their harlot songs, and their dances of lewd
delight; thy delicate limbs were but taught the attitude that Nature
dedicates to the worship of a God, and the music of thy voice was tuned
to the songs of thy fallen country, sad with the memory of her wrongs,
animated with the names of her heroes, with the solemnity of her prayers.
These scrolls, and the lessons of our seers, have imparted to thee such
of our science and our history as may fit thy mind to aspire, and thy
heart to feel for a sacred cause.  Thou listenest to me, Leila?"

Perplexed and wondering, for never before had her father addressed her in
such a strain, the maiden answered with an earnestness of manner that
seemed to content the questioner; and he resumed, with an altered,
hollow, solemn voice:

"Then curse the persecutors.  Daughter of the great Hebrew race, arise
and curse the Moorish taskmaster and spoiler!"

As he spoke, the adjuror himself rose, lifting his right hand on high;
while his left touched the shoulder of the maiden.  But she, after gazing
a moment in wild and terrified amazement upon his face, fell cowering at
his knees; and, clasping them imploringly, exclaimed in scarce articulate
murmurs:

"Oh, spare me! spare me!"

The Hebrew, for such he was, surveyed her, as she thus quailed at his
feet, with a look of rage and scorn: his hand wandered to his poniard, he
half unsheathed it, thrust it back with a muttered curse, and then,
deliberately drawing it forth, cast it on the ground beside her.

"Degenerate girl!" he said, in accents that vainly struggled for calm,
"if thou hast admitted to thy heart one unworthy thought towards a
Moorish infidel, dig deep and root it out, even with the knife, and to
the death--so wilt thou save this hand from that degrading task."

He drew himself hastily from her grasp, and left the unfortunate girl
alone and senseless.




CHAPTER V.

AMBITION DISTORTED INTO VICE BY LAW.

On descending a broad flight of stairs from the apartment, the Hebrew
encountered an old man, habited in loose garments of silk and fur, upon
whose withered and wrinkled face life seemed scarcely to struggle against
the advance of death--so haggard, wan, and corpse-like was its aspect.

"Ximen," said the Israelite, "trusty and beloved servant, follow me to
the cavern."  He did not tarry for an answer, but continued his way with
rapid strides through various courts and alleys, till he came at length
into a narrow, dark, and damp gallery, that seemed cut from the living
rock.  At its entrance was a strong grate, which gave way to the Hebrew's
touch upon the spring, though the united strength of a hundred men could
not have moved it from its hinge.  Taking up a brazen lamp that burnt in
a niche within it, the Hebrew paused impatiently till the feeble steps of
the old man reached the spot; and then, reclosing the grate, pursued his
winding way for a considerable distance, till he stopped suddenly by a
part of the rock which seemed in no respect different from the rest: and
so artfully contrived and concealed was the door which he now opened, and
so suddenly did it yield to his hand, that it appeared literally the
effect of enchantment, when the rock yawned, and discovered a circular
cavern, lighted with brazen lamps, and spread with hangings and cushions
of thick furs.  Upon rude and seemingly natural pillars of rock, various
antique and rusty arms were suspended; in large niches were deposited
scrolls, clasped and bound with iron; and a profusion of strange and
uncouth instruments and machines (in which modern science might, perhaps,
discover the tools of chemical invention) gave a magical and ominous
aspect to the wild abode.

The Hebrew cast himself on a couch of furs; and, as the old man entered
and closed the door, "Ximen," said he, "fill out wine--it is a soothing
counsellor, and I need it."

Extracting from one of the recesses of the cavern a flask and goblet,
Ximen offered to his lord a copious draught of the sparkling vintage of
the Vega, which seemed to invigorate and restore him.

"Old man," said he, concluding the potation with a deep-drawn sigh, "fill
to thyself-drink till thy veins feel young."

Ximen obeyed the mandate but imperfectly; the wine just touched his lips,
and the goblet was put aside.

"Ximen," resumed the Israelite, "how many of our race have been butchered
by the avarice of the Moorish kings since first thou didst set foot
within the city?"

"Three thousand--the number was completed last winter, by the order of
Jusef the vizier; and their goods and coffers are transformed into shafts
and cimiters against the dogs of Galilee."

"Three thousand--no more! three thousand only!  I would the number had
been tripled, for the interest is becoming due!"

"My brother, and my son, and my grandson, are among the number," said the
old man, and his face grew yet more deathlike.

"Their monuments shall be in hecatombs of their tyrants.  They shall not,
at least, call the Jews niggards in revenge."

