whose attendance was not required outside, including eight mounted
trumpeters, four at one end of the field, and four at the other,
together with a host of yeomen belonging to Prince Charles, in liveries
of white, with leaves of gold, and black caps, with wreaths and bands of
gold, and black and white plumes.

At the western extremity of the inclosure stood the royal gallery,
richly decorated for the occasion with velvet and cloth of gold, and
having the royal arms emblazoned in front. Above it floated the royal
standard. Supported by strong oaken posts, and entered by a staircase at
the side, this gallery was open below, and the space thus left was
sufficiently large to accommodate a dozen or more mounted knights,
while thick curtains could be let down at the sides to screen them from
observation, if required. Here it was intended that the Prince of Wales
and his six companions-at-arms should assemble, and wait till summoned
forth from it by the marshals of the field. There was a similar place of
assemblage for the Duke of Lennox and his knights at the opposite end of
the tilt-yard; and at both spots there were farriers, armourers, and
grooms in attendance, to render assistance, if needful.

On the right of the field stood an elevated platform, covered with a
canopy, and approached by a flight of steps. It was reserved for the
marshals and judges, and facing it was the post affixed to the barriers,
from which the ring, the grand prize of the day, was suspended, at a
height exactly within reach of a lance. Like the streets without, the
whole arena was deeply sanded.

This was what Madame Bonaventure beheld from the roof of the cock-pit,
and a very pretty sight she thought it.

All things, it will be seen, were in readiness, in the tilt yard,--and
the arrival of the King seemed to be impatiently expected--not only by
the knights who were eager to display their prowess, but by the court
dames and the gallants with them, as well as by all the officials
scattered about in different parts of the field, and enlivening it by
their variegated costumes.

Suddenly loud acclamations resounding from all sides of the tilt-yard,
accompanied by flourishes of trumpets, proclaimed the entrance of the
royal laggard to the gallery. James took his place in the raised seat
assigned to him, and after conferring for a few moments with the Conde
de Gondomar, who formed part of the brilliant throng of nobles and
ambassadors in attendance, he signified to Sir John Finett that the
jousting might commence, and the royal pleasure was instantly made known
to the marshals of the field.

The first course was run by Prince Charles, who acquitted himself with
infinite grace and skill, but failed in carrying off the ring; and
similar ill luck befell the Duke of Lennox. The Marquis of Hamilton was
the next to run, and he met with no better success; and the fourth essay
was made by Buckingham. His career was executed with all the consummate
address for which the favourite was remarkable, and it appeared certain
that he would carry off the prize; but in lowering his lance he did not
make sufficient allowance for the wind, and this caused it slightly to
swerve, and though he touched the ring, he did not bear it away. The
course, however, was considered a good one by the judges, and much
applauded; but the Marquis was greatly mortified by his failure.

It now came to Sir Jocelyn's turn, and his breast beat high with
ardour, as he prepared to start on his career. Keeping his back to the
ring till the moment of setting forward, he made a demi-volte to the
right, and then gracefully raising his lance, as his steed started on
its career, he continued to hold it aloft until he began to near the
object of his aim, when he gently and firmly allowed the point to
decline over the right ear of his horse, and adjusted it in a line with
the ring. His aim proved so unerring that he carried off the prize, amid
universal applause.




CHAPTER XII.

The Tilting Match.


After all the other competitors for the prize had essayed a career
within the arena, Sir Jocelyn's was held to be the best course run. The
ring was again carried off both by the Earl of Pembroke and Lord
Mordaunt; but in the opinion of the marshals of the field, neither of
those noblemen displayed so much grace and skill as Mounchensey: and the
decision was confirmed by the King.

The applauses which rang through the tilt-yard, on the announcement that
our handsome young knight had gained the first course, increased the
bitterness of Buckingham's feelings towards him; and he expressed his
regrets in a low tone to Sir Giles Mompesson that the combat about to
take place was not _a l'outrance_ instead of being _a plaisance_.

Sir Giles smiled grimly in reply.

Some little time elapsed, during which preparations were made for the
tilting-match, and great excitement pervaded the assemblage. The King
laughingly inquired of the Spanish ambassador if he still felt secure of
winning his wager, and was answered by De Gondomar that he had never had
the slightest misgiving on the subject, but he was now better satisfied
than ever that the result of the coming struggle would justify his
expectations. In the ladies' gallery an unusual degree of interest was
manifested in what was going forward; and many a wish was audibly
expressed by many a fair dame in Mounchensey's favour.

At length, the trumpets sounded, and the cries of the heralds were
heard, cheering on the combatants, as they prepared to dash furiously
against each other, bidding them do their devoir bravely, since bright
eyes looked down upon them. These stimulants to valorous display were
scarcely needed, for the champions were eager to prove their prowess.
Issuing one by one, from beneath their respective scaffolds, and curbing
the impatience of their steeds till they received from the marshals
permission to start, they rushed from their posts with lightning
swiftness to meet with a crashing shock midway. Various successes
attended the different combatants, but on the whole the advantage lay
clearly on the side of the Duke of Lennox, none of whose party had
sustained any material discomfiture; while on the side of Prince
Charles, the Earls of Montgomery and Rutland had been unhorsed. The
interest of the spectators was kept in breathless suspense to the last,
it being arranged that the tilting-match should close with the conflict
between Buckingham and Mounchensey.

Thus, when the trumpets sounded for the seventh and last time, and the
two knights stationed themselves opposite each other, every eye was
intently fixed upon them. Apparently, no two antagonists could be better
or more equally matched than they were; and throughout the whole field
it would have been in vain to search for another pair equally gifted by
nature, both being models of manly beauty of feature and symmetry of
frame. Indeed they might have been cast in the same mould, so nearly
alike were they in shape and size; and if their armour had been similar,
and their steeds corresponding in colour, they would have been
undistinguishable, when apart. Buckingham in some respects presented the
nobler figure of the two, owing to his flowing plumes, his embossed and
inlaid armour, and the magnificent housings of his charger--but he was
fully rivalled by the grace and chivalrous air of his antagonist.

As the Marquis, confident in his address, disdained the use of the
_passe-guarde_ and the _mentonniere_, Mounchensey abandoned those
defences, though they were used by all the other knights, and placed his
reliance in the strength of his breast-plate and gorget, and in the
force of his right arm.

When summoned forth by the trumpets, the two champions executed
demi-voltes with curvets, and then stood stock-still at either end of
the barriers. Each then selected a lance from the bundle offered them by
the esquires, and their choice of a weapon made, they carefully
fastened down their visors, which up to this moment had been raised.

Seeing them in readiness, the heralds gave the signal for the encounter.
Starting against each other like thunder-bolts, they met in mid-career.
The shock was tremendous, and many a cry sprang from female lips, while
bursts of applause arose from the hardier spectators.

Both lances were shivered, but the results of the strokes dealt on
either side were widely different. Mounchensey maintained his seat
firmly in the saddle, though his steed had been forced back upon its
haunches by his opponent's blow, who had touched his gorget; and riding
on with all the ease, vigour, and grace, our young knight had previously
exhibited, he threw down the truncheon of his lance, and opened his
gauntlet to show that his hand was wholly uninjured.

Very differently had it fared with Buckingham, whose defeat was
unquestionable. Unhorsed and unhelmeted, he was rolled in the dust; and
as he sprang to his feet, had the mortification of hearing the deafening
cheers that greeted his adversary's triumph. Eager to hide his
confusion, he vaulted upon the back of his steed, which was brought to
him by an esquire, the animal's flanks still quivering and reeking from
the terrible shock it had undergone, and dashed beneath the scaffold he
had so lately quitted--his pride severely humbled.

While the crest-fallen favourite thus retired to recover himself, Sir
Jocelyn rode slowly towards the royal gallery. Having now raised his
visor, his features were fully revealed to view, and perhaps were never
seen to such advantage as at this proud and happy moment. His emotions
were indeed enviable--but one thing was wanting to complete his
satisfaction--the presence of her, before whom, of all others, he was
most eager to distinguish himself. What mattered it that scarves and
kerchiefs were waved to him by some of the fairest dames in the land?
What mattered it that his name was called aloud, and that gloves and
knots of ribands fell at his feet, as he rode past the ladies' gallery?
His heart was untouched by smile or glance, and he paused not to pick up
one of the favours showered upon him.

But what means this sudden change in his demeanour? Why does he start
and stop, and look inquiringly towards the back of the gallery? Whom
does he discern amongst that bevy of beauties? Can it be Aveline? And if
so, how comes she there?

As he pauses, all eyes are fixed upon her towards whom his gaze is
directed. There is no difficulty in detecting the object of his regards,
for her attire is simpler than that of all the glittering dames around
her, and of a sadder hue. Her confusion also betrays her. She would not
be seen by him she came to see. She would muffle up her features, but it
is too late; and she is not only fully exposed to his view, but to that
of a hundred other curious eyes. Though many a high-born damsel marvels
at the young knight's insensibility to her own superior attractions,
none can deny that the unknown maiden is exquisitely beautiful, and
demands are eagerly made as to who she may be. No one can answer--and no
clue is given by her companion, for the elderly dame by whom she is
attended, and who resembles a duenna, is likewise unknown to all.

As soon as Sir Jocelyn recovers his surprise, he requests a favour from
the lady of his love, and she cannot refuse him--for immediately all the
dames in front of the gallery move aside, to let her advance.

With her pale cheeks crimsoned with blushes, and her dark eyes flashing
with mingled emotions of shame and pleasure, Aveline steps forward--and
having no other favour to bestow upon her knight, she gives him her
kerchief, which he presses to his lips, and then with a graceful
salutation moves forward on his course. This is no time for
explanation--and he must be content with his happiness, without
inquiring how it has been procured for him.

The incident, however, has been generally noticed, and causes a good
deal of speculation and talk amongst the female portion of the
assemblage. There is one individual, however, of the opposite sex, who
witnesses it with sentiments different from those by which most other
observers are affected. This is Sir Giles Mompesson. He, it appears, has
not been unaware of Aveline's presence at the jousts, though he did not
anticipate its revelation in this manner to Sir Jocelyn; and a bitter
smile crosses his lips, as he watches the brief interview between the
pair. He cares not what transports they indulge in now--nor what hopes
they form for the future. He promises himself that he will effectually
mar their bliss!




CHAPTER XIII.

The Felon Knight.


A few more bounds of his steed brought Sir Jocelyn to the royal gallery,
where he dismounted, and leaving his steed in charge of an esquire,
ascended the stairs in company with the marshals of the field, and
presently found himself in the presence of the King. James received him
very graciously. On the right of the monarch stood the Conde de
Gondomar, who smiled on his _protege_ as he approached, and glanced at a
silver coffer full of diamonds, pearls, emeralds, amethysts, and other
precious stones, borne by an attendant in the gorgeous livery of the
Marquis of Buckingham.

"We greet ye as victor, Sir Jocelyn," said James, as the young knight
made a profound obeisance to him; "and it rejoices us to say ye hae
demeaned yourself honourably and fairly in the field. How say ye, Sirs?"
he added to the marshals and others. "Shall not the prize of the day be
adjudged to Sir Jocelyn?"

"It must be so, of right, your Majesty," replied the foremost of them.
"A better course at the ring could not be run than Sir Jocelyn hath
performed, nor could greater 'vantage be gained in the jousts than he
hath obtained over the Marquis of Buckingham. All has been done by him
in accordance with the rules of honour, and without fraud or
supercherie.

"Enough, gentlemen," said James. "Count, ye hae won your wager; and as
to you, Sir Jocelyn, ye hae proved yourself a very mirror of
chivalry--_exemplar antiquoe fortitudinis et magnanimitatis_--on the
pattern of Bayard, the knight without fear and without reproach, and the
like of whom we scarce expected to see in these latter days. You are
right weel entitled to the prize ye hae gained, and which his Excellency
so honourably assigns to you."

"With your Majesty's permission, I will add the diamond clasp which I
staked against the Marquess's casket of gems," said De Gondomar, "and
will beseech Sir Jocelyn to wear it as a testimony on my part of his
merit as a cavalier. It is scarcely too much to say for him, after his
recent brilliant achievements, that he takes rank amongst the foremost
of the distinguished knights encircling your Majesty's throne."

"He takes rank as the first and best," cried James, emphatically; "since
he hath overcome Buckingham, who till this day hath held the chief place
among our chivalry."

"Your Majesty overwhelms me by your commendations," replied Sir Jocelyn;
"and I can only say, in reply, that my best energies shall be devoted to
your service, whenever and howsoever called upon. As to your
Excellency's gift," he added to De Gondomar, who had unfastened the
glittering clasp and presented it to him, "I shall ever guard it, as a
devotee in your own sunny land of Spain would the most precious relic."

The coffer containing the gems was then, upon a sign from the King,
delivered to Sir Jocelyn, who, as he received it from the attendant,
took a string of pearls from it and gave them to the marshal, requesting
they might be offered as _largesse_ to the heralds; and the officer
promised that the request should be complied with. Having bestowed a
similar boon upon each of the marshals, Mounchensey requested that the
coffer might be placed in charge of his esquire--and his directions were
complied with.

"Is all concluded?" demanded the King.

"The contest for the prize is necessarily decided," replied the marshal;
"but there yet remains the combat with the sword on horseback, if it
pleases Sir Jocelyn to engage in it."

"What saith our young knight?" demanded the King. "Is he willing to risk
the laurels he hath so fairly won on another, and it may be more
dangerous encounter? What he hath already done may fairly entitle him to
decline further hazard, if he be so minded."

"I should ill deserve your Majesty's high commendations if I hesitated
for a moment," replied Mounchensey; "but so far from feeling
disinclination to the combat, I should regret if this opportunity for
further distinction were denied me. With your Majesty's gracious
permission, I will pray the marshals of the field to let it be
proclaimed by the heralds and pursuivants-at-arms that I challenge any
true knight to do battle with me with the sword, and on horseback."

"Ye will fight with a blunted blade, Sir Jocelyn," cried the King. "We
maun hae nae risk of life. Our dear dog, Steenie, hath had his bonnie
craig well-nigh broken, and we will hae nae mair mischief done."

"The laws of the tilt-yard, with which Sir Jocelyn is doubtless well
acquainted," observed the marshal, "require that the edge of the sword
shall be dull, as your Majesty hath stated, and that no blow shall be
dealt with the point of the weapon. These conditions must be strictly
observed."

"They shall be," replied Sir Jocelyn; "and I pray you now to do your
devoir, and make the proclamation."

On this the marshal and his followers departed; and Sir Jocelyn, bowing
reverently to the King, took his way after them, and descending the
stairs, leaped on the back of his charger.

Soon after this, and while a sword, blunted in the manner prescribed,
was girded round his waist by his esquire, the trumpets were sounded,
and the challenge proclaimed by the marshal. It was immediately
responded to by a blast from the opposite end of the arena, and a
herald, stationed at this point, called out in a loud voice that the
challenge was accepted. Again the excitement rose high among the
spectators; again all eyes were directed towards Sir Jocelyn; and again
many ardent aspirations were uttered by his numerous fair admirers for
his success,--though none so fervent as that breathed by Aveline. Sir
Jocelyn cast one glance towards that part of the ladies' gallery where
he knew her to be placed, and then prepared for his last essay.

As yet, he knew not who was to be his antagonist; but when a knight in
sable armour, and with a sable plume upon his helm, rode from beneath
the scaffold, he discovered, to his great indignation, that it was Sir
Giles Mompesson. After a moment's reflection, he resolved upon a course
of action. When the signal for the combat was given by the marshal, and
Sir Giles, sword in hand, dashed into the arena, Mounchensey rode
towards him, but, without drawing his sword, and raising himself in the
saddle, commanded him in a thundering voice to retire.

The impetuosity of Sir Giles's career carried him past his antagonist,
but he now wheeled round, and regarded Mounchensey fiercely from
beneath the bars of his helmet.

"Retire, said you?" he exclaimed; "not unless you acknowledge yourself
defeated. In my turn, I bid you go back to the point you started from,
and commence the combat in due form, or I shall hold you vanquished, and
compel you to abase your crest."

"Hear me," cried Sir Jocelyn, "and let it be heard by all. I challenged
any _true_ knight to the combat, but you answer not to the description.
I proclaim you publicly in this place as a false and felon knight, and
declare you utterly unworthy of my sword. Back to your starting-place,
and if the heralds do their duty, they will hack off your spurs, and
drive you with shame from the lists."

"And think you I will tamely brook this insult?" roared Sir Giles; "draw
your sword at once, and let it be a mortal combat between us."

"Never," replied Sir Jocelyn, disdainfully. "I will not stoop to the
level of your infamy."

"Then stoop to earth," cried Sir Giles, aiming a terrible blow at him
with his sword.

If the stroke had taken effect as intended, it would probably have made
good Mompesson's threat, but Sir Jocelyn was too wary and too agile even
for his powerful assailant. Before the sword could descend, he seized
his adversary's wrist, and in another instant possessed himself of the
blade. This he accomplished without injury, as the sword was blunted.
Still maintaining his grasp of the weapon, he raised himself in his
stirrups to give additional force to the blow, and with the pummel of
the sword, struck Sir Giles a blow upon the brainpan with such violence,
that he dropped from the saddle as if shot.

During this strange scene, not a word had been uttered by the
spectators, who looked on with the greatest curiosity, wondering how it
would end. As Sir Giles fell from his horse, and lay stretched in
perfect insensibility on the ground, a tremendous shout was raised, and
Sir Jocelyn was as much applauded as if he had performed an
extraordinary feat--so universally was the extortioner detested.

Nor was there any sympathy manifested, when a few moments afterwards Sir
Giles was raised from the ground by the pursuivants, and his helmet
being removed, exhibited a countenance livid as death, with a stream of
blood coursing slowly down the temples. Many would have been
