through[2] the Acherusian headland and came to land over against it as
the wind had just ceased.

[Footnote 1: i.e. Saviour of sailors.]

[Footnote 2: i.e. through the ravine that divides the headland.]

Not long had they come unmarked by Lycus, the lord of that land, and the
Mariandyni--they, the slayers of Amycus, according to the report which
the people heard before; but for that very deed they even made a league
with the heroes. And Polydeuces himself they welcomed as a god, flocking
from every side, since for a long time had they been warring against the
arrogant Bebrycians. And so they went up all together into the city, and
all that day with friendly feelings made ready a feast within the palace
of Lycus and gladdened their souls with converse. Aeson's son told him
the lineage and name of each of his comrades and the behests of Pelias,
and how they were welcomed by the Lemnian women, and all that they did
at Dolionian Cyzicus; and how they reached the Mysian land and Cius,
where, sore against their will, they left behind the hero Heracles, and
he told the saying of Glaucus, and how they slew the Bebrycians and
Amycus, and he told of the prophecies and affliction of Phineus, and how
they escaped the Cyanean rocks, and how they met with Leto's son at the
island. And as he told all, Lycus was charmed in soul with listening;
and he grieved for Heracles left behind, and spake as follows among them
all:

"O friends, what a man he was from whose help ye have fallen away, as ye
cleave your long path to Aeetes; for well do I know that I saw him here
in the halls of Dascylus my father, when he came hither on foot through
the land of Asia bringing the girdle of warlike Hippolyte; and me he
found with the down just growing on my cheeks. And here, when my brother
Priolas was slain by the Mysians--my brother, whom ever since the people
lament with most piteous dirges--he entered the lists with Titias in
boxing and slew him, mighty Titias, who surpassed all the youths in
beauty and strength; and he dashed his teeth to the ground. Together
with the Mysians he subdued beneath my father's sway the Phrygians also,
who inhabit the lands next to us, and he made his own the tribes of the
Bithynians and their land, as far as the mouth of Rhebas and the peak of
Colone; and besides them the Paphlagonians of Pelops yielded just as
they were, even all those round whom the dark water of Billaeus breaks.
But now the Bebrycians and the insolence of Amycus have robbed me, since
Heracles dwells far away, for they have long been cutting off huge
pieces of my land until they have set their bounds at the meadows of
deep-flowing Hypius. Nevertheless, by your hands have they paid the
penalty; and it was not without the will of heaven, I trow, that he
brought war on the Bebrycians this day--he, the son of Tyndareus, when
he slew that champion. Wherefore whatever requital I am now able to pay,
gladly will I pay it, for that is the rule for weaker men when the
stronger begin to help them. So with you all, and in your company, I bid
Dascylus my son follow; and if he goes, you will find all men friendly
that ye meet on your way through the sea even to the mouth of the river
Thermodon. And besides that, to the sons of Tyndareus will I raise a
lofty temple on the Acherusian height, which all sailors shall mark far
across the sea and shall reverence; and hereafter for them will I set
apart outside the city, as for gods, some fertile fields of the
well-tilled plain."

Thus all day long they revelled at the banquet. But at dawn they hied
down to the ship in haste; and with them went Lycus himself, when he had
given them countless gifts to bear away; and with them he sent forth his
son from his home.

And here his destined fate smote Idmon, son of Abas, skilled in
soothsaying; but not at all did his soothsaying save him, for necessity
drew him on to death. For in the mead of the reedy river there lay,
cooling his flanks and huge belly in the mud, a white-tusked boar, a
deadly monster, whom even the nymphs of the marsh dreaded, and no man
knew it; but all alone he was feeding in the wide fen. But the son of
Abas was passing along the raised banks of the muddy river, and the boar
from some unseen lair leapt out of the reed-bed, and charging gashed his
thigh and severed in twain the sinews and the bone. And with a sharp cry
the hero fell to the ground; and as he was struck his comrades flocked
together with answering cry. And quickly Peleus with his hunting spear
aimed at the murderous boar as he fled back into the fen; and again he
turned and charged; but Idas wounded him, and with a roar he fell
impaled upon the sharp spear. And the boar they left on the ground just
as he had fallen there; but Idmon, now at the last gasp, his comrades
bore to the ship in sorrow of heart, and he died in his comrades' arms.

And here they stayed from taking thought for their voyaging and abode in
grief for the burial of their dead friend. And for three whole days they
lamented; and on the next they buried him with full honours, and the
people and King Lycus himself took part in the funeral rites; and, as is
the due of the departed, they slaughtered countless sheep at his tomb.
And so a barrow to this hero was raised in that land, and there stands a
token for men of later days to see, the trunk of a wild olive tree, such
as ships are built of; and it flourishes with its green leaves a little
below the Acherusian headland. And if at the bidding of the Muses I must
tell this tale outright, Phoebus strictly commanded the Boeotians and
Nisaeans to worship him as guardian of their city, and to build their
city round the trunk of the ancient wild olive; but they, instead of the
god-fearing Aeolid Idmon, at this day honour Agamestor.

Who was the next that died? For then a second time the heroes heaped up
a barrow for a comrade dead. For still are to be seen two monuments of
those heroes. The tale goes that Tiphys son of Hagnias died; nor was it
his destiny thereafter to sail any further. But him there on the spot a
short sickness laid to rest far from his native land, when the company
had paid due honours to the dead son of Abas. And at the cruel woe they
were seized with unbearable grief. For when with due honours they had
buried him also hard by the seer, they cast themselves down in
helplessness on the sea-shore silently, closely wrapped up, and took no
thought for meat or drink; and their spirit drooped in grief, for all
hope of return was gone. And in their sorrow they would have stayed from
going further had not Hera kindled exceeding courage in Ancaeus, whom
near the waters of Imbrasus Astypalaea bore to Poseidon; for especially
was he skilled in steering and eagerly did he address Peleus:

"Son of Aeacus, is it well for us to give up our toils and linger on in
a strange land? Not so much for my prowess in war did Jason take me with
him in quest of the fleece, far from Parthenia, as for my knowledge of
ships. Wherefore, I pray, let there be no fear for the ship. And so
there are here other men of skill, of whom none will harm our voyaging,
whomsoever we set at the helm. But quickly tell forth all this and
boldly urge them to call to mind their task."

Thus he spake; and Peleus' soul was stirred with gladness, and
straightway he spake in the midst of all: "My friends, why do we thus
cherish a bootless grief like this? For those two have perished by the
fate they have met with; but among our host are steersmen yet, and many
a one. Wherefore let us not delay our attempt, but rouse yourselves to
the work and cast away your griefs."

And him in reply Aeson's son addressed with helpless words: "Son of
Aeacus, where are these steersmen of thine? For those whom we once
deemed to be men of skill, they even more than I are bowed with vexation
of heart. Wherefore I forebode an evil doom for us even as for the dead,
if it shall be our lot neither to reach the city of fell Aeetes, nor
ever again to pass beyond the rocks to the land of Hellas, but a
wretched fate will enshroud us here ingloriously till we grow old for
naught."

Thus he spake, but Ancaeus quickly undertook to guide the swift ship;
for he was stirred by the impulse of the goddess. And after him Erginus
and Nauplius and Euphemus started up, eager to steer. But the others
held them back, and many of his comrades granted it to Ancaeus.

So on the twelfth day they went aboard at dawn, for a strong breeze of
westerly wind was blowing. And quickly with the oars they passed out
through the river Acheron and, trusting to the wind, shook out their
sails, and with canvas spread far and wide they were cleaving their
passage through the waves in fair weather. And soon they passed the
outfall of the river Callichorus, where, as the tale goes, the Nysean
son of Zeus, when he had left the tribes of the Indians and came to
dwell at Thebes, held revels and arrayed dances in front of a cave,
wherein he passed unsmiling sacred nights, from which time the
neighbours call the river by the name of Callichorus[1] and the cave
Aulion.[2]

[Footnote 1: i.e. river of fair dances.]

[Footnote 2: i.e. the bedchamber.]

Next they beheld the barrow of Sthenelus, Actor's son, who on his way
back from the valorous war against the Amazons--for he had been the
comrade of Heracles--was struck by an arrow and died there upon the
sea-beach. And for a time they went no further, for Persephone herself
sent forth the spirit of Actor's son which craved with many tears to
behold men like himself, even for a moment. And mounting on the edge of
the barrow he gazed upon the ship, such as he was when he went to war;
and round his head a fair helm with four peaks gleamed with its
blood-red crest. And again he entered the vast gloom; and they looked
and marvelled; and Mopsus, son of Ampycus, with word of prophecy urged
them to land and propitiate him with libations. Quickly they drew in
sail and threw out hawsers, and on the strand paid honour to the tomb of
Sthenelus, and poured out drink offerings to him and sacrificed sheep as
victims. And besides the drink offerings they built an altar to Apollo,
saviour of ships, and burnt thigh bones; and Orpheus dedicated his lyre;
whence the place has the name of Lyra.

And straightway they went aboard as the wind blew strong; and they drew
the sail down, and made it taut to both sheets; then Argo was borne over
the sea swiftly, even as a hawk soaring high through the air commits to
the breeze its outspread wings and is borne on swiftly, nor swerves in
its flight, poising in the clear sky with quiet pinions. And lo, they
passed by the stream of Parthenius as it flows into the sea, a most
gentle river, where the maid, daughter of Leto, when she mounts to
heaven after the chase, cools her limbs in its much-desired waters. Then
they sped onward in the night without ceasing, and passed Sesamus and
lofty Erythini, Crobialus, Cromna and woody Cytorus. Next they swept
round Carambis at the rising of the sun, and plied the oars past long
Aegialus, all day and on through the night.

And straightway they landed on the Assyrian shore where Zeus himself
gave a home to Sinope, daughter of Asopus, and granted her virginity,
beguiled by his own promises. For he longed for her love, and he
promised to grant her whatever her heart's desire might be. And she in
her craftiness asked of him virginity. And in like manner she deceived
Apollo too who longed to wed her, and besides them the river Halys, and
no man ever subdued her in love's embrace. And there the sons of noble
Deimachus of Tricca were still dwelling, Deileon, Autolycus and
Phlogius, since the day when they wandered far away from Heracles; and
they, when they marked the array of chieftains, went to meet them and
declared in truth who they were; and they wished to remain there no
longer, but as soon as Argestes[1] blew went on ship-board. And so with
them, borne along by the swift breeze, the heroes left behind the river
Halys, and left behind Iris that flows hard by, and the delta-land of
Assyria; and on the same day they rounded the distant headland of the
Amazons that guards their harbour.

[Footnote 1: The north-west wind.]

Here once when Melanippe, daughter of Ares, had gone forth, the hero
Heracles caught her by ambuscade and Hippolyte gave him her glistening
girdle as her sister's ransom, and he sent away his captive unharmed. In
the bay of this headland, at the outfall of Thermodon, they ran ashore,
for the sea was rough for their voyage. No river is like this, and none
sends forth from itself such mighty streams over the land. If a man
should count every one he would lack but four of a hundred, but the real
spring is only one. This flows down to the plain from lofty mountains,
which, men say, are called the Amazonian mountains. Thence it spreads
inland over a hilly country straight forward; wherefrom its streams go
winding on, and they roll on, this way and that ever more, wherever best
they can reach the lower ground, one at a distance and another near at
hand; and many streams are swallowed up in the sand and are without a
name; but, mingled with a few, the main stream openly bursts with its
arching crest of foam into the Inhospitable Pontus. And they would have
tarried there and have closed in battle with the Amazons, and would have
fought not without bloodshed--for the Amazons were not gentle foes and
regarded not justice, those dwellers on the Doeantian plain; but
grievous insolence and the works of Ares were all their care; for by
race they were the daughters of Ares and the nymph Harmonia, who bare to
Ares war-loving maids, wedded to him in the glens of the Acmonian
wood--had not the breezes of Argestes come again from Zeus; and with the
wind they left the rounded beach, where the Themiscyreian Amazons were
arming for war. For they dwelt not gathered together in one city, but
scattered over the land, parted into three tribes. In one part dwelt the
Themiscyreians, over whom at that time Hippolyte reigned, in another the
Lycastians, and in another the dart-throwing Chadesians. And the next
day they sped on and at nightfall they reached the land of the Chalybes.

That folk have no care for ploughing with oxen or for any planting of
honey-sweet fruit; nor yet do they pasture flocks in the dewy meadow.
But they cleave the hard iron-bearing land and exchange their wages for
daily sustenance; never does the morn rise for them without toil, but
amid bleak sooty flames and smoke they endure heavy labour.

And straightway thereafter they rounded the headland of Genetaean Zeus
and sped safely past the land of the Tibareni. Here when wives bring
forth children to their husbands, the men lie in bed and groan with
their heads close bound; but the women tend them with food, and prepare
child-birth baths for them.

Next they reached the sacred mount and the land where the Mossynoeci
dwell amid high mountains in wooden huts,[1] from which that people take
their name. And strange are their customs and laws. Whatever it is right
to do openly before the people or in the market place, all this they do
in their homes, but whatever acts we perform at home, these they perform
out of doors in the midst of the streets, without blame. And among them
is no reverence for the marriage-bed, but, like swine that feed in
herds, no whit abashed in others' presence, on the earth they lie with
the women. Their king sits in the loftiest hut and dispenses upright
judgments to the multitude, poor wretch! For if haply he err at all in
his decrees, for that day they keep him shut up in starvation.

[Footnote 1: called "Mossynes."]

They passed them by and cleft their way with oars over against the
island of Ares all day long; for at dusk the light breeze left them. At
last they spied above them, hurtling through the air, one of the birds
of Ares which haunt that isle. It shook its wings down over the ship as
she sped on and sent against her a keen feather, and it fell on the left
shoulder of goodly Oileus, and he dropped his oar from his hands at the
sudden blow, and his comrades marvelled at the sight of the winged bolt.
And Eribotes from his seat hard by drew out the feather, and bound up
the wound when he had loosed the strap hanging from his own
sword-sheath; and besides the first, another bird appeared swooping
down; but the hero Clytius, son of Eurytus--for he bent his curved bow,
and sped a swift arrow against the bird--struck it, and it whirled round
and fell close to the ship. And to them spake Amphidamas, son of Aleus:

"The island of Ares is near us; you know it yourselves now that ye have
seen these birds. But little will arrows avail us, I trow, for landing.
But let us contrive some other device to help us, if ye intend to land,
bearing in mind the injunction of Phineus. For not even could Heracles,
when he came to Arcadia, drive away with bow and arrow the birds that
swam on the Stymphalian lake. I saw it myself. But he shook in his hand
a rattle of bronze and made a loud clatter as he stood upon a lofty
peak; and the birds fled far off, screeching in bewildered fear.
Wherefore now too let us contrive some such device, and I myself will
speak, having pondered the matter beforehand. Set on your heads your
helmets of lofty crest, then half row by turns, and half fence the ship
about with polished spears and shields. Then all together raise a mighty
shout so that the birds may be scared by the unwonted din, the nodding
crests, and the uplifted spears on high. And if we reach the island
itself, then make mighty noise with the clashing of shields."

Thus he spake, and the helpful device pleased all. And on their heads
they placed helmets of bronze, gleaming terribly, and the blood-red
crests were tossing. And half of them rowed in turn, and the rest
covered the ship with spears and shields. And as when a man roofs over a
house with tiles, to be an ornament of his home and a defence against
rain, and one tile fits firmly into another, each after each; so they
roofed over the ship with their shields, locking them together. And as a
din arises from a warrior-host of men sweeping on, when lines of battle
meet, such a shout rose upward from the ship into the air. Now they saw
none of the birds yet, but when they touched the island and clashed upon
their shields, then the birds in countless numbers rose in flight hither
and thither. And as when the son of Cronos sends from the clouds a dense
hail storm on city and houses, and the people who dwell beneath hear the
din above the roof and sit quietly, since the stormy season has not come
upon them unawares, but they have first made strong their roofs; so the
birds sent against the heroes a thick shower of feather-shafts as they
darted over the sea to the mountains of the land opposite.

What then was the purpose of Phineus in bidding the divine band of
heroes land there? Or what kind of help was about to meet their desire?

The sons of Phrixus were faring towards the city of Orchomenus from Aea,
coming from Cytaean Aeetes, on board a Colchian ship, to win the
boundless wealth of their father; for he, when dying, had enjoined this
journey upon them. And lo, on that day they were very near that island.
But Zeus had impelled the north wind's might to blow, marking by rain
the moist path of Arcturus; and all day long he was stirring the leaves
upon the mountains, breathing gently upon the topmost sprays; but at
night he rushed upon the sea with monstrous force, and with his
shrieking blasts uplifted the surge; and a dark mist covered the
heavens, nor did the bright stars anywhere appear from among the clouds,
but a murky gloom brooded all around. And so the sons of Phrixus,
drenched and trembling in fear of a horrible doom, were borne along by
the waves helplessly. And the force of the wind had snatched away their
sails and shattered in twain the hull, tossed as it was by the breakers.
And hereupon by heaven's prompting those four clutched a huge beam, one
of many that were scattered about, held together by sharp bolts, when
the ship broke to pieces. And on to the island the waves and the blasts
of wind bore the men in their distress, within a little of death. And
straightway a mighty rain burst forth, and rained upon the sea and the
island, and all the country opposite the island, where the arrogant
Mossynoeci dwelt. And the sweep of the waves hurled the sons of Phrixus,
together with their massy beam, upon the beach of the island, in the
murky night; and the floods of rain from Zeus ceased at sunrise, and
soon the two bands drew near and met each other, and Argus spoke first:

"We beseech you, by Zeus the Beholder, whoever ye are, to be kindly and
to help us in our need. For fierce tempests, falling on the sea, have
shattered all the timbers of the crazy ship in which we were cleaving
our path on business bent. Wherefore we entreat you, if haply ye will
listen, to grant us just a covering for our bodies, and to pity and
succour men in misfortune, your equals in age. Oh, reverence suppliants
and strangers for Zeus' sake, the god of strangers and suppliants. To
Zeus belong both suppliants and strangers; and his eye, methinks,
beholdeth even us."

And in reply the son of Aeson prudently questioned him, deeming that the
prophecies of Phineus were being fulfilled: "All these things will we
straightway grant you with right good will. But come tell me truly in
what country ye dwell and what business bids you sail across the sea,
and tell me your own glorious names and lineage."

And him Argus, helpless in his evil plight, addressed: "That one Phrixus
an Aeolid reached Aea from Hellas you yourselves have clearly heard ere
this, I trow; Phrixus, who came to the city of Aeetes, bestriding a ram,
which Hermes had made all gold; and the fleece ye may see even now. The
ram, at its own prompting, he then sacrificed to Zeus, son of Cronos,
above all, the god of fugitives. And him did Aeetes receive in his
palace, and with gladness of heart gave him his daughter Chalciope in
marriage without gifts of wooing.[1] From those two are we sprung. But
Phrixus died at last, an aged man, in the home of Aeetes; and we, giving
heed to our father's behests, are journeying to Orchomenus to take the
possessions of Athamas. And if thou dost desire to learn our names, this
is Cytissorus, this Phrontis, and this Melas, and me ye may call Argus."

[Footnote 1: i.e. without exacting gifts from the bridegroom. So in the
Iliad (ix. 146) Agamemnon offers Achilles any of his three daughters
[Greek: anhaednos]]

Thus he spake, and the chieftains rejoiced at the meeting, and tended
them, much marvelling. And Jason again in turn replied, as was fitting,
with these words:

"Surely ye are our kinsmen on my father's side, and ye pray that with
kindly hearts we succour your evil plight. For Cretheus and Athamas were
brothers. I am the grandson of Cretheus, and with these comrades here I
am journeying from that same Hellas to the city of Aeetes. But of these
things we will converse hereafter. And do ye first put clothing upon
you. By heaven's devising, I ween, have ye come to my hands in your sore
need."

He spake, and out of the ship gave them raiment to put on. Then all
together they went to the temple of Ares to offer sacrifice of sheep;
and in haste they stood round the altar, which was outside the roofless
temple, an altar built of pebbles; within a black stone stood fixed, a
sacred thing, to which of yore the Amazons all used to pray. Nor was it
lawful for them, when they came from the opposite coast, to burn on this
