"I shall never ask that of you, Jacques," Ralph said warmly. "I
consider we are quits now, though you may not. Indeed, I can tell you
that I don't consider that two months of kindness are wiped out by
just taking a jump on to the back of a snake."

There were loud sounds of shouting, singing, and quarreling as they
passed near the great fires that were blazing near the storehouse.
They reached the waterside without notice, and taking a boat rowed off
to the brig. The captain looked over the side:

"Who is that?"

"Jacques Clery and the English lad, captain."

"You got tired of the noise on shore, I suppose?" the captain said.

"Not exactly that, captain, for we have not been near the others at
all. We took a long walk through the woods up to the top of the hill
in the middle of the island and we came back for two reasons. The
first because I have been so badly scared by a snake, who would have
bit me had not this young fellow leaped on to its back just as he was
about to strike me in the neck, that I would not have slept on the
ground for anything; and, in the second place, we came to tell you
that from the top of the hill we saw a large frigate--English, I
should say, from the cut of her sails--five or six miles off on the
other side of the island, and I thought you ought to know about her at
once."

"Thank you, Jacques; that is important. I was going to sail in the
morning, but we must not stir as long as she is in the neighborhood.
So this young fellow saved your life, did he?"

"That he did, captain; and it was the quickest thing you ever saw. I
was just lying down at full length when he caught sight of the snake.
There was no time to stop me; no time even to cry out. He just jumped
on a sudden and came down on the brute as it was on the point of
striking. Had he stopped for one quarter of a second I should have
been a dead man hours ago."

"That was a near escape indeed, Jacques. Are they pretty quiet there
on shore? I heard them shouting several times."

"They seem quarreling a bit, captain; but they are sure to do that
with all that liquor on hand."

"They won't come to much harm," the captain said. "I gave the
strictest orders that all weapons should be left behind before they
landed, and that any man carrying even a knife would have his leave
stopped during the rest of the cruise. Beside, the first mate is there
to look after them. I will go ashore myself at daybreak and take a
look round from the top of that hill. If that frigate is still
cruising about near the island it must be because they have got some
sort of an idea of the whereabouts of our hiding place. We must wait
till she moves away. It won't do to risk anything."

Upon the following morning the captain and Jacques, accompanied by
Ralph, landed. They passed close by the storehouse, and saw the men
still asleep round the extinguished fires. The captain called out the
storekeeper:

"You can serve out one pannikin of wine to each man," he said, "but no
more. They will want that to pull them together. Tell the first mate
to get them on board as soon as possible, and set them to work to tidy
up the ship and get everything ready for setting sail at a moment's
notice. Tell him an English frigate is reported as close to the
island. I am going up to look after her."

Two hours' steady walking took them to the top of the hill. There were
no signs of any vessel as far as they could see. The captain, who had
brought his glass with him, carefully examined every island in sight.
Presently he uttered an exclamation:

"There are three boats rowing together close under the cliffs there,"
he said, pointing to the nearest island. "No doubt the frigate is
lying behind it. They must be searching for some concealed harbor like
ours. _Peste!_ this is awkward. What do you think, Jacques?"

"I should say you were right in what you said last night, captain.
They must have got an idea that our rendezvous is somewhere
hereabouts, though they don't know for certain where, and they are
searching all the island round. If they come along here like that we
shall be caught in a trap. A vessel might sail close by without
suspecting there was an entrance here, however hard they might be
looking for it; but if they send boats rowing along the shore they
couldn't help finding it. Still, there is nothing to prevent our
sailing away now, as the island is between us and them."

"That is so," the captain said. "But if they come while we are away,
in the first place they would capture all the booty in the stores, and
in the second place they might lie quiet in the harbor and would sink
the other ships when they returned. I will go down to the port again,
Jacques, and will send up two of the men from the storehouse to keep
watch here, turn and turn about. Do you remain here until you are
relieved. I will leave my glass with you. If there is anything fresh,
leave the boy on watch and come down with the news yourself. I must
talk this matter over with the mates. We have no direct interest in
the stores, but we must do the best we can for our owners."

Jacques and Ralph watched the distant boats through the glass until
they disappeared round the end of the island, then turned the glass
seaward. Jacques was using it at the time. "See!" he exclaimed, "there
are three sails together there."

"I can see them plainly enough," Ralph said. "What do you make them
out to be?"

"A schooner, a brig, and a three-masted vessel. They are lying close
together, and I fancy boats are passing between them. However, I
couldn't swear to that. They must be fifteen miles away. I expect they
are our consorts, and a merchantman they have captured."

"Can they see them from the other side of that island?" Ralph asked
excitedly.

"I should say they could," Jacques replied after pausing to calculate
the line of sight. "It depends how far round the frigate is lying, and
how close in shore. But if they have sent any one up on the hill
there, of course they can make them out as plainly as we can." Jacques
handed the glass to Ralph.

"Yes, I think I can make out boats, Jacques. What do you suppose they
are doing?"

"Most likely they are transferring the valuable part of her cargo on
board."

"What will they do with her then?"

"I expect they will let her go; but of course that depends whether she
is a new ship and worth taking the risk of carrying her to France."

"They don't burn or sink her, then?"

"No; there would be no good in that; for they wouldn't know what to do
with the crew. Of course they don't want the bother of prisoners here,
and they wouldn't want to turn them adrift in the boats. They might
land on some island near and see us going and coming here, and carry
the news to some of your cruisers. No, I expect they will take what is
valuable and let them go--that is if the ship isn't worth sending
home. I suppose that is so in this case; for if they were going to put
a prize crew on board and send it to France, they would not be
transferring the cargo. Well, we shall see in another half hour."




CHAPTER V.

THE BRITISH CRUISERS.


An hour passed. During this time the watchers on the hill saw that the
brig had been lying alongside the three-masted vessel, and felt sure
that the cargo was being transferred, then the merchantman's sails
were hoisted, and she slowly sailed away. For another hour the other
two crafts lay motionless, then they hoisted sail and headed for the
island. There was a brisk, steady wind blowing, and they came along
fast through the water.

"We shall soon see now whether your frigate has made them out,"
Jacques said; "but I will not wait any longer but will go and tell the
captain what is going on. In another hour the others will be up here
to relieve you, then you can bring down the latest news."

Left alone, Ralph watched anxiously the progress of the distant
vessels, turning the glass frequently toward the other island, beyond
the end of which he momentarily expected to see the white sails of the
frigate appear. An hour passed. The schooner and the brig were now
within about four miles of the nearest point of the island, and still
there were no signs of the English ship. Presently he heard voices
behind him, and two French sailors came up. Ralph was now free to
return, but he thought he had better wait until the brig and schooner
reached a point where they would be hidden by the island from the
sight of any-one who might be watching on the hill six miles away.

In another half-hour they had reached this point. No signs had been
seen of the frigate, and Ralph felt sure that she must have been
anchored in some bay whose headland prevented her seeing the
approaching craft; for had she noticed them she would assuredly have
set out to intercept them before they reached the island, which lay
almost dead to windward of them. He was just turning to go when one of
the men gave a sudden exclamation. He turned round again and saw the
frigate just appearing from behind the other island. She was
close-hauled, and it was soon evident by her course that she was
beating up for the point round which the other two ships had
disappeared.

Ralph was puzzled at this; for if she had made out the brig and
schooner, her natural course would have been to have made for the
other end of the island, so as to cut them off as they sailed past it;
whereas they would now, when they gained the extremity of the island,
find themselves five or six miles astern of the other two craft. The
French sailors were equally puzzled, and there was a hot argument
between them; but they finally concluded that her appearance at that
moment must be accidental, and she could not have made out the
privateers. They had just told Ralph to run down with the news to the
harbor when a light was thrown upon the mystery; for from the other
end of the island from which the frigate had emerged a large schooner
appeared. Every sail was set, and her course was directed toward this
other end of the island upon which the watchers were standing. The two
French sailors burst out into a torrent of oaths, expressive of
surprise and alarm; for it was evident that from the course the
schooner was taking she intended to intercept the two privateers, and
engage them until the frigate came to her assistance.

"Run, boy! run for your life!" one of them exclaimed, "and tell the
captain. But no; wait a moment," and he directed the glass upon the
schooner. "A thousand curses!" he exclaimed. "It is the Cerf schooner
the English captured from us six months ago. She is the fastest craft
in these waters. Tell the captain that I am coming after you, but your
legs will beat mine."

Ralph dashed off at full speed, but as soon as he had fairly distanced
the French sailor he began to run more slowly. For the moment he had
so entered into the feelings of his companions that he had identified
himself with them, but now he had time to think, his sympathies swung
round to the English ship. He did not particularly want La Belle Marie
to be captured; for he had been so well treated on board her that he
felt no ill-will toward her. But her capture meant his deliverance.

He thought over the matter as he ran, and wondered first why the
frigate did not take the line to cut the privateers off, instead of
going round by the other end of the island. He could only suppose that
it was because the schooner was the fastest vessel, and was more
likely to arrive in time at the point. Beside, if she showed there
before the privateers reached the point they might double back again,
and the frigate would make the other end of the island before they
were halfway back. It might be, too, that the captain has suspected
the truth, knowing that the privateers had a rendezvous somewhere in
that neighborhood, and that his object in remaining so long behind the
island was to give them time to enter their port in ignorance of his
being in the neighborhood. At any rate, the great thing was, that the
schooner and brig should enter the little harbor before knowing that
they were pursued. Once in, it would be impossible for them to get out
again and beat off shore with the wind blowing dead on the land,
before both the schooner and frigate had rounded their respective ends
of the island.

Therefore, although Ralph ran fast enough to keep well ahead of the
sailor, he made no effort to keep up a greater rate of speed than was
necessary for this. As soon as he reached the shore a boat rowed off
from the brig to fetch him. He saw with satisfaction that although the
men were all on board, no preparations were made for getting under way
at once; and, indeed, the captain would have no anxiety for his own
ship, as he would know that the privateers, if they saw the frigate
coming out to meet them, would sail right away from the island, and
the frigate would be sure to pursue until out of sight of land.

"What news, boy?" the captain asked as the boat came close alongside.
"Is the frigate in chase of the others?"

"Yes, sir," Ralph replied; "the frigate and a schooner are both in
chase."

"Which way are they bearing?"

"The privateers do not know they are chased sir. The frigate did not
show round the island over there until the schooner and brig were
hidden behind the end of this island. She made toward the western end,
and the schooner is making for the eastern end. The sailors who came
up told me to tell you that the schooner is the Cerf, one of the
fastest vessels out here."

The captain uttered an exclamation of dismay, which was echoed by
those standing round him.

"Row out through the entrance," he shouted to the coxswain of the
boat, "and warn the others of the danger! Tell them to make straight
out. If they come in here, we shall all be caught in a trap together!"

The oars dipped in the water, but before the boat was fairly in motion
there was an exclamation, for the head sail of the schooner glided in
past the projecting cliff. A moment later the whole vessel came into
view.

"Bring the boat back alongside!" the captain shouted. "I will go on
board her at once. She may get out in time yet!"

As the schooner rounded up her sails came down, and she headed
straight toward the brig. The captain of the Belle Marie stood up in
the stern-sheet of the boat, shouting and waving his hands and
gesticulating to them to get up sail again. Those on board the
schooner looked on in surprise, unable to guess his meaning.

"There are two English cruisers, one coming round each end of the
island!" he shouted as he approached the schooner. "Get out again if
you can, otherwise they must catch us all in here!"

The captain in the schooner at once saw the emergency, and roared out
orders. The boats were all lowered at once, and the men tumbled on
board. Hawsers were lowered from the bows, and they began at once to
tow her head round, for there was not a breath of wind in the
land-locked harbor.

"How much time have we got?" the captain asked as the schooner's head
came slowly round.

"I don't know," the other captain replied. "It's a question of
minutes, anyhow. Ah, here is the brig!" and the boat dashed forward
and he gave similar orders to those that had been given to the
schooner.

"Get them both round!" the captain shouted. "I will row out through
the entrance and give you warning if these accursed cruisers are in
sight."

The boat dashed through the narrow entrance, and at once felt the full
force of the breeze. "Dead on shore," the captain muttered bitterly.
"They will have to work right out into the arms of one or other of
them."

They rowed a hundred yards out, when, beyond the furthermost point
they could see to the east, the sails of the schooner were perceived.

"Take her round," the captain said sharply. "It's too late now, we
have got to fight for it."

They rowed back through the entrance. The schooner slowly towed by her
boats was approaching.

"It is no use," the captain said, "you are too late. The schooner has
rounded the end of the island, and with this breeze will be here in
half an hour. You never can work out in time. Beside, they would see
you come out; and even if you got away, which you couldn't do, they
would come back and capture the depot. We have got to fight for it,
that's evident; and the boats of a fleet could hardly make their way
in here. We had best get the three craft moored with their broadsides
to the entrance. We will blow the boats to tinder if they try to come
in, and then we can load up with all the most valuable goods and slip
out at night-time. That is our only chance."

The captain of the schooner jumped into the boat, and they again rowed
out into the entrance. He saw at once that the other's advice was the
only one to be followed. It would be impossible to beat off the shore
before the schooner came up and while they were talking the frigate
appeared round the other end of the island. They therefore returned
into the harbor. The Belle Marie's anchor was raised, and the three
vessels moored head and stern across the harbor, a hundred yards from
the entrance. As soon as this was done strong parties were sent ashore
from each of the vessels, and six heavy ship's guns that had been
landed from some captured vessel were dragged from their place near
the storehouse and planted on the heights, so as to sweep the narrow
channel.

It was late in the evening before this was finished, and an earthwork
thrown up to shelter the men working the guns from musketry fire. In
the meantime the two ships of war had met outside, and again
separating cruised several times from end to end of the rocky wall,
evidently searching for the entrance through which the privateers they
had been pursuing had so suddenly disappeared. In the morning the
French sailors were at work early, and two or three strong chains were
fastened across the mouth of the passage.

"Now," the captain of the Belle Marie said exultantly, as he regained
the deck of his ship, "we are ready to give them a warm reception. The
boats of all the British cruisers on the station would never force
their way through that gap."

Ralph had not been called upon to assist in the work of preparation,
he and Jacques having done their day's work on the journey to the top
of the hill and back. He saw from the exultation in the faces of the
Frenchmen that they considered their position was impregnable, and he
shuddered at the thought of the terrible carnage that would ensue if
the boats of the English vessels should try to force an entrance. The
following morning a lookout on the cliffs reported that two boats had
left the ships and were rowing toward the shore. On reaching the foot
of the cliffs they rowed along abreast at a distance of thirty or
forty yards of the shores. They stopped rowing at the mouth of the
entrance, and were suddenly hailed by the captain of the schooner, who
was standing on the cliff above.

"If you try to enter," he said, "you will be destroyed at once. We
don't want to harm you if you will leave us alone; but we have guns
enough to blow a whole fleet out of water, and will use them if we are
driven to it."

"Thank you for your warning," a voice shouted back from the boats, and
then an order was given, and they rowed back to the ships.

"Well, have you found the place, Lieutenant Pearson?" the captain of
the frigate asked as the young lieutenant stepped on deck.

"Yes, sir, we have found it. It is just where the boat turned and came
out again."

"I can see no signs of it now," the captain said, examining the shore
with his telescope.

"No, sir; you wouldn't until you were within a hundred yards of it.
But rowing close in as we were we saw it some time before we got
there. The rocks overlap each other, and there is a narrow channel
some fifty yards long between them. Apparently this makes a sharp turn
at the other end and opens out. We saw nothing of the vessels we were
chasing yesterday, but on high ground facing the channel there is a
battery of six guns planted so as to rake anything coming in. There
are some chains across the end. While we were lying on our oars there
we were hailed." And he then repeated the warning that had been given.

"Nasty place to get into--eh?" the captain said thoughtfully.

"Very nasty, sir. You see, the guns would play right down into the
channel; then there are the chains to break down, and perhaps more
batteries, and certainly the ships to tackle when we get inside."

"Is there width for the frigate to enter?" the captain asked.

"Just width, I should say, and no more, sir. We should certainly have
to get the yards braced fore and aft, but the ship herself would go
through with something to spare, I should say."

"What depth of water is there close in shore?"

"Plenty of depth sir, right up to the foot of the cliffs; but of
course I can say nothing as to the depth in the channel."

"No, of course not," the captain said. "Well, it's something that we
have run these pests to earth at last, but I see it is going to be no
easy matter to get at them."

The captain now signaled to the captain of the schooner to come on
board, and when he did so the two officers retired to the cabin
together and had a long consultation. The young officer on coming on
deck got into his boat, and taking Lieutenant Pearson with him rowed
for the cliffs, a few hundred yards to the west of the inlet. Here
they could obtain a view of the channel and its surroundings. Not a
man was to be seen. The muzzles of the six guns pointed menacingly
down into the passage, and the chains could be seen just above the
water's edge.

