"Ay, marry, if it satisfies you," she answered, drily. "It is of a piece
with the rest of the reasoning of the royal pedant, whom Master Potts
styles the British Solomon."

"I only give the learned monarch the title by which he is recognised
throughout Christendom," rejoined Potts, sharply.

"Well, there is comfort in the thought, that I shall never be taken for
a wizard," said the squire.

"Be not too sure of that, good Master Nicholas," returned Potts. "Our
present prince seems to have had you in his eye when he penned his
description of a wizard, for, he saith, 'A great number of them that
ever have been convict or confessors of witchcraft, as may be presently
seen by many that have at this time confessed, are some of them rich and
worldly-wise; some of them fat or corpulent in their bodies; and most
part of them altogether given over to the pleasures of the flesh,
continual haunting of company, and all kinds of merriness, lawful and
unlawful.' This hitteth you exactly, Master Nicholas."

"Zounds!" exclaimed the squire, "if this be exact, it toucheth me too
nearly to be altogether agreeable."

"The passage is truly quoted, Nicholas," observed Mistress Nutter, with
a cold smile. "I perfectly remember it. Master Potts seems to have the
'Daemonologie' at his fingers' ends."

"I have made it my study, madam," replied the lawyer, somewhat mollified
by the remark, "as I have the statute on witchcraft, and indeed most
other statutes."

"We have wasted time enough in this unprofitable talk," said Mistress
Nutter, abruptly quitting them without bestowing the slightest
salutation on Potts.

"I was but jesting in what I said just now, good Master Nicholas,"
observed the little lawyer, nowise disconcerted at the slight "though
they were the king's exact words I quoted. No one would suspect you of
being a wizard--ha!--ha! But I am resolved to prosecute the search, and
I calculate upon your aid, and that of Master Richard Assheton, who goes
with us."

"You shall have mine, at all events, Master Potts," replied Nicholas;
"and I doubt not, my cousin Dick's, too."

"Our May Queen, Alizon Device, is Mother Demdike's grand-daughter, is
she not?" asked Potts, after a moment's reflection.

"Ay, why do you ask?" demanded Nicholas.

"For a good and sufficing reason," replied Potts. "She might be an
important witness; for, as King James saith, 'bairns or wives may, of
our law, serve for sufficient witnesses and proofs.' And he goeth on to
say, 'For who but witches can be proofs, and so witnesses of the doings
of witches?'"

"You do not mean to aver that Alizon Device is a witch, sir?" cried
Nicholas, sharply.

"I aver nothing," replied Potts; "but, as a relative of a suspected
witch, she will be the best witness against her."

"If you design to meddle with Alizon Device, expect no assistance from
me, Master Potts," said Nicholas, sternly, "but rather the contrary."

"Nay, I but threw out the hint, good Master Nicholas," replied Potts.
"Another witness will do equally well. There are other children, no
doubt. I rely on you, sir--I rely on you. I shall now go in search of
Master Nowell, and obtain the warrant and the constable."

"And I shall go keep my appointment with Parson Dewhurst, at the Abbey,"
said Nicholas, bowing slightly to the attorney, and taking his
departure.

"It will not do to alarm him at present," said Potts, looking after him,
"but I'll have that girl as a witness, and I know how to terrify her
into compliance. A singular woman, that Mistress Alice Nutter. I must
inquire into her history. Odd, how obstinately she set her face against
witchcraft. And yet she lives at Rough Lee, in the very heart of a witch
district, for such Master Nicholas Assheton calls this Pendle Forest. I
shouldn't wonder if she has dealings with the old hags she
defends--Mother Demdike and Mother Chattox. Chattox! Lord bless us, what
a name!--There's caldron and broomstick in the very sound! And Demdike
is little better. Both seem of diabolical invention. If I can unearth a
pack of witches, I shall gain much credit from my honourable good lords
the judges of assize in these northern parts, besides pleasing the King
himself, who is sure to hear of it, and reward my praiseworthy zeal.
Look to yourself, Mistress Nutter, and take care you are not caught
tripping. And now, for Master Roger Nowell."

With this, he peered about among the crowd in search of the magistrate,
but though he thrust his little turned-up nose in every direction, he
could not find him, and therefore set out for the Abbey, concluding he
had gone thither.

As Mistress Nutter walked along, she perceived James Device among the
crowd, holding Jennet by the hand, and motioned him to come to her. Jem
instantly understood the sign, and quitting his little sister, drew
near.

"Tell thy mother," said Mistress Nutter, in a tone calculated only for
his hearing, "to come to me, at the Abbey, quickly and secretly. I shall
be in the ruins of the old convent church. I have somewhat to say to
her, that concerns herself as well as me. Thou wilt have to go to Rough
Lee and Malkin Tower to-night."

Jem nodded, to show his perfect apprehension of what was said and his
assent to it, and while Mistress Nutter moved on with a slow and
dignified step, he returned to Jennet, and told her she must go home
directly, a piece of intelligence which was not received very graciously
by the little maiden; but nothing heeding her unwillingness, Jem walked
her off quickly in the direction of the cottage; but while on the way to
it, they accidentally encountered their mother, Elizabeth Device, and
therefore stopped.

"Yo mun go up to th' Abbey directly, mother," said Jem, with a wink,
"Mistress Nutter wishes to see ye. Yo'n find her i' t' ruins o' t' owd
convent church. Tak kere yo're neaw seen. Yo onderstond."

"Yeigh," replied Elizabeth, nodding her head significantly, "ey'n go at
wonst, an see efter Alizon ot t' same time. Fo ey'm towd hoo has
fainted, an been ta'en to th' Abbey by Lady Assheton."

"Never heed Alizon," replied Jem, gruffly. "Hoo's i' good hands. Ye
munna be seen, ey tell ye. Ey'm going to Malkin Tower to-neet, if yo'n
owt to send."

"To-neet, Jem," echoed little Jennet.

"Eigh," rejoined Jem, sharply. "Howd te tongue, wench. Dunna lose time,
mother."

And as he and his little sister pursued their way to the cottage,
Elizabeth hobbled off towards the Abbey, muttering, as she went, "I hope
Alizon an Mistress Nutter winna meet. Nah that it matters, boh still
it's better not. Strange, the wench should ha' fainted. Boh she's always
foolish an timmersome, an ey half fear has lost her heart to young
Richard Assheton. Ey'n watch her narrowly, an if it turn out to be so,
she mun be cured, or be secured--ha! ha!"

And muttering in this way, she passed through the Abbey gateway, the
wicket being left open, and proceeded towards the ruinous convent
church, taking care as much as possible to avoid observation.




CHAPTER V.--MOTHER CHATTOX.


Not far from the green where the May-day revels were held, stood the
ancient parish church of Whalley, its square tower surmounted with a
flag-staff and banner, and shaking with the joyous peals of the ringers.
A picturesque and beautiful structure it was, though full of
architectural incongruities; and its grey walls and hoary buttresses,
with the lancet-shaped windows of the choir, and the ramified tracery of
the fine eastern window, could not fail to please any taste not quite so
critical as to require absolute harmony and perfection in a building.
Parts of the venerable fabric were older than the Abbey itself, dating
back as far as the eleventh century, when a chapel occupied the site;
and though many alterations had been made in the subsequent structure at
various times, and many beauties destroyed, especially during the period
of the Reformation, enough of its pristine character remained to render
it a very good specimen of an old country church. Internally, the
cylindrical columns of the north aisle, the construction of the choir,
and the three stone seats supported on rounded columns near the altar,
proclaimed its high antiquity. Within the choir were preserved the
eighteen richly-carved stalls once occupying a similar position in the
desecrated conventual church: and though exquisite in themselves, they
seemed here sadly out of place, not being proportionate to the
structure. Their elaborately-carved seats projected far into the body of
the church, and their crocketed pinnacles shot up almost to the ceiling.
But it was well they had not shared the destruction in which almost all
the other ornaments of the magnificent fane they once decorated were
involved. Carefully preserved, the black varnished oak well displayed
the quaint and grotesque designs with which many of them--the Prior's
stall in especial--were embellished. Chief among them was the abbot's
stall, festooned with sculptured vine wreaths and clustering grapes, and
bearing the auspicious inscription:

          Semper gaudentes sint ista sede sedentes:

singularly inapplicable, however, to the last prelate who filled it.
Some fine old monuments, and warlike trophies of neighbouring wealthy
families, adorned the walls, and within the nave was a magnificent pew,
with a canopy and pillars of elaborately-carved oak, and lattice-work at
the sides, allotted to the manor of Read, and recently erected by Roger
Nowell; while in the north and south aisles were two small chapels,
converted since the reformed faith had obtained, into pews--the one
called Saint Mary's Cage, belonging to the Assheton family; and the
other appertaining to the Catterals of Little Mitton, and designated
Saint Nicholas's Cage. Under the last-named chapel were interred some
of the Paslews of Wiswall, and here lay the last unfortunate Abbot of
Whalley, between whoso grave, and the Assheton and Braddyll families, a
fatal relation was supposed to subsist. Another large pew, allotted to
the Towneleys, and designated Saint Anthony's Cage, was rendered
remarkable, by a characteristic speech of Sir John Towneley, which gave
much offence to the neighbouring dames. Called upon to decide as to the
position of the sittings in the church, the discourteous knight made
choice of Saint Anthony's Cage, already mentioned, declaring, "My man,
Shuttleworth of Hacking, made this form, and here will I sit when I
come; and my cousin Nowell may make a seat behind me if he please, and
my son Sherburne shall make one on the other side, and Master Catteral
another behind him, and for the residue the use shall be, first come
first speed, and that will make the proud wives of Whalley rise betimes
to come to church." One can fancy the rough knight's chuckle, as he
addressed these words to the old clerk, certain of their being quickly
repeated to the "proud wives" in question.

Within the churchyard grew two fine old yew-trees, now long since
decayed and gone, but then spreading their dark-green arms over the
little turf-covered graves. Reared against the buttresses of the church
was an old stone coffin, together with a fragment of a curious
monumental effigy, likewise of stone; but the most striking objects in
the place, and deservedly ranked amongst the wonders of Whalley, were
three remarkable obelisk-shaped crosses, set in a line upon pedestals,
covered with singular devices in fretwork, and all three differing in
size and design. Evidently of remotest antiquity, these crosses were
traditionally assigned to Paullinus, who, according to the Venerable
Bede, first preached the Gospel in these parts, in the early part of the
seventh century; but other legends were attached to them by the vulgar,
and dim mystery brooded over them.

Vestiges of another people and another faith were likewise here
discernible, for where the Saxon forefathers of the village prayed and
slumbered in death, the Roman invaders of the isle had trodden, and
perchance performed their religious rites; some traces of an encampment
being found in the churchyard by the historian of the spot, while the
north boundary of the hallowed precincts was formed by a deep foss, once
encompassing the nigh-obliterated fortification. Besides these records
of an elder people, there was another memento of bygone days and creeds,
in a little hermitage and chapel adjoining it, founded in the reign of
Edward III., by Henry, Duke of Lancaster, for the support of two
recluses and a priest to say masses daily for him and his descendants;
but this pious bequest being grievously abused in the subsequent reign
of Henry VI., by Isole de Heton, a fair widow, who in the first
transports of grief, vowing herself to heaven, took up her abode in the
hermitage, and led a very disorderly life therein, to the great scandal
of the Abbey, and the great prejudice of the morals of its brethren, and
at last, tired even of the slight restraint imposed upon her, fled away
"contrary to her oath and profession, not willing, nor intending to be
restored again;" the hermitage was dissolved by the pious monarch, and
masses ordered to be said daily in the parish church for the repose of
the soul of the founder. Such was the legend attached to the little
cell, and tradition went on to say that the anchoress broke her leg in
crossing Whalley Nab, and limped ever afterwards; a just judgment on
such a heinous offender. Both these little structures were picturesque
objects, being overgrown with ivy and woodbine. The chapel was
completely in ruins, while the cell, profaned by the misdoings of the
dissolute votaress Isole, had been converted into a cage for vagrants
and offenders, and made secure by a grated window, and a strong door
studded with broad-headed nails.

The view from the churchyard, embracing the vicarage-house, a
comfortable residence, surrounded by a large walled-in garden, well
stocked with fruit-trees, and sheltered by a fine grove of rook-haunted
timber, extended on the one hand over the village, and on the other over
the Abbey, and was bounded by the towering and well-wooded heights of
Whalley Nab. On the side of the Abbey, the most conspicuous objects were
the great north-eastern gateway, with the ruined conventual church. Ever
beautiful, the view was especially so on the present occasion, from the
animated scene combined with it; and the pleasant prospect was enjoyed
by a large assemblage, who had adjourned thither to witness the
concluding part of the festival.

Within the green and flower-decked bowers which, as has before been
mentioned, were erected in the churchyard, were seated Doctor Ormerod
and Sir Ralph Assheton, with such of their respective guests as had not
already retired, including Richard and Nicholas Assheton, both of whom
had returned from the abbey; the former having been dismissed by Lady
Assheton from further attendance upon Alizon, and the latter having
concluded his discourse with Parson Dewhurst, who, indeed, accompanied
him to the church, and was now placed between the Vicar and the Rector
of Middleton. From this gentle elevation the gay company on the green
could be fully discerned, the tall May-pole, with its garlands and
ribands, forming a pivot, about which the throng ever revolved, while
stationary amidst the moving masses, the rush-cart reared on high its
broad green back, as if to resist the living waves constantly dashed
against it. By-and-by a new kind of movement was perceptible, and it
soon became evident that a procession was being formed. Immediately
afterwards, the rush-cart was put in motion, and winded slowly along the
narrow street leading to the church, preceded by the morris-dancers and
the other May-day revellers, and followed by a great concourse of
people, shouting, dancing, and singing.

On came the crowd. The jingling of bells, and the sound of music grew
louder and louder, and the procession, lost for awhile behind some
intervening habitations, though the men bestriding the rush-cart could
be discerned over their summits, burst suddenly into view; and the
revellers entering the churchyard, drew up on either side of the little
path leading to the porch, while the rush-cart coming up the next
moment, stopped at the gate. Then four young maidens dressed in white,
and having baskets in their hands, advanced and scattered flowers along
the path; after which ladders were reared against the sides of the
rush-cart, and the men, descending from their exalted position, bore the
garlands to the church, preceded by the vicar and the two other divines,
and followed by Robin Hood and his band, the morris-dancers, and a troop
of little children singing a hymn. The next step was to unfasten the
bundles of rushes, of which the cart was composed, and this was very
quickly and skilfully performed, the utmost care being taken of the
trinkets and valuables with which it was ornamented. These were gathered
together in baskets and conveyed to the vestry, and there locked up.
This done, the bundles of rushes were taken up by several old women, who
strewed the aisles with them, and placed such as had been tied up as
mats in the pews. At the same time, two casks of ale set near the gate,
and given for the occasion by the vicar, were broached, and their
foaming contents freely distributed among the dancers and the thirsty
crowd. Very merry were they, as may be supposed, in consequence, but
their mirth was happily kept within due limits of decorum.

When the rush-cart was wellnigh unladen Richard Assheton entered the
church, and greatly pleased with the effect of the flowery garlands with
which the various pews were decorated, said as much to the vicar, who
smilingly replied, that he was glad to find he approved of the practice,
"even though it might savour of superstition;" and as the good doctor
walked away, being called forth, the young man almost unconsciously
turned into the chapel on the north aisle. Here he stood for a few
moments gazing round the church, wrapt in pleasing meditation, in which
many objects, somewhat foreign to the place and time, passed through his
mind, when, chancing to look down, he saw a small funeral wreath, of
mingled yew and cypress, lying at his feet, and a slight tremor passed
over his frame, as he found he was standing on the ill-omened grave of
Abbot Paslew. Before he could ask himself by whom this sad garland had
been so deposited, Nicholas Assheton came up to him, and with a look of
great uneasiness cried, "Come away instantly, Dick. Do you know where
you are standing?"

"On the grave of the last Abbot of Whalley," replied Richard, smiling.

"Have you forgotten the common saying," cried Nicholas--"that the
Assheton who stands on that unlucky grave shall die within the year?
Come away at once."

"It is too late," replied Richard, "I have incurred the fate, if such a
fate be attached to the tomb; and as my moving away will not preserve
me, so my tarrying here cannot injure me further. But I have no fear."

"You have more courage than I possess," rejoined Nicholas. "I would not
set foot on that accursed stone for half the county. Its malign
influence on our house has been approved too often. The first to
experience the fatal destiny were Richard Assheton and John Braddyll,
the purchasers of the Abbey. Both met here together on the anniversary
of the abbot's execution--some forty years after its occurrence, it is
true, and when they were both pretty well stricken in years--and within
that year, namely 1578, both died, and were buried in the vault on the
opposite side of the church, not many paces from their old enemy. The
last instance was my poor brother Richard, who, being incredulous as you
are, was resolved to brave the destiny, and stationed himself upon the
tomb during divine service, but he too died within the appointed time."

"He was bewitched to death--so, at least, it is affirmed," said Richard
Assheton, with a smile. "But I believe in one evil influence just as
much as in the other."

"It matters not how the destiny be accomplished, so it come to pass,"
rejoined the squire, turning away. "Heaven shield you from it!"

"Stay!" said Richard, picking up the wreath. "Who, think you, can have
placed this funeral garland on the abbot's grave?"

"I cannot guess!" cried Nicholas, staring at it in amazement--"an enemy
of ours, most likely. It is neither customary nor lawful in our
Protestant country so to ornament graves. Put it down, Dick."

"I shall not displace it, certainly," replied Richard, laying it down
again; "but I as little think it has been placed here by a hostile hand,
as I do that harm will ensue to me from standing here. To relieve your
anxiety, however, I will come forth," he added, stepping into the aisle.
"Why should an enemy deposit a garland on the abbot's tomb, since it was
by mere chance that it hath met my eyes?"

"Mere chance!" cried Nicholas; "every thing is mere chance with you
philosophers. There is more than chance in it. My mind misgives me
strangely. That terrible old Abbot Paslew is as troublesome to us in
death, as he was during life to our predecessor, Richard Assheton. Not
content with making his tombstone a weapon of destruction to us, he
pays the Abbey itself an occasional visit, and his appearance always
betides some disaster to the family. I have never seen him myself, and
trust I never shall; but other people have, and have been nigh scared
out of their senses by the apparition."

"Idle tales, the invention of overheated brains," rejoined Richard.
"Trust me, the abbot's rest will not be broken till the day when all
shall rise from their tombs; though if ever the dead (supposing such a
thing possible) could be justified in injuring and affrighting the
living, it might be in his case, since he mainly owed his destruction to
our ancestor. On the same principle it has been held that church-lands
are unlucky to their lay possessors; but see how this superstitious
notion has been disproved in our own family, to whom Whalley Abbey and
its domains have brought wealth, power, and worldly happiness."

"There is something in the notion, nevertheless," replied Nicholas; "and
though our case may, I hope, continue an exception to the rule, most
grantees of ecclesiastical houses have found them a curse, and the time
may come when the Abbey may prove so to our descendants. But, without
discussing the point, there is one instance in which the malignant
influence of the vindictive abbot has undoubtedly extended long after
his death. You have heard, I suppose, that he pronounced a dreadful
anathema upon the child of a man who had the reputation of being a
wizard, and who afterwards acted as his executioner. I know not the
whole particulars of the dark story, but I know that Paslew fixed a
curse upon the child, declaring it should become a witch, and the mother
of witches. And the prediction has been verified. Nigh eighty years have
flown by since then, and the infant still lives--a fearful and
mischievous witch--and all her family are similarly fated--all are
witches."

"I never heard the story before," said Richard, somewhat thoughtfully;
"but I guess to whom you allude--Mother Demdike of Pendle Forest, and
her family."

"Precisely," rejoined Nicholas; "they are a brood of witches."

"In that case Alizon Device must be a witch," cried Richard; "and I
think you will hardly venture upon such an assertion after what you have
seen of her to-day. If she be a witch, I would there were many such--as
fair and gentle. And see you not how easily the matter is explained?
'Give a dog an ill name and hang him'--a proverb with which you are
familiar enough. So with Mother Demdike. Whether really uttered or not,
the abbot's curse upon her and her issue has been bruited abroad, and
hence she is made a witch, and her children are supposed to inherit the
infamous taint. So it is with yon tomb. It is said to be dangerous to
our family, and dangerous no doubt it is to those who believe in the
saying, which, luckily, I do not. The prophecy works its own fulfilment.
The absurdity and injustice of yielding to the opinion are manifest. No
wrong can have been done the abbot by Mother Demdike, any more than by
her children, and yet they are to be punished for the misdeeds of their
predecessor."

"Ay, just as you and I, who are of the third and fourth generation, may
be punished for the sins of our fathers," rejoined Nicholas. "You have
Scripture against you, Dick. The only thing I see in favour of your
argument is, the instance you allege of Alizon. She does not look like a
witch, certainly; but there is no saying. She may be only the more
dangerous for her rare beauty, and apparent innocence!"

"I would answer for her truth with my life," cried Richard, quickly. "It
is impossible to look at her countenance, in which candour and purity
shine forth, and doubt her goodness."

"She hath cast her spells over you, Dick, that is certain," rejoined
Nicholas, laughing; "but to be serious. Alizon, I admit, is an exception
to the rest of the family, but that only strengthens the general rule.
Did you ever remark the strange look they all--save the fair maid in
question--have about the eyes?"

Richard answered in the negative.

"It is very singular, and I wonder you have not noticed it," pursued
Nicholas; "but the question of reputed witchcraft in Mother Demdike has
some chance of being speedily settled; for Master Potts, the little
London lawyer, who goes with us to Pendle Forest to-morrow, is about to
have her arrested and examined before a magistrate."

"Indeed!" exclaimed Richard, "this must be prevented."

"Why so?" exclaimed Nicholas, in surprise.

"Because the prejudice existing against her is sure to convict and
destroy her," replied Richard. "Her great age, infirmities, and poverty,
will be proofs against her. How can she, or any old enfeebled creature
like her, whose decrepitude and misery should move compassion rather
than excite fear--how can such a person defend herself against charges
easily made, and impossible to refute? I do not deny the possibility of
witchcraft, even in our own days, though I think it of very unlikely
occurrence; but I would determinately resist giving credit to any tales
told by the superstitious vulgar, who, naturally prone to cruelty, have
so many motives for revenging imaginary wrongs. It is placing a dreadful
weapon in their hands, of which they have cunning enough to know the
use, but neither mercy nor justice enough to restrain them from using
it. Better let one guilty person escape, than many innocent perish. So
many undefined charges have been brought against Mother Demdike, that at
last they have fixed a stigma on her name, and made her an object of
dread and suspicion. She is endowed with mysterious power, which would
have no effect if not believed in; and now must be burned because she is
called a witch, and is doting and vain enough to accept the title."

"There is something in a witch difficult, nay, almost impossible to
describe," said Nicholas, "but you cannot be mistaken about her. By her
general ill course of life, by repeated acts of mischief, and by
threats, followed by the consequences menaced, she becomes known. There
is much mystery in the matter, not permitted human knowledge entirely to
penetrate; but, as we know from the Scriptures that the sin of
witchcraft did exist, and as we have no evidence that it has ceased, so
it is fair to conclude, that there may be practisers of the dark offence
in our own days, and such I hold to be Mother Demdike and Mother
Chattox. Rival potentates in evil, they contend which shall do most
mischief, but it must be admitted the former bears away the bell."

"If all the ill attributed to her were really caused by her
machinations, this might be correct," replied Richard, "but it only
shows her to be more calumniated than the other. In a word, cousin
Nicholas, I look upon them as two poor old creatures, who, persuaded
they really possess the supernatural power accorded to them by the
vulgar, strive to act up to their parts, and are mainly assisted in
doing so by the credulity and fears of their audience."

"Admitting the blind credulity of the multitude," said Nicholas, "and
their proneness to discern the hand of the witch in the most trifling
accidents; admitting also, their readiness to accuse any old crone
unlucky enough to offend them of sorcery; I still believe that there are
actual practisers of the black art, who, for a brief term of power, have
entered into a league with Satan, worship him and attend his sabbaths,
and have a familiar, in the shape of a cat, dog, toad, or mole, to obey
their behests, transform themselves into various shapes--as a hound,
horse, or hare,--raise storms of wind or hail, maim cattle, bewitch and
slay human beings, and ride whither they will on broomsticks. But,
holding the contrary opinion, you will not, I apprehend, aid Master
Potts in his quest of witches."

"I will not," rejoined Richard. "On the contrary, I will oppose him. But
enough of this. Let us go forth."

And they quitted the church together.

As they issued into the churchyard, they found the principal arbours
occupied by the morris-dancers, Robin Hood and his troop, Doctor Ormerod
and Sir Ralph having retired to the vicarage-house.

Many merry groups were scattered about, talking, laughing, and singing;
but two persons, seemingly objects of suspicion and alarm, and shunned
by every one who crossed their path, were advancing slowly towards the
three crosses of Paullinus, which stood in a line, not far from the
church-porch. They were females, one about five-and-twenty, very comely,
and habited in smart holiday attire, put on with considerable rustic
coquetry, so as to display a very neat foot and ankle, and with plenty
of ribands in her fine chestnut hair. The other was a very different
person, far advanced in years, bent almost double, palsy-stricken, her
arms and limbs shaking, her head nodding, her chin wagging, her snowy
locks hanging about her wrinkled visage, her brows and upper lip frore,
and her eyes almost sightless, the pupils being cased with a thin white
film. Her dress, of antiquated make and faded stuff, had been once deep
red in colour, and her old black hat was high-crowned and broad-brimmed.
She partly aided herself in walking with a crutch-handled stick, and
partly leaned upon her younger companion for support.

"Why, there is one of the old women we have just been speaking
of--Mother Chattox," said Richard, pointing them out, "and with her, her
grand-daughter, pretty Nan Redferne."

"So it is," cried Nicholas, "what makes the old hag here, I marvel! I
will go question her."

So saying, he strode quickly towards her.

"How now, Mother Chattox!" he cried. "What mischief is afoot? What makes
the darkness-loving owl abroad in the glare of day? What brings the
grisly she-wolf from her forest lair? Back to thy den, old witch! Ar't
crazed, as well as blind and palsied, that thou knowest not that this is
a merry-making, and not a devil's sabbath? Back to thy hut, I say! These
sacred precincts are no place for thee."

"Who is it speaks to me?" demanded the old hag, halting, and fixing her
glazed eyes upon him.

"One thou hast much injured," replied Nicholas. "One into whose house
thou hast brought quick-wasting sickness and death by thy infernal arts.
One thou hast good reason to fear; for learn, to thy confusion, thou
damned and murtherous witch, it is Nicholas, brother to thy victim,
Richard Assheton of Downham, who speaks to thee."

"I know none I have reason to fear," replied Mother Chattox; "especially
thee, Nicholas Assheton. Thy brother was no victim of mine. Thou wert
the gainer by his death, not I. Why should I slay him?"

"I will tell thee why, old hag," cried Nicholas; "he was inflamed by the
beauty of thy grand-daughter Nancy here, and it was to please Tom
Redferne, her sweetheart then, but her spouse since, that thou
bewitchedst him to death."

"That reason will not avail thee, Nicholas," rejoined Mother Chattox,
with a derisive laugh. "If I had any hand in his death, it was to serve
and pleasure thee, and that all men shall know, if I am questioned on
the subject--ha! ha! Take me to the crosses, Nance."

"Thou shalt not 'scape thus, thou murtherous hag," cried Nicholas,
furiously.

"Nay, let her go her way," said Richard, who had drawn near during the
colloquy. "No good will come of meddling with her."

"Who's that?" asked Mother Chattox, quickly.

[Illustration: NAN REDFERNE AND MOTHER CHATTOX.]

"Master Richard Assheton, o' Middleton," whispered Nan Redferne.

"Another of these accursed Asshetons," cried Mother Chattox. "A plague
seize them!"

"Boh he's weel-favourt an kindly," remarked her grand-daughter.

"Well-favoured or not, kindly or cruel, I hate them all," cried Mother
Chattox. "To the crosses, I say!"

But Nicholas placed himself in their path.

"Is it to pray to Beelzebub, thy master, that thou wouldst go to the
crosses?" he asked.

"Out of my way, pestilent fool!" cried the hag.

"Thou shalt not stir till I have had an answer," rejoined Nicholas.
"They say those are Runic obelisks, and not Christian crosses, and that
the carvings upon them have a magical signification. The first, it is
averred, is written o'er with deadly curses, and the forms in which they
are traced, as serpentine, triangular, or round, indicate and rule their
swift or slow effect. The second bears charms against diseases, storms,
and lightning. And on the third is inscribed a verse which will render
him who can read it rightly, invisible to mortal view. Thou shouldst be
learned in such lore, old Pythoness. Is it so?"

The hag's chin wagged fearfully, and her frame trembled with passion,
but she spoke not.

"Have you been in the church, old woman?" interposed Richard.

"Ay, wherefore?" she rejoined.

"Some one has placed a cypress wreath on Abbot Paslew's grave. Was it
you?" he asked.

"What! hast thou found it?" cried the hag. "It shall bring thee rare
luck, lad--rare luck. Now let me pass."

"Not yet," cried Nicholas, forcibly grasping her withered arm.

The hag uttered a scream of rage.

"Let me go, Nicholas Assheton," she shrieked, "or thou shalt rue it.
Cramps and aches shall wring and rack thy flesh and bones; fever shall
consume thee; ague shake thee--shake thee--ha!"

And Nicholas recoiled, appalled by her fearful gestures.

"You carry your malignity too far, old woman," said Richard severely.

"And thou darest tell me so," cried the hag. "Set me before him, Nance,
that I may curse him," she added, raising her palsied arm.

"Nah, nah--yo'n cursed ower much already, grandmother," cried Nan
Redferne, endeavouring to drag her away. But the old woman resisted.

"I will teach him to cross my path," she vociferated, in accents shrill
and jarring as the cry of the goat-sucker.

"Handsome he is, it may be, now, but he shall not be so long. The bloom
shall fade from his cheek, the fire be extinguished in his eyes, the
strength depart from his limbs. Sorrow shall be her portion who loves
him--sorrow and shame!"

"Horrible!" exclaimed Richard, endeavouring to exclude the voice of the
crone, which pierced his ears like some sharp instrument.

"Ha! ha! you fear me now," she cried. "By this, and this, the spell
shall work," she added, describing a circle in the air with her stick,
then crossing it twice, and finally scattering over him a handful of
grave dust, snatched from an adjoining hillock.

"Now lead me quickly to the smaller cross, Nance," she added, in a low
tone.

Her grand-daughter complied, with a glance of deep commiseration at
Richard, who remained stupefied at the ominous proceeding.

"Ah! this must indeed be a witch!" he cried, recovering from the
momentary shock.

"So you are convinced at last," rejoined Nicholas. "I can take breath
now the old hell-cat is gone. But she shall not escape us. Keep an eye
upon her, while I see if Simon Sparshot, the beadle, be within the
churchyard, and if so he shall take her into custody, and lock her in
the cage."

With this, he ran towards the throng, shouting lustily for the beadle.
Presently a big, burly fellow, in a scarlet doublet, laced with gold, a
black velvet cap trimmed with red ribands, yellow hose, and shoes with
great roses in them, and bearing a long silver-headed staff, answered
the summons, and upon being told why his services were required,
immediately roared out at the top of a stentorian voice, "A witch,
lads!--a witch!"

All was astir in an instant. Robin Hood and his merry men, with the
morris-dancers, rushed out of their bowers, and the whole churchyard was
in agitation. Above the din was heard the loud voice of Simon Sparshot,
still shouting, "A witch!--witch!--Mother Chattox!"

"Where--where?" demanded several voices.

"Yonder," replied Nicholas, pointing to the further cross.

A general movement took place in that direction, the crowd being headed
by the squire and the beadle, but when they came up, they found only Nan
Redferne standing behind the obelisk.

"Where the devil is the old witch gone, Dick?" cried Nicholas, in
dismay.

"I thought I saw her standing there with her grand-daughter," replied
Richard; "but in truth I did not watch very closely."

"Search for her--search for her," cried Nicholas.

But neither behind the crosses, nor behind any monument, nor in any hole
or corner, nor on the other side of the churchyard wall, nor at the
back of the little hermitage or chapel, though all were quickly
examined, could the old hag be found.

On being questioned, Nan Redferne refused to say aught concerning her
grandmother's flight or place of concealment.

"I begin to think there is some truth in that strange legend of the
cross," said Nicholas. "Notwithstanding her blindness, the old hag must
have managed to read the magic verse upon it, and so have rendered
herself invisible. But we have got the young witch safe."

"Yeigh, squoire!" responded Sparshot, who had seized hold of Nance--"hoo
be safe enough."

"Nan Redferne is no witch," said Richard Assheton, authoritatively.

"Neaw witch, Mester Ruchot!" cried the beadle in amazement.

"No more than any of these lasses around us," said Richard. "Release
her, Sparshot."

"I forbid him to do so, till she has been examined," cried a sharp
voice. And the next moment Master Potts was seen pushing his way through
the crowd. "So you have found a witch, my masters. I heard your shouts,
and hurried on as fast as I could. Just in time, Master Nicholas--just
in time," he added, rubbing his hands gleefully.

"Lemme go, Simon," besought Nance.

"Neaw, neaw, lass, that munnot be," rejoined Sparshot.

"Help--save me, Master Richard!" cried the young woman.

By this time the crowd had gathered round her, yelling, hooting, and
shaking their hands at her, as if about to tear her in pieces; but
Richard Assheton planted himself resolutely before her, and pushed back
the foremost of them.

"Remove her instantly to the Abbey, Sparshot," he cried, "and let her be
kept in safe custody till Sir Ralph has time to examine her. Will that
content you, masters?"

"Neaw--neaw," responded several rough voices; "swim her!--swim her!"

"Quite right, my worthy friends, quite right," said Potts. "_Primo_, let
us make sure she is a witch--_secundo_, let us take her to the Abbey."

"There can be no doubt as to her being a witch, Master Potts," rejoined
Nicholas; "her old grand-dame, Mother Chattox, has just vanished from
our sight."

"Has Mother Chattox been here?" cried Potts, opening his round eyes to
their widest extent.

"Not many minutes since," replied Nicholas. "In fact, she may be here
still for aught I know."

"Here!--where?" cried Potts, looking round.

"You won't discover her for all your quickness," replied Nicholas. "She
has rendered herself invisible, by reciting the magical verses inscribed
on that cross."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the attorney, closely examining the mysterious
inscriptions. "What strange, uncouth characters! I can make neither head
nor tail, unless it be the devil's tail, of them."

At this moment a whoop was raised by Jem Device, who, having taken his
little sister home, had returned to the sports on the green, and now
formed part of the assemblage in the churchyard. Between the rival witch
potentates, Mothers Demdike and Chattox, it has already been said a
deadly enmity existed, and the feud was carried on with equal animosity
by their descendants; and though Jem himself came under the same
suspicion as Nan Redferne, that circumstance created no tie of interest
between them, but the contrary, and he was the most active of her
assailants. He had set up the above-mentioned cry from observing a large
rat running along the side of the wall.

"Theere hoo goes," whooped Jem, "t'owd witch, i' th' shape ov a
rotten!--loo-loo-loo!"

Half the crowd started in pursuit of the animal, and twenty sticks were
thrown at it, but a stone cast by Jem stayed its progress, and it was
instantly despatched. It did not change, however, as was expected by the
credulous hinds, into an old woman, and they gave vent to their
disappointment and rage in renewed threats against Nan Redferne. The
dead rat was hurled at her by Jem, but missing its mark, it hit Master
Potts on the head, and nearly knocked him off the cross, upon which he
had mounted to obtain a better view of the proceedings. Irritated by
this circumstance, as well as by the failure of the experiment, the
little attorney jumped down and fell to kicking the unfortunate rat,
after which, his fury being somewhat appeased, he turned to Nance, who
had sunk for support against the pedestal, and said to her--"If you will
tell us what has become of the old witch your grandmother, and undertake
to bear witness against her, you shall be set free."

"Ey'n tell ye nowt, mon," replied Nance, doggedly. "Put me to onny trial
ye like, ye shanna get a word fro me."

"That remains to be seen," retorted Potts, "but I apprehend we shall
make you speak, and pretty plainly too, before we've done with you.--You
hear what this perverse and wrong-headed young witch declares, masters,"
he shouted, again clambering upon the cross. "I have offered her
liberty, on condition of disclosing to us the manner of her diabolical
old relative's evasion, and she rejects it."

An angry roar followed, mixed with cries from Jem Device, of "swim
her!--swim her!"

"You had better tell them what you know, Nance," said Richard, in a low
tone, "or I shall have difficulty in preserving you from their fury."

"Ey darena, Master Richard," she replied, shaking her head; and then she
added firmly, "Ey winna."

Finding it useless to reason with her, and fearing also that the
infuriated crowd might attempt to put their threats into execution,
Richard turned to his cousin Nicholas, and said: "We must get her away,
or violence will be done."

"She does not deserve your compassion, Dick," replied Nicholas; "she is
only a few degrees better than the old hag who has escaped. Sparshot
here tells me she is noted for her skill in modelling clay figures."

"Yeigh, that hoo be," replied the broad-faced beadle; "hoo's
unaccountable cliver ot that sort o' wark. A clay figger os big os a six
months' barn, fashiont i' th' likeness o' Farmer Grimble o' Briercliffe
lawnd, os died last month, war seen i' her cottage, an monny others
besoide. Amongst 'em a moddle o' your lamented brother, Squoire Ruchot
Assheton o' Downham, wi' t' yeod pood off, and th' 'eart pieret thro'
an' thro' wi' pins and needles."

"Ye lien i' your teeth, Simon Sparshot!" cried Nance; regarding him
furiously.

"If the head were off, Simon, I don't see how the likeness to my poor
brother could well be recognised," said Nicholas, with a half smile.
"But let her be put to some mild trial--weighed against the church
Bible."

"Be it so," replied Potts, jumping down; "but if that fail, we must have
recourse to stronger measures. Take notice that, with all her fright,
she has not been able to shed a tear, not a single tear--a clear
witch--a clear witch!"

"Ey'd scorn to weep fo t' like o' yo!" cried Nance, disdainfully, having
now completely recovered her natural audacity.

"We'll soon break your spirit, young woman, I can promise you," rejoined
Potts.

As soon as it was known what was about to occur, the whole crowd moved
towards the church porch, Nan Redferne walking between Richard Assheton
and the beadle, who kept hold of her arm to prevent any attempt at
escape; and by the time they reached the appointed place, Ben Baggiley,
the baker, who had been despatched for the purpose, appeared with an
enormous pair of wooden scales, while Sampson Harrop, the clerk, having
visited the pulpit, came forth with the church Bible, an immense volume,
bound in black, with great silver clasps.

"Come, that's a good big Bible at all events," cried Potts, eyeing it
with satisfaction. "It looks like my honourable and singular good Lord
Chief-Justice Sir Edward Coke's learned 'Institutes of the Laws of
England,' only that that great legal tome is generally bound in
calf--law calf, as we say."

"Large as the book is, it will scarce prove heavy enough to weigh down
the witch, I opine," observed Nicholas, with a smile.

"We shall see, sir," replied Potts. "We shall see."

By this time, the scales having been affixed to a hook in the porch by
Baggiley, the sacred volume was placed on one side, and Nance set down
by the beadle on the other. The result of the experiment was precisely
what might have been anticipated--the moment the young woman took her
place in the balance, it sank down to the ground, while the other kicked
the beam.

"I hope you are satisfied now, Master Potts," cried Richard Assheton.
