her knees there to kiss her hand.

"Sister," she said, "one could never dream that you could need pardon.  I
love you so--that all you do, it seems to me must be right--whatsoever it
might be."

Clorinda drew her fair hands away and clasped them on the top of her
head, proudly, as if she crowned herself thereby, her great and splendid
eyes setting themselves upon her sister's face.

"All that I do," she said slowly, and with the steadfast high arrogance
of an empress' self--"All that I do _is_ right--for me.  I make it so by
doing it.  Do you think that I am conquered by the laws that other women
crouch and whine before, because they dare not break them, though they
long to do so?  _I_ am my own law--and the law of some others."

It was by this time the first month of the summer, and to-night there was
again a birth-night ball, at which the beauty was to dazzle all eyes; but
'twas of greater import than the one she had graced previously, it being
to celebrate the majority of the heir to an old name and estate, who had
been orphaned early, and was highly connected, counting, indeed, among
the members of his family the Duke of Osmonde, who was one of the richest
and most envied nobles in Great Britain, his dukedom being of the oldest,
his numerous estates the most splendid and beautiful, and the long
history of his family full of heroic deeds.  This nobleman was also a
distant kinsman to the Earl of Dunstanwolde, and at this ball, for the
first time for months, Sir John Oxon appeared again.

He did not arrive on the gay scene until an hour somewhat late.  But
there was one who had seen him early, though no human soul had known of
the event.

In the rambling, ill-cared for grounds of Wildairs Hall there was an old
rose-garden, which had once been the pride and pleasure of some lady of
the house, though this had been long ago; and now it was but a lonely
wilderness where roses only grew because the dead Lady Wildairs had loved
them, and Barbara and Anne had tended them, and with their own hands
planted and pruned during their childhood and young maiden days.  But of
late years even they had seemed to have forgotten it, having become
discouraged, perchance, having no gardeners to do the rougher work, and
the weeds and brambles so running riot.  There were high hedges and
winding paths overgrown and run wild; the stronger rose-bushes grew in
tangled masses, flinging forth their rich blooms among the weeds; such as
were more delicate, struggling to live among them, became more frail and
scant-blossoming season by season; a careless foot would have trodden
them beneath it as their branches grew long and trailed in the grass; but
for many months no foot had trodden there at all, and it was a beauteous
place deserted.

In the centre was an ancient broken sun-dial, which was in these days in
the midst of a sort of thicket, where a bold tangle of the finest red
roses clambered, and, defying neglect, flaunted their rich colour in the
sun.

And though the place had been so long forgotten, and it was not the
custom for it to be visited, about this garlanded broken sun-dial the
grass was a little trodden, and on the morning of the young heir's coming
of age some one stood there in the glowing sunlight as if waiting.

This was no less than Mistress Clorinda herself.  She was clad in a
morning gown of white, which seemed to make of her more than ever a tall,
transcendent creature, less a woman than a conquering goddess; and she
had piled the dial with scarlet red roses, which she was choosing to
weave into a massive wreath or crown, for some purpose best known to
herself.  Her head seemed haughtier and more splendidly held on high even
than was its common wont, but upon these roses her lustrous eyes were
downcast and were curiously smiling, as also was her ripe, arching lip,
whose scarlet the blossoms vied with but poorly.  It was a smile like
this, perhaps, which Mistress Wimpole feared and trembled before, for
'twas not a tender smile nor a melting one.  If she was waiting, she did
not wait long, nor, to be sure, would she have long waited if she had
been kept by any daring laggard.  This was not her way.

'Twas not a laggard who came soon, stepping hurriedly with light feet
upon the grass, as though he feared the sound which might be made if he
had trodden upon the gravel.  It was Sir John Oxon who came towards her
in his riding costume.

He came and stood before her on the other side of the dial, and made her
a bow so low that a quick eye might have thought 'twas almost mocking.
His feather, sweeping the ground, caught a fallen rose, which clung to
it.  His beauty, when he stood upright, seemed to defy the very morning's
self and all the morning world; but Mistress Clorinda did not lift her
eyes, but kept them upon her roses, and went on weaving.

"Why did you choose to come?" she asked.

"Why did you choose to keep the tryst in answer to my message?" he
replied to her.

At this she lifted her great shining eyes and fixed them full upon him.

"I wished," she said, "to hear what you would say--but more to _see_ you
than to hear."

"And I," he began--"I came--"

She held up her white hand with a long-stemmed rose in it--as though a
queen should lift a sceptre.

"You came," she answered, "more to see _me_ than to hear.  You made that
blunder."

"You choose to bear yourself like a goddess, and disdain me from Olympian
heights," he said.  "I had the wit to guess it would be so."

She shook her royal head, faintly and most strangely smiling.

"That you had not," was her clear-worded answer.  "That is a later
thought sprung up since you have seen my face.  'Twas quick--for you--but
not quick enough."  And the smile in her eyes was maddening.  "You
thought to see a woman crushed and weeping, her beauty bent before you,
her locks dishevelled, her streaming eyes lifted to Heaven--and you--with
prayers, swearing that not Heaven could help her so much as your deigning
magnanimity.  You have seen women do this before, you would have seen
_me_ do it--at your feet--crying out that I was lost--lost for ever.
_That_ you expected!  'Tis not here."

Debauched as his youth was, and free from all touch of heart or
conscience--for from his earliest boyhood he had been the pupil of rakes
and fashionable villains--well as he thought he knew all women and their
ways, betraying or betrayed--this creature taught him a new thing, a new
mood in woman, a new power which came upon him like a thunderbolt.

"Gods!" he exclaimed, catching his breath, and even falling back apace,
"Damnation! you are _not_ a woman!"

She laughed again, weaving her roses, but not allowing that his eyes
should loose themselves from hers.

"But now, you called me a goddess and spoke of Olympian heights," she
said; "I am not one--I am a woman who would show other women how to bear
themselves in hours like these.  Because I am a woman why should I kneel,
and weep, and rave?  What have I lost--in losing you?  I should have lost
the same had I been twice your wife.  What is it women weep and beat
their breasts for--because they love a man--because they lose his love.
They never have them."

She had finished the wreath, and held it up in the sun to look at it.
What a strange beauty was hers, as she held it so--a heavy, sumptuous
thing--in her white hands, her head thrown backward.

"You marry soon," she asked--"if the match is not broken?"

"Yes," he answered, watching her--a flame growing in his eyes and in his
soul in his own despite.

"It cannot be too soon," she said.  And she turned and faced him, holding
the wreath high in her two hands poised like a crown above her head--the
brilliant sun embracing her, her lips curling, her face uplifted as if
she turned to defy the light, the crimson of her cheek.  'Twas as if from
foot to brow the woman's whole person was a flame, rising and burning
triumphant high above him.  Thus for one second's space she stood,
dazzling his very eyesight with her strange, dauntless splendour; and
then she set the great rose-wreath upon her head, so crowning it.

"You came to see me," she said, the spark in her eyes growing to the size
of a star; "I bid you look at me--and see how grief has faded me these
past months, and how I am bowed down by it.  Look well--that you may
remember."

"I look," he said, almost panting.

"Then," she said, her fine-cut nostril pinching itself with her breath,
as she pointed down the path before her--"_go_!--back to your kennel!"

* * * * *

That night she appeared at the birth-night ball with the wreath of roses
on her head.  No other ladies wore such things, 'twas a fashion of her
own; but she wore it in such beauty and with such state that it became a
crown again even as it had been the first moment that she had put it on.
All gazed at her as she entered, and a murmur followed her as she moved
with her father up the broad oak staircase which was known through all
the country for its width and massive beauty.  In the hall below guests
were crowded, and there were indeed few of them who did not watch her as
she mounted by Sir Jeoffry's side.  In the upper hall there were guests
also, some walking to and fro, some standing talking, many looking down
at the arrivals as they came up.

"'Tis Mistress Wildairs," these murmured as they saw her.  "Clorinda, by
God!" said one of the older men to his crony who stood near him.  "And
crowned with roses!  The vixen makes them look as if they were built of
rubies in every leaf."

At the top of the great staircase there stood a gentleman, who had indeed
paused a moment, spellbound, as he saw her coming.  He was a man of
unusual height and of a majestic mien; he wore a fair periwig, which
added to his tallness; his laces and embroiderings were marvels of art
and richness, and his breast blazed with orders.  Strangely, she did not
seem to see him; but when she reached the landing, and her face was
turned so that he beheld the full blaze of its beauty, 'twas so great a
wonder and revelation to him that he gave a start.  The next moment
almost, one of the red roses of her crown broke loose from its fastenings
and fell at his very feet.  His countenance changed so that it seemed
almost, for a second, to lose some of its colour.  He stooped and picked
the rose up and held it in his hand.  But Mistress Clorinda was looking
at my Lord of Dunstanwolde, who was moving through the crowd to greet
her.  She gave him a brilliant smile, and from her lustrous eyes surely
there passed something which lit a fire of hope in his.

After she had made her obeisance to her entertainers, and her birthday
greetings to the young heir, he contrived to draw closely to her side and
speak a few words in a tone those near her could not hear.

"To-night, madam," he said, with melting fervour, "you deign to bring me
my answer as you promised."

"Yes," she murmured.  "Take me where we may be a few moments alone."

He led her to an antechamber, where they were sheltered from the gaze of
the passers-by, though all was moving gaiety about them.  He fell upon
his knee and bowed to kiss her fair hand.  Despite the sobriety of his
years, he was as eager and tender as a boy.

"Be gracious to me, madam," he implored.  "I am not young enough to wait.
Too many months have been thrown away."

"You need wait no longer, my lord," she said--"not one single hour."

And while he, poor gentleman, knelt, kissing her hand with adoring
humbleness, she, under the splendour of her crown of roses, gazed down at
his grey-sprinkled head with her great steady shining orbs, as if gazing
at some almost uncomprehended piteous wonder.

In less than an hour the whole assemblage knew of the event and talked of
it.  Young men looked daggers at Dunstanwolde and at each other; and
older men wore glum or envious faces.  Women told each other 'twas as
they had known it would be, or 'twas a wonder that at last it had come
about.  Upon the arm of her lord that was to be, Mistress Clorinda passed
from room to room like a royal bride.

As she made her first turn of the ballroom, all eyes upon her, her beauty
blazing at its highest, Sir John Oxon entered and stood at the door.  He
wore his gallant air, and smiled as ever; and when she drew near him he
bowed low, and she stopped, and bent lower in a curtsey sweeping the
ground.

'Twas but in the next room her lord led her to a gentleman who stood with
a sort of court about him.  It was the tall stranger, with the fair
periwig, and the orders glittering on his breast--the one who had started
at sight of her as she had reached the landing of the stairs.  He held
still in his hand a broken red rose, and when his eye fell on her crown
the colour mounted to his cheek.

"My honoured kinsman, his Grace the Duke of Osmonde," said her affianced
lord.  "Your Grace--it is this lady who is to do me the great honour of
becoming my Lady Dunstanwolde."

And as the deep, tawny brown eye of the man bending before her flashed
into her own, for the first time in her life Mistress Clorinda's lids
fell, and as she swept her curtsey of stately obeisance her heart struck
like a hammer against her side.




CHAPTER IX--"I give to him the thing he craves with all his soul--myself"


In a month she was the Countess of Dunstanwolde, and reigned in her
lord's great town house with a retinue of servants, her powdered lackeys
among the tallest, her liveries and equipages the richest the world of
fashion knew.  She was presented at the Court, blazing with the
Dunstanwolde jewels, and even with others her bridegroom had bought in
his passionate desire to heap upon her the magnificence which became her
so well.  From the hour she knelt to kiss the hand of royalty she set the
town on fire.  It seemed to have been ordained by Fate that her passage
through this world should be always the triumphant passage of a
conqueror.  As when a baby she had ruled the servants' hall, the kennel,
and the grooms' quarters, later her father and his boisterous friends,
and from her fifteenth birthday the whole hunting shire she lived in, so
she held her sway in the great world, as did no other lady of her rank or
any higher.  Those of her age seemed but girls yet by her side, whether
married or unmarried, and howsoever trained to modish ways.  She was but
scarce eighteen at her marriage, but she was no girl, nor did she look
one, glowing as was the early splendour of her bloom.  Her height was far
beyond the ordinary for a woman; but her shape so faultless and her
carriage so regal, that though there were men upon whom she was tall
enough to look down with ease, the beholder but felt that her tallness
was an added grace and beauty with which all women should have been
endowed, and which, as they were not, caused them to appear but
insignificant.  What a throat her diamonds blazed on, what shoulders and
bosom her laces framed, on what a brow her coronet sat and glittered.  Her
lord lived as 'twere upon his knees in enraptured adoration.  Since his
first wife's death in his youth, he had dwelt almost entirely in the
country at his house there, which was fine and stately, but had been kept
gloomily half closed for a decade.  His town establishment had, in truth,
never been opened since his bereavement; and now--an elderly man--he
returned to the gay world he had almost forgotten, with a bride whose
youth and beauty set it aflame.  What wonder that his head almost reeled
at times and that he lost his breath before the sum of his strange late
bliss, and the new lease of brilliant life which seemed to have been
given to him.

In the days when, while in the country, he had heard such rumours of the
lawless days of Sir Jeoffry Wildairs' daughter, when he had heard of her
dauntless boldness, her shrewish temper, and her violent passions, he had
been awed at the thought of what a wife such a woman would make for a
gentleman accustomed to a quiet life, and he had indeed striven hard to
restrain the desperate admiration he was forced to admit she had inspired
in him even at her first ball.

The effort had, in sooth, been in vain, and he had passed many a
sleepless night; and when, as time went on, he beheld her again and
again, and saw with his own eyes, as well as heard from others, of the
great change which seemed to have taken place in her manners and
character, he began devoutly to thank Heaven for the alteration, as for a
merciful boon vouchsafed to him.  He had been wise enough to know that
even a stronger man than himself could never conquer or rule her; and
when she seemed to begin to rule herself and bear herself as befitted her
birth and beauty, he had dared to allow himself to dream of what
perchance might be if he had great good fortune.

In these days of her union with him, he was, indeed, almost humbly amazed
at the grace and kindness she showed him every hour they passed in each
other's company.  He knew that there were men, younger and handsomer than
himself, who, being wedded to beauties far less triumphant than she,
found that their wives had but little time to spare them from the world,
which knelt at their feet, and that in some fashion they themselves
seemed to fall into the background.  But 'twas not so with this woman,
powerful and worshipped though she might be.  She bore herself with the
high dignity of her rank, but rendered to him the gracious respect and
deference due both to his position and his merit.  She stood by his side
and not before him, and her smiles and wit were bestowed upon him as
generously as to others.  If she had once been a vixen, she was surely so
no longer, for he never heard a sharp or harsh word pass her lips, though
it is true her manner was always somewhat imperial, and her lacqueys and
waiting women stood in greatest awe of her.  There was that in her
presence and in her eye before which all commoner or weaker creatures
quailed.  The men of the world who flocked to pay their court to her, and
the popinjays who followed them, all knew this look, and a tone in her
rich voice which could cut like a knife when she chose that it should do
so.  But to my Lord of Dunstanwolde she was all that a worshipped lady
could be.

"Your ladyship has made of me a happier man than I ever dared to dream of
being, even when I was but thirty," he would say to her, with reverent
devotion.  "I know not what I have done to deserve this late summer which
hath been given me."

"When I consented to be your wife," she answered once, "I swore to myself
that I would make one for you;" and she crossed the hearth to where he
sat--she was attired in all her splendour for a Court ball, and starred
with jewels--bent over his chair and placed a kiss upon his grizzled
hair.

Upon the night before her wedding with him, her sister, Mistress Anne,
had stolen to her chamber at a late hour.  When she had knocked upon the
door, and had been commanded to enter, she had come in, and closing the
door behind her, had stood leaning against it, looking before her, with
her eyes wide with agitation and her poor face almost grey.

All the tapers for which places could be found had been gathered
together, and the room was a blaze of light.  In the midst of it, before
her mirror, Clorinda stood attired in her bridal splendour of white satin
and flowing rich lace, a diamond crescent on her head, sparks of light
flaming from every point of her raiment.  When she caught sight of Anne's
reflection in the glass before her, she turned and stood staring at her
in wonder.

"What--nay, what is this?" she cried.  "What do you come for?  On my
soul, you come for something--or you have gone mad."

Anne started forward, trembling, her hands clasped upon her breast, and
fell at her feet with sobs.

"Yes, yes," she gasped, "I came--for something--to speak--to pray you--!
Sister--Clorinda, have patience with me--till my courage comes again!"
and she clutched her robe.

Something which came nigh to being a shudder passed through Mistress
Clorinda's frame; but it was gone in a second, and she touched
Anne--though not ungently--with her foot, withdrawing her robe.

"Do not stain it with your tears," she said, "'twould be a bad omen."

Anne buried her face in her hands and knelt so before her.

"'Tis not too late!" she said--"'tis not too late yet."

"For what?" Clorinda asked.  "For what, I pray you tell me, if you can
find your wits.  You go beyond my patience with your folly."

"Too late to stop," said Anne--"to draw back and repent."

"What?" commanded Clorinda--"what then should I repent me?"

"This marriage," trembled Mistress Anne, taking her poor hands from her
face to wring them.  "It should not be."

"Fool!" quoth Clorinda.  "Get up and cease your grovelling.  Did you come
to tell me it was not too late to draw back and refuse to be the Countess
of Dunstanwolde?" and she laughed bitterly.

"But it should not be--it must not!" Anne panted.  "I--I know, sister, I
know--"

Clorinda bent deliberately and laid her strong, jewelled hand on her
shoulder with a grasp like a vice.  There was no hurry in her movement or
in her air, but by sheer, slow strength she forced her head backward so
that the terrified woman was staring in her face.

"Look at me," she said.  "I would see you well, and be squarely looked
at, that my eyes may keep you from going mad.  You have pondered over
this marriage until you have a frenzy.  Women who live alone are
sometimes so, and your brain was always weak.  What is it that you know.
Look--in my eyes--and tell me."

It seemed as if her gaze stabbed through Anne's eyes to the very centre
of her brain.  Anne tried to bear it, and shrunk and withered; she would
have fallen upon the floor at her feet a helpless, sobbing heap, but the
white hand would not let her go.

"Find your courage--if you have lost it--and speak plain words," Clorinda
commanded.  Anne tried to writhe away, but could not again, and burst
into passionate, hopeless weeping.

"I cannot--I dare not!" she gasped.  "I am afraid.  You are right; my
brain is weak, and I--but that--that gentleman--who so loved you--"

"Which?" said Clorinda, with a brief scornful laugh.

"The one who was so handsome--with the fair locks and the gallant air--"

"The one you fell in love with and stared at through the window," said
Clorinda, with her brief laugh again.  "John Oxon!  He has victims
enough, forsooth, to have spared such an one as you are."

"But he loved you!" cried Anne piteously, "and it must have been that
you--you too, sister--or--or else--"  She choked again with sobs, and
Clorinda released her grasp upon her shoulder and stood upright.

"He wants none of me--nor I of him," she said, with strange sternness.
"We have done with one another.  Get up upon your feet if you would not
have me thrust you out into the corridor."

She turned from her, and walking back to her dressing-table, stood there
steadying the diadem on her hair, which had loosed a fastening when Anne
tried to writhe away from her.  Anne half sat, half knelt upon the floor,
staring at her with wet, wild eyes of misery and fear.

"Leave your kneeling," commanded her sister again, "and come here."

Anne staggered to her feet and obeyed her behest.  In the glass she could
see the resplendent reflection; but Clorinda did not deign to turn
towards her while she addressed her, changing the while the brilliants in
