employed his own powers and charms, physical and mental, from his
fifteenth year upward, without having learned the actual weight and
measure of their potency, as a man knows the weight and size of a thing
he can put into scales and measure with a yardstick. He remembered well
hours, when the fact that he was of a beauteous shape and height, and
gazed at others with a superb appealing eye, had made that difference
which lies between failure and success; he had never forgot one of the
occasions upon which the power of keeping silence under provocation or
temptation, the ability to control each feature and compel it to calm
sweetness, had served him as well as a regiment of soldiers might have
served him. Each such experience he had retained mentally for future
reference. Roxholm possessed this power to restrain himself, and to
keep silent, reflecting, and judging meanwhile, and was taller than he,
of greater grace, and unconscious state of bearing; his beauty of
countenance had but increased as he grew to manhood.

"I was the handsomest lad at Court in the year '65," his Grace of
Marlborough said once (he had been made Duke by this time). "The year
you were born I was the handsomest man in the army, they used to
say--but I was no such beauty and giant as you, Marquess. The gods were
_en veine_ when they planned you."

"When I was younger," said Roxholm, "it angered me to hear my looks
praised so much; I was boy enough to feel I must be unmanly. But
now--'tis but as it should be, that a man should have straight limbs
and a great body, and a clean-cut countenance. It should be nature--not
a thing to be remarked; it should be mere nature--and the other an
unnatural thing. 'Tis cruel that either man or woman should be weak or
uncomely. All should be as perfect parts of the great universe as are
the mountains and the sun."

"'Tis not so yet," remarked my Lord Marlborough, with his inscrutable
smile. "'Tis not so yet."

"Not yet," said Roxholm. "But let each creature live to make it so--men
that they may be clean and joyous and strong; women that they may be
mates for them. They should be as strong as we, and have as great
courage."

His Lordship smiled again. They were at the Hague at this time and in
his quarters, where he was pleased occasionally to receive the young
officer with a gracious familiarity. For reasons of his own, he wished
to know him well and understand the strengths and weaknesses of his
character. Therefore he led him into talk, and was pleased to find that
he frequently said things worth hearing, though they were often new and
somewhat daring things to be said by one of his age at this period,
when 'twas not the custom for a man to think for himself, but either to
follow the licentious follies of his fellows or accept without question
such statements as his Chaplain made concerning a somewhat unreasoning
Deity, His inflexible laws, and man's duty towards Him. That a handsome
youth, for example, should, in a serious voice and with a thoughtful
face, announce that beauty should be but nature, and ugliness regarded
as a disease, instead of humbly submitted to as the will of God, was,
indeed, a startling heresy and might have been regarded as impious,
even though so gravely said. Therefore it was my Lord Marlborough
smiled.

"I spoke to you of marriage once before," he remarked. "You bring it
back to me. Do you care for women?" bluntly.

Roxholm met his eye with his own straight, cool gaze.

"Yes, my Lord," he answered with some grimness, and said no more.

"The one you wait for has not yet come to Court, as I said that day,"
his Grace went on, and now he was grave again, and had even fallen
into a speculative tone. "But it struck me once that I heard of
her--though she is no fit companion for you yet--and Heaven knows if
she ever will be. The path before her is too full of traps for safety."

Roxholm did not speak. Whether fond of women or not, he was not given
to talking of them, and a certain reserve would have prevented his
entering upon any discussion of the future Lady Roxholm, whomsoever she
might in the future prove to be. He stood in an easy attitude, watching
with some vague curiosity the expression of his chief's countenance.
But suddenly he found himself checking a slight start, and this was
occasioned by his Lordship's next words.

"In the future I shall take pains to hear what befalls her," the Duke
said. "In two or three years' time we shall hear somewhat. She will
marry a duke--be a King's mistress, or go to ruin in some less splendid
and more tragic way. No woman is born into the world with such beauty
as they say is hers, and such wild fire in her veins, without setting
the world--or herself--in flames. A new Helen of Troy she may be, and
yet she is but the ninth daughter of a drunken Gloucestershire
baronet."

'Twas here that Roxholm found himself checking his start, but he had
not checked it soon enough to escape the observance of the quickest
sighted man in Europe.

"What!" he said, "you have heard of her?"

"I have seen her, your Grace," Roxholm answered, "on the hunting field
in Gloucestershire."

"Is she so splendid a young creature as they say? Was she in boy's
attire, as we hear her rascal father lets her ride with him?"

"I thought her a boy, and had never seen one like her," said Roxholm,
and he was amazed to feel himself disturbed as if he spoke not of a
child, but of a beauty of ripe years.

"Is she of such height and strength and wondrous development as rumour
tells us?" his Grace continued, still observing him as if with
interest. "At twelve years old, 'tis told, she is tall enough for
eighteen, and can fence and leap hedges and break horses, and that she
plays the tyrant over men four times her age."

"I saw her but once, your Grace," replied Roxholm. "She was tall and
strong and handsome."

"Go and see her again, my lord Marquess," said the Captain-General,
turning to his papers. "But do not wait too long. Such beauties must be
caught early."

When he went back to his quarters, my lord Marquess strolled through
the quaint streets of the town slowly, and looking upon the ground as
he walked. For some reason he felt vaguely depressed, and, searching
within himself for a reason, recognised that the slight cloud resting
upon his spirits recalled to him a feeling of his early childhood--no
other than the sense of restless unhappiness he had felt years ago when
he had first overheard the story of the wretched Lady of Wildairs and
her neglected children.

"Yes," he said, "'tis almost the same feeling, though then I was a
child, and now I am a man. When I saw the girl at the hunt, and rode
home afterwards with Dunstanwolde, listening to her story, there was
gloom in the air. There is that in it to make a man's spirit heavy. I
must not think of her."

But Fate herself was against him. For one thing, my Lord Marlborough
had brought back to him, with a few words, with strange vividness the
picture of the brilliant young figure in its hunting scarlet, its
gallop across the field with head held high, its flying leap over the
hedge, and the gay insolence and music of its laugh.

"A child could not have made a man so remember her," he said,
impatiently. "She was half woman then--half lovely, youthful devil.
There is an ill savour about it all."

When he entered his rooms he found guests waiting him. A
pleasure-loving young ensign, whom he had known at Oxford, and two of
the lad's cronies. They were a trio of young scapegraces, delighted
with any prospect of adventure, and regarding their martial duties
chiefly as opportunities to shine in laced coats and cocked hats, and
swagger with a warlike air and a military ogle when they passed a
pretty woman in the street. It was the pretty woman these young English
soldiers had come to do battle with, and hoped to take captive with
flying colours and flourish of trumpets.

They were in the midst of great laughter when Roxholm entered, and
young Tantillion, the ensign, sprang up to meet him in the midst of a
gay roar. The lad had been one of his worshippers at the University,
and loved him fondly, coming to him with all sorts of confidences, to
pour forth his love difficulties, to grumble at his military duties
when they interfered with his pleasures, to borrow money from him to
pay his gaming debts.

"He has been with my Lord Marlborough," he cried; "I know he has by his
sober countenance! We are ready to cheer thee up, Roxholm, with the
jolliest story. 'Tis of the new beauty, who is but twelve years old and
has set half the world talking."

"Mistress Clorinda Wildairs of Wildairs Hall in Gloucestershire," put
in Bob Langford, one of the cronies, a black-eyed lad of twenty.
"Perhaps your Lordship has heard of her, since she is so much gossiped
of--Mistress Clorinda Wildairs, who has been brought up half boy by her
father and his cronies, and is already the strappingest beauty in
England."

"He is too great a gentleman to have heard of such an ill-mannered
young hoyden," said Tantillion, "but we will tell him. 'Twas my sister
Betty's letter--writ from Warwickshire--set us on," and he pulled forth
a scrawled girlish-looking epistle from his pocket and spread it on the
table. "Shalt hear it, Roxholm? Bet is a minx, and 'tis plain she is
green with jealousy of the other girl--but 'tis the best joke I have
heard for many a day."

And forthwith Roxholm must sit down and hear the letter read and listen
to their comments thereupon, and their shouts of boyish laughter.

Little Lady Betty Tantillion, who was an embryo coquette of thirteen,
had been to visit her relations in Warwickshire, and during her stay
among them had found the chief topic of conversation a certain mad
creature over the borders of Gloucestershire--a Mistress Clorinda
Wildairs, who was the scandal of the county, and plainly the delight of
all the tongue-waggers.

"And oh, Tom, she is a grate thing, almost as tall as a woman though
she is but twelve years of age," wrote her young Ladyship, whose
spelling, by the way, was by no means as correct as her sense of the
proprieties. "Her father, Sir Jeoffry, allows her to ride in boys'
clothes, which is indecent for a young lady even at her time of life.
Brother Tom, how would you like to see your sister Betty astride a
hunter, in breeches? Lady Maddon (she is the slender, graceful buty who
is called the 'Willow Wand' by the gentlemen who are her servants)--she
saith that this girl is a coarse thing and has so little modisty that
she is proud to show her legs, thinking men will admire them, but she
is mistaken, for gentlemen like a modist woman who is slight and
delicate. She (Mistress Clo--as they call her) has big, bold, black
eyes and holds her chin in the air and her mouth looks as red as if
'twere painted every hour. Every genteel woman speaks ill of her and is
ashamed of her bold ways. And she is not even handsome, Tom, for all
their talk, for I have seen her myself and _think nothing of her
looks_. Her breeding is said to be shameful and her langwidge a
disgrace to her secks. The gentlemen are always telling tales of her
ways, and they laugh and make such a noise when they talk about her
over their wine. At our Aunt Flixton's one day, my cousin Gill and me
stood behind a tree to hear what was being said by some men who were
telling stories of her (which was no wrong because we wished to learn a
lesson so that we might not behave like her). Some of their words we
did not understand, but some we did and 'twas of a Chaplain (they
called him a fat-chopped hipercrit) who went to counsel her to behayve
more decent, and she no doubt was impudent and tried to pleas him, for
he forgot his cloth and put his arms sudden about her and kist her. And
the men roared shameful, for the one who told it said she knocked him
down on his knees and held him there with one hand on his shoulder
while she boxed his face from side to side till his nose bled in
streams, and cried she (Oh, Tom!) 'Damn thy fat head,' each time she
struck him 'if that is thy way to convert women, this is my way to
convert men.' And he could scarce crawl away weeping, his blood and
tears streeming down his face, which shows she hath not a reverence
even for the cloth itself. Dere brother Thomas, if you should meet her
in England when you come back from the wars, and she is a woman, I do
pray you will not be like the other gentlemen and be so silly as to
praise her, for such creatures should not be encorragd."

Throughout the reading of the letter uproarious shouts of laughter had
burst forth at almost every sentence, and when he had finished the
epistle, little Tantillion fell forward, his face on his arms on the
table, his mirth almost choking him, while the others leaned back and
roared. 'Twas only Roxholm who was not overcome, the story not seeming
so comical to him as to the others, and yet there were points at which
he himself could not help but laugh.

"'Damn thy fat head,'" shrieked Tom Tantillion, "'If that is thy way to
convert women, this is mine to convert men.' Oh, Lord! I think I see
the parson!"

"With his fat, slapped face and his streaming eyes and bloody nose!"
shouted Langford.

"Serve him damn right!" said Tantillion, sobering and wiping his own
eyes. "To put their heads into such hornets' nests would make a lot of
them behave more decent." And then he picked up the letter again and
made brotherly comments upon it.

"'Tis just like a minx of a girl to think a man cannot see through her
spite," he said. "Bet is dying to be a woman and have the fellows
ogling her. She is a pretty chit and will be the languishing kind, like
the die-away Maddon who is so 'modist.' She is thin enough to be made
'modist' by it. No breeches for her, but farthingales and 'modesty
pieces' high enough to graze her chin. 'Some of their words we did not
understand'"--reading from the letter, and he looked at the company
with a large comprehensive wink. "'Her breeding is disgraceful and her
langwidge a disgrace to her secks'--Well, I'll be hanged if she isn't a
girl after a man's own heart, if she's handsome enough to dress like a
lad, and has the spirit to ride and leap like one--and can slap a
Chaplain's face for him when he plays the impudent goat. Aren't you of
my opinion, Roxholm, for all you don't laugh as loud as the rest of us?
Aren't you of my mind?"

"Yes," said Roxholm, who for a few moments had been gazing at the wall
with a somewhat fierce expression.

"Hello!" exclaimed Tantillion, not knowing the meaning of it. "What are
you thinking of?"

Roxholm recovered himself, but his smile was rather a grim one.

"I think of the Chaplain," he said, "and how I should like to have
dealt with him myself--after young Mistress Wildairs let him go."




_CHAPTER IX_

_Sir John Oxon Lays a Wager at Cribb's Coffee House_.


This is to be no story of wars and battles, of victories and historic
events, such great engines being but touched upon respectfully, as
their times and results formed part of the atmosphere of the life of a
gentleman of rank who moved in the world affected by them, and among
such personages as were most involved in the stirring incidents of
their day. That which is to be told is but the story of a man's life
and the love which was the greatest power in it--the thing which
brought to him the fiercest struggles, the keenest torture, and the
most perfect joy.

During the next two years Gerald Mertoun saw some pretty service and
much change of scene, making the "grand tour," as it were, under
circumstances more exciting and of more moment to the world at large
than is usually the case when a gentleman makes it. He so acquitted
himself on several occasions that England heard of him and prophesied
that if my Lord Marlborough's head were taken off in action there was a
younger hero who might fill his place. At the news of each battle,
whether it ended in victory or not, old Rowe rang the bells at
Camylott, rejoicing that even if the enemy was not routed with great
slaughter, my lord Marquess was still alive to fight another day. At
Blenheim he so bore himself that the Duke talked long and gravely with
him in private, laying before him all the triumphs a career of arms
would bring to him.

"Twenty years hence, Roxholm," he said, watching him with his keen
glance as he ever did, "you might take my place, had England such
questions to settle as she has to-day. In twenty years I shall be
seventy-four. You were hammered from the metal nature cast me in, and
you could take any man's place if 'twas your will. I could have taken
any man's place I had chosen to take, by God, and so can you. If a
man's brain and body are built in a certain way he can be soldier,
bishop, physician, financier, statesman, King; and he will have like
power in whatsoever he chooses to be, or Fate chooses that he shall be.
As statesman, King, or soldier, the world will think him greatest
because such things glitter in the eye and make more sound; but the
strong man will be strong if Fortune makes him a huckster, and none can
hide him. If Louis XV is as great a schemer as the fourteenth Louis has
been, you may lead armies if you choose; but you will not choose, I
think. You do not love it, Roxholm--you do not love it."

"No," answered Roxholm; "I do not love it. I can fight--any man can
fight who has not white blood--and ours has been a fighting house; but
mowing men down by thousands, cutting their throats, burning towns, and
desolating villages filled with maddened men and shrieking women and
children, does not set my blood in a flame as it does the blood of a
man who is born for victorious slaughter. I loathe so the slaughter
that I hate the victory. No; there are other things I can do better for
England, and be happier in doing them."

"I have known that," said the Captain-General, "even when I have seen
you sweep by, followed by your men, at your most splendid moment. I
have known it most when we have sate together and talked--as 'tis not
my way to talk to much older men."

They had so talked together, and upon matters much more important than
the world knew. His Grace of Marlborough's years had been given to
other things than letters. He could win a great victory with far
greater ease than he could pen the dispatch announcing it when 'twas
gained. "Of all things," he once said to his Duchess, "I do not love
writing." He possessed the faculty of using all men and things that
came into his way, and there were times when he found of value the
services of a young nobleman whose education and abilities were of the
highest, and who felt deeply honoured by his unusual confidence, and
was also silent and discreet both through taste and by nature. Older
men were oftenest privately envious and ambitious; and a man who has
desires for place and power is not to be trusted by one who has gained
the highest and is attacked by jealousy on all sides. This man was
rich, of high rank, and desired nothing his Grace wished to retain;
besides this, his nature was large and so ruled by high honour that
'twas not in him to scheme or parley with schemers. So it befel that,
despite his youth, he enjoyed the privilege of being treated as if his
years had been as ripe as his intellect. He knew and learned many
things. Less was hid from him than from any other man in the army, had
the truth been known. When 'twas a burning necessity for the great man
to cross to England to persuade her Majesty to change her ministers,
Roxholm knew the processes by which the end was reached. He had
knowledge of all the feverish fits through which political England
passed, in greater measure than he himself was conscious of. His
reflections upon the affairs of Portugal and their management, his
belief in the importance of the Emperor's reconciliation with the
Protestants of Hungary, and of many a serious matter, were taken into
consideration and pondered over when he knew it not. In hastening
across the Channel to the English Court, in journeying to Berlin to
encounter great personages, in hearing of and beholding intrigue,
triumphs, disappointments, pomps, and vanities, he studied in the best
possible school the art and science of statesmanship, and won for
himself a place in men's minds and memories.

When, after Blenheim, he returned to England with a slight wound, his
appearance at Court was regarded as an event of public interest, and
commented upon with flowery rhetoric in the journals. The ladies vowed
he had actually grown taller than before, that his deep eyes had a
power no woman could resist, and that there was indeed no gentleman in
England to compare with him either for intellect, beauty, or breeding.
Her Majesty showed him a particular favour, and it was rumoured that
she had remarked that, had one of her many dead infants lived and grown
to such a manhood, she would have been a happy woman. Duchess Sarah
melted to him as none had ever seen her melt to man before. She had
