head, for I dared not trust my foreign tongue.

Before I reached the gateway they had joined me, which I was glad of,
fearing more insolence from the soldiers.  But these men held their
peace, looking grave, and even affrighted, being of them who had heard
the prophecy of the Maiden and seen its fulfilment.

"Have ye found the body of that man?" said Poulengy to a
sergeant-at-arms.

"Nay, sir, we deem that his armour weighed him down, for he never rose
once, though that Scot's head was seen thrice and no more.  Belike they
are good, peaceful friends at the bottom of the fosse together."

"Of what man speak you?" asked the Maiden of Poulengy.

"Of him that blasphemed as we went by an hour ago.  Wrestling with a Scot
on some quarrel, they broke the palisade, and--lo! there are joiners
already mending it.  'Tis old and frail.  The gentle Dauphin is over poor
to keep the furnishings of his castle as a king should do."

The Maiden grew wan as sun-dried grass in summer when she heard this
story told.  Crossing herself, she said--

"Alas!  I warned him, but he died unconfessed.  I will do what I may to
have Masses said for the repose of his soul, poor man: and he so young!"

With that she wept, for she wept readily, even for a less thing than such
a death as was that archer's.

We had now crossed the drawbridge, whereat my heart beat more lightly,
and the Maiden told Poulengy that she would go to the house where she
lodged, near the castle.

"And thence," she said, "I must fare into the town, for I have promised
to visit a damsel of my friends, one Heliote Poulvoir, if I may find my
way thither.  Know you, gentle damsel," she said to me, "where she
abides?  Or perchance you can lead me thither, if it lies on your way."

"I was even going thither, Pucelle," I said, mincing in my speech;
whereat she laughed, for of her nature she was merry.

"Scots are Heliote and her father, and a Scot are not you also, damsel?
your speech betrays you," she said; "you all cling close together, you
Scots, as beseems you well, being strangers in this sweet land of
France"; and her face lighted up as she spoke the name she loved, and my
heart worshipped her with reverence.

"Farewell," she cried to Poulengy, smiling graciously, and bowing with
such a courtesy as a queen might show, for I noted it myself, as did all
men, that this peasant girl had the manners of the Court, being schooled,
as I deem, by the greatest of ladies, her friends St. Margaret and St.
Catherine.

Then, with an archer, who had ridden beside her from Vaucouleurs,
following after her as he ever did, the Maiden and I began to go down the
steep way that led to the town.  Little she spoke, and all my thought was
to enter the house before Elliot could spy me in my strange disguise.




CHAPTER VII--CONCERNING THE WRATH OF ELLIOT, AND THE JEOPARDY OF NORMAN
LESLIE


The while we went down into the city of Chinon, a man attired as a maid,
a maiden clad as a man--strange companions!--we held but little converse.
Her mind, belike, was on fire with a great light of hope, of which
afterwards I learned, and the end of the days of trouble and of men's
disbelief seemed to her to be drawing near.  We may not know what visions
of victory and of auxiliary angels, of her King crowned, and fair France
redeemed and at peace, were passing through her fancy.  Therefore she was
not fain to talk, being at all times a woman of few words; and in this,
as in so many other matters, unlike most of her sex.

On my side I had more than enough to think of, for my case and present
jeopardy were enough to amaze older and wiser heads than mine.  For,
imprimis, I had slain one of the King's guards; and, moreover, had struck
the first blow, though my adversary, indeed, had given me uttermost
provocation.  But even if my enemies allowed me to speak in my own
defence, which might scarcely be save by miracle, it was scantly possible
for me to prove that the other had insulted me and my country.  Some
little hope I had that Sir Patrick Ogilvie, now constable of the Scottish
men-at-arms in France, or Sir Hugh Kennedy, or some other of our knights,
might take up my quarrel, for the sake of our common blood and country,
we Scots always backing each the other when abroad.  Yet, on the other
hand, it was more probable that I might be swinging, with a flock of
crows pecking at my face, before any of my countrymen could speak a word
for me with the King.

It is true that they who would most eagerly have sought my life deemed me
already dead, drowned in the fosse, and so would make no search for me.
Yet, as soon as I went about my master's affairs, as needs I must, I
would be known and taken; and, as we say in our country proverb, "my
craig would ken the weight of my hurdies." {12} None the less, seeing
that the soldiers deemed me dead, I might readily escape at once from
Chinon, and take to the roads again, if but I could reach my master's
house unseen, and get rid of this foolish feminine gear of cap and
petticoat which now I wore to my great shame and discomfort.

But on this hand lay little hope; for, once on the road, I should be in a
worse jeopardy than ever before, as an apprentice fled from my master,
and, moreover, with blood on my hands.  Moreover, I could ill brook the
thought of leaving Elliot, to whom my heart went forth in love, and of
missing my chance to strike a blow in the wars for the Maiden, and
against the English; of which reward I had the promise from my master.
Fortune, and fame, and love, if I were to gain what every young man most
desires, were only to be won by remaining at Chinon; but there, too, the
face of death was close to mine--as, indeed, death, or at least shame and
poverty, lay ambushed for me on all sides.

Here I sadly remembered how, with a light heart, I had left St. Andrews,
deeming that the story of my life was now about to begin, as it did for
many young esquires of Greece and other lands, concerning whom I had read
in romances.  Verily in the tale of my adventures hitherto there had been
more cuffs than crowns, more shame than honour; and, as to winning my
spurs, I was more in point to win a hempen rope, and in my end disgrace
my blood.

Now, as if these perils were not enough to put a man beside himself,
there was another risk which, even more than these, took up my thoughts.
Among all my dangers and manifold distresses, this raised its head
highest in my fancy, namely, the fear that my love should see me in my
outlandish guise, clad in woman's weeds, and carrying on my head a
woman's burden.  It was not so much that she must needs laugh and hold me
in little account.  Elliot laughed often, so that now it was not her
mirth, to which she was ever ready, but her wrath (whereto she was ready
also) that I held in awful regard.  For her heart and faith, in a
marvellous manner passing the love of women, were wholly set on this
maid, in whose company I now fared.  And, if the Maid went in men's
attire (as needs she must, for modesty's sake, who was about men's
business, in men's company), here was I attending her in woman's gear, as
if to make a mock of her, though in my mind I deemed her no less than a
sister of the saints.  And Elliot was sure to believe that I carried
myself thus in mockery and to make laughter; for, at that time, there
were many in France who mocked, as did that soldier whose death I had
seen and caused.  Thus I stood in no more danger of death, great as was
that risk, than in jeopardy of my mistress's favour, which, indeed, of
late I had been in some scant hope at last to win.  Thus, on all hands, I
seemed to myself as sore bestead as ever man was, and on no side saw any
hope of succour.

I mused so long and deep on these things, that the thought which might
have helped me came to me too late, namely, to tell all my tale to the
Maiden herself, and throw me on her mercy.  Nay, even when at last and
late this light shone on my mind, I had shame to speak to her,
considering the marvellous thing which I had just beheld of her, in the
fulfilment of her prophecy.  But now my master's house was in sight, at
the turning from the steep stairs and the wynd, and there stood Elliot on
the doorstep, watching and waiting for the Maid, as a girl may wait for
her lover coming from the wars.

There was no time given me to slink back and skulk in the shadow of the
corner of the wynd; for, like a greyhound in speed, Elliot had flown to
us and was kneeling to the Maid, who, with a deep blush and some anger in
her face--for she loved no such obeisances--bade her rise, and so kissed
and embraced her, as young girls use among themselves when they are
friends and fain of each other.  I had turned myself to go apart into the
shadow of the corner, as secretly as I might, when I ran straight into
the arms of the archer that followed close behind us.  On this encounter
he gave a great laugh, and, I believe, would have kissed me; but, the
Maiden looking round, he stood erect and grave as a soldier on guard, for
the Maiden would suffer no light loves and daffing.

"Whither make you, damsel, in such haste?" she cried to me.  "Come, let
me present you to this damsel, my friend--and one of your own country-
women.  Elliot, ma mie," she said to my mistress, "here is this kind
lass, a Scot like yourself, who has guided me all the way from the castle
hither, and, faith, the way is hard to find.  Do you thank her for me,
and let her sit down in your house: she must be weary with the weight of
her basket and her linen"--for these, when she spoke to me, I had laid on
the ground.  With this she led me up to Elliot by the hand, who began to
show me very gracious countenance, and to thank me, my face burning all
the while with confusion and fear of her anger.

Suddenly a new look, such as I had never seen before on her face in her
light angers, came into her eyes, which grew hard and cold, her mouth
also showing stiff; and so she stood, pale, gazing sternly, and as one
unable to speak.  Then--

"Go out of my sight," she said, very low, "and from my father's house!
Forth with you for a mocker and a gangrel loon!"--speaking in our common
Scots,--"and herd with the base thieves from whom you came, coward and
mocking malapert!"

The storm had fallen on my head, even as I feared it must, and I stood as
one bereft of speech and reason.

The Maid knew no word of our speech, and this passion of Elliot's, and so
sudden a change from kindness to wrath, were what she might not
understand.

"Elliot, ma mie," she said, very sweetly, "what mean you by this anger?
The damsel has treated me with no little favour.  Tell me, I pray, in
what she has offended."

But Elliot, not looking at her, said to me again, and this time tears
leaped up in her eyes--"Forth with you! begone, ere I call that archer to
drag you before the judges of the good town."

I was now desperate, for, clad as I was, the archer had me at an avail,
and, if I were taken before the men of the law, all would be known, and
my shrift would be short.

"Gracious Pucelle," I said, in French, turning to the Maiden, "my life,
and the fortune of one who would gladly fight to the death by your side,
are in your hands.  For the love of the blessed saints, your sisters, and
of Him who sends you on your holy mission, pray this demoiselle to let me
enter the house with you, and tell my tale to you and her.  If I satisfy
you not of my honour and good intent, I am ready, in this hour, to go
before the men of law, and deliver myself up to their justice.  For
though my life is in jeopardy, I dread death less than the anger of this
honourable demoiselle.  And verily this is a matter of instant life or
death."

So saying, I clasped my hands in the manner of one in prayer, setting all
my soul into my speech, as a man desperate.

The Maiden had listened very gravely, and sweetly she smiled when my
prayer was ended.

"Verily," she said to me, "here is deeper water than I can fathom.
Elliot, ma mie, you hear how gently, and in what distress, this fair lass
beseeches us."

"Fair lass!" cried Elliot: and then broke off between a sob and a laugh,
her hand catching at her side.

"If you love me," said the Maid, looking on her astonished, and not
without anger--"if you love me, as you have said, you that are the first
of my comforters, and, till this day, my only friend in your strange
town, let the lass come in and tell us her tale.  For, even if she be
distraught, and beside herself, as I well deem, I am sent to be a friend
of all them that suffer.  Moreover, ma mie, I have glad tidings for you,
which I am longing to speak, but speak it I will never, while the lass
goes thus in terror and fear of death or shame."

In saying these last words, the fashion of her countenance was changed to
a sweet entreaty and command, such as few could have beheld and denied
her what she craved, and she laid her hand lightly on Elliot's shoulder.

"Come," said Elliot, "be it as you will; come in with me; and
you"--turning to myself--"do you follow us."

They passed into the house, I coming after, and the archer waiting at the
door.

"Let none enter," said the Maiden to her archer, "unless any come to me
from the King, or unless it be the master of the house."

We passed into the chamber where my master was wont to paint his missals
and psalters when he would be alone.  Then Elliot very graciously bade
the Maiden be seated, but herself stood up, facing me.

"Gracious Maiden, and messenger of the holy saints," she said, "this
lass, as you deem her, is no woman, but a man, my father's apprentice,
who has clad himself thus to make of you a mockery and a laughing-stock,
because that you, being a maid, go attired as a man, by the will of Them
who sent you to save France.  Have I said enough, and do I well to be
angry?" and her eyes shone as she spoke.

The Maiden's brows met in wrath; she gazed upon me steadfastly, and I
looked--sinful man that I am!--to see her hand go to the hilt of the
sword that she wore.  But, making no motion, she only said--

"And thou, wherefore hast thou mocked at one who did thee no evil, and at
this damsel, thy master's daughter?"

"Gentle Maiden," I said, "listen to me for but a little moment.  It may
be, when thou hast heard all, that thou wilt still be wroth with me,
though not for mockery, which was never in my mind.  But the gentle
damsel, thy friend, will assuredly pardon me, who have already put my
life in peril for thy sake, and for the sake of our dear country of
Scotland and her good name."

"Thy life in peril for me!  How mean you?  I stood in no danger, and I
never saw your face before."

"Yet hast thou saved my life," I said; "but of that we may devise
hereafter.  I am, indeed, though a gentleman by blood and birth, the
apprentice of the father of this damsel, thy friend, who is himself a
gentleman and of a good house, but poverty drives men to strange shifts.
This day I went with my master to the castle, and I was on the drawbridge
when thou, with the gentlemen thy esquires, passed over it to see the
King.  On that bridge a man-at-arms spoke to thee shameful words,
blaspheming the holy name of God.  No sooner hadst thou gone by than he
turned on me, reviling my native country of Scotland.  Then I, not
deeming that to endure such taunts became my birth and breeding, struck
him on his lying mouth.  Then, as we wrestled on the bridge, we both
struck against the barrier, which was low, frail, and old, so that it
gave way under our weight, and we both fell into the moat.  When I rose
he was not in sight, otherwise I would have saved him by swimming, for I
desire to have the life of no man on my hands in private quarrel.  But
the archers shot at me from the drawbridge, so that I had to take thought
for myself.  By swimming under the water I escaped, behind a jutting
rock, to a secret stair, whence I pushed my way into a chamber of the
castle.  Therein was a damsel, busy with the linen, who, of her goodwill,
clad me in this wretched apparel above my own garb, and so, for that
time, saved my life, and I passed forth unknown; but yet hath caused me
to lose what I prize more highly than life--that is, the gracious
countenance of this gentle lady, thy friend and my master's daughter,
whom it is my honour and duty in all things to please and serve.  Tell
me, then, do I merit your wrath as a jester and a mock-maker, or does
this gentle lady well to be angry with her servitor?"

The Maiden crossed herself, and murmured a prayer for the soul of him who
had died in the moat.  But Elliot instantly flew to me, and, dragging off
my woman's cap, tore with her fair hands at the white linen smock about
my neck and waist, so that it was rent asunder and fell on the floor,
leaving me clad in my wet doublet and hose.

At this sight, without word spoken, she broke out into the merriest
laughter that ever I heard, and the most welcome; and the Maid too,
catching the malady of her mirth, laughed low and graciously, so that to
see and hear her was marvel.

"Begone!" cried Elliot--"begone, and shift thy dripping gear"; and, as I
fled swiftly to my chamber, I heard her laughter yet, though there came a
sob into it; but for the Maid, she had already stinted in her mirth ere I
left the room.

In this strange and unseemly fashion did I first come into the knowledge
of this admirable Maid--whom, alas! I was to see more often sad than
merry, and weeping rather than laughing, though, even in her utmost need,
her heart could be light and her mirth free: a manner that is uncommon
even among brave men, but, in women, never known by me save in her.  For
it is the way of women to be very busy and seriously concerned about the
smallest things, whereat a man only smiles.  But she, with her life at
stake, could pluck gaiety forth of danger, if the peril threatened none
but herself.  These manners of hers I learned to know and marvel at in
the later days that came too soon; but now in my chamber, I shifted my
wet raiment for dry with a heart wondrous light.  My craig {13} was in
peril, as we say, neither less nor more than half an hour agone, but I
had escaped the anger of Elliot; and even, as I deemed, had won more of
her good countenance, seeing that I had struck a blow for Scotland and
for her friend.  This thought made me great cheer in my heart; as I
heard, from the room below, the voices of the two girls devising together
very seriously for nigh the space of an hour.  But, knowing that they
might have matters secret between themselves to tell of, for the Maiden
had said that she brought good tidings, I kept coy and to myself in my
little upper chamber.  To leave the house, indeed, was more than my life
was worth.  Now to fly and hide was what I could not bring myself to
venture; here I would stay where my heart was, and take what fortune the
saints might send.  So I endured to wait, and not gladden myself with the
sight of Elliot, and the knowledge of how I now stood with her.  To me
this was great penance, but at last the voices ceased, and, looking
secretly from the window, I saw the Maiden depart, her archer following
her.

Now I could no longer bridle in my desire to be with Elliot, and learn
whether I was indeed forgiven, and how I stood in her favour.  So,
passing down the stair that led from my cubicle, I stood at the door of
