



XVIII

THE HOMESTEADER'S MARRIAGE AND A LITTLE FUNERAL


     _December 2, 1912._

DEAR MRS. CONEY,--

Every time I get a new letter from you I get a new inspiration, and I
am always glad to hear from you.

I have often wished I might tell you all about my Clyde, but have not
because of two things. One is I could not even begin without telling
you what a good man he is, and I didn't want you to think I could do
nothing but brag. The other reason is the haste I married in. I am
ashamed of that. I am afraid you will think me a Becky Sharp of a
person. But although I married in haste, I have no cause to repent.
That is very fortunate because I have never had one bit of leisure to
repent in. So I am lucky all around. The engagement was powerfully
short because both agreed that the trend of events and ranch work
seemed to require that we be married first and do our "sparking"
afterward. You see, we had to chink in the wedding between times, that
is, between planting the oats and other work that must be done early or
not at all. In Wyoming ranchers can scarcely take time even to be
married in the springtime. That having been settled, the license was
sent for by mail, and as soon as it came Mr. Stewart saddled Chub and
went down to the house of Mr. Pearson, the justice of the peace and a
friend of long standing. I had never met any of the family and
naturally rather dreaded to have them come, but Mr. Stewart was firm in
wanting to be married at home, so he told Mr. Pearson he wanted him and
his family to come up the following Wednesday and serve papers on the
"wooman i' the hoose." They were astonished, of course, but being such
good friends they promised him all the assistance they could render.
They are quite the dearest, most interesting family! I have since
learned to love them as my own.

Well, there was no time to make wedding clothes, so I had to "do up"
what I did have. Isn't it queer how sometimes, do what you can, work
will keep getting in the way until you can't get anything done? That is
how it was with me those few days before the wedding; so much so that
when Wednesday dawned everything was topsy-turvy and I had a very
strong desire to run away. But I always did hate a "piker," so I stood
pat. Well, I had most of the dinner cooked, but it kept me hustling to
get the house into anything like decent order before the old dog
barked, and I knew my moments of liberty were limited. It was blowing a
perfect hurricane and snowing like midwinter. I had bought a beautiful
pair of shoes to wear on that day, but my vanity had squeezed my feet a
little, so while I was so busy at work I had kept on a worn old pair,
intending to put on the new ones later; but when the Pearsons drove up
all I thought about was getting them into the house where there was
fire, so I forgot all about the old shoes and the apron I wore.

I had only been here six weeks then, and was a stranger. That is why I
had no one to help me and was so confused and hurried. As soon as the
newcomers were warm, Mr. Stewart told me I had better come over by him
and stand up. It was a large room I had to cross, and how I did it
before all those strange eyes I never knew. All I can remember very
distinctly is hearing Mr. Stewart saying, "I will," and myself chiming
in that I would, too. Happening to glance down, I saw that I had
forgotten to take off my apron or my old shoes, but just then Mr.
Pearson pronounced us man and wife, and as I had dinner to serve right
away I had no time to worry over my odd toilet. Anyway the shoes were
comfortable and the apron white, so I suppose it could have been
worse; and I don't think it has ever made any difference with the
Pearsons, for I number them all among my most esteemed friends.

It is customary here for newlyweds to give a dance and supper at the
hall, but as I was a stranger I preferred not to, and so it was a long
time before I became acquainted with all my neighbors. I had not
thought I should ever marry again. Jerrine was always such a dear
little pal, and I wanted to just knock about foot-loose and free to see
life as a gypsy sees it. I had planned to see the Cliff-Dwellers' home;
to live right there until I caught the spirit of the surroundings
enough to live over their lives in imagination anyway. I had planned to
see the old missions and to go to Alaska; to hunt in Canada. I even
dreamed of Honolulu. Life stretched out before me one long, happy
jaunt. I aimed to see all the world I could, but to travel unknown
bypaths to do it. But first I wanted to try homesteading.

But for my having the grippe, I should never have come to Wyoming. Mrs.
Seroise, who was a nurse at the institution for nurses in Denver while
I was housekeeper there, had worked one summer at Saratoga, Wyoming. It
was she who told me of the pine forests. I had never seen a pine until
I came to Colorado; so the idea of a home among the pines fascinated
me. At that time I was hoping to pass the Civil-Service examination,
with no very definite idea as to what I would do, but just to be
improving my time and opportunity. I never went to a public school a
day in my life. In my childhood days there was no such thing in the
Indian Territory part of Oklahoma where we lived, so I have had to try
hard to keep learning. Before the time came for the examination I was
so discouraged because of the grippe that nothing but the mountains,
the pines, and the clean, fresh air seemed worth while; so it all came
about just as I have written you.

So you see I was very deceitful. Do you remember, I wrote you of a
little baby boy dying? That was my own little Jamie, our first little
son. For a long time my heart was crushed. He was such a sweet,
beautiful boy. I wanted him so much. He died of erysipelas. I held him
in my arms till the last agony was over. Then I dressed the beautiful
little body for the grave. Clyde is a carpenter; so I wanted him to
make the little coffin. He did it every bit, and I lined and padded it,
trimmed and covered it. Not that we couldn't afford to buy one or that
our neighbors were not all that was kind and willing; but because it
was a sad pleasure to do everything for our little first-born
ourselves.

As there had been no physician to help, so there was no minister to
comfort, and I could not bear to let our baby leave the world without
leaving any message to a community that sadly needed it. His little
message to us had been love, so I selected a chapter from John and we
had a funeral service, at which all our neighbors for thirty miles
around were present. So you see, our union is sealed by love and
welded by a great sorrow.

Little Jamie was the first little Stewart. God has given me two more
precious little sons. The old sorrow is not so keen now. I can bear to
tell you about it, but I never could before. When you think of me, you
must think of me as one who is truly happy. It is true, I want a great
many things I haven't got, but I don't want them enough to be
discontented and not enjoy the many blessings that are mine. I have my
home among the blue mountains, my healthy, well-formed children, my
clean, honest husband, my kind, gentle milk cows, my garden which I
make myself. I have loads and loads of flowers which I tend myself.
There are lots of chickens, turkeys, and pigs which are my own special
care. I have some slow old gentle horses and an old wagon. I can load
up the kiddies and go where I please any time. I have the best, kindest
neighbors and I have my dear absent friends. Do you wonder I am so
happy? When I think of it all, I wonder how I can crowd all my joy into
one short life. I don't want you to think for one moment that you are
bothering me when I write you. It is a real pleasure to do so. You're
always so good to let me tell you everything. I am only afraid of
trying your patience too far. Even in this long letter I can't tell you
all I want to; so I shall write you again soon. Jerrine will write too.
Just now she has very sore fingers. She has been picking gooseberries,
and they have been pretty severe on her brown little paws.

With much love to you, I am

  "Honest and truly" yours,
    ELINORE RUPERT STEWART.




XIX

THE ADVENTURE OF THE CHRISTMAS TREE


     _January 6, 1913._

MY DEAR FRIEND,--

I have put off writing you and thanking you for your thought for us
until now so that I could tell you of our very happy Christmas and our
deer hunt all at once.

To begin with, Mr. Stewart and Junior have gone to Boulder to spend the
winter. Clyde wanted his mother to have a chance to enjoy our boy, so,
as he had to go, he took Junior with him. Then those of my dear
neighbors nearest my heart decided to prevent a lonely Christmas for
me, so on December 21st came Mrs. Louderer, laden with an immense plum
pudding and a big "_wurst_," and a little later came Mrs. O'Shaughnessy
on her frisky pony, Chief, her scarlet sweater making a bright bit of
color against our snow-wrapped horizon. Her face and ways are just as
bright and cheery as can be. When she saw Mrs. Louderer's pudding and
sausage she said she had brought nothing because she had come to get
something to eat herself, "and," she continued, "it is a private
opinion of mine that my neighbors are so glad to see me that they are
glad to feed me." Now wouldn't that little speech have made her welcome
anywhere?

Well, we were hilariously planning what Mrs. O'Shaughnessy called a
"widdy" Christmas and getting supper, when a great stamping-off of snow
proclaimed a newcomer. It was Gavotte, and we were powerfully glad to
see him because the hired man was going to a dance and we knew Gavotte
would contrive some unusual amusement. He had heard that Clyde was
going to have a deer-drive, and didn't know that he had gone, so he had
come down to join the hunt just for the fun, and was very much
disappointed to find there was going to be no hunt. After supper,
however, his good humor returned and he told us story after story of
big hunts he had had in Canada. He worked up his own enthusiasm as well
as ours, and at last proposed that we have a drive of our own for a
Christmas "joy." He said he would take a station and do the shooting if
one of us would do the driving. So right now I reckon I had better tell
you how it is done.

There are many little parks in the mountains where the deer can feed,
although now most places are so deep in snow that they can't walk in
it. For that reason they have trails to water and to the different
feeding-grounds, and they can't get through the snow except along these
paths. You see how easy it would be for a man hidden on the trail to
get one of the beautiful creatures if some one coming from another
direction startled them so that they came along that particular path.

So they made their plans. Mrs. O'Shaughnessy elected herself driver.
Two miles away is a huge mountain called Phillipeco, and deer were
said to be plentiful up there. At one time there had been a sawmill on
the mountain, and there were a number of deserted cabins in which we
could make ourselves comfortable. So it was planned that we go up the
next morning, stay all night, have the hunt the following morning, and
then come home with our game.

Well, we were all astir early the next morning and soon grain, bedding,
and chuck-box were in the wagon. Then Mrs. Louderer, the _kinder_, and
myself piled in; Mrs. O'Shaughnessy bestrode Chief, Gavotte stalked on
ahead to pick our way, and we were off.

It was a long, tedious climb, and I wished over and over that I had
stayed at home; but it was altogether on Baby's account. I was so
afraid that he would suffer, but he kept warm as toast. The day was
beautiful, and the views many times repaid us for any hardship we had
suffered. It was three o'clock before we reached the old mill camp.
Soon we had a roaring fire, and Gavotte made the horses comfortable in
one of the cabins. They were bedded in soft, dry sawdust, and were
quite as well off as if they had been in their own stalls. Then some
rough planks were laid on blocks, and we had our first meal since
breakfast. We called it supper, and we had potatoes roasted in the
embers, Mrs. Louderer's _wurst_, which she had been calmly carrying
around on her arm like a hoop and which was delicious with the bread
that Gavotte toasted on long sticks; we had steaming coffee, and we
were all happy; even Baby clapped his hands and crowed at the unusual
sight of an open fire. After supper Gavotte took a little stroll and
returned with a couple of grouse for our breakfast. After dark we sat
around the fire eating peanuts and listening to Gavotte and Mrs.
Louderer telling stories of their different great forests. But soon
Gavotte took his big sleeping-bag and retired to another cabin, warning
us that we must be up early. Our improvised beds were the most
comfortable things; I love the flicker of an open fire, the smell of
the pines, the pure, sweet air, and I went to sleep thinking how blest
I was to be able to enjoy the things I love most.

It seemed only a short time until some one knocked on our door and we
were all wide awake in a minute. The fire had burned down and only a
soft, indistinct glow from the embers lighted the room, while through a
hole in the roof I could see a star glimmering frostily. It was Gavotte
at the door and he called through a crack saying he had been hearing
queer noises for an hour and he was going to investigate. He had called
us so that we need not be alarmed should we hear the noise and not find
him. We scrambled into our clothes quickly and ran outdoors to listen.

I can never describe to you the weird beauty of a moonlight night among
the pines when the snow is sparkling and gleaming, the deep silence
unbroken even by the snapping of a twig. We stood shivering and
straining our ears and were about to go back to bed when we heard
faintly a long-drawn wail as if all the suffering and sorrow on earth
were bound up in that one sound. We couldn't tell which way it came
from; it seemed to vibrate through the air and chill our hearts. I had
heard that panthers cried that way, but Gavotte said it was not a
panther. He said the engine and saws had been moved from where we were
to another spring across the canon a mile away, where timber for sawing
was more plentiful, but he supposed every one had left the mill when
the water froze so they couldn't saw. He added that some one must have
remained and was, perhaps, in need of help, and if we were not afraid
he would leave us and go see what was wrong.

We went in, made up the fire, and sat in silence, wondering what we
should see or hear next. Once or twice that agonized cry came shivering
through the cold moonlight. After an age, we heard Gavotte crunching
through the snow, whistling cheerily to reassure us. He had crossed the
canon to the new mill camp, where he had found two women, loggers'
wives, and some children. One of the women, he said, was "so ver'
seek," 't was she who was wailing so, and it was the kind of "seek"
where we could be of every help and comfort.

Mrs. Louderer stayed and took care of the children while Mrs.
O'Shaughnessy and I followed after Gavotte, panting and stumbling,
through the snow. Gavotte said he suspected they were short of
"needfuls," so he had filled his pockets with coffee and sugar, took in
a bottle some of the milk I brought for Baby, and his own flask of
whiskey, without which he never travels.

At last, after what seemed to me hours of scrambling through the snow,
through deepest gloom where pines were thickest, and out again into
patches of white moonlight, we reached the ugly clearing where the new
camp stood. Gavotte escorted us to the door and then returned to our
camp. Entering, we saw the poor, little soon-to-be mother huddled on
her poor bed, while an older woman stood near warning her that the oil
would soon be all gone and they would be in darkness. She told us that
the sick one had been in pain all the day before and much of the night,
and that she herself was worn completely out. So Mrs. O'Shaughnessy
sent her to bed and we took charge.

Secretly, I felt it all to be a big nuisance to be dragged out from my
warm, comfortable bed to traipse through the snow at that time of the
night. But the moment poor little Molly spoke I was glad I was living,
because she was a poor little Southern girl whose husband is a Mormon.
He had been sent on a mission to Alabama, and the poor girl had fallen
in love with his handsome face and knew nothing of Mormonism, so she
had run away with him. She thought it would be so grand to live in the
glorious West with so splendid a man as she believed her husband to
be. But now she believed she was going to die and she was glad of it
because she could not return to her "folks," and she said she knew her
husband was dead because he and the other woman's husband, both of whom
had intended to stay there all winter and cut logs, had gone two weeks
before to get their summer's wages and buy supplies. Neither man had
come back and there was not a horse or any other way to get out of the
mountains to hunt them, so they believed the men to be frozen somewhere
on the road. Rather a dismal prospect, wasn't it? Molly was just
longing for some little familiar thing, so I was glad I have not yet
gotten rid of my Southern way of talking. No Westerner can ever
understand a Southerner's need of sympathy, and, however kind their
hearts, they are unable to give it. Only a Southerner can understand
how dear are our peculiar words and phrases, and poor little Molly took
new courage when she found I knew what she meant when she said she was
just "honin'" after a friendly voice.

Well, soon we had the water hot and had filled some bottles and placed
them around our patient, and after a couple of hours the tiny little
stranger came into the world. It had been necessary to have a great
fire in order to have light, so as soon as we got Baby dressed I opened
the door a little to cool the room and Molly saw the morning star
twinkling merrily. "Oh," she said, "that is what I will call my little
girlie,--Star, dear little Star."

It is strange, isn't it? how our spirits will revive after some great
ordeal. Molly had been sure she was going to die and saw nothing to
live for; now that she had had a cup of hot milk and held her red
little baby close, she was just as happy and hopeful as if she had
never left her best friends and home to follow the uncertain fortunes
of young Will Crosby. So she and I talked of ash-hoppers, smoke-houses,
cotton-patches, goobers, poke-greens, and shoats, until she fell
asleep.

Soon day was abroad, and so we went outdoors for a fresh breath. The
other woman came out just then to ask after Molly. She invited us into
her cabin, and, oh, the little Mormons were everywhere; poor, half-clad
little things! Some sour-dough biscuit and a can of condensed milk was
everything they had to eat. The mother explained to us that their "men"
had gone to get things for them, but had not come back, so she guessed
they had got drunk and were likely in jail. She told it in a very
unconcerned manner. Poor thing! Years of such experience had taught her
that blessed are they who expect nothing, for they shall not be
disappointed. She said that if Molly had not been sick she would have
walked down out of the mountains and got help.

Just then two shots rang out in quick succession, and soon Gavotte came
staggering along with a deer across his shoulders. That he left for
the family. From our camp he had brought some bacon and butter for
Molly, and, poor though it may seem, it was a treat for her. Leaving
the woman to dress the venison with her oldest boy's aid, we put out
across the canon for our own breakfast. Beside our much-beaten trail
hung the second venison, and when we reached our camp and had our own
delicious breakfast of grouse, bread, butter, and coffee, Gavotte took
Chub and went for our venison. In a short time we were rolling
homeward. Of course it didn't take us nearly so long to get home
because it was downhill and the road was clearly marked, so in a couple
of hours we were home.

Gavotte knew the two loggers were in Green River and were then at work
storing ice for the railroad, but he had not known that their wives
were left as they were. The men actually had got drunk, lost their
money, and were then trying to replace it. After we debated a bit we
decided we could not enjoy Christmas with those people in want up
there in the cold. Then we got busy. It is sixty miles to town,
although our nearest point to the railroad is but forty, so you see it
was impossible to get to town to get anything. You should have seen us!
Every old garment that had ever been left by men who have worked here
was hauled out, and Mrs. O'Shaughnessy's deft fingers soon had a pile
of garments cut. We kept the machine humming until far into the night,
as long as we could keep our eyes open.

All next day we sewed as hard as we could, and Gavotte cooked as hard
as he could. We had intended to have a tree for Jerrine, so we had a
box of candles and a box of Christmas snow. Gavotte asked for all the
bright paper we could find. We had lots of it, and I think you would be
surprised at the possibilities of a little waste paper. He made
gorgeous birds, butterflies, and flowers out of paper that once wrapped
parcels. Then he asked us for some silk thread, but I had none, so he
told us to comb our hair and give him the combings. We did, and with a
drop of mucilage he would fasten a hair to a bird's back and then hold
it up by the hair. At a few feet's distance it looked exactly as though
the bird was flying. I was glad I had a big stone jar full of
_fondant_, because we had a lot of fun shaping and coloring candies. We
offered a prize for the best representation of a "nigger," and we had
two dozen chocolate-covered things that might have been anything from a
monkey to a mouse. Mrs. Louderer cut up her big plum pudding and put it
into a dozen small bags. These Gavotte carefully covered with green
paper. Then we tore up the holly wreath that Aunt Mary sent me, and put
a sprig in the top of each green bag of pudding. I never had so much
fun in my life as I had preparing for that Christmas.

At ten o'clock, the morning of the 24th, we were again on our way up
the mountain-side. We took shovels so we could clear a road if need
be. We had dinner at the old camp, and then Gavotte hunted us a way out
to the new, and we smuggled our things into Molly's cabin so the
children should have a real surprise. Poor, hopeless little things!
Theirs was, indeed, a dull outlook.

Gavotte busied himself in preparing one of the empty cabins for us and
in making the horses comfortable. He cut some pine boughs to do that
with, and so they paid no attention when he cut a small tree. In the
mean time we had cleared everything from Molly's cabin but her bed; we
wanted her to see the fun. The children were sent to the spring to
water the horses and they were all allowed to ride, so that took them
out of the way while Gavotte nailed the tree into a box he had filled
with dirt to hold it steady.

There were four women of us, and Gavotte, so it was only the work of a
few moments to get the tree ready, and it was the most beautiful one I
ever saw. Your largest bell, dear Mrs. Coney, dangled from the topmost
branch. Gavotte had attached a long, stout wire to your Santa Claus, so
he was able to make him dance frantically without seeming to do so. The
hairs that held the birds and butterflies could not be seen, and the
effect was beautiful. We had a bucket of apples rubbed bright, and
these we fastened to the tree just as they grew on their own branches.
The puddings looked pretty, too, and we had done up the parcels that
held the clothes as attractively as we could. We saved the candy and
the peanuts to put in their little stockings.

As soon as it was dark we lighted the candles and then their mother
called the children. Oh, if you could have seen them! It was the very
first Christmas tree they had ever seen and they didn't know what to
do. The very first present Gavotte handed out was a pair of trousers
for eight-years-old Brig, but he just stood and stared at the tree
until his brother next in size, with an eye to the main chance, got
behind him and pushed him forward, all the time exclaiming, "Go on,
can't you! They ain't doin' nothin' to you, they's just doin' somethin'
for you." Still Brig would not put out his hand. He just shook his
tousled sandy head and said he wanted a bird. So the fun kept up for an
hour. Santa had for Molly a package of oatmeal, a pound of butter, a
Mason jar of cream, and a dozen eggs, so that she could have suitable
food to eat until something could be done.

After the presents had all been distributed we put the phonograph on a
box and had a dandy concert. We played "There were Shepherds," "Ave
Maria," and "Sweet Christmas Bells." Only we older people cared for
those, so then we had "Arrah Wanna," "Silver Bells," "Rainbow," "Red
Wing," and such songs. How delighted they were! Our concert lasted two
hours, and by that time the little fellows were so sleepy that the
excitement no longer affected them and they were put to bed, but they
hung up their stockings first, and even Molly hung hers up too. We
filled them with peanuts and candy, putting the lion's share of
"niggers" into Molly's stocking.

Next morning the happiness broke out in new spots. The children were
all clean and warm, though I am afraid I can't brag on the fit of all
the clothes. But the pride of the wearers did away with the necessity
of a fit. The mother was radiantly thankful for a warm petticoat; that
it was made of a blanket too small for a bed didn't bother her, and the
stripes were around the bottom anyway. Molly openly rejoiced in her new
gown, and that it was made of ugly gray outing flannel she didn't know
nor care. Baby Star Crosby looked perfectly sweet in her little new
clothes, and her little gown had blue sleeves and they thought a white
skirt only added to its beauty. And so it was about everything. We all
got so much out of so little. I will never again allow even the
smallest thing to go to waste. We were every one just as happy as we
could be, almost as delighted as Molly was over her "niggers," and
there was very little given that had not been thrown away or was not
just odds and ends.

There was never anything more true than that it is more blessed to give
than to receive. We certainly had a delicious dinner too, and we let
Molly have all she wanted that we dared allow her to eat. The roast
venison was so good that we were tempted to let her taste it, but we
thought better of that. As soon as dinner was over we packed our
belongings and betook ourselves homeward.

It was just dusk when we reached home. Away off on a bare hill a wolf
barked. A big owl hooted lonesomely among the pines, and soon a pack of
yelping coyotes went scampering across the frozen waste.

It was not the Christmas I had in mind when I sent the card, but it was
a _dandy_ one, just the same.

With best wishes for you for a happy, _happy_ New Year,

  Sincerely your friend,
    ELINORE RUPERT STEWART.




XX

THE JOYS OF HOMESTEADING


     _January 23, 1913._

DEAR MRS. CONEY,--

I am afraid all my friends think I am very forgetful and that you think
I am ungrateful as well, but I am going to plead not guilty. Right
after Christmas Mr. Stewart came down with _la grippe_ and was so
miserable that it kept me busy trying to relieve him. Out here where we
can get no physician we have to dope ourselves, so that I had to be
housekeeper, nurse, doctor, and general overseer. That explains my long
silence.

And now I want to thank you for your kind thought in prolonging our
Christmas. The magazines were much appreciated. They relieved some
weary night-watches, and the box did Jerrine more good than the
medicine I was having to give her for _la grippe_. She was content to
stay in bed and enjoy the contents of her box.

When I read of the hard times among the Denver poor, I feel like urging
them every one to get out and file on land. I am very enthusiastic
about women homesteading. It really requires less strength and labor to
raise plenty to satisfy a large family than it does to go out to wash,
with the added satisfaction of knowing that their job will not be lost
