The Spaniards having divided the treasure among them, the Inca insisted
that they should fulfil their promise of setting him at liberty. But the
Spaniards, with unparalleled treachery and cruelty had now determined to
put him to death; an action the most criminal and atrocious that stains
the Spanish name, amidst all the deeds of violence committed in carrying
on the conquest of the New World. In order to give some colour of
justice to this outrage, Pizarro resolved to try the Inca, according to
the forms of the criminal courts of Spain, and having constituted
himself chief judge, charges the most absurd, and even ridiculous, were
brought against him; but, as his infamous judges had predetermined, he
was found guilty, and condemned to be burnt alive.

Atahualpa, astonished at his fate, endeavoured to avert it by tears, by
promises, and by entreaties; but pity never touched the unfeeling heart
of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led instantly to execution, and the
cruel priest, after having prostituted his sacred office to confirm the
wicked sentence, offered to console, and attempted to convert him.

The dread of a cruel death, extorted from the trembling victim his
consent to be baptized. The ceremony was performed; and Atahualpa,
instead of being burnt alive, was strangled at the stake.

Pizarro then proceeded in his career of cruelty and rapacity, till, in
ten years, he subdued the whole of this great empire, and divided it
among his followers.

In making the division, he allotted the richest and finest provinces to
himself and his favourites, giving the less valuable to Almagro and his
friends.

This partiality highly offended Almagro, who thought his claims equal to
Pizarro's, and this led to open hostilities; when Almagro being taken
prisoner, he was beheaded in prison by order of Pizarro.

Soon after this, Pizarro himself was assassinated in his palace by a
party of Almagro's friends, headed by the son of Almagro, in revenge for
the death of his father.

Some time before this, the cruel and bigoted priest, Val de Viridi, had
been beaten to death with the butt end of muskets, in the island of
Puma, at the instigation of Almagro.

Thus retributive justice, in the end, overtook these unjust and cruel
men.

[Illustration]




CHAPTER XII.

PARLEY DESCRIBES THE NATURAL BEAUTIES OF AMERICA.


Let us now leave for a while the cruel Spaniards, and talk about the
beauties of nature, in these new discovered countries.

In these extensive regions, every thing appeared new and wonderful; not
only the inhabitants, but the whole face of nature was totally different
from anything that had been seen in Europe.

Grand ridges of mountains, numerous volcanoes, some of them, though
under the Equator, covered with perpetual snows. Noble rivers, whose
course, in several instances, exceeds three thousand miles.

Here are found the palm-tree, the cedar, the tamarind, the guaiacum,
the sassafras, the hickory, the chestnut, the walnut of many different
kinds, the wild cherry (sometimes a hundred feet high), and more than
fifty different sorts of oak.

The plane, of which there are two kinds, one found in Asia, which is
called the oriental plane: that found in America is called the
occidental plane; but the Americans call it button-wood, or sycamore.
Its foliage is richer, and its leaves of a more beautiful green than the
oriental. It grows to a great size.

The cypress is perhaps the largest of the American trees; it is a more
than a hundred and twenty feet high; and the diameter of the trunk at
forty or fifty feet from the ground is sometimes eight or ten feet.

Another tree of gigantic magnitude is the wild cotton or Cuba tree. A
canoe made from the single trunk of this tree has been know to contain a
hundred persons.

Above all these in beauty is the majestic magnolia which shoots up to
the height of more than a hundred feet; its trunk perfectly straight,
surmounted by a thick expanded head of pale green foliage, in the form
of a cone.

From the centre of the flowery crown which terminates each of its
branches, a flower of the purest white arises, having the form of a
rose, from six to nine inches in diameter.

To the flower succeeds a crimson cone; this, in opening, exhibits round
seeds of the finest coral red, surrounded by delicate threads, six
inches long.

Here, every plant and tree displays its most majestic form.

Upon the shady banks of the Madelina there grows a climbing plant which
the botanists call Aristolochia, the flowers of which are four feet in
circumference, and children amuse themselves with covering their heads
with them as hats.

The Banana which grows in all the hot parts of America, and furnishes
the Indians with the chief part of their daily food, producing more
nutritious substance, in less space, and with less trouble than any
other known plant.

[Illustration]

It is here that the ground produces the sugar-cane, the coffee, and the
cocoa-nut from which is produced the chocolate. The vanilla, the anana
or pine apple, and many other delicious fruits.

The cacao, though generally pronounced cocoa, must not be confounded
with the Cocoa Palm which produces that largest of all nuts, the
Cocoa-nut.

These trees and plants which I have mentioned, and many more equally
beautiful, are all natives of the American woods.

But the European settlers, when they came, brought over to Europe many
valuable kinds of fruit and plants, which they did not find here; and I
never was more delighted than once on passing through Virginia, to
observe the dwellings of the settlers shaded by orange, lemon, and
pomegranate trees, that fill the air with the perfume of their flowers,
while their branches are loaded with fruit.

Strawberries of native growth, of the richest flavour, spring up beneath
your feet; and when these are passed away, every grove and field looks
like a cherry orchard. Then follow the peaches, every hedge-row is
planted with them. But it is the flowers and the flowering shrubs, that,
beyond all else, render these regions so beautiful. No description can
give an idea of the variety, the profusion, and the luxuriance of them.

The Dog-wood, whose lateral fan-like branches are dotted all over with
star-like blossoms of splendid white, as large as those of the
gumcistus.

The straight silvery column of the Papan fig, crowned with a canopy of
large indented leaves; and the wild orange tree, mixed with the
odoriferous and common laurel, form striking ornaments of this
enchanting scene, with many other lovely flowers too numerous to
describe.

There is another charm that enchants the wanderer in the American woods.
In a bright day in the summer months you walk through an atmosphere of
butterflies, so gaudy in hue, and so varied in form, that I often
thought they looked like flowers on the wing.

Some of them are large, measuring three or four inches across the wing,
but many, and those of the most beautiful, are small. Some have wings
the most dainty lavender, and bodies of black; others are fawn and rose
colour, and others are orange and bright blue: but pretty as they are,
it is their numbers more than their beauty; and their gay, and
noiseless movement through the air, crossing each other in chequered
maze, that so delights the eye.

[Illustration]

That beautiful production, the humming bird, is also the sportive
inhabitant of these warm climates, and I think they surpass all the
works of nature in singularity of form, splendour of colour, and variety
of species.

They are found in all the West India islands and in most parts of the
American continent: the smallest species does not exceed the size of
some of the bees.

[Illustration]

There are so many different kinds, and each so beautiful, that it is
impossible to describe them. They are constantly on the wing, collecting
insects from the blossoms of the tamarind, the orange, or any other tree
that happens to be in flower: and the humming noise proceeds from the
surprising velocity with which they move their wings.




CHAPTER XIII.

PARLEY TELLS OF THE FIRST ENGLISH COLONY IN AMERICA.


In the beginning of the reign of James the First, who you know succeeded
Elizabeth, the first successful attempt was made by the English to found
a colony in America.

Three small vessels, of which the largest did not exceed one hundred
tons burden, under the command of Captain Newport, formed the first
squadron that was to execute what had been so long, and so vainly
attempted; and sailed with a hundred and five men destined to remain in
America.

Several of these emigrants were members of distinguished
families--particularly George Percy, a brother of the Earl of
Northumberland; and several were officers of reputation, of whom we may
notice Bartholomew Gosnald, the navigator, and Captain John Smith, one
of the most distinguished ornaments of an age that abounded with
memorable men.

Thus, after the lapse of a hundred and ten years from the discovery of
the continent by Cabot, and twenty-two years after its first occupation
by Raleigh, was the number of the English colonists limited to a hundred
and five; and this handful of men undertook the arduous task of peopling
a remote and uncultivated land, covered with woods and marshes, and
inhabited only by savages and beasts of prey.

Newport and his squadron did not accomplish their voyage in less than
four months; but its termination was rendered particularly fortunate by
the effect of a storm, which defeated their purpose of landing and
settling at Roanoak, and carried them into the bay of Chesapeak; and
coasting along its southern shore, they entered a river which the
natives called Powhatan, and explored its banks for more than forty
miles from its mouth.

The adventurers, impressed with the superior advantages of the coast and
region to which they had been thus happily conducted, determined to make
this the place of their abode.

They gave to their infant settlement, as well as to the neighbouring
river, the name of their king; and James Town retains the distinction of
being the oldest of existing habitations of the English in America.

Newport having landed the colonists, with what supplies of provisions
were destined for their support, set sail with his ships to return to
England, in the month of June, 1607.

The colonists soon found themselves limited to a scanty supply of
unwholesome provisions; and the heat and moisture of the climate
combining with the effect of their diet, brought on diseases that raged
with fatal violence.

Before the month of September, one half of their number had miserably
perished, and among these victims was Bartholomew Gosnald, who had
planned the expedition, and greatly contributed to its success.

This scene of suffering was embittered by dissensions among themselves.
At length, in the extremity of their distress, when ruin seemed to
threaten them, as well from famine as the fury of the savages, the
colonists obtained a complete and unexpected deliverance, which the
piety of Smith ascribed to the influence of God in their behalf.

The savages, actuated by a sudden change of feeling, not only refrained
from molesting them, but brought them, without being asked, a supply of
provisions so liberal, as at once to remove their apprehensions of
famine and hostility.

The colonists were now instructed by their misfortunes, and the sense of
urgent danger, led them to submit to the advice of the man, whose
talents were most likely to extricate them from the difficulties with
which they were surrounded.

Every eye was now turned on Captain Smith, whose superior talents and
experience, had so far excited the envy and jealousy of his colleagues,
that he had been excluded from a seat in the council.

Under Captain Smith's directions, James Town was fortified, so as to
repel the attacks of the savages, and its inhabitants were provided with
dwellings that afforded shelter from the weather, and contributed to
restore and preserve their health.

Finding the supplies of the savages discontinued, he took with him some
of his people and penetrated into the interior of the country, where by
courtesy and kindness to the tribes whom he found well disposed, he
succeeded in procuring a plentiful supply of provisions. In the midst of
his successes he was surprised during an expedition by a hostile body of
savages, who having made him prisoner, after a gallant and nearly
successful defence, prepared to inflict on him the usual fate of their
captives.

His genius and presence of mind did not desert him on this trying
occasion. He desired to speak with the sachem or chief of the tribe to
which he was a prisoner, and, presenting him with a mariner's compass,
expatiated on the wonderful discoveries to which this little instrument
had led, described the shape of the earth, the vastness of its land and
oceans, the course of the sun and the varieties of nations, wisely
forbearing to express any solicitude for his life.

The savages listened to him with amazement and admiration. They handled
the compass, viewing with surprise the play of the needle, which they
plainly saw, but were unable to touch; and he appeared to have gained
some ascendancy over their minds.

For an hour afterwards they seemed undecided; but their habitual
disposition returning, they bound him to a tree, and were preparing to
despatch him with their arrows.

But a deeper impression had been made by his harangue on the mind of
their chief, who, holding up the compass in his hand, gave the signal of
reprieve, and Smith, though still guarded as a prisoner, was conducted
to a dwelling, where he was kindly treated and plentifully entertained.

[Illustration]

But after vainly attempting to prevail on their captive to betray the
English colony into their hands, the Indian referred his fate to
Powhatan, the king or principal sachem of the country, to whose presence
they conducted him in pompous and triumphant procession.

This prince received him with much ceremony, ordered a rich repast to be
set before him, and then adjudged him to suffer death by having his head
laid on a stone and beaten to pieces with clubs.

[Illustration]

At the place appointed for his execution, Smith was again rescued from
impending destruction by Pocahontas, the favourite daughter of the
chief, who, finding her first entreaties disregarded, threw her arms
round the prisoner, and declared her determination to save him or die
with him.

Her generous compassion prevailed over the cruelty of her tribe, and the
king not only gave Smith his life, but soon after sent him back to James
Town, where the benificence of Pocahontas continued to follow him with
supplies of provisions that delivered the colony from famine.

This eminent commander continued for some time to govern the colony with
the greatest wisdom and prudence, when he received a dangerous wound
from the accidental explosion of some gunpowder. Completely disabled by
this misfortune, and destitute of surgical aid in the colony, he was
compelled to resign his command, and take his departure for England. He
never returned to Virginia again.




CHAPTER XIV.

PARLEY TELLS OF THE ORIGINAL NATIVE AMERICANS.


I recollect when I was staying in America, an old Delaware Indian came
to Boston to sell some skins and furs, and he called at the house where
I was stopping. He had once been a chief among the Indians, but was now
poor.

I went to this Indian's home, which was a little hut near Mount Holyoke.
We found his wife and his three children; two boys and a girl. They came
out to meet us, and were very glad to see their father and me.

I was very hungry and tired when I arrived. The Indian's wife roasted
some bear's flesh, and gave us some bread made of pounded corn, for our
supper.

I then went to bed on some bear skins, and slept very well. Early in the
morning I was called to go hunting with the Indian and his two sons. It
was a fine bright morning in October. The sun was shining on the tops of
the mountains; we climbed Mount Holyoke, through the woods, and ascended
a high rock, from which we could see a beautiful valley far below us, in
the centre of which was the little town of Northampton, much smaller
than it is now.

[Illustration]

"Do you see those houses?" said the Indian to me, "When my grandfather
was a boy, there was not a house where you see so many: that valley
which now belongs to white men, belonged to red men."

"Then the red men were rich and happy; now they are poor and wretched.
Then that beautiful river which you see running through the valley, and
which is called the Connecticut, was theirs. They owned these fine
mountains too, they hunted in these woods, and fished in that river, and
were numerous and powerful,--now they are few and weak."

"But how has this change happened?" said I, "who has taken your lands
from you, and made you so miserable?"

"I will tell you all about that to-night," said he, "when we return
home."

We proceeded cautiously through the woods, and had not gone far when the
Indian beckoned us all to stop. "Look yonder," said he to me, "on that
high rock above us!" I did so, but could see nothing. "Look again," said
he; I did, and saw a young hind standing upon the point of a rock which
hung over the valley; she was a beautiful little animal, full of spirit,
with large black eyes, slender legs and of a reddish brown colour.

He now selected a choice arrow, placed it on the bow, and sent it
whizzing through the air. It struck directly through the heart. The
little animal sprang violently forward, over the rock, and fell dead
many feet below, where Whampum's sons soon found it; we now returned to
the wigwam, carrying the fawn with us.

[Illustration]

In the evening I reminded him of his promise to tell me how the Indians
had been robbed of their lands and reduced to poverty. He accordingly
began as follows:--

"A great many years ago," said he, "when men with white skins had never
been seen in this land, some Indians who were out fishing at a place
where the sea widens, espied at a great distance something very large,
floating on the water, and such as they had never seen before.

"These Indians immediately returning to the shore, apprized their
countrymen of what they had observed, and pressed them to go out with
them and discover what it might be. They hurried out together, and saw
with astonishment what the others had described, but could not agree
upon what it was; some believed it to be an uncommonly large fish or
animal, whilst others were of opinion that it must be a very large house
floating on the sea.

"They sent off messengers to carry the news to their scattered chiefs
and warriors that they should come together immediately.

"The chiefs were soon assembled and deliberating as to the manner in
which they should receive the Manitou or Supreme Being on his arrival.
