evening's conversation faded as soon as it was spoken; but with the Earl
of Buchan it remained brooding on itself, and filling his dark spirit
with yet blacker fancies.

The confinement of the Scottish noblemen was not of long duration.
Edward, whose temper, save when his ambition was concerned, was
generally just and equitable, discovering, after an impartial
examination, that they were in no ways connected with the affairs in the
north, and feeling also it was his interest to conciliate the regard of
all the Scottish nobles disaffected to Bruce, very soon restored them
alike to their personal liberty and to his favor; his courteous apology
for unjust suspicion, frankly acknowledging that the news from Scotland,
combined with his irritating disease, had rendered him blind and
suspicious, at once disarmed Fife of wrath. Buchan, perhaps, had not
been so easily appeased had his mind been less darkly engrossed. His
petition, that his son might be sent for, to be placed as a hostage in
the hands of Edward, and thus saved from the authority of his mother,
whom he represented as an artful, designing woman, possessed of
dangerous influence, was acceded to on the instant, and the king's full
confidence restored. It was easy to act upon Edward's mind, already
incensed against Isabella of Buchan for her daring defiance of his
power; and Buchan did work, till he felt perfectly satisfied that the
wife he hated would be fully cared for without the very smallest trouble
or interference on his part, save the obtaining possession of her
person; that the vengeance he had vowed would be fully perfected,
without any reproach or stigma cast upon his name.

Meantime the exertions of the King of England for the suppression of the
rebels continued with unabated ardor. Orders were issued and proclaimed
in every part of England for the gathering together one of the noblest
and mightiest armies that had ever yet followed him to war. To render it
still more splendidly impressive, and give fresh incentive to his
subjects, whose warlike spirit he perhaps feared might be somewhat
depressed by this constant call upon them for the reduction of a
country ever rising in revolt, Edward caused proclamation to be
severally made in every important town or county, "that all who were
under the obligation to become knights, and possessed the necessary
means, should appear at Westminster on the coming solemn season of
Whitsuntide, where they should be furnished with every requisite, save
and except the trappings for their horses, from the king's wardrobe, and
be treated with all solemn honor and distinction as best befitted their
rank, and the holy vows they took upon themselves."

A proclamation such as this, in the very heart of the chivalric era, was
all-sufficient to engage every Englishman heart and soul in the service
of his king; and ere the few weeks intervening between Easter and
Whitsuntide were passed, Westminster and its environs presented a scene
of martial magnificence and knightly splendor, which had never before
been equalled. Three hundred noble youths, sons of earls, barons, and
knights, speedily assembled at the place appointed, all attended
according to their rank and pretensions; all hot and fiery spirits,
eager to prove by their prompt attendance their desire to accept their
sovereign's invitation. The splendor of their attire seemed to demand
little increase from the bounty of the king, but nevertheless, fine
linen garments, rich purple robes, and superb mantles woven with gold,
were bestowed on each youthful candidate, thus strengthening the links
which bound him to his chivalric sovereign, by the gratification of his
vanity in addition to the envied honors of knighthood. As our tale
relates more to Scottish than to English history, we may not linger
longer on the affairs of South Britain than is absolutely necessary for
the clear comprehension of the situation of her far less flourishing
sister. Exciting therefore as was the scene enacted in Westminster,
descriptive as it was of the spirit of the age, we are compelled to give
it but a hasty glance, and pass on to events of greater moment.

Glorious, indeed, to an eyewitness, must have been the ceremony of
admitting these noble and valiant youths into the solemn mysteries and
chivalric honors of knighthood. On that day the Prince of Wales was
first dubbed a knight, and made Duke of Aquitaine; and so great was the
pressure of the crowd, in their eagerness to witness the ceremonial in
the abbey, where the prince hastened to confer his newly-received
dignity on his companions, that three knights were killed, and several
fainted from heat and exhaustion. Strong war-horses were compelled to
drive back and divide the pressing crowds, ere the ceremony was allowed
to proceed. A solemn banquet succeeded; and then it was that Edward,
whose energy of mind appeared completely to have annihilated disease and
weakness of frame, made that extraordinary vow, which it has puzzled
both historian and antiquary satisfactorily to explain. The matter of
the vow merely betrayed the indomitable spirit of the man, but the
manner seemed strange even in that age. Two swans, decorated with golden
nets and gilded reeds, were placed in solemn pomp before the king, and
he, with imposing fervor, made a solemn vow to the Almighty and the
swans, that he would go to Scotland, and, living or dead, avenge the
murder of Comyn, and the broken faith of the traitorous Scots. Then,
with that earnestness of voice and majesty of mien for which he was
remarkable, he adjured his subjects, one and all, by the solemn fealty
they had sworn to him, that if he should die on the journey, they would
carry his body into Scotland, and never give it burial till the prince's
dominion was established in that country. Eagerly and willingly the
nobles gave the required pledge; and so much earnestness of purpose, so
much martial spirit pervaded that gorgeous assembly, that once more did
hope prevail in the monarch's breast, once more did he believe his
ambitious yearnings would all be fulfilled, and Scotland, rebellious,
haughty Scotland, lie crushed and broken at his feet. Once more his dark
eye flashed, his proud lip curled with its wonted smiles; his warrior
form, erect and firm as in former days, now spurned the couch of
disease, and rode his war-horse with all the grace and ease of former
years. A gallant army, under the command of Aymer de Valence, Earl of
Pembroke, had already been dispatched towards Scotland, bearing with it
the messengers of the Earl of Buchan, armed both with their lord's
commands and Edward's warrant for the detention of the young heir of
Buchan, and to bring him with all honor to the head-quarters of the
king. The name of Isabella of Buchan was subjoined to that of the Bruce,
and together with all those concerned in his rising proclaimed as
traitors and a price set upon their heads. This done, the king had been
enabled to wait with greater tranquillity the assembling of his larger
army, and after the ceremonials of Westminster, orders were issued for
every earl and baron to proceed with their followers to Carlisle, which
was named the head-quarters of the army, there to join their sovereign
with his own immediate troops. The Scottish nobles Edward's usual policy
retained in honorable posts about his person, not choosing to trust
their fidelity beyond the reach of his own eye.

Obedient to these commands, all England speedily appeared in motion, the
troops of every county moving as by one impulse to Carlisle. Yet there
were some of England's noblest barons in whose breasts a species of
admiration, even affection, was at work towards the very man they were
now marching to destroy, and this was frequently the case in the ages of
chivalry. Fickle as the character of Robert Bruce had appeared to be,
there was that in it which had ever attracted, riveted the regard of
many of the noble spirits in King Edward's court. The rash daring of his
enterprise, the dangers which encircled him, were such as dazzled and
fascinated the imagination of those knights in whom the true spirit of
chivalry found rest. Pre-eminent amongst these was the noble Earl of
Gloucester. His duty to his sovereign urged him to take the field; his
attachment for the Bruce would have held him neuter, for the ties that
bound brothers in arms were of no common or wavering nature. Brothers in
blood had frequently found themselves opposed horse to horse, and lance
to lance, on the same field, and no scruples of conscience, no pleadings
of affection, had power to avert the unnatural strife; but not such was
it with brothers in arms--a link strong as adamant, pure as their own
sword-steel, bound their hearts as one; and rather, much rather would
Gloucester have laid down his own life, than expose himself to the
fearful risk of staining his sword with the blood of his friend. The
deepest dejection took possession of his soul, which not all the
confidence of his sovereign, the gentle, affectionate pleadings of his
wife, could in any way assuage.




CHAPTER VIII.


It was the month of June, and the beautiful county of Perth smiled in
all the richness and loveliness of early summer. Not yet had the signal
of war floated on the pure springy breeze, not yet had the stains of
blood desecrated the gladsome earth, although the army of De Valence was
now within very few miles of Scone, which was still the head-quarters of
the Scottish king. Aware of the very great disparity of numbers between
his gallant followers and those of Pembroke, King Robert preferred
entrenching himself in his present guarded situation, to meeting De
Valence in the open field, although, more than once tempted to do so,
and finding extreme difficulty in so curbing the dauntless spirit of his
followers as to incline them more towards the defensive than the attack.
Already had the fierce thunders of the Church been launched against him
for the sin of murder committed in consecrated ground. Excommunication
in all its horrors exposed him to death from any hand, that on any
pretence of private hate or public weal might choose to strike; but
already had there arisen spirits bold enough to dispute the awful
mandates of the Pope, and the patriotic prelates who had before
acknowledged and done homage to their sovereign, now neither wavered in
their allegiance nor in any way sought to promulgate the sentence
thundered against him. A calm smile had passed over the Bruce's noble
features as the intelligence of the wrath of Rome was communicated to
him.

"The judge and the avenger is in heaven, holy father," he said; "to His
hands I commit my cause, conscious of deserving, as humbly awaiting,
chastisement for that sin which none can reprobate and abhor more
strongly than myself; if blood must flow for blood, His will be done. I
ask but to free my country, to leave her in powerful yet righteous
hands, and willingly I will depart, confident of mercy for my soul."

Fearful, however, that this sentence might dispirit his subjects, King
Robert watched his opportunity of assembling and addressing them. In a
brief, yet eloquent speech, he narrated the base, cold-blooded system of
treachery of Comyn; how, when travelling to Scotland, firmly trusting
in, and depending on, the good faith the traitor had so solemnly
pledged, a brawl had arisen between his (Bruce's) followers and some men
in the garb of Borderers, who were discovered to be emissaries of the
Red Comyn, and how papers had been found on them, in which all that
could expose the Bruce to the deadly wrath of Edward was revealed, and
his very death advised as the only effectual means of quelling his
efforts for the freedom of Scotland, and crushing the last hopes of her
still remaining patriots. He told them how, on the natural indignation
excited by this black treachery subsiding, he had met Sir John Comyn at
Dumfries--how, knowing the fierce irascibility of his natural temper, he
had willingly agreed that the interview Comyn demanded should take place
in the church of the Minorite Friars, trusting that the sanctity of the
place would be sufficient to restrain him.

"But who may answer for himself, my friends?" he continued, mournfully;
"it needs not to dilate on that dark and stormy interview, suffice it
that the traitor sought still to deceive, still to win me by his
specious sophistry to reveal my plans, again to be betrayed, and that
when I taunted him with his base, cowardly treachery, his black
dishonor, words of wrath and hate, and blind deluded passion arose
between us, and the spirit of evil at work within me urged my rash sword
to strike. Subjects and friends, I plead no temptation as excuse, I make
no defence; I deplore, I contemn the deed. If ye deem me worthy of
death, if ye believe the sentence of our holy father in God, his
holiness the Pope, be just, that it is wholly free from the machinations
of England, who, deeming force of arms not sufficient, would hurl the
wrath of heaven's viceregent on my devoted head, go, leave me to the
fate it brings; your oath of allegiance is dissolved. I have yet
faithful followers, to make one bold stand against the tyrant, and die
for Scotland; but if ye absolve me, if ye will yet give me your hearts
and swords, oh, fear me not, my countrymen, we may yet be free!"

Cries, tears, and blessings followed this wisely-spoken appeal, one
universal shout reiterated their vows of allegiance; those who had felt
terrified at the mandate of their spiritual father, now traced it not to
his impartial judgment, but to the schemes of Edward, and instantly felt
its weight and magnitude had faded into air. The unwavering loyalty of
the Primate of Scotland, the Bishop of Glasgow, and the Abbot of Scone
strengthened them alike in their belief and allegiance, and a band of
young citizens were instantly provided with arms at the expense of the
town, and the king entreated by a deputation of the principal
magistrates to accept their services as a guard extraordinary, lest his
life should be yet more endangered from private individuals, by the
sentence under which he labored; and gratified by their devotedness,
though his bold spirit spurned all Fear of secret assassination, their
request was graciously accepted.

The ceremony of knighthood which the king had promised to confer on
several of his young followers had been deferred until the present time,
to admit of their preparing for their inauguration with all the solemn
services of religion which the rites enjoined.

The 15th day of June was the time appointed, and Nigel Bruce and Alan of
Buchan were to pass the night previous, in solemn prayer and vigil, in
the abbey church of Scone. That the rules of chivalry should not be
transgressed by his desire to confer some honor on the son of the
Countess of Buchan, which would demonstrate the high esteem in which she
was held by her sovereign, Alan had served the king, first as page and
then as esquire, in the interval that had elapsed since his coronation,
and now he beheld with ardor the near completion of the honor for which
he pined. His spirit had been wrung well-nigh to agony, when amidst the
list of the proscribed as traitors he beheld his mother's name; not so
much at the dangers that would encircle her--for from those he might
defend her--but that his father was still a follower of the unmanly
tyrant, who would even war against a woman--his father should still
calmly assist and serve the man who set a price upon his mother's head.
Alas! poor boy, he little knew that father's heart.

It was evening, a still, oppressive evening, for though the sun yet
shone brightly as he sunk in the west, a succession of black
thunder-clouds, gradually rising higher and higher athwart the intense
blue of the firmament, seemed to threaten that the wings of the tempest
were already brooding on the dark bosom of night. The very flowers
appeared to droop beneath the weight of the atmosphere; the trees moved
not, the birds were silent, save when now and then a solitary note was
heard, and then hushed, as if the little warbler shrunk back in his
leafy nest, frightened at his own voice. Perchance it was the stillness
of nature which had likewise affected the inmates of a retired chamber
in the palace, for though they sate side by side, and their looks
betrayed that the full communion of soul was not denied, few words were
spoken. The maiden of Buchan bent over the frame which contained the
blue satin scarf she was embroidering with the device of Bruce, in gold
and gems, and it was Nigel Bruce who sate beside her, his deep,
expressive eyes fixed upon her in such fervid, such eloquent love, that
seldom was it she ventured to raise her glance to his. A slight shadow
was on those sweet and gentle features, perceptible, perchance, to the
eye of love alone; and it was this that, after enjoying that silent
communion of the spirit, so dear to those who love, which bade Nigel
fling his arm around that slender form, and ask--

"What is it, sweet one? why art thou sad?"

"Do not ask me, Nigel, for indeed I know not," she answered, simply,
looking up a moment in his face, in that sweet touching confidence,
which made him draw her closer to his protecting heart; "save that,
perchance, the oppression of nature has extended to me, and filled my
soul with unfounded fancies of evil. I ought to be very happy, Nigel,
loved thus by _thee_," she hid her eyes upon his bosom; "received as thy
promised bride, not alone by thy kind sisters, thy noble brothers,
but--simple-hearted maiden as I am--deemed worthy of thee by good King
Robert's self. Nigel, dearest Nigel, why, in an hour of joy like this,
should dreams of evil come?"

"To whisper, my beloved, that not on earth may we look for the
perfection of joy, the fulness of bliss; that while the mortal shell is
round us joy is chained to pain, and granted us but to lift up the
spirit to that heaven where pain is banished, bliss made perfect;
dearest, 'tis but for this!" answered the young enthusiast, and the rich
yet somewhat mournful tones of his voice thrilled to his listener's
heart.

"Thou speakest as if thou, too, hadst experienced forebodings like to
these, my Nigel," said Agnes, thoughtfully. "I deemed them but the
foolishness of my weaker mind."

"Deem them not foolishness, beloved. There are minds, indeed, that know
them not, but they are of that rude, coarse material which owns no
thought, hath no hopes but those of earth and earthly things, insensible
to that profundity of joy which makes us _feel_ its _chain_: 'tis not to
the lightly feeling such forebodings come."

"But thou--hast thou felt them, Nigel, dearest? hast thou listened to,
_believed_ their voice?

"I have felt, I feel when I gaze on thee, sweet one, a joy so deep, so
full, that I scarce dare trace it to an earthly cause," he said,
slightly evading a direct answer. "I cannot look forward and, as it
were, extend that deep joy to the future; but the fetter binding it to
pain reminds me I am mortal, that not an earth may I demand find seek
and hope to find its fulfilment."

She looked up in his face, with an expression both of bewilderment and
fear, and her hand unconsciously closed on his arm, as thus to detain
him to her side.

"Yes, my beloved," he added, with more animation, "it is not because I
put not my trust in earth for unfading joy that we shall find not its
sweet flowers below; that our paths on earth may be darkened, because
the fulness of bliss is alone to be found in heaven. Mine own sweet
Agnes, while darkness and strife, and blood and death, are thus at work
around us, is it marvel we should sometimes dream of sorrow? Yet, oh
yet, have we not both the same hope, the same God, the same home in
heaven; and if our doom be to part on earth, shall we not, oh, shall we
not meet in bliss? I say not such things will be, my best beloved; but
better look thus upon the dim shadow sometimes resting on the rosy wings
of joy, than ever dismiss it as the vain folly of a weakened mind."

He pressed his lips, which quivered, on the fair, beautiful brow then
resting in irresistible sorrow on his bosom; but he did not attempt by
words to check that maiden's sudden burst of tears. After a while, when
he found his own emotion sufficiently restrained, soothingly and fondly
he cheered her to composure, and drew from her the thoughts which had
disturbed her when he first spoke.

"'Twas of my mother, Nigel, of my beloved, my noble mother that I
thought; proscribed, hunted, set a price upon as a traitor. Can her
children think on such indignity without emotion--and when I remember
the great power of King Edward, who has done this--without fear for her
fate?"

"Sweetest, fear not for her; her noble deed, her dauntless heroism has
circled her with such a guard of gallant knights and warriors, that, in
the hands of Edward, trust me, dearest, she shall never fall; and even
if such should be, still, I say, fear not. Unpitying and cruel as Edward
is, where his ambition is concerned, he is too true a knight, too noble
in spirit to take a woman's blood; he is now fearfully enraged, and
therefore has he done this. And as to indignity, 'tis shame to the
proscriber not to the proscribed, my love!"

"There is one I fear yet more than Edward," continued the maiden,
fearfully; "one that I should love more. Oh, Nigel, my very spirit
shrinks from the image of my father. I have sought to love him, to
dismiss the dark haunting visions which his name has ever brought before
me. I saw him once, but once, and his stern terrible features and harsh
voice so terrified my childish fancies, that I hid myself till he had
departed, and I have never seen him since, and yet, oh yet, I fear him!"

"What is it that thou fearest, love?"

"I know not," she answered; "but if evil approach my mother, it will
come from him, and so silently, so unsuspectedly, that none may avoid
it. Nigel, he cannot love my mother! he is a foe to Bruce, a friend of
the slaughtered Comyn, and will he not demand a stern account of the
deed that she hath done? will he not seek vengeance? and oh, will he
not, may he not in wrath part thee and me, and thus thy bodings be
fulfilled?"

"Agnes, never! The mandate of man shall never part us; the power of man,
unless my limbs be chained, shall never sever thee and me. He that hath
never acted a father's part, can have no power on his child. Thou art
mine, my beloved!--mine with thy mother's blessing; and mine thou shalt
be--no earthly power shall part us. Death, death alone can break the
links that bind us, and must be of God, though man may seem the cause.
Be comforted, sweet love. Hark! they are chiming vespers; I must be gone
for the solemn vigil of to-night, and to-morrow thou shalt arm thine own
true knight, mine Agnes, and deck me with that blue scarf, more precious
even than the jewelled sword my sovereign brother gives. Farewell, for a
brief, brief while; I go to watch and pray. Oh, let thy orisons attend
me, and surely then my vigil shall be blest."

"Pray thou for me, my Nigel," whispered the trembling girl, as he
clasped her in his arms, "that true as I may be, strength befitting thy
promised bride may be mine own. Nigel, my beloved, indeed I need such
prayer."

He whispered hope and comfort, and departed by the stone stairs which
led from the gothic casement where they had been sitting, into the
garden; he lingered to gather some delicate blue-bells which had just
blown, and turned back to place them in the lap of Agnes. She eagerly
raised them and pressed them to her lips, but either their fragile
blossoms could not bear even her soft touch, or the heavy air had
inwardly withered their bloom, for the blossoms fell from their stalks,
and scattered their beautiful petals at her feet.




CHAPTER IX.


The hour of vespers had come and passed; the organ and choir had hushed
their solemn sounds. The abbot and his attendant monks, the king who,
with his train, had that evening joined the solemn service, all had
departed, and but two inmates were left within the abbey church of
Scone. Darkness and silence had assumed their undisturbed dominion, for
the waxen tapers left burning on the altar lighted but a few yards
round, leaving the nave and cloisters in impenetrable gloom. Some twenty
or thirty yards east of the altar, elevated some paces from the ground,
in its light and graceful shrine, stood an elegantly sculptured figure
of the Virgin and Child. A silver lamp, whose pure flame was fed with
aromatic incense, burned within the shrine and shed its soft light on a
suit of glittering armor which was hanging on the shaft of a pillar
close beside it. Directly behind the altar was a large oriel window of
stained glass, representing subjects from Scripture. The window, with
its various mullions and lights, formed one high pointed arch, marked by
solid stone pillars on each side, the capitals of which traced the
commencement of the arch. Another window, similar in character, though
somewhat smaller in dimensions, lighted the west end of the church; and
near it stood another shrine containing a figure of St. Stephen, lighted
as was that of the Virgin and Child, and, like that, gleaming on a suit
of armor, and on the figure of the youthful candidate for knighthood,
whose task was to pass that night in prayer and vigil beside his armor,
unarmed, saved by that panoply of proof which is the Christian's
portion--faith, lowliness, and prayer.

No word passed between these pledged brothers in arms. Their watch was
in opposite ends of the church, and save the dim, solemn light of the
altar, darkness and immeasurable space appeared to stretch between them.
Faintly and fitfully the moon had shone through one of the long, narrow
windows of the aisles, shedding its cold spectral light for a brief
space, then passing into darkness. Heavy masses of clouds sailed slowly
in the heavens, dimly discernible through the unpainted panes; the
oppression of the atmosphere increasing as the night approached her
zenith, and ever and anon a low, long peal of distant thunder, each
succeeding one becoming longer and louder than the last, and heralded by
the blue flash of vivid lightning, announced the fury of the coming
tempest.

The imaginations even as the feelings of the young men were already
strongly excited, although their thoughts, perchance, were less akin
than might have been expected. The form of his mother passed not from
the mental vision of the young heir of Buchan: the tone of her voice,
the unwonted tear which had fallen on his cheek when he had knelt before
her that evening, ere he had departed to his post, craving her blessing
on his vigil, her prayers for him--that tone, that tear, lingered on his
memory, hallowing every dream of glory, every warrior hope that entered
in his soul. Internally he vowed he would raise the banner of his race,
and prove the loyalty, the patriotism, the glowing love of liberty which
her counsels, her example had planted in his breast; and if the
recollection of his mother's precarious situation as a proscribed
traitor to Edward, and of his father's desertion of his country and her
patriot king in his adherence to a tyrant--if these reflections came to
damp the bright glowing views of others, they did but call the indignant
blood to his cheek, and add greater firmness to his impatient step, for
yet more powerfully did they awake his indignation against Edward. Till
now he had looked upon him exclusively in the light of Scotland's
foe--one against whom he with all true Scottish men must raise their
swords, or live forever 'neath the brand of slaves and cowards; but now
a personal cause of anger added fuel to the fire already burning in his
breast. His mother was proscribed--a price set upon her head; and as if
to fill the measure of his cup of bitterness to overflowing, his own
father, he who should have been her protector, aided and abetted the
cruel, pitiless Edward. Traitress! Isabella of Buchan a traitress! the
noblest, purest, bravest amid Scotland's children. She who to him had
ever seemed all that was pure and good, and noblest in woman; and most
noble and patriot-hearted now, in the fulfilment of an office inherent
in the House of Fife. Agitated beyond expression, quicker and quicker he
strode up and down the precincts marked for his watch, the increasing
tempest without seeming to assimilate strangely with the storm within.
Silence would have irritated, would have chafed those restless smartings
into very agony, but the wild war of the elements, while they roused
his young spirit into yet stronger energy, removed its pain.

"It matters not," his train of thought continued, "while this brain can
think, this heart can feel, this arm retain its strength, Isabella of
Buchan needs no other guardian but her son. It is as if years had left
their impress on my heart, as if I had grown in very truth to man,
thinking with man's wisdom, fighting with man's strength. He that hath
never given a father's love, hath never done a father's duty, hath no
claim upon his child; but she, whose untiring devotion, whose faithful
love hath watched over me, guarded, blessed from the first hour of my
life, instilled within me the principles of life on earth and
immortality in heaven--mother! mother! will not thy gentle virtues cling
around thy boy, and save him even from a father's curse? Can I do else
than devote the life thou gavest, to thee, and render back with my
stronger arm, but not less firm soul, the care, protection, love thou
hast bestowed on me? Mother, Virgin saint," he continued aloud, flinging
himself before the shrine to which we have alluded, "hear, oh hear my
