and in providing refuge for the homeless and the suffering. Thomas
Wingfield, for the most part this money has come to me as the fruit
of human folly and human wretchedness, frailty and sin. Use it for
the purposes of wisdom and the advancing of right and liberty. May it
prosper you, and remind you of me, your old master, the Spanish quack,
till at last you pass it on to your children or the poor. And now one
word more. If your conscience will let you, abandon the pursuit of de
Garcia. Take your fortune and go with it to England; wed that maid whom
you desire, and follow after happiness in whatever way seems best to
you. Who are you that you should meet out vengeance on this knave de
Garcia? Let him be, and he will avenge himself upon himself. Otherwise
you may undergo much toil and danger, and in the end lose love, and
life, and fortune at a blow.'

'But I have sworn to kill him,' I answered, 'and how can I break so
solemn an oath? How could I sit at home in peace beneath the burden of
such shame?'

'I do not know; it is not for me to judge. You must do as you wish, but
in the doing of it, it may happen that you will fall into greater shames
than this. You have fought the man and he has escaped you. Let him go if
you are wise. Now bend down and kiss me, and bid me farewell. I do not
desire that you should see me die, and my death is near. I cannot tell
if we shall meet again when in your turn you have lain as I lie now, or
if we shape our course for different stars. If so, farewell for ever.'

Then I leant down and kissed him on the forehead, and as I did so I
wept, for not till this hour did I learn how truly I had come to love
him, so truly that it seemed to me as though my father lay there dying.

'Weep not,' he said, 'for all our life is but a parting. Once I had a
son like you, and ours was the bitterest of farewells. Now I go to seek
for him again who could not come back to me, so weep not because I die.
Good-bye, Thomas Wingfield. May God prosper and protect you! Now go!'

So I went weeping, and that night, before the dawn, all was over with
Andres de Fonseca. They told me that he was conscious to the end and
died murmuring the name of that son of whom he spoke in his last words
to me.

What was the history of this son, or of Fonseca himself, I never
learned, for like an Indian he hid his trail as step by step he wandered
down the path of life. He never spoke of his past, and in all the books
and documents that he left behind him there is no allusion to it. Once,
some years ago, I read through the cipher volumes of records that I have
spoken of, and of which he gave me the key before he died. They stand
before me on the shelf as I write, and in them are many histories of
shame, sorrow, and evil, of faith deluded and innocence betrayed, of
the cruelty of priests, of avarice triumphant over love, and of love
triumphant over death--enough, indeed, to furnish half a hundred of
true romances. But among these chronicles of a generation now past and
forgotten, there is no mention of Fonseca's own name and no hint of his
own story. It is lost for ever, and perhaps this is well. So died my
benefactor and best friend.

When he was made ready for burial I went in to see him and he looked
calm and beautiful in his death sleep. Then it was that she who had
arrayed him for the grave handed to me two portraits most delicately
painted on ivory and set in gold, which had been found about his neck.
I have them yet. One is of the head of a lady with a sweet and wistful
countenance, and the other the face of a dead youth also beautiful, but
very sad. Doubtless they were mother and son, but I know no more about
them.

On the morrow I buried Andres de Fonseca, but with no pomp, for he had
said that he wished as little money as possible spent upon his dead
body, and returned to the house to meet the notaries. Then the seals
were broken and the parchments read and I was put in full possession of
the dead man's wealth, and having deducted such sums as were payable for
dues, legacies, and fees, the notaries left me bowing humbly, for was I
not rich? Yes, I was rich, wealth had come to me without effort, and
I had reason to desire it, yet this was the saddest night that I had
passed since I set foot in Spain, for my mind was filled with doubts and
sorrow, and moreover my loneliness got a hold of me. But sad as it might
be, it was destined to seem yet more sorrowful before the morning. For
as I sat making pretence to eat, a servant came to me saying that a
woman waited in the outer room who had asked to see his late master.
Guessing that this was some client who had not heard of Fonseca's death
I was about to order that she should be dismissed, then bethought me
that I might be of service to her or at the least forget some of my own
trouble in listening to hers. So I bade him bring her in. Presently she
came, a tall woman wrapped in a dark cloak that hid her face. I bowed
and motioned to her to be seated, when suddenly she started and spoke.

'I asked to see Don Andres de Fonseca,' she said in a low quick voice.
'You are not he, senor.'

'Andres de Fonseca was buried to-day,' I answered. 'I was his assistant
in his business and am his heir. If I can serve you in any way I am at
your disposal.'

'You are young--very young,' she murmured confusedly, 'and the matter is
terrible and urgent. How can I trust you?'

'It is for you to judge, senora.'

She thought a while, then drew off her cloak, displaying the robes of a
nun.

'Listen,' she said. 'I must do many a penance for this night's work, and
very hardly have I won leave to come hither upon an errand of mercy. Now
I cannot go back empty-handed, so I must trust you. But first swear by
thine blessed Mother of God that you will not betray me.'

'I give you my word,' I answered; 'if that is not enough, let us end
this talk.'

'Do not be angry with me,' she pleaded; 'I have not left my convent
walls for many years and I am distraught with grief. I seek a poison of
the deadliest. I will pay well for it.'

'I am not the tool of murderers,' I answered. 'For what purpose do you
wish the poison?'

'Oh! I must tell you--yet how can I? In our convent there dies to-night
a woman young and fair, almost a girl indeed, who has broken the vows
she took. She dies to-night with her babe--thus, oh God, thus! by being
built alive into the foundations of the house she has disgraced. It is
the judgment that has been passed upon her, judgment without forgiveness
or reprieve. I am the abbess of this convent--ask not its name or
mine--and I love this sinner as though she were my daughter. I have
obtained this much of mercy for her because of my faithful services
to the church and by secret influence, that when I give her the cup of
water before the work is done, I may mix poison with it and touch the
lips of the babe with poison, so that their end is swift. I may do this
and yet have no sin upon my soul. I have my pardon under seal. Help me
then to be an innocent murderess, and to save this sinner from her last
agonies on earth.'

I cannot set down the feelings with which I listened to this tale
of horror, for words could not carry them. I stood aghast seeking an
answer, and a dreadful thought entered my mind.

'Is this woman named Isabella de Siguenza?' I asked.

'That name was hers in the world,' she answered, 'though how you know it
I cannot guess.'

'We know many things in this house, mother. Say now, can this Isabella
be saved by money or by interest?'

'It is impossible; her sentence has been confirmed by the Tribunal of
Mercy. She must die and within two hours. Will you not give the poison?'

'I cannot give it unless I know its purpose, mother. This may be a
barren tale, and the medicine might be used in such a fashion that I
should fall beneath the law. At one price only can I give it, and it is
that I am there to see it used.'

She thought a while and answered: 'It may be done, for as it chances the
wording of my absolution will cover it. But you must come cowled as a
priest, that those who carry out the sentence may know nothing. Still
others will know and I warn you that should you speak of the matter you
yourself will meet with misfortune. The Church avenges itself on those
who betray its secrets, senor.'

'As one day its secrets will avenge themselves upon the Church,' I
answered bitterly. 'And now let me seek a fitting drug--one that is
swift, yet not too swift, lest your hounds should see themselves baffled
of the prey before all their devilry is done. Here is something that
will do the work,' and I held up a phial that I drew from a case of such
medicines. 'Come, veil yourself, mother, and let us be gone upon this
"errand of mercy."'

She obeyed, and presently we left the house and walked away swiftly
through the crowded streets till we came to the ancient part of the city
along the river's edge. Here the woman led me to a wharf where a boat
was in waiting for her. We entered it, and were rowed for a mile or more
up the stream till the boat halted at a landing-place beneath a high
wall. Leaving it, we came to a door in the wall on which my companion
knocked thrice. Presently a shutter in the woodwork was drawn, and a
white face peeped through the grating and spoke. My companion answered
in a low voice, and after some delay the door was opened, and I found
myself in a large walled garden planted with orange trees. Then the
abbess spoke to me.

'I have led you to our house,' she said. 'If you know where you are, and
what its name may be, for your own sake I pray you forget it when you
leave these doors.'

I made no answer, but looked round the dim and dewy garden.

Here it was doubtless that de Garcia had met that unfortunate who must
die this night. A walk of a hundred paces brought us to another door in
the wall of a long low building of Moorish style. Here the knocking and
the questioning were repeated at more length. Then the door was opened,
and I found myself in a passage, ill lighted, long and narrow, in the
depths of which I could see the figures of nuns flitting to and fro like
bats in a tomb. The abbess walked down the passage till she came to a
door on the right which she opened. It led into a cell, and here she
left me in the dark. For ten minutes or more I stayed there, a prey to
thoughts that I had rather forget. At length the door opened again, and
she came in, followed by a tall priest whose face I could not see, for
he was dressed in the white robe and hood of the Dominicans that left
nothing visible except his eyes.

'Greeting, my son,' he said, when he had scanned me for a while. 'The
abbess mother has told me of your errand. You are full young for such a
task.'

'Were I old I should not love it better, father. You know the case. I
am asked to provide a deadly drug for a certain merciful purpose. I have
provided that drug, but I must be there to see that it is put to proper
use.'

'You are very cautious, my son. The Church is no murderess. This woman
must die because her sin is flagrant, and of late such wickedness
has become common. Therefore, after much thought and prayer, and many
searchings to find a means of mercy, she is condemned to death by those
whose names are too high to be spoken. I, alas, am here to see the
sentence carried out with a certain mitigation which has been allowed by
the mercy of her chief judge. It seems that your presence is needful to
this act of love, therefore I suffer it. The mother abbess has warned
you that evil dogs the feet of those who reveal the secrets of the
Church. For your own sake I pray you to lay that warning to heart.'

'I am no babbler, father, so the caution is not needed. One word more.
This visit should be well feed, the medicine is costly.'

'Fear not, physician,' the monk answered with a note of scorn in his
voice; 'name your sum, it shall be paid to you.'

'I ask no money, father. Indeed I would pay much to be far away
to-night. I ask only that I may be allowed to speak with this girl
before she dies.'

'What!' he said, starting, 'surely you are not that wicked man? If so,
you are bold indeed to risk the sharing of her fate.'

'No, father, I am not that man. I never saw Isabella de Siguenza except
once, and I have never spoken to her. I am not the man who tricked her
but I know him; he is named Juan de Garcia.'

'Ah!' he said quickly, 'she would never tell his real name, even under
threat of torture. Poor erring soul, she could be faithful in her
unfaith. Of what would you speak to her?'

'I wish to ask her whither this man has gone. He is my enemy, and I
would follow him as I have already followed him far. He has done worse
by me and mine than by this poor girl even. Grant my request, father,
that I may be able to work my vengeance on him, and with mine the
Church's also.'

'"Vengeance is mine," saith the Lord; "I will repay." Yet it may be,
son, that the Lord will choose you as the instrument of his wrath.
An opportunity shall be given you to speak with her. Now put on this
dress'--and he handed me a white Dominican hood and robe--'and follow
me.'

'First,' I said, 'let me give this medicine to the abbess, for I will
have no hand in its administering. Take it, mother, and when the time
comes, pour the contents of the phial into a cup of water. Then, having
touched the mouth and tongue of the babe with the fluid, give it to the
mother to drink and be sure that she does drink it. Before the bricks
are built up about them both will sleep sound, never to wake again.'

'I will do it,' murmured the abbess; 'having absolution I will be bold,
and do it for love and mercy's sake!'

'Your heart is too soft, sister. Justice is mercy,' said the monk with a
sigh. 'Alas for the frailty of the flesh that wars against the spirit!'

Then I clothed myself in the ghastly looking dress, and they took lamps
and motioned to me to follow them.



CHAPTER X

THE PASSING OF ISABELLA DE SIGUENZA


Silently we went down the long passage, and as we went I saw the eyes of
the dwellers in this living tomb watch us pass through the gratings of
their cell doors. Little wonder that the woman about to die had striven
to escape from such a home back to the world of life and love! Yet for
that crime she must perish. Surely God will remember the doings of such
men as these priests, and the nation that fosters them. And, in deed, He
does remember, for where is the splendour of Spain to-day, and where are
the cruel rites she gloried in? Here in England their fetters are broken
for ever, and in striving to bind them fast upon us free Englishmen she
is broken also--never to be whole again.

At the far end of the passage we found a stair down which we passed. At
its foot was an iron-bound door that the monk unlocked and locked
again upon the further side. Then came another passage hollowed in the
thickness of the wall, and a second door, and we were in the place of
death.

It was a vault low and damp, and the waters of the river washed its
outer wall, for I could hear their murmuring in the silence. Perhaps the
place may have measured ten paces in length by eight broad. For the rest
its roof was supported by massive columns, and on one side there was a
second door that led to a prison cell. At the further end of this gloomy
den, that was dimly lighted by torches and lamps, two men with hooded
heads, and draped in coarse black gowns, were at work, silently mixing
lime that sent up a hot steam upon the stagnant air. By their sides were
squares of dressed stone ranged neatly against the end of the vault, and
before them was a niche cut in the thickness of the wall itself, shaped
like a large coffin set upon its smaller end. In front of this niche was
placed a massive chair of chestnut wood. I noticed also that two other
such coffin-shaped niches had been cut in this same wall, and filled
in with similar blocks of whitish stone. On the face of each was a date
graved in deep letters. One had been sealed up some thirty years before,
and one hard upon a hundred.

These two men were the only occupants of the vault when we entered it,
but presently a sound of soft and solemn singing stole down the second
passage. Then the door was opened, the mason monks ceased labouring at
the heap of lime, and the sound of singing grew louder so that I could
catch the refrain. It was that of a Latin hymn for the dying. Next
through the open door came the choir, eight veiled nuns walking two
by two, and ranging themselves on either side of the vault they ceased
their singing. After them followed the doomed woman, guarded by two more
nuns, and last of all a priest bearing a crucifix. This man wore a black
robe, and his thin half-frenzied face was uncovered. All these and other
things I noticed and remembered, yet at the time it seemed to me that I
saw nothing except the figure of the victim. I knew her again, although
I had seen her but once in the moonlight. She was changed indeed, her
lovely face was fuller and the great tormented eyes shone like stars
against its waxen pallor, relieved by the carmine of her lips alone.
Still it was the same face that some eight months before I had seen
lifted in entreaty to her false lover. Now her tall shape was wrapped
about with grave clothes over which her black hair streamed, and in
her arms she bore a sleeping babe that from time to time she pressed
convulsively to her breast.

On the threshold of her tomb Isabella de Siguenza paused and looked
round wildly as though for help, scanning each of the silent watchers to
find a friend among them. Then her eye fell upon the niche and the heap
of smoking lime and the men who guarded it, and she shuddered and would
have fallen had not those who attended her led her to the chair and
placed her in it--a living corpse.

Now the dreadful rites began. The Dominican father stood before her and
recited her offence, and the sentence that had been passed upon her,
which doomed her, 'to be left alone with God and the child of your sin,
that He may deal with you as He sees fit.'* To all of this she seemed to
pay no heed, nor to the exhortation that followed. At length he ceased
with a sigh, and turning to me said:

'Draw near to this sinner, brother, and speak with her before it is too
late.'

     * Lest such cruelty should seem impossible and
     unprecedented, the writer may mention that in the museum of
     the city of Mexico, he has seen the desiccated body of a
     young woman, which was found immured in the walls of a
     religious building.  With it is the body of an infant.
     Although the exact cause of her execution remains a matter
     of conjecture, there can be no doubt as to the manner of her
     death, for in addition to other evidences, the marks of the
     rope with which her limbs were bound in life are still
     distinctly visible. Such in those days were the mercies of
     religion!

Then he bade all present gather themselves at the far end of the vault
that our talk might not be overheard, and they did so without wonder,
thinking doubtless that I was a monk sent to confess the doomed woman.

So I drew near with a beating heart, and bending over her I spoke in her
ear.

'Listen to me, Isabella de Siguenza!' I said; and as I uttered the name
she started wildly. 'Where is that de Garcia who deceived and deserted
you?'

'How have you learnt his true name?' she answered. 'Not even torture
would have wrung it from me as you know.'

'I am no monk and I know nothing. I am that man who fought with de
Garcia on the night when you were taken, and who would have killed him
had you not seized me.'

'At the least I saved him, that is my comfort now.'

'Isabella de Siguenza,' I said, 'I am your friend, the best you ever had
and the last, as you shall learn presently. Tell me where this man is,
for there is that between us which must be settled.'

'If you are my friend, weary me no more. I do not know where he is.
Months ago he went whither you will scarcely follow, to the furthest
Indies; but you will never find him there.'

'It may still be that I shall, and if it should so chance, say have you
any message for this man?'

'None--yes, this. Tell him how we died, his child and his wife--tell him
that I did my best to hide his name from the priests lest some like fate
should befall him.'

'Is that all?'

'Yes. No, it is not all. Tell him that I passed away loving and
forgiving.'

'My time is short,' I said; 'awake and listen!' for having spoken thus
she seemed to be sinking into a lethargy. 'I was the assistant of that
Andres de Fonseca whose counsel you put aside to your ruin, and I have
given a certain drug to the abbess yonder. When she offers you the cup
of water, see that you drink and deep, you and the child. If so none
shall ever die more happily. Do you understand?'

'Yes--yes,' she gasped, 'and may blessings rest upon you for the gift.
Now I am no more afraid--for I have long desired to die--it was the way
I feared.'

'Then farewell, and God be with you, unhappy woman.'

'Farewell,' she answered softly, 'but call me not unhappy who am about
to die thus easily with that I love.' And she glanced at the sleeping
babe.

Then I drew back and stood with bent head, speaking no word. Now the
Dominican motioned to all to take the places where they had stood before
and asked her:

'Erring sister, have you aught to say before you are silent for ever?'

'Yes,' she answered in a clear, sweet voice, that never even quavered,
so bold had she become since she learned that her death would be swift
and easy. 'Yes, I have this to say, that I go to my end with a clean
heart, for if I have sinned it is against custom and not against God.
I broke the vows indeed, but I was forced to take those vows, and,
therefore, they did not bind. I was a woman born for light and love,
and yet I was thrust into the darkness of this cloister, there to wither
dead in life. And so I broke the vows, and I am glad that I have
broken them, though it has brought me to this. If I was deceived and
my marriage is no marriage before the law as they tell me now, I knew
nothing of it, therefore to me it is still valid and holy and on my soul
there rests no stain. At the least I have lived, and for some few hours
I have been wife and mother, and it is as well to die swiftly in this
cell that your mercy has prepared, as more slowly in those above. And
now for you--I tell you that your wickedness shall find you out, you who
dare to say to God's children--"Ye shall not love," and to work murder
on them because they will not listen. It shall find you out I say, and
not only you but the Church you serve. Both priest and Church shall be
broken together and shall be a scorn in the mouths of men to come.'

'She is distraught,' said the Dominican as a sigh of fear and wonder
went round the vault, 'and blasphemes in her madness. Forget her words.
Shrive her, brother, swiftly ere she adds to them.'

Then the black-robed, keen-eyed priest came to her, and holding the
cross before her face, began to mutter I know not what. But she rose
from the chair and thrust the crucifix aside.

'Peace!' she said, 'I will not be shriven by such as you. I take my sins
to God and not to you--you who do murder in the name of Christ.'

The fanatic heard and a fury took him.

'Then go unshriven down to hell, you--' and he named her by ill names
and struck her in the face with the ivory crucifix.

The Dominican bade him cease his revilings angrily enough, but Isabella
de Siguenza wiped her bruised brow and laughed aloud a dreadful laugh to
hear.

'Now I see that you are a coward also,' she said. 'Priest, this is my
last prayer, that you also may perish at the hands of fanatics, and more
terribly than I die to-night.'

Then they hurried her into the place prepared for her and she spoke
again:

'Give me to drink, for we thirst, my babe and I!'

Now I saw the abbess enter that passage whence the victim had been led.
Presently she came back bearing a cup of water in her hand and with it a
loaf of bread, and I knew by her mien that my draught was in the water.
But of what befell afterwards I cannot say certainly, for I prayed
the Dominican to open the door by which we had entered the vault, and
passing through it I stood dazed with horror at some distance. A
while went by, I do not know how long, till at length I saw the abbess
standing before me, a lantern in her hand, and she was sobbing bitterly.

'All is done,' she said. 'Nay, have no fear, the draught worked well.
Before ever a stone was laid mother and child slept sound. Alas for her
soul who died unrepentant and unshriven!'

'Alas for the souls of all who have shared in this night's work,' I
answered. 'Now, mother, let me hence, and may we never meet again!'

Then she led me back to the cell, where I tore off that accursed monk's
robe, and thence to the door in the garden wall and to the boat which
still waited on the river, and I rejoiced to feel the sweet air upon my
face as one rejoices who awakes from some foul dream. But I won little
sleep that night, nor indeed for some days to come. For whenever I
closed my eyes there rose before me the vision of that beauteous woman
