of Bombay, to give my opinion as to whether it is expedient to
render any assistance to Nana Furnuwees. It is, to them, almost as
important as to Nana that Scindia should not obtain supreme power.
I have replied that I could not recommend any such step, for that
Nana's cause seemed altogether lost; and that any aid to him would
be absolutely useless, and would only serve Scindia with a pretext
for declaring war against us. Of course, what you have told me
entirely alters the situation. It will not be necessary for the
Council to assist Nana, but they can give him fair words and, even
if Balloba should win the day, he will have no ground for accusing
us of having aided Nana.

"It is impossible to overlook the value of your communication, Mr.
Lindsay; and I can promise you that you will not find the
Government of Bombay ungrateful, for it will relieve them of the
anxiety which the progress of events here has caused them."

On leaving the Residency, Harry returned to the farm where he had left
his horse and, early next morning, put on his disguise again, painted
lines round his eyes, touched some of the hairs of his eyebrows with
white paint, mixed some white horsehair with the tuft on the top of his
head, and dropped a little juice of a plant resembling belladonna--used
at times, by ladies in the east, to dilate the pupils of their eyes and
make them dark and brilliant--in his eyes.

Soyera had told him of this herb, when he related to her how Balloba
had detected him by the lightness of his eyes. He was greatly surprised
at the alteration it effected in his appearance, and felt assured that
even Balloba himself would not again recognize him.

He bought a dozen sacks of grain from the farmer and, placing these
in the bullock cart, started for Scindia's camp. He had, during the
night, buried the gold; for he thought that, until he knew his
ground, and could feel certain of entering Bajee Rao's camp
unquestioned, it would be better that there should be nothing in
the cart, were he searched, to betray him. He carried in his hand
the long staff universally used by bullock drivers and, passing
through Poona, arrived an hour later at the camp, which was pitched
some three miles from the city.

As large numbers of carts, with forage and provisions, arrived
daily in the camp for the use of the troops, no attention whatever
was paid to him and, on enquiring for the encampment of Bajee
Rao--one of whose officers had, he said, purchased the grain, for
his horses and those of his officers and escort--he soon found the
spot, which was on somewhat rising ground in the centre of the
camp. It was much larger than he had expected to find it as, beyond
being prevented from leaving, Bajee had full liberty, and was even
permitted to have some of his friends round him, and two or three
dozen troopers of his household regiment.

In charge of these was a young officer, who was well known to Harry
during the time of Mahdoo Rao. Seeing him standing in front of a
tent, Harry stopped the cart opposite to him and, leaving it, went
up to him.

"Where shall I unload the cart?" he asked.

"I know nothing about it," the officer said. "Who has ordered it?
The supply will be welcome enough, for we are very short of
forage."

Then, changing his tone, Harry said:

"You do not know me, Nujeef. I am your friend, Puntojee."

"Impossible!" the other said, incredulously.

"It is so. I am not here for amusement, as you may guess; but am on
a private mission to Bajee Rao. Will you inform him that I am here?
I dare not say whom I come from, even to you; but can explain
myself fully to him."

"I will let him know, certainly, Puntojee; but there is little
doubt that Balloba has his spies here, and it will be necessary to
arrange that your meeting shall not be noticed. Do you sit down
here by your cart, as if waiting for orders where to unload it. I
will go across to Bajee's tent, and see him."

Nujeef accordingly went over to the rajah's tent, and returned in a
quarter of an hour.

"Bajee will see you," he said. "First unload your grain in the
lines of our cavalry, place some in front of your bullocks, and
leave them there; then cross to the tent next to Bajee's. It is
occupied by one of his officers, who carries the purse and makes
payments. Should you be watched, it would seem that you are only
going there to receive the price of the grain. Bajee himself will
slip out of the rear of his tent, and enter the next in the same
way. The officer is, at present, absent; so that you can talk
without anyone having an idea that you and Bajee are together."

Harry carried out the arrangement and, after leaving his bullocks,
made his way to the spot indicated. He found the young rajah had
gone there.

"And you are Puntojee!" the latter said. "I saw you but a few
times, but Rao Phurkay has often mentioned your name, to me, as
being one who stood high in the confidence of my cousin Mahdoo.
Nujeef tells me that you have a private communication to make to
me; and indeed, I can well believe that. You would not thus
disguise yourself, unless the business was important."

"It is, Your Highness. Nana Furnuwees has received your message. He
reciprocates your expressions of friendship, and has sent me here
to let you know that the time is approaching when your deliverance
from Balloba can be achieved."

He then delivered the message with which he had been entrusted.
Bajee's face became radiant, as he went on.

"This is news, indeed," he said. "That Phurkay was faithful to me,
I knew; but I thought that he was the only friend I had left. Truly
Nana Furnuwees is a great man, and I will gladly give the
undertaking he asks for; that, in the event of his succeeding in
placing me on the musnud, he shall be my minister, with the same
authority and power that he had under Mahdoo."

"I have, at the farmhouse where I am stopping, a thousand gold
mohurs, which Nana has sent to enable you to begin your
preparations; but he urges that you should be extremely careful
for, as you see by what I have told you, he has ample power to
carry out the plan without any assistance from yourself, and it is
most important that nothing shall be done that can arouse the
suspicions of Balloba, until all is ready for the final stroke. I
have not brought it with me, today, as I knew not how vigilant they
might be in camp, and it was possible that my sacks of grain might
be examined. As, however, I passed in without question, I will
bring it when I next come, which will be in two days."

"I suppose there is no objection to my telling Phurkay what is
being done?"

"None at all, Your Highness. He has not yet been informed, though
communications have passed between him and Nana. But, although the
latter was well convinced of his devotion, he thought it safer that
no one should know the extent of the plot, until all was in
readiness."

Two days later, Harry made another journey to the camp, and this
time with the bags of money hidden among the grain, in one of the
sacks. He saw Bajee Rao, as before, and received from him a paper,
with the undertaking required by Nana. The sack containing the
money was put down where Bajee's horses were picketed, and was
there opened by a confidential servant, who carried the bags into
the tent which was close by.

As he was leaving the camp, Harry had reason to congratulate
himself on the precautions that he had taken; for he met Balloba,
riding along with a number of officers. Harry had, with his change
of costume, assumed the appearance of age. He walked by the side of
the bullocks, stooping greatly and leaning on his staff; and the
minister passed without even glancing at him.

Harry, on his return, paid the farmer for the hire of his cart. The
latter was well pleased for, in addition to the money so earned, he
had charged a good price for the two waggon loads of grain. Harry
then put off the peasant's dress, and resumed that of a trooper,
and rode back to Raygurh, where he reported to Nana the success of
his mission.



Chapter 5: Down To Bombay.


Harry's stay with Nana was a short one as, in three days, he was
again sent to Poona. This time he was to take up his abode at a
large house, occupied by two of the leaders of Bajee's party; the
rajah having told him that he would request them to entertain him,
if he should again come to Poona. He was the bearer of fifty
thousand rupees, principally in gold, which he was to give to them
for the use of Bajee. He had no message this time for the prince,
personally, Nana having said to him:

"I want you to let me know how matters are going on. The young man
may do something rash and, if Balloba's suspicions are in any way
excited, he may send him to some distant fortress; which would
seriously upset my plans, for I should have to retain Chimnajee in
power, as representative of his brother.

"We know that he was placed on the musnud greatly in opposition to
his wishes; and he certainly hailed, with pleasure, the prospect of
Bajee's release. Still, it would not be the same thing for me. A
minister of the Peishwa can rule without question by the people
but, acting only as minister to a representative of the Peishwa, he
would be far more severely criticised; and it is certain that, to
raise money for paying Scindia the sum that has been agreed upon,
extra taxation must be put on, the odium resulting from which would
fall upon me."

The two officers received Harry cordially. He had personally known
them both and, as Nana's representative, they would have treated
him with much honour, had it not been pointed out to them that this
might be fatal to their plans for, did Balloba hear that some
strange officer was being so treated by them, he would be sure to
set at once about finding out who he was, and what he was doing
there.

"Matters are going on well," they said. "The old general, Manajee
Phurkay, who was one of Rugoba's devoted adherents, is now staying
in Bajee's camp, and is enlisting men for his service."

"Where are they being assembled?"

"In Bajee's camp. He is not interfered with, there."

"It appears to be a very rash proceeding," Harry said. "It is true
that Bajee has apparent liberty, and can have with him in his camp
many of his friends; but a gathering of armed men can scarcely
escape the eye of so keen an observer as Balloba."

[Illustration: Harry . . . saw a party of soldiers coming along the]
road.

A few days later, Harry, being out one evening, saw a party of
soldiers coming along the road from the direction of Scindia's
camp. This was unusual for, in order to prevent plundering, the
orders were stringent that none of Scindia's troops should enter
Poona. He hurried back to the house, and acquainted the two leaders
with what he had seen. They were inclined to laugh at his
apprehension but, when a body of horsemen were seen coming down the
street, they issued orders for the doors to be closed and
barricaded. There were some twenty men in the house, and when the
officer who commanded the detachment summoned them to open the
door, and to deliver the two nobles to him, he was met by a decided
refusal, from the chiefs themselves, from an upper window.

The officer then ordered his men to dismount and break open the
door but, when they attempted to do so, they were met by a fire of
musketry from every window. Many fell; and the officer, seeing that
the house could not be taken, except by a force much larger than
that at his command, rode off at full speed, with the survivors, to
Scindia's camp.

No sooner had they gone than the horses were brought out from the
stables, and the two officers, with ten of their troopers, rode off
at full speed. Harry refused to accompany them, as he wished to see
what had really happened, in order to carry the news to Nana. He
therefore rode out to the farmhouse where he had before stayed,
left his horse there, and returned to Poona.

Here he heard that Rao Phurkay had been seized, and that Bajee
Rao's encampment was surrounded by troops, who suffered none to
enter or leave it. The next morning he went over there and found
that, as the supply of water had been cut off, the garrison had
surrendered; all being allowed to depart, with the exception of
Bajee, over whom a strong guard had been placed.

Before they left, Manajee Phurkay gave them all directions to
gather in the neighbourhood of Waee. They did so, and were joined
at once by the two chiefs. Nana promptly sent them a supply of
money, telling them to take up their position at the Salpee Ghaut;
where they were speedily joined by ten thousand men, and openly
declared for Bajee Rao.

In the meantime Balloba, believing that the whole plot was the work
of Bajee Rao, determined to despatch him, as a prisoner, to a
fortress in the heart of Scindia's dominions. He sent him off with
a strong escort, under the charge of an officer named Sukaram
Ghatgay who, although having command only of a troop of one hundred
horse, belonged to an ancient and honourable family.

Balloba could hardly have made a worse choice. Ghatgay had a
daughter who was reported to be of exceptional beauty, and the
young Scindia had asked her father for her hand. Ghatgay, an
ambitious and enterprising man, had given no decided answer; not
from any real hesitation, for he saw how enormous would be the
advantage, to himself, of such an alliance; but in order to
increase Scindia's ardour by pretended opposition, and so to secure
the best terms possible for himself. The reason he gave would
appear natural to any Mahratta of good blood, as none of these
would have given a daughter of their house to one who, however high
in rank, had ancestors belonging to a low caste.

Upon the way, Bajee, who was aware of Scindia's wishes, and was
most anxious to obtain his goodwill, urged Ghatgay to give him his
daughter in marriage and, after much pretended hesitation, the
latter agreed to do so--on condition that Bajee would authorize him
to promise Scindia a large sum of money, as soon as he again
ascended the musnud; and that he would get the prince to appoint
him his prime minister, which post would be vacant at the overthrow
of Balloba. This being arranged, Bajee Rao pretended that he was
seriously ill; and Ghatgay therefore halted, with his escort, on
the banks of the Paira.

Taking with him his disguise as a countryman, Harry, as soon as he
learned that Ghatgay had started with Bajee, mounted and followed
him; and travelled, at some little distance in rear of the party,
until they halted. Then he went to the house of a cultivator, left
his horse there, and exchanged his dress as fighting man for that
of a countryman.

There was no occasion for him, now, to disguise his age or darken
his eyes and, as before, he hired a cart, bought some grain for
forage, some sacks of rice and other things, and boldly entered
Ghatgay's camp. As the prices he asked were low, Ghatgay purchased
the whole contents of his cart. When this was cleared, Harry left
his cattle and wandered about, saying that he and the animals
needed an hour's rest.

Presently he passed Bajee Rao, who was standing listlessly at the
door of a tent.

"I am Puntojee," Harry said, as he passed. "I followed you with the
horse, that I might help you to escape."

"Stay and talk to me here," the young prince said. "It will seem
that I am only passing my time in asking you questions about the
country."

"I wanted to ascertain the road by which you will travel, after
crossing the river. I have money with me, and will endeavour to
raise a force of forty or fifty men; with which to make a sudden
attack upon your camp, after nightfall. I will bring a good horse
with me. If you will run out when you hear the uproar, I will ride
up with the spare horse. You will leap on to its back, and we can
gallop off."

"You are a brave fellow, Puntojee, and I thank you heartily for
your offer; but, happily, I stand in no need of it. I have gained
Ghatgay over, and he will linger here until we hear that Balloba
has been arrested, and that Nana Furnuwees is approaching Poona.
Believe me, I shall never forget your offer, or the fidelity that
has prompted it; and when I am established as Peishwa you shall, if
it pleases you, have any post at court you may desire."

"I thank you much, Prince; but I am an officer of Nana, and know
that, in acting as I have done, I am acting in his interest, as
well as yours. I am glad that the necessity for making an attack
upon the camp is obviated. I might have had considerable trouble in
raising a sufficient force for such a purpose, for even the most
reckless would hesitate to fall on one of Scindia's officers; and
in the next place, although I doubt not that I should have been
able to carry you off, Ghatgay would, as soon as he had beaten off
the attacking party, have set out in pursuit, and raised the whole
country, and the difficulty of reaching the Western Ghauts would
have been immense.

"I hope to see Your Highness at Poona."

So saying, he strolled carelessly back to the bullock cart, waited
till the animals had finished their feed, and then drove off again;
returned the cart to its owner, and started again for Poona.

On his arrival there, he went to the Residency and informed Mr.
Malet that Bajee had gained over the officer who was escorting him,
and was ready to come back to Poona, as soon as the blow was
struck.

"It will be struck soon," Mr. Malet said. "All is in readiness. I
sent your report on to the Council, urging that, as it seemed
likely that Bajee Rao would soon be on the musnud, they should
express their readiness to recognize him. I received a despatch
only yesterday, saying that they perfectly agreed with me, and had
already sent off a messenger to Nana stating their willingness to
recognize Bajee as lawful heir to the late Peishwa.

"Things are working well. The Nizam's general has been ordered to
watch Purseram Bhow, who is raising troops for the purpose of
aiding in crushing Bajee's supporters. Holkar and Scindia's troops
also are in readiness to move and, after the fete of the Dussera,
the regular battalions in the Peishwa's service, commanded by Mr.
Boyd, will march to the Neera bridge, and a brigade of Scindia's
regulars will move against Raygurh.

"It is evident that neither Balloba nor Purseram has the slightest
suspicion of what is going on, or they would never have despatched
troops from here. I certainly have felt very uneasy, since Bajee
was carried away; for he is a necessary figure, and should be here
as soon as Nana arrives, otherwise there would be no recognized
head. It would have been hopeless to try to deliver him, once
imprisoned in one of the strong fortresses in Scindia's dominions;
and the latter could have made any terms for himself that he chose
to dictate.

"Your news has relieved me of this anxiety, and I think it probable
that everything will now be managed without bloodshed; and that we
may, for a time, have peace here."

The next morning, Harry rode off and rejoined Nana, who thanked him
warmly for the manner in which he had carried out his mission, and
especially for his offer to attempt to rescue Bajee from his
captors.

"It would have been the greatest misfortune," he said, "had he been
carried far away. I should have been obliged to recognize his
brother Chimnajee; and Scindia, having Bajee in his hands, would
have kept up a constant pressure, and might probably have marched
to Poona to restore him; which he would certainly have succeeded in
doing, for the feeling of the population would have been all in
favour of the lawful heir.

"As a token of my satisfaction, here is an order upon my treasurer
for fifty thousand rupees."

All being ready, Scindia, on the 27th of October, suddenly arrested
Balloba; and sent a body of his troops, with those of the Nizam's
general, for the purpose of seizing Purseram Bhow. The latter,
receiving news of what had happened in good time, and taking with
him Chimnajee, fled to a fortress; but was quickly pursued, and
obliged to surrender. Bajee Rao was brought back to Beema, eighteen
miles from Poona. His brother Amrud, and Rao Phurkay, were also
released.

Nana joined his army at the Salpee Ghaut, and Scindia's infantry,
under Mr. Boyd, marched for the capital; which Nana refused to
enter, however, until he had received a formal declaration, from
Bajee, that he intended no treachery against him. This pledge was
given; and a treaty was, at the same time, entered into by the
Nizam and Scindia, both agreeing to establish Bajee Rao on the
musnud, and reinstate Nana as his prime minister. These matters
being settled, Nana returned to Poona, from which he had been
absent for nearly a year, and resumed the duties of prime minister.

A fortnight later, Bajee Rao was solemnly invested as Peishwa. One
of his first acts was to send for Harry, to whom he gave a robe of
honour, and thirty thousand rupees in money, in token of his
gratitude for the risk he had run in communicating with him, and
for his daring proposal to rescue him from the hands of his escort.

On the day after Nana's re-entry into the capital, Harry received a
note from Mr. Malet, asking him to call.

"I expect Colonel Palmer to relieve me of my duties here, in the
course of a day or two. I need scarcely say I shall be glad to be
released from a work which is surrounded with infinite difficulty,
and which constantly upsets all human calculations. Nana is in
power again; but another turn of the wheel may take place, at any
moment, and he may again be an exile, or possibly a prisoner.

"It seems to me that it would be well for you to accompany me to
Bombay. The remembrance of your services will be fresh, and they
cannot but be recognized by the Council. That body is frequently
changed and, in two or three years' time, there will be fresh men,
who will know nothing of what has happened now, and be indisposed
to rake up old reports and letters, or to reward past services;
especially as the whole position here may have altered, half a
dozen times, before that."

"I will gladly do so, sir, and thank you very heartily for your
kindness. I will ride over to Jooneer, tomorrow, and bring my old
nurse down with me; and I have no doubt Sufder will be willing to
accompany us. He has rendered good services to Nana; and the latter
will, I am sure, grant him leave of absence for as long as may be
necessary."

"I think it would certainly be best to take them both down, if
possible. They could make affidavits, in Bombay, that would place
it beyond doubt that you are Major Lindsay's son. It is morally
certain that there are relatives of your father and mother still
living, in England. I do not say that you require any assistance
from them; but when you return home, as everyone does, two or three
times, in the course of his Indian service, it would be pleasant to
find friends there; and it would be well that your position should
be established beyond all question."

"I will gladly go down with you," Soyera said, when Harry laid the
matter before her. "I am happy and contented here, but should be glad
to see Bombay again. It was my home for ten years. I am very glad you
have made up your mind to go, for it is time that you should take your
place among your countrymen; and the recommendation of the Resident
at the court of Poona is as good a one as you could wish for.

"I should say that you had better give up, at once, staining your
skin. I can see that you have not used the dye for some days, and
it would be as well to recover your proper colour, before Mr. Malet
introduces you to the Council at Bombay."

"I will ride down to the town," Harry said, "and engage a gharry [a
native carriage] to carry you to Poona. When we get there, I shall
learn what route Mr. Malet will take, and how fast he will travel;
and shall then see which will be the best for you--to go down in a
gharry, or to be carried in a dhoolie [a palanquin]."

"But all this will cost money, Harry."

"I am well provided with funds," Harry said, "for the Nana and
Bajee Rao have both made me handsome presents for the services I
rendered them. There is, therefore, no reason why we should not
travel in comfort."

They arrived at Poona two days later; and Harry--having ascertained
that the new Resident would not arrive until the next day, and that
he would probably wish Mr. Malet to defer his departure for at
least two days, in order to give him his experience of the factions
and intrigues there, and of the character of all those who were
likely to influence events--rode to see Nana, who had not yet
returned to Poona.

"I have come, your excellency," he said, "to tell you that it is my
wish to retire from the public service."

The minister looked greatly surprised.

"Why, Puntojee," he said, "this sounds like madness. Young as you
are, you have secured powerful protectors, both in the Peishwa and
myself; and you may hope to reach a high office in the state, as
you grow older.

"I do not know, though," he went on, speaking to himself rather
than to the lad, "that high office is a thing to be desired. It
means being mixed up in intrigues of all kinds, being the object of
jealousy and hatred, and running a terrible risk of ruin at every
change in the government here."

Then he turned again to Harry.

"And what are you thinking of doing?"

"I will speak frankly to your highness. I am not a Mahratta, as you
and everyone else suppose. I am the son of English parents."

And he then went on to give an account of the killing of his father
and mother, and of how he was saved by Soyera, and brought up as
her son; until such times as he might, with advantage, go down to
Bombay. Nana listened with great interest.

