for room, they had to do everything on the same spot. The corpses of
those who had died from their wounds, exposure to the weather, and the
like lay heaped one upon another. The smells were intolerable; and the
prisoners were at the same time afflicted by hunger and thirst. During
eight months they were allowed only about half a pint of water and a
pint of food a day.[44] Every kind of misery which could befall man in
such a place befell them. This was the condition of all the captives
for about ten weeks. At length the Syracusans sold them, with the
exception of the Athenians and of any Sicilian or Italian Greeks who
had sided with them in the war. The whole number of the public
prisoners is not accurately known, but they were not less than seven
thousand.

Of all the Hellenic actions which took place in this war, or indeed of
all Hellenic actions which are on record, this was the greatest--the
most glorious to the victors, the most ruinous to the vanquished; for
they were utterly and at all points defeated, and their sufferings
were prodigious. Fleet and army perished from the face of the earth;
nothing was saved, and of the many who went forth few returned home.

Thus ended the Sicilian expedition.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 36: From Book VII of the "History of the Peloponnesian War,"
translated by Benjamin Jowett. "The noblest piece of tragedy in all
written history," says John Morley of this book. Gray, the poet, in
one of his letters, inquired, "Is it, or is it not, the finest thing
you ever read in your life?" Macaulay, in a letter once wrote: "I do
assure you that there is no prose composition in the world that I
place so high as the Seventh book of Thucydides. Tacitus was a great
man, but he was not up to the Sicilian expedition." Praise is given to
this chapter by Mahaffy for "the sustained splendor of the narrative."
Grote had profound admiration for the famous picture contained in the
selection here given. He refers to its "condensed and burning phrases"
as imparting an impression which modern historians have sought in vain
to convey.]

[Footnote 37: The modern Catania, on the east coast of Sicily.]

[Footnote 38: The people of Acarnania, a province of Greece, lying on
the Ionian Sea south of the Ambracian Gulf.]

[Footnote 39: Commander of the Athenians.]

[Footnote 40: The Spartan general who had been sent to Syracuse by
advice of Alcibiades after he went over to the enemy.]

[Footnote 41: Next under Nicias in command of the expedition. He died
twenty-nine years before the birth of the orator of the same name.]

[Footnote 42: Here occurred one of the most memorable events in the
Peloponnesian war, the defense of Pylos under Demosthenes.]

[Footnote 43: This island lies immediately south of Pylos. It is long
and narrow and guards the Bay of Navarino, the largest harbor in
Greece, which was the scene of a famous battle between the English,
French, Turkish, and Russian fleets in 1827.]

[Footnote 44: This allowance of food was only about one-half the
amount usually given to a slave.]




XENOPHON

     Born in Athens about 430 B.C.; died after 357; celebrated as
     historian and essayist, being a disciple of Socrates; joined
     the expedition of Cyrus the Younger in 401, and after the
     battle of Cunaxa became the chief leader of ten thousand
     Greeks in their march to the Black Sea, the story being
     chronicled in his famous "Anabasis"; fought on the Spartan
     side in the battle of Coronea; banished from Athens, he
     settled at Scillus in Eleia; spent his last years in
     Corinth; among his writings besides the "Anabasis" are the
     "Hellenica," "Cycropaedia," "Memorabilia of Socrates," and
     essays on hunting and horsemanship.

I

THE CHARACTER OF CYRUS THE YOUNGER[45]


Thus then died Cyrus, a man who, of all the Persians since Cyrus the
Elder, was the most princely and most worthy of empire, as is agreed
by all who appear to have had personal knowledge of him. In the first
place, while he was yet with his brother and the other youths, he was
a boy, and when he was receiving his education thought to surpass them
all in everything. For without exception the sons of the Persian
nobles are educated at the gates of the king;[46] where they may learn
many a lesson of virtuous conduct, but can see or hear nothing
disgraceful. In this place the boys see some honored by the king, and
others disgraced, and hear of them; so that in their very childhood
they learn to govern and to obey.

Here Cyrus, first of all, showed himself most remarkable for modesty
among those of his own age, and for paying more ready obedience to his
elders than even those who were inferior to him in station; and next
he was noted for his fondness for horses, and for managing them in a
superior manner. They found him, too, very desirous of learning and
most assiduous in practising the warlike exercises of archery and
hurling the javelin. When it suited his age, he grew extremely fond of
the chase, and of braving dangers in encounters with wild beasts. On
one occasion he did not shrink from a she bear that attacked him;
however, in grappling with her, he was dragged from his horse, and
received some wounds, the scars of which were visible on his body, but
at last killed her. The person who first came to his assistance he
made a happy man in the eyes of many.

When he was sent down by his father, as satrap of Lydia and Great
Phrygia and Cappadocia, and was also appointed commander of all the
troops whose duty it is to muster in the plain of Castolus, he soon
showed that if he made a league or compact with any one, or gave a
promise, he deemed it of the utmost importance not to break his word.
Accordingly, the states that were committed to his charge, as well as
individuals, had the greatest confidence in him; and if any one had
been his enemy, he felt secure that if Cyrus entered into a treaty
with him, he should suffer no infraction of the stipulations. When,
therefore, he waged war against Tissaphernes,[47] all the cities, of
their own accord, chose to adhere to Cyrus in preference to
Tissaphernes, except the Milesians; but they feared Cyrus, because he
would not abandon the cause of the exiles; for he both showed by his
deeds, and declared in words, that he would never desert them, since
he had once become a friend to them, not even tho they should grow
still fewer in number, and be in a worse condition than they were.

Whenever any one did Cyrus a kindness or an injury, he showed himself
anxious to go beyond him in those respects; and some used to mention a
wish of his, that he "desired to live long enough to outdo both those
who had done him good, and those who had done him ill, in the requital
that he should make." Accordingly, to him alone of the men of our days
were so great a number of people desirous of committing the disposal
of their property, their cities, and their own person.

Yet no one could with truth say this of him, that he suffered the
criminal or unjust to deride his authority; for he of all men
inflicted punishment most unsparingly; and there were often to be
seen, along the most frequented roads, men deprived of their feet, or
hands, or eyes; so that in Cyrus' dominions it was possible for any
one, Greek or barbarian, who did no wrong, to travel without fear
whithersoever he pleased, and having with him whatever might suit his
convenience.

To those who showed ability for war, it is acknowledged that he paid
distinguished honor. His first war was with the Pisidians and Mysians;
and, marching in person into these countries, he made those whom he
saw voluntarily hazarding their lives in his service governors over
the territory that he subdued, and distinguished them with rewards in
other ways, so that the brave appeared to be the most fortunate of
men, while the cowardly were deemed fit only to be their slaves. There
were, therefore, great numbers of persons who voluntarily exposed
themselves to danger wherever they thought that Cyrus would become
aware of their exertions.

With regard to justice, if any appeared to him inclined to display
that virtue, he made a point of making such men richer than those who
sought to profit by injustice. Accordingly, while in many other
respects his affairs were administered judiciously, he likewise
possest an army worthy of the name. For it was not for money that
generals and captains came from foreign lands to enter into his
service, but because they were persuaded that to serve Cyrus well
would be more profitable than any amount of monthly pay. Besides, if
any one executed his orders in a superior manner, he never suffered
his diligence to go unrewarded; consequently, in every undertaking,
the best-qualified officers were said to be ready to assist him.

If he noticed any one that was a skilful manager, with strict regard
to justice, stocking the land of which he had the direction, and
securing income from it, he would never take anything from such a
person, but was ever ready to give him something in addition; so that
men labored with cheerfulness, acquired property with confidence, and
made no concealment from Cyrus of what each possest; for he did not
appear to envy those who amassed riches openly, but to endeavor to
bring into use the wealth of those who concealed it.

Whatever friends he made, and felt to be well disposed to him, and
considered to be capable of assisting him in anything that he might
wish to accomplish, he is acknowledged by all to have been most
successful in attaching them to him. For, on the very same account on
which he thought that he himself had need of friends--namely, that he
might have cooperators in his undertakings--did he endeavor to prove
an efficient assistant to his friends in whatever he perceived any of
them desirous of effecting.

He received, for many reasons, more presents than perhaps any other
single individual; and these he outdid every one else in distributing
among his friends, having a view to the character of each, and to what
he perceived each most needed. Whatever presents any one sent him of
articles of personal ornament, whether for warlike accouterment or
merely for dress, concerning these, they said, he used to remark that
he could not decorate his own person with them all, but that he
thought friends well equipped were the greatest ornament a man could
have. That he should outdo his friends, indeed, in conferring great
benefits is not at all wonderful, since he was so much more able; but
that he should surpass his friends in kind attentions and an anxious
desire to oblige, appears to me far more worthy of admiration.
Frequently, when he had wine served him of a peculiarly fine flavor,
he would send half-emptied flagons of it to some of his friends, with
a message to this effect, "Cyrus has not for some time met with
pleasanter wine than this; and he has therefore sent some of it to
you, and begs you will drink it to-day, with those whom you love
best." He would often, too, send geese partly eaten and the halves of
loaves, and other such things, desiring the bearer to say, in
presenting them, "Cyrus has been delighted with these, and therefore
wishes you also to taste of them."

Wherever provender was scarce, but he himself, from having many
attendants, and from the care which he took, was able to procure some,
he would send it about, and desire his friends to give that provender
to the horses that carried them, so that hungry steeds might not carry
his friends. Whenever he rode out and many were likely to see him, he
would call to him his friends, and hold earnest conversation with
them, that he might show whom he held in honor; so that, from what I
have heard, I should think that no one was ever beloved by a greater
number of persons, either Greeks or barbarians. Of this fact the
following is a proof: that no one deserted to the king from Cyrus,
tho only a subject (except that Orontes[48] attempted to do so; but he
soon found the person whom he believed faithful to him more a friend
to Cyrus than to himself), while many came over to Cyrus from the
king, after they had become enemies to each other, and these, too, men
who were greatly beloved by the king; for they felt persuaded that if
they proved themselves brave soldiers under Cyrus, they would obtain
from him more adequate rewards for their services than from the king.

What occurred also at the time of his death is a great proof as well
that he himself was a man of merit as that he could accurately
distinguish such as were trustworthy, well disposed, and constant to
their attachment. For when he was killed, all his friends and the
partakers of his table who were with him fell fighting in his defense
except Ariaeus, who had been posted in command of the cavalry on the
left; and, when he learned that Cyrus had fallen in the battle, he
took to flight, with all the troops which he had under his command.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 45: From the "Anabasis." Translated by J. S. Watson. Cyrus
the Younger, son of Darius Nothus, with the help of 10,000 Greeks,
sought to conquer his brother Artaxerxes, but was defeated and killed
in the battle of Cunaxa in 401 B.C. The elder Cyrus, called the
"Great," founder of the Persian Empire, died in 529 B.C. It is the
retreat of the 10,000 Greeks that Xenophon chronicles in the
"Anabasis."]

[Footnote 46: By this is meant at the palace of the king, tho not
literally within the palace. Among the ancient Persians, as to-day
among the Turks at Constantinople, the king's palace was called "the
Porte."]

[Footnote 47: A Persian satrap who took part in the battle of Cunaxa.
He became chief ruler of Western Asia, but was overthrown by the
Greeks in 395 and put to death.]

[Footnote 48: A Persian of royal blood, one of the officers of Cyrus
the Younger, several times in revolt against him, and finally
condemned.]




II

THE GREEK ARMY IN THE SNOWS OF ARMENIA[49]

(400 B.C.)


The next day it was thought necessary to march away as fast as
possible, before the enemy's force should be reassembled, and get
possession of the pass. Collecting their baggage at once, therefore,
they set forward through a deep snow, taking with them several guides;
and, having the same day passed the height on which Tiribazus had
intended to attack them, they encamped. Hence they proceeded three
days' journey, through a desert tract of country, a distance of
fifteen parasangs, to the river Euphrates, and passed it without being
wet higher than the middle. The sources of the river were said not to
be far off.

Hence they advanced three days' march, through much snow and a level
plain, a distance of fifteen parasangs; the third day's march was
extremely troublesome, as the north wind blew full in their faces,
completely parching up everything and benumbing the men. One of the
augurs, in consequence, advised that they should sacrifice to the
wind; and a sacrifice was accordingly offered, when the vehemence of
the wind appeared to every one manifestly to abate. The depth of the
snow was a fathom; so that many of the baggage-cattle and slaves
perished, with about thirty of the soldiers. They continued to burn
fires through the whole night, for there was plenty of wood at the
place of encampment. But those who came up late could get no wood;
those therefore who had arrived before, and had kindled fires, would
not admit the late comers to the fire unless they gave them a share of
the corn or other provisions that they had brought. Thus they shared
with one another what they respectively had. In the places where the
fires were made, as the snow melted, there were formed large pits that
reached to the ground; and here there was accordingly opportunity to
measure the depth of the snow.

Hence they marched through snow the whole of the following day, and
many of the men contracted the bulimia. Xenophon, who commanded in the
rear, finding in his way such of the men as had fallen down with it,
knew not what disease it was. But as one of those acquainted with it
told him that they were evidently affected with bulimia, and that they
would get up if they had something to eat, he went round among the
baggage, and, wherever he saw anything eatable, he gave it out, and
sent such as were able to run to distribute it among those diseased,
who, as soon as they had eaten, rose up and continued their march. As
they proceeded, Cheirisophus[50] came, just as it grew dark, to a
village, and found a spring in front of the rampart, some women and
girls belonging to the place fetching water. The women asked them who
they were; and the interpreter answered, in the Persian language, that
they were people going from the king to the satrap. They replied that
he was not there, but about a parasang off.

However, as it was late, they went with the water-carriers within the
rampart to the head man of the village; and here Cheirisophus, and as
many of the troops as could come up, encamped; but of the rest, such
as were unable to get to the end of the journey spent the night on the
way without food or fire; and some of the soldiers lost their lives on
that occasion. Some of the enemy too, who had collected themselves
into a body, pursued our rear, and seized any of the baggage-cattle
that were unable to proceed, fighting with one another for the
possession of them. Such of the soldiers, also, as had lost their
sight from the effects of the snow, or had had their toes mortified by
the cold, were left behind. It was found to be a relief to the eyes
against the snow if the soldiers kept something black before them on
the march, and to the feet, if they kept constantly in motion, and
allowed themselves no rest, and if they took off their shoes in the
night; but as to such as slept with their shoes on, the straps worked
into their feet, and the soles were frozen about them; for when their
old shoes had failed them, shoes of raw hides had been made by the
men themselves from the newly skinned oxen.

From such unavoidable sufferings, some of the soldiers were left
behind, who, seeing a piece of ground of a black appearance, from the
snow having disappeared there, conjectured that it must have melted;
and it had, in fact, melted in the spot from the effect of a fountain,
which was sending up a vapor in a woody hollow close at hand. Turning
aside thither, they sat down and refused to proceed farther. Xenophon,
who was with the rear-guard, as soon as he heard this, tried to
prevail on them by every art and means not to be left behind, telling
them, at the same time, that the enemy were collected and pursuing
them in great numbers. At last he grew angry; and they told him to
kill them, as they were quite unable to go forward. He then thought it
the best course to strike terror, if possible, into the enemy that
were behind, lest they should fall upon the exhausted soldiers. It was
now dark, and the enemy were advancing with a great noise, quarreling
about the booty that they had taken, when such of the rear-guard as
were not disabled started up, and rushed toward them, while the tired
men, shouting as loud as they could, clashed their spears against
their shields. The enemy, struck with alarm, threw themselves into the
hollow amid the snow, and no one of them afterward made himself heard
from any quarter.

Xenophon, and those with him, telling the sick men that a party would
come to their relief next day, proceeded on their march, but before
they had gone four stadia they found other soldiers resting by the
way in the snow, and covered up with it, no guard being stationed over
them. They roused them up, but they said that the head of the army was
not moving forward. Xenophon, going past them, and sending on some of
the ablest of the peltasts, ordered them to ascertain what it was that
hindered their progress. They brought word that the whole army was in
that manner taking rest. Xenophon and his men, therefore, stationing
such a guard as they could, took up quarters there without fire or
supper. When it was near day, he sent the youngest of his men to the
sick, telling them to rouse them and oblige them to proceed.

At this juncture Cheirisophus sent some of his people from the
villages to see how the rear were faring. The young men were rejoiced
to see them, and gave them the sick to conduct to the camp, while they
themselves went forward, and, before they had gone twenty stadia,
found themselves at the village in which Cheirisophus was quartered.
When they came together, it was thought safe enough to lodge the
troops up and down in the villages. Cheirisophus accordingly remained
where he was, and the other officers, appropriating by lot the several
villages that they had in sight, went to their respective quarters
with their men.

Here Polycrates, an Athenian captain, requested leave of absence, and,
taking with him the most active of his men, and hastening to the
village which Xenophon had been allotted, surprized all the villagers
and their head man in their houses, together with seventeen colts that
were bred as a tribute for the king, and the head man's daughter, who
had been but nine days married; her husband was gone out to hunt
hares, and was not found in any of the villages. Their houses were
under ground, the entrance like the mouth of a well, but spacious
below; there were passages dug into them for the cattle, but the
people descended by ladders. In the houses were goats, sheep, cows,
and fowls, with their young; all the cattle were kept on fodder within
the walls.[51] There were also wheat, barley, leguminous vegetables,
and barley-wine, in large bowls; the grains of barley floated in it
even with the brims of the vessels, and reeds also lay in it, some
larger and some smaller, without joints; and these, when any one was
thirsty, he was to take in his mouth and suck. The liquor is very
strong, unless one mixed water with it, and a very pleasant drink to
those accustomed to it.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 49: From the "Anabasis." Translated by J. S. Watson. The
"Anabasis" has made Xenophon perhaps the most prominent figure of
ancient classical literature, largely because every schoolboy who
studies Greek knows at least this book. It stands in that sense to
Greek literature as Caesar's "Commentaries" stands to Latin. The book
has further value, not only as authentic history, but for the curious
details it gives of the manners and customs of savage tribes living
along the shores of the Euxine, and of those which prevailed at the
Persian court and elsewhere in the Persian state.]

[Footnote 50: A Spartan general who, at the instance of Xenophon, had
been appointed to lead the van of the retreating Greek army.]

[Footnote 51: W. T. Ainsworth, who has made a geographical commentary
on Xenophon's "Anabasis," says: "This description of a village on the
