
But her laughter-loving Venus answered: "The son of Tydeus, haughty
Diomede, has wounded me, because I was withdrawing from battle my
beloved son AEneas, who is by far most dear to me of all. For it is no
longer the destructive contest of Trojans and of Greeks; but now the
Greeks fight even with the immortals."

But her Dione, divine one of goddesses, answered: "Endure, my daughter,
and bear up, although grieved; for many of us, possessing Olympian
habitations, have in times past endured pains at the hand of men,[213]
imposing heavy griefs on one another. Mars, in the first place, endured
it, when Otus and valiant Ephialtes, the sons of Aloeus, bound him in a
strong chain. He was chained in a brazen prison for thirteen months: and
perhaps Mars, insatiate of war, had perished there, had not his
stepmother, all-fair Eeribaea, told it to Mercury; but he stole Mars
away, already exhausted, for the cruel chain subdued him. Juno also
suffered, when the brave son of Amphitryon smote her in the right
breast with a three-pronged shaft. Then most irremediable pain seized
her. Amongst these Pluto also endured a swift shaft, when the same hero,
the son of aegis-bearing Jove, afflicted him with pains at Pylos amongst
the dead, having wounded him. But he went to the palace of Jove, and the
lofty Olympus, grieving in his heart, and transfixed with pains; for the
shaft had pierced into his huge shoulder, and tortured his soul. But
Paeon healed him, sprinkling pain-assuaging remedies, for he was not at
all mortal. Audacious, regardless one! who felt no compunction in doing
lawless deeds,--who with his bow violated the gods that dwell in
Olympus. But against thee azure-eyed goddess Minerva has excited this
man. Infatuate! nor does the son of Tydeus know this in his mind, that
he is by no means long-lived who fights with the immortals, nor ever at
his knees will sons lisp a father's name, as he returns from war and
dreadful battle. Therefore, let the son of Tydeus now, though he be very
brave, have a care, lest a better than thou fight with him: lest at a
future time AEgialea, the very prudent daughter of Adrastus, the noble
spouse of horse-taming Diomede, grieving, should rouse her servants from
sleep, longing for the husband of her youth, the bravest of the Greeks."

   [Footnote 213: Speaking of these humiliations of the gods, Grote,
   Hist. t. i. p. 78, well observes: "The god who serves is for a
   time degraded; but the supreme god who commands the servitude is
   in the like proportion exalted, whilst the idea of some sort of
   order and government among these super-human beings was never
   lost sight of."]

She spoke, and with her palms wiped off the ichor from her hand: the
hand was healed, and the severe pains mitigated. But then Minerva and
Juno looking on, provoked Saturnian Jove with heart-cutting words; but
amidst them azure-eyed goddess Minerva thus began speaking:

"Father Jove, wilt thou indeed be angry with me on account of what I
shall say? Surely it must be that Venus, inspiring some one of the
Grecian women with a desire of accompanying the Trojans, whom now she
exceedingly loves, while caressing one of those fair-robed Grecian
women, has torn her delicate hand against a golden buckle."

Thus she spoke: but the father of men and gods smiled, and having
called, he thus accosted golden Venus:

"Not to thee, daughter mine, are intrusted warlike works; but do thou
confine thyself to the desirable offices of marriage, and all these
things shall be a care to swift Mars and to Minerva."

Thus they, indeed, were speaking such things to each other. But Diomede,
doughty in the din of battle, rushed upon AEneas, conscious that Apollo
himself held over him his hands. But he revered not the mighty god, for
he always longed to slay AEneas, and despoil him of his glorious armour.
Thrice then, immediately, he rushed on, eager to slay him, and thrice
Apollo repelled his shield with violence; but when at length the fourth
time he rushed on, like a god, the far-darting Apollo menacing terribly,
addressed him: "Consider, O son of Tydeus, and retire, nor wish to think
things equal with the gods; for the race of the immortal gods and of men
walking on the earth is in nowise similar."

Thus he spoke: but the son of Tydeus retired a little, biding the wrath
of far-darting Apollo. But Apollo placed AEneas apart from the crowd, in
sacred Pergamus, where his temple was.[214] Latona and shaft-rejoicing
Diana healed him in the mighty shrine, and adorned him with glory. But
silver-bowed Apollo formed a phantom like unto AEneas himself and such in
arms. Around the phantom the Trojans and the noble Greeks smote on each
others' breasts the well-battered ox-hide shields, and the light
bucklers. Then at length Phoebus Apollo addressed impetuous Mars:

   [Footnote 214: "On the Trojan citadel of Pergamus itself was a
   temple of Apollo, Diana and Latona; and hence Homer represents
   these three deities protecting the falling city."--Mueller,
   Dorians, vol. i. p. 248.]

"Mars! Mars! man-slaughterer, gore-tainted, wall-batterer! wouldst not
thou now, meeting this man, the son of Venus, withdraw him from the
battle, who would even now cope with father Jove? First, indeed, in
close combat, he wounded Venus in the hand, at the wrist; but then he
assailed me, like unto a god."

Thus having spoken, he sat down on lofty Pergamus; but destructive Mars
aroused the ranks of the Trojans, going through them, assimilating
himself to Acamus, the swift leader of the Thracians, and thus he
harangued the Jove-nourished sons of Priam:

"Ye sons of Priam, Jove-nourished king, how long will ye suffer the
people to be slain by the Greeks? Is it until they fight around the
well-made gates? A hero lies prostate, whom we honoured equally with
noble Hector, the son of magnanimous Anchises. But come, let us rescue
from the assault our excellent companion."

Thus having spoken, he excited the might and courage of heart. Then
Sarpedon much rebuked noble Hector:

Hector, where now has that strength gone, which thou didst formerly
possess? Thou saidst, I ween, that thou, with thy kindred and thy
brothers, couldst defend the city without the forces and allies. Now I
can neither see nor perceive any of these; but they crouch down, like
dogs but a lion: we, on the contrary, who are here mere allies, bear the
brunt of the fight. Even I, being thine ally, have come from a very
great distance; for far off is Lycia, at lying Xanthus, where I left my
beloved wife and my infant son, and many possessions, which he who is
poor covets: but I, nevertheless, exhort the Lycians, and ready myself
to fight with that hero; and yet there is here to me such store as the
Greeks can carry or let. But thou standest still, and dost not exhort
even the forces to stand and to defend their wives. Beware perchance,
as though ensnared in the meshes of an a turing net, thou become a prey
and a spoil to hostile for quickly will they destroy thy well-inhabited
city. As it behoves thee, both night and day, to interest thyself in
these matters, beseeching the chiefs of thy far-summoned force to
persevere with ardour, and forego their violent strife.

Thus spoke Sarpedon, but his speech gnawed the heart of Hector, and
immediately he leaped from his chariot with his armour to the ground,
and brandishing his sharp spear, went in all directions through the
army, exhorting the battle; and he stirred up a grievous conflict. The
Trojans rallied and stood against the Greeks; but the Greeks stood in
close array, withstood them, nor fled.

And as the wind scatters the chaff about the threshing-floors, when men
are winnowing [it], and yellow Ceres is separating both the grain and
the chaff, the winds rush along; and the chaff-heaps[215] grow white
beneath; thus then the Greeks became white with the chaff from above,
which indeed through them, as they again mingled in the combat, the feet
of the steeds struck up [the ground] to the brazen heaven; for the
charioteers turning back. But they directed the strength of theirs
straight forward; and fierce Mars spread a vapour over the battle,
aiding the Trojans, going about everywhere, echoing the commands of
golden-sworded Phoebus Apollo and ordered him to excite the courage of
the Trojans, whenever he should see Pallas Minerva departing; for she
was an ally of the Greeks. But he sent forth AEneas from his very rich
shrine and infused strength into the breast of the shepherd of the
people.

   [Footnote 215: But cf. Schol. [Greek: oi tonoi eis ous ta achyra
   ekpiptei].]

Then AEneas placed himself amidst his companions and they rejoiced when
they saw him approaching alive, unhurt and having excellent strength.
They did not ever, ask any questions; for a different labour did not
pale which the silver-bowed god and man-slaughtering war and Strife
insatiably raging, had excited. But then Greeks, the two Ajaces, and
Ulysses and Diomede, urged on to fight. But they, even by themselves,
feared neither the violent attacks[216] of the Trojans, nor their
shouts: but remained firm, like unto clouds, which the son of Saturn,
during a calm, has placed upon the lofty mountains, at rest, when the
might of Boreas sleeps,[217] and of the other impetuous winds, which,
blowing with shrill blasts, disperse the shadowy clouds. Thus the Greeks
awaited the Trojans, standing firm, nor fled. But the son of Atreus kept
hurrying through the host, exhorting them much:

"O friends, be men, and assume a valiant heart, and feel shame[218]
towards each other through the fierce engagements: for more of those men
who dread shame are safe, than are slain; but from fugitives neither
does any glory arise, nor any assistance."

He spoke, and darted with his spear quickly, and struck Deicoon, son of
Pergasis, a warrior chief, the companion of magnanimous AEneas, whom the
Trojans honoured equally with the sons of Priam; since he was prompt to
fight amidst the van. Him then king Agamemnon struck in the shield with
his spear, but it [the shield] did not repel the spear, for even through
this it passed onwards, and pierced him through the belt, at the lower
part of the stomach. And he made a crash as he fell, and his arms
rattled over him.

Here then AEneas slew some brave heroes of the Greeks,--Crethon and
Orsilochus, the sons of Diocles: their father, indeed, rich in
sustinence,[219] dwelt in well-built Pherae; but his origin was from the
river Alpheus, which flows widely through the land of the Pylians.
Alpheus begat Orsilochus, a prince over many men; but Orsilochus begat
magnanimous Diocles; and of Diocles were born two sons, Crethon and
Orsilochus, well skilled in all kinds of battle. These, indeed, in the
bloom of youth, in their sable ships followed with the Argives to Ilium
famed for noble steeds, seeking honour for the sons of Atreus, Agamemnon
and Menelaus: but there the end of death overshadowed them.

   [Footnote 216: Such seems to be the force of the plural [Greek:
   bias].]

   [Footnote 217: "Ascending, while the north wind sleeps."--Milton,
   P. L. ii. 489.]

   [Footnote 218: I. e. be ashamed to fly or give way. Compare
   Plato, Sympos. p. 317, F. G. ed. Laem., where he dwells upon the
   advantages of friends fighting together, as rendering men ashamed
   of any cowardly action.]

   [Footnote 219: This construction with the genitive is very common
   in Latin. Virg. Georg. ii. 468: "dives opum." AEn. i. 18; Hor. Ep.
   ii. 2, 31; Od. iv. 8, 5; Silius, i. 393.]

They two,[220] just as two lions have been reared under their dam, amid
the thickets of a deep wood, on a mountain's heights; they in process of
time seizing oxen and fat sheep, lay waste the stalls of men, till at
length they are themselves killed by the hands of men with the sharp
brass; such these two, subdued by the hands of AEneas, fell like lofty
firs. Then Menelaus, brave in the din of war, pitied them fallen, and
went through the van, equipped in shining brass, brandishing his spear;
for Mars kindled his strength, with the design that he should be subdued
by the hands of AEneas.

But him Antilochus, son of magnanimous Nestor, beheld, and proceeded
through the van, for he feared much for the shepherd of the people, lest
he should suffer anything, and greatly disappoint them of [the fruits
of] their labour. And now they were stretching forth their hands and
sharp spears against each other, eager to fight; but Antilochus stood
very near the shepherd[221] of the people. But AEneas, though a brisk
warrior, remained not, when he beheld the two heroes standing near each
other. When, therefore, they had drawn the dead bodies[222] to the
people of the Greeks, they gave the miserable pair into the hands of
their companions; and they themselves, returning back, fought in the
van.

   [Footnote 220: The order is, [Greek: toge, oio leonte dyo].
   Anthon refers to Kuehner 1. 443, 4, p. 97, Jelf's Translation.]

   [Footnote 221: See note on ver. 50.]

   [Footnote 222: Of the sons of Diocles.]

Then they slew Pylaemenes, equal to Mars, general of the magnanimous
shielded Paphlagonians. Him indeed the son of Atreus, spear-renowned
Menelaus, wounded with a spear as he stood, having smote him on the
collar-bone. But Antilochus on his part smote the charioteer Mydon, his
brave attendant, the son of Atymnias (now he was in the act of turning
his solid-hoofed steeds), having struck him with a hand-stone on the
elbow; immediately the reins, white with ivory, fell from his hands on
the ground in the dust. But Antilochus, rushing on, smote him with his
sword in the temple, and panting he fell from the well-made chariot,
headlong in the dust, on his head and his shoulders. Very long he stood
(for he fell on deep sand), till the two horses, striking him, cast him
to the ground in the dust: but Antilochus lashed them on, and drove them
to the army of the Greeks.

But them Hector discerned through the ranks, and rushed on them,
vociferating, and with him followed the brave phalanxes of the Trojans.
Mars and venerable Bellona led them; she, on the one hand, bearing with
her tumultuous Din, but Mars, on the other, brandished a huge spear in
his hands. At one time, indeed, he paced before Hector, at another after
him.

But him Diomede, brave in fight, seeing, trembled. As when a man,
uncertain of his course, passing over a great plain, has stopped at a
swift-flowing river, running into the sea, beholding it boiling with
foam, and retreats back in haste: so then did the son of Tydeus retire,
and he said to the host:

"O friends, how do we all admire noble Hector, that he is both a
spearman and a daring warrior! But with him one at least of the gods is
ever present, who wards off death; even now Mars in person stands by him
like unto a mortal man. But retreat back, [with your faces] turned
always to the Trojans, nor desire to fight valiantly against the gods."

Thus then he said: but the Trojans advanced very near them. There Hector
slew two heroes skilled in battle, Menesthes and Anchialus, being in one
chariot. But mighty Telamonian Ajax pitied them falling; and advancing
he stood very near them, and launched with his shining spear, and smote
Amphius, son of Selagus, who, exceedingly rich in property and crops,
dwelt in Paesus. But fate had led him as an ally to Priam and his sons.
Him Telamonian Ajax smote on the belt, and the long-shadowed spear was
fixed in the pit of his stomach. Falling, he made a crash, and
illustrious Ajax ran up to him, about to spoil [him of] his armour; but
the Trojans poured upon him sharp spears, shining all around, and his
shield received many. But he, pressing on him with his heel, drew from
the body his brazen spear; however, he was not able to take off from his
shoulders any other beautiful armour, for he was pressed upon with
weapons. He also dreaded the stout defence of haughty Trojans,[223] who,
both numerous and doughty, stood around, stretching forth their spears,
and who drove him away from them, although being mighty, and valiant,
and renowned. But he, retiring, was repelled by force.

   [Footnote 223: Cf. Lex. Seg. 6, p. 336. Bekk.: [Greek: agerochos
   semnos, yperopies, yrasus]. On the different and doubtful
   etymologies of this word, see Alberti on Hesych. t. i. p, 44, and
   Buttm. Lexil. p. 19, sq.]

Thus they, on the one hand, toiled through the violent conflict. But
violent fate urged on Tlepolemus, the brave and great son of Hercules,
against godlike Sarpedon. But when they, the son and grandson of
cloud-collecting Jove, were now rushing against one another, Tlepolemus
first addressed him [Sarpedon]:

"Sarpedon, chief of the Lycians, what necessity is there for thee, being
a man unskilled in war, to tremble here? Falsely do they say that thou
art the offspring of aegis-bearing Jove, since thou art far inferior to
those heroes, who were of Jove, in the time of ancient men. But what
sort do they say that Hercules was, my bold-minded, lion-hearted father?
who formerly coming hither, on account of the steeds of Laomedon, with
six ships only, and with a few men, laid waste the city of Ilium, and
widowed its streets. But thou hast an ignoble mind, and thy forces are
perishing away; nor do I think that thou wilt be an assistance to the
Trojans, having come from Lycia, not even if thou be exceedingly
valiant; but that, slain by me, thou wilt pass through the gates of
Hades."

But him Sarpedon, leader of the Lycians, in return accosted:
"Tlepolemus, he indeed overturned sacred Ilium, through the folly of the
hero, famous Laomedon, who reproved with harsh language him who had
deserved well, nor did he give back the steeds, on account of which he
came from afar. But I tell thee that here slaughter and gloomy death
will befall thee at my hands; and that, subdued by my spear, thou wilt
give glory to me, and a spirit to steed-famed[224] Pluto."

   [Footnote 224: An epithet probably derived from the steeds
   ("inferni raptoris equos," Claudian, de R. P. i. 1) employed in
   the abduction of Proserpine.]

Thus spoke Sarpedon: but Tlepolemus raised his ashen spear, and from
their hands, at the same moment, flew the long spears. Sarpedon, on his
part, struck the centre of [his adversary's] neck, and the grievous
weapon passed right through; and gloomy night overspread his eyes. But
Tlepolemus in the meantime had struck Sarpedon in the left thigh with
his long spear; and the spear, rushing with violence, passed through,
grazing the bone: but his father as yet averted death.

His noble companions bore godlike Sarpedon from the battle; but the long
spear, trailed along with him, pained him; but this no one of them
hastening noticed, nor thought of extracting from his thigh the ashen
spear, that he might ascend the chariot; for such anxiety did his
attendants entertain for him. But on the other side the well-greaved
Greeks carried Tlepolemus from the fight; and divine Ulysses, possessing
an enduring heart, perceived them, and his soul was stirred within him.
And then he anxiously pondered in his mind and soul, whether he should
pursue farther the son of loud-thundering Jove, or should take away the
lives of many more Lycians. But it was not fated for magnanimous Ulysses
to slay the brave son of Jove with the sharp spear. Therefore Minerva
turned his thoughts towards the multitude of the Lycians. Then he slew
Coeranus, and Alastor, and Chromius, and Alcander, and Halius, and
Noemon, and Prytanis. And yet more Lycians would noble Ulysses have
slain, had not mighty crest-tossing Hector quickly perceived him. He
therefore went through the van, armed in shining brass, bearing terror
to the Greeks: then Sarpedon, the son of Jove, rejoiced at him
approaching, and spoke [this] mournful address:

"O son of Priam, I pray thee, suffer me not to lie a prey to the Greeks,
but aid me. Even then[225] let life forsake me in thy city; since I was
not destined to gladden my dear wife and infant son, returning home to
my dear fatherland."

   [Footnote 225: I. e. when you have rescued my body from the foe,
   I will die content in Troy.--Anthon.]

Thus he spoke: but him plume-waving Hector answered nought, but flew
past him, in order that he might repel the Greeks with all haste, and
take away the lives of many. His noble companions meantime placed
godlike Sarpedon under a very beautiful beech of aegis-bearing Jove.
Stout Pelagon then, who was his beloved companion, forced out the ashen
spear from his thigh. Thereupon animation left him, and darkness was
poured over his eyes; but he again revived, for the breeze of Boreas,
breathing upon him around, refreshed in spirit him panting with
difficulty.

But the Greeks, on account of Mars and brazen-helmed Hector, neither
were driven at any time back to their sable ships, nor did they advance
forward to battle; but always kept giving ground, since they had heard
that Mars was with the Trojans.

Then whom first, whom last did Hector, the son of Priam, and brazen Mars
slay? The godlike Teuthras, and moreover the knight Orestes, the AEtolian
spearman Trechus, and oenomaus, and Helenus of the race of oenops, and
Oresbius of flexible[226] belt, who dwelt in Hyla, near the lake
Cephissus, very intent on wealth: and near him dwelt other Boeotians,
having a very rich territory.

   [Footnote 226: Cf. Buttm. Lexil. p. 66. I. e. "a belt which he
   could easily move, and which, from its suppleness and
   flexibility, yielded to the pressure of his person."--Anthon.]

When therefore the white-armed goddess Juno perceived these Greeks
perishing in the violent engagement, straightway to Minerva she
addressed winged words:

"Strange! O daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, unwearied one, certainly we
have made a vain promise to Menelaus, that he should return after having
destroyed well-walled Ilium, if we suffer destructive Mars thus to rage.
But come, let us too bethink ourselves of some powerful aid."

Thus she spoke; nor did the azure-eyed goddess Minerva disobey her.
Juno, on her part, venerable goddess, daughter of mighty Saturn, quickly
moving, harnessed her gold-caparisoned steeds; but Hebe speedily applied
to the chariot, to the iron axletree on both sides, the curved wheels,
golden, with eight spokes. Of these, indeed, the felloe is of gold,
imperishable: but above [are] brazen tires fastened on them, wonderful
to be seen; but the circular naves on both sides are of silver; and the
body[227] was stretched on with gold and silver thongs (there was a
double circular rim); from this projected a silver pole; at its
extremity she bound the golden, beauteous yoke, and to it attached the
beautiful golden poitrels. But Juno, longing for conquest and battle,
led the swift-footed steeds under the yoke.

   [Footnote 227: [Greek: dioros] is properly the seat, but is here
   put for the whole chariot.]

Minerva, on the other hand, the daughter of aegis-bearing Jove, let flow
down on her father's floor her dainty robe of variegated hue, which she
herself had wrought and worked with her own hands: then she, having put
on her tunic, equipped herself for the tearful war in the armour of
cloud-compelling Jove, and around her shoulders she then threw the
fringed aegis, dreadful, around which on all sides Terror appears plumed.
Thereon was Strife, thereon Fortitude, and thereon was chilling
Pursuit;[228] on it was the Gorgonian head of the dreadful monster,
dire, horrible, a portent of aegis-bearing Jove. On her head she placed
her four-crested helmet, with a spreading metal ridge,[229] golden,
sufficient for the heavy-armed of a hundred cities. She then stepped
into her shining chariot with her feet; and took her spear, heavy, huge,
and sturdy, with which she, sprung from a dread sire, subdues the ranks
of heroic men, with whomsoever she is wroth. But Juno with the lash
quickly urged on the steeds. The gates of heaven creaked spontaneously,
the gates which the Hours guarded, to whom are intrusted the mighty
heaven and Olympus, as well to open the dense cloud as to close it. In
this way, indeed, through these gates, they drove their steeds, urged on
with the goad: and they found the son of Saturn sitting apart from the
other gods on the highest summit of many-peaked Olympus. There staying
her steeds, the white-armed goddess Juno interrogated supreme Saturnian
Jove, and thus addressed him:

"O father Jove, art thou not indignant at Mars for these bold
deeds,--how numerous and how choice a multitude of Greeks he has
destroyed rashly, nor as became him: a grief indeed to me; but Venus and
silver-bowed Apollo in quiet are delighted, having let slip this frantic
[god], who knows no rights. Father Jove, wilt thou be angry with me if I
drive Mars from the battle, having dreadfully wounded him?"

   [Footnote 228: Compare [Greek: Proioxis] and [Greek: Palioxis],
   similarly personified, in Hesiod, Scut. Herc. 134, and Virg. AEn.
   viii. 701:

              "--tristesque ex aethere Dirae,
              Et scissa gaudens vadit Discordia palla;
              Quam cum sanguineo sequitur Bellona flagello."]

   [Footnote 229: See note on iii. 362.]

But her answering, cloud-compelling Jove addressed:

"Come, incite the pillaging Minerva against him, who is very wont to
cause him to approach grievous woes."

Thus he spoke: nor did the white-armed goddess Juno disobey, but she
lashed on her steeds. They flew, not unwillingly, midway between the
earth and the starry heaven. Now, as much haze[230] as a man sees with
his eyes, sitting upon some lofty point, and looking over the darkling
ocean, so far do the high-sounding steeds of the gods clear at one
bound. But when they now reached Troy, and the two flowing rivers, where
Simois and Scamander unite their streams, there the white-armed goddess
Juno stayed her steeds, having loosed them from the chariot, and shed a
dense mist around them. But to them Simois afforded ambrosial food to
feed on.

But they went on, like unto timid doves in their pace, hastening to
assist the Grecian heroes. But when they had now arrived where the most
numerous[231] and the bravest stood collected in dense array round
horse-breaking Diomede, like raw-devouring lions or wild boars, whose
strength is not feeble, there standing, the white-armed goddess Juno
shouted aloud, having likened herself to great-hearted, brazen-voiced
Stentor, who was accustomed to shout as loud as fifty other men:

   [Footnote 230: Opposed to the pure air of aether. See Buttm.
   Lexil. p. 37, sqq.]

   [Footnote 231: Observe the elegant position of the plural verb
   between two singular substantives, according to the Schema
   Alemanicum. Compare Od. K, 513, and Il. Y, 138, which have been
   pointed out by Lesbonax, p. 179, ed. Valck.]

"Shame! ye Greeks! foul subjects of disgrace! admirable in form [alone].
As long, indeed, as divine Achilles was wont to be engaged in the war,
the Trojans were not in the habit of advancing beyond the Dardan gates;
for they dreaded his mighty spear; but now they fight at the hollow
ships, far away from the city."

Thus saying, she aroused the strength and courage of each. The
azure-eyed goddess Minerva rushed towards the son of Tydeus; but she
found that prince by his steeds and chariot, cooling the wound which
Pandarus had inflicted on him with a shaft. For perspiration had
afflicted him beneath the broad belt of his well-orbed shield: with this
was he afflicted, and he was fatigued as to his hand; and raising the
belt, he wiped away the black gore. Then the goddess touched the yoke of
the horses, and said:

"Little like himself has Tydeus begotten a son. Tydeus was certainly
small in body, but a warrior. And even when I suffered him not to fight,
nor to rush furiously to battle, when he came far from the Greeks, an
ambassador to Thebes to the numerous Cadmeans, I commanded him to feast
quietly in the palaces; but he, retaining his doughty spirit, as before,
challenged the youths, the Cadmeans, and easily conquered them in
everything; so great an auxiliary was I to him. But thee, indeed, I
stand by and preserve, and I exhort thee freely to fight against the
Trojans. But either weariness, from great toil, has entered thy limbs,
or at least disheartening fear in some manner possesses thee. Thou art
not henceforth to be deemed at least the son of Tydeus, the gallant son
of AEneus."

But her valiant Diomede answering addressed: "I know thee, O goddess,
daughter of aegis-bearing Jove; therefore will I willingly tell this word
to thee, nor will I conceal it. Neither does any disheartening fear
possess me, nor any sloth: but as yet I am mindful of thy mandates,
which thou didst enjoin. Thou didst not suffer me to fight with the
other happy gods; but if Venus, the daughter of Jove, should come into
the battle, to wound her at least with the sharp steel. Wherefore now I
myself retire, and have ordered all the other Greeks to be collected
here: for I perceive Mars dispensing the battle."

But him the azure-eyed goddess Minerva then answered: "Diomede, son of
Tydeus, most dear to my soul, neither fear this Mars at all, nor any
other of the immortals; such an auxiliary am I to thee. But come, first
direct thy solid-hoofed steeds against Mars, strike him in close combat,
nor regard impetuous Mars, this frenzied and unnatural pest, shifter
from one to another; who lately haranguing promised me and Juno, that he
would fight against the Trojans, and aid the Greeks; but now he mixes
with the Trojans, and has forgotten these."

Thus having said, she forced Sthenelus from his horses to the ground,
dragging him back with her hand; but he promptly leaped down. Then the
goddess herself, infuriate, ascended the chariot beside noble Diomede,
and greatly did the beechen axle groan under the weight; for it bore a
dreadful goddess and a very brave hero. Then Pallas Minerva seized the
scourge and the reins. Straightway she drove the solid-hoofed steeds
against Mars first. He, indeed, had just slain huge Periphas, the
illustrious son of Ochesius, by far the bravest of the AEtolians. Him
indeed gore-stained Mars slew; but Minerva put on the helmet of Pluto
that impetuous Mars might not see her.

But when man-slaughtering Mars saw noble Diomede, he suffered huge
Periphas to lie there, where first slaying him he had taken away his
life, but he went straight against horse breaking Diomede. And when
these came near, advancing against each other, Mars first, over the yoke
and the reins of the steeds, stretched himself forward with his brazen
spear, eager to take away his life. It then the azure-eyed goddess
Minerva having caught in her hand, turned from the chariot, so as to be
borne away in vain. But next Diomede, valiant in the din of war, made
the attack with his brazen spear; and Pallas Minerva firmly fastened it
in his lowest flank, where he was girt with his belt. In that very part
striking, she wounded him, and tore his beautiful skin, and drew out the
spear again. Then roared brazen Mars, as loud as nine or ten thousand
men roar in war, joining the strife of battle. And then fear seized the
terrified Greeks and Trojans, so loud bellowed Mars, insatiate of war.

And as when from the clouds, a gloomy haze appears, a heavy-blowing wind
arising from heat; such did brazen Mars appear to Diomede, son of
Tydeus, going amid the clouds into the broad heaven. Quickly he reached
lofty Olympus, the seat of the gods, and sat near Saturnian Jove,
grieving in his heart, and showed the immortal blood flowing down from
the wound, and complaining, he spoke winged words:

"Father Jove, art thou not incensed beholding these violent deeds? Ever,
of a truth, are we deities suffering most grievous woes from the
machinations of each other, and [whilst] conferring favour upon men. We
all are indignant with thee;[232] for thou hast begotten a mad,
pernicious daughter, to whom evil works are ever a care. For all the
other gods, as many as are in Olympus, obey thee, and unto thee each of
us is subject. But her thou restrainest not by words, nor by any act,
but dost indulge her, since thou thyself didst beget this destructive
daughter. Who now has urged on Diomede, the overbearing son of Tydeus,
to rage against the immortal gods. Venus he first wounded, in close
fight, in the hand at the wrist; and, equal to a god, he afterwards
rushed on myself; but my swift feet withdrew me; [otherwise] I should
certainly for a long time have endured woes there amidst the dreadful
heaps of slain, or living should have been exhausted by the strokes of
the brass."

   [Footnote 232: Or, "through thee we are all at variance," taking
   [Greek: soi] as put for [Greek: dia se] with Lesbonax, [Greek:
   peoi schem]. p. 186; Hesychius, t. ii. p. 1234, and the
   Scholiast.]

Him sternly regarding, cloud-compelling Jove addressed: "Complain not to
me, inconstant one, sitting by me: for thou art most hateful to me, of
all the gods that possess Olympus: for to thee discord is ever grateful,
and wars and battles: thou hast thy mother Juno's insufferable and
unbending disposition, which I myself can scarcely repress with words.
Wherefore I think thou sufferest these things by her instigation. Yet no
longer can I endure thy suffering pain, for thou art my offspring, and
to me thy mother brought thee forth. But hadst thou, destructive as thou
art, been born of any other of the gods, even long since hadst thou been
far lower than the sons of Uranus."

Thus he spoke, and ordered Paeon to heal him: and Paeon healed him,
spreading [on his wound] pain-assuaging medicines; for he was not by any
means mortal. As when fig-tree juice,[233] on being stirred about,
curdles the white milk, fluid before, and it very rapidly coagulates,
while one is mixing it; thus at that time did he speedily heal impetuous
Mars. Hebe then washed him, and put on him beautiful garments. Then,
exulting in glory, near Saturnian Jove he sat down.

And now again Argive Juno and the powerful assistant Minerva returned to
the palace of mighty Jove, after having stayed man-slaying Mars from his
deeds of slaughter.

   [Footnote 233: Used as rennet.]




                            BOOK THE SIXTH.

                               ARGUMENT.


The gods having left the field, victory now inclines to the side of the
Greeks, and Helenus counsels Hector to order a public supplication to
Minerva in the citadel. While Hector is gone to the city for that
purpose, Diomedes and Glaucus recognize the friendship which had
formerly existed between their fathers, and exchange armour in token of
amity. Hecuba and the Trojan matrons present a robe to Minerva, and
offer up prayers for their country. Hector reproves Paris, and brings
him back to the field, having first taken an affecting farewell of his
wife and child.


And now the dreadful battle of the Trojans and the Greeks was abandoned.
Often here and there the battle raged through the plain, [the
combatants] directing against each other their brass-tipped spears,
between the rivers of Simois and Xanthus.

First Telamonian Ajax, the bulwark of the Greeks, broke through the
phalanx of the Trojans, and gave light[234] to his companions, smiting
the good and mighty hero Acamas, son of Eyssorus, who was the bravest
amongst the Thracians. First he struck him on the ridge of the
horse-haired helmet; and the brazen spear fixed itself in his forehead,
and passed on within the bone; but darkness veiled his eyes.

   [Footnote 234: _I. e._ the light of hope. Cf. Virg. AEn. ii, 281:
   "O _lux_ Dardaniae, _spes_ o fidissima Teucrum." Quintus Calab.
   iii. 561. [Greek: Epei su moi ieron ymar, kai phaos eelioio
   peles].]

But Diomede, brave in the din of war, slew Axylus, the son of Teuthras,
