foolhardy, that I should have dropped into a doze.  From this I awakened
to the characteristic sound of digging, looked down, and saw immediately
below me the back view of a gardener in a stable waistcoat.  Now he would
appear steadily immersed in his business; anon, to my more immediate
terror, he would straighten his back, stretch his arms, gaze about the
otherwise deserted garden, and relish a deep pinch of snuff.  It was my
first thought to drop from the wall upon the other side.  A glance
sufficed to show me that even the way by which I had come was now cut
off, and the field behind me already occupied by a couple of shepherds'
assistants and a score or two of sheep.  I have named the talismans on
which I habitually depend, but here was a conjuncture in which both were
wholly useless.  The copestone of a wall arrayed with broken bottles is
no favourable rostrum; and I might be as eloquent as Pitt, and as
fascinating as Richelieu, and neither the gardener nor the shepherd lads
would care a halfpenny.  In short, there was no escape possible from my
absurd position: there I must continue to sit until one or other of my
neighbours should raise his eyes and give the signal for my capture.

The part of the wall on which (for my sins) I was posted could be scarce
less than twelve feet high on the inside; the leaves of the beech which
made a fashion of sheltering me were already partly fallen; and I was
thus not only perilously exposed myself, but enabled to command some part
of the garden walks and (under an evergreen arch) the front lawn and
windows of the cottage.  For long nothing stirred except my friend with
the spade; then I heard the opening of a sash; and presently after saw
Miss Flora appear in a morning wrapper and come strolling hitherward
between the borders, pausing and visiting her flowers--herself as fair.
_There_ was a friend; _here_, immediately beneath me, an unknown
quantity--the gardener: how to communicate with the one and not attract
the notice of the other?  To make a noise was out of the question; I
dared scarce to breathe.  I held myself ready to make a gesture as soon
as she should look, and she looked in every possible direction but the
one.  She was interested in the vilest tuft of chickweed, she gazed at
the summit of the mountain, she came even immediately below me and
conversed on the most fastidious topics with the gardener; but to the top
of that wall she would not dedicate a glance!  At last she began to
retrace her steps in the direction of the cottage; whereupon, becoming
quite desperate, I broke off a piece of plaster, took a happy aim, and
hit her with it in the nape of the neck.  She clapped her hand to the
place, turned about, looked on all sides for an explanation, and spying
me (as indeed I was parting the branches to make it the more easy), half
uttered and half swallowed down again a cry of surprise.

The infernal gardener was erect upon the instant.  'What's your wull,
miss?' said he.

Her readiness amazed me.  She had already turned and was gazing in the
opposite direction.  'There's a child among the artichokes,' she said.

'The Plagues of Egyp'!  _I'll_ see to them!' cried the gardener
truculently, and with a hurried waddle disappeared among the evergreens.

That moment she turned, she came running towards me, her arms stretched
out, her face incarnadined for the one moment with heavenly blushes, the
next pale as death.  'Monsieur de. Saint-Yves!' she said.

'My dear young lady,' I said, 'this is the damnedest liberty--I know it!
But what else was I to do?'

'You have escaped?' said she.

'If you call this escape,' I replied.

'But you cannot possibly stop there!' she cried.

'I know it,' said I.  'And where am I to go?'

She struck her hands together.  'I have it!' she exclaimed.  'Come down
by the beech trunk--you must leave no footprint in the border--quickly,
before Robie can get back!  I am the hen-wife here: I keep the key; you
must go into the hen-house--for the moment.'

I was by her side at once.  Both cast a hasty glance at the blank windows
of the cottage and so much as was visible of the garden alleys; it seemed
there was none to observe us.  She caught me by the sleeve and ran.  It
was no time for compliments; hurry breathed upon our necks; and I ran
along with her to the next corner of the garden, where a wired court and
a board hovel standing in a grove of trees advertised my place of refuge.
She thrust me in without a word; the bulk of the fowls were at the same
time emitted; and I found myself the next moment locked in alone with
half a dozen sitting hens.  In the twilight of the place all fixed their
eyes on me severely, and seemed to upbraid me with some crying
impropriety.  Doubtless the hen has always a puritanic appearance,
although (in its own behaviour) I could never observe it to be more
particular than its neighbours.  But conceive a British hen!




CHAPTER VIII--THE HEN-HOUSE


I was half an hour at least in the society of these distressing bipeds,
and alone with my own reflections and necessities.  I was in great pain
of my flayed hands, and had nothing to treat them with; I was hungry and
thirsty, and had nothing to eat or to drink; I was thoroughly tired, and
there was no place for me to sit.  To be sure there was the floor, but
nothing could be imagined less inviting.

At the sound of approaching footsteps, my good-humour was restored.  The
key rattled in the lock, and Master Ronald entered, closed the door
behind him, and leaned his back to it.

'I say, you know!' he said, and shook a sullen young head.

'I know it's a liberty,' said I.

'It's infernally awkward: my position is infernally embarrassing,' said
he.

'Well,' said I, 'and what do you think of mine?'

This seemed to pose him entirely, and he remained gazing upon me with a
convincing air of youth and innocence.  I could have laughed, but I was
not so inhumane.

'I am in your hands,' said I, with a little gesture.  'You must do with
me what you think right.'

'Ah, yes!' he cried: 'if I knew!'

'You see,' said I, 'it would be different if you had received your
commission.  Properly speaking, you are not yet a combatant; I have
ceased to be one; and I think it arguable that we are just in the
position of one ordinary gentleman to another, where friendship usually
comes before the law.  Observe, I only say _arguable_.  For God's sake,
don't think I wish to dictate an opinion.  These are the sort of nasty
little businesses, inseparable from war, which every gentleman must
decide for himself.  If I were in your place--'

'Ay, what would you do, then?' says he.

'Upon my word, I do not know,' said I.  'Hesitate, as you are doing, I
believe.'

'I will tell you,' he said.  'I have a kinsman, and it is what _he_ would
think, that I am thinking.  It is General Graham of Lynedoch--Sir Thomas
Graham.  I scarcely know him, but I believe I admire him more than I do
God.'

'I admire him a good deal myself,' said I, 'and have good reason to.  I
have fought with him, been beaten, and run away.  _Veni_, _victus sum_,
_evasi_.'

'What!' he cried.  'You were at Barossa?'

'There and back, which many could not say,' said I.  'It was a pretty
affair and a hot one, and the Spaniards behaved abominably, as they
usually did in a pitched field; the Marshal Duke of Belluno made a fool
of himself, and not for the first time; and your friend Sir Thomas had
the best of it, so far as there was any best.  He is a brave and ready
officer.'

'Now, then, you will understand!' said the boy.  'I wish to please Sir
Thomas: what would he do?'

'Well, I can tell you a story,' said I, 'a true one too, and about this
very combat of Chiclana, or Barossa as you call it.  I was in the Eighth
of the Line; we lost the eagle of the First Battalion, more betoken, but
it cost you dear.  Well, we had repulsed more charges than I care to
count, when your 87th Regiment came on at a foot's pace, very slow but
very steady; in front of them a mounted officer, his hat in his hand,
white-haired, and talking very quietly to the battalions.  Our Major,
Vigo-Roussillon, set spurs to his horse and galloped out to sabre him,
but seeing him an old man, very handsome, and as composed as if he were
in a coffee-house, lost heart and galloped back again.  Only, you see,
they had been very close together for the moment, and looked each other
in the eyes.  Soon after the Major was wounded, taken prisoner, and
carried into Cadiz.  One fine day they announced to him the visit of the
General, Sir Thomas Graham.  "Well, sir," said the General, taking him by
the hand, "I think we were face to face upon the field."  It was the
white-haired officer!'

'Ah!' cried the boy,--his eyes were burning.

'Well, and here is the point,' I continued.  'Sir Thomas fed the Major
from his own table from that day, and served him with six covers.'

'Yes, it is a beautiful--a beautiful story,' said Ronald.  'And yet
somehow it is not the same--is it?'

'I admit it freely,' said I.

The boy stood awhile brooding.  'Well, I take my risk of it,' he cried.
'I believe it's treason to my sovereign--I believe there is an infamous
punishment for such a crime--and yet I'm hanged if I can give you up.'

I was as much moved as he.  'I could almost beg you to do otherwise,' I
said.  'I was a brute to come to you, a brute and a coward.  You are a
noble enemy; you will make a noble soldier.'  And with rather a happy
idea of a compliment for this warlike youth, I stood up straight and gave
him the salute.

He was for a moment confused; his face flushed.  'Well, well, I must be
getting you something to eat, but it will not be for six,' he added, with
a smile: 'only what we can get smuggled out.  There is my aunt in the
road, you see,' and he locked me in again with the indignant hens.

I always smile when I recall that young fellow; and yet, if the reader
were to smile also, I should feel ashamed.  If my son shall be only like
him when he comes to that age, it will be a brave day for me and not a
bad one for his country.

At the same time I cannot pretend that I was sorry when his sister
succeeded in his place.  She brought me a few crusts of bread and a jug
of milk, which she had handsomely laced with whisky after the Scottish
manner.

'I am so sorry,' she said: 'I dared not bring on anything more.  We are
so small a family, and my aunt keeps such an eye upon the servants.  I
have put some whisky in the milk--it is more wholesome so--and with eggs
you will be able to make something of a meal.  How many eggs will you be
wanting to that milk? for I must be taking the others to my aunt--that is
my excuse for being here.  I should think three or four.  Do you know how
to beat them? or shall I do it?'

Willing to detain her a while longer in the hen-house, I displayed my
bleeding palms; at which she cried aloud.

'My dear Miss Flora, you cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs,'
said I; 'and it is no bagatelle to escape from Edinburgh Castle.  One of
us, I think, was even killed.'

'And you are as white as a rag, too,' she exclaimed, 'and can hardly
stand!  Here is my shawl, sit down upon it here in the corner, and I will
beat your eggs.  See, I have brought a fork too; I should have been a
good person to take care of Jacobites or Covenanters in old days!  You
shall have more to eat this evening; Ronald is to bring it you from town.
We have money enough, although no food that we can call our own.  Ah, if
Ronald and I kept house, you should not be lying in this shed!  He
admires you so much.'

'My dear friend,' said I, 'for God's sake do not embarrass me with more
alms.  I loved to receive them from that hand, so long as they were
needed; but they are so no more, and whatever else I may lack--and I lack
everything--it is not money.'  I pulled out my sheaf of notes and
detached the top one: it was written for ten pounds, and signed by that
very famous individual, Abraham Newlands.  'Oblige me, as you would like
me to oblige your brother if the parts were reversed, and take this note
for the expenses.  I shall need not only food, but clothes.'

'Lay it on the ground,' said she.  'I must not stop my beating.'

'You are not offended?' I exclaimed.

She answered me by a look that was a reward in itself, and seemed to
imply the most heavenly offers for the future.  There was in it a shadow
of reproach, and such warmth of communicative cordiality as left me
speechless.  I watched her instead till her hens' milk was ready.

'Now,' said she, 'taste that.'

I did so, and swore it was nectar.  She collected her eggs and crouched
in front of me to watch me eat.  There was about this tall young lady at
the moment an air of motherliness delicious to behold.  I am like the
English general, and to this day I still wonder at my moderation.

'What sort of clothes will you be wanting?' said she.

'The clothes of a gentleman,' said I.  'Right or wrong, I think it is the
part I am best qualified to play.  Mr. St. Ives (for that's to be my name
upon the journey) I conceive as rather a theatrical figure, and his
make-up should be to match.'

'And yet there is a difficulty,' said she.  'If you got coarse clothes
the fit would hardly matter.  But the clothes of a fine gentleman--O, it
is absolutely necessary that these should fit!  And above all, with
your'--she paused a moment--'to our ideas somewhat noticeable manners.'

'Alas for my poor manners!' said I.  'But my dear friend Flora, these
little noticeabilities are just what mankind has to suffer under.
Yourself, you see, you're very noticeable even when you come in a crowd
to visit poor prisoners in the Castle.'

I was afraid I should frighten my good angel visitant away, and without
the smallest breath of pause went on to add a few directions as to stuffs
and colours.

She opened big eyes upon me.  'O, Mr. St. Ives!' she cried--'if that is
to be your name--I do not say they would not be becoming; but for a
journey, do you think they would be wise?  I am afraid'--she gave a
pretty break of laughter--'I am afraid they would be daft-like!'

'Well, and am I not daft?' I asked her.

'I do begin to think you are,' said she.

'There it is, then!' said I.  'I have been long enough a figure of fun.
Can you not feel with me that perhaps the bitterest thing in this
captivity has been the clothes?  Make me a captive--bind me with chains
if you like--but let me be still myself.  You do not know what it is to
be a walking travesty--among foes,' I added bitterly.

'O, but you are too unjust!' she cried.  'You speak as though any one
ever dreamed of laughing at you.  But no one did.  We were all pained to
the heart.  Even my aunt--though sometimes I do think she was not quite
in good taste--you should have seen her and heard her at home!  She took
so much interest.  Every patch in your clothes made us sorry; it should
have been a sister's work.'

'That is what I never had--a sister,' said I.  'But since you say that I
did not make you laugh--'

'O, Mr. St. Ives! never!' she exclaimed.  'Not for one moment.  It was
all too sad.  To see a gentleman--'

'In the clothes of a harlequin, and begging?' I suggested.

'To see a gentleman in distress, and nobly supporting it,' she said.

'And do you not understand, my fair foe,' said I, 'that even if all were
as you say--even if you had thought my travesty were becoming--I should
be only the more anxious, for my sake, for my country's sake, and for the
sake of your kindness, that you should see him whom you have helped as
God meant him to be seen? that you should have something to remember him
by at least more characteristic than a misfitting sulphur-yellow suit,
and half a week's beard?'

'You think a great deal too much of clothes,' she said.  'I am not that
kind of girl.'

'And I am afraid I am that kind of man,' said I.  'But do not think of me
too harshly for that.  I talked just now of something to remember by.  I
have many of them myself, of these beautiful reminders, of these
keepsakes, that I cannot be parted from until I lose memory and life.
Many of them are great things, many of them are high virtues--charity,
mercy, faith.  But some of them are trivial enough.  Miss Flora, do you
remember the day that I first saw you, the day of the strong east wind?
Miss Flora, shall I tell you what you wore?'

We had both risen to our feet, and she had her hand already on the door
to go.  Perhaps this attitude emboldened me to profit by the last seconds
of our interview; and it certainly rendered her escape the more easy.

'O, you are too romantic!' she said, laughing; and with that my sun was
blown out, my enchantress had fled away, and I was again left alone in
the twilight with the lady hens.




CHAPTER IX--THREE IS COMPANY, AND FOUR NONE


The rest of the day I slept in the corner of the hen-house upon Flora's
shawl.  Nor did I awake until a light shone suddenly in my eyes, and
starting up with a gasp (for, indeed, at the moment I dreamed I was still
swinging from the Castle battlements) I found Ronald bending over me with
a lantern.  It appeared it was past midnight, that I had slept about
sixteen hours, and that Flora had returned her poultry to the shed and I
had heard her not.  I could not but wonder if she had stooped to look at
me as I slept.  The puritan hens now slept irremediably; and being
cheered with the promise of supper I wished them an ironical good-night,
and was lighted across the garden and noiselessly admitted to a bedroom
on the ground floor of the cottage.  There I found soap, water,
razors--offered me diffidently by my beardless host--and an outfit of new
clothes.  To be shaved again without depending on the barber of the gaol
was a source of a delicious, if a childish joy.  My hair was sadly too
long, but I was none so unwise as to make an attempt on it myself.  And,
indeed, I thought it did not wholly misbecome me as it was, being by
nature curly.  The clothes were about as good as I expected.  The
waistcoat was of toilenet, a pretty piece, the trousers of fine
kerseymere, and the coat sat extraordinarily well.  Altogether, when I
beheld this changeling in the glass, I kissed my hand to him.
