was addressed, according to the countess's directions, to Sarpo the
bookseller, in Milan.  For purposes of such a nature, Barto Rizzo
turned the uneasy craven to account.

It happened that one of the maids at Sonnenberg was about to marry a
peasant, of Meran, part proprietor of a vineyard, and the nuptials were
to be celebrated at the castle.  Among those who thronged the courtyard
on the afternoon of the ceremony, Vittoria beheld her faithful Beppo, who
related the story of his pursuit of her, and the perfidy of Luigi;--a
story so lengthy, that his voluble tongue running at full speed could
barely give the outlines of it.  He informed her, likewise, that he had
been sent for, while lying in Trent, by Captain Weisspriess, whom he had
seen at an inn of the Ultenthal, weak but improving.  Beppo was the
captain's propitiatory offering to Vittoria.  Meanwhile the ladies sat
on a terrace, overlooking the court, where a stout fellow in broad green
braces and blue breeches lay half across a wooden table, thrumming a
zither, which set the groups in motion.  The zither is a melancholy
little instrument; in range of expression it is to the harp what the
winchat is to the thrush; or to the violin, what that bird is to the
nightingale; yet few instruments are so exciting: here and there along
these mountain valleys you may hear a Tyrolese maid set her voice to its
plaintive thin tones; but when the strings are swept madly there is mad
dancing; it catches at the nerves.  "Andreas!  Andreas!" the dancers
shouted to encourage the player.  Some danced with vine-poles; partners
broke and wandered at will, taking fresh partners, and occasionally
huddling in confusion, when the poles were levelled and tilted at them,
and they dispersed.  Beppo, dancing mightily to recover the use of his
legs, met his acquaintance Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz, and the pair
devoted themselves to a rivalry of capers; jump, stamp, shuffle, leg
aloft, arms in air, yell and shriek: all took hands around them and
streamed, tramping the measure, and the vine-poles guarded the ring.
Then Andreas raised the song: "Our Lady is gracious," and immediately
the whole assemblage were singing praise to the Lady of the castle.
Following which, wine being brought to Andreas, he drank to his lady,
to his lady's guests, to the bride, to the, bridegroom, to everybody.
He was now ready to improvize, and dashed thumb and finger on the zither,
tossing up his face, swarthy-flushed: "There was a steinbock with a
beard."  Half-a-dozen voices repeated it, as to proclaim the theme.

Alas! a beard indeed, for there is no end to this animal.  I know him;"
said the duchess dolefully.

              "There was a steinbock with a beard;
               Of no gun was he afeard
               Piff-paff left of him: piff-paff right of him
               Piff-paff everywhere, where you get a sight of him."

The steinbock led through the whole course of a mountaineer's emotions
and experiences, with piff-paff continually left of him and right of him
and nothing hitting him.  The mountaineer is perplexed; an able man, a
dead shot, who must undo the puzzle or lose faith in his skill, is a
tremendous pursuer, and the mountaineer follows the steinbock ever.  A
'sennderin' at a 'sennhutchen' tells him that she admitted the steinbock
last night, and her curled hair frizzled under the steinbock's eyes.  The
case is only too clear: my goodness! the steinbock is the----.  "Der Teu
.  .  .  !" said Andreas, with a comic stop of horror, the rhyme falling
cleverly to "ai."  Henceforth the mountaineer becomes transformed into a
champion of humanity, hunting the wicked bearded steinbock in all
corners; especially through the cabinet of those dark men who decree the
taxes detested in Tyrol.

The song had as yet but fairly commenced, when a break in the 'piff-paff'
chorus warned Andreas that he was losing influence, women and men were
handing on a paper and bending their heads over it; their responses
hushed altogether, or were ludicrously inefficient.

"I really believe the poor brute has come to a Christian finish--this
Ahasuerus of steinbocks!" said the duchess.

The transition to silence was so extraordinary and abrupt, that she
called to her chasseur to know the meaning of it.  Feckelwitz fetched the
paper and handed it up.  It exhibited a cross done in blood under the
word 'Meran,' and bearing that day's date.  One glance at it told Laura
what it meant.  The bride in the court below was shedding tears:
the bridegroom was lighting his pipe and consoling her; women were
chattering, men shrugging.  Some said they had seen an old grey-haired
hag (hexe) stand at the gates and fling down a piece of paper.  A little
boy whose imagination was alive with the tale of the steinbock, declared
that her face was awful, and that she had only the, use of one foot.  A
man patted him on the shoulder, and gave him a gulp of wine, saying with
his shrewdest air: "One may laugh at the devil once too often, though!"
and that sentiment was echoed; the women suggested in addition the
possibility of the bride Lisa having something on her conscience,
seeing that she had lived in a castle two years and more.  The potential
persuasions of Father Bernardus were required to get the bride to go away
to her husband's roof that evening: when she did make her departure, the
superstitious peasantry were not a merry party that followed at her
heels.

At the break-up of the festivities Wilfrid received an intimation that
his sister had arrived in Meran from Bormio.  He went down to see her,
and returned at a late hour.  The ladies had gone to rest.  He wrote a
few underlined words, entreating Vittoria to grant an immediate interview
in the library of the castle.  The missive was entrusted to Aennchen.
Vittoria came in alarm.

"My sister is perfectly well," said Wilfrid.  "She has heard that Captain
Gambier has been arrested in the mountains; she had some fears concerning
you, which I quieted.  What I have to tell you, does not relate to her.
The man Angelo Guidascarpi is in Meran.  I wish you to let the signora
know that if he is not carried out of the city before sunset to-morrow,
I must positively inform the superior officer of the district of his
presence there."

This was their first private interview.  Vittoria (for she knew him) had
acceded to it, much fearing that it would lead to her having to put on
her sex's armour.  To collect her wits, she asked tremblingly how Wilfrid
had chanced to see Angelo.  An old Italian woman, he said, had accosted
him at the foot of the mountain, and hearing that he was truly an
Englishman--"I am out of my uniform," Wilfrid remarked with intentional
bitterness--had conducted him to the house of an Italian in the city,
where Angelo Guidascarpi was lying.

"Ill?" said Vittoria.

"Just recovering.  After that duel, or whatever it may be called with
Weisspriess, he lay all night out on the mountains.  He managed to get
the help of a couple of fellows, who led him at dusk into Meran, saw an
Italian name over a shop, and--I will say for them that the rascals hold
together.  There he is, at all events."

"Would you denounce a sick man, Wilfrid?"

"I certainly cannot forget my duty upon every point"

"You are changed!"

"Changed!  Am I the only one who is changed?"

"He must have supposed that it would be Merthyr.  I remember speaking of
Merthyr to him as our unchangeable friend.  I told him Merthyr would be
here."

"Instead of Merthyr, he had the misfortune to see your changeable friend,
if you will have it so."

"But how can it be your duty to denounce him, Wilfrid.  You have quitted
that army."

"Have I?  I have forfeited my rank, perhaps."

"And Angelo is not guilty of a military offence."

"He has slain one of a family that I am bound to respect."

"Certainly, certainly," said Vittoria hurriedly.

Her forehead showed distress of mind; she wanted Laura's counsel.

"Wilfrid, do you know the whole story?"

"I know that he inveigled Count Paul to his house and slew him; either he
or his brother, or both."

"I have been with him for days, Wilfrid.  I believe that he would do no
dishonourable thing.  He is related----".

"He is the cousin of Count Ammiani."

"Ah! would you plunge us in misery?"

"How?"

"Count Ammiani is my lover."

She uttered it unblushingly, and with tender eyes fixed on him.

"Your lover!" he exclaimed, with vile emphasis.

"He will be my husband," she murmured, while the mounting hot colour
burned at her temples.

"Changed--who is changed?"  he said, in a vehement underneath.  "For that
reason I am to be false to her who does me the honour to care for me!"

"I would not have you false to her in thought or deed."

"You ask me to spare this man on account of his relationship to your
lover, and though he has murdered the brother of the lady whom I esteem.
What on earth is the meaning of the petition?  Really, you amaze me."

"I appeal to your generosity, Wilfrid, I am Emilia."

"Are you?"

She gave him her hand.  He took it, and felt at once the limit of all
that he might claim.  Dropping the hand, he said:

"Will nothing less than my ruin satisfy you?  Since that night at La
Scala, I am in disgrace with my uncle; I expect at any moment to hear
that I am cashiered from the army, if not a prisoner.  What is it that
you ask of me now?  To conspire with you in shielding the man who has
done a mortal injury to the family of which I am almost one.  Your reason
must perceive that you ask too much.  I would willingly assist you in
sparing the feelings of Count Ammiani; and, believe me, gratitude is the
last thing I require to stimulate my services.  You ask too much; you
must see that you ask too much."

"I do," said Vittoria.  "Good-night, Wilfrid."

He was startled to find her going, and lost his equable voice in trying
to detain her.  She sought relief in Laura's bosom, to whom she
recapitulated the interview.

"Is it possible," Laura said, looking at her intently, "that you do not
recognize the folly of telling this Lieutenant Pierson that you were
pleading to him on behalf of your lover?  Could anything be so monstrous,
when one can see that he is malleable to the twist of your little finger?
Are you only half a woman, that you have no consciousness of your power?
Probably you can allow yourself--enviable privilege!--to suppose that
he called you down at this late hour simply to inform you that he is
compelled to do something which will cause you unhappiness!  I repeat,
it is an enviable privilege.  Now, when the real occasion has come for
you to serve us, you have not a single weapon--except these tears, which
you are wasting on my lap.  Be sure that if he denounces Angelo, Angelo's
life cries out against you.  You have but to quicken your brain to save
him.  Did he expose his life for you or not?  I knew that he was in
Meran," the signora continued sadly.  "The paper which frightened the
silly peasants, revealed to me that he was there, needing help.  I told
you Angelo was under an evil star.  I thought my day to-morrow would be
a day of scheming.  The task has become easy, if you will."

"Be merciful; the task is dreadful," said Vittoria.

"The task is simple.  You have an instrument ready to your hands.  You
can do just what you like with him--make an Italian of him; make him
renounce his engagement to this pert little Lena of Lenkenstein, break
his sword, play Arlecchino, do what you please.  He is not required for
any outrageous performance.  A week, and Angelo will have recovered his
strength; you likewise may resume the statuesque demeanour which you have
been exhibiting here.  For the space of one week you are asked for some
natural exercise of your wits and compliancy.  Hitherto what have you
accomplished, pray?"  Laura struck spitefully at Vittoria's degraded
estimation of her worth as measured by events.  "You have done nothing--
worse than nothing.  It gives me horrors to find it necessary to entreat
you to look your duty in the face and do it, that even three or four
Italian hearts--Carlo among them--may thank you.  Not Carlo, you say?"
(Vittoria had sobbed, "No, not Carlo.") "How little you know men!  How
little do you think how the obligations of the hour should affect a
creature deserving life!  Do you fancy that Carlo wishes you to be for
ever reading the line of a copy-book and shaping your conduct by it?  Our
Italian girls do this; he despises them.  Listen to me; do not I know
what is meant by the truth of love?  I pass through fire, and keep
constant to it; but you have some vile Romance of Chivalry in your head;
a modern sculptor's figure, 'MEDITATION;' that is the sort of bride you
would give him in the stirring days of Italy.  Do you think it is only a
statue that can be true?  Perceive--will you not--that this Lieutenant
Pierson is your enemy.  He tells you as much; surely the challenge is
fair?  Defeat him as you best can.  Angelo shall not be abandoned."

"O me! it is unendurable; you are merciless," said Vittoria, shuddering.

She saw the vile figure of herself aping smirks and tender meanings to
her old lover.  It was a picture that she dared not let her mind rest on:
how then could she personate it?  All through her life she had been
frank; as a young woman, she was clear of soul; she felt that her,
simplicity was already soiled by the bare comprehension of the abominable
course indicated by Laura.  Degradation seemed to have been a thing up to
this moment only dreamed of; but now that it was demanded of her to play
