
"He was in love with the woman when he was a lad," Laura replied, and
pertinently to Vittoria's feelings.  This threw the moist shade across
her features.

Beppo in Turin and Luigi on the lake were the watch set on Countess
d'Isorella; they were useless except to fortify Laura's suspicions.  The
Duchess of Graatli wrote mere gossip from Milan.  She mentioned that Anna
of Lenkenstein had visited with her the tomb of her brother Count Paul at
Bologna, and had returned in double mourning; and that Madame Sedley--
"the sister of our poor ruined Pierson"--had obtained grace, for herself
at least, from Anna, by casting herself at Anna's feet,--and that they
were now friends.

Vittoria felt ashamed of Adela.

When Carlo returned, the signora attacked him boldly with all her
weapons; reproached him; said, "Would my husband have treated me in such
a manner?"  Carlo twisted his moustache and stroked his young beard for
patience.  They passed from room to balcony and terrace, and Laura
brought him back into company without cessation of her fire of questions
and sarcasms, saying, "No, no; we will speak of these things publicly."
She appealed alternately to Agostino, Vittoria, and Countess Ammiani for
support, and as she certainly spoke sense, Carlo was reduced to gloom and
silence.  Laura then paused.  "Surely you have punished your bride
enough?"  she said; and more softly, "Brother of my Giacomo! you are
under an evil spell."

Carlo started up in anger.  Bending to Vittoria, he offered her his hand
to lead her out, They went together.

"A good sign," said the countess.

"A bad sign!" Laura sighed.  "If he had taken me out for explanation!
But tell me, my Agostino, are you the woman's dupe?"

"I have been," Agostino admitted frankly.

"You did really put faith in her?"

"She condescends to be so excessively charming."

"You could not advance a better reason."

"It is one of our best; perhaps our very best, where your sex is
concerned, signora."

"You are her dupe no more?"

"No more.  Oh, dear no!"

"You understand her now, do you?"

"For the very reason, signora, that I have been her dupe.  That is, I am
beginning to understand her.  I am not yet in possession of the key."

"Not yet in possession!"  said Laura contemptuously; "but, never mind.
Now for Carlo."

"Now for Carlo.  He declares that he never has been deceived by her."

"He is perilously vain," sighed the signora.

"Seriously"--Agostino drew out the length of his beard--"I do not suppose
that he has been--boys, you know, are so acute.  He fancies he can make
her of service, and he shows some skill."

"The skill of a fish to get into the net!"

"My dearest signora, you do not allow for the times.  I remember"--
Agostino peered upward through his eyelashes in a way that he had--
"I remember seeing in a meadow a gossamer running away with a spider-
thread.  It was against all calculation.  But, observe: there were
exterior agencies at work: a stout wind blew.  The ordinary reckoning is
based on calms.  Without the operation of disturbing elements, the
spider-thread would have gently detained the gossamer."

"Is that meant for my son?"  Countess Ammiani asked slowly, with
incredulous emphasis.

Agostino and Laura, laughing in their hearts at the mother's mysterious
veneration for Carlo, had to explain that 'gossamer' was a poetic,
generic term, to embrace the lighter qualities of masculine youth.

A woman's figure passed swiftly by the window, which led Laura to suppose
that the couple outside had parted.  She ran forth, calling to one of
them, but they came hand in hand, declaring that they had seen neither
woman nor man.  "And I am happy," Vittoria whispered.  She looked happy,
pale though she was.

"It is only my dreadful longing for rest which makes me pale," she said
to Laura, when they were alone.  "Carlo has proved to me that he is wiser
than I am."

"A proof that you love Carlo, perhaps," Laura rejoined.

"Dearest, he speaks more gently of the king."

"It may be cunning, or it may be carelessness."

"Will nothing satisfy you, wilful sceptic?  He is quite alive to the
Countess d'Isorella's character.  He told me how she dazzled him once."

"Not how she has entangled him now?"

"It is not true.  He told me what I should like to dream over without
talking any more to anybody.  Ah, what a delight! to have known him, as
you did, when he was a boy.  Can one who knew him then mean harm to him?
I am not capable of imagining it.  No; he will not abandon poor broken
Lombardy, and he is right; and it is my duty to sit and wait.  No shadow
shall come between us.  He has said it, and I have said it.  We have but
one thing to fear, which is contemptible to fear; so I am at peace."

"Love-sick," was Laura's mental comment.  Yet when Carlo explained his
position to her next day, she was milder in her condemnation of him, and
even admitted that a man must be guided by such brains as he possesses.
He had conceived that his mother had a right to claim one month from him
at the close of the war; he said this reddening.  Laura nodded.  He
confessed that he was irritated when he met the Countess d'Isorella, with
whom, to his astonishment, he found Barto Rizzo.  She had picked him up,
weak from a paroxysm, on the high-road to Milan.  "And she tamed the
brute," said Carlo, in admiration of her ability; "she saw that he was
plot-mad, and she set him at work on a stupendous plot; agents running
nowhere, and scribblings concentring in her work-basket.  You smile at
me, as if I were a similar patient, signora.  But I am my own agent.
I have personally seen all my men in Turin and elsewhere.  Violetta has
not one grain of love for her country; but she can be made to serve it.
As for me, I have gone too far to think of turning aside and drilling
with Luciano.  He may yet be diverted from Rome, to strike another blow
for Lombardy.  The Chief, I know, has some religious sentiment about
Rome.  So might I have; it is the Head of Italy.  Let us raise the body
first.  And we have been beaten here.  Great Gods!  we will have another
fight for it on the same spot, and quickly.  Besides, I cannot face
Luciano and tell him why I was away from him in the dark hour.  How can I
tell him that I was lingering to bear a bride to the altar? while he and
the rest--poor fellows!  Hard enough to have to mention it to you,
signora!"

She understood his boyish sense of shame.  Making smooth allowances for a
feeling natural to his youth and the circumstances, she said, "I am your
sister, for you were my husband's brother in arms, Carlo.  We two speak
heart to heart: I sometimes fancy you have that voice: you hurt me with
it more than you know; gladden me too!  My Carlo, I wish to hear why
Countess d'Isorella objects to your marriage."

"She does not object."

"An answer that begins by quibbling is not propitious.  She opposes it."

"For this reason: you have not forgotten the bronze butterfly?"

"I see more clearly," said Laura, with a start.

"There appears to be no cure for the brute's mad suspicion of her," Carlo
pursued: "and he is powerful among the Milanese.  If my darling takes my
name, he can damage much of my influence, and--you know what there is to
be dreaded from a fanatic."

Laura nodded, as if in full agreement with him, and said, after
meditating a minute, "What sort of a lover is this!"

She added a little laugh to the singular interjection.

"Yes, I have also thought of a secret marriage," said Carlo, stung by her
penetrating instinct so that he was enabled to read the meaning in her
mind.

"The best way, when you are afflicted by a dilemma of such a character,
my Carlo," the signora looked at him, "is to take a chess-table and make
your moves on it.  'King--my duty;' 'Queen--my passion;' 'Bishop--my
social obligation;' 'Knight--my what-you-will and my round-the-corner
wishes.'  Then, if you find that queen may be gratified without
endangering king, and so forth, why, you may follow your inclinations;
and if not, not.  My Carlo, you are either enviably cool, or you are an
enviable hypocrite."

"The matter is not quite so easily settled as that," said Carlo.

On the whole, though against her preconception, Laura thought him an
honest lover, aud not the player of a double game.  She saw that Vittoria
should have been with him in the critical hour of defeat, when his
passions were down, and heaven knows what weakness of our common manhood,
that was partly pride, partly love-craving, made his nature waxen to
every impression; a season, as Laura knew, when the mistress of a loyal
lover should not withhold herself from him.  A nature tender like
Carlo's, and he bearing an enamoured heart, could not, as Luciano Romara
had done, pass instantly from defeat to drill.  And vain as Carlo was
(the vanity being most intricate and subtle, like a nervous fluid), he
was very open to the belief that he could diplomatize as well as fight,
and lead a movement yet better than follow it.  Even so the signora tried
to read his case.

They were all, excepting Countess Ammiani ("who will never, I fear, do me
this honour," Violetta wrote, and the countess said, "Never," and quoted
a proverb), about to pass three or four days at the villa of Countess
d'Isorella.  Before they set out, Vittoria received a portentous envelope
containing a long scroll, that was headed "YOUR CRIMES," and detailing a
lest of her offences against the country, from the revelation of the plot
in her first letter to Wilfrid, to services rendered to the enemy during
the war, up to the departure of Charles Albert out of forsaken Milan.

"B. R."  was the undisguised signature at the end of the scroll.

Things of this description restored her old war-spirit to Vittoria.  She
handed the scroll to Laura; Laura, in great alarm, passed it on to Carlo.
He sent for Angelo Guidascarpi in haste, for Carlo read it as an ante-
dated justificatory document to some mischievous design, and he desired
that hands as sure as his own, and yet more vigilant eyes, should keep
watch over his betrothed.




CHAPTER XXXVIII

VIOLETTA D'ISORELLA

The villa inhabited by Countess d'Isorella was on the water's edge,
within clear view of the projecting Villa Ricciardi, in that darkly-
wooded region of the lake which leads up to the Italian-Swiss canton.

Violetta received here an envoy from Anna of Lenkenstein, direct out of
Milan: an English lady, calling herself Mrs. Sedley, and a particular
friend of Countess Anna.  At the first glance Violetta saw that her
visitor had the pretension to match her arts against her own; so, to
sound her thoroughly, she offered her the hospitalities of the villa
for a day or more.  The invitation was accepted.  Much to Violetta's
astonishment, the lady betrayed no anxiety to state the exact terms of
her mission: she appeared, on the contrary, to have an unbounded
satisfaction in the society of her hostess, and prattled of herself and
Antonio-Pericles, and her old affection for Vittoria, with the wiliest
simplicity, only requiring to be assured at times that she spoke
intelligible Italian and exquisite French.  Violetta supposed her to feel
that she commanded the situation.  Patient study of this woman revealed
to Violetta the amazing fact that she was dealing with a born bourgeoise,
who, not devoid of petty acuteness, was unaffectedly enjoying her noble
small-talk, and the prospect of a footing in Italian high society.
Violetta smiled at the comedy she had been playing in, scarcely
reproaching herself for not having imagined it.  She proceeded to the
point of business without further delay.

Adela Sedley had nothing but a verbal message to deliver.  The Countess
Anna of Lenkenstein offered, on her word of honour as a noblewoman, to
make over the quarter of her estate and patrimony to the Countess
d'Isorella, if the latter should succeed in thwarting--something.

Forced to speak plainly, Adela confessed she thought she knew the nature
of that something.

To preclude its being named, Violetta then diverged from the subject.

"We will go round to your friend the signor Antonio-Pericles at Villa
Ricciardi," she said.  "You will see that he treats me familiarly, but
he is not a lover of mine.  I suspect your 'something' has something to
do with the Jesuits."

Adela Sedley replied to the penultimate sentence: "It would not surprise
me, indeed, to hear of any number of adorers."

"I have the usual retinue, possibly," said Violetta.

"Dear countess, I could be one of them myself!"  Adela burst out with
tentative boldness.

"Then, kiss me."

And behold, they interchanged that unsweet feminine performance.

Adela's lips were unlocked by it.

"How many would envy me, dear Countess d'Isorella!"

She really conceived that she was driving into Violetta's heart by the
great high-road of feminine vanity.  Violetta permitted her to think as
she liked.

"Your countrywomen, madame, do not make large allowances for beauty,
I hear."

"None at all.  But they are so stiff!  so frigid!  I know one, a Miss
Ford, now in Italy, who would not let me have a male friend, and a
character, in conjunction."

"You are acquainted with Count Karl Lenkenstein?"

Adela blushingly acknowledged it.

"The whisper goes that I was once admired by him," said Violetta.

"And by Count Ammiani."

"By count?  by milord?  by prince?  by king?"

"By all who have good taste."

"Was it jealousy, then, that made Countess Anna hate me?"

"She could not--or she cannot now."

"Because I have not taken possession of her brother."

"I could not--may I say it?--I could not understand his infatuation until
Countess Anna showed me the portrait of Italy's most beautiful living
woman.  She told me to look at the last of the Borgia family."

Violetta laughed out clear music.  "And now you see her?"

"She said that it had saved her brother's life.  It has a star and a
scratch on the left cheek from a dagger.  He wore it on his heart, and an
assassin struck him there: a true romance.  Countess Anna said to me that
it had saved one brother, and that it should help to avenge the other.
She has not spoken to me of Jesuits."

"Nothing at all of the Jesuits?"  said Violetta carelessly.  "Perhaps she
wishes to use my endeavours to get the Salaseo armistice prolonged, and
tempts me, knowing I am a prodigal.  Austria is victorious, you know, but
she wants peace.  Is that the case?  I do not press you to answer."

Adela replied hesitatingly: "Are you aware, countess, whether there is
any truth in the report that Countess Lena has a passion for Count
Ammiani?"

"Ah, then," said Violetta, "Countess Lena's sister would naturally wish
to prevent his contemplated marriage!  We may have read the riddle at
last.  Are you discreet?  If you are, you will let it be known that I had
the honour of becoming intimate with you in Turin--say, at the Court.  We
shall meet frequently there during winter, I trust, if you care to make a
comparison of the Italian with the Austrian and the English nobility."

An eloquent "Oh!" escaped from Adela's bosom.  She had certainly not
expected to win her way with this estimable Italian titled lady thus
rapidly.  Violetta had managed her so well that she was no longer sure
whether she did know the exact nature of her mission, the words of which
she had faithfully transmitted as having been alone confided to her.  It
was with chagrin that she saw Pericles put his fore-finger on a salient
dimple of the countess's cheek when he welcomed them.  He puffed and blew
like one working simultaneously at bugle and big drum on hearing an
allusion to Victoria.  The mention of the name of that abominable
traitress was interdicted at Villa Ricciardi, he said; she had dragged
him at two armies' tails to find his right senses at last: Pericles was
cured of his passion for her at last.  He had been mad, but he was cured
--and so forth, in the old strain.  His preparations for a private
operatic performance diverted him from these fierce incriminations, and
he tripped busily from spot to spot, conducting the ladies over the
tumbled lower floors of the spacious villa, and calling their admiration
on the desolation of the scene.  Then they went up to the maestro's room.
Pericles became deeply considerate for the master's privacy.  "He is my
