
As soon as the God had been placed on board his barge, Bent-Anat and her
companions rose from their knees.

Then came some priests, who carried a box with the sacred evergreen tree
of Amon; and when a fresh outburst of music fell on her ear, and a cloud
of incense was wafted up to her, Bent-Anat said: "Now my father should be
coming."

"And you," cried Rameri, "and close behind, Nefert's husband, Mena, with
the guards.  Uncle Ani comes on foot.  How strangely he has dressed
himself like a sphinx hind-part before!"

"How so?"  asked Nefert.

"A sphinx," said Rameri laughing, it has the body of a lion, and the head
of a man,

     [There were no female sphinxes in Egypt.  The sphinx was called Neb,
     i. e., the lord.  The lion-couchant had either a man's or a rams
     head.]

and my uncle has a peaceful priest's robe, and on his head the helmet of
a warrior."

"If the king were here, the distributor of life," said Nefert, "you would
not be missing from among his supporters."

"No indeed!"  replied the prince, "and the whole thing is altogether
different when my father is here.  His heroic form is splendid on his
golden throne; the statues of Truth and justice spread their wings behind
him as if to protect him; his mighty representative in fight, the lion,
lies peacefully before him, and over him spreads the canopy with the
Urmus snake at the top.  There is hardly any end to the haruspices, the
pastophori with the standards, the images of the Gods, and the flocks and
herds for sacrifice.  Only think, even the North has sent representatives
to the feast, as if my father were here.  I know all the different signs
on the standards.  Do you recognize the images of the king's ancestors,
Nefert?  No? no more do I; but it seemed to me that Ahmes I., who
expelled the Hyksos--from whom our grandmother was descended--headed the
procession, and not my grandfather Seti, as he should have done.  Here
come the soldiers; they are the legions which Ani equipped, and who
returned victorious from Ethiopia only last night.  How the people cheer
them! and indeed they have behaved valiantly.  Only think, Bent-Anat and
Nefert, what it will be when my father comes home, with a hundred captive
princes, who will humbly follow his chariot, which your Mena will drive,
with our brothers and all the nobles of the land, and the guards in their
splendid chariots."

"They do not think of returning yet!"  sighed Nefert.  While more and
more troops of the Regent's soldiers, more companies of musicians, and
rare animals, followed in procession, the festal bark of Amon started
from the shore.

It was a large and gorgeous barge of wood, polished all over and overlaid
with gold, and its edge was decorated with glittering glass-beads, which
imitated rubies and emeralds; the masts and yards were gilt, and purple
sails floated from them.  The seats for the priests were of ivory, and
garlands of lilies and roses hung round the vessel, from its masts and
ropes.

The Regent's Nile-boat was not less splendid; the wood-work shone with
gilding, the cabin was furnished with gay Babylonian carpets; a lion's-
head formed the prow, as formerly in Hatasu's sea-going vessels, and two
large rubies shone in it, for eyes.  After the priests had embarked, and
the sacred barge had reached the opposite shore, the people pressed into
the boats, which, filled almost to sinking, soon so covered the whole
breadth of the river that there was hardly a spot where the sun was
mirrored in the yellow waters.

"Now I will put on the dress of a gardener," cried Rameri, "and cross
over with the wreaths."

"You will leave us alone?" asked Bent-Anat.

"Do not make me anxious," said Rameri.

"Go then," said the princess.  "If my father were here how willingly I
would go too."

"Come with me," cried the boy.  "We can easily find a disguise for you
too."

"Folly!"  said Bent-Anat; but she looked enquiringly at Nefert, who
shrugged her shoulders, as much as to say: "Your will is my law."

Rameri was too sharp for the glances of the friends to have escaped him,
and he exclaimed eagerly:

"You will come with me, I see you will!  Every beggar to-day flings his
flower into the common grave, which contains the black mummy of his
father--and shall the daughter of Rameses, and the wife of the chief
charioteer, be excluded from bringing garlands to their dead?"

"I shall defile the tomb by my presence," said Bent-Anat coloring.

"You--you!"  exclaimed Rameri, throwing his arms round his sister's neck,
and kissing her.  "You, a noble generous creature, who live only to ease
sorrow and to wipe away tears; you, the very image of my father--unclean!
sooner would I believe that the swans down there are as black as crows,
and the rose-wreaths on the balcony rank hemlock branches.  Bek-en-Chunsu
pronounced you clean, and if Ameni--"

"Ameni only exercises his rights," said Bent-Anat gently, "and you know
what we have resolved.  I will not hear one hard word about him to-day."

"Very well!  he has graciously and mercifully kept us from the feast,"
said Rameri ironically, and he bowed low in the direction of the
Necropolis, "and you are unclean.  Do not enter the tombs and the temples
on my account; let us stay outside among the people.  The roads over
there are not so very sensitive; paraschites and other unclean folks pass
over them every day.  Be sensible, Bent-Anat, and come.  We will disguise
ourselves; I will conduct you; I will lay the garlands in the tombs, we
will pray together outside, we will see the sacred procession and the
feats of the magicians, and hear the festive discourse.  Only think!
Pentaur, in spite of all they have said against him, is to deliver it.
The temple of Seti wants to do its best to-day, and Ameni knows very well
that Pentaur, when he opens his mouth, stirs the hearts of the people
more than all the sages together if they were to sing in chorus!  Come
with me, sister."

"So be it then," said Bent-Anat with sudden decision.

Rameri was surprised at this quick resolve, at which however he was
delighted; but Nefert looked anxiously at her friend.  In a moment her
eyes fell; she knew now who it was that her friend loved, and the fearful
thought--"How will it end?"  flashed through her mind.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

An hour later a tall, plainly dressed woman crossed the Nile, with a
dark-skinned boy and a slender youth by her side.  The wrinkles on her
brow and cheeks agreed little with her youthful features; but it would
have been difficult to recognize in these three the proud princess, the
fair young prince, and the graceful Nefert, who looked as charming as
ever in the long white robe of a temple-student.

They were followed by two faithful and sturdy head-servants from among
the litter-bearers of the princess, who were however commanded to appear
as though they were not in any way connected with their mistress and her
companions.

The passage across the Nile had been accomplished but slowly, and thus
the royal personages had experienced for the first time some of the many
difficulties and delays which ordinary mortals must conquer to attain
objects which almost fly to meet their rulers.  No one preceded them to
clear the river, no other vessel made way for them; on the contrary, all
tried to take place ahead of them, and to reach the opposite shore before
them.

When at last they reached the landing-place, the procession had already
passed on to the temple of Seti; Ameni had met it with his chorus of
singers, and had received the God on the shore of the Nile; the prophets
of the Necropolis had with their own hands placed him in the sacred Sam-
bark of the House of Seti, which was artistically constructed of cedar
wood and electrum set with jewels; thirty pastophori took the precious
burden on their shoulders, and bore it up the avenue of Sphinxes--which
led from the river to the temple--into the sanctuary of Seti, where Amon
remained while the emissaries from the different provinces deposited
their offerings in the forecourt.  On his road from the shore kolchytes
had run before him, in accordance with ancient custom, strewing sand in
his path.

In the course of an hour the procession once more emerged into the open
air, and turning to the south, rested first in the enormous temple of
Anienophis III., in front of which the two giant statues stood as
sentinels--they still remain, the colossi of the Nile valley.  Farther to
the south it reached the temple of Thotmes the Great, then, turning
round, it clung to the eastern face of the Libyan hills--pierced with
tombs and catacombs; it mounted the terraces of the temple of Hatasu, and
paused by the tombs of the oldest kings which are in the immediate
neighborhood; thus by sunset it had reached the scene of the festival
itself, at the entrance of the valley in which the tomb of Setitt had
been made, and in whose westernmost recesses were some of the graves of
the Pharaohs of the deposed race.

This part of the Necropolis was usually visited by lamp-light, and under
the flare of torches, before the return of the God to his own temple and
the mystery-play on the sacred lake, which did not begin till midnight.

Behind the God, in a vase of transparent crystal, and borne high on a
pole that all the multitude might see it, was the heart of the sacred
ram.

Our friends, after they had laid their wreaths on the magnificent altars
of their royal ancestors without being recognized, late in the afternoon
joined the throng who followed the procession.  They mounted the eastern
cliff of the hills close by the tomb of Mena's forefathers, which a
prophet of Amon, named Neferhotep--Mena's great-grandfather--had
constructed.  Its narrow doorway was besieged by a crowd, for within the
first of the rock-chambers of which it consisted, a harper was singing a
dirge for the long-since buried prophet, his wife and his sister.  The
song had been composed by the poet attached to his house; it was graven
in the stone of the second rock-room of the tomb, and Neferhotep had left
a plot of ground in trust to the Necropolis, with the charge of
administering its revenues for the payment of a minstrel, who every-year
at the feast of the dead should sing the monody to the accompaniment of
his lute.

     [The tomb of Neferhotep is well preserved, and in it the inscription
     from which the monody is translated.]

The charioteer well knew this dirge for his ancestor, and had often sung
it to Nefert, who had accompanied him on her lute; for in their hours of
joy also--nay especially--the Egyptians were wont to remember their dead.

Now the three companions listened to the minstrel as he sang:

              "Now the great man is at rest,
               Gone to practise sweeter duties.
               Those that die are the elect
               Since the Gods have left the earth.
               Old men pass and young men come;
               Yea, a new Sun rises daily
               When the old sun has found rest
               In the bosom of the night.

              "Hail, O Prophet!  on this feast day
               Odorous balsams, fragrant resins
               Here we bring--and offer garlands,
               Throwing flowers down before thee,
               And before thy much-loved sister,
               Who has found her rest beside thee.

              "Songs we sing, and strike the lyre
               To thy memory, and thine honor.
               All our cares are now forgotten,
               Joy and hope our breasts are filling;
               For the day of our departure
               Now draws near, and in the silence
               Of the farther shore is rest."

When the song ceased, several people pressed into the little oratory to
express their gratitude to the deceased prophet by laying a few flowers
on his altar.  Nefert and Rameri also went in, and when Nefert had
offered a long and silent prayer to the glorified spirits of her dead,
that they might watch over Mena, she laid her garland beside the grave in
which her husband's mother rested.

Many members of the court circle passed close to the royal party without
recognizing them; they made every effort to reach the scene of the
festival, but the crowd was so great that the ladies had several times to
get into a tomb to avoid it.  In each they found the altar loaded with
offerings, and, in most, family-parties, who here remembered their dead,
with meat and fruits, beer and wine, as though they were departed
travellers who had found some far off rest, and whom they hoped sooner or
later to see again.

The sun was near setting when at last the princess and her companions
reached the spot where the feast was being held.  Here stood numbers of
stalls and booths, with eatables of every sort, particularly sweet cakes
for the children, dates, figs, pomegranates, and other fruits.  Under
light awnings, which kept off the sun, were sold sandals and kerchiefs of
every material and hue, ornaments, amulets, fans, and sun-shades, sweet
essences of every kind, and other gifts for offerings or for the toilet.
The baskets of the gardeners and flower-girls were already empty, but the
money-changers were full of business, and the tavern and gambling booths
were driving a brisk trade.

Friends and acquaintances greeted each other kindly, while the children
showed each other their new sandals, the cakes they had won at the games,
or the little copper rings they had had given to them, and which must now
be laid out.  The largest crowd was gathered to see the magicians from
the House of Seti, round which the mob squatted on the ground in a
compact circle, and the children were good-naturedly placed in the front
row.

When Bent-Anat reached the place all the religious solemnity was ended.

There stood the canopy under which the king and his family were used to
