
He put his hand in and found a piece of meat wrapped up in two cabbage-
leaves.  Old Hekt had brought a leg of a gazelle from Thebes for Uarda,
and he now saw that the women had put a piece of it into his little sack
for his refreshment.  He looked at the gift with emotion, but he did not
venture to touch it, for he felt as if in doing so he should be robbing
the sick girl.  While eating the bread and the radish he contemplated the
piece of meat as if it were some costly jewel, and when a fly dared to
settle on it he drove it off indignantly.

At last he tasted the meat, and thought of many former noon-day meals,
and how he had often found a flower in the satchel, that Uarda had placed
there to please him, with the bread.  His kind old eyes filled with
tears, and his whole heart swelled with gratitude and love.  He looked
up, and his glance fell on the table, and he asked himself how he would
have felt if instead of the old priest, robbed of his heart, the sunshine
of his old age, his granddaughter, were lying there motionless.  A cold
shiver ran over him, and he felt that his own heart would not have been
too great a price to pay for her recovery.  And yet!  In the course of
his long life he had experienced so much suffering and wrong, that he
could not imagine any hope of a better lot in the other world.  Then he
drew out the bond Nebsecht had given him, held it up with both hands, as
if to show it to the Immortals, and particularly to the judges in the
hall of truth and judgment, that they might not reckon with him for the
crime he had committed--not for himself but for another--and that they
might not refuse to justify Rui, whom he had robbed of his heart.

While he thus lifted his soul in devotion, matters were getting warm
outside the dissecting room.  He thought he heard his name spoken, and
scarcely had he raised his head to listen when a taricheut came in and
desired him to follow him.

In front of the rooms, filled with resinous odors and incense, in which
the actual process of embalming was carried on, a number of taricheutes
were standing and looking at an object in an alabaster bowl.  The knees
of the old man knocked together as he recognized the heart of the beast
which he had substituted for that of the Prophet.

The chief of the taricheutes asked him whether he had opened the body of
the dead priest.

Pinem stammered out "Yes."  Whether this was his heart?  The old man
nodded affirmatively.

The taricheutes looked at each other, whispered together; then one of
them went away, and returned soon with the inspector of victims from the
temple of Anion, whom he had found in the house of the weaver, and the
chief of the kolchytes.

"Show me the heart," said the superintendent of the sacrifices as he
approached the vase.  "I can decide in the dark if you have seen rightly.
I examine a hundred animals every day.  Give it here!--By all the Gods of
Heaven and Hell that is the heart of a ram!"

"It was found in the breast of Rui," said one of the taricheutes
decisively.  "It was opened yesterday in the presence of us all by this
old paraschites."

"It is extraordinary," said the priest of Anion.  "And incredible.  But
perhaps an exchange was effected.--Did you slaughter any victims here
yesterday or--?"

"We are  purifying ourselves," the chief of the kolchytes interrupted,
for the great festival of the valley, and for ten days no beast can have
been killed here for food;  besides, the stables and  slaughterhouses are
a long way from this, on the other side of the linen-factories."

"It is strange!"  replied the priest.  "Preserve this heart carefully,
kolchytes: or, better still, let it be enclosed in a case.  We will take
it over to the chief prophet of Anion.  It would seem that some miracle
has happened."

"The heart belongs to the Necropolis," answered the chief kolchytes, "and
it would therefore be more fitting if we took it to the chief priest of
the temple of Seti, Ameni."

"You command here!"  said the other.  "Let us go."  In a few minutes the
priest of Anion and the chief of the kolchytes were being carried towards
the valley in their litters.  A taricheut followed them, who sat on a
seat between two asses, and carefully carried a casket of ivory, in which
reposed the ram's heart.

The old paraschites watched the priests disappear behind the tamarisk
bushes.  He longed to run after them, and tell them everything.

His conscience quaked with self reproach, and if his sluggish
intelligence did not enable him to take in at a glance all the results
that his deed might entail, he still could guess that he had sown a seed
whence deceit of every kind must grow.  He felt as if he had fallen
altogether into sin and falsehood, and that the goddess of truth, whom he
had all his life honestly served, had reproachfully turned her back on
him.  After what had happened never could he hope to be pronounced a
"truth-speaker" by the judges of the dead.  Lost, thrown away, was the
aim and end of a long life, rich in self-denial and prayer!  His soul
shed tears of blood, a wild sighing sounded in his ears, which saddened
his spirit, and when he went back to his work again, and wanted to remove
the soles of the feet

     [One of the mummies of Prague which were dissected by Czermak, had
     the soles of the feet removed and laid on the breast.  We learn from
     Chapter 125 of the Book of the Dead that this was done that the
     sacred floor of the hall of judgment might not be defiled when the
     dead were summoned before Osiris.]

from a body, his hand trembled so that he could not hold the knife.




CHAPTER XXIII.

The news of the end of the sacred ram of Anion, and of the death of the
bull Apis of Memphis, had reached the House of Seti, and was received
there with loud lamentation, in which all its inhabitants joined, from
the chief haruspex down to the smallest boy in the school-courts.

The superior of the institution, Ameni, had been for three days in
Thebes, and was expected to return to-day.  His arrival was looked for
with anxiety and excitement by many.  The chief of the haruspices was
eager for it that he might hand over the imprisoned scholars to condign
punishment, and complain to him of Pentaur and Bent-Anat; the initiated
knew that important transactions must have been concluded on the farther
side of the Nile; and the rebellious disciples knew that now stern
justice would be dealt to them.

The insurrectionary troop were locked into an open court upon bread and
water, and as the usual room of detention of the establishment was too
small for them all, for two nights they had had to sleep in a loft on
thin straw mats.  The young spirits were excited to the highest pitch,
but each expressed his feelings in quite a different manner.

Bent-Anat's brother, Rameses' son, Rameri, had experienced the same
treatment as his fellows, whom yesterday he had led into every sort of
mischief, with even more audacity than usual, but to-day he hung his
head.

In a corner of the court sat Anana, Pentaur's favorite scholar, hiding
his face in his hands which rested on his knees.  Rameri went up to him,
touched his shoulders and said:

"We have played the game, and now must bear the consequences for good and
for evil.  Are you not ashamed of yourself, old boy?  Your eyes are wet,
and the drops here on your hands have not fallen from the clouds.  You
who are seventeen, and in a few months will be a scribe and a grown man!"

Anana looked at the prince, dried his eyes quickly; and said:

"I was the ring-leader.  Ameni will turn me out of the place, and I must
return disgraced to my poor mother, who has no one in the world but me."

"Poor fellow!"  said Rameri kindly.  "It was striking at random!  If only
our attempt had done Pentaur any good!"

"We have done him harm, on the contrary," said Anana vehemently, "and
have behaved like fools!"  Rameri nodded in full assent, looked
thoughtful for a moment, and then said:

"Do you know, Anana, that you were not the ringleader?  The trick was
planned in this crazy brain; I take the whole blame on my own shoulders.
I am the son of Rameses, and Ameni will be less hard on me than on you."

"He will examine us all," replied Anana, "and I will be punished sooner
than tell a lie."

Rameri colored.

"Have you ever known my tongue sin against the lovely daughter of Ra?"
he exclaimed.  "But look here! did I stir up Antef, Hapi, Sent and all
the others or no?  Who but I advised you to find out Pentaur?  Did I
threaten to beg my father to take me from the school of Seti or not?
I was the instigator of the mischief, I pulled the wires, and if we are
questioned let me speak first.  Not one of you is to mention Anana's
name; do you hear?  not one of you, and if they flog us or deprive us of
our food we all stick to this, that I was guilty of all the mischief."

"You are a brave fellow!" said the son of the chief priest of Anion,
shaking his right hand, while Anana held his left.

The prince freed himself laughing from their grasp.

"Now the old man may come home," he exclaimed, "we are ready for him.
But all the same I will ask my father to send me to Chennu, as sure as my
name is Rameri, if they do not recall Pentaur."

"He treated us like school-boys!"  said the eldest of the young
malefactors.

"And with reason," replied Rameri, "I respect him all the more for it.
You all think I am a careless dog--but I have my own ideas, and I will
speak the words of wisdom."

With these words he looked round on his companions with comical gravity,
and continued--imitating Ameni's manner:

"Great men are distinguished from little men by this--they scorn and
contemn all which flatters their vanity, or seems to them for the moment
desirable, or even useful, if it is not compatible with the laws which
they recognize, or conducive to some great end which they have set before
them; even though that end may not be reached till after their death.

"I have learned this, partly from my father, but partly I have thought it
out for myself; and now I ask you, could Pentaur as 'a great man' have
dealt with us better?"

"You have put into words exactly what I myself have thought ever since
yesterday," cried Anana.  "We have behaved like babies, and instead of
carrying our point we have brought ourselves and Pentaur into disgrace."

The rattle of an approaching chariot was now audible, and Rameri
exclaimed, interrupting Anana, "It is he.  Courage, boys!  I am the
guilty one.  He will not dare to have me thrashed--but he will stab me
with looks!"

Ameni descended quickly from his chariot.  The gate-keeper informed him
that the chief of the kolchytes, and the inspector of victims from the
temple of Anion, desired to speak with him.
