
"Three days after I had taken leave of Atossa I had to marry Artystone,
the daughter of Gobryas.  She is beautiful, and would make any other man
happy.  The day after the wedding the Angare reached Babylon with the
news of your illness.  My mind was made up at once; I begged the king to
let me go to you, nurse you, and warn you of the danger which threatens
your life in Egypt--took leave of my bride, in spite of all my father-in-
law's protestations, and went off at full speed with Prexaspes, never
resting till I reached your side, my dear Bartja.  Now I shall go with
you and Zopyrus to Egypt, for Gyges must accompany the ambassador to
Samos, as interpreter.  This is the king's command; he has been in better
spirits the last few days; the inspection of the masses of troops coming
up to Babylon diverts him, besides which, the Chaldaeans have assured him
that the planet Adar, which belongs to their wargod Chanon, promises a
great victory to the Persian arms.  When do you think you shall be able
to travel, Bartja?"

"To-morrow, if you like," was the answer.  "The doctors say the sea-
voyage will do me good, and the journey by land to Smyrna is very short."

"And  I can assure you," added Zopyrus, "that Sappho will cure you sooner
than all the doctors in the world."

"Then we will start in three days;" said Darius after some consideration,
"we have plenty to do before starting.  Remember we are going into what
may almost be called an enemy's country.  I have been thinking the matter
over, and it seems to me that Bartja must pass for a Babylonian carpet-
merchant, I for his brother, and Zopyrus for a dealer in Sardian red."

"Couldn't we be soldiers?"  asked Zopyrus.  "It's such an ignominious
thing to be taken for cheating pedlers.  How would it be, for instance,
if we passed ourselves off for Lydian soldiers, escaped from punishment,
and seeking service in the Egyptian army?"

"That's not a bad idea," said Bartja, "and I think too that we look more
like soldiers than traders."

"Looks and manner are no guide," said Gyges.  "Those great Greek
merchants and ship-owners go about as proudly as if the world belonged
to them.  But I don't find Zopyrus' proposal a bad one."

"Then so let it be," said Darius, yielding.  "In that case Oroetes must
provide us with the uniform of Lydian Taxiarchs."

"You'd better take the splendid dress of the Chiliarchs" at once, I
think," cried Gyges.

"Why, on such young men, that would excite suspicion directly."

"But we can't appear as common soldiers."

"No, but as Hekatontarchs."

"All right," said Zopyrus laughing.  "Anything you like except a shop-
keeper.--So in three days we are off.  I am glad I shall just have time
to make sure of the satrap's little daughter, and to visit the grove of
Cybele at last.  Now, goodnight, Bartja; don't get up too early.  What
will Sappho say, if you come to her with pale cheeks?"




CHAPTER X.

The sun of a hot midsummer-day had risen on Naukratis.  The Nile had
already begun to overflow its banks, and the fields and gardens of the
Egyptians were covered with water.

The harbor was crowded with craft of all kinds.  Egyptian vessels were
there, manned by Phoenician colonists from the coasts of the Delta, and
bringing fine woven goods from Malta, metals and precious stones from
Sardinia, wine and copper from Cyprus.  Greek triremes laden with oil,
wine and mastic-wood; metal-work and woollen wares from Chalcis,
Phoenician and Syrian craft with gaily-colored sails, and freighted with
cargoes of purple stuffs, gems, spices, glass-work, carpets and cedar-
trees,--used in Egypt, where wood was very scarce, for building purposes,
and taking back gold, ivory, ebony, brightly-plumaged tropical birds,
precious stones and black slaves,--the treasures of Ethiopia; but more
especially the far-famed Egyptian corn, Memphian chariots, lace from
Sais, and the finer sorts of papyrus.  The time when commerce was carried
on merely by barter was now, however, long past, and the merchants of
Naukratis not seldom paid for their goods in gold coin and carefully-
weighed silver.

Large warehouses stood round the harbor of this Greek colony, and
slightly-built dwelling-houses, into which the idle mariners were lured
by the sounds of music and laughter, and the glances and voices of
painted and rouged damsels.  Slaves, both white and colored, rowers and
steersmen, in various costumes, were hurrying hither and thither, while
the ships' captains, either dressed in the Greek fashion or in Phoenician
garments of the most glaring colors, were shouting orders to their crews
and delivering up their cargoes to the merchants.  Whenever a dispute
arose, the Egyptian police with their long staves, and the Greek warders
of the harbor were quickly at hand.  The latter were appointed by the
elders of the merchant-body in this Milesian colony.

The port was getting empty now, for the hour at which the market opened
was near, and none of the free Greeks cared to be absent from the market-
place then.  This time, however, not a few remained behind, curiously
watching a beautifully-built Samian ship, the Okeia, with a long prow
like a swan's neck, on the front of which a likeness of the goddess Hera
was conspicuous.  It was discharging its cargo, but the public attention
was more particularly attracted by three handsome youths, in the dress of
Lydian officers, who left the ship, followed by a number of slaves
carrying chests and packages.

The handsomest of the three travellers, in whom of course our readers
recognize their three young friends, Darius, Bartja and Zopyrus, spoke
to one of the harbor police and asked for the house of Theopompus the
Milesian, to whom they were bound on a visit.

Polite and ready to do a service, like all the Greeks, the police
functionary at once led the way across the market-place,--where the
opening of business had just been announced by the sound of a bell,--to a
handsome house, the property of the Milesian, Theopompus, one of the most
important and respected men in Naukratis.

The party, however, did not succeed in crossing the market-place without
hindrance.  They found it easy enough to evade the importunities of
impudent fishsellers, and the friendly invitations of butchers, bakers,
sausage and vegetable-sellers, and potters.  But when they reached the
part allotted to the flower-girls, Zopyrus was so enchanted with the
scene, that he clapped his hands for joy.

     [Separate portions of the market were set apart for the sale of
     different goods.  The part appointed for the flower-sellers, who
     passed in general for no better than they should be, was called the
     "myrtle-market."  Aristoph.  Thesmoph. 448.]

Three wonderfully-lovely girls, in white dresses of some half-transparent
material, with colored borders, were seated together on low stools,
binding roses, violets and orange-blossoms into one long wreath.  Their
charming heads were wreathed with flowers too, and looked very like the
lovely rosebuds which one of them, on seeing the young men come up, held
out to their notice.

"Buy my roses, my handsome gentlemen," she said in a clear, melodious
voice, "to put in your sweethearts' hair."

Zopyrus took the flowers, and holding the girl's hand fast in his own,
answered, "I come from a far country, my lovely child, and have no
sweetheart in Naukratis yet; so let me put the roses in your own golden
hair, and this piece of gold in your white little hand."

The girl burst into a merry laugh, showed her sister the handsome
present, and answered: "By Eros, such gentlemen as you cannot want for
sweethearts.  Are you brothers?"

"No."

"That's a pity, for we are sisters."

"And you thought we should make three pretty couples?"

"I may have thought it, but I did not say so."

"And your sisters?"

     [This passage was suggested by the following epigram of Dionysius
     "Roses are blooming on thy cheek, with roses thy basket is laden,
     Which dost thou sell?  The flowers?  Thyself?  Or both, my pretty
     maiden?"]

The girls laughed, as if they were but little averse to such a
connection, and offered Bartja and Darius rosebuds too.

The young men accepted them, gave each a gold piece in return, and were
not allowed to leave these beauties until their helmets had been crowned
with laurel.

Meanwhile the news of the strangers' remarkable liberality had spread
among the many girls, who were selling ribbons, wreaths and flowers close
by.  They all brought roses too and invited the strangers with looks and
words to stay with them and buy their flowers.

Zopyrus, like many a young gentleman in Naukratis, would gladly have
accepted their invitations, for most of these girls were beautiful, and
their hearts were not difficult to win; but Darius urged him to come
away, and begged Bartja to forbid the thoughtless fellow's staying any
longer.  After passing the tables of the money-changers, and the stone
seats on which the citizens sat in the open air and held their
consultations, they arrived at the house of Theopompus.

The stroke given by their Greek guide with the metal knocker on the
house-door was answered at once by a slave.  As the master was at the
market, the strangers were led by the steward, an old servant grown grey
in the service of Theopompus, into the Andronitis, and begged to wait
there until he returned.

They were still engaged in admiring the paintings on the walls, and the
artistic carving of the stone floor, when Theopompus, the merchant whom
we first learnt to know at the house of Rhodopis, came back from the
market, followed by a great number of slaves bearing his purchases.

     [Men of high rank among the Greeks did not disdain to make purchases
     at market, accompanied by their slaves, but respectable women could
     not appear there.  Female slaves were generally sent to buy what was
     needed.]

He received the strangers with charming politeness and asked in what way
he could be of use to them, on which Bartja, having first convinced
himself that no unwished--for listeners were present, gave him the roll
he had received from Phanes at parting.

Theopompus had scarcely read its contents, when he made a low bow to the
prince, exclaiming: "By Zeus, the father of hospitality, this is the
greatest honor that could have been conferred upon my house!  All I
possess is yours, and I beg you to ask your companions to accept with
kindness what I can offer.  Pardon my not having recognized you at once
in your Lydian dress.  It seems to me that your hair is shorter and your
beard thicker, than when you left Egypt.  Am I right in imagining that
you do not wish to be recognized?  It shall be exactly as you wish.  He
is the best host, who allows his guests the most freedom.  All, now I
recognize your friends; but they have disguised themselves and cut their
curls also.  Indeed, I could almost say that you, my friend,
whose name--"

"My name is Darius."

"That you, Darius, have dyed your hair black.  Yes?  Then you see my
memory does not deceive me.  But that is nothing to boast of, for I saw
you several times at Sais, and here too, on your arrival and departure.
You ask, my prince, whether you would be generally recognized?  Certainly
not.  The foreign dress, the change in your hair and the coloring of your
eyebrows have altered you wonderfully.  But excuse me a moment, my old
steward seems to have some important message to give."

In a few minutes Theopompus came back, exclaiming: "No, no, my honored
friends, you have certainly not taken the wisest way of entering
Naukratis incognito.  You have been joking with the flower-girls and
paying them for a few roses, not like runaway Lydian Hekatontarchs, but
like the great lords you are.  All Naukratis knows the pretty, frivolous
sisters, Stephanion, Chloris and Irene, whose garlands have caught many a
heart, and whose sweet glances have lured many a bright obolus out of the
pockets of our gay young men.  They're very fond of visiting the flower-
girls at market-time, and agreements are entered into then for which more
than one gold piece must be paid later; but for a few roses and good
words they are not accustomed to be so liberal as you have been.  The
girls have been boasting about you and your gifts, and showing your good
red gold to their stingier suitors.  As rumor is a goddess who is very
apt to exaggerate and to make a crocodile out of a lizard, it happened
that news reached the Egyptian captain on guard at the market, that some
newly-arrived Lydian warriors had been scattering gold broadcast among
the flower-girls.  This excited suspicion, and induced the Toparch to
send an officer here to enquire from whence you come, and what is the
object of your journey hither.  I was obliged to use a little stratagem
to impose upon him, and told him, as I believe you wish, that you were
rich young men from Sardis, who had fled on account of having incurred
the satrap's ill-will.  But I see the government officer coming, and with
him the secretary who is to make out passports which will enable you to
remain on the Nile unmolested.  I have promised him a handsome reward, if
he can help you in getting admitted into the king's mercenaries.  He was
caught and believed my story.  You are so young, that nobody would
imagine you were entrusted with a secret mission."

The talkative Greek had scarcely finished speaking when the clerk, a
