forehead, before I could prevent it.  There, you needn't laugh; it will
be a month at least before I can get purified from all these pollutions.
I took an emetic, and when that at last began to take effect, they all
mocked and sneered at me.  But that was not all.  A cursed cook-boy
nearly beat a sacred kitten to death before my very eyes.  Then an
ointment-mixer, who had heard that I was your servant, made that godless
Bubares ask me whether I could cure diseases of the eye too.  I said yes,
because you know in sixty years it's rather hard if one can't pick up
something from one's master.  Bubares was interpreter between us, and the
shameful fellow told him to say that he was very much disturbed about a
dreadful disease in his eyes.  I asked what it was, and received for
answer that he could not tell one thing from another in the dark!"

"You should have told him that the best remedy for that was to light a
candle."

"Oh, I hate the rascals!  Another hour among them will be the death of
me!"

"I am sure you behaved oddly enough among these foreigners," said
Nebenchiari smiling, "you must have made them laugh at you, for the
Persians are generally very polite, well-behaved people.  Try them again,
only once.  I shall be very glad to take you in this evening, but I can't
possibly do it before."

"It is as I thought!  He's altered too, like everybody else!  Osiris is
dead and Seth rules the world again."

"Farewell!  When the seven stars rise, our old Ethiopian slave, Nebununf,
will wait for you here."

"Nebununf, that old rogue?  I never want to see him again."

"Yes, the very same."

"Him--well it's a good thing, when people stay as they were.  To be sure
I know some people who can't say so much of themselves, and who instead
of minding their own business, pretend to heal inward diseases, and when
a faithful old servant .  .  ."

"Hold your tongue, and wait patiently till evening."  These last words
were spoken seriously, and produced the desired impression.  The old man
made another obeisance, and before his master left him, said: "I came
here under the protection of Phanes, the former commander of the Greek
mercenaries.  He wishes very much to speak with you."

"That is his concern.  He can come to me."

"You never leave that sick girl, whose eyes are as sound as .  .  ."

"Hib!"

"For all I care she may have a cataract in both.  May Phanes come to you
this evening?"

"I wished to be alone with you."

"So did I; but the Greek seems to be in a great hurry, and he knows
nearly everything that I have to tell you."

"Have you been gossiping then?"

"No--not exactly--but .  .  ."

"I always thought you were a man to be trusted."

"So I was.  But this Greek knows already a great deal of what I know, and
the rest .  .  ."

"Well?"

"The rest he got out of me, I hardly know how myself.  If I did not wear
this amulet against an evil eye, I should have been obliged .  .  ."

"Yes, yes, I know the Athenian--I can forgive you.  I should like him to
come with you this evening.  But I see the sun is already high in the
heavens.  I have no time to lose.  Tell me in a few words what has
happened."

"I thought this evening .  .  ."

"No, I must have at least a general idea of what has happened before I
see the Athenian.  Be brief."

"You have been robbed!"

"Is that all?"

"Is not that enough?"

"Answer me.  Is that all?"

"Yes!"

"Then farewell."

"But Nebenchari!"

The physician did not even hear this exclamation; the gates of the harem
had already closed behind him.

When the Pleiades had risen, Nebenchari was to be found seated alone in
one of the magnificent rooms assigned to his use on the eastern side of
the palace, near to Kassandane's apartments.  The friendly manner in
which he had welcomed his old servant had given place to the serious
expression which his face usually wore, and which had led the cheerful
Persians to call him a morose and gloomy man.

Nebenchari was an Egyptian priest through and through; a member of that
caste which never indulged in a jest, and never for a moment forgot to be
dignified and solemn before the public; but when among their relations
and their colleagues completely threw off this self-imposed restraint,
and gave way at times even to exuberant mirth.

Though he had known Phanes in Sais, he received him with cold politeness,
and, after the first greeting was ended, told Hib to leave them alone.

"I have come to you," said the Athenian, "to speak about some very
important affairs."

"With which I am already acquainted," was the Egyptian's curt reply.

"I am inclined to doubt that," said Phanes with an incredulous smile.

"You have been driven out of Egypt, persecuted and insulted by Psamtik,
and you have come to Persia to enlist Cambyses as an instrument of
revenge against my country."

"You are mistaken.  I have nothing against your country, but all the more
against Amasis and his house.  In Egypt the state and the king are one,
as you very well know."

"On the contrary, my own observations have led me to think that the
priests considered themselves one with the state."

"In that case you are better informed than I, who have always looked on
the kings of Egypt as absolute.  So they are; but only in proportion as
they know how to emancipate themselves from the influence of your caste.
--Amasis himself submits to the priests now."

"Strange intelligence!"

"With which, however, you have already long been made acquainted."

"Is that your opinion?"

"Certainly it is.  And I know with still greater certainty that once--you
hear me--once, he succeeded in bending the will of these rulers of his to
his own."

"I very seldom hear news from home, and do not understand what you are
speaking of."

"There I believe you, for if you knew what I meant and could stand there
quietly without clenching your fist, you would be no better than a dog
who only whimpers when he's kicked and licks the hand that torments him."

The physician turned pale.  "I know that Amasis has injured and insulted
me," he said, "but at the same time I must tell you that revenge is far
too sweet a morsel to be shared with a stranger."

"Well said!  As to my own revenge, however, I can only compare it to a
vineyard where the grapes are so plentiful, that I am not able to gather
them all myself."

"And you have come hither to hire good laborers."

"Quite right, and I do not even yet give up the hope of securing you to
take a share in my vintage."

"You are mistaken.  My work is already done.  The gods themselves have
taken it in hand.  Amasis has been severely enough punished for banishing
me from country, friends and pupils into this unclean land."

"You mean by his blindness perhaps?"

"Possibly."

"Then you have not heard that Petammon, one of your colleagues, has
succeeded in cutting the skin, which covered the pupil of the eye and so
restoring Amasis' sight?"

The Egyptian started and ground his teeth; recovered his presence of
mind, however, in a moment, and answered: "Then the gods have punished
the father through the children."

"In what way?  Psamtik suits his father's present mood very well.  It is
true that Tachot is ill, but she prays and sacrifices with her father all
the more for that; and as to Nitetis, you and I both know that her death
will not touch him very closely."

"I really do not understand you."

"Of course not, so long as you fancy that I believe your beautiful
patient to be Amasis' daughter."

The Egyptian started again, but Phanes went on without appearing to
notice his emotion: "I know more than you suppose.  Nitetis is the
daughter of Hophra, Amasis' dethroned predecessor.  Amasis brought her
up as his own child-first, in order to make the Egyptians believe that
Hophra had died childless; secondly, in order to deprive her of her
rights to the throne; for you know women are allowed to govern on the
Nile."

"These are mere suppositions."

"For which, however, I can bring irrefragable proofs.  Among the papers
which your old servant Hib brought with him in a small box, there must be
some letters from a certain Sonnophre, a celebrated accoucheur, your own
father, which .  .  ."

     [To judge from the pictures on the monuments and from the 1st Chap.
     of Exodus, it would seem that in ancient, as in modern Egypt,
     midwives were usually called in to assist at the birth of children;
     but it is also certain, that in difficult cases physicians were
     employed also.  In the hieratic medical papyrus in Berlin, women are
     often spoken of as assisting at such times.  In the medical Papyrus
     Ebers certain portions are devoted to diseases peculiar to women.
     "There were special rooms set aside in private houses for the birth
     of children, as symbolical ones were reserved in the temples.  These
     chambers were called meschen, and from them was derived the name
     given to midwives, to meschennu.]

"If that be the case, those letters are my property, and I have not the
slightest intention of giving them up; besides which you might search
Persia from one end to the other without finding any one who could
decipher my father's writing."

"Pardon me, if I point out one or two errors into which you have fallen.
First, this box is at present in my hands, and though I am generally
accustomed to respect the rights of property, I must assure you that, in
the present instance, I shall not return the box until its contents have
