hours reproached herself for having foolishly squandered the wealth of
her people.  The present appeared unbearable, and from the future a host
of black cares pressed upon her.

The following days were overcrowded with business details.

Half of her nights were spent in the observatory.  She had not asked
again for Barine.  On the fifth night she permitted Alexas to conduct her
once more to the little observatory which had been erected for her father
at Lochias, and Antony's favourite knew how to prove that a star which
had long threatened her planet was that of the woman whom she seemed to
have forgotten as completely as she had ignored his former warning
against this very foe.

The Queen denied this, but Alexas eagerly continued: "The night after
your return home your kindness was again displayed in its inexhaustible
and--to us less noble souls--incomprehensible wealth.  Deeply agitated,
we watched during the memorable examination the touching spectacle of the
greatest heart making itself the standard by which to measure what is
petty and ignoble.  But ere the second trial takes place the wanderers
above, who know the future, bid me warn you once more; for that woman's
every look was calculated, every word had its fixed purpose, every tone
of her voice was intended to produce a certain effect.  Whatever she said
or may yet say had no other design than to deceive my royal mistress.  As
yet there have been no definite questions and answers.  But you will have
her examined, and then----What may she not make of the story of Mark
Antony, Barine, and the two armlets?  Perhaps it will be a masterpiece."

"Do you know its real history?" asked Cleopatra, clasping her fingers
more closely around the pencil in her hand.

"If I did," replied Alexas, smiling significantly, "the receiver of
stolen goods should not betray the thief."

"Not even if the person who has been robbed--the Queen--commands you to
give up the dishonestly acquired possession?"

"Unfortunately, even then I should be forced to withhold obedience; for
consider, my royal mistress, there are but two great luminaries around
which my dark life revolves.  Shall I betray the moon, when I am sure of
gaining nothing thereby save to dim the warm light of the sun?"

"That means that your revelations would wound me, the sun?"

"Unless your lofty soul is too great to be reached by shadows which
surround less noble women with an atmosphere of indescribable torture."

"Do you intend to render your words more attractive by the veil with
which you shroud them?  It is transparent, and dims the vision very
little.  My soul, you think, should be free from jealousy and the other
weaknesses of my sex.  There you are mistaken.  I am a woman, and wish to
remain one.  As Terence's Chremes says he is a human being, and nothing
human is unknown to him, I do not hesitate to confess all feminine
frailties.  Anubis told me of a queen in ancient times who would not
permit the inscriptions to record 'she,' but 'he came,' or 'he, the
ruler, conquered.'  Fool!  Whatever concerns me, my womanhood is not less
lofty than the crown.  I was a woman ere I became Queen.  The people
prostrate themselves before my empty litters; but when, in my youth, I
wandered in disguise with Antony through the city streets and visited
some scene of merrymaking, while the men gazed admiringly at me, and we
heard voices behind us murmur, 'A  handsome couple!'  I returned home
full of joy and pride.  But there was something greater still for the
woman to learn, when the heart in the breast of the Queen forgot throne
and sceptre and, in the hours consecrated to Eros, tasted joys known to
womanhood alone.  How can you men, who only command and desire,
understand the happiness of sacrifice?  I am a woman; my birth does not
exalt me above any feeling of my sex; and what I now ask is not as Queen
but as woman."

"If that is the case," Alexas answered with his hand upon his heart, "you
impose silence upon me; for were I to confess to the woman Cleopatra what
agitates my soul, I should be guilty of a double crime--I would violate a
promise and betray the friend who confided his noble wife to my
protection."

"Now the darkness is becoming too dense for me," replied Cleopatra,
raising her head with repellent pride.  "Or, if I choose to raise the
veil, I must point out to you the barriers--

"Which surround the Queen," replied the Syrian with an obsequious bow.
"There you behold the fact.  It is an impossibility to separate the woman
from the princess.  So far as I am concerned, I do not wish to anger the
former against the presumptuous adorer, and I desire to yield to the
latter the obedience which is her due.  Therefore I entreat you to
forget the armlet and its many painful associations, and pass to the
consideration of other matters.  Perhaps the fair Barine will voluntarily
confess everything, and even add how she managed to ensnare the amiable
son of the greatest of men, and the most admirable of mothers, the young
King Caesarion."

Cleopatra's eyes flashed more brightly, and she angrily exclaimed:
"I found the boy just now as though he were possessed by demons.  He was
ready to tear the bandage from his wound, if he were refused the woman
whom he loved.  A magic potion was the first thought, and his tutor of
course attributes everything to magic arts.  Charmian, on the contrary,
declares that his visits annoyed and even alarmed Barine.  Nothing except
a rigid investigation can throw light upon this subject.  We will await
the Imperator's return.  Do you think that he will again seek the singer?
You are his most trusted confidant.  If you desire his best good, and
care for my favour, drop your hesitation and answer this question."

The Syrian assumed the manner of a man who had reached a decision, and
answered firmly: "Certainly he will, unless you prevent him.  The
simplest way would be--"

"Well?"

"To inform him, as soon as he lands, that she is no longer to be found.
I should be especially happy to receive this commission from my royal
sun."

"And do you think it would dim the light of your moon a little, were he
to seek her here in vain?"

"As surely as that the contrary would be the case if he were always as
gratefully aware of the peerless brilliancy of his sun as it deserves.
Helios suffers no other orb to appear so long as he adorns the heavens.
His lustre quenches all the rest.  Let my sun so decree, and Barine's
little star will vanish."

"Enough!  I know your aim now.  But a human life is no small thing, and
this woman, too, is the child of a mother.  We must consider, earnestly
consider, whether our purpose cannot be gained without proceeding to
extremes.  This must be done with zeal and a kindly intention--But I--
Now, when the fate of this country, my own, and the children's is hanging
in the balance, when I have not fifteen minutes at my command, and there
is no end of writing and consulting, I can waste no time on such
matters."

"The reflective mind must be permitted to use its mighty wings
unimpeded," cried the Syrian eagerly.  "Leave the settlement of minor
matters to trustworthy friends."

Here they were  interrupted  by  the "introducer," who announced the
eunuch Mardion.  He had come on business which, spite of the late hour,
permitted no delay.

Alexas accompanied the Queen to the tablinum, where they found the
eunuch.  A slave attended him, carrying a pouch filled with letters which
