gratitude.  Let all who love her and the divine Antony, the new Herakles
and Dionysus--both will soon make their entry among us crowned with the
laurels of victory--join the Regent and every well-disposed person in
seizing yonder bit of land so meanly withheld by base avarice and a
sentiment--a sentiment, do you hear?--which I do not name more plainly,
simply because wickedness is repulsive to me, and I do not stand here as
an accuser.  Whoever upholds the word-monger who spouts forth books as
the dolphin at my side does water, may do so.  I shall not envy him.  But
first look at Didymus's ally and panegyrist.  There he stands opposite to
me.  It would have been better for him had the dolphin at his feet taught
him silence.  Then he might have remained in the obscurity which befits
him.

"But whether willing or not, I must drag him forth, and I will show you
Dion, fellow-citizens, though I would far rather have you see things
which arouse less ire.  The dim light prevents your distinguishing the
colour of his robe, but I know it, for I saw it in the glare of day.  It
is hyacinthine purple.  You know what that costs.  It would support the
wives and children of many among you for ten long years.  'How heavy must
be the purse which can expose such a treasure to sun and rain!' is the
thought of every one who sees him strutting about as proudly as a
peacock.  And his purse is loaded with many talents.  Only it is a pity
that, day after day, most of you must give your children a little less
bread and deprive yourselves of many a draught of wine to deck him out so
bravely.  His father, Eumenes, was a tax-collector, and what the leech
extorted from you and your children, the son now uses to drive, clad in
hyacinthine purple, a four-horse chariot, which splashes the mire from
the street into your faces as it rolls onward.  By the dog! the gentleman
does  not weigh  so  very much, yet he needs four horses to drag him.
And, fellow-citizens, do you know why?  I'll tell you.  He's afraid of
sticking fast everywhere, even in his speech."

Here Philostratus lowered his voice, for the phrase "sticking fast" had
drawn a laugh from some of his hearers; but Dion, whose father had really
amassed, in the high position of a receiver of taxes, the handsome
fortune which his son possessed, did not delay his reply.

"Yes, yes," he retorted scornfully, "yonder Syrian babbler hit the mark
this time.  He stands before me, and who does not easily stick fast when
marsh and mire are so near?  As for the hyacinthine purple cloak, I wear
it because I like it.  His crocus-yellow one is less to my taste, though
he certainly looks fine enough in it in the sunlight.  It shines like a
buttercup in the grass.  You know the plant.  When it fades--and I ask
whether you think Philostratus looks like a bud--when it fades, it leaves
a hollow spiral ball which a child's breath could blow away.  Suppose in
future we should call the round buttercup seed-vessels 'Philostratus
heads'?  You like the suggestion?  I am glad, fellow-citizens, and I
thank you.  It proves your good taste.  Then we will stick to the
comparison.  Every head contains a tongue, and Philostratus says that his
is the tool which supports him."

"Hear the money-bag, the despiser of the people!"  interrupted
Philostratus furiously.  "The honest toil by which a citizen earns a
livelihood is a disgrace in his eyes."

"Honest toil, my good friend," replied Dion, "is scarcely in question
here.  I spoke only of your tongue.--You understand me, fellow-citizens.
Or, if any of you are not yet acquainted with this worthy man, I will
show him to you, for I know him well.  He is my foe, yet I can sincerely
recommend him to many of you.  If any one has a very bad, shamefully
corrupt cause to bring before the courts, I most earnestly counsel him
to apply to the buttercup man perched on yonder fountain.  He will thank
me for it.  Believe me, Didymus's cause is just, precisely because this
advocate so eagerly assails it.  I told you just now the matter under
discussion.  Which of you who owns a garden can say in future, 'It is
mine,' if, during the absence of the Queen, it is allowable to take it
away to be used for any other purpose?  But this is what threatens
Didymus.  If this is to be the custom here, let every one beware of
sowing a radish or planting a bush or a tree, for should the wife of
some great noble desire to dry her linen there, he may be deprived
of it ere the former can ripen or the latter give shade."

Loud applause followed this sentence, but Philostratus shouted in a voice
that echoed far and wide: "Hear me, fellow-citizens; do not allow your
selves to be deceived!  No one is to be robbed here.  The project is to
purchase, at a high price, the spot which the city needs for her
adornment, and to honour and please the Queen.  Are the Regent and the
citizens to lose this opportunity of expressing the gratitude of years,
and the rejoicing over the greatest of victories, of which we shall soon
hear, because an evil-disposed person--the word must be uttered--a foe
to his country, opposes it?"

"Now the mire is coming too near me," Dion angrily responded, "and I
might really stick fast, as I was warned; for I do not envy the ready
presence of mind of any person whose tongue would not falter when the
basest slander scattered its venom over him.  You all know, fellow-
citizens, through how many generations the Didymus family has lived to
the honour of this city, doing praiseworthy work in yonder house.  You
know that the good old man who dwells there was one of the teachers of
the royal children."

"And yet," cried Philostratus, "only the day before yesterday he walked
arm in arm in the Paneum garden with Arius, the tutor of Octavianus, our
own and our Queen's most hated foe.  In my presence, and before I know
not how many others, Didymus distinguished this Arius as his most beloved
pupil."

"To give you that title," retorted Dion, "would certainly fill any
teacher with shame and anger, no matter how far you had surpassed him in
wisdom and knowledge.  Nay, had you been committed to the care of the
herring dealers, instead of the rhetoricians, every honest man among them
would disown you, for they sell only good wares for good money, while you
give the poorest in exchange for glittering gold.  This time you trample
under foot the fair name of an honourable man.  But I will not suffer it;
and you hear, fellow-citizens, I now challenge this Syrian to prove that
Didymus ever betrayed his native land, or I will brand him in your
presence a base slanderer, an infamous, venal destroyer of character!"

"An insult from such lips is easily borne," replied Philostratus in a
tone of scornful superiority; but there was a pause ere he again turned
to the listening throng, and with all the warmth he could throw into his
voice continued: "What do I desire, then, fellow-citizens?  What is the
sole object of my words?  I stand here with clean hands, impelled solely
by the impulse of my heart, to plead for the Queen.  In order to secure
the only suitable site for the statues to be erected to Cleopatra's
honour and fame, I enter into judgment with her foes, expose myself to
the insult with which boastful insolence is permitted to vent its wrath
upon me.  But I am not dismayed, though, in pursuing this course, I am
acting against the law of Nature; for the infamous man against whom I
raise my voice was my teacher, too, and ere he turned from the path of
right and virtue--under influences which I will not mention here--he
numbered me also, in the presence of many witnesses, among his best
pupils.  I was certainly one of the most grateful--I chose his
granddaughter--the truth must be spoken--for my wife.  The possession--"

"Possession!" interrupted Dion in a loud, excited tone.  "The corpse cast
ashore by the waves might as well boast possession of the sea!"

The dim torchlight was sufficient to reveal Philostratus's pallor to the
bystanders.  For a moment the orator seemed to lose his self-control, but
he quickly recovered himself, and shouted: "Fellow-citizens, dear
friends!  I was about to make you witnesses of the misery which a woman,
whose wickedness is even greater than her beauty, brought upon an
inexperienced--"

But he went no further; for his hearers--many of whom knew the brilliant,
generous Dion, and Barine, the fair singer at the last Adonis festival--
gave the orator tokens of their indignation, which were all the more
pitiless because of the pleasure they felt in seeing an expert vanquished
by an untrained foe.  The wordy war would not have ended so quickly,
however, had not restlessness and alarm taken possession of the crowd.
The shout, "Back! disperse!" ran through the multitude, and directly
after the trampling of hoofs and the commands of the leader of a troop of
Libyan cavalry were heard.  The matter at stake was not sufficiently
important to induce the populace to offer an armed force resistance which
might have entailed serious danger.  Besides, the blustering war of
tongues had reached a merry close, and loud laughter blended with the
shouts of fear and warning; for the surging throng had swept with
unexpected speed towards the fountain and plunged Philostratus into the
basin.  Whether this was due to the wrath of some enemy, or to mere
accident, could not be learned; the vain efforts of the luckless man to
crawl out of the water up the smooth marble were so comical, and his
gestures, after helping hands had dragged him dripping upon the pavement
of the square, were so irresistibly funny, that more laughing than angry
voices were heard, especially when some one cried, "His hands were soiled
by blackening Didymus, so the washing will do him good."  "Some wise
physicians flung him into the water," retorted an other;  "he needed the
cold application after the blows Dion dealt him."

The Regent, who had sent the troop of horsemen to drive the crowd away
from Didymus's house, might well be pleased that the violent measure
encountered so little resistance.

The throng quickly scattered, and was speedily attracted by something new
at the Theatre of Dionysus--the zither-player Anaxenor had just announced
from its steps that Cleopatra and Antony had won the most brilliant
victory, and had sung to the accompaniment of his lute a hymn which had
deeply stirred all hearts.  He had composed it long before, and seized
the first opportunity--the report had reached his ears while breakfasting
in Kanopus--to try its effect.

As soon as the square began to empty, Barine left her post of
observation.  It was long since her heart had throbbed so violently.
Not one of the many suitors for her favour had been so dear to her as
Dion; but she now felt that she loved him.

What he had just done for her and her grandfather was worthy of the
deepest gratitude; it proved that he did not come to her house, like most
of her guests, merely to while away the evening hours.

It had been no small matter for the young aristocrat, in the presence of
the whole multitude, to enter into a debate with the infamous
Philostratus, and how well he had succeeded in silencing the dreaded
orator!  Besides, Dion had even taken her part against his own powerful
uncle, and perhaps by his deed drawn upon himself the hostility of his
enemy's brother, Alexas, Antony's powerful favourite.  Barine might
assure herself that he, who was the peer of any Macedonian noble in the
city, would have done this for no one else.

She felt as if the act had ransomed her.

When, after an unhappy marriage and many desolate days, she had regained
her former bright cheerfulness and saw her house become the centre of the
intellectual life of the city, she had striven until now to extend the
same welcome to all her guests.  She had perceived that she ought not to
give any one the power over her which is possessed by the man who knows
that he is beloved, and even to Dion she had granted little more than to
the others.  But now she saw plainly that she would resign the pleasure
of being a universally admired woman, whose modest home attracted the
most distinguished men in the city, for the far greater happiness which
would be hers as Dion's beloved wife.

With him, cherished by his love, she believed that she could find far
greater joy in solitude than in the gay course of her present life.

She knew now what she must do if Dion sought her, and the architect,
for the first time, found her a silent companion.  He had willingly
accompanied her back to her grandfather's house, where he had again met
her sister Helena, while she had quitted it disappointed, because her
brave defender had not returned there.

After the interruption of the debate Dion had been in a very cheerful
mood.  The pleasant sensation of having championed a good cause, and the
delightful consciousness of success were not new to him, but he had
rarely felt so uplifted as now.  He most ardently longed for his next
meeting with Barine, and imagined how he would describe what had happened
and claim her gratitude for his friendly service.  The scene had risen
clearly before his mind, but scarcely had the radiant vision of the
