as child's play compared with the nervous tension to which he had been
strung by the appalling events he had witnessed on all sides.  How petty
was the excitement of an Alexandrian horse-race!  Whether Timon or
Ptolemy or he himself should win--what did it matter?  It was a fine
thing no doubt to carry off the crown in the circus at Byzantium, but
there were other and soul-stirring crises there beyond those which were
bound up with horses or chariots.  There a throne was the prize, and
might cost the blood and life of thousands!--What did a man bring home
from the churches in the Nile valley?  But if he crossed the threshold
of St. Sophia's in Constantinople he often might have his blood curdled,
or bring home--what matter?--bleeding wounds, or even be carried home
--a corpse.

Three times had he seen the throne change masters.  An emperor and an
empress had been stripped of the purple and mutilated before his eyes.

Aye, then and there he had had real and intense excitement to thrill him
to the marrow and quick.  As for the rest!  Well, yes, he had had more
trivial pleasures too.  He had not been received as other Egyptians were:
half-educated philosophers--who called themselves Sages and assumed a
mystic and pompously solemn demeanor, Astrologers, Rhetoricians, poverty-
stricken but witty and venemous satirists, physicians making a display of
the learning of their forefathers, fanatical theologians--always ready to
avail themselves of other weapons than reason and dogma in their bitter
contests over articles of faith, hermits and recluses--
as foul in mind as they were dirty in their persons, corn-merchants and
usurers with whom it was dangerous to conclude a bargain without
witnesses.  Orion was none of these.  As the handsome, genial, and
original-minded son of the rich and noble Governor, Mukaukas George, he
was welcomed as a sort of ambassador; whatever the golden youth of the
city allowed themselves was permitted to him.  His purse was as well
lined as theirs, his health and vigor far more enduring; and his horses
had beaten theirs in three races, though he drove them himself and did
not trust them to paid charioteers.  The "rich Egyptian," the "New
Antinous," "handsome Orion," as he was called, could never be spared from
feast or entertainment.  He was a welcome guest at the first houses in
the city, and in the palace and the villa of the Senator Justinus, an old
friend of his father, he was as much at home as a son of the house.

It was under his roof, and the auspices of his kindhearted wife Martina,
that he made acquaintance with the fair Heliodora, the widow of a nephew
of the Senator; and the whole city had been set talking of the tender
intimacy Orion had formed with the beautiful young woman whose rigid
virtue had hitherto been a subject of admiration no less than her fair
hair and the big jewels with which she loved to set off her simple but
costly dress.  And many a fair Byzantine had striven for the young
Egyptian's good graces before Heliodora had driven them all out of the
field.  Still, she had not yet succeeded in enslaving Orion deeply and
permanently; and when, last evening, he had assured his mother that she
was not mistress of his heart he spoke truly.

His conduct in the Capital had not certainly been exemplary, but he had
never run wild, and had enjoyed the respect not only of his companions in
pleasure, but of grave and venerable men whom he had met in the house of
Justinus, and who sang the praises of his intelligence and eagerness to
learn.  As a boy he had been a diligent scholar, and here he let no
opportunity slip.  Not least had he cultivated his musical talents in the
Imperial city, and had acquired a rare mastery in singing and playing the
lute.

He would gladly have remained some time longer at the Capital, but at
last the place grew too hot to hold him-mainly on his father's account.
The conviction that George had largely contributed to the disaffection of
Egypt for the Byzantine Empire and had played into the hands of the
irresistible and detested upstart Arabs, had found increasing acceptance
in the highest circles, especially since Cyrus--the deposed and now
deceased Patriarch of Alexandria--had retired to Constantinople.  Orion's
capture was in fact already decided on, when the Senator Justinus and
some other friends had hinted a warning which he had acted on just in
time.

His father's line of conduct had placed him in great peril; but he owed
him no grudge for it--indeed, he most deeply approved of it.  A thousand
times had he witnessed the contempt heaped on the Egyptians by the
Greeks, and the loathing and hatred of the Orthodox for the Monophysite
creed of his fellow-countrymen.

He had with difficulty controlled his wrath as he had listened again
and again to the abuse and scorn poured out on his country and people by
gentle and simple, laymen and priests, even in his presence; regarding
him no doubt as one of themselves--a Greek in whose eyes everything
"Barbarian" was as odious and as contemptible as in their own.

But the blood of his race flowed in the veins of the "new Antinous" who
could sing Greek songs so well and with so pure an accent; every insult
to his people was stamped deep in his heart, every sneer at his faith
revived his memory of the day when the Melchites had slain his two
brothers.  And these bloody deeds, these innumerable acts of oppression
by which the Greek; had provoked and offended the schismatic Egyptian and
hunted them to death, were now avenged by his father.  It lifted up his
heart and made him proud to think of it.  He showed his secret soul to
the old man who was as much surprised as delighted at what he found
there; for he had feared that Orion might not be able wholly to escape
the powerful influences of Greek beguilements;--nay, he had often felt
anxious lest his own son might disapprove of his having surrendered to
the Arab conquerors the province entrusted to his rule, and concluded a
peace with them.

The Mukaukas now felt himself as one with Orion, and from time to time
looked tenderly up at him from the draught-board.  Neforis was doing her
best to entertain the mother of her son's future bride, and divert her
attention from his strange demeanor.  She seemed indeed to be successful,
for Dame Susannah agreed to everything she said; but she betrayed the
fact that she was keeping a sharp watch by suddenly asking: "Does your
husband's lofty niece not think us worthy of a single word?"

"Oh no!"  said Neforis bitterly.  "I only hope she may soon find some
other people to whom she can behave more graciously.  You may depend
upon it I will put no obstacle in her way."

Then she brought the conversation round to Katharina, and the widow told
her that her brother-in-law, Chrysippus, was now in Memphis with his two
little daughters.  They were to go away on the morrow, so the young girl
had been obliged to devote herself to them:  "And so the poor child is
sitting there at this minute," she lamented, "and must keep those two
little chatter-boxes quiet while she is longing to be here instead."

Orion quite understood these last words; he asked after the young girl,
and then added gaily:

"She promised me a collar yesterday for my little white keepsake from
Constantinople.  Fie! Mary, you should not tease the poor little beast."

"No, let the dog go," added the widow, addressing the governor's little
granddaughter, who was trying to make the recalcitrant dog kiss her doll.
"But you know, Orion, this tiny creature is really too delicate for such
a big man as you are!  You should give him to some pretty young lady and
then he would fulfil his destiny!  And Katharina is embroidering him a
collar; I ought not to tell her little secret, but it is to have gold
stars on a blue ground."

"Because Orion is a star," cried the little girl.  "So she is working
nothing but Orions."

"But fortunately there is but one star of my name," observed he.  "Pray
tell her that Dame Susa."

The child clapped her hands.  "He does not choose to have any other star
near him!"  she exclaimed.

The widow broke in: "Little simpleton!  I know people who cannot even
bear to have a likeness traced between themselves and any one else.--But
this you must permit, Orion--you were quite right just now, Neforis; his
mouth and brow might have been taken from his father's face."

The remark was quite accurate; and yet it would have been hard to imagine
two men more unlike than the bright youth full of vitality, and the
languid old man on the couch, to whom even the small exertion of moving
the men was an effort.  The Mukaukas might once have been like his son,
but in some long past time.  Thin grey locks now only covered one half of
his bald head, and of his eyes, which, thirty years since, had sparkled
perhaps as keenly as Orion's, there was usually nothing, or very little
to be seen; for the heavy lids always drooped over them as though they
had lost the power to open, and this gave his handsome but deathly-pale
face a somewhat owl-like look.  It was not morose, however; on the
contrary the mingled lines of suffering and of benevolent kindliness
resulted in an expression only of melancholy.  The mouth and flabby
cheeks were as motionless as though they were dead.  Grief, anxiety and
alarms seemed to have passed over them with a paralysing hand and had
left their trace there.  He looked like a man weary unto death, and still
living only because fate had denied him the grace to die.  Indeed, he had
often been taken for dead by his family when he had dipped too freely
into a certain little blood-stone box to take too many of the white
opium-pills, one of which he placed between his colorless lips at long
intervals, even during his game of draughts.

He lifted each piece slowly, like a sleeper with his eyes half shut; and
yet his opponent could not hold her own against his wary tactics and was
defeated by him now for the third time, though her uncle himself called
her a good player.  It was easy to read in her high, smooth brow and
dark-blue eyes with their direct gaze, that she could think clearly and
decisively, and also feel deeply.  But she seemed wilful too, and
contradictory--at any rate to-day; for when Orion pointed out some move
to her she rarely took his advice, but with set lips, pushed the piece
according to her own, rarely wiser, judgment.  It was quite plain that
she was refractory under the guidance of this--especially of this
counsellor.

The bystanders could not fail to see the girl's repellent manner and
Orion's eager attempts to propitiate her; and for this reason Neforis was
glad when, just as her husband had finished the third game, and had
pushed the men together on the board with the back of his hand, his
chamberlain reminded him that the Arab was without, awaiting his pleasure
with growing impatience.  The Mukaukas answered only by a sign, drew his
long caftan of the finest wool closer around him, and pointed to the
doors and the open roof.  The rest of the party had long felt the chill
of the damp night air that blew through the room from the river, but
knowing that the father suffered more from heat than from anything, they
had all willingly endured the draught.  Now, however, Orion called the
slaves, and before the strangers were admitted the doors were closed and
the roof covered.

Paula rose; the governor lay motionless and kept his eyes apparently
closed; he must, however, have seen what was going forward through an
imperceptible slit, for he turned first to Paula and then to the other
women saying: "Is it not strange?--Most old folks, like children, seek
the sun, and love to sit, as the others play, in its heat.  While I--
something that happened to me years ago--you know;--and it seemed to
freeze my blood.  Now it never gets warm, and I feel the contrast between
the coolness in here and the heat outside most acutely, almost as a pain.
The older we grow the more ready we are to abandon to the young the
things we ourselves used most to enjoy.  The only thing which we old
folks do not willingly relinquish is personal comfort, and I thank you
for enduring annoyances so patiently for the sake of securing mine.--It
is a terrific summer!  You, Paula, from the heights of Lebanon, know what
ice is.  How often have I wished that I could have a bed of snow.  To
feel myself one with that fresh, still coldness would be all I wish for!
The cold air which you dread does me good.  But the warmth of youth
rebels against everything that is cool."

