at your service."

"Not there!"  cried the leech.  "I must have rooms with plenty of fresh
air, looking out upon the river."

"There are none but the handsome rooms in the visitor's quarters, where
my husband's niece has hers, Sick persons of the family have often lain
there, but for such humble folk--you understand?"

"No--I am deaf," replied the physician.

"Oh, I know that," laughed Neforis.  "But those rooms are really just
refurnished for exalted guests."

"It would be hard to find any more exalted than such as these, sick unto
death," replied Philippus.  "They are nearer to God in Heaven than you
are; to your advantage I believe.  Here, you people!  Carry these poor
souls up to the guests' rooms."




CHAPTER IX.

"It is impossible, impossible, impossible!"  cried Orion, jumping up from
his writing-table.  He thought of what he had done as a misfortune, and
not as a crime; he himself hardly knew how it had all come about.  Yes,
there must be demons, evil, spiteful demons--and it was they who had led
him to so mad a deed.

Yesterday evening, after the buying of the hanging, he had yielded to his
mother's request that he should escort the widow Susannah home.  At her
house he had met her husband's brother, a jovial old fellow named
Chrysippus; and when the conversation turned on the tapestry, and the
Mukaukas' purpose of dedicating this work of art with all the gems worked
into it, to the Church, the old man had clasped his hands, fully sharing
Orion's disapproval, and had exclaimed laughing "What, you the son, and
is not even a part of the precious stones to fall to your share?  Why
Katharina?  Just a little diamond, a tiny opal might well add to the
earthly happiness of the young, though the old must lay up treasure in
heaven.--Do not be a fool!  The Church's maw is full enough, and really
a mouthful is your due."

And then they drank a good deal of fine wine, till at last the older man
had accompanied Orion home, to stretch his limbs in the cool night air.
A litter was carried behind him for him to return in, and all the way he
had continued to persuade the youth to induce his father not to fling the
whole treasure into the jaws of the Church, but to spare him a few stones
at least for a more pleasing use.  They had laughed over it a good deal,
and Orion in his heart had thought Chrysippus very right, and had
remembered Heliodora, and her love of large, handsome gems, and the
keepsake he owed her.  But that neither his father nor his mother would
remove a single stone, and that the whole hanging would be dedicated, was
beyond a doubt; at the same time, some of this superfluous splendor was
in fact his due as their son, and a prettier gift to Heliodora than the
large emerald could not be imagined.  Yes--and she should have it!  How
delighted she would be!  He even thought of the chief idea for the verses
to accompany the gift.

He had the key of the tablinum, in which the work was lying, about his
person; and when, on his return, he found the servants still sitting
round the fire, he shut the door of the out-buildings while a feeling
came over him which he remembered having experienced last on occasions
when he and his brothers had robbed a forbidden fruit-tree.  He was on
the point of giving up his mad project; and when, in the tablinum itself,
a horrible inward tremor again came over him he had actually turned to
retreat--but he remembered old Chrysippus and his prompts.  To turn and
fly now would be cowardice.  Heliodora must have the large emerald, and
with his verses; his father might give away all the rest as he pleased.
When he was kneeling in front of the work with his knife in his hand,
that sickening terror had come over him for the third time; if the large
emerald had not come off into his hand at the first effort he would
certainly have rolled the bale up again and have left the tablinum clean-
handed.  But the evil demon had been at his elbow, had thrust the gem
into his hand, as it were, so that two cuts with the knife had sufficed
to displace it from its setting.  It rolled into his hand and he felt its
noble weight; he cast aside all care, and had thought no more with
anything but pleasure of this splendid trick, which he would relate
to-morrow to old Chrysippus--of course under seal of secrecy.

But now, in the sober light of day, how different did this mad, rash deed
appear; how heavily had he already been punished; what consequences might
it not entail?  His hatred of Paula grew every minute: she had certainly
seen all that had happened and would not hesitate to betray him--that she
had shown last night.  War, as it were, was declared between them, and he
vowed to himself, with fire in his eyes, that he would not shirk it!  At
the same time he could not deny that she had never looked handsomer than
when she stood, with hair half undone, confronting him--threatening him.
"It is to be love or hate between us."  he muttered to himself.
"No half-measures: and she has chosen hate!  Good!  Hitherto I have only
had to fight against men; but this bold, hard, and scornful maiden, who
rejects every gentle feeling, is no despicable foe.  She has me at bay.
If she does her worst by me I will return it in kind!--And who is the
owner of the shoes?  I have taken all possible means to find him.
Shameful, shameful! that I cannot hold up my head to look boldly at my
own face in the glass.  Heliodora is a sweet creature, an angel of
kindness.  She loved me truly; but this--this--Ah; even for her, this is
too great a sacrifice!"

He pressed his hand to his brow and flung himself on a divan.  He might
well be weary, for he had not closed his eyes for more than thirty hours
and had already done much business that morning.  He had given orders to
Sebek the house-steward and to the captain of the Egyptian guard to hunt
out the owner of the sandals by the aid of the dogs, and to cast him into
prison; next he had of his own accord--since his father generally did not
fall asleep till the morning and had not yet left his room--tried to
pacify the Arab merchant with regard to the mishap that had befallen his
head man under the governor's roof; but with small success.

Finally the young man had indulged his desire to compose a few lines
addressed to the fair Heliodora--for there was no form of physical or
mental effort to which he was not trained.  He had not lost the idea that
had occurred to him yesterday before his theft in the tablinum, and to
put it into verse was in his present mood an easy task.  He wrote as
follows:

     "'Like liketh like' saith the saw; and like to like is but fitting.
     Yet, in the hardest of gems thy soft nature rejoices?
     Nay, but if noble and rare, if its beauty is priceless,
     Then, Heliodora, the stone is like thee--akin to thy beauty.
     Thus let this emerald please thee;--and know that the fire
     That fills it with light burns more fierce in the heart of thy
                                                            Friend."

He penned the lines rapidly; and as he did so he felt, he knew not why,
an excited thrill, as though every word he threw off was a blow aimed at
Paula.  Last night he had intended to send the costly jewel to the
handsome widow in a suitable setting; but now it would be madly imprudent
to order such a thing.  He must send it away at once; he had hastened to
pack it up with the verses, with his own hand, and entrusted it to
Chusar, a horsedealer's groom from Constantinople, who had brought his
Pannonian steeds to Memphis.  He had himself seen off this trustworthy
messenger, who could speak no Egyptian and very little Greek, and when
his horse was lost to sight in the dust of the road leading to Alexandria
he had returned home in a calmer mood.  Ships were constantly putting to
sea from that port for Constantinople, and Chusar was enjoined to sail by
the first that should be leaving.  At least the odious deed should not
have been committed in vain; and yet he would have given a year of his
life if now he could but know that it had never been done.

"Impossible!"  and "Curse it!"  were the words he had most frequently
repeated in the course of his retrospect during the past night and
morning.  How he had had to rush and hurry under the broiling sun! and
the sense of being compelled to do so for mere concealment's sake seemed
to him--who had never in his life before done anything that he could not
justify in the eyes of honest men--so humiliating, that it brought the
sweat to his burning brow.  He--Orion--to dread discovery as a thief!
It was inconceivable, and he was afraid, positively afraid for the first
time since his boyhood.  His fortunate star, which in the Capital had
shone on him so brightly and benevolently, seemed to have proved
faithless in this ruinous hole!  What had that Persian girl taken into
her crazy head that she must rush upon him like some furious beast of
prey?  He had been bound to her once, no doubt, by a transient passion--
and what youth of his age was blind to the charms of a pretty slave-girl?
She had been a lovely child, and it was a vexation, nay a grief to him,
that she should have been so shamefully punished.  If she should recover,
and he could have prayed that she might, it would of course be his part
to provide for her--of course.  To be just, he could not but confess that
she indeed had good reason to hate him: but Paula?  He had shown her
nothing but kindness and yet how unhesitatingly, how openly she had
displayed her enmity.  He could see her now with the name "murderer" on
her quivering lips; the word had stung him like a lance-thrust.  What a
hideous, degrading and unjust accusation lay in that exclamation!  Should
he submit to it unrevenged?

Was she as innocent as she was haughty and cold?  What was she doing in
the viridarium at midnight?--For she must have been there before that
ill-starred dog flew at Mandane.  An assignation with the owner of the
shoes his mother had found was out of the question, for they belonged to
some man about the stables.  Love, thought he, for a wonder had nothing
to do with it; but as he came in he had noticed a man crossing the court-
yard who looked like Paula's freedman, Hiram the trainer.  Probably she
had arranged a meeting with her stammering friend in order--in order?--
Well, there was but one thing that seemed likely: She was plotting to fly
from his parents' house and needed this man's assistance.

He had seen within a few hours of his return that his mother did not make
life sweet to the girl, and yet his father had very possibly opposed her
wish to seek another home.  But why should she avoid and hate him?  In
that expedition on the river and on their way home he could have sworn
that she loved him, and the remembrance of those hours brought her near
to him again, and wiped out his schemes of vengeance against her, of
punishment to be visited on her.  Then he thought of little Katharina
whom his mother intended him to marry, and at the thought he laughed
softly to himself.  In the Imperial gardens at Constantinople he had once
seen a strange Indian bird, with a tiny body and head and an immensely
long tail, shining like silver and mother of pearl.  This was Katharina!
She herself a mere nothing; but then her tail! vast estates and immense
sums of money; and this--this was all his mother saw.  But did he need
more than he had?  How rich his father must be to spend so large a sum
on an offering to the Church as heedlessly as men give alms to a beggar.

Katharina--and Paula!

Yes, the little girl was a bright, brisk creature; but then Thomas'
daughter--what power there was in her eye, what majesty in her gait,
how--how--how enchanting her--her voice could be--her voice....

He was asleep, worn out by heat and fatigue; and in a dream he saw Paula
lying on a couch strewn with roses while all about her sounded wonderful
heart-ensnaring music; and the couch was not solid but blue water, gently
moving: he went towards her and suddenly a large black eagle swooped down
on him, flapped his wings in his face and when, half-blinded, he put his
hand to his eyes the bird pecked the roses as a hen picks millet and
barley.  Then he was angry, rushed at the eagle, and tried to clutch him
with his hands; but his feet seemed rooted to the ground, and the more he
struggled to move freely the more firmly he was dragged backwards.  He
fought like a madman against the hindering force, and suddenly it
released him.  He was still under this impression when he woke, streaming
with perspiration, and opened his eyes.  By his couch stood his mother
who had laid her hand on his feet to rouse him.

She looked pale and anxious and begged him to come quickly to his father
who was much disturbed, and wished to speak with him.  Then she hurried
away.

While he hastily arranged his hair and had his shoes clasped he felt
vexed that, under the influence of that foolish dream, and still half
asleep, he had let his mother go before ascertaining what the
circumstances were that had given rise to his father's anxiety.  Had it
anything to do with the incidents of the past night?  No.--If he had been
suspected his mother would have told him and warned him.  It must refer
to something else.  Perhaps the old merchant's stalwart headman had died
of his wounds, and his father wished to send him--Orion--across the Nile
to the Arab viceroy to obtain forgiveness for the murder of a Moslem,
actually within the precincts of the governor's house.  This fatal blow
might indeed entail serious consequences; however, the matter might very
likely be quite other than this.

When he left his room the brooding heat that filled the house struck him
as peculiarly oppressive, and a painful feeling, closely resembling
shame, stole over him as he crossed the viridarium, and glanced at the
grass from which--thanks to Paula's ill-meant warning--he had carefully
brushed away his foot-marks before daybreak.  How cowardly, how base,
it all was The best of all in life: honor, self-respect, the proud
consciousness of being an honest man--all staked and all lost for nothing
at all!  He could have slapped his own face or cried aloud like a child
that has broken its most treasured toy.  But of what use was all this?
What was done could not be undone; and now he must keep his wits about
him so as to remain, in the eyes of others at least, what he had always
been, low as he had fallen in his own.
