well on what terms she was with himself.  Even before he had come into
the council-room she had offered her explanation of the robbery to Nilus,
through her nurse Perpetua; but it would have seemed fairer and more
friendly in his eyes--and here he raised his voice--if she had chosen to
confide to him, Orion, her plan for helping the freedman.  Then he might
have been able to warn her.  He could only regard this mode of action,
independently of him, as a fresh proof of her dislike, and she must hold
herself responsible for the consequences.  Justice must now take its
course with inexorable rigor.

The wrathful light in his eyes showed her what she had to expect from
him, and that he was prepared to fight her to the end.  She saw that he
thought that she had broken the promise she had but just now given him;
but she had not commissioned Perpetua to interfere in the matter; on the
contrary, she had desired the woman to leave it to her to produce her
evidence only in the last extremity.  Orion must believe that she had
done him a wrong; still, could that make him so far forget himself as to
carry out his threats, and sacrifice an innocent man--to divert suspicion
from himself, while he branded her as a false witness?  Aye, even from
that he would not shrink!  His flaming glance, his abrupt demeanor, his
laboring breath, proclaimed it plainly enough.--Then let the struggle
begin!  At this moment she would have died rather than have tried to
mollify him by a word of excuse.  The turmoil in his whole being vibrated
through hers.  She was ready to throw herself at his feet and implore him
to control himself, to guard himself against further wrong-doing--but she
maintained her proud dignity, and the eyes that met his were not less
indignant and defiant than his own.

They stood face to face like two young eagles preparing to fight, with
feathers on end, arching their pinions and stretching their necks.  She,
confident of victory in the righteousness of her cause, and far more
anxious for him than for herself; he, almost blind to his own danger,
but, like a gladiator confronting his antagonist in the arena, far more
eager to conquer than to protect his own life and limb.

While Nilus explained to her what, in part, she already knew, and
repeated their suspicion that she had been tempted to make a false
declaration to save the life of her servant, whose devotion, no doubt,
to his missing master had led him to commit the robbery; she kept her
eye on Orion rather than on the speaker.  At last Nilus referred to the
trunk, which had been brought from Paula's room under her own eyes,
informing her that the assembly were ready to hear and examine into
anything she had to say in her own defence.

Orion's agitation rose to its highest pitch.  He felt that the blood had
fled from his cheeks, and his thoughts were in utter confusion.  The
council, the accused, his enemy Paula--everything in the room lay before
him shrouded in a whirl of green mist.  All he saw seemed to be tinted
with light emerald green.  The hair, the faces, the dresses of those
present gleamed and floated in a greenish light; and not till Paula went
up to the chest with a firm, haughty step, drew out a small key, gave it
to the treasurer, and answered his speech with three words: "Open the
box!"--uttering them with cold condescension as though even this were too
much--not till then did he see clearly once more: her bright brown hair,
the fire of her blue eyes, the rose and white of her complexion, the
light dress which draped her fine figure in noble folds, and her
triumphant smile.  How beautiful, how desirable was this woman!  A few
minutes and she would be worsted in this contest; but the triumph had
cost him not only herself, but all that was good and pure in his soul,
and worthy of his forefathers.  An inward voice cried it out to him, but
he drowned it in the shout of "Onwards," like a chariot-driver.  Yes--on;
still on towards the goal; away over ruins and stones, through blood and
dust, till she bowed her proud neck, crushed and beaten, and sued for
mercy.

The lid of the trunk flew open.  Paula stooped, lifted the necklace, held
it out to the judges, pulling it straight by the two ends....  Ah! what
a terrible, heartrending cry of despair!  Orion even, never, never wished
to hear the like again.  Then she flung the jewel on the table,
exclaiming: "Shameful, shameful!  atrocious!"  she tottered backwards and
clung to her faithful Betta; for her knees were giving way, and she felt
herself in danger of sinking to the ground.

Orion sprang forward to support her, but she thrust him aside, with a
glance so full of anguish, rage and intense contempt that he stood
motionless, and clasped his hand over his heart.--And this deed, which
was to work such misery for two human beings, he had smiled in doing!
This practical joke which concealed a death-warrant--to what fearful
issues might it not lead?

Paula had sunk speechless on to a seat, and he stood staring in silence,
till a burst of laughter broke from the assembly and old Psamtik, the
captain of the guard, who had long been a member of the council of
justice, exclaimed:

"By my soul, a splendid stone!  There is the heathen god Eros with his
winged sweetheart Psyche smiling in his face.  Did you never read that
pretty story by Apuleius--'The Golden Ass' it is called?  The passage is
in that.  Holy Luke!  how finely it is carved.  The lady has taken out
the wrong necklace.  Look, Gamaliel, where could your green pigeon's egg
have found a place in that thing?"  and he pointed to the gem.

"Nowhere," said the Jew.  "The noble lady.  .  ."  But Orion roughly bid
the witness to be silent, and Nilus, taking up the engraved gem, examined
it closely.  Then he--he the grave, just man, on whose support Paula had
confidently reckoned--went up to her and with a regretful shrug asked her
whether the other necklace with the setting of which she had spoken was
in the trunk.

The blood ran cold in her veins.  This thing that had happened was as
startling as a miracle.  But no!  No higher Power had anything to do with
this blow.  Orion believed that she had failed in her promise of
screening him by her silence, and this, this was his revenge.  By what
means--how he had gone to work, was a mystery.  What a trick!--and it had
succeeded!  But should she take it like a patient child?  No.  A thousand
times no!  Suddenly all her old powers of resistance came back; hatred
steeled her wavering will; and, as in fancy, he had seen himself in the
circus, driving in a race, so she pictured herself seated at the chess-
board.  She felt herself playing with all her might to win; but not, as
with his father, for flowers, trifling presents or mere glory; nay, for a
very different stake Life or Death!

She would do everything, anything to conquer him; and yet, no--come what
might--not everything.  Sooner would she succumb than betray him as the
thief or reveal what she had discovered in the viridarium.  She had
promised to keep the secret; and she would repay the father's kindness
by screening the son from this disgrace.  How beautiful, how noble had
Orion's image been in her heart.  She would not stain it with this
disgrace in her own eyes and in those of the world.  But every other
reservation must be cast far, far away, to snatch the victory from him
and to save Hiram.  Every fair weapon she might use; only this treachery
she could not, might not have recourse to.  He must be made to feel that
she was more magnanimous than he; that she, under all conceivable
circumstances, kept her word.  That was settled; her bosom once more rose
and fell, and her eye brightened again; still it was some little time
before she could find the right words with which to begin the contest.

Orion could see the seething turmoil in her soul; he felt that she was
arming herself for resistance, and he longed to spur her on to deal the
first blow.  Not a word had she uttered of surprise or anger, not a
syllable of reproach had passed her lips.  What was she thinking of, what
was she plotting?  The more startling and dangerous the better; the more
bravely she bore herself, the more completely in the background might he
leave the painful sense of fighting against a woman.  Even heroes had
boasted of a victory over Amazons.

At last, at last!--She rose and went towards Hiram.  He had been tied to
the stake to which criminals were bound, and as an imploring glance from
his honest eyes met hers, the spell that fettered her tongue was
unloosed; she suddenly understood that she had not merely to protect
herself, but to fulfil a solemn duty.  With a few rapid steps she went up
to the table at which her judges sat in a semi-circle, and leaning on it
with her left hand, raised her right high in the air, exclaiming:

"You are the victims of a cruel fraud; and I of an unparalleled and
wicked trick, intended to bring me to ruin!--Look at that man at the
stake.  Does he look like a robber?  A more honest and faithful servant
never earned his freedom, and the gratitude Hiram owed to his master, my
father, he has discharged to the daughter for whose sake he quitted his
home, his wife and child.  He followed me, an orphan, here into a strange
land.--But that matters not to you.--Still, if you will hear the truth,
the strict and whole. . . ."

"Speak!"  Orion put in; but she went on, addressing herself exclusively
to Nilus, and his peers, and ignoring him completely:

"Your president, the son of the Mukaukas, knows that, instead of the
accused, I might, if I chose, be the accuser.  But I scorn it--for love
of his father, and because I am more high-minded than he.  He will
understand!--With regard to this particular emerald Hiram, my freedman,
took it out of its setting last evening, under my eyes, with his knife;
other persons besides us, thank God! have seen the setting, empty, on the
chain to which it belonged.  This afternoon it was still in the place to
which some criminal hand afterwards found access, and attached that gem
instead.  That I have just now seen for the first time--I swear it by
Christ's wounds.  It is an exquisite work.  Only a very rich man--the
richest man here, can give away such a treasure, for whatever purpose he
may have in view--to destroy an enemy let us say.--Gamaliel," and she
turned to the Jew--"At what sum would you value that onyx?"

The Israelite asked to see the gem once more; he turned it about, and
then said with a grin: "Well, fair lady, if my black hen laid me little
things like that I would feed it on cakes from Arsinoe and oysters from
Canopus.  The stone is worth a landed estate, and though I am not a rich
man, I would pay down two talents for it at any moment, even if I had to
borrow the money."

This statement could not fail to make a great impression on the judges.
Orion, however, exclaimed: "Wonders on wonders mark this eventful day!
The prodigal generosity which had become an empty name has revived again
among us!  Some lavish demon has turned a worthless plate of gold into a
costly gem.--And may I ask who it was that saw the empty setting hanging
to your chain?"  Paula was in danger of forgetting even that last reserve
she had imposed on herself; she answered with trembling accents:

"Apparently your confederates or you yourself did.  You, and you alone,
have any cause. . . ."

But he would not allow her to proceed.  He abruptly interrupted her,
exclaiming: "This is really too much!  Oh, that you were a man!  How far
your generosity reaches I have already seen.  Even hatred, the bitterest
hostility. . . ."

"They would have every right to ruin you completely!"  she cried, roused
to the utmost.  "And if I were to charge you with the most horrible
crime. . . ."

"You yourself would be committing a crime, against me and against this
house," he said menacingly.  "Beware!  Can self-delusion go so far that
you dare to appeal to me to testify to the fable you have trumped up...."

"No.  Oh, no!  That would be counting on some honesty in you yet," she
loudly broke in.  "I have other witnesses: "Mary, the granddaughter of
the Mukaukas," and she tried to catch his eye.

"The child whose little heart you have won, and who follows you about
like a pet dog!"  he cried.

"And besides Mary, Katharina, the widow Susannah's daughter," she added,
sure of her triumph, and the color mounted to her cheeks.  "She is no
longer a child, but a maiden grown, as you know.  I therefore demand of
you--" and she again turned to the assembly--"that you will fulfil your
functions worthily and promote justice in my behalf by calling in both
these witnesses and hearing their evidence."

On this Orion interposed with forced composure: "As to whether a soft-
hearted child ought to be exposed to the temptation to save the friend
she absolutely worships by giving evidence before the judges, be it what
it may, only her grandparents can decide.  Her tender years would at any
rate detract from the validity of her evidence, and I am averse to
involving a child of this house in this dubious affair.  With regard to
Katharina, it is, on the contrary, the duty of this court to request her
presence, and I offer myself to go and fetch her."

He resolutely resisted Paula's attempts to interrupt him again: she
should have a patient hearing presently in the presence of her witness.
The gem no doubt had come to her from her father.  But at this her
righteous indignation was again too much for her; she cried out quite
beside herself:

"No, and again no.  Some reprobate scoundrel, an accomplice of yours--
yes, I repeat it--made his way into my room while I was in the sick-room,
and either forced the lock of my trunk or opened it with a false key."

"That can easily be proved," said Orion.  In a confident tone he desired
that the box should be placed on the table, and requested one of the
council, who understood such matters, to give his opinion.  Paula knew
the man well.  He was one of the most respected members of the household,
the chief mechanician whose duty it was to test and repair the water-
clocks, balances, measures and other instruments.  He at once proceeded
to examine the lock and found it in perfect order, though the key, which
was of peculiar form, could certainly not have found a substitute in any
false key; and Paula was forced to admit that she had left the trunk
locked at noon and had worn the key round her neck ever since.  Orion
listened to his opinion with a shrug, and before going to seek Katharina
gave orders that Paula and the nurse should be conducted to separate
rooms.  To arrive at any clear decision in this matter, it was necessary
that any communication between these two should be rendered impossible.
As soon as the door was shut on them he hastened into the garden, where
he hoped to find Katharina.

The council looked after him with divided feelings.  They were here
confronted by riddles that were hard to solve.  No one of them felt that
he had a right to doubt the good intentions of their lord's son, whom
they looked up to as a talented and high-minded youth.  His dispute with
Paula had struck them painfully, and each one asked himself how it was
