
"Then I see no reason for refusing," he said.  "Still, I may ask you a
favor in return.  It seems to me no less important than it did to you,
to know what a great man like the patriarch finds to talk about, and
since I place myself at your commands...."

"I thought," said the girl with a smile, "that your first object would be
to discharge some small portion of your debt to me; however, I expect no
excessive magnanimity, and the little I heard is soon told.  It cannot
matter much to you either--so I will agree to your wishes, and you, in
return, must promise.  .  .  ."

"To speak the whole truth."

"As truly as you hope for forgiveness of your sins?"

"As truly as that."

"That is well."

"And what is it that you want to know?"

At this she shook her head, exclaiming uneasily:

"Nay, nay, not yet.  It cannot be done so lightly.  First let me speak;
and then open the door, and if I want to fly let me go without saying or
asking me another word.--Give me that chair; I must sit down."  And in
fact she seemed to need it; for some minutes she had looked very pale and
exhausted, and her hands trembled as she drew her handkerchief across her
face.

When she was seated she began her story; and while her words flowed on
quickly but without expression, as though she spoke mechanically, Orion
listened with eager interest, for what she had to tell struck him as
highly significant and important.

He had been watched by the patriarch's orders.  By midnight Benjamin
had already been informed of Orion's visit to Fostat, and to the Arab
general.  Nothing, however, had been said about it beyond a fear lest
he had gone thither with a view to abjuring the faith of his fathers
and going over to the Infidels.  Far more important were the facts
Orion gathered as to the prelate's negotiations with the Khaliff's
representative.  Amru had urged a reduction of the number of convents and
of the monks and nuns who lived on the bequests and gifts of the pious,
busied in all kinds of handiwork according to the rule of Pachomius, and
enabled, by the fact of their living at free quarters, to produce almost
all the necessaries of life, from the mats on the floors to the shoes
worn by the citizens, at a much lower price than the independent
artisans, whether in town or country.  The great majority of these poor
creatures were already ruined by such competition, and Amru, seeing the
Arab leather-workers, weavers, ropemakers, and the rest, threatened with
the same fate, had determined to set himself firmly to restrict all this
monastic work.  The patriarch had resisted stoutly and held out long,
but at last he had been forced to sacrifice almost half the convents
for monks and nuns.

But nothing had been conceded without an equivalent; for Benjamin was
well aware of the immense difficulties which he, as chief of the Church,
could put in the way of the new government of the country.  So it was
left to him to designate which convents should be suppressed, and he had,
of course, begun by laying hands on the few remaining Melchite retreats,
among them the Convent of St. Cecilia, next to the house of Rufinus.
This establishment was now to be closed within three days and to become
the property of the Jacobite Church; but it was to be done quite quietly,
for there was no small fear that now, when the delayed rising of the
river was causing a fever of anxiety in all minds, the impoverished
populace of the town might rise in defence of the wealthy sisterhood to
whom they were beholden for much benevolence and kind care.

Opposition from the town-senate was also to be looked for, since the
deceased Mukaukas had pronounced this measure unjust and detrimental to
the common welfare.  The evicted orthodox nuns were to be taken into
various Jacobite convents as lay sisters similar cases had already been
known; but the abbess, whose superior intellect, high rank, and far-
reaching influence might, if she were left free to act, easily rouse the
prelates of the East to oppose Benjamin, was to be conveyed to a remote
convent in Ethiopia, whence no flight or return was possible.

Katharina's report took but few minutes, and she gave it with apparent
indifference; what could the suppression of an orthodox cloister, and the
dispersion of its heretic sisterhood, matter to her, or to Orion, whose
brothers had fallen victims to Melchite fanaticism?  Orion did not betray
his deep interest in all he heard, and when at length Katharina rose and
pointed feebly to the door, all she said, as though she were vexed at
having wasted so much time, was: "That, on the whole, is all."

"All?" asked Orion unlocking the door.

"Certainly, all," she repeated uneasily.  "What I meant to ask--whether I
ever know it or not--it does not matter.--It would be better perhaps-yes,
that is all.--Let me go."

But he did not obey her.

"Ask," he said kindly.  "I will  answer you gladly."

"Gladly?"  she retorted, with an incredulous shrug.  "In point of fact
you ought to feel uncomfortable whenever you see me; but things do not
always turn out as they ought, in Memphis or in the world; for what do
you men care what becomes of a poor girl like me?  Do not imagine that
I mean to reproach you; God forbid!  I do not even owe you a grudge.
If anyone can live such a thing down I can.  Do not you think so?
Everything is admirably arranged for me; I cannot fail to do well.
I am very rich, and not ugly, and I shall have a hundred suitors yet.
Oh, I am a most enviable creature!  I have had one lover already, and the
next will be more faithful, at any rate, and not throw me over so
ruthlessly as the first.--Do not you think so?"

"I hope so," said Oriole gravely.  "Bitter as the cup is that you offer
me to drink.  .  ."

"Well?"

"I can only repeat that I must even drink it, since the fault was mine.
Nothing would so truly gladden me as to be able to atone in some degree
for my sin against you."

"Oh dear no!" she scornfully threw in.  "Our hopes shall not be fixed so
high as that!  All is at an end between us, and if you ever were anything
to me, you are nothing to me now--absolutely nothing.  One hour in the
past we had in common; it was short indeed, but to me--would you believe
it?--a very great matter.  It aged the young creature, whom you, but
yesterday, still regarded as a mere child--that much I know--with amazing
rapidity; aye, and made a worse woman of her than you can fancy."

"That indeed would grieve me to the bottom of my soul," replied Orion.
"There is, I know, no excuse for my conduct.  Still, as you yourself
know, our mothers' wish in the first instance. . ."

"Destined us for each other, you would say.  Quite true!--And it was all
to please Dame Neforis that you put your arms round me, under the
acacias, and called me your own, your all, your darling, your rose-bud?
Was that--and this is exactly what I want to ask you, what I insist on
knowing--was that all a lie--or did you, at any rate, in that brief
moment, under the trees, love me with all your heart--love me as now you
love--I cannot name her--that other?--The truth, Orion, the whole truth,
on your oath!"

She had raised her voice and her eyes glowed with the excitement of
passion; and now, when she ceased speaking, their sparkling, glistening
enquiry plainly and unreservedly confessed that her heart still was his,
that she counted on his high-mindedness and expected him to say "yes."
Her round arm lay closely pressed to her bosom, as though to keep its
wild heaving within bounds.  Her delicate face had lost its pallor and
seemed bathed in a glow, now tender and now crimson.  Her little mouth,
which but now had uttered such bitter words, was parted in a smile as if
ready to bestow a sweet reward for the consoling, saving answer, for
which her whole being yearned, and her eager eyes, shining through tears,
did not cease to entreat him so pathetically, so passionately!  How
bewitching an image of helpless, love-sick, beseeching youth and grace.

"As you love that other,--on your oath."--The words still rang in the
young man's ear.  All that was soft in his soul urged him to make good
the evil he had brought upon this fair, hapless young creature; but those
very words gave him strength to remain steadfast; and though he felt
himself appealed to for comfort and compassion, he could only stretch out
imploring hands, as though praying for help, and say:

"Ah Katharina, and you are as lovely, as charming now, as you were then;
but--much as you attracted me, the great love that fills a life can come
but once...  Forget what happened afterwards...  Put your question in
another form, alter it a little, and ask me again--or let me assure you."

But he had no time to say more; for, before he could atop her, she had
slipped past him and flown away like some swift wild thing into the road
and down to the fishing cove.




CHAPTER IV.

Orion stood alone gazing sadly after her.  Was this his father's curse--
that all who loved him must reap pain and grief in return?

He shivered; still, his youthful energy and powers of resistance were
strong enough to give him speedy mastery over these torturing
reflections.  What opportunities lay before him of proving his prowess!
Even while Katharina was telling her story, the brave and strenuous youth
had set himself the problem of rescuing the cloistered sisters.  The
greater the danger its solution might involve him in, the more impossible
it seemed at first sight, the more gladly, in his present mood, would he
undertake it.  He stepped out into the road and closed the door behind
him with a feeling of combative energy.

It was growing dusk.  Philippus must now be with Mary and, with the
leech's aid, he was resolved to get the child away from his mother's
house.  Not till he felt that she was safe with Paula in Rufinus' house,
could he be free to attempt the enterprise which floated before his eyes.
On the stairs he shouted to a slave:

"My chariot with the Persian trotting horse!"  and a few minutes after he
entered the little girl's room at the same time with a slave girl who
carried in a lamp.  Neither Mary nor the physician observed him at first,
and he heard her say to Philippus, who sat holding her wrist between his
fingers.

"What is the matter with you this evening?  Good heavens, how pale and
