pronounced an unrighteous sentence?" he bowed his head in contrition.

The dying man murmured even less articulately and incoherently than
before: "The gem--the hanging--you, you perhaps--was it you?  that
emerald--I cannot. . ."

Orion helped his father in his vain efforts to utter the dreadful words.
Sooner would he have died with the old man than have deceived him in such
a moment; he replied humbly and in a low voice:

"Yes, Father--I took it.  But as surely as I love you and my mother this,
the first reckless act of my life, which has brought such horrors in its
train. . .  Shall be the last," he would have said; but the words "I took
it," had scarcely passed his lips when his father was shaken by a violent
trembling, the expression of his eyes changed fearfully, and before the
son had spoken his vow to the end the unhappy father was, by a tremendous
effort, sitting upright.  Loud sobs of penitence broke from the young
man's heaving breast, as the Mukaukas wrathfully exclaimed, in thick
accents, as quickly as the heavy, paralyzed tongue would allow:

"You, you!  A disgrace to our ancient and blameless Court! You?--Away
with you!  A thief, an unjust judge, a false witness,--and the only
descendant of Menas!  If only these hands were able--you--you--Go,
villain!"  And with this wild outcry, George, the gentle and just
Mukaukas, sank back on his pillows; his bloodshot eyes were staring,
fixed on vacancy; his gasping lips repeated again and again, but less and
less audibly the one word "Villain;" his swollen fingers clutched at the
light coverlet that lay over him; a strange, shrill wheezing came through
his open mouth, and the heavy corpse of the great dignitary fell, like a
falling palm-tree, into Orion's arms.

Orion started up, his eyes inflamed, his hair all dishevelled, and shook
the dead man as though to compel him back to life again, to hear his oath
and accept his vow, to see his tears of repentance, to pardon him and
take back the name of infamy which had been his parting word to his loved
and spoilt child.

In the midst of this wild outbreak the physician came back, glanced at
the dead man's distorted features, laid a hand on his heart, and said
with solemn regret as he led little Mary away from the couch:

"A good and just man is gone from the land of the living."

Orion cried aloud and pushed away Mary, who had stolen close to him; for,
young as she was, she felt that it was she who had brought the worst woe
on her uncle, and that it was her part to show him some affection.

She ran then to her grandmother; but she, too, put her aside and fell on
her knees by the side of her wretched son to weep with him; to console
him who was inconsolable, and in whom, a few minutes since, she had hoped
to find her own best consolation; but her fond words of motherly comfort
found no echo in his broken spirit.




CHAPTER XVI.

When Philippus had parted from Paula he had told her that the Mukaukas
might indeed die at any moment, but that it was possible that he might
yet struggle with death for weeks to come.  This hope had comforted her;
for she could not bear to think that the only true friend she had had in
Memphis, till she had become more intimate with the physician, should
quit the world forever without having heard her justification.  Nothing
could be more unlikely than that any one in Neforis' household--excepting
her little grandchild should ever remember her with kindness; and she
scarcely desired it; but she rebelled against the idea of forfeiting the
respect she had earned, even in the governor's house.  If her friend
should succeed in prolonging her uncle's life, by a confidential
interview with him she might win back his old affection and his good
opinion.

Her new home she felt was but a resting-place, a tabernacle in the
desert-journey of her solitary pilgrimage, and she here meant to avail
herself of the information she had gathered from her Melchite dependents.
Hope had now risen supreme in her heart over grief and disappointment.
Orion's presence alone hung like a threatening hail-cloud over the
sprouting harvest of her peace of mind.  And yet, next to the necessity
of waiting at Memphis for the return of her messenger, nothing tied her
to the place so strongly as her interest in watching the future course of
his life, at any rate from a distance.  What she felt for him-and she
told herself it was deep aversion-nevertheless constituted a large share
of her inner life, little as she would confess it to herself.

Her new hosts had received her as a welcome guest, and they certainly did
not seem to be poor.  The house was spacious, and though it was old and
unpretentious it was comfortable and furnished with artistic taste.  The
garden had amazed her by the care lavished on it; she had seen a hump-
backed gardener and several children at work in it.  A strange party-for
every one of them, like their chief, was in some way deformed or
crippled.

The plot of ground--which extended towards the river to the road-way for
foot passengers, vehicles and the files of men towing the Nile-boats--was
but narrow, and bounded on either side by extensive premises.  Not far
from the spot where it lay nearest to the river was the bridge of boats
connecting Memphis with the island of Rodah.  To the right was the
magnificent residence--a palace indeed--belonging to Susannah; to the
left was an extensive grove, where tall palms, sycamores with spreading
foliage, and dense thickets of blue-green tamarisk trees cast their
shade.  Above this bower of splendid shrubs and ancient trees rose a
long, yellow building crowned with a turret; and this too was not unknown
to her, for she had often heard it spoken of in her uncle's house, and
had even gone there now and then escorted by Perpetua.  It was the
convent of St. Cecilia, the refuge of the last nuns of the orthodox creed
left in Memphis; for, though all the other sisterhoods of her confession
had long since been banished, these had been allowed to remain in their
old home, not only because they were famous sick-nurses, a distinction
common to all the Melchite orders, but even more because the decaying
municipality could not afford to sacrifice the large tax they annually
paid to it.  This tax was the interest on a considerable capital
bequeathed to the convent by a certain wise predecessor of the Mukaukas',
with the prudent proviso, ratified under the imperial seal of Theodosius
II., that if the convent were at any time broken up, this endowment, with
the land and buildings which it likewise owed to the generosity of the
same benefactor, should become the property of the Christian emperor at
that time reigning.

Mukaukas George, notwithstanding his well-founded aversion for everything
Melchite, had taken good care not to press this useful Sisterhood too
hardly, or to deprive his impoverished capital of its revenues only to
throw them into the hands of the wealthy Moslems.  The title-deed on
which the Sisters relied was good; and the governor, who was a good
lawyer as well as a just man, had not only left them unmolested, but in
spite of his fears--during the last few years--for his own safety, had
shown himself no respecter of persons by defending their rights firmly
and resolutely against the powerful patriarch of the Jacobite Church.
The Senate of the ancient capital naturally, approved his course, and had
not merely suffered the heretic Sisterhood to remain, but had helped and
encouraged it.

The Jacobite clergy of the city shut their eyes, and only opened them to
watch the convent at Easter-tide; for on the Saturday before Easter, the
nuns, in obedience to an agreement made before the Monophysite Schism,
were required to pay a tribute of embroidered vestments to the head of
the Christian Churches, with wine of the best vintages of Kochome near
the Pyramid of steps, and a considerable quantity of flowers and
confectionary.  So the ancient coenobium of women was maintained, and
though all Egypt was by this time Jacobite or Moslem, and many of the
older Sisters had departed this life within the last year, no one had
thought of enquiring how it was that the number of the nuns remained
still the same, till the Jacobite archbishop Benjamin filled the
patriarchal throne of Alexandria in the place of the Melchite Cyrus.

To Benjamin the heretical Sisters at Memphis--the hawks in a dove-cote,
as he called them--were an offence, and he thought that the deed might
bear a new interpretation: that as there was no longer a Christian
emperor, and as the word "Christian" was used in the document, if the
convent were broken up the property should pass into the hands of the
only Christian magnate then existing in the country: himself, namely,
and his Church.  The ill-feeling which the Patriarch fostered against the
Mukaukas had been aggravated to hostility by their antagonism on this
matter.

A musical dirge now fell on Paula's ear from the convent chapel.  Was the
worthy Mother Superior dead?  No, this lament must be for some other
death, for the strange skirling wail of the Egyptian women came up to her
corner window from the road, from the bridge, and from the boats on the
river.  No Jacobite of Memphis would have dared to express her grief so
publicly for the death of a Melchite; and as the chorus of voices
swelled, the thought struck her with a chill that it must be her uncle
and friend who had closed his weary eyes in death.

It was with deep emotion and many tears that she perceived how sincerely
the death of this righteous man was bewailed by all his fellow-citizens.
Yes, he only, and no other Egyptian, could have called forth this great
and expressive regret.  The wailing women in the road were daubing the
mud of the river on their foreheads and bosoms; men were standing in
large groups and beating their heads and breasts with passionate
gestures.  On the bridge of boats the men would stop others, and from
thence, too, piercing shrieks came across to her.

At last Philippus came in and confirmed her fears.  The governor's death
had shocked him no less than it did her, and he had to tell Paula all he
knew of the dead man's last hours.

"Still, one good thing has come out of this misery," he said.  "There is
nothing so comforting as the discovery that we have been deceived in
thinking ill of a man and of his character.  This Orion, who has sinned
so basely against himself and against you, is not utterly reprobate."

"Not?"  interrupted Paula.  "Then he has taken you in too!"

"Taken me in?"  said the leech.  "Hardly, I think.  I have, alas! stood
by many a death-bed; for I am too often sent for when Death is already
beckoning the sick man away.  I have met thousands of mourners in these
melancholy scenes, which, I can assure you, are the very best school for
training any one who desires to search the hearts of his fellow-
creatures.  By the bed of death, or in the mart, where everything is a
question of Mine and Thine, it is easy to see how some--we for instance
--are as careful to hide from the world all that is great and noble in us
as others are to conceal what is petty and mean--we read men's hearts as
an open page.  From my observations of the dying and of those who sorrow
for them, I, who am not Menander not Lucian, could draw a series of
portraits which should be as truthful likenesses as though the men had
turned themselves inside out before me."

"That a dying man should show himself as he really is I can well
believe," replied Paula.  "He need have no further care for the opinions
of others; but the mourners?  Why, custom requires them to assume an air
of grief and to shed tears."

"Very true; regret repeats itself by the side of the dead," replied the
physician.  "But the chamber of the dying is like a church.  Death
consecrates it, and the man who stands face to face with death often
drops the mask by which he cheats his fellows.  There we may see faces
which you would shudder to look on, but others, too, which merely to see
is enough to make us regard the degenerate species to which we belong
