
How fair it was! And Orion had snatched this rose in the bud, and
trodden it under foot! She had, no doubt, felt for him what Paula
herself felt. And now? Did she feel nothing but hatred of him, or could
her heart, in spite of her indignation and scorn, not altogether cast
off the spell that had once bound it?

What weakness was this! She was, she must, she would be his foe!

Her thoughts went back to the idle and futile life that she had led for
so many years. The physician had hit the mark; and he had been too
easy rather than severe. Yes, she would begin to make good use of
her powers--but how, in what way, here and among these people? How
transfigured poor Philippus had seemed when she had given him her hand;
with what energy had he poured forth his words.

"And how false," she mused, "is the saying that the body is the mirror
of the soul! If it were so, Philippus would have the face of Orion, and
Orion that of Philippus." But could Orion's heart be wholly reprobate?
Nay, that was impossible; her every impulse resisted the belief. She
must either love him or hate him, there was no third alternative; but as
yet the two passions were struggling within her in a way that was quite
intolerable.

The physician had spoken of being a brother to her, and she could not
help smiling at the idea. She could, she thought, live very happily and
calmly with him, with her nurse Betta, and with the learned old friend
who shared his home, and of whom he had often talked to her; she could
join him in his studies, help him in his calling, and discuss many
things well worth knowing. Such a life, she told herself, would be
a thousand times preferable to this, with Neforis. In him she had
certainly found a friend; and her glad recognition of the fact was the
first step towards the fulfilment of his promise, since it showed that
her heart was still ready to go forth to the kindness of another.

Amid these meditations, however, her anxiety for Hiram constantly
recurred to her, and it was clear to her mind that, if she and Orion
should come to extremities, she could no longer dwell under the
governor's roof. Often she had longed for nothing so fervently as to be
able to quit it; but to-day it filled her with dread, for parting from
her uncle necessarily involved parting from his son. She hated him;
still, to lose sight of him altogether would be very hard to bear. To go
with Philippus and live with him as his sister would never do; nay, it
struck her as something inconceivable, strangely incongruous.

Meanwhile she listened to Mandane's breathing and treated her in
obedience to the leech's orders, longing for his return; presently
however, not he but the nun came to the bed-side, laid her hand on the
girl's forehead, and without paying any heed to Paula, whispered kindly:
"That is right child, sleep away; have a nice long sleep. So long as she
can be kept quiet; if only she goes on like this!--Her head is cooler.
Philippus will certainly say there is scarcely any fever. Thank God, the
worst danger is over!"

"Oh, how glad I am!" cried Paula, and she spoke with such warmth and
sincerity that the nun gave her a friendly nod and left the sick girl to
her care, quite satisfied.

It was long since Paula had felt so happy. She fancied that her presence
had had a good affect on the sufferer, that Mandane had already been
brought by her nursing to the threshold of a new life. Paula, who
but just now had regarded herself as a persecuted victim of Fate, now
breathed more freely in the belief that she too might bring joy to some
one. She looked into Mandane's more than pretty face with real joy and
tenderness, laid the bandage which had slipped aside gently over her
ears, and breathed a soft kiss on her long silken lashes.

She rapidly grew in favor with the shrewd nun; when the hour for prayer
came round, the sister included in her petitions--Paula--the orphan
under a stranger's roof, the Greek girl born, by the inscrutable decrees
of God, outside the pale of her saving creed. At length Philippus
returned; he was rejoiced at his new friend's brightened aspect, and
declared that Mandane had, under her care, got past the first and worst
danger, and might be expected to recover, slowly indeed, but completely.

After Paula had renewed the compress--and he intentionally left her to
do it unaided, he said encouragingly:

"How quickly you have learnt your business.--Now, the patient is asleep
again; the Sister will keep watch, and for the present we can be of no
use to the girl; sleep is the best nourishment she can have. But with
us--or at any rate with me, it is different. We have still two hours to
wait for the next meal: my breakfast is standing untouched, and yours
no doubt fared the same; so be my guest. They always send up enough to
satisfy six bargemen."

Paula liked the proposal, for she had long been hungry. The nun was
desired to hasten to fetch some more plates, of drinking-vessels there
was no lack--and soon the new allies were seated face to face, each at
a small table. He carved the duck and the roast quails, put the salad
before her and some steaming artichokes, which the nun had brought up
at the request of the cook whose only son the physician had saved; he
invited her attention to the little pies, the fruits and cakes which
were laid ready, and played the part of butler; and then, while they
heartily enjoyed the meal, they carried on a lively conversation.

Paula for the first time asked Philippus to tell her something of his
early youth; he began with an account of his present mode of life, as a
partner in the home of the singular old priest of Isis, Horus Apollo,
a diligent student; he described his strenuous activity by day and his
quiet studies by night, and gave everything such an amusing aspect that
often she could not help laughing. But presently he was sad, as he told
her how at an early age he had lost his father and mother, and was
left to depend solely on himself and on a very small fortune, having no
relations; for his father had been a grammarian, invited to Alexandria
from Athens, who had been forced to make a road for himself through
life, which had lain before him like an overgrown jungle of papyrus
and reeds. Every hour of his life was devoted to his work, for a rough,
outspoken Goliath, such as he, never could find it easy to meet with
helpful patrons. He had managed to live by teaching in the high schools
of Alexandria, Athens, and Caesarea, and by preparing medicines from
choice herbs--drinking water instead of wine, eating bread and fruit
instead of quails and pies; and he had made a friend of many a good man,
but never yet of a woman--it would be difficult with such a face as his!

"Then I am the first?" said Paula, who felt deep respect for the man who
had made his way by his own energy to the eminent position which he
had long held, not merely in Memphis, but among Egyptian physicians
generally.

He nodded, and with such a blissful smile that she felt as though a
sunbeam had shone into her very soul. He noticed this at once, raised
his goblet, and drank to her, exclaiming with a flush on his cheek:

"The joy that comes to others early has come to me late; but then the
woman I call my friend is matchless!"

"Well, it is to be hoped she may not prove to be so wicked as you just
now described her.--If only our alliance is not fated to end soon and
abruptly."

"Ah!" cried the physician, "every drop of blood in my veins...."

"You would be ready to shed it for me," Paula broke in, with a pathetic
gesture, borrowed from a great tragedian she had seen at the theatre in
Damascus. "But never fear: it will not be a matter of life and death--at
worst they will but turn me out of the house and of Memphis."

"You?" cried Philippus startled, "but who would dare to do so?"

"They who still regard me as a stranger.--You described the case
admirably. If they have their way, my dear new friend, our fate will be
like that of the learned Dionysius of Cyrene."

"Of Cyrene?"

"Yes. It was my father who told me the story. When Dionysius sent his
son to the High School at Athens, he sat down to write a treatise for
him on all the things a student should do and avoid. He devoted himself
to the task with the utmost diligence; but when, at the end of four
years, he could write on the last leaf of the roll. 'Here this book hath
a happy ending,' the young man whose studies it was intended to guide
came home to Cyrene, a finished scholar."

"And we have struck up a friendship...?"

"And made a treaty of alliance, only to be parted ere long."

Philippus struck his fist vehemently on the little table in front of his
couch and exclaimed: "That I will find means to prevent!--But now, tell
me in confidence, what has last happened between you and the family
down-stairs?"

"You will know quite soon enough."

"Whichever of them fancies that you can be turned out of doors
without more ado and there will be an end between us, may find himself
mistaken!" cried the physician with an angry sparkle in his eyes. "I
have a right to put in a word in this house. It has not nearly come to
that yet, and what is more, it never shall. You shall quit it certainly;
but of your own free will, and holding your head high...."

As he spoke the door of the outer room was hastily opened and the next
instant Orion was standing before them, looking with great surprise at
the pair who had just finished their meal. He said coldly:

"I am disturbing you, I see."

"Not in the least," replied the leech; and the young man, perceiving
what bad taste it would be and how much out of place to give expression
to his jealous annoyance, said, with a smile: "If only it had been
granted to a third person to join in this symposium!"

"We found each other all-sufficient company," answered Philippus.

"A man who could believe in all the doctrines of the Church as readily
as in that statement would be assured of salvation," laughed Orion. "I
am no spoilsport, respected friends; but I deeply regret that I must,
on the present occasion, disturb your happiness. The matter in
question...." And he felt he might now abandon the jesting tone which so
little answered to his mood, "is a serious one. In the first instance it
concerns your freedman, my fair foe."

"Has Hiram come back?" asked Paula, feeling herself turn pale.

"They have brought him in," replied Orion. "My father at once summoned
the court of judges. Justice has a swift foot here with us; I am sorry
for the man, but I cannot prevent its taking its course. I must beg of
you to appear at the examination when you are called."

"The whole truth shall be told!" said Paula sternly and firmly.

"Of course," replied Orion. Then turning to the physician, he added: "I
would request you, worthy Esculapius, to leave me and my cousin together
for a few minutes. I want to give her a word of counsel which will
certainly be to her advantage."

Philippus glanced enquiringly at the girl; she said with clear decision:
"You and I can have no secrets. What I may hear, Philippus too may
know."

Orion, with a shrug, turned to leave the room:

On the threshold he paused, exclaiming with some excitement and genuine
distress:

"If you will not listen to me for your own sake, do so at least,
whatever ill-feeling you may bear me, because I implore you not to
refuse me this favor. It is a matter of life or death to one human
being, of joy or misery to another. Do not refuse me.--I ask nothing
unreasonable, Philippus. Do as I entreat you and leave us for a moment
alone."

Again the physician's eyes consulted the young girl's; this time she
said: "Go!" and he immediately quitted the room.

Orion closed the door.

"What have I done, Paula," he began with panting breath, "that since
yesterday you have shunned me like a leper--that you are doing your
utmost to bring me to ruin?"

"I mean to plead for the life of a trusty servant; nothing more," she
said indifferently.

"At the risk of disgracing me!" he retorted bitterly.

"At that risk, no doubt, if you are indeed so base as to throw your own
guilt on the shoulders of an honest man."

"Then you watched me last night?"

"The merest chance led me to see you come out of the tablinum...."

"I do not ask you now what took you there so late," he interrupted, "for
it revolts me to think anything of you but the best, the highest.--But
you? What have you experienced at my hands but friendship--nay, for
concealment or dissimulation is here folly--but what a lover...?"

"A lover!" cried Paula indignantly. "A lover? Dare you utter the word,
when you have offered your heart and hand to another--you...."

"Who told you so?" asked Orion gloomily.

"Your own mother."

"That is it; so that is it?" cried the young man, clasping his hands
convulsively. "Now I begin to see, now I understand. But stay. For if
it is indeed that which has roused you to hate me and persecute me, you
must love me, Paula--you do love me, and then, noblest and sweetest...."
He held out his hand; but she struck it aside, exclaiming in a tremulous
voice:

"Be under no delusion. I am not one of the feeble lambs whom you have
beguiled by the misuse of your gifts and advantages; and who then are
eager to kiss your hands. I am the daughter of Thomas; and another
woman's betrothed, who craves my embraces on the way to his wedding,
will learn to his rueing that there are women who scorn his disgraceful
suit and can avenge the insult intended them. Go--go to your judges!
You, a false witness, may accuse Hiram, but I will proclaim you, you the
son of this house, as the thief! We shall see which they believe."

"Me!" cried Orion, and his eyes flashed as wrathfully and vindictively
as her own. "The son of the Mukaukas! Oh, that you were not a woman!
I would force you to your knees and compel you to crave my pardon. How
dare you point your finger at a man whose life has hitherto been as
spotless as your own white raiment? Yes, I did go to the tablinum--I
did tear the emerald from the hanging; but I did it in a fit of
recklessness, and in the knowledge that what is my father's is mine. I
threw away the gem to gratify a mere fancy, a transient whim. Cursed be
the hour when I did it!--Not on account of the deed itself, but of the
consequences it may entail through your mad hatred. Jealousy, petty,
unworthy jealousy is at the bottom of it! And of whom are you jealous?"

"Of no one; not even of your betrothed, Katharina," replied Paula with
forced composure. "What are you to me that, to spare you humiliation,
I should risk the life of the most honest soul living? I have said: The
judges shall decide between you."

"No, they shall not!" stormed Orion. "At least, not as you intend!
Beware, beware, I say, of driving me to extremities! I still see in you
the woman I loved; I still offer you what lies within my power: to let
everything end for the best for you...."

"For me! Then I, too, am to suffer for your guilt?"

"Did you hear the barking of hounds just now?"

"I heard dogs yelping."

"Very well.--Your freedman has been brought in, the pack got on his
scent and have now been let into the house close to the tablinum. The
dogs would not stir beyond the threshold and on the white marble step,
towards the right-hand side, the print of a man's foot was found in
the dust. It is a peculiar one, for instead of five toes there are but
three. Your Hiram was fetched in, and he was found to have the same
number of toes as the mark on the marble, neither more nor less. A horse
trod on his foot, in your father's stable, and two of his toes had to
be cut off: we got this out of the stammering wretch with some
difficulty.--On the other side of the door-way there was a smaller
print, but though the dogs paid no heed to that I examined it, and
assured myself--how, I need not tell you--that it was you who had stood
there. He, who has no business whatever in the house, must have made his
way last night into the tablinum, our treasury. Now, put yourself in the
judges' place. How can such facts be outweighed by the mere word of a
girl who, as every one knows, is on anything rather than good terms with
my mother, and who will leave no stone unturned to save her servant."

"Infamous!" cried Paula. "Hiram did not steal the gem, as you must know
who stole it. The emerald he sold was my property; and were those stones
really so much alike that even the seller..."

"Yes, indeed. He could not tell one from the other. Evil spirits have
been at work all through, devilish, malignant demons. It would be enough
to turn one's brain, if life were not so full of enigmas! You yourself
are the greatest.--Did you give the Syrian your emerald to sell in order
to fly from this house with the money?--You are silent? Then I am
right. What can my father be to you--you do not love my mother--and the
son!--Paula, Paula, you are perhaps doing him an injustice--you hate
him, and it is a pleasure to you to injure him."

"I do not wish to hurt you or any one," replied the girl. "And you have
guessed wrongly. Your father refused me the means of seeking mine."

"And you wanted to procure money to search for one who is long since
dead!--Even my mother admits that you speak the truth; if she is right,
and you really take no pleasure in doing me a mischief, listen to me,
follow my advice, and grant my prayer! I do not ask any great matter."

"Speak on then."

"Do you know what a man's honor is to him? Need I tell you that I am a
lost and despised man if I am found guilty of this act of the maddest
folly by the judges of my own house? It may cost my father his life
if he hears that the word 'guilty' is pronounced on me; and I--I--what
would become of me I cannot foresee!--I--oh God, oh God, preserve me
from frenzy!--But I must be calm; time presses.... How different it is
for your servant; he seems ready even now to take the guilt on himself,
for, whatever he is asked, he still keeps silence. Do you do the same;
and if the judges insist on knowing what you had to do with the Syrian
last night--for the dogs traced the scent to your staircase--hazard
a conjecture that the faithful fellow stole the emerald in order to
gratify your desire to search for your father, his beloved master. If
you can make up your mind to so great a sacrifice--oh, that I should
have to ask it of you!--I swear to you by all I hold sacred, by yourself
and by my father's head, I will set Hiram free within three days,
unbeaten and unhurt, and magnificently indemnified; and I will myself
help him on the way whither he may desire to go, or you to send him,
in search of your father.--Be silent; remain neutral in the background;
that is all I ask, and I will keep my word--that, at any rate, you do
not doubt?" She had listened to him with bated breath; she pitied him
deeply as he stood there, a suppliant in bitter anguish of soul, a
criminal who still could not understand that he was one, and who relied
on the confidence that, only yesterday, he still had had the right to
exact from all the world. He appeared before her like a fine proud tree
struck by lightning, whose riven trunk, trembling to its fall, must be
crushed to the earth by the first storm, unless the gardener props it
up. She longed to be able to forget all he had brought upon her and to
grasp his hand in friendly consolation; but her deeply aggrieved pride
helped her to preserve the cold and repellent manner she had so far
succeeded in assuming.

With much hesitation and reserve she consented to be silent as long as
he kept his promise. It was for his father's sake, rather than his own,
that she would so far become his accomplice: at the same time everything
else was at an end between them, and she should bless the hour which
might see her severed from him and his for ever.

The end of her speech was in a strangely hard and repellent tone; she
felt she must adopt it to disguise how deeply she was touched by his
unhappiness and by the extinction of the sunshine in him which had once
warmed her own heart too with bliss. To him it seemed that an icy rigor
breathed in her words--bitter contempt and hostile revulsion. He had
some difficulty in keeping himself from breaking out again in violent
wrath. He was almost sorry that he had trusted her with his secret and
begged her for mercy, instead of leaving things to run their course, and
if it had come to the worst, dragging her to perdition with him. Sooner
would he forfeit honor and peace than humble himself again before this
pitiless and cold-hearted foe. At this moment he really hated her, and
only wished it were possible to fight her, to break her pride, to see
her vanquished and crying for quarter at his feet. It was with a great
effort--with tingling cheeks and constrained utterance that he said:

"Severance from you is indeed best for us all.--Be ready: the judges
will send for you soon."

"Very well," she replied. "I will be silent; you have only to provide
for the Syrian's safety. You have given me your word."

"And so long as you keep yours I will keep mine. Or else..." the words
would come from his quivering lips--"or else war to the knife!"

"War to the knife!" she echoed with flashing eyes. "But one thing more.
I have proof that the emerald which Hiram sold belonged to me. By all
the saints--proof!"

"So much the better for you," he said. "Woe to us both, if you force me
to forget that you are a woman!"

And he left the room with a rapid step.




CHAPTER XII.

Orion went down stairs scowling and clenching his fists. His heart ached
to bursting.

What had he done, what had befallen him? That a woman should dare to
treat him so!--a woman whom he had deigned to love--the loveliest and
noblest of women; but at the same time the haughtiest, most vengeful,
and most hateful.

He had once read this maxim: "When a man has committed a base action, if
only one other knows of it he carries the death-warrant of his peace in
the bosom of his garment." He felt the full weight of this sentence; and
the other--the one who knew--was Paula, the woman of all others whom he
most wished should look up to him. But yesterday it had been a vision of
heaven on earth to dream of holding her in his arms and calling her his;
now he had but one wish: that he could humble and punish her. Oh, that
his hands should be tied, that he should be dependent on her mercy like
a condemned criminal! It was inconceivable--intolerable!

But she should be taught to know him. He had passed through life
hitherto as white as a swan; if this luckless hour and this woman made
him appear as a vulture, it was not his fault, it was hers. She should
soon see which was the stronger of the two. He would punish her in every
way in which a woman can be punished, even if the way to it led
through crime and misery! He was not afraid that the leech bad won her
affections, for he knew, with strange certainty that, in spite of the
hostility she displayed, her heart was his and his alone. "The gold coin
called love," said he to himself, "has two faces: tender devotion and
bitter aversion; just now she is showing me the latter. But, however
different the image and superscription may be on the two sides, if you
ring it, it always gives out the same tone; and I can hear it even in
her most insulting words."

When the family met at table he made Paula's excuses; he himself ate
only a few mouthfuls, for the judges had assembled some time since and
were waiting for him.

The right of life and death had been placed in the hands of the
ancestors of the Mukaukas, powerful princes of provinces; they had
certainly wielded it even in the dynasty of Psammitichus, whose power
had been put to a terrible end by Cambyses the Persian. And still the
Uraeus snake--the asp whose bite caused almost instant death, reared its
head as the time-honored emblem of this privilege, by the side of St.
George the Dragon-slayer, over the palaces of the Mukaukas at Memphis,
and at Lykopolis in Upper Egypt. And in both these places the head
of the family retained the right of arbitrary judgment and capital
punishment over the retainers of his house and the inhabitants of
the district he governed, after Justinian first, and then the Emperor
Heraclius, had confirmed them in their old prerogative. The chivalrous
St. George was placed between the snakes so as to replace a heathen
symbol by a Christian one. Formerly indeed the knight himself had had
the head of a sparrow-hawk: that is to say of the god Horus, who had
overthrown the evil-spirit, Seth-Typhon, to avenge his father; but about
two centuries since the heathen crocodile-destroyer had been transformed
into the Christian conqueror of the dragon.

After the Arab conquest the Moslems had left all ancient customs and
rights undisturbed, including those of the Mukaukas.

The court which assembled to sit in judgment on all cases concerning
the adherents of the house consisted of the higher officials of the
governor's establishment. The Mukaukas himself was president, and his
grown-up son was his natural deputy. During Orion's absence, Nilus, the
head of the exchequer, a shrewd and judicious Egyptian, had generally
represented his invalid master; but on the present occasion Orion was
appointed to take his place, and to preside over the assembly.

The governor's son hastened to his father's bedroom to beg him to
lend him his ring as a token of the authority transferred to him; the
Mukaukas had willingly allowed him to take it off his finger, and had
enjoined him to exercise relentless severity. Generally he inclined to
leniency; but breaking into a house was punishable with death, and in
this instance it was but right to show no mercy, out of deference to the
Arab merchant. But Orion, mindful of his covenant with Paula, begged his
father to give him full discretion. The old Moslem was a just man, who
would agree to a mitigated sentence under the circumstances; besides,
the culprit was not in strict fact a member of the household, but in the
service of a relation.

The Mukaukas applauded his son's moderation and judgment. If only he had
been in rather better health he himself would have had the pleasure of
being present at the sitting, to see him fulfil for the first time so
important a function, worthy of his birth and position.

Orion kissed his father's hand with heart-felt but melancholy emotion,
for this praise from the man he so truly loved was a keen pleasure; and
yet he felt that it was of ill-omen that his duties as judge, of which
he knew the sacred solemnity, should be thus--thus begun.

It was in a softened mood, sunk in thought as to how he could best save
Hiram and leave Paula's name altogether out of the matter, that he went
to the hall of justice; and there he found the nurse Perpetua in eager
discussion with Nilus.

The old woman was quite beside herself. In the clatter of her loom she
had heard nothing of what had been going on till a few minutes ago; now
she was ready to swear to the luckless Hiram's innocence. The stone he
had sold had belonged to his young mistress, and thank God there was no
lack of evidence of the fact; the setting of the emerald was lying
safe and sound in Paula's trunk. Happily she had had an opportunity of
speaking to her; and that she, the daughter of Thomas, should be brought
before the tribunal, like a citizen's daughter or slave-girl, was
unheard of, shameful!

At this Orion roughly interfered; he desired the old gate-keeper to
conduct Perpetua at once to the storeroom next to the tablinum, where
the various stuffs prepared for the use of the household were laid by,
and to keep her there under safe guard till further notice. The tone
in which he gave the order was such that even the nurse did not
remonstrate; and Nilus, for his part obeyed in silence when Orion bid
him return to his place among the judges.

Nilus went back to the judgment-hall in uneasy consternation. Never
before had he seen his young lord in this mood. As he heard the nurse's
statement the veins had swelled in his smooth youthful forehead, his
nostrils had quivered with convulsive agitation, his voice had lost all
its sweetness, and his eyes had a sinister gleam.

Orion was now alone; he ground his teeth with rage. Paula had betrayed
him in spite of her promise, and how mean was her woman's cunning! She
could be silent before the judges--yes. Silent in all confidence now, to
the very last; but the nurse, her mouthpiece, had already put Nilus,
the keenest and most important member of the court, in possession of
the evidence which spoke for her and against him. It was shocking,
disgraceful! Base and deliberately malicious treachery. But the end was
not yet: he still was free to act and to ward off the spiteful stroke
by a counterthrust. How it should be dealt was clear from Perpetua's
statement; but his conscience, his instincts and long habits of
submission to what was right, good, and fitting held him back. Not only
had he never himself done a base or a mean action; he loathed it in
another, and the only thing he could do to render Paula's perfidy
harmless was, as he could not deny, original and bold, but at the same
time detestable and shameful.

Still, he could not and he would not succumb in this struggle. Time
pressed. Long reflection was impossible; suddenly he felt carried away
by a fierce and mad longing to fight it out--he felt as he had felt on a
race-day in the hippodrome, when he had driven his own quadriga ahead of
all the rest.

Onwards, then, onwards; and if the chariot were wrecked, if the horses
were killed, if his wheels maimed his comrades overthrown in the
arena-still, onwards, onwards!

A few hasty steps brought him to the lodge of the gate-keeper, a sturdy
old man who had held his post for forty years. He had formerly been a
locksmith and it still was part of his duty to undertake the repairs of
the simple household utensils. Orion as a youth had been a beautiful and
engaging boy and a great favorite with this worthy man; he had delighted
in sitting in his little room and handing him the tools for his work.
He himself had remarkable mechanical facility and had been the old man's
apt pupil; nay, he had made such progress as to be able to carve pretty
little boxes, prayer-book cases, and such like, and provide them with
locks, as gifts to his parents on their birth days--a festival always
kept with peculiar solemnity in Egypt, and marked by giving and
receiving presents. He understood the use of tools, and he now hastily
selected such as he needed. On the window-ledge stood a bunch of
flowers which he had ordered for Paula the day before, and which he had
forgotten to fetch this terrible morning. With this in one hand, and the
tools in the breast of his robe he hastened upstairs.

"Onwards, I must keep on!" he muttered, as he entered Paula's room,
bolted the door inside and, kneeling before her chest, tossed the
flowers aside. If he was discovered, he would say that he had gone into
his cousin's chamber to give her the bouquet.

"Onwards; I must go on!" was still his thought, as he unscrewed the
hinge on which the lid of the trunk moved. His hands trembled, his
breath came fast, but he did his task quickly. This was the right way
to work, for the lock was a peculiar one, and could not have been opened
without spoiling it. He raised the lid, and the first thing his hand
came upon in the chest was the necklace with the empty medallion--it
was as though some kind Genius were aiding him. The medallion hung but
slightly to the elegantly-wrought chain; to detach it and conceal it
about his person was the work of a minute.

But now the most resolute. "On, on...." was of no further avail. This
was theft: he had robbed her whom, if she only had chosen it, he was
ready to load with everything wherewith fate had so superabundantly
blessed him. No, this--this....

A singular idea suddenly flashed through his brain; a thought which
brought a smile to his lips even at this moment of frightful tension.
He acted upon it forth with: he drew out from within his under-garment a
gem that hung round his neck by a gold chain. This jewel--a masterpiece
by one of the famous Greek engravers of heathen antiquity--had been
given him in Constantinople in exchange for a team of four horses to
which his greatest friend there had taken a fancy. It was in fact of
greater price than half a dozen fine horses. Half beside himself, and as
if intoxicated, Orion followed the wild impulse to which he had yielded;
indeed, he was glad to have so precious a jewel at hand to hang in the
place of the worthless gold frame-work. It was done with a pinch; but
screwing up the hinge again was a longer task, for his hands trembled
violently--and as the moment drew near in which he meant to let Paula
feel his power, the more quickly his heart beat, and the more difficult
he found it to control his mind to calm deliberation.

After he had unbolted the door he stood like a thief spying the long
corridor of the strangers' wing, and this increased his excitement to
a frenzy of rage with the world, and fate, and most of all with her who
had compelled him to stoop to such base conduct. But now the charioteer
had the reins and goad in his hand. Onwards now, onwards!

He flew down stairs, three steps at a time, as he had been wont when
a boy. In the anteroom he met Eudoxia, Mary's Greek governess, who had
just brought her refractory pupil into the house, and he tossed her
the nosegay he still held in his hands; then, without heeding the
languishing glances the middle-aged damsel sent after him with her
thanks, he hastened back to the gate-keeper's lodge where he hurriedly
disburdened himself of the locksmith's tools.

A few minutes later he entered the judgment-hall. Nilus the treasurer
showed him to the governor's raised seat, but an overpowering
bashfulness kept him from taking this position of honor. It was with a
burning brow, and looks so ominously dark that the assembly gazed at
him with timid astonishment, that he opened the proceedings with a few
broken sentences. He himself scarcely knew what he was saying, and heard
his own voice as vaguely as though it were the distant roar of waves.
However, he succeeded in clearly stating all that had happened: he
showed the assembly the stone which had been stolen and recovered; he
explained how the thief had been taken; he declared Paula's freedman to
be guilty of the robbery, and called upon him to bring forward anything
he could in his own defence. But the accused could only stammer out that
he was not guilty. He was not able to defend himself, but his mistress
could no doubt give evidence that would justify him.

Orion pushed the hair from his forehead, proudly raised his aching head,
and addressed the judges:

"His mistress is a lady of rank allied to our house. Let us keep her
out of this odious affair as is but seemly. Her nurse gave Nilus some
information which may perhaps avail to save this unhappy man. We will
neglect nothing to that end; but you, who are less familiar with the
leading circumstances, must bear this in mind to guard yourselves
against being misled: This lady is much attached to the accused; she
clings to him and Perpetua as the only friends remaining to her from
her native home. Moreover, there is nothing to surprise me or you in the
fact that a noble woman, as she is, should assume the onus of another's
crime, and place herself in a doubtful light to save a man who has
hitherto been honest and faithful. The nurse is here; shall she be
called, or have you, Nilus, heard from her everything that her mistress
can say in favor of her freedman?"

"Perpetua told me, and told you, too, my lord, certain credible facts,"
replied the treasurer. "But I could not repeat them so exactly as she
herself, and I am of opinion that the woman should be brought before the
court."

"Then call her," said Orion, fixing his eyes on vacancy above the heads
of the assembly, with a look of sullen dignity.

After a long and anxious pause the old woman was brought in. Confident
in her righteous cause she came forward boldly; she blamed Hiram
somewhat sharply for keeping silence so long, and then explained that
Paula, to procure money for her search for her father, had made the
freedman take a costly emerald out of its setting in her necklace, and
that it was the sale of this gem that had involved her fellow-countryman
in this unfortunate suspicion.

The nurse's deposition seemed to have biased the greater part of the
council in favor of the accused; but Orion did not give them time to
discuss their impressions among themselves. Hardly had Perpetua ceased
speaking, when Orion took up the emerald, which was lying on the table
before him, exclaiming excitedly, nay, angrily:

"And the stone which is recognized by the man who sold it--an expert in
gems--as being that which was taken from the hanging, and unique of its
kind, is supposed, by some miracle of nature, to have suddenly appeared
in duplicate?--Malignant spirits still wander through the world, but
would hardly dare to play their tricks in this Christian house. You all
know what 'old women's tales' are; and the tale that old woman has told
us is one of the most improbable of its class. 'Tell that to Apelles the
Jew,' said Horace the Roman; but his fellow-Israelite, Gamaliel'--and
he turned to the jeweller who was sitting with the other witnesses will
certainly not believe it; still less I, who see through this tissue of
falsehood. The daughter of the noble Thomas has condescended to weave it
with the help of that woman--a skilled weaver, she--to spread it before
us in order to mislead us, and so to save her faithful servant from
imprisonment, from the mines, or from death. These are the facts.--Do I
err, woman, or do you still adhere to your statement?"

The nurse, who had hoped to find in Orion her mistress' advocate, had
listened to his speech with growing horror. Her eyes flashed as she
looked at him, first with mockery and then with vehement disgust; but,
though they filled with tears at this unlooked-for attack, she preserved
her presence of mind, and declared she had spoken the truth, and nothing
but the truth, as she always did. The setting of her mistress' emerald
would prove her statement.

Orion shrugged his shoulders, desired the woman to fetch her mistress,
whose presence was now indispensable, and called to the treasurer:

"Go with her, Nilus! And let a servant bring the trunk here that the
owner may open it in the presence of us all and before any one else
touches the contents. I should not be the right person to undertake
it since no one in this Jacobite household--hardly even one of
yourselves--has found favor in the eyes of the Melchite. She has
unfortunately a special aversion for me, so I must depute to others
every proceeding that could lead to a misunderstanding.--Conduct her
hither, Nilus; of course with the respect due to a maiden of high rank."

While the envoy was gone Orion paced the room with swift, restless
steps, Once only he paused and addressed the judges:

"But supposing the empty setting should be found, how do you account
for the existence of two--two gems, each unique of its kind? It is
distracting. Here is a soft-hearted girl daring to mislead a serious
council of justice for the sake, for the sake of...." he stamped his
foot with rage and continued his silent march.

"He is as yet but a beginner," thought the assembled officials as they
watched his agitation. "Otherwise how could he allow such an absurd
attempt to clear an accused thief to affect him so deeply, or disturb
his temper?"

Paula's arrival presently put an end to Orion's pacing the room. He
received her with a respectful bow and signed to her to be seated.
Then he bid Nilus recapitulate the results of the proceedings up to the
present stage, and what he and his colleagues supposed to be her motive
for asserting that the stolen emerald was her property. He would as far
as possible leave it to the others to question her, since she knew full
well on what terms she was with himself. Even before he had come into
the council-room she had offered her explanation of the robbery to
Nilus, through her nurse Perpetua; but it would have seemed fairer and
more friendly in his eyes--and here he raised his voice--if she had
chosen to confide to him, Orion, her plan for helping the freedman. Then
he might have been able to warn her. He could only regard this mode of
action, independently of him, as a fresh proof of her dislike, and she
must hold herself responsible for the consequences. Justice must now
take its course with inexorable rigor.

The wrathful light in his eyes showed her what she had to expect from
him, and that he was prepared to fight her to the end. She saw that he
thought that she had broken the promise she had but just now given him;
but she had not commissioned Perpetua to interfere in the matter; on the
contrary, she had desired the woman to leave it to her to produce her
evidence only in the last extremity. Orion must believe that she had
done him a wrong; still, could that make him so far forget himself as
to carry out his threats, and sacrifice an innocent man--to divert
suspicion from himself, while he branded her as a false witness? Aye,
even from that he would not shrink! His flaming glance, his abrupt
demeanor, his laboring breath, proclaimed it plainly enough.--Then let
