heart--the blood--it is indeed an uncontrollable fever! I hope, first
and foremost, that he will keep away from his mother in his present
unreason."

His mother was, however, George's first desire. He did not believe she
would sanction his sacrifice to Annie Hyde. Justice, honour, gratitude!
these were fine names of his father's invention to adorn a ceremony
which would celebrate his life-long misery, and he rebelled against
such an immolation of his youth and happiness. When he reached the
house, he found that his mother had gone to the pond to feed her swans;
and he decided to ride a little out of his way in order to see her
there. Presently he came to a spot where tall, shadowing pines
surrounded a large sheet of water, dipping their lowest branches into
it. Mrs. Hyde stood among them, and the white, stately birds were
crowding to her very feet. He reined in his horse to watch her, and
though accustomed to her beauty, he marvelled again at it. Like a
sylvan goddess she stood, divinely tall, and divinely fair; her whole
presence suffused with a heavenly serenity and happiness! Upon the soft
earth the hoofs of his horse had not been audible, but when he came
within her sight, it was wonderful to watch the transformation on her
countenance. A great love, a great joy, swept away like a gust of wind,
the peace on its surface; and a glowing, loving intelligence made her
instantly restless. She called him with sweet imperiousness, "George!
Joris! Joris! My dear one!" and he answered her with the one word ever
near, and ever dear, to a woman's heart--"MOTHER!"

"I thought you were with your father. Where have you left him?"

"In the wilderness. There is need for me to go to the city. My father
will tell you WHY. I come only to see you--to kiss you--"

"Joris, I see that you are angry. Well then, my dear one, what is it?
What has your father been saying to you?"

"He will tell you."

"SO! Whatever it is, your part I shall take. Right or wrong, your part
I shall take."

"There is nothing wrong, dear mother."

"Money, is it?"

"It is not money. My father is generous to me."

"Then, some woman it is?"

"Kiss me, mother. After all, there is no woman like unto you."

She drew close to him, and he stooped his handsome face to hers, and
kissed her many times. Her smile comforted him, for it was full of
confidence, as she said--

"Trouble not yourself, Joris. At the last, your father sees through my
eyes. Must you go? Well then, the Best of Beings go with you!"

"When are you coming to town, mother?"

"Next week. There is a dinner party at the President's, and your father
will not be absent--nor I--nor you?"

"If I am invited, I shall go, just that I may see you enter the room.
Let me tell you, that sight always fills my heart with a tumultuous
pride and love."

"A great flatterer are you, Joris!" but she lifted her face again, and
George kissed it, and then rode rapidly away.

He hardly drew rein until he reached his grandfather's house, a
handsome Dutch residence, built of yellow brick, and standing in a
garden that was, at this season, a glory of tulips and daffodils,
hyacinths and narcissus--the splendid colouring of the beds being
wonderfully increased by their borderings of clipped box. An air of
sunshiny peace was over the place, and as the upper-half of the
side-door stood open he tied his horse and went in. The ticking of the
tall house-clock was the only sound he heard at first, but as he stood
irresolute, a sweet, thin voice in an adjoining room began to sing a
hymn.

"Grandmother! Grandmother!! Grandmother!!!" he called, and before the
last appeal was echoed the old lady appeared. She came forward rapidly,
her knitting in her hand. She was singularly bright and alert, with
rosy cheeks, and snow-white hair under a snow-white cap of
clear-starched lace. A snow-white kerchief of lawn was crossed over her
breast, and the rest of her dress was so perfectly Dutch that she might
have stepped out of one of Tenier's pictures.

"Oh, my Joris!" she cried, "Joris! Joris! I am so happy to see thee.
But what, then, is the matter? Thy eyes are full of trouble."

"I will tell you, grandmother." And he sat down by her side and went
over the conversation he had had with his father. She never interrupted
him, but he knew by the rapid clicking of her knitting needles that she
was moved far beyond her usual quietude. When he ceased speaking, she
answered--

"To sell thee, Joris, is a great shame, and for nothing to sell thee is
still worse. This is what I think: Let half of the income from the
earldom go to the poor young lady, but THYSELF into the bargain, is
beyond all reason. And if with Cornelia Moran thou art in love, a good
thing it is;--so I say."

"Do you know Cornelia, grandmother?"

"Well, then, I have seen her; more than once. A great beauty I think
her; and Doctor John has Money--plenty of money--and a very good family
are the Morans. I remember his father--a very fine gentleman."

"But my father hates Doctor Moran."

"Very wicked is he to hate any one. Why, then?"

"He gave me only one reason--that his family is French."

"SO! Thy mother was Dutch. Every one cannot be English--a God's mercy
they cannot! Now, then, thy grandfather is coming; thy trouble tell to
him. Good advice he will give thee."

Senator Van Heemskirk however went first into his garden and gathering
great handfuls of white narcissus and golden daffodils, he called a
slave woman and bade her carry them to the Semple house, and lay them
in, and around, his friend's coffin. One white lily he kept in his hand
as he came towards his wife and grandson, with eyes fixed on its beauty.

"Lysbet," he said,--but he clasped George's hand as he spoke--"My
Lysbet, if in the Dead Valley of this earth grow such heavenly flowers
as this, we will not fear the grave. It is only to sleep on the breast
that gives us the lily and the rose, and the wheat, and the corn. Oh,
how sweet is this flower! It has the scent of Paradise."

He laid it gently down while he put off his fine broadcloth coat and
lace ruffles and assumed the long vest and silk skull cap, which was
his home dress; then he put it in a buttonhole of his vest, and seemed
to joy himself in its delicate fragrance. With these preliminaries
neither Joris nor Lysbet interfered; but when he had lit his long pipe
and seated himself comfortably in his chair, Lysbet said--

"Where hast thou been all this afternoon?"

"I have been sealing up my friend's desk and drawers until his sons
arrive. Very happy he looks. He is now ONE OF THOSE THAT KNOW."

"Well, then, after the long strife, 'He Rests.'"

"Men have written it. What know they about it? Rest would not be heaven
to my friend Alexander Semple. To work, to be up and doing His Will,
that would be his delight."

"I wonder, Joris, if in the next life we shall know each other?"

"My Lysbet, in this life do we know each other?"

"I think not. Here has come our dear Joris full of trouble to thee, for
his father has said such things as I could not have believed. Joris,
tell thy grandfather what they are."

And this time George, being very sure of hearty sympathy, told his tale
with great feeling--perhaps even with a little anger. His grandfather
listened patiently to the youth's impatience, but he did not answer
exactly to his expectations.

"My Joris," he said, "so hard it is to accept what goes against our
wishes. If Cornelia Moran you had not met, would your father's desires
be so impossible to you? Noble and generous would they not seem--"

"But I have seen Cornelia, and I love her."

"Two or three times you have seen her. How can you be sure that you
love her?"

"In the first hour I was sure."

"Of nothing are we quite sure. In too great a hurry are you. Miss Moran
may not love you. She may refuse ever to love you. Her mind you have
not asked. Beside this, in his family her father may not wish you. A
very proud man is Doctor John."

"Grandfather, I may be an earl some day."

"An English earl. Doctor John may not endure to think of his only child
living in that far-off country. I, myself, know how this thought can
work a father to madness. And, again, your Cousin Annie may not wish to
marry you."

"Faith, sir, I had not thought of myself as so very disagreeable."

"No. Vain and self-confident is a young man. See, then, how many things
may work this way, that way, and if wise you are you will be quiet and
wait for events. One thing, move not in your anger; it is like putting
to sea in a tempest. Now I shall just say a word or two on the other
side. If your father is so set in his mind about the Hydes, let him do
the justice to them he wishes to do; but it is not right that he should
make YOU do it for him."

"He says that only I can give Annie justice."

"But that is not good sense. When the present Earl dies, and she is
left an orphan, who shall prevent your father from adopting her as his
own daughter, and leaving her a daughter's portion of the estate? In
such case, she would be in exactly the same position as if her brother
had lived and become earl. Is not that so?"

"My dear, dear grandfather, you carry wisdom with you! Now I shall have
the pleasure to propose to my father that he do his own justice! O
wise, wise grandfather! You have made me happy to a degree!"

"Very well, but say not that _I_ gave you such counsel. When your
father speaks to me, as he is certain to do, then I will say such and
such words to him; but my words in your mouth will be a great offence;
and very justly so, for it is hard to carry words, and carry nothing
else. Your dear mother--how is she?"

"Well and happy. She builds, and she plants, and the days are too short
for her. But my father is not so happy. I can see that he is wearied of
everything."

"Not here, is his heart. It is in England. And no longer has he great
hopes to keep him young. If of Liberty I now speak to him, he has a
smile so hopeless that both sad and angry it makes me. No faith has he
left in any man, except Washington; and I think, also, he is
disappointed that Washington was not crowned King George the First."

"I can assure you, sir, that others share his disappointment. Mr. Adams
would not object to be Duke of New York, and even little Burr would
like a lordship."

"I have heard; my ears are not dull, nor my eyes blind. But too much
out of the world lives your father; men who do so grow unfit to live in
the world. He dreams dreams impossible to us--impossible to France--and
then he says 'Liberty is a dream.' Well, well, Life also is a
dream--when we awake--"

Then he ceased speaking, and there was silence until Lysbet Van
Heemskirk said, softly, "When we awake, WE SHALL BE SATISFIED."

Van Heernskirk smiled at his wife's cheerful assurance, and continued,
"It is true, Lysbet, what you say; and even here, in our dreaming, what
satisfaction! As for me, I expect not too much. The old order and the
new order fight yet for the victory; and what passes now will be worth
talking about fifty years hence."

"It is said, grandfather, that the Dutch church is anti-Federal to a
man."

"Not true are such sayings. The church will be very like old Van
Steenwyck, who boasts of his impartiality, and who votes for the
Federals once, and for the anti-Federals once, and the third time does
not vote at all. If taken was the vote of the Church, it would be six
for the Federals and half-a-dozen for the anti-Federals."

"Mr. Burr--"

"Of Mr. Burr I will not talk. I like not his little dirty politics."

"He is very clever."

"Well, then, you have to praise him for being clever; for being honest
you cannot praise him."

"'Tis a monstrous pity that Right can only be on one side; yet
sometimes Right and Mr. Burr may happen to be on the same side."

"The right way is too straight for Aaron Burr. If into it he wanders
'tis for a wrong reason."

"My dear grandfather, how your words bite!"

"I wish not to say biting things; but Aaron Burr stands for those
politicians who turn patriotism into shopkeeping and their own
interest--men who care far more for WHO governs us than for HOW we are
governed. And what will be the end of such ways? I will tell you. We
shall have a Democracy that will be the reign of those who know the
least and talk the loudest."

At this point in the conversation Van Heemskirk was called to the door
about some business matter and George was left alone with his
grandmother. She was setting the tea-table, and her hands were full of
china; but she put the cups quickly down, and going to George's side,
said--

"Cornelia Moran spends this evening with her friend Arenta Van Ariens.
Well then, would thou like an excuse to call on Arenta?"

"Oh, grandmother! Do you indeed know Arenta? Can you send me there?"

"Since she was one month old I have known Arenta. This morning, she
came here to borrow for her Aunt Jacobus my ivory winders. Now then, I
did not wish to lend Angelica Jacobus my winders; and I said to Arenta
that 'by and by I would look for them.' Not far are they to seek; and
for thy pleasure I will get them, and thou canst take them this evening
to Arenta."

"O you dear, dear grandmother!" and he stood up, and lifted her rosy
face between his hands and kissed her.

"I am so fond of thee," she continued. "I love thee so much; and thy
pleasure is my pleasure; and I see no harm--no harm at all--in thy love
for the beautiful Cornelia. I think, with thee, she is a girl worth any
man's heart; and if thou canst win her, I, for one, will be joyful with
thee. Perhaps, though, I am a selfish old woman--it is so easy to be
selfish."

"Let me tell you, grandmother, you know not how to be selfish."

"Let me tell thee, Joris, I was thinking of myself, as well as of thee.
For while thy grandfather talked of Aaron Burr, this thought came into
my mind--if to Annie Hyde my Joris is married, he will live in England,
and I shall see him no more in this world. But if to Cornelia Moran he
