An absence of nine years had, however, made him personally a stranger to
most of the people. The young men had been mere lads when he went away,
while of the elders, many were dead, or removed. As he approached the
group around Ezra, he recognized but few of the faces, all of which were
turned upon him with a common expression of curious scrutiny. There was
Meshech Little. Him he shook hands with, and also with Peleg, and Israel
Goodrich. Ezra had come to the village since his day.

"Surely this is Abe Konkapot," he said, extending his hand to a fine
looking Indian. "Why Abe, I heard the Stockbridges had moved out to York
State."

"You hear true," responded the smiling Indian. "Heap go. Some stay. No
want to go."

"Widder Nimham's gal Lu, could tell ye 'bout why Abe don' want ter go, I
guess," observed Obadiah Weeks, who directed the remark, however, not
so much to Perez as to some of the half-grown young men, from whom it
elicited a responsive snicker at Abe's expense.

Indeed, after the exchange of the first greetings, it became apparent
that Perez' presence was a damper on the conversation. The simple fact
was, the people did not recognize him as one of them. It was not that
his dress, although a uniform, was better or costlier than theirs. The
blue stockings were threadbare, and had been often mended, and the coat,
of the same hue, was pitiably white in the seams, while the original
buff of the waistcoat and knee breeches had faded to a whitey brown.
But the erect soldierly carriage of the wearer, and that neatness and
trimness in details, which military experience renders habitual, made
this frayed and time-stained uniform seem almost elegant, as compared
with the clothes that hung slouchily upon the men around him. Their
faces were rough, and unshaven, their hair unkempt, their feet bare,
or covered with dusty shoes, and they had generally left their coats
at home. Perez was clean shaven, his shoes, although they barely held
together, were neatly brushed, and the steel buckles polished, while his
hair was gathered back over his ears, and tied with a black ribbon in a
queue behind, in the manner of gentlemen. But Israel Goodrich and Ezra
also wore their hair in this manner, while shoes and clean shaved faces
were occasional indulgences with every bumpkin who stood around. It was
not then alone any details of dress, but a certain distinction in
air and bearing about Perez, which had struck them. The discipline
of military responsibility, and the officer's constant necessity of
maintaining an aspect of authority and dignity, before his men, had left
refining marks upon his face, which distinguished it as a different
sort from the countenances about him with their expressions of pathetic
stolidity, or boorish shrewdness. In a word, although they knew old
Elnathan Hamlin to be one of themselves, they instinctively felt that
this son of his had become a gentleman.

At any time this consciousness would have produced constraint, and
checked spontaneous conversation, but now, just at the moment when the
demarcation of classes was taking the character of open hostility, it
produced a sentiment of repulsion and enmity. His place was on the other
side; not with the people, but with the gentlemen, the lawyers, the
parsons, and the judges. Why did he come spying among them?

Perez, without guessing the reason of it, began to be conscious of
the unsympathetic atmosphere, and was about moving away, when Israel
Goodrich remarked, with the air of wishing to avoid an appearance of
churlishness.

"Lessee, Perez, ye've been gone nigh onter nine year. Ye muss find some
changes in the taown."

Israel, as a man of more considerable social importance than the most
of those who stood around, and being moreover, old enough to be Perez'
father, had been less affected by the impulse of class jealousy than the
others.

"I've been home only one day, Mr. Goodrich," said Perez quietly, "but
I've noticed some changes already. When I went away, every man in town
had a farm of his own. As far as I've seen since I've been back, a few
rich men have got pretty near all the farms now, and the men who used to
own em, are glad of a chance to work on em as hired hands."

Such a sentiment, expressed by one of themselves, would have called
forth a shower of confirmatory ejaculations, but the people stared at
Perez in mere astonishment, the dead silence of surprise, at hearing
such a strong statement of their grievances, from one whose appearance
and manner seemed to identify him with the anti-popular, or gentleman's
side. So far as this feeling of bewilderment took any more definite
form, it evidently inclined to suspicion, rather than confidence. Was he
mocking them? Was he trying to entrap them? Even Israel looked sharply
at him, and his next remark, after quite a silence, was on another
subject.

"I s'pose ye know ez haow they've set the niggers free."

"Yes," replied Perez, "I heard of that when I was away, but I didn't
know the reason why they'd set em free, till I got home."

"What dew ye callate 's the reason?"

"I see they've made slaves of the poor folks, and don't need the niggers
any more," replied Perez, as quietly as if he were making the most
casual remark.

But still the people stared at him and looked questioningly at each
other, so bereft of magnetic force is language, though it express our
inmost convictions, when we do not believe that the heart of the speaker
beats in sympathy with what he says.

"I don' quite git yer idee. Haow dew ye make out that air 'bout poor
folks bein slaves?" said Ezra Phelps dryly.

It was evident that any man who thought he was going to get at the real
feelings of these rustics without first gaining their confidence, little
understood the shrewd caution of the race.

"I make it out this way," replied Perez. "I find pretty much every rich
man has a gang of debtors working for him, working out their debts. If
they are idle, if they dispute with him, if they don't let him do what
he pleases with them and their families, he sends them to jail with
a word, and there they stay till he wants to let them out. No man can
interfere between him and them. He does with em whatsoever he will. And
that's why I call them slaves."

Now, Meshech Little was slightly intoxicated. By that mysterious
faculty, whereby the confirmed drunkard, although absolutely
impecunious, nevertheless manages to keep soaked, while other thirsty
men can get nothing, he had obtained rum. And Meshech it was who,
proceeding in that spirit of frankness engendered by the bottle, now
brought about the solution of a misunderstanding, that was becoming
painful.

"Wha' ye say, Perez, z'all right, but wha'n time be _yew_ a sayin on it
fer? Ye be dressed so fine, an a cap'n b'sides, that we callated ye'd
take yer tod tew the store, long with the silk stockins, 'stid o'
consortin with common folks like we be."

There was a general sensation. Every mouth was opened, and every neck
craned forward to catch the reply.

"Did you think so, Meshech? Well, you see you are mistaken. There's not
a man among you has less cause to love the silk stockings, as you call
them, than I have, and you Meshech ought to know it. Nine years ago,
my brother Reub and I marched with the minute men. Parson and Squire
Woodbridge, and Squire Edwards and all of em, came round us and said,
'We'll take care of your father and mother. We'll never forget what you
are doing to-day.' Yesterday I came home to find my father and mother
waiting to be sold out by the sheriff, and go to the poor house; and
Reub, I found my brother Reub, rotting to death in Barrington jail."

"By gosh, I forgot baout Reub, I declar I did," exclaimed Meshech,
contritely.

"Give us yer hand," said Israel, "I forgot same ez Meshech, an I
misdoubted ye. This be Ezra Phelps, ez owns the new mill."

"Shake agin," said Peleg, extending his hand.

There was exhilaration as well as cordiality in the faces of the men,
who now crowded around Perez, an exhilaration which had its source in
the fact, that one whose appearance and bearing identified him with the
gentlemen, was on their side. It filled them with more encouragement,
than would have done the accession of a score of their own rank and
sort. Brawn and muscle they could themselves supply, but for leadership,
social, political and religious, they had always been accustomed to look
to the gentlemen of the community, and from this lifelong and inherited
habit, came the new sense of confidence and moral sanction, which they
felt in having upon their side in the present crisis, one in whom they
had instinctively recognized the traits of the superior caste.

"Hev ye hearn the news from Northampton, Perez?" asked Israel.

"Yes, and if you men are as much in earnest as I am, there'll be news
from Barrington to-morrow," replied Perez, glancing around.

"Ef thar ain't, there'll be a lot on us disappinted, fer we be all a
callatin tew go thar tew see," said Israel, significantly.

"We'll git yer brother aouter jail, fer ye, Perez, an ef thar's any
fightin with the m'lishy, ye kin show us haow, I guess."

Meshech, as before intimated, was partially drunk, and spoke out of the
fullness of his heart. But except for this one outburst, a stranger,
especially one who did not know the New England disposition, and its
preference for innuendo to any other mode of speech, in referring to the
most important and exciting topics, would have failed entirely to get
the idea that these farmers and laborers contemplated an act of armed
rebellion on the morrow. He would, indeed, have heard frequent allusions
to the probability there would be great goings on at Barrington, next
morning, and intimations more or less explicit, on the part of nearly
every man present, that he expected to be on hand to see what was done.
But there was no intimation that they, themselves, expected to be the
doers. Many, indeed, perhaps most, had very likely no distinct idea, of
personally doing anything, nor was it at all necessary that they should
have in order to ensure the expected outbreak, when the time should
come. Given an excited crowd, all expecting something to be done which
they desire to have done, and all the necessary elements of mob action
are present.




CHAPTER SEVENTH

THE FIRST ENCOUNTER


The next morning by six o'clock, a large number of persons had gathered
on the green at Stockbridge, in consequence of an understanding
that those intending to witness the goings on at Barrington, should
rendezvous at the tavern, and go down together, whereby their own hearts
would be made stronger, and their enemies the more impressed. A good
many had, indeed, gone on ahead, singly, or in parties. Meshech Little,
who lived on the Barrington road, said that he hadn't had a wink
of sleep since four o'clock, for the noise of passing teams and
pedestrians. Those who owned horses and carts, including such men as
Israel Goodrich and Ezra Phelps, had preferred that mode of locomotion,
but there were, nevertheless, as many as one hundred men and boys in the
muster on the green. Perhaps a quarter of them had muskets, the others
carried stout cudgels.

All sorts of rumors were flying about. One story was that the militia
had been ordered out with a dozen rounds of cartridges, to defend the
court and jail. Some even had heard that a cannon had been placed in
front of the court house, and trained on the Stockbridge road. On the
other hand, it was asserted that the court would not try to sit at all.
As now one, and now another, of these contradictory reports prevailed,
ebullitions of courage and symptoms of panic alternated among the
people. It was easy to see that they contemplated the undertaking, on
which they were embarking, not without a good deal of nervousness. Abner
was going from group to group, trying to keep up their spirits.

"Hello," he exclaimed, coming across Jabez Flint. "Look a here, boys.
Derned ef Jabez ain't a comin long with the res' on us. Wal, Jabez, I
swow, I never callated ez I sh'd be a fightin long side o' ye. Misry
makes strange bedfellers, though."

"It's you ez hez changed sides, not me," responded the Tory. "I wuz
allers agin the state, an naow ye've come over tew my side."

Abner scratched his head.

"I swan, it doos look so. Anyhow, I be glad tew see ye tidday. I see
ye've got yer gun, Jabez. Ye muss be keerful. Loryers is so derndly like
foxes, that ye mout hit one on em by mistake."

There was a slight snicker at this, but the atmosphere was decidedly too
heavy for jokes. However boldly they might discourse at the tavern of an
evening, over their mugs of flip, about taking up arms and hanging the
lawyers, it was not without manifold misgivings, that these law-abiding
farmers found themselves on the point of being actually arrayed against
the public authorities in armed rebellion. The absence of Israel
Goodrich and Ezra Phelps, who were looked up to as the most substantial
in estate and general respectability of those who inclined to the
popular side, was moreover unfortunate, although it was supposed that
they would be present at Barrington.

Meshech, indeed, in spite of the earliness of the hour, was full of
pot-valor, and flourished his gun in a manner more perilous to those
about him than to the state authorities, but his courage reeked so
strongly of its source, that the display was rather discouraging than
otherwise to the sober men around. Paul Hubbard, who had come down from
the ironworks with thirty men or more, presently drew Abner aside and
said:

"See here. It won't do to wait round any longer. We must start. They're
losing all their grit standing here and thinking it over."

But the confabulation was interrupted by a cry of panic from Obadiah
Weeks:

"Golly, here come the slectmen!"

"Hell!" exclaimed Hubbard, whirling on his heel, and taking in the
situation with a glance, while Abner's face was expressive of equal
consternation.

The local authorities had been so quiet the day before, that no
interference on their part had been thought of.

But here in a body came the five selectmen, cane in hand, headed by
Jahleel Woodbridge, wearing his most awful frown, and looking like the
embodied majesty of law. The actions and attitudes of the crowd were
like those of scholars interrupted by the entrance of the master in
the midst of a scene of uproar. Those nearest the corners of the tavern
promptly slunk behind it. Obadiah slipped around to the further side of
the buttonwood tree before the tavern. There was a general movement in
the body of the crowd, caused by the effort of each individual to slip
quietly behind somebody else, while from the edges, men began to sneak
homewards across the green, at a rate, which, had the warning been a
little longer, would have left no assemblage at all by the time the
selectmen arrived on the spot. Those who could not find shelter behind
their fellows, and could not escape save by a dead run, pulled their
hats over their eyes and looked on the ground, slyly dropping their
cudgels, meanwhile, in the grass. There was not a gun to be seen.

With his head thrown back in the stiffest possible manner, his lips
pursed out, and throwing glances like lashes right and left, Woodbridge,
followed by the other selectmen, passed through the midst of the people,
until he reached the stone step before the tavern door. He stepped up
on this, and ere he opened his lips, swept the shame-faced assemblage
before him with a withering glance. What with those who had pulled their
hats over their eyes, and those who had turned their backs to him in
anxiety to avoid identification, there was not an eye that met his.
Abner himself, brave as a lion with his own class, was no braver than
any one of them when it came to encountering one of the superior caste,
to which he, and his ancestors before him, had looked up as their rulers
and leaders by prescription. And so it must be written of even Abner,
that he had somehow managed to get the trunk of the buttonwood tree,
which sheltered Obadiah, between a part at least of his own enormous
bulk, and Squire Woodbridge's eye. Paul Hubbard's bitter hatred of
gentlemen, so far stood him in stead of courage, that it would not let
him hide himself. He stood in plain view, but with his face half averted
from Woodbridge, while his lip curled in bitter scorn of his own craven
spirit. For it must be remembered that I am writing not of the American
farmer and laborer of this democratic age, but of men who were separated
but by a generation or two from the peasant serfs of England, and who
under the stern and repressive rule of the untitled aristocracy of
the colonies, had enjoyed little opportunity for outgrowing inherited
instincts of servility.

And now it was that Perez Hamlin, who had been all this while within the
tavern, his attention attracted by the sudden silence which had fallen
on the people without, stepped to the door, appearing on the threshold
just above Squire Woodbridge's head and a little to one side of him. At
a glance he saw the way things were going. Already half demoralized by
the mere presence and glance of the magnates, a dozen threatening
words from the opening lips of Woodbridge would suffice to send these
incipient rebels, like whipped curs, to their homes. He thought of Reub,
and for a moment his heart was filled with grief and terror. Then he had
an inspiration.

In the crowd was one known as Little Pete, a German drummer of
Reidesel's Hessian corps, captured with Burgoyne's army. Brought to
Stockbridge and quartered there as a prisoner he had continued to live
in the town since the war. Abner had somewhere procured an old drum for
Pete, and with this hung about his neck, the sticks in his hands, he
now stood not ten feet away from the tavern door. He spoke but little
English, and, being a foreigner, had none of that awe for the selectmen,
alike in their personal and official characters, which unnerved the
village folk. Left isolated by the falling back of the people around
him, Pete was now staring at these dignitaries in stolid indifference.
They did not wear uniforms, and Pete had never learned to respect or
fear anything not in uniform.

Having first brought the people before him, to the fitting preliminary
stage of demoralization, by the power of his eye, Woodbridge said in
stern, authoritative tones, the more effective for being low pitched,

"You may well"----

That was as far, however, as he got. With the first sound of his voice,
Perez stepped down beside him. Drawing his sword, which he had put on
that morning, he waved it with a commanding gesture, and looking at
little Pete, said with a quick, imperious accent:

"Drum!"

If a man in an officer's uniform, with a shining piece of steel in his
hand, should order Pete to jump into the mouth of a cannon, he would no
more think of hesitating, than the cannon itself of refusing to go off
when the linstock was pulled. Without the change of a muscle in his
heavy face, he raised the drumsticks and brought them down on the
sheepskin.

And instantly the roll of the drum deafened the ears of the people,
utterly drowning the imperious tones of the selectman, and growing
louder and swifter from moment to moment, as the long unused wrists of
the drummer recalled their former cunning.

Woodbridge spoke yet a few words without being able to hear himself.
Then, his smooth, fleshy face purple with rage, he wheeled and glared at
Hamlin. It did not need the drum to silence him now. He was so overcome
with amazement and passion that he could not have articulated a word.
But if he thought to face down the man by his side, he was mistaken. At
least a head taller than Woodbridge, Perez turned and looked down into
the congested eyes of the other with cool, careless, defiance.

And how about the people who looked on? The confident, decisive tone of
Hamlin's order to the drummer, the bold gesture that enforced it, the
fearless contempt for the village great man, which it implied, the
unflinching look with which he met his wrathful gaze, and accompanying
all these, the electrifying roll of the drum with its martial
suggestions, had acted like magic on the crowd. Those who had slunk
away came running back. Muskets rose to shoulders, sticks were again
brandished, and the eyes of the people, a moment ago averted and
downcast, rose defiantly. On every face there was a broad grin of
