terrible life; in every wood was heard the axe felling logs for the
ships; from every anvil flew the sparks from the hammer, as iron took
shape into helmet and sword.  All things seemed to favour the Church's
chosen one.  Conan, Count of Bretagne, sent to claim the Duchy of
Normandy, as legitimate heir.  A few days afterwards, Conan died,
poisoned (as had died his father before him) by the mouth of his horn
and the web of his gloves.  And the new Count of Bretagne sent his
sons to take part against Harold.

All the armament mustered at the roadstead of St. Valery, at the mouth
of the Somme.  But the winds were long hostile, and the rains fell in
torrents.




CHAPTER XI.


And now, while war thus hungered for England at the mouth of the
Somme, the last and most renowned of the sea-kings, Harold Hardrada,
entered his galley, the tallest and strongest of a fleet of three
hundred sail, that peopled the seas round Solundir.  And a man named
Gyrdir, on board the King's ship, dreamed a dream [239].  He saw a
great witch-wife standing on an isle of the Sulen, with a fork in one
hand and a trough in the other [240].  He saw her pass over the whole
fleet;--by each of the three hundred ships he saw her; and a fowl sat
on the stern of each ship, and that fowl was a raven; and he heard the
witch-wife sing this song:

    "From the East I allure him,
     At the West I secure him;
     In the feast I foresee
     Rare the relics for me;
       Red the drink, white the bones.

     The ravens sit greeding,
     And watching, and heeding;
     Thoro' wind, over water,
     Comes scent of the slaughter,
     And ravens sit greeding
       Their share of the bones.

     Thoro' wind, thoro' weather,
     We're sailing together;
     I sail with the ravens;
     I watch with the ravens;
     I snatch from the ravens
       My share of the bones."

There was also a man called Thord [241], in a ship that lay near the
King's; and he too dreamed a dream.  He saw the fleet nearing land,
and that land was England.  And on the land was a battle-array two-
fold, and many banners were flapping on both sides.  And before the
army of the landfolk was riding a huge witch-wife upon a wolf; the
wolf had a man's carcase in his mouth, and the blood was dripping and
dropping from his jaws; and when the wolf had eaten up that carcase,
the witch-wife threw another into his jaws; and so, one after another;
and the wolf cranched and swallowed them all.  And the witch-wife sang
this song:

    "The green waving fields
       Are hidden behind
     The flash of the shields,
       And the rush of the banners
         That toss in the wind.

     But Skade's eagle eyes
       Pierce the wall of the steel,
     And behold from the skies
       What the earth would conceal;
     O'er the rush of the banners
       She poises her wing,
     And marks with a shadow
       The brow of the King.

     And, in bode of his doom,
     Jaw of Wolf, be the tomb
     Of the bones and the flesh,
     Gore-bedabbled and fresh,
     That cranch and that drip
     Under fang and from lip.
     As I ride in the van
     Of the feasters on man,
       With the King!

     Grim wolf, sate my maw,
       Full enow shall there be.
     Hairy jaw, hungry maw,
       Both for ye and for me!

     Meaner food be the feast
     Of the fowl and the beast;
     But the witch, for her share,
     Takes the best of the fare
     And the witch shall be fed
     With the king of the dead,
     When she rides in the van
     Of the slayers of man,
       With the King."

And King Harold dreamed a dream.  And he saw before him his brother,
St. Olave.  And the dead, to the Scald-King sang this song:

    "Bold as thou in the fight,
       Blithe as thou in the hall,
     Shone the noon of my might,
       Ere the night of my fall!

     How humble is death,
       And how haughty is life;
     And how fleeting the breath
       Between slumber and strife!

     All the earth is too narrow,
       O life, for thy tread!
     Two strides o'er the barrow
       Can measure the dead.

     Yet mighty that space is
       Which seemeth so small;
     The realm of all races,
       With room for them all!"

But Harold Hardrada scorned witch-wife and dream; and his fleets
sailed on.  Tostig joined him off the Orkney Isles, and this great
armament soon came in sight of the shores of England.  They landed at
Cleveland [242], and at the dread of the terrible Norsemen, the
coastmen fled or submitted.  With booty and plunder they sailed on to
Scarborough, but there the townsfolk were brave, and the walls were
strong.

The Norsemen ascended a hill above the town, lit a huge pile of wood,
and tossed the burning piles down on the roofs.  House after house
caught the flame, and through the glare and the crash rushed the men
of Hardrada.  Great was the slaughter, and ample the plunder; and the
town, awed and depeopled, submitted to flame and to sword.

Then the fleet sailed up the Humber and Ouse, and landed at Richall,
not far from York; but Morcar, the Earl of Northumbria, came out with
all his forces,--all the stout men and tall of the great race of the
Anglo-Dane.

Then Hardrada advanced his flag, called Land-Eyda, the "Ravager of the
World," [243] and, chaunting a war-stave,--led his men to the
onslaught.

The battle was fierce, but short.  The English troops were defeated,
they fled into York; and the Ravager of the World was borne in triumph
to the gates of the town.  An exiled chief, however tyrannous and
hateful, hath ever some friends among the desperate and lawless; and
success ever finds allies among the weak and the craven,--so many
Northumbrians now came to the side of Tostig.  Dissension and mutiny
broke out amidst the garrison within; Morcar, unable to control the
townsfolk, was driven forth with those still true to their country and
King, and York agreed to open its gates to the conquering invader.

At the news of this foe on the north side of the land, King Harold was
compelled to withdraw all the forces at watch in the south against the
tardy invasion of William.  It was the middle of September; eight
months had elapsed since the Norman had launched forth his vaunting
threat.  Would he now dare to come?--Come or not, that foe was afar,
and this was in the heart of the country!

Now, York having thus capitulated, all the land round was humbled and
awed; and Hardrada and Tostig were blithe and gay; and many days,
thought they, must pass ere Harold the King can come from the south to
the north.  The camp of the Norsemen was at Standford Bridge, and that
day it was settled that they should formally enter York.  Their ships
lay in the river beyond; a large portion of the armament was with the
ships.  The day was warm, and the men with Hardrada had laid aside
their heavy mail and were "making merry," talking of the plunder of
York, jeering at Saxon valour, and gloating over thoughts of the Saxon
maids, whom Saxon men had failed to protect,--when suddenly between
them and the town rose and rolled a great cloud of dust. High it rose,
and fast it rolled, and from the heart of the cloud shone the spear
and the shield.

"What army comes yonder?" said Harold Hardrada.

"Surely," answered Tostig, "it comes from the town that we are to
enter as conquerors, and can be but the friendly Northumbrians who
have deserted Morcar for me."

Nearer and nearer came the force, and the shine of the arms was like
the glancing of ice.

"Advance the World-Ravager!" cried Harold Hardrada, "draw up, and to
arms!"

Then, picking out three of his briskest youths, he despatched them to
the force on the river with orders to come up quick to the aid.  For
already, through the cloud and amidst the spears, was seen the flag of
the English King.  On the previous night King Harold had entered York,
unknown to the invaders--appeased the mutiny--cheered the townsfolks;
and now came like a thunderbolt borne by the winds, to clear the air
of England from the clouds of the North.

Both armaments drew up in haste, and Hardrada formed his array in the
form of a circle,--the line long but not deep, the wings curving round
till they met [244], shield to shield.  Those who stood in the first
rank set their spear shafts on the ground, the points level with the
breast of a horseman; those in the second, with spears yet lower,
level with the breast of a horse; thus forming a double palisade
against the charge of cavalry.  In the centre of this circle was
placed the Ravager of the World, and round it a rampart of shields.
Behind that rampart was the accustomed post at the onset of battle for
the King and his body-guard.  But Tostig was in front, with his own
Northumbrian lion banner, and his chosen men.

While this army was thus being formed, the English King was
marshalling his force in the far more formidable tactics, which his
military science had perfected from the warfare of the Danes.  That
form of battalion, invincible hitherto under his leadership, was in
the manner of a wedge or triangle.  So that, in attack, the men
marched on the foe presenting the smallest possible surface to the
missives, and in defence, all three lines faced the assailants.  King
Harold cast his eye over the closing lines, and then, turning to
Gurth, who rode by his side, said:

"Take one man from yon hostile army, and with what joy should we
charge on the Northmen!"

"I conceive thee," answered Gurth, mournfully, "and the same thought
of that one man makes my arm feel palsied."

The King mused, and drew down the nasal bar of his helmet.

"Thegns," said he suddenly, to the score of riders who grouped round
him, "follow."  And shaking the rein of his horse, King Harold rode
straight to that part of the hostile front from which rose, above the
spears, the Northumbrian banner of Tostig.  Wondering, but mute, the
twenty thegns followed him.  Before the grim array, and hard by
Tostig's banner, the King checked his steed and cried:

"Is Tostig, the son of Godwin and Githa, by the flag of the
Northumbrian earldom?"

With his helmet raised, and his Norwegian mantle flowing over his
