"And what propose you to yourself and to the kingdom in all this,
Master Adam?" asked Edward, curiously bending his tall person over the
tortured iron.

"I propose to make Nature the labourer of man," answered Warner.
"When I was a child of some eight years old, I observed that water
swelleth into vapour when fire is applied to it.  Twelve years
afterwards, at the age of twenty, I observed that while undergoing
this change it exerts a mighty mechanical force.  At twenty-five,
constantly musing, I said, 'Why should not that force become subject
to man's art?'  I then began the first rude model, of which this is
the descendant.  I noticed that the vapour so produced is elastic,--
that is, that as it expands, it presses against what opposes it; it
has a force applicable everywhere force is needed by man's labour.
Behold a second agency of gigantic resources!  And then, still
studying this, I perceived that the vapour thus produced can be
reconverted into water, shrinking necessarily, while so retransformed,
from the space it filled as vapour, and leaving that space a vacuum.
But Nature abhors a vacuum; produce a vacuum, and the bodies that
surround rush into it.  Thus, the vapour again, while changing back
into water, becomes also a force,--our agent.  And all the while these
truths were shaping themselves to my mind, I was devising and
improving also the material form by which I might render them useful
to man; so at last, out of these truths, arose this invention!"

"Pardie," said Edward, with the haste natural to royalty, "what in
common there can be between thy jargon of smoke and water and this
huge ugliness of iron passeth all understanding.  But spare us thy
speeches, and on to thy puppet-show."

Adam stared a moment at the king in the surprise that one full of his
subject feels when he sees it impossible to make another understand
it, sighed, shook his head, and prepared to begin.

"Observe," he said, "that there is no juggling, no deceit.  I will
place in this deposit this small lump of brass--would the size of this
toy would admit of larger experiment!  I will then pray ye to note, as
I open door after door, how the metal passes through various changes,
all operated by this one agency of vapour.  Heed and attend.  And if
the crowning work please thee, think, great king, what such an agency
upon the large scale would be to thee; think how it would multiply all
arts and lessen all labour; think that thou hast, in this, achieved
for a whole people the true philosopher's stone.  Now note!"

He placed the rough ore in its receptacle, and suddenly it seemed
seized by a vice within, and vanished.  He proceeded then, while
dexterously attending to the complex movements, to open door after
door, to show the astonished spectators the rapid transitions the
metal underwent, and suddenly, in the midst of his pride, he stopped
short, for, like a lightning-flash, came across his mind the
remembrance of the fatal papers.  Within the next door he was to open,
they lay concealed.  His change of countenance did not escape Richard,
and he noted the door which Adam forbore to open, as the student
hurriedly, and with some presence of mind, passed to the next, in
which the metal was shortly to appear.

"Open this door," said the prince, pointing to the handle.  "No!
forbear!  There is danger! forbear!" exclaimed the mechanician.

"Danger to thine own neck, varlet and impostor!" exclaimed the duke;
and he was about himself to open the door, when suddenly a loud roar,
a terrific explosion was heard.  Alas! Adam Warner had not yet
discovered for his engine what we now call the safety-valve.  The
steam contained in the miniature boiler had acquired an undue
pressure; Adam's attention had been too much engrossed to notice the
signs of the growing increase, and the rest may be easily conceived.
Nothing could equal the stupor and the horror of the spectators at
this explosion, save only the boy-duke, who remained immovable, and
still frowning.  All rushed to the door, huddling one on the other,
scarcely knowing what next was to befall them, but certain that the
wizard was bent upon their destruction.  Edward was the first to
recover himself; and seeing that no lives were lost, his first impulse
was that of ungovernable rage.

"Foul traitor!" he exclaimed, "was it for this that thou hast
pretended to beguile us with thy damnable sorceries?  Seize him!  Away
to the Tower Hill! and let the priest patter an ave while the doomsman
knots the rope."

Not a hand stirred; even Catesby would as lief have touched the king's
lion before meals, as that poor mechanician, standing aghast, and
unheeding all, beside his mutilated engine.

"Master Nevile," said the king, sternly, "dost thou hear us?

"Verily," muttered the Nevile, approaching very slowly, "I knew what
would happen; but to lay hands on my host, an' he were fifty times a
wizard--No!  My liege," he said in a firm tone, but falling on his
knee, and his gallant countenance pale with generous terror, "my
liege, forgive me.  This man succoured me when struck down and wounded
by a Lancastrian ruffian; this man gave me shelter, food, and healing.
Command me not, O gracious my lord, to aid in taking the life of one
to whom I owe my own."

"His life!" exclaimed the Duchess of Bedford,--"the life of this most
illustrious person!  Sire, you do not dream it!"

"Heh! by the saints, what now?" cried the king, whose choler, though
fierce and ruthless, was as short-lived as the passions of the
indolent usually are, and whom the earnest interposition of his
mother-in-law much surprised and diverted.  "If, fair belle-mere, thou
thinkest it so illustrious a deed to frighten us out of our mortal
senses, and narrowly to 'scape sending us across the river like a bevy
of balls from a bombard, there is no disputing of tastes.  Rise up,
Master Nevile, we esteem thee not less for thy boldness; ever be the
host and the benefactor revered by English gentlemen and Christian
youth.  Master Warner may go free."

Here Warner uttered so deep and hollow a groan, that it startled all
present.

"Twenty-five years of labour, and not to have seen this!" he
ejaculated.  "Twenty and five years, and all wasted!  How repair this
disaster?  O fatal day!"

"What says he?  What means he?" said Jacquetta.

"Come home!--home!" said Marmaduke, approaching the philosopher, in
great alarm lest he should once more jeopardize his life.  But Adam,
shaking him off, began eagerly, and with tremulous hands, to examine
the machine, and not perceiving any mode by which to guard in future
against a danger that he saw at once would, if not removed, render his
invention useless, tottered to a chair and covered his face with his
hands.

"He seemeth mightily grieved that our bones are still whole!" muttered
Edward.  "And why, belle-mere mine, wouldst thou protect this pleasant
tregetour?"

"What!" said the duchess, "see you not that a man capable of such
devices must be of doughty service against our foes?"

"Not I.  How?"

"Why, if merely to signify his displeasure at our young Richard's
over-curious meddling, he can cause this strange engine to shake the
walls,--nay, to destroy itself,--think what he might do were his power
and malice at our disposing.  I know something of these nigromancers."

"And would you knew less! for already the commons murmur at your
favour to them.  But be it as you will.  And now--ho, there! let our
steeds be caparisoned."

"You forget, sire," said Richard, who had hitherto silently watched
the various parties, "the object for which we summoned this worthy
man.  Please you now, sir, to open that door."

"No, no!" exclaimed the king, hastily, "I will have no more provoking
the foul fiend; conspirator or not, I have had enough of Master
Warner.  Pah!  My poor placard is turned lampblack.  Sweet mother-in-
law, take him under thy protection; and Richard, come with me."

So saying, the king linked his arm in that of the reluctant
Gloucester, and quitted the room.  The duchess then ordered the rest
also to depart, and was left alone with the crest-fallen philosopher.




CHAPTER VII.

MY LADY DUCHESS'S OPINION OF THE UTILITY OF MASTER WARNER'S INVENTION,
AND HER ESTEEM FOR ITS--EXPLOSION.

Adam, utterly unheeding, or rather deaf to, the discussion that had
taken place, and his narrow escape from cord and gibbet, lifted his
head peevishly from his bosom, as the duchess rested her hand almost
caressingly on his shoulder, and thus addressed him,--

"Most puissant Sir, think not that I am one of those who, in their
ignorance and folly, slight the mysteries of which thou art clearly so
great a master.  When I heard thee speak of subjecting Nature to Man,
I at once comprehended thee, and blushed for the dulness of my
kindred."

"Ah, lady, thou hast studied, then, the mathematics.  Alack! this is a
grievous blow; but it is no inherent fault in the device.  I am
clearly of mind that it can be remedied.  But oh! what time, what
thought, what sleepless nights, what gold will be needed!"

"Give me thy sleepless nights and thy grand thoughts, and thou shalt
not want gold."

"Lady," cried Adam, starting to his feet, "do I hear aright?  Art
thou, in truth, the patron I have so long dreamed of?  Hast thou the
brain and the heart to aid the pursuits of science?"

"Ay! and the power to protect the students!  Sage, I am the Duchess of
Bedford, whom men accuse of witchcraft,--as thee of wizardy.  From the
wife of a private gentleman, I have become the mother of a queen.  I
stand amidst a court full of foes; I desire gold to corrupt, and
wisdom to guard against, and means to destroy them.  And I seek all
these in men like thee!"

Adam turned on her his bewildered eyes, and made no answer.

"They tell me," said the duchess, "that Henry of Windsor employed
learned men to transmute the baser metals into gold.  Wert thou one of
them?"

"No."

"Thou knowest that art?"

"I studied it in my youth, but the ingredients of the crucible were
too costly."

"Thou shalt not lack them with me.  Thou knowest the lore of the
stars, and canst foretell the designs of enemies,--the hour whether to
act or to forbear?"

"Astrology I have studied, but that also was in youth; for there
dwelleth in the pure mathematics that have led me to this invention--"

"Truce with that invention, whatever it be; think of it no more,--it
has served its end in the explosion, which proved thy power of
mischief.  High objects are now before thee.  Wilt thou be of my
household, one of my alchemists and astrologers?  Thou shalt have
leisure, honour, and all the moneys thou canst need."

"Moneys!" said Adam, eagerly, and casting his eyes upon the mangled
model.  "Well, I agree; what you will,--alchemist, astrologist,
wizard,--what you will.  This shall all be repaired,--all; I begin to
see now, all!  I begin to see; yes, if a pipe by which the too-
excessive vapour could--ay, ay!--right, right," and he rubbed his
hands.

Jacquetta was struck with his enthusiasm.  "But surely, Master Warner,
this has some virtue you have not vouchsafed to explain; confide in
me, can it change iron to gold?"

"No; but--"

"Can it predict the future?"

"No; but--"

"Can it prolong life?"

"No; but--"

"Then, in God's name let us waste no more time about it!" said the
duchess, impatiently,--"your art is mine now.  Ho, there!--I will send
my page to conduct thee to thy apartments, and thou shalt lodge next
to Friar Bungey, a man of wondrous lere, Master Warner, and a worthy
confrere in thy researches.  Hast thou any one of kith and kin at home
to whom thou wilt announce thy advancement?"

"Ah, lady!  Heaven forgive me, I have a daughter,--an only child,--my
Sibyll; I cannot leave her alone, and--"

"Well, nothing should distract thy cares from thine art,--she shall be
sent for.  I will rank her amongst my maidens.  Fare-thee-well, Master
Warner!  At night I will send for thee, and appoint the tasks I would
have thee accomplish."

So saying, the duchess quitted the room, and left Adam alone, bending
over his model in deep revery.

From this absorption it was the poor man's fate to be again aroused.

The peculiar character of the boy-prince of Gloucester was that of one
who, having once seized upon an object, never willingly relinquished
it.  First, he crept and slid and coiled round it as the snake.  But
if craft failed, his passion, roused by resistance, sprang at his prey
with a lion's leap: and whoever examines the career of this
extraordinary personage, will perceive, that whatever might be his
habitual hypocrisy, he seemed to lose sight of it wholly when once
resolved upon force.  Then the naked ferocity with which the
destructive propensity swept away the objects in his path becomes
fearfully and startlingly apparent, and offers a strange contrast to
the wily duplicity with which, in calmer moments, he seems to have
sought to coax the victim into his folds.  Firmly convinced that
Adam's engine had been made the medium of dangerous and treasonable
correspondence with the royal prisoner, and of that suspicious,
restless, feverish temperament which never slept when a fear was
wakened, a doubt conceived, he had broke from his brother, whose more
open valour and less unquiet intellect were ever willing to leave the
crown defended but by the gibbet for the detected traitor, the sword
for the declared foe; and obtaining Edward's permission "to inquire
further into these strange matters," he sent at once for the porter
who had conveyed the model to the Tower; but that suspicious
accomplice was gone.  The sound of the explosion of the engine had no
less startled the guard below than the spectators above.  Releasing
their hold of their prisoner, they had some taken fairly to their
heels, others rushed into the palace to learn what mischief had
ensued; and Hugh, with the quick discretion of his north country, had
