object! for the shadowy and the spiritual one is immortal,--until,
indeed, it be possessed!

It might be, perhaps, with a resolute desire to conquer the new love
and confirm the old that Hastings, one morning, repaired to the house
of the Lady Bonville, for her visit to the court had expired.  It was
a large mansion, without the Lud Gate.

He found the dame in a comely chamber, seated in the sole chair the
room contained, to which was attached a foot-board that served as a
dais, while around her, on low stools, sat some spinning, others
broidering--some ten or twelve young maidens of good family, sent to
receive their nurturing under the high-born Katherine, [And strange as
it may seem to modern notions, the highest lady who received such
pensioners accepted a befitting salary for their board and education.]
while two other and somewhat elder virgins sat a little apart, but
close under the eye of the lady, practising the courtly game of
"prime:" for the diversion of cards was in its zenith of fashion under
Edward IV., and even half a century later was considered one of the
essential accomplishments of a well-educated young lady.  [So the
Princess Margaret, daughter of Henry VIL, at the age of fourteen,
exhibits her skill, in prime or trump, to her betrothed husband, James
IV. of Scotland; so, among the womanly arts of the unhappy Katherine
of Arragon, it is mentioned that she could play at "cards and dyce."
(See Strutt: Games and Pastimes, Hones' edition, p. 327.)  The
legislature was very anxious to keep these games sacred to the
aristocracy, and very wroth with 'prentices and the vulgar for
imitating the ruinous amusements of their betters.]  The exceeding
stiffness, the solemn silence of this female circle, but little
accorded with the mood of the graceful visitor.  The demoiselles
stirred not at his entrance, and Katherine quietly motioned him to a
seat at some distance.

"By your leave, fair lady," said Hastings, "I rebel against so distant
an exile from such sweet company;" and he moved the tabouret close to
the formidable chair of the presiding chieftainess.

Katherine smiled faintly, but not in displeasure.

"So gay a presence," she said, "must, I fear me, a little disturb
these learners."

Hastings glanced at the prim demureness written on each blooming
visage, and replied,--

"You wrong their ardour in such noble studies.  I would wager that
nothing less than my entering your bower on horseback, with helm on
head and lance in rest, could provoke even a smile from one pair of
the twenty rosy lips round which, methinks, I behold Cupido hovering
in vain!"

The baroness bent her stately brows, and the twenty rosy lips were all
tightly pursed up, to prevent the indecorous exhibition which the
wicked courtier had provoked.  But it would not do: one and all the
twenty lips broke into a smile,--but a smile so tortured, constrained,
and nipped in the bud, that it only gave an expression of pain to the
features it was forbidden to enliven.

"And what brings the Lord Hastings hither?" asked the baroness, in a
formal tone.

"Can you never allow for motive the desire of pleasure, fair dame?"

That peculiar and exquisite blush, which at moments changed the whole
physiognomy of Katherine, flitted across her smooth cheek, and
vanished.  She said gravely,--

"So much do I allow it in you, my lord, that hence my question."

"Katherine!" exclaimed Hastings, in a voice of tender reproach, and
attempting to seize her hand, forgetful of all other presence save
that to which the blush, that spoke of old, gave back the ancient
charm.

Katherine cast a hurried and startled glance over the maiden group,
and her eye detected on the automaton faces one common expression of
surprise.  Humbled and deeply displeased, she rose from the awful
chair, and then, as suddenly reseating herself, she said, with a voice
and lip of the most cutting irony, "My lord chamberlain is, it seems,
so habituated to lackey his king amidst the goldsmiths and grocers,
that he forgets the form of language and respect of bearing which a
noblewoman of repute is accustomed to consider seemly."

Hastings bit his lip, and his falcon eye shot indignant fire.

"Pardon, my Lady of Bonville and Harrington, I did indeed forget what
reasons the dame of so wise and so renowned a lord hath to feel pride
in the titles she hath won.  But I see that my visit hath chanced out
of season.  My business, in truth, was rather with my lord, whose
counsel in peace is as famous as his truncheon in war!"

"It is enough," replied Katherine, with a dignity that rebuked the
taunt, "that Lord Bonville has the name of an honest man,--who never
rose at court."

"Woman, without one soft woman-feeling!" muttered Hastings, between
his ground teeth, as he approached the lady and made his profound
obeisance.  The words were intended only for Katherine's ear, and they
reached it.  Her bosom swelled beneath the brocaded gorget, and when
the door closed on Hastings, she pressed her hands convulsively
together, and her dark eyes were raised upward.

"My child, thou art entangling thy skein," said the lady of Bonville,
as she passed one of the maidens, towards the casement, which she
opened,--"the air to-day weighs heavily!"




CHAPTER VI.

JOY FOR ADAM, AND HOPE FOR SIBYLL--AND POPULAR FRIAR BUNGEY!

Leaping on his palfrey, Hastings rode back to the Tower, dismounted at
the gate, passed on to the little postern in the inner court, and
paused not till he was in Warner's room.  "How now, friend Adam?  Thou
art idle."

"Lord Hastings, I am ill."

"And thy child not with thee?"

"She is gone to her grace the duchess, to pray her to grant me leave
to go home, and waste no more life on making gold."

"Home!  Go hence!  We cannot hear it!  The duchess must not grant it.
I will not suffer the king to lose so learned a philosopher."

"Then pray the king to let the philosopher achieve that which is in
the power of labour."  He pointed to the Eureka.  "Let me be heard in
the king's council, and prove to sufficing judges what this iron can
do for England."

"Is that all?  So be it.  I will speak to his highness forthwith.  But
promise that thou wilt think no more of leaving the king's palace."

"Oh, no, no!  If I may enter again into mine own palace, mine own
royalty of craft and hope, the court or the dungeon all one to me!"

"Father," said Sibyll, entering, "be comforted.  The duchess forbids
thy departure, but we will yet flee--"  She stopped short as she saw
Hastings.  He approached her timidly, and with so repentant, so
earnest a respect in his mien and gesture, that she had not the heart
to draw back the fair hand he lifted to his lips.

"No, flee not, sweet donzell; leave not the desert court, without the
flower and the laurel, the beauty and the wisdom, that scent the hour,
and foretype eternity.  I have conferred with thy father,--I will
obtain his prayer from the king.  His mind shall be free to follow its
own impulse, and thou"--he whispered--"pardon--pardon an offence of
too much love.  Never shall it wound again."

Her eyes, swimming with delicious tears, were fixed upon the floor.
Poor child! with so much love, how could she cherish anger?  With so
much purity, how distrust herself?  And while, at least, he spoke, the
dangerous lover was sincere.  So from that hour peace was renewed
between Sibyll and Lord Hastings.--Fatal peace! alas for the girl who
loves--and has no mother!

True to his word, the courtier braved the displeasure of the Duchess
of Bedford, in inducing the king to consider the expediency of
permitting Adam to relinquish alchemy, and repair his model.  Edward
summoned a deputation from the London merchants and traders, before
whom Adam appeared and explained his device.  But these practical men
at first ridiculed the notion as a madman's fancy, and it required all
the art of Hastings to overcome their contempt, and appeal to the
native acuteness of the king.  Edward, however, was only caught by
Adam's incidental allusions to the application of his principle to
ships.  The merchant-king suddenly roused himself to attention, when
it was promised to him that his galleys should cross the seas without
sail, and against wind and tide.

"By Saint George!" said he, then, "let the honest man have his whim.
Mend thy model, and every saint in the calendar speed thee!  Master
Heyford, tell thy comely wife that I and Hastings will sup with her
to-morrow, for her hippocras is a rare dainty.  Good day to you,
worshipful my masters.  Hastings, come hither; enough of these
trifles,--I must confer with thee on matters really pressing,--this
damnable marriage of gentle George's!"

And now Adam Warner was restored to his native element of thought; now
the crucible was at rest, and the Eureka began to rise from its ruins.
He knew not the hate that he had acquired in the permission he had
gained; for the London deputies, on their return home, talked of
nothing else for a whole week but the favour the king had shown to a
strange man, half-maniac, half-conjuror, who had undertaken to devise
a something which would throw all the artisans and journeymen out of
work!  From merchant to mechanic travelled the news, and many an
honest man cursed the great scholar, as he looked at his young
children, and wished to have one good blow at the head that was
hatching such devilish malice against the poor!  The name of Adam
Warner became a byword of scorn and horror.  Nothing less than the
deep ditch and strong walls of the Tower could have saved him from the
popular indignation; and these prejudices were skilfully fed by the
jealous enmity of his fellow-student, the terrible Friar Bungey.  This
