her trust; and her love in both was so evident, so deep, so
exquisitely contrasting the cold and frivolous natures amidst which
his lot had fallen, that he recoiled from casting away forever a heart
never to be replaced.  Standing on that bridge of life, with age
before and youth behind, he felt that never again could he be so
loved, or, if so loved by one so worthy of whatever of pure affection,
of young romance, was yet left to his melancholy and lonely soul.

He took her hand, and, as she felt its touch, her firmness forsook
her, her head drooped upon her bosom, and she burst into an agony of
tears.

"Oh, Sibyll, forgive me!  Smile on me again, Sibyll!" exclaimed
Hastings, subdued and melted.  But, alas! the heart once bruised and
galled recovers itself but slowly, and it was many minutes before the
softest words the eloquent lover could shape to sound sufficed to dry
those burning tears, and bring back the enchanting smile,--nay, even
then the smile was forced and joyless.  They walked on for some
moments, both in thought, till Hastings said: "Thou lovest me, Sibyll,
and art worthy of all the love that man can feel for maid; and yet,
canst thou solve me this question, nor chide me that I ask it, Dost
thou not love the world and the world's judgments more than me?  What
is that which women call honour?  What makes them shrink from all love
that takes not the form and circumstance of the world's hollow rites?
Does love cease to be love, unless over its wealth of trust and
emotion the priest mouths his empty blessing?  Thou in thy graceful
pride art angered if I, in wedding thee, should remember the sacrifice
which men like me--I own it fairly--deem as great as man can make; and
yet thou wouldst fly my love if it wooed thee to a sacrifice of thine
own."

Artfully was the question put, and Hastings smiled to himself in
imagining the reply it must bring; and then Sibyll answered, with the
blush which the very subject called forth,

"Alas, my lord, I am but a poor casuist, but I feel that if I asked
thee to forfeit whatever men respect,--honour and repute for valour,
to be traitor and dastard,--thou couldst love me no more; and marvel
you if, when man woos woman to forfeit all that her sex holds
highest,--to be in woman what dastard and traitor is in man,--she
hears her conscience and her God speak in a louder voice than can come
from a human lip?  The goods and pomps of the world we are free to
sacrifice, and true love heeds and counts them not; but true love
cannot sacrifice that which makes up love,--it cannot sacrifice the
right to be loved below; the hope to love on in the realm above; the
power to pray with a pure soul for the happiness it yearns to make;
the blessing to seem ever good and honoured in the eyes of the one by
whom alone it would be judged.  And therefore, sweet lord, true love
never contemplates this sacrifice; and if once it believes itself
truly loved, it trusts with a fearless faith in the love on which it
leans."

"Sibyll, would to Heaven I had seen thee in my youth!  Would to Heaven
I were more worthy of thee!" And in that interview Hastings had no
heart to utter what he had resolved, "Sibyll, I sought thee but to say
Farewell."




CHAPTER VI.

WARWICK RETURNS--APPEASES A DISCONTENTED PRINCE--AND CONFERS WITH A
REVENGEFUL CONSPIRATOR.

It was not till late in the evening that Warwick arrived at his vast
residence in London, where he found not only Marmaduke Nevile ready to
receive him, but a more august expectant, in George Duke of Clarence.
Scarcely had the earl crossed the threshold, when the duke seized his
arm, and leading him into the room that adjoined the hall, said,--

"Verily, Edward is besotted no less than ever by his wife's leech-like
family.  Thou knowest my appointment to the government of Ireland;
Isabel, like myself, cannot endure the subordinate vassalage we must
brook at the court, with the queen's cold looks and sour words.  Thou
knowest, also, with what vain pretexts Edward has put me of; and now,
this very day, he tells me that he hath changed his humour,--that I am
not stern enough for the Irish kernes; that he loves me too well to
banish me, forsooth; and that Worcester, the people's butcher but the
queen's favourite, must have the post so sacredly pledged to me.  I
see in this Elizabeth's crafty malice.  Is this struggle between
king's blood and queen's kith to go on forever?"

"Calm thyself, George; I will confer with the king tomorrow, and hope
to compass thy not too arrogant desire.  Certes, a king's brother is
the fittest vice-king for the turbulent kernes of Ireland, who are
ever flattered into obeisance by ceremony and show.  The government
was pledged to thee--Edward can scarcely be serious.  Moreover,
Worcester, though forsooth a learned man--Mort-Dieu! methinks that
same learning fills the head to drain the heart!--is so abhorred for
his cruelties that his very landing in Ireland will bring a new
rebellion to add to our already festering broils and sores.  Calm
thyself, I say.  Where didst thou leave Isabel?"

"With my mother."

"And Anne?--the queen chills not her young heart with cold grace?"

"Nay, the queen dare not unleash her malice against Edward's will;
and, to do him justice, he hath shown all honour to Lord Warwick's
daughter."

"He is a gallant prince, with all his faults," said the father,
heartily, "and we must bear with him, George; for verily he hath bound
men by a charm to love him.  Stay thou and share my hasty repast, and
over the wine we will talk of thy views.  Spare me now for a moment; I
have to prepare work eno' for a sleepless night.  This Lincolnshire
rebellion promises much trouble.  Lord Willoughby has joined it; more
than twenty thousand men are in arms.  I have already sent to convene
the knights and barons on whom the king can best depend, and must urge
their instant departure for their halls, to raise men and meet the
foe.  While Edward feasts, his minister must toil.  Tarry a while till
I return."  The earl re-entered the hall, and beckoned to Marmaduke,
who stood amongst a group of squires.

"Follow me; I may have work for thee."  Warwick took a taper from one
of the servitors, and led the way to his own more private apartment.
On the landing of the staircase, by a small door, stood his body-
squire--"Is the prisoner within?"

"Yes, my lord."

"Good!"--The earl opened the door by which the squire had mounted
guard, and bade Marmaduke wait without.

The inmate of the chamber, whose dress bore the stains of fresh travel
and hard riding, lifted his face hastily as the earl entered.

"Robin Hilyard," said Warwick, "I have mused much how to reconcile my
service to the king with the gratitude I owe to a man who saved me
from great danger.  In the midst of thy unhappy and rebellious designs
thou wert captured and brought to me; the papers found on thee attest
a Lancastrian revolt, so ripening towards a mighty gathering, and so
formidable from the adherents whom the gold and intrigues of King
Louis have persuaded to risk land and life for the Red Rose, that all
the king's friends can do to save his throne is now needed.  In this
revolt thou hast been the scheming brain, the master hand, the match
to the bombard, the fire brand to the flax.  Thou smilest, man!  Alas!
seest thou not that it is my stern duty to send thee bound hand and
foot before the king's council, for the brake to wring from thee thy
guilty secrets, and the gibbet to close thy days?"

"I am prepared," said Hilyard; "when the bombard explodes, the match
has become useless; when the flame smites the welkin, the firebrand is
consumed!"

"Bold man! what seest thou in this rebellion that can profit thee?"

"I see, looming through the chasms and rents made in the feudal order
by civil war, the giant image of a free people."

"And thou wouldst be a martyr for the multitude, who deserted thee at
Olney?"

"As thou for the king who dishonoured thee at Shene!"

Warwick frowned, and there was a moment's pause; at last, said the
earl: "Look you, Robin, I would fain not have on my hands the blood of
a man who saved my life.  I believe thee, though a fanatic and half
madman,--I believe thee true in word as rash of deed.  Swear to me on
the cross of this dagger that thou wilt lay aside all scheme and plot
for this rebellion, all aid and share in civil broil and dissension,
and thy life and liberty are restored to thee.  In that intent, I have
summoned my own kinsman, Marmaduke Nevile.  He waits without the door;
he shall conduct thee safely to the seashore; thou shalt gain in peace
my government of Calais, and my seneschal there shall find thee all
thou canst need,--meat for thy hunger and moneys for thy pastime.
Accept my mercy, take the oath, and begone."

"My lord," answered Hilyard, much touched and affected, "blame not
thyself if this carcass feed the crows--my blood be on mine own head!
I cannot take this oath; I cannot live in peace; strife and broil are
grown to me food and drink.  Oh, my lord! thou knowest not what dark
and baleful memories made me an agent in God's hand against this
ruthless Edward!" and then passionately, with whitening lips and
convulsive features, Hilyard recounted to the startled Warwick the
same tale which had roused the sympathy of Adam Warner.

The earl, whose affections were so essentially homely and domestic,
was even more shocked than the scholar by the fearful narrative.

"Unhappy man!" he said with moistened eyes, "from the core of my heart
I pity thee.  But thou, the scathed sufferer from civil war, wilt thou
be now its dread reviver?"

"If Edward had wronged thee, great earl, as me, poor franklin, what
would be thine answer?  In vain moralize to him whom the spectre of a
murdered child and the shriek of a maniac wife haunt and hound on to
vengeance!  So send me to rack and halter.  Be there one curse more on
the soul of Edward!"

"Thou shalt not die through my witness," said the earl, abruptly; and
he quitted the chamber.

Securing the door by a heavy bolt on the outside, he gave orders to
his squire to attend to the comforts of the prisoner; and then turning
into his closet with Marmaduke, said: "I sent for thee, young cousin,
with design to commit to thy charge one whose absence from England I
deemed needful--that design I must abandon.  Go back to the palace,
and see, if thou canst, the king before he sleeps; say that this
rising in Lincolnshire is more than a riot,--it is the first burst of
a revolution! that I hold council here to-night, and every shire, ere
the morrow, shall have its appointed captain.  I will see the king at
morning.  Yet stay--gain sight of my child Anne; she will leave the
court to-morrow.  I will come for her; bid her train be prepared; she
and the countess must away to Calais,--England again hath ceased to be
a home for women!  What to do with this poor rebel?" muttered the
earl, when alone; "release him I cannot; slay him I will not.  Hum,
there is space enough in these walls to inclose a captive."




CHAPTER VII.

THE FEAR AND THE FLIGHT.

King Edward feasted high, and Sibyll sat in her father's chamber,--she
silent with thought of love, Adam silent in the toils of science.  The
Eureka was well-nigh finished, rising from its ruins more perfect,
more elaborate, than before.  Maiden and scholar, each seeming near to
the cherished goal,--one to love's genial altar, the other to fame's
lonely shrine.

Evening advanced, night began, night deepened.  King Edward's feast
was over, but still in his perfumed chamber the wine sparkled in the
golden cup.  It was announced to him that Sir Marmaduke Nevile, just
arrived from the earl's house, craved an audience.  The king, pre-
occupied in deep revery, impatiently postponed it till the morrow.

"To-morrow," said the gentleman in attendance, "Sir Marmaduke bids me
say, fearful that the late hour would forbid his audience, that Lord
Warwick himself will visit your Grace.  I fear, sire, that the
disturbances are great indeed, for the squires and gentlemen in Lady
Anne's train have orders to accompany her to Calais to-morrow."

"To-morrow, to-morrow!" repeated the king--"well, sir, you are
dismissed."

The Lady Anne (to whom Sibyll had previously communicated the king's
kindly consideration for Master Warner) had just seen Marmaduke, and
learned the new dangers that awaited the throne and the realm.  The
Lancastrians were then openly in arms for the prince of her love, and
against her mighty father!
