Richard Nevile!" answered Warwick, in a stern whisper.

Edward paused, and at that moment Anthony himself emerged from his
tent (which adjoined the king's) in company with the Archbishop of
York, who had rode thither in Warwick's train.

"My liege," said that gallant knight, putting his knee to the ground,
"I have heard from the archbishop the new perils that await your
Highness, and I grieve sorely that, in this strait, your councillors
deem it meet to forbid me the glory of fighting or falling by your
side!  I know too well the unhappy odium attached to my House and name
in the northern parts, to dispute the policy which ordains my absence
from your armies.  Till these feuds are over, I crave your royal leave
to quit England, and perform my pilgrimage to the sainted shrine of
Compostella."

A burning flush passed over the king's face as he raised his brother-
in-law, and clasped him to his bosom.

"Go or stay, as you will, Anthony!" said he; "but let these proud men
know that neither time nor absence can tear you from your king's
heart.  But envy must have its hour Lord Warwick, I attend you; but it
seems rather as your prisoner than your liege."

Warwick made no answer: the king mounted, and waved his hand to
Anthony.  The torches tossed to and fro, the horns sounded, and in a
silence moody and resentful on either part Edward and his terrible
subject rode on to the towers of Warwick.

The next day the king beheld with astonishment the immense force that,
in a time so brief, the earl had collected round his standard.

From his casement, which commanded that lovely slope on which so many
a tourist now gazes with an eye that seeks to call back the stormy and
chivalric past, Edward beheld the earl on his renowned black charger,
reviewing the thousands that, file on file and rank on rank, lifted
pike and lance in the cloudless sun.

"After all," muttered the king, "I can never make a new noble a great
baron!  And if in peace a great baron overshadows the throne, in time
of war a great baron is a throne's bulwark!  Gramercy, I had been mad
to cast away such an army,--an army fit for a king to lead!  They
serve Warwick now; but Warwick is less skilful in the martial art than
I, and soldiers, like hounds, love best the most dexterous huntsman!"




CHAPTER VII.

HOW KING EDWARD ARRIVES AT THE CASTLE OF MIDDLEHAM.

On the ramparts of feudal Middleham, in the same place where Anne had
confessed to Isabel the romance of her childish love, again the
sisters stood, awaiting the coming of their father and the king.  They
had only, with their mother, reached Middleham two days before, and
the preceding night an advanced guard had arrived at the castle to
announce the approach of the earl with his royal comrade and visitor.
From the heights, already they beheld the long array winding in
glorious order towards the mighty pile.

"Look!" exclaimed Isabel, "look! already methinks I see the white
steed of Clarence.  Yes! it is he! it is my George, my husband!  The
banner borne before shows his device."

"Ah, happy Isabel!" said Anne, sighing; "what rapture to await the
coming of him one loves!"

"My sweet Anne," returned Isabel, passing her arm tenderly round her
sister's slender waist, "when thou hast conquered the vain folly of
thy childhood, thou wilt find a Clarence of thine own.  And yet,"
added the young duchess, smiling, "it must be the opposite of a
Clarence to be to thy heart what a Clarence is to mine.  I love
George's gay humour,--thou lovest a melancholy brow.  I love that
charming weakness which supples to my woman will,--thou lovest a proud
nature that may command thine own.  I do not respect George less,
because I know my mind stronger than his own; but thou (like my gentle
mother) wouldst have thy mate lord and chief in all things, and live
from his life as the shadow from the sun.  But where left you our
mother?"

"In the oratory, at prayer."

"She has been sad of late."

"The dark times darken her; and she ever fears the king's falseness or
caprice will stir the earl up to some rash emprise.  My father's
letter, brought last night to her, contains something that made her
couch sleepless."

"Ha!" exclaimed the duchess, eagerly, "my mother confides in thee more
than me.  Saw you the letter?"

"No."

"Edward will make himself unfit to reign," said Isabel, abruptly.
"The barons will call on him to resign; and then--and then, Anne--
sister Anne,--Warwick's daughters cannot be born to be simple
subjects!"

"Isabel, God temper your ambition!  Oh, curb it, crush it down!  Abuse
not your influence with Clarence.  Let not the brother aspire to the
brother's crown."

"Sister, a king's diadem covers all the sins schemed in the head that
wins it!"

As the duchess spoke, her eyes flashed and her form dilated.  Her
beauty seemed almost terrible.

The gentle Anne gazed and shuddered; but ere she found words to
rebuke, the lovely shape of the countess-mother was seen moving slowly
towards them.  She was dressed in her robes of state to receive her
kingly guest; the vest fitting high to the throat, where it joined the
ermine tippet, and thickly sown with jewels; the sleeves tight, with
the second or over sleeves, that, loose and large, hung pendent and
sweeping even to the ground; and the gown, velvet of cramousin,
trimmed with ermine,--made a costume not less graceful than
magnificent, and which, where compressed, set off the exquisite
symmetry of a form still youthful, and where flowing added majesty to
a beauty naturally rather soft and feminine than proud and stately.
As she approached her children, she looked rather like their sister
than their mother, as if Time, at least, shrunk from visiting harshly
one for whom such sorrows were reserved.

The face of the countess was so sad in its aspect of calm and sweet
resignation that even the proud Isabel was touched; and kissing her
mother's hand, she asked if any ill tidings preceded her father's
coming.

"Alas, my Isabel, the times themselves are bad tidings!  Your youth
scarcely remembers the days when brother fought against brother, and
the son's sword rose against the father's breast. But I, recalling
them, tremble to hear the faintest murmur that threatens a civil war."
She paused, and forcing a smile to her lips, added, "Our woman fears
must not, however, sadden our lords with an unwelcome countenance; for
men returning to their hearths have a right to a wife's smile; and so,
Isabel, thou and I, wives both, must forget the morrow in to-day.
Hark! the trumpets sound near and nearer! let us to the hall."

Before, however, they had reached the castle, a shrill blast rang at
the outer gate.  The portcullis was raised; the young Duke of
Clarence, with a bridegroom's impatience, spurred alone through the
gloomy arch, and Isabel, catching sight of his countenance lifted
towards the ramparts, uttered a cry, and waved her hand.  Clarence
beard and saw, leaped from his steed, and had clasped Isabel to his
breast, almost before Anne or the countess had recognized the new
comer.

Isabel, however, always stately, recovered in an instant from the joy
she felt at her lord's return, and gently escaping his embrace, she
glanced with a blush towards the battlements crowded with retainers;
Clarence caught and interpreted the look.

"Well, belle mere," he said, turning to the countess, "and if yon
faithful followers do witness with what glee a fair bride inspires a
returning bridegroom, is there cause for shame in this cheek of
damascene?"

"Is the king still with my father?" asked Isabel, hastily, and
interrupting the countess's reply.

"Surely, yes; and hard at hand.  And pardon me that I forgot, dear
lady, to say that my royal brother has announced his intention of
addressing the principal officers of the army in Middleham Hall.  This
news gave me fair excuse for hastening to you and Isabel."

"All is prepared for his highness," said the countess, "save our own
homage.  We must quicken our steps; come, Anne."  The countess took
the arm of the younger sister, while the duchess made a sign to
Clarence.  He lingered behind, and Isabel, drawing him aside, asked,

"Is my father reconciled to Edward?"

"No,--nor Edward to him."

"Good!  The king has no soldiers of his own amidst yon armed train?"

"Save a few of Anthony Woodville's recruits, none.  Raoul de Fulke and
St. John have retired to their towers in sullen dudgeon.  But have you
no softer questions for my return, bella mia?"

"Pardon me, many--my king."

"King!"

"What other name should the successor of Edward IV. bear?"

"Isabel," said Clarence, in great emotion, "what is it you would tempt
me to?  Edward IV. spares the life of Henry VI., and shall Edward
IV.'s brother conspire against his own?"

"Saints forefend!" exclaimed Isabel; "can you so wrong my honest
meaning?  O George! can you conceive that your wife--Warwick's
daughter--harbours the thought of murder?  No! surely the career
before you seems plain and spotless!  Can Edward reign?  Deserted by
the barons, and wearing away even my father's long-credulous love;
odious! except in luxurious and unwarlike London, to all the commons--
how reign?  What other choice left? none,--save Henry of Lancaster or
George of York."

"Were it so!" said the weak duke; and yet be added falteringly,
"believe me, Warwick meditates no such changes in my favour."

"Time is a rapid ripener," answered Isabel; "but hark! they are
lowering the drawbridge for our guests."




CHAPTER VIII.

THE ANCIENTS RIGHTLY GAVE TO THE GODDESS OF ELOQUENCE A CROWN.

The lady of Warwick stood at the threshold of the porch, which, in the
inner side of the broad quadrangle, admitted to the apartments used by
the family; and, heading the mighty train that, line after line,
emerged through the grim jaws of the arch, came the earl on his black
destrier, and the young king.

Even where she stood, the anxious chatelaine beheld the moody and
gloomy air with which Edward glanced around the strong walls of the
fortress, and up to the battlements that bristled with the pikes and
sallets of armed men, who looked on the pomp below, in the silence of
military discipline.

"Oh, Anne!" she whispered to her youngest daughter, who stood beside
her, "what are women worth in the strife of men?  Would that our
smiles could heal the wounds which a taunt can make in a proud man's
heart!"

Anne, affected and interested by her mother's words, and with a secret
curiosity to gaze upon the man who ruled on the throne of the prince
she loved, came nearer and more in front; and suddenly, as he turned
his head, the king's regard rested upon her intent eyes and blooming
face.

"Who is that fair donzell, cousin of Warwick?" he asked.

"My daughter, sire."

"Ah, your youngest!--I have not seen her since she was a child."

Edward reined in his charger, and the earl threw himself from his
selle, and held the king's stirrup to dismount.  But he did so with a
haughty and unsmiling visage.  "I would be the first, sire," said he,
with a slight emphasis, and as if excusing to himself his
condescension, "to welcome to Middleham the son of Duke Richard."

"And your suzerain, my lord earl," added Edward, with no less proud a
meaning, and leaning his hand lightly on Warwick's shoulder, he
dismounted slowly.  "Rise, lady," he said, raising the countess, who
knelt at the porch, "and you too, fair demoiselle.  Pardieu, we envy
the knee that hath knelt to you."  So saying, with royal graciousness,
he took the countess's hand, and they entered the hall as the
musicians, in the gallery raised above, rolled forth their stormy
welcome.

The archbishop, who had followed close to Warwick and the king,
whispered now to his brother,

"Why would Edward address the captains?"

"I know not."

"He hath made himself familiar with many in the march."

"Familiarity with a steel casque better becomes a king than waisall
with a greasy flat-cap."

"You do not fear lest he seduce from the White Bear its retainers?"

"As well fear that he can call the stars from their courses around the
sun."

While these words were interchanged, the countess conducted the king
to a throne-chair raised upon the dais, by the side of which were
