"Good night, then."  Lebeau leisurely took up his hat and drew on his
gloves--then, as if struck by a sudden thought, he turned briskly on the
artisan and said in quick blunt tones:

"Armand Monnier, explain to me why it is that you--a Parisian artisan,
the type of a class the most insubordinate, the most self-conceited that
exists on the face of earth--take without question, with so docile a
submission, the orders of a man who plainly tells you he does not
sympathise in your ultimate objects, of whom you really know very little,
and whose views you candidly own you think are those of an old and
obsolete school of political reasoners."

"You puzzle me to explain," said Monnier, with an ingenuous laugh, that
brightened up features stern and hard, though comely when in repose.
"Partly, because you are so straightforward, and do not talk _blague_;
partly, because I don't think the class I belong to would stir an inch
unless we had a leader of another class--and you give me at least that
leader.  Again, you go to that first stage which we all agree to take,
and--well, do you want me to explain more?"

"Yes."

"_Et bien_!  you have warned me, like an honest man; like an honest man I
warn you.  That first step we take together; I want to go a step further;
you retreat, you say, 'No:' I reply you are committed; that further step
you must take, or I cry '_Traitre_!--_au la lanterne_!'  You talk of
'superior experience:' bah! what does experience really tell you?  Do you
suppose that Philippe Egalite, when he began to plot against Louis XVI.,
meant to vote for his kinsman's execution by the guillotine?  Do you
suppose that Robespierre, when he commenced his career as the foe of
capital punishment, foresaw that he should be the Minister of the Reign
of Terror?  Not a bit of it.  Each was committed by his use of those he
designed for his tools: so must you be--or you perish."

Lebeau, leaning against the door, heard the frank avowal he had courted
without betraying a change of countenance.  But when Armand Monnier had
done, a slight movement of his lips showed emotion; was it of fear or
disdain?

"Monnier," he said, gently; "I am so much obliged to you for the manly
speech you have made.  The scruples which my conscience had before
entertained are dispelled.  I dreaded lest I, a declared wolf, might
seduce into peril an innocent sheep.  I see I have to deal with a wolf of
younger vigour and sharper fangs than myself, so much the better: obey my
orders now; leave it to time to say whether I obey yours later.  _Au
revoir_."




CHAPTER VI.

Isaura's apartment, on the following Thursday evening, was more filled
than usual.  Besides her habitual devotees in the artistic or literary
world, there were diplomatists and deputies commixed with many fair
chiefs of _la jeunesse doree_; amongst the latter the brilliant
Enguerrand de Vandemar, who, deeming the acquaintance of every celebrity
essential to his own celebrity in either Carthage, the _beau monde_, or
the _demi-monde_, had, two Thursdays before, made Louvier attend her
soiree and present him.  Louvier, though gathering to his own salons
authors and artists, very rarely favoured their rooms with his presence;
he did not adorn Isaura's party that evening.  But Duplessis was there,
in compensation.  It had chanced that Valerie had met Isaura at some
house in the past winter, and conceived an enthusiastic affection for
her: since then, Valerie came very often to see her, and made a point of
dragging with her to Isaura's Thursday reunions her obedient father.
Soirees, musical or literary, were not much in his line; but he had no
pleasure like that of pleasing his spoilt child.  Our old friend Frederic
Lemercier was also one of Isaura's guests that night.  He had become more
and more intimate with Duplessis, and Duplessis had introduced him to the
fair Valerie as "_un jeune homme plein de moyens, qui ira loin_."

Savarin was there of course, and brought with him an English gentleman of
the name of Bevil, as well known at Paris as in London--invited
everywhere--popular everywhere,--one of those welcome contributors to the
luxuries of civilised society who trade in gossip, sparing no pains to
get the pick of it, and exchanging it liberally sometimes for a haunch of
venison, sometimes for a cup of tea.  His gossip not being adulterated
with malice was in high repute for genuine worth.

If Bevil said, "This story is a fact," you no more thought of doubting
him than you would doubt Rothschild if he said, "This is Lafitte of '48."

Mr. Bevil was at present on a very short stay at Paris, and, naturally
wishing to make the most of his time, he did not tarry beside Savarin,
but, after being introduced to Isaura, flitted here and there through the
assembly.

                         "Apis Matinae--
                         More modoque--
                         Grata carpentis thyma"--

The bee proffers honey, but bears a sting.

The room was at its fullest when Gustave Rameau entered, accompanied by
Monsieur de Mauleon.

Isaura was agreeably surprised by the impression made on her by the
Vicomte's appearance and manner.  His writings, and such as she had heard
of his earlier repute, had prepared her to see a man decidedly old, of
withered aspect and sardonic smile--aggressive in demeanour--forward or
contemptuous in his very politeness--a Mephistopheles engrafted on the
stem of a Don Juan.  She was startled by the sight of one who, despite
his forty-eight years--and at Paris a man is generally older at forty-
eight than he is elsewhere--seemed in the zenith of ripened manhood--
startled yet more by the singular modesty of a deportment too thoroughly
high-bred not to be quietly simple--startled most by a melancholy
expression in eyes that could be at times soft, though always so keen,
and in the grave pathetic smile which seemed to disarm censure of past
faults in saying, "I have known sorrows."

He did not follow up his introduction to his young hostess by any of the
insipid phrases of compliment to which she was accustomed; but, after
expressing in grateful terms his thanks for the honour she had permitted
Rameau to confer on him, he moved aside, as if he had no right to detain
her from other guests more worthy her notice, towards the doorway, taking
his place by Enguerrand amidst a group of men of whom Duplessis was the
central figure.

At that time--the first week in May, 1870--all who were then in Paris
will remember that there were two subjects uppermost in the mouths of
men: first, the plebiscite; secondly, the conspiracy to murder the
Emperor--which the disaffected considered to be a mere fable, a pretence
got up in time to serve the plebiscite and prop the Empire.

Upon this latter subject Duplessis had been expressing himself with
unwonted animation.  A loyal and earnest Imperialist, it was only with
effort that he could repress his scorn of that meanest sort of gossip
which is fond of ascribing petty motives to eminent men.

To him nothing could be more clearly evident than the reality of this
conspiracy, and he had no tolerance for the malignant absurdity of
maintaining that the Emperor or his Ministers could be silly and wicked
enough to accuse seventy-two persons of a crime which the police had been
instructed to invent.

As De Mauleon approached, the financier brought his speech to an abrupt
close.  He knew in the Vicomte de Mauleon the writer of articles which
had endangered the Government, and aimed no pointless shafts against its
Imperial head.

"My cousin," said Enguerrand, gaily, as he exchanged a cordial shake of
the hand with Victor, "I congratulate you on the fame of journalist, into
which you have vaulted, armed cap-a pie, like a knight of old into his
saddle; but I don't sympathise with the means you have taken to arrive at
that renown.  I am not myself an Imperialist--a Vandemar can be scarcely
that.  But if I am compelled to be on board a ship, I don't wish to take
out its planks and let in an ocean, when all offered to me instead is a
crazy tub and a rotten rope."

"_Tres bien_," said Duplessis, in Parliamentary tone and phrase.

"But," said De Mauleon, with his calm smile, "would you like the captain
of the ship, when the sky darkened and the sea rose, to ask the common
sailors 'whether they approved his conduct on altering his course or
shortening his sail'?  Better trust to a crazy tub and a rotten rope than
to a ship in which the captain consults a plebiscite."

"Monsieur," said Duplessis, "your metaphor is ill chosen no metaphor
indeed is needed.  The head of the State was chosen by the voice of the
people, and, when required to change the form of administration which the
people had sanctioned, and inclined to do so from motives the most
patriotic and liberal, he is bound again to consult the people from whom
he holds his power.  It is not, however, of the plebiscite we were
conversing, so much as of the atrocious conspiracy of assassins--so
happily discovered in time.  I presume that Monsieur de Mauleon must
share the indignation which true Frenchmen of every party must feel
against a combination united by the purpose of murder."

The Vicomte bowed as in assent.  "But do you believe," asked a Liberal
Depute, "that such a combination existed, except in the visions of the
police or the cabinet of a Minister?"

Duplessis looked keenly at De Mauleon while this question was put to him.
Belief or disbelief in the conspiracy was with him, and with many, the
test by which a sanguinary revolutionist was distinguished from an honest
politician.

"Ma foi," answered De Mauleon, shrugging his shoulders, "I have only one
belief left; but that is boundless.  I believe in the folly of mankind in
general, and of Frenchmen in particular.  That seventy-two men should
plot the assassination of a sovereign on whose life interests so numerous
and so watchful depend, and imagine they could keep a secret which any
drunkard amongst them would blab out, any tatterdemalion would sell, is a
_betise_ so gross that I think it highly probable.  But pardon me if I
look upon the politics of Paris much as I do upon its mud--one must pass
through it when one walks in the street.  One changes one's shoes before
entering the salon.  A word with you, Enguerrand,"--and taking his
kinsman's arm he drew him aside from the circle.  "What has become of
your brother?  I see nothing of him now."

"Oh, Raoul," answered Enguerrand, throwing himself on a couch in a
recess, and making room for De Mauleon beside him--"Raoul is devoting
himself to the distressed _ouvriers_ who have chosen to withdraw from
work.  When he fails to persuade them to return, he forces food and fuel
