Gustave had listened very attentively, and without interruption, until
now; when he looked up, and said with his customary sneer, "Did your
Monsieur, _fort bel homme_, you say, inform you of the value of the
advice, rather of the commands, you were implicitly to obey?"

"Yes," answered Julie, "not then, but later.  Let me go on.  We arrived
at M. N-----'s, an elderly grave man.  He said that all he knew was that
he held the money in trust for the Monsieur with me, to be given to him,
with the accumulations of interest, on the death of the lady who had
deposited it.  If that Monsieur had instructions how to dispose of the
money, they were not known to him.  All he had to do was to transfer it
absolutely to him on the proper certificate of the lady's death.  So you
see, Gustave, that the Monsieur could have kept all from me if he had
liked."

"Your Monsieur is very generous.  Perhaps you will now tell me his name."

"No; he forbids me to do it yet."

"And he took this apartment for you, and gave you money to buy that smart
dress and these furs.  Bah! _mon enfant_, why try to deceive me?  Do I
not know my Paris?  A _fort bel homme_ does not make himself guardian to
a _fort belle fine_ so young and fair as Mademoiselle Julie Caumartin
without certain considerations which shall be nameless, like himself."

Julie's eyes flashed.  "Ah, Gustave! ah, Monsieur!" she said, half
angrily, half plaintively, "I see that my guardian knew you better than
I did.  Never mind; I will not reproach.  Thou halt the right to despise
me."

"Pardon! I did not mean to offend thee," said Gustave, somewhat
disconcerted.  "But own that thy story is strange; and this guardian, who
knows me better than thou--does he know me at all?  Didst thou speak to
him of me?"

"How could I help it?  He says that this terrible war, in which he takes
an active part, makes his life uncertain from day to day.  He wished to
complete the trust bequeathed to him by seeing me safe in the love of
some worthy man who"--she paused for a moment with an expression of
compressed anguish, and then hurried on--"who would recognise what was
good in me,--would never reproach me for--for--the past.  I then said
that my heart was thine: I could never marry any one but thee."

"Marry me," faltered Gustave--"marry!"

"And," continued the girl, not heeding his interruption, "he said thou
wert not the husband he would choose for me: that thou wert not--no, I
cannot wound thee by repeating what he said unkindly, unjustly.  He bade
me think of thee no more.  I said again, that is impossible."

"But," resumed Rameau, with an affected laugh, "why think of anything so
formidable as marriage?  Thou lovest me, and--"  He approached again,
seeking to embrace her.  She recoiled.  "No, Gustave, no.  I have sworn
solemnly by the memory of my lost mother--O--that I will never sin again.
I will never be to thee other than thy friend--or thy wife."

Before Gustave could reply to these words, which took him wholly by
surprise, there was a ring at the outer door, and the old bonne ushered
in Victor de Mauleon.  He halted at the threshold, and his brow
contracted.

"So you have already broken faith with me, Mademoiselle?"

"No, Monsieur, I have not broken faith," cried Julie; passionately.
"I told you that I would not seek to find out Monsieur Rameau.  I did not
seek, but I met him unexpectedly.  I owed to him an explanation.  I
invited him here to give that explanation.  Without it, what would he
have thought of me?  Now he may go, and I will never admit him again
without your sanction."

The Vicomte turned his stern look upon Gustave, who though, as we know,
not wanting in personal courage, felt cowed by his false position; and
his eye fell, quailed before De Mauleon's gaze.

"Leave us for a few minutes alone, Mademoiselle," said the Vicomte.
"Nay, Julie," he added, in softened tones, "fear nothing.  I, too, owe
explanation--friendly explanation--to M. Rameau."

With his habitual courtesy towards women, he extended his hand to Julie,
and led her from the room.  Then, closing the door, he seated himself,
and made a sign to Gustave to do the same.

"Monsieur," said De Mauleon, "excuse me if I detain you.  A very few
words will suffice for our present interview.  I take it for granted that
Mademoiselle has told you that she is no child of Madame Surville's: that
her own mother bequeathed her to my protection and guardianship with a
modest fortune which is at my disposal to give or withhold.  The little I
have seen already of Mademoiselle impresses me with sincere interest in
her fate.  I look with compassion on what she may have been in the past;
I anticipate with hope what she may be in the future.  I do not ask you
to see her in either with my eyes.  I say frankly that it is my
intention, and I may add, my resolve, that the ward thus left to my
charge shall be henceforth safe from the temptations that have seduced
her poverty, her inexperience, her vanity, if you will, but have not yet
corrupted her heart. _Bref_, I must request you to give me your word of
honour that you will hold no further communication with her.  I can allow
no sinister influence to stand between her fate and honour."

"You speak well and nobly, M. le Vicomte," said Rameau, "and I give the
promise you exact."  He added, feelingly: "It is true her heart has never
been corrupted that is good, affectionate, unselfish as a child's. _J'ai
l'honneur de vous saluer_, M. le Vicomte."

He bowed with a dignity unusual to him, and tears were in his eyes as he
passed by De Mauleon and gained the anteroom.  There a side-door suddenly
opened, and Julie's face, anxious, eager, looked forth.

Gustave paused: "Adieu, Mademoiselle!  Adieu, though we may never meet
again,--though our fates divide us,--believe me that I shall ever cherish
your memory--and--"

The girl interrupted him, impulsively seizing his arm, and looking him in
the face with a wild fixed stare.  "Hush! dost thou mean to say that we
are parted,--parted forever?"

"Alas!" said Gustave, "what option is before us?  Your guardian rightly
forbids my visits; and even were I free to offer you my hand, you
yourself say that I am not a suitor he would approve."

Julie turned her eyes towards De Mauleon, who, following Gustave into the
ante-room, stood silent and impassive, leaning against the wall.

He now understood and replied to the pathetic appeal in the girl's eyes.

"My young ward," he said, "M. Rameau expresses himself with propriety and
truth.  Suffer him to depart.  He belongs to the former life; reconcile
yourself to the new."

He advanced to take her hand, making a sign to Gustave to depart.  But as
he approached Julie, she uttered a weak piteous wail, and fell at his
feet senseless.  De Mauleon raised and carried her into her room, where
he left her to the care of the old bonne.  On re-entering the anteroom,
he found Gustave still lingering by the outer door.  "You will pardon me,
Monsieur," he said to the Vicomte, "but in fact I feel so uneasy, so
unhappy.  Has she--?  You see, you see that there is danger to her
health, perhaps to her reason, in so abrupt a separation, so cruel a
rupture between us.  Let me call again, or I may not have strength to
keep my promise."

De Mauleon remained a few minutes musing.  Then he said in a whisper,
"Come back into the salon.  Let us talk frankly."




CHAPTER X.

"M. Rameau," said De Mauleon, when the two men had reseated themselves in
the salon, "I will honestly say that my desire is to rid myself as soon
as I can of the trust of guardian to this young lady.  Playing as I do
with fortune, my only stake against her favours is my life.  I feel as if
it were my duty to see that Mademoiselle is not left alone and friendless
in the world at my decease.  I have in my mind for her a husband that I
think in every way suitable: a handsome and brave young fellow in my
battalion, of respectable birth, without any living relations to consult
as to his choice.  I have reason to believe that if Julie married him,
she need never fear as a reproach to her antecedents.  Her dot would
suffice to enable him to realise his own wish of a country town in
Normandy.  And in that station, Paris and its temptations would soon pass
from the poor child's thoughts, as an evil dream.  But I cannot dispose
of her hand without her own consent; and if she is to be reasoned out of
her fancy for you, I have no time to devote to the task.  I come to the
point,  You are not the man I would choose for her husband.  But,
evidently, you are the man she would choose.  Are you disposed to marry
her?  You hesitate, very naturally; I have no right to demand an
immediate answer to a question so serious.  Perhaps you will think over
it, and let me know in a day or two?  I take it for granted that if you
were, as I heard, engaged before the siege to marry the Signora Cicogna,
that engagement is annulled?"

"Why take it for granted?" asked Gustave, perplexed.  "Simply because I
find you here.  Nay, spare explanations and excuses.  I quite understand
that you were invited to come.  But a man solemnly betrothed to a
_mademoiselle_ like the Signora Cicogna, in a time of such dire calamity
and peril, could scarcely allow himself to be tempted to accept the
invitation of one so beautiful, and so warmly attached to him, as is
Mademoiselle Julie; and on witnessing the passionate strength of that
attachment, say that he cannot keep a promise not to repeat his visits.
But if I mistake, and you are still betrothed to the Signorina, of course
all discussion is at an end."

Gustave hung his head in some shame, and in much bewildered doubt.

The practised observer of men's characters, and of shifting phases of
mind, glanced at the, poor poet's perturbed countenance with a half-smile
of disdain.

"It is for you to judge how far the very love to you so ingenuously
evinced by my ward--how far the reasons against marriage with one whose
antecedents expose her to reproach--should influence one of your advanced
opinions upon social ties.  Such reasons do not appear to have with
artists the same weight they have with the bourgeoisie.  I have but to
add that the husband of Julie will receive with her hand a dot of nearly
120,000 francs; and I have reason to believe that that fortune will be
increased--how much, I cannot guess-when the cessation of the siege will
allow communication with England.  One word more.  I should wish to rank
the husband of my ward in the number of my friends.  If he did not oppose
the political opinions with which I identify my own career, I should be
pleased to make any rise in the world achieved by me assist to the
raising of himself.  But my opinions, as during the time we were
brought together you were made aware, are those of a practical man
of the world, and have nothing in common with Communists, Socialists,
Internationalists, or whatever sect would place the aged societies of
Europe in Medea's caldron of youth.  At a moment like the present,
fanatics and dreamers so abound that the number of such sinners will
necessitate a general amnesty when order is restored.  What a poet so
young as you may have written or said at such a time will be readily
forgotten and forgiven a year or two hence, provided he does not put his
notions into violent action.  But if you choose to persevere in the views
you now advocate, so be it.  They will not make poor Julie less a
believer in your wisdom and genius.  Only they will separate you from me,
and a day may come when I should have the painful duty of ordering you to
be shot--_Die meliora_.  Think over all I have thus frankly said.  Give
me your answer within forty-eight hours; and meanwhile hold no
communication with my ward.  I have the honour to wish you good-day."




CHAPTER XI.

The short grim day was closing when Gustave, quitting Julie's apartment,
again found himself in the streets.  His thoughts were troubled and
confused.  He was the more affected by Julie's impassioned love for him,
by the contrast with Isaura's words and manner in their recent interview.
His own ancient fancy for the "Ondine of Paris" became revived by the
difficulties between their ancient intercourse which her unexpected
scruples and De Mauleon's guardianship interposed.  A witty writer thus
defines _une passion, "_une caprice inflamme par des obstacles_."  In the
ordinary times of peace, Gustave, handsome, aspiring to reputable
position in the _beau monde_, would not have admitted any considerations
to compromise his station by marriage with a _fagurante_.  But now the
wild political doctrines he had embraced separated his ambition from that
_beau monde_, and combined it with ascendancy over the revolutionists of
the populace--a direction which he must abandon if he continued his suit
to Isaura.  Then, too, the immediate possession of Julie's dot was not
without temptation to a man who was so fond of his personal comforts, and
who did not see where to turn for a dinner, if, obedient to Isaura's
"prejudices," he abandoned his profits as a writer in the revolutionary
press.  The inducements for withdrawal from the cause he had espoused,
held out to him with so haughty a coldness by De Mauleon, were not wholly
without force, though they irritated his self-esteem.  He was dimly aware
of the Vicomte's masculine talents for public life; and the high
reputation he had already acquired among military authorities, and even
among experienced and thoughtful civilians, had weight upon Gustave's
impressionable temperament.  But though De Mauleon's implied advice here
coincided in much with the tacit compact he had made with Isaura, it
alienated him more from Isaura herself, for Isaura did not bring to him
the fortune which would enable him to suspend his lucubrations, watch the
turn of events, and live at ease in the meanwhile; and the dot to be
received with De Mauleon's ward had those advantages.

While thus meditating Gustave turned into one of the cantines still open,
to brighten his intellect with a _petit verre_, and there he found the
two colleagues in the extinct Council of Ten, Paul Grimm and Edgar
Ferrier.  With the last of these revolutionists Gustave had become
intimately _lie_.  They wrote in the same journal, and he willingly
accepted a distraction from his self-conflict which Edgar offered him in
a dinner at the cafe Riche, which still offered its hospitalities at no
exorbitant price.  At this repast, as the drink circulated, Gustave waxed
confidential.  He longed, poor youth, for an adviser.  Could he marry a
girl who had been a ballet-dancer, and who had come into an unexpected
heritage?  "_Es-tu fou d'en douter_?" cried Edgar.  "What a sublime
occasion to manifest thy scorn of the miserable banalities of the
bourgeoisie!  It will but increase thy moral power over the people.  And
then think of the money.  What an aid to the cause!  What a capital for
the launch!--journal all thine own!  Besides, when our principles
triumph--as triumph they must--what would be marriage but a brief and
futile ceremony, to be broken the moment thou hast cause to complain of
thy wife or chafe at the bond?  Only get the dot into thine own hands.
_L'amour passe--reste la cassette_."

Though there was enough of good in the son of Madame Rameau to revolt at
the precise words in which the counsel was given, still, as the fumes of
the punch yet more addled his brains, the counsel itself was acceptable;
and in that sort of maddened fury which intoxication produces in some
excitable temperaments, as Gustave reeled home that night leaning on the
arm of stouter Edgar Ferrier, he insisted on going out of his way to pass
the house in which Isaura lived, and, pausing under her window, gasped
out some verses of a wild song, then much in vogue among the votaries of
Felix Pyat, in which everything that existent society deems sacred was
reviled in the grossest ribaldry.  Happily Isaura's ear heard it not.
The girl was kneeling by her bedside absorbed in prayer.




CHAPTER XII.

Three days after the evening thus spent by Gustave Rameau, Isaura was
startled by a visit from M. de Mauleon.  She had not seen him since the
commencement of the siege, and she did not recognise him at first glance
in his military uniform.

"I trust you will pardon my intrusion, Mademoiselle," he said, in the low
sweet voice habitual to him in his gentler moods, "but I thought it
became me to announce to you the decease of one who, I fear, did not
discharge with much kindness the duties her connection with you imposed.
Your father's second wife, afterwards Madame Selby, is no more.  She died
some days since in a convent to which she had retired."

Isaura had no cause to mourn the dead, but she felt a shock in the
suddenness of this information; and in that sweet spirit of womanly
compassion which entered so largely into her character, and made a part
of her genius itself, she murmured tearfully, "The poor Signora!  Why
could I not have been with her in illness?  She might then have learned
to love me.  And she died in a convent, you say?  Ah, her religion was
then sincere!  Her end was peaceful?"

"Let us not doubt that, Mademoiselle.  Certainly she lived to regret any
former errors, and her last thought was directed towards such atonement
as might be in her power.  And it is that desire of atonement which now
strangely mixes me up, Mademoiselle, in your destinies.  In that desire
for atonement, she left to my charge, as a kinsman distant indeed, but
still, perhaps, the nearest with whom she was personally acquainted--a
young ward.  In accepting that trust, I find myself strangely compelled
to hazard the risk of offending you."

"Offending me?  How?  Pray speak openly."

"In so doing, I must utter the name of Gustave Rameau."

Isaura turned pale and recoiled, but she did not speak.  "Did he inform
me rightly that, in the last interview with him three days ago, you
expressed a strong desire that the engagement between him and yourself
should cease; and that you only, and with reluctance, suspended your
rejection of the suit he had pressed on you, in consequence of his
entreaties, and of certain assurances as to the changed direction of the
talents of which we will assume that he is possessed?"

"Well, well, Monsieur," exclaimed Isaura, her whole face brightening;
"and you come on the part of Gustave Rameau to say that on reflection he
does not hold me to our engagement--that in honour and in conscience I am
free?"

"I see," answered De Mauleon, smiling, "that I am pardoned already.  It
would not pain you if such were my instructions in the embassy I
undertake?"

"Pain me?  No.  But--"

"But what?"

"Must he persist in a course which will break his mother's heart, and
make his father deplore the hour that he was born?  Have you influence
over him, M. de Mauleon?  If so, will you not exert it for his good?"

"You interest yourself still in his fate, Mademoiselle?"

"How can I do otherwise?  Did I not consent to share it when my heart
shrank from the thought of our union?  And now when, if I understand you
rightly, I am free, I cannot but think of what was best in him."

"Alas!  Mademoiselle, he is but one of many--a spoilt child of that
Circe, imperial Paris.  Everywhere I look around, I see but corruption.
It was hidden by the halo which corruption itself engenders.  The halo
is gone, the corruption is visible.  Where is the old French manhood?
Banished from the heart, it comes out only at the tongue.  Were our
deeds like our words, Prussia would beg on her knee to be a province of
