communistic, on the principles of Fourier; Le Noy adheres to the policy
of Danton, and would commence the republic by a reign of terror; our
Italian ally abhors the notion of general massacre, and advocates
individual assassination.  Ruvigny would annihilate the worship of a
Deity; Monnier holds with Voltaire and Robespierre, that, 'if there were
no Deity, it would be necessary to man to create one.'  Bref, we could
not agree upon any plan for the new edifice, and therefore we refuse to
discuss one till the ploughshare has gone over the ruins of the old.  But
I have another and more practical reason for keeping our council distinct
from all societies with professed objects beyond that of demolition.  We
need a certain command of money.  It is I who bring to you that, and--
how?  Not from my own resources,--they but suffice to support myself; not
by contributions from _ouvriers_ who, as you well know, will subscribe
only for their own ends in the victory of workmen over masters.  I bring
money to you from the coffers of the rich malcontents.  Their politics
are not those of most present; their politics are what they term
moderate.  Some are indeed for a republic, but for a republic strong in
defence of order, in support of property; others--and they are more
numerous and the more rich--for a constitutional monarchy, and, if
possible, for the abridgment of universal suffrage, which in their eyes
tends only to anarchy in the towns and arbitrary rule under priestly
influence in the rural districts.  They would not subscribe a sou if they
thought it went to further the designs whether of Ruvigny the atheist, or
of Monnier, who would enlist the Deity of Rousseau on the side of the
drapeau rouge; not a sou if they knew I had the honour to boast such
confreres as I see around me.  They subscribe, as we concert, for the
fall of Bonaparte.  The policy I adopt I borrow from the policy of the
English Liberals.  In England, potent millionnaires, high-born dukes,
devoted Churchmen, belonging to the Liberal party, accept the services of
men who look forward to measures which would ruin capital, eradicate
aristocracy, and destroy the Church, provided these men combine with them
in some immediate step onward against the Tories.  They have a proverb
which I thus adapt to French localities: if a train passes Fontainebleau
on its way to Marseilles, why should I not take it to Fontainebleau
because other passengers are going on to Marseilles?

"Confreres, it seems to me the moment has come when we may venture some
of the fund placed at my disposal to other purposes than those to which
it has been hitherto devoted.  I propose, therefore, to set up a journal
under the auspices of Gustave Rameau as editor-in-chief,--a journal
which, if he listen to my advice, will create no small sensation.  It
will begin with a tone of impartiality; it will refrain from all violence
of invective; it will have wit, it will have sentiment, and eloquence; it
will win its way into the salons and cafes of educated men; and then, and
then, when it does change from polished satire into fierce denunciation
and sides with the blouses, its effect will be startling and terrific.
Of this I will say more to citizen Rameau in private.  To you I need not
enlarge upon the fact that, at Paris, a combination of men, though
immeasurably superior to us in status or influence, without a journal at
command is nowhere; with such a journal, written not to alarm but to
seduce fluctuating opinions, a combination of men immeasurably inferior
to us may be anywhere.

"Confreres, this affair settled, I proceed to distribute amongst you sums
of which each who receives will render me an account, except our valued
confrere the Pole.  All that we can subscribe to the cause of humanity a
representative of Poland requires for himself."  (A suppressed laugh
among all but the Pole, who looked round with a grave, imposing air, as
much as to say, "What is there to laugh at?--a simple truth.")

M. Lebeau then presented to each of his confreres a sealed envelope,
containing no doubt a bank-note, and perhaps also private instructions as
to its disposal.  It was one of his rules to make the amount of any sum
granted to an individual member of the society from the fund at his
disposal a confidential secret between himself and the recipient.  Thus
jealousy was avoided if the sums were unequal; and unequal they generally
were.  In the present instance the two largest sums were given to the
"Medecin des Pauvres" and to the delegate from Verviers.  Both were no
doubt to be distributed among "the poor," at the discretion of the
trustee appointed.

Whatever rules with regard to the distribution of money M. Lebeau laid
down were acquiesced in without demur, for the money was found
exclusively by himself, and furnished without the pale of the Secret
Council, of which he had made himself founder and dictator.  Some other
business was then discussed, sealed reports from each member were handed
to the president, who placed them unopened in his pocket, and resumed,
"Confreres, our seance is now concluded.  The period for our next meeting
must remain indefinite, for I myself shall leave Paris as soon as I have
set on foot the journal, on the details of which I will confer with
citizen Rameau.  I am not satisfied with the progress made by the two
travelling missionaries who complete our Council of Ten; and though I do
not question their zeal, I think my experience may guide it if I take a
journey to the towns of Bordeaux and Marseilles, where they now are.  But
should circumstances demanding concert or action arise, you may be sure
that I will either summon a meeting or transmit instructions to such of
our members as may be most usefully employed.  For the present,
confreres, you are relieved.  Remain only you, dear young author."




CHAPTER VII.

Left alone with Gustave Rameau, the President of the Secret Council
remained silently musing for some moments; but his countenance was no
longer moody and overcast,--his nostrils were dilated, as in triumph;
there was a half-smile of pride on his lips.  Rameau watched him
curiously and admiringly.  The young man had the impressionable,
excitable temperament common to Parisian genius,--especially when it
nourishes itself on absinthe.  He enjoyed the romance of belonging to a
secret society; he was acute enough to recognize the sagacity by which
this small conclave was kept out of those crazed combinations for
impracticable theories more likely to lead adventurers to the Tarpeian
Rock than to the Capitol, while yet those crazed combinations might, in
some critical moment, become strong instruments in the hands of practical
ambition.  Lebeau fascinated him, and took colossal proportions in his
intoxicated vision,--vision indeed intoxicated at this moment, for before
it floated the realized image of his aspirations,--a journal of which he
was to be the editor-in-chief; in which his poetry, his prose, should
occupy space as large as he pleased; through which his name, hitherto
scarce known beyond a literary clique, would resound in salon and club
and cafe, and become a familiar music on the lips of fashion.  And he
owed this to the man seated there,--a prodigious man.

"Cher poete," said Lebeau, breaking silence, "it gives me no mean
pleasure to think I am opening a career to one whose talents fit him for
those goals on which they who reach write names that posterity shall
read.  Struck with certain articles of yours in the journal made
celebrated by the wit and gayety of Savarin, I took pains privately to
inquire into your birth, your history, connections, antecedents.  All
confirmed my first impression,--that you were exactly the writer I wish
to secure to our cause.  I therefore sought you in your rooms,
unintroduced and a stranger, in order to express my admiration of your
compositions. _Bref_, we soon became friends; and after comparing minds,
I admitted you, at your request, into this Secret Council.  Now, in
proposing to you the conduct of the journal I would establish, for which
I am prepared to find all necessary funds, I am compelled to make
imperative conditions.  Nominally you will be editor-in-chief: that
station, if the journal succeeds, will secure you position and fortune;
if it fail, you fail with it.  But we will not speak of failure; I must
have it succeed.  Our interest, then, is the same.  Before that interest
all puerile vanities fade away.  Nominally, I say, you are editor-in-
chief; but all the real work of editing will, at first, be done by
others."

"Ah!" exclaimed Rameau, aghast and stunned.  Lebeau resumed,

"To establish the journal I propose needs more than the genius of youth;
it needs the tact and experience of mature years."

Rameau sank back on his chair with a sullen sneer on his pale lips.
Decidedly Lebeau was not so great a man as he had thought.

"A certain portion of the journal," continued Lebeau, "will be
exclusively appropriated to your pen."

Rameau's lip lost the sneer.

"But your pen must be therein restricted to compositions of pure fancy,
disporting in a world that does not exist; or, if on graver themes
connected with the beings of the world that does exist, the subjects will
be dictated to you and revised.  Yet even in the higher departments of a
journal intended to make way at its first start, we need the aid, not
indeed of men who write better than you, but of men whose fame is
established,--whose writings, good or bad, the public run to read, and
will find good even if they are bad.  You must consign one column to the
playful comments and witticisms of Savarin."

"Savarin?  But he has a journal of his own.  He will not, as an author,
condescend to write in one just set up by me; and as a politician, he as
certainly will not aid in an ultrademocratic revolution.  If he care for
politics at all, he is a constitutionalist, an Orleanist."

"Enfant! as an author Savarin will condescend to contribute to your
journal, first, because it in no way attempts to interfere with his own;
secondly,--I can tell you a secret, Savarin's journal no longer suffices
for his existence.  He has sold more than two-thirds of its property; he
is in debt, and his creditor is urgent; and to-morrow you will offer
Savarin thirty thousand francs for one column from his pen, and signed by
his name, for two months from the day the journal starts.  He will
accept, partly because the sum will clear off the debt that hampers him,
partly because he will take care that the amount becomes known; and that
will help him to command higher terms for the sale of the remaining
shares in the journal he now edits, for the new book which you told me he
intended to write, and for the new journal which he will be sure to set
up as soon as he has disposed of the old one.  You say that, as a
politician, Savarin, an Orleanist, will not aid in an ultra-democratic
revolution.  Who asks him to do so?  Did I not imply at the meeting that
we commence our journal with politics the mildest?  Though revolutions
are not made with rose-water, it is rose-water that nourishes their
roots.  The polite cynicism of authors, read by those who float on the
surface of society, prepares the way for the social ferment in its deeps.
Had there been no Voltaire, there would have been no Camille Desmoulins;
had there been no Diderot, there would have been no Marat.  We start as
polite cynics.  Of all cynics Savarin is the politest.  But when I bid
high for him, it is his clique that I bid for.  Without his clique he is
but a wit; with his clique, a power.  Partly out of that clique, partly
out of a circle beyond it, which Savarin can more or less influence, I
select ten.  Here is the list of them; study it. _Entre nous_, I esteem
their writings as little as I do artificial flies; but they are the
artificial flies at which, in this particular season of the year, the
public rise.  You must procure at least five of the ten; and I leave you
carte blanche as to the terms.  Savarin gained, the best of them will be
proud of being his associates.  Observe, none of these messieurs of
brilliant imagination are to write political articles; those will be
furnished to you anonymously, and inserted without erasure or omission.
When you have secured Savarin, and five at least of the collaborateurs in
the list, write to me at my office.  I give you four days to do this; and
the day the journal starts you enter into the income of fifteen thousand
francs a year, with a rise in salary proportioned to profits.  Are you
contented with the terms?"

"Of course I am; but supposing I do not gain the aid of Savarin, or five
at least of the list you give, which I see at a glance contains names the
most _a la mode_ in this kind of writing, more than one of them of high
social rank, whom it is difficult for me even to approach,--if, I say, I
fail?"

"What! with a carte blanche of terms? fie!  Are you a Parisian?  Well, to
answer you frankly, if you fail in so easy a task, you are not the man to
edit our journal, and I shall find another. _Allez, courage_!  Take my
advice; see Savarin the first thing to-morrow morning.  Of course, my
name and calling you will keep a profound secret from him, as from all.
Say as mysteriously as you can that parties you are forbidden to name
instruct you to treat with M. Savarin, and offer him the terms I have
specified, the thirty thousand francs paid to him in advance the moment
he signs the simple memorandum of agreement.  The more mysterious you
are, the more you will impose,--that is, wherever you offer money and
don't ask for it."

Here Lebeau took up his hat, and, with a courteous nod of adieu, lightly
descended the gloomy stairs.




CHAPTER VIII.

At night, after this final interview with Lebeau, Graham took leave for
good of his lodgings in Montmartre, and returned to his apartment in the
Rue d'Anjou.  He spent several hours of the next morning in answering
numerous letters accumulated during his absence.  Late in the afternoon
he had an interview with M. Renard, who, as at that season of the year he
was not over-busied with other affairs, engaged to obtain leave to place
his services at Graham's command during the time requisite for inquiries
at Aix, and to be in readiness to start the next day.  Graham then went
forth to pay one or two farewell visits; and these over, bent his way
through the Champs Elysees towards Isaura's villa, when he suddenly
encountered Rochebriant on horseback.  The Marquis courteously
dismounted, committing his horse to the care of the groom, and linking
his arm in Graham's, expressed his pleasure at seeing him again; then,
with some visible hesitation and embarrassment, he turned the
conversation towards the political aspects of France.

"There was," he said, "much in certain words of yours, when we last
walked together in this very path, that sank deeply into my mind at the
time, and over which I have of late still more earnestly reflected.  You
spoke of the duties a Frenchman owed to France, and the 'impolicy' of
remaining aloof from all public employment on the part of those attached
to the Legitimist cause."

"True; it cannot be the policy of any party to forget that between the
irrevocable past and the uncertain future there intervenes the action of
the present time."

"Should you, as an impartial bystander, consider it dishonourable in me
if I entered the military service under the ruling sovereign?"

"Certainly not, if your country needed you."

"And it may, may it not?  I hear vague rumours of coming war in almost
every salon I frequent.  There has been gunpowder in the atmosphere we
breathe ever since the battle of Sadowa.  What think you of German
arrogance and ambition?  Will they suffer the swords of France to rust in
their scabbards?"

"My dear Marquis, I should incline to put the question otherwise.  Will
the jealous _amour propre_ of France permit the swords of Germany to
remain sheathed?  But in either case, no politician can see without grave
apprehension two nations so warlike, close to each other, divided by a
borderland that one covets and the other will not yield, each armed to
the teeth,--the one resolved to brook no rival, the other equally
determined to resist all aggression.  And therefore, as you say, war is
in the atmosphere; and we may also hear, in the clouds that give no sign
of dispersion, the growl of the gathering thunder.  War may come any day;
and if France be not at once the victor--"

"France not at once the victor?" interrupted Alain, passionately; "and
against a Prussian!  Permit me to say no Frenchman can believe that."

"Let no man despise a foe," said Graham, smiling half sadly.  "However, I
must not incur the danger of wounding your national susceptibilities.  To
return to the point you raise.  If France needed the aid of her best and
bravest, a true descendant of Henri Quatre ought to blush for his ancient
noblesse were a Rochebriant to say, 'But I don't like the colour of the
flag.'"

"Thank you," said Alain, simply; "that is enough."  There was a pause,
the young men walking on slowly, arm in arm.  And then there flashed
across Graham's mind the recollection of talk on another subject in that
very path.  Here he had spoken to Alain in deprecation of any possible
alliance with Isaura Cicogna, the destined actress and public; singer.
His cheek flushed; his heart smote him.  What! had he spoken slightingly
of her--of her?  What if she became his own wife?  What! had he himself
failed in the respect which he would demand as her right from the
loftiest of his high-born kindred?  What, too, would this man, of fairer
youth than himself, think of that disparaging counsel, when be heard that
the monitor had won the prize from which he had warned another?  Would it
not seem that he had but spoken in the mean cunning dictated by the fear
