had cost us various delays and inconveniences; and the glaring want
of courtesy and good sense displayed by their virtual leader did not
dispose us to bear these annoyances with much patience. We resolved to
leave camp early in the morning, and push forward as rapidly as possible
for Fort Laramie, which we hoped to reach, by hard traveling, in four or
five days. The captain soon trotted up between us, and we explained our
intentions.

"A very extraordinary proceeding, upon my word!" he remarked. Then he
began to enlarge upon the enormity of the design. The most prominent
impression in his mind evidently was that we were acting a base and
treacherous part in deserting his party, in what he considered a very
dangerous stage of the journey. To palliate the atrocity of our conduct,
we ventured to suggest that we were only four in number while his party
still included sixteen men; and as, moreover, we were to go forward
and they were to follow, at least a full proportion of the perils he
apprehended would fall upon us. But the austerity of the captain's
features would not relax. "A very extraordinary proceeding, gentlemen!"
and repeating this, he rode off to confer with his principal.

By good luck, we found a meadow of fresh grass, and a large pool of
rain-water in the midst of it. We encamped here at sunset. Plenty of
buffalo skulls were lying around, bleaching in the sun; and sprinkled
thickly among the grass was a great variety of strange flowers. I had
nothing else to do, and so gathering a handful, I sat down on a buffalo
skull to study them. Although the offspring of a wilderness, their
texture was frail and delicate, and their colors extremely rich; pure
white, dark blue, and a transparent crimson. One traveling in this
country seldom has leisure to think of anything but the stern features
of the scenery and its accompaniments, or the practical details of each
day's journey. Like them, he and his thoughts grow hard and rough. But
now these flowers suddenly awakened a train of associations as alien to
the rude scene around me as they were themselves; and for the moment my
thoughts went back to New England. A throng of fair and well-remembered
faces rose, vividly as life, before me. "There are good things," thought
I, "in the savage life, but what can it offer to replace those powerful
and ennobling influences that can reach unimpaired over more than three
thousand miles of mountains, forests and deserts?"

Before sunrise on the next morning our tent was down; we harnessed our
best horses to the cart and left the camp. But first we shook hands
with our friends the emigrants, who sincerely wished us a safe journey,
though some others of the party might easily have been consoled had we
encountered an Indian war party on the way. The captain and his brother
were standing on the top of a hill, wrapped in their plaids, like
spirits of the mist, keeping an anxious eye on the band of horses below.
We waved adieu to them as we rode off the ground. The captain replied
with a salutation of the utmost dignity, which Jack tried to imitate;
but being little practiced in the gestures of polite society, his effort
was not a very successful one.

In five minutes we had gained the foot of the hills, but here we came to
a stop. Old Hendrick was in the shafts, and being the very incarnation
of perverse and brutish obstinacy, he utterly refused to move. Delorier
lashed and swore till he was tired, but Hendrick stood like a rock,
grumbling to himself and looking askance at his enemy, until he saw a
favorable opportunity to take his revenge, when he struck out under the
shaft with such cool malignity of intention that Delorier only escaped
the blow by a sudden skip into the air, such as no one but a Frenchman
could achieve. Shaw and he then joined forces, and lashed on both sides
at once. The brute stood still for a while till he could bear it no
longer, when all at once he began to kick and plunge till he threatened
the utter demolition of the cart and harness. We glanced back at the
camp, which was in full sight. Our companions, inspired by emulation,
were leveling their tents and driving in their cattle and horses.

"Take the horse out," said I.

I took the saddle from Pontiac and put it upon Hendrick; the former
was harnessed to the cart in an instant. "Avance donc!" cried Delorier.
Pontiac strode up the hill, twitching the little cart after him as if
it were a feather's weight; and though, as we gained the top, we saw the
wagons of our deserted comrades just getting into motion, we had little
fear that they could overtake us. Leaving the trail, we struck directly
across the country, and took the shortest cut to reach the main stream
of the Platte. A deep ravine suddenly intercepted us. We skirted its
sides until we found them less abrupt, and then plunged through the best
way we could. Passing behind the sandy ravines called "Ash Hollow," we
stopped for a short nooning at the side of a pool of rain-water; but
soon resumed our journey, and some hours before sunset were descending
the ravines and gorges opening downward upon the Platte to the west of
Ash Hollow. Our horses waded to the fetlock in sand; the sun scorched
like fire, and the air swarmed with sand-flies and mosquitoes.

At last we gained the Platte. Following it for about five miles, we saw,
just as the sun was sinking, a great meadow, dotted with hundreds of
cattle, and beyond them an emigrant encampment. A party of about a dozen
came out to meet us, looking upon us at first with cold and suspicious
faces. Seeing four men, different in appearance and equipment from
themselves, emerging from the hills, they had taken us for the van
of the much-dreaded Mormons, whom they were very apprehensive of
encountering. We made known our true character, and then they greeted
us cordially. They expressed much surprise that so small a party should
venture to traverse that region, though in fact such attempts are not
unfrequently made by trappers and Indian traders. We rode with them to
their camp. The wagons, some fifty in number, with here and there a tent
intervening, were arranged as usual in a circle; in the area within the
best horses were picketed, and the whole circumference was glowing with
the dusky light of the fires, displaying the forms of the women and
children who were crowded around them. This patriarchal scene was
curious and striking enough; but we made our escape from the place with
all possible dispatch, being tormented by the intrusive curiosity of the
men who crowded around us. Yankee curiosity was nothing to theirs. They
demanded our names, where we came from, where we were going, and what
was our business. The last query was particularly embarrassing; since
traveling in that country, or indeed anywhere, from any other motive
than gain, was an idea of which they took no cognizance. Yet they were
fine-looking fellows, with an air of frankness, generosity, and even
courtesy, having come from one of the least barbarous of the frontier
counties.

We passed about a mile beyond them, and encamped. Being too few in
number to stand guard without excessive fatigue, we extinguished our
fire, lest it should attract the notice of wandering Indians; and
picketing our horses close around us, slept undisturbed till morning.
For three days we traveled without interruption, and on the evening of
the third encamped by the well-known spring on Scott's Bluff.

Henry Chatillon and I rode out in the morning, and descending the
western side of the Bluff, were crossing the plain beyond. Something
that seemed to me a file of buffalo came into view, descending the
hills several miles before us. But Henry reined in his horse, and keenly
peering across the prairie with a better and more practiced eye, soon
discovered its real nature. "Indians!" he said. "Old Smoke's lodges, I
b'lieve. Come! let us go! Wah! get up, now, Five Hundred Dollar!" And
laying on the lash with good will, he galloped forward, and I rode by
his side. Not long after, a black speck became visible on the prairie,
full two miles off. It grew larger and larger; it assumed the form of
a man and horse; and soon we could discern a naked Indian, careering at
full gallop toward us. When within a furlong he wheeled his horse in
a wide circle, and made him describe various mystic figures upon the
prairie; and Henry immediately compelled Five Hundred Dollar to execute
similar evolutions. "It IS Old Smoke's village," said he, interpreting
these signals; "didn't I say so?"

As the Indian approached we stopped to wait for him, when suddenly he
vanished, sinking, as it were, into the earth. He had come upon one of
the deep ravines that everywhere intersect these prairies. In an instant
the rough head of his horse stretched upward from the edge and the rider
and steed came scrambling out, and hounded up to us; a sudden jerk of
the rein brought the wild panting horse to a full stop. Then followed
the needful formality of shaking hands. I forget our visitor's name.
He was a young fellow, of no note in his nation; yet in his person and
equipments he was a good specimen of a Dakota warrior in his ordinary
traveling dress. Like most of his people, he was nearly six feet high;
lithely and gracefully, yet strongly proportioned; and with a skin
singularly clear and delicate. He wore no paint; his head was bare; and
his long hair was gathered in a clump behind, to the top of which was
attached transversely, both by way of ornament and of talisman, the
mystic whistle, made of the wingbone of the war eagle, and endowed with
various magic virtues. From the back of his head descended a line of
glittering brass plates, tapering from the size of a doubloon to that of
a half-dime, a cumbrous ornament, in high vogue among the Dakotas, and
for which they pay the traders a most extravagant price; his chest and
arms were naked, the buffalo robe, worn over them when at rest, had
fallen about his waist, and was confined there by a belt. This, with the
gay moccasins on his feet, completed his attire. For arms he carried a
quiver of dogskin at his back, and a rude but powerful bow in his hand.
His horse had no bridle; a cord of hair, lashed around his jaw, served
in place of one. The saddle was of most singular construction; it was
made of wood covered with raw hide, and both pommel and cantle rose
perpendicularly full eighteen inches, so that the warrior was wedged
firmly in his seat, whence nothing could dislodge him but the bursting
of the girths.

Advancing with our new companion, we found more of his people seated in
a circle on the top of a hill; while a rude procession came straggling
down the neighboring hollow, men, women, and children, with horses
dragging the lodge-poles behind them. All that morning, as we moved
forward, tall savages were stalking silently about us. At noon we
reached Horse Creek; and as we waded through the shallow water, we saw a
wild and striking scene. The main body of the Indians had arrived before
us. On the farther bank stood a large and strong man, nearly naked,
holding a white horse by a long cord, and eyeing us as we approached.
This was the chief, whom Henry called "Old Smoke." Just behind him his
youngest and favorite squaw sat astride of a fine mule; it was covered
with caparisons of whitened skins, garnished with blue and white beads,
and fringed with little ornaments of metal that tinkled with every
movement of the animal. The girl had a light clear complexion, enlivened
by a spot of vermilion on each cheek; she smiled, not to say grinned,
upon us, showing two gleaming rows of white teeth. In her hand, she
carried the tall lance of her unchivalrous lord, fluttering with
feathers; his round white shield hung at the side of her mule; and his
pipe was slung at her back. Her dress was a tunic of deerskin, made
beautifully white by means of a species of clay found on the prairie,
and ornamented with beads, arrayed in figures more gay than tasteful,
and with long fringes at all the seams. Not far from the chief stood a
group of stately figures, their white buffalo robes thrown over their
shoulders, gazing coldly upon us; and in the rear, for several acres,
the ground was covered with a temporary encampment; men, women, and
children swarmed like bees; hundreds of dogs, of all sizes and colors,
ran restlessly about; and, close at hand, the wide shallow stream was
alive with boys, girls, and young squaws, splashing, screaming, and
laughing in the water. At the same time a long train of emigrant
wagons were crossing the creek, and dragging on in their slow, heavy
procession, passed the encampment of the people whom they and their
descendants, in the space of a century, are to sweep from the face of
the earth.

The encampment itself was merely a temporary one during the heat of the
day. None of the lodges were erected; but their heavy leather coverings,
and the long poles used to support them, were scattered everywhere
around, among weapons, domestic utensils, and the rude harness of mules
and horses. The squaws of each lazy warrior had made him a shelter
from the sun, by stretching a few buffalo robes, or the corner of a
lodge-covering upon poles; and here he sat in the shade, with a favorite
young squaw, perhaps, at his side, glittering with all imaginable
trinkets. Before him stood the insignia of his rank as a warrior, his
white shield of bull-hide, his medicine bag, his bow and quiver, his
lance and his pipe, raised aloft on a tripod of three poles. Except the
dogs, the most active and noisy tenants of the camp were the old women,
ugly as Macbeth's witches, with their hair streaming loose in the wind,
and nothing but the tattered fragment of an old buffalo robe to hide
their shriveled wiry limbs. The day of their favoritism passed two
generations ago; now the heaviest labors of the camp devolved upon them;
they were to harness the horses, pitch the lodges, dress the buffalo
robes, and bring in meat for the hunters. With the cracked voices of
these hags, the clamor of dogs, the shouting and laughing of children
and girls, and the listless tranquillity of the warriors, the whole
scene had an effect too lively and picturesque ever to be forgotten.

We stopped not far from the Indian camp, and having invited some of the
chiefs and warriors to dinner, placed before them a sumptuous repast of
biscuit and coffee. Squatted in a half circle on the ground, they soon
disposed of it. As we rode forward on the afternoon journey, several of
our late guests accompanied us. Among the rest was a huge bloated savage
of more than three hundred pounds' weight, christened La Cochon, in
consideration of his preposterous dimensions and certain corresponding
traits of his character. "The Hog" bestrode a little white pony, scarce
able to bear up under the enormous burden, though, by way of keeping
up the necessary stimulus, the rider kept both feet in constant motion,
playing alternately against his ribs. The old man was not a chief; he
never had ambition enough to become one; he was not a warrior nor a
hunter, for he was too fat and lazy: but he was the richest man in the
whole village. Riches among the Dakotas consist in horses, and of these
The Hog had accumulated more than thirty. He had already ten times as
many as he wanted, yet still his appetite for horses was insatiable.
Trotting up to me he shook me by the hand, and gave me to understand
that he was a very devoted friend; and then he began a series of most
earnest signs and gesticulations, his oily countenance radiant with
smiles, and his little eyes peeping out with a cunning twinkle from
between the masses of flesh that almost obscured them. Knowing nothing
at that time of the sign language of the Indians, I could only guess at
his meaning. So I called on Henry to explain it.

The Hog, it seems, was anxious to conclude a matrimonial bargain. He
said he had a very pretty daughter in his lodge, whom he would give
me, if I would give him my horse. These flattering overtures I chose to
reject; at which The Hog, still laughing with undiminished good humor,
gathered his robe about his shoulders, and rode away.

Where we encamped that night, an arm of the Platte ran between high
bluffs; it was turbid and swift as heretofore, but trees were growing on
its crumbling banks, and there was a nook of grass between the water
and the hill. Just before entering this place, we saw the emigrants
encamping at two or three miles' distance on the right; while the whole
Indian rabble were pouring down the neighboring hill in hope of the same
sort of entertainment which they had experienced from us. In the savage
landscape before our camp, nothing but the rushing of the Platte broke
the silence. Through the ragged boughs of the trees, dilapidated and
half dead, we saw the sun setting in crimson behind the peaks of the
Black Hills; the restless bosom of the river was suffused with red; our
white tent was tinged with it, and the sterile bluffs, up to the rocks
that crowned them, partook of the same fiery hue. It soon passed away;
no light remained, but that from our fire, blazing high among the dusky
trees and bushes. We lay around it wrapped in our blankets, smoking and
conversing until a late hour, and then withdrew to our tent.

We crossed a sun-scorched plain on the next morning; the line of old
cotton-wood trees that fringed the bank of the Platte forming its
extreme verge. Nestled apparently close beneath them, we could discern
in the distance something like a building. As we came nearer, it assumed
form and dimensions, and proved to be a rough structure of logs. It was
a little trading fort, belonging to two private traders; and originally
intended, like all the forts of the country, to form a hollow square,
with rooms for lodging and storage opening upon the area within. Only
two sides of it had been completed; the place was now as ill-fitted for
the purposes of defense as any of those little log-houses, which
upon our constantly shifting frontier have been so often successfully
maintained against overwhelming odds of Indians. Two lodges were pitched
close to the fort; the sun beat scorching upon the logs; no living thing
was stirring except one old squaw, who thrust her round head from the
opening of the nearest lodge, and three or four stout young pups, who
were peeping with looks of eager inquiry from under the covering. In a
moment a door opened, and a little, swarthy black-eyed Frenchman came
out. His dress was rather singular; his black curling hair was parted
in the middle of his head, and fell below his shoulders; he wore a tight
frock of smoked deerskin, very gayly ornamented with figures worked
in dyed porcupine quills. His moccasins and leggings were also gaudily
adorned in the same manner; and the latter had in addition a line of
long fringes, reaching down the seams. The small frame of Richard,
for by this name Henry made him known to us, was in the highest degree
athletic and vigorous. There was no superfluity, and indeed there
seldom is among the active white men of this country, but every limb was
compact and hard; every sinew had its full tone and elasticity, and the
whole man wore an air of mingled hardihood and buoyancy.

Richard committed our horses to a Navahoe slave, a mean looking fellow
taken prisoner on the Mexican frontier; and, relieving us of our rifles
with ready politeness, led the way into the principal apartment of his
establishment. This was a room ten feet square. The walls and floor were
of black mud, and the roof of rough timber; there was a huge fireplace
made of four flat rocks, picked up on the prairie. An Indian bow and
otter-skin quiver, several gaudy articles of Rocky Mountain finery, an
Indian medicine bag, and a pipe and tobacco pouch, garnished the walls,
and rifles rested in a corner. There was no furniture except a sort
of rough settle covered with buffalo robes, upon which lolled a
tall half-breed, with his hair glued in masses upon each temple,
and saturated with vermilion. Two or three more "mountain men" sat
cross-legged on the floor. Their attire was not unlike that of Richard
himself; but the most striking figure of the group was a naked Indian
boy of sixteen, with a handsome face, and light, active proportions, who
sat in an easy posture in the corner near the door. Not one of his limbs
moved the breadth of a hair; his eye was fixed immovably, not on any
person present, but, as it appeared, on the projecting corner of the
fireplace opposite to him.

On these prairies the custom of smoking with friends is seldom omitted,
whether among Indians or whites. The pipe, therefore, was taken from the
wall, and its great red bowl crammed with the tobacco and shongsasha,
mixed in suitable proportions. Then it passed round the circle, each man
inhaling a few whiffs and handing it to his neighbor. Having spent half
an hour here, we took our leave; first inviting our new friends to drink
a cup of coffee with us at our camp, a mile farther up the river. By
this time, as the reader may conceive, we had grown rather shabby; our
clothes had burst into rags and tatters; and what was worse, we had very
little means of renovation. Fort Laramie was but seven miles before us.
Being totally averse to appearing in such plight among any society that
could boast an approximation to the civilized, we soon stopped by the
river to make our toilet in the best way we could. We hung up small
looking-glasses against the trees and shaved, an operation neglected for
six weeks; we performed our ablutions in the Platte, though the utility
of such a proceeding was questionable, the water looking exactly like
a cup of chocolate, and the banks consisting of the softest and richest
yellow mud, so that we were obliged, as a preliminary, to build a
cause-way of stout branches and twigs. Having also put on radiant
moccasins, procured from a squaw of Richard's establishment, and made
what other improvements our narrow circumstances allowed, we took our
seats on the grass with a feeling of greatly increased respectability,
to wait the arrival of our guests. They came; the banquet was concluded,
and the pipe smoked. Bidding them adieu, we turned our horses' heads
toward the fort.

An hour elapsed. The barren hills closed across our front, and we could
see no farther; until having surmounted them, a rapid stream appeared
at the foot of the descent, running into the Platte; beyond was a green
meadow, dotted with bushes, and in the midst of these, at the point
where the two rivers joined, were the low clay walls of a fort. This
was not Fort Laramie, but another post of less recent date, which having
sunk before its successful competitor was now deserted and ruinous. A
moment after the hills, seeming to draw apart as we advanced, disclosed
Fort Laramie itself, its high bastions and perpendicular walls of
clay crowning an eminence on the left beyond the stream, while behind
stretched a line of arid and desolate ridges, and behind these again,
towering aloft seven thousand feet, arose the grim Black Hills.

We tried to ford Laramie Creek at a point nearly opposite the fort, but
the stream, swollen with the rains in the mountains, was too rapid. We
passed up along its bank to find a better crossing place. Men gathered
on the wall to look at us. "There's Bordeaux!" called Henry, his face
brightening as he recognized his acquaintance; "him there with the
spyglass; and there's old Vaskiss, and Tucker, and May; and, by George!
there's Cimoneau!" This Cimoneau was Henry's fast friend, and the only
man in the country who could rival him in hunting.

We soon found a ford. Henry led the way, the pony approaching the bank
with a countenance of cool indifference, bracing his feet and sliding
into the stream with the most unmoved composure.

     At the first plunge the horse sunk low,
     And the water broke o'er the saddle-bow

We followed; the water boiled against our saddles, but our horses bore
us easily through. The unfortunate little mules came near going down
with the current, cart and all; and we watched them with some solicitude
scrambling over the loose round stones at the bottom, and bracing
stoutly against the stream. All landed safely at last; we crossed a
little plain, descended a hollow, and riding up a steep bank found
ourselves before the gateway of Fort Laramie, under the impending
blockhouse erected above it to defend the entrance.



CHAPTER IX

SCENES AT FORT LARAMIE


Looking back, after the expiration of a year, upon Fort Laramie and its
inmates, they seem less like a reality than like some fanciful picture
of the olden time; so different was the scene from any which this tamer
side of the world can present. Tall Indians, enveloped in their white
buffalo robes, were striding across the area or reclining at full length
on the low roofs of the buildings which inclosed it. Numerous squaws,
gayly bedizened, sat grouped in front of the apartments they occupied;
their mongrel offspring, restless and vociferous, rambled in every
direction through the fort; and the trappers, traders, and ENGAGES of
the establishment were busy at their labor or their amusements.

We were met at the gate, but by no means cordially welcomed. Indeed,
we seemed objects of some distrust and suspicion until Henry Chatillon
explained that we were not traders, and we, in confirmation, handed to
the bourgeois a letter of introduction from his principals. He took
it, turned it upside down, and tried hard to read it; but his literary
attainments not being adequate to the task, he applied for relief to
the clerk, a sleek, smiling Frenchman, named Montalon. The letter read,
