contrary in his body. It is when she was a girl she put on clothes like
your own--lady's clothes--and she went to the Pope. Did she turn
Catholic? She'd be beheaded if she did; the Government would behead her;
it is the Government has power in England."


HER WISDOM

"As to the last Queen, we thought her bad when we had her, but now we
think her good. She was a hard woman, and she did nothing for Ireland in
the bad years; but I'll give you the reason she had for that. She had it
in her mind always to keep Ireland low, it being the place she mostly
got her soldiers. That might not be good for Ireland, but it was good
for her own benefit. The time the lads have not a bit to eat, that is
the time they will go soldiering."


WAR AND MISERY

"There was war and misery going on all through Victoria's reign. It was
the Boer war killed her, she being aged, and seeing all her men going
out, and able to do nothing. Ten to one they were against the Boers.
That is what killed her. It is a great tribute to the war it did that."


THE PRESENT KING

"The present King is very good. He is a gentleman very fond of visiting,
and well pleased with every class of people he will meet."


THE OLD AGE PENSIONS

"The old age pension is very good, and as to taxes, them can't pay it
that hasn't it. It is since the Boer War there is coin sent back from
Africa every week that is dug from the goldpits out there. That is what
the English wanted the time they went to war; they want to close up the
minerals for themselves. If it wasn't for the war, that pension would
never be given to Ireland. They'd have been driven home by the Boers if
it wasn't for the Irish that were in the front of every battle. And the
Irish held out better too, they can starve better than the rest, there
is more bearing in them. It wasn't till all the Irish were killed that
the English took to bribing. Bribed Botha they did with a bag of gold.
For all the generals in England that are any good are Irish. Buller was
the last they had, and he died. They can find no good generals at all in
England, unless they might get them very young."


ANOTHER THOUGHT

"It was old money was in the Treasury idle, and the King and Queen
getting old wanted to distribute it in the country it was taken from.
But some say it was money belonging to captains and big men that died in
the war and left no will after them. Anyway it is likely it will not
hold; and it is known that a great many of those that get it die very
soon."


A PROPHECY

"It is likely there will be a war at the end of the two thousand, that
was always foretold. And I hear the English are making ships that will
dive the same as diving ducks under the water. But as to the Irish
Americans, they would sweep the entire world; and England is afraid of
America, it being a neighbour."


NOTES

I have given this book its name because it is at my own door, in the
Barony of Kiltartan, I have heard a great number of the stories from
beggars, pipers, travelling men, and such pleasant company. But others I
have heard in the Workhouse, or to the north of Galway Bay, in
Connemara, or on its southern coast, in Burren. I might, perhaps, better
have called the little book Myths in the Making.

A sociable people given to conversation and belief; no books in the
house, no history taught in the schools; it is likely that must have
been the way of it in old Greece, when the king of highly civilised
Crete was turned by tradition into a murderous tyrant owning a monster
and a labyrinth. It was the way of it in old France too, one thinks,
when Charlemagne's height grew to eight feet, and his years were counted
by centuries: "He is three hundred years old, and when will he weary of
war?" Anyhow, it has been the way of modern Ireland--the Ireland I
know--and when I hear myth turned into history, or history into myth, I
see in our stonebreakers and cattle drivers Greek husbandmen or ancient
vinedressers of the Loire.

I noticed some time ago, when listening to many legends of the Fianna,
that is about Finn, their leader, the most exaggerated of the tales have
gathered; and I believe the reason is that he, being the greatest of the
"Big Men," the heroic race, has been most often in the mouths of the
people. They have talked of him by their fire-sides for two thousand
years or so; at first earlier myths gathered around him, and then from
time to time any unusual feats of skill or cunning shown off on one or
another countryside, till many of the stories make him at the last
grotesque, little more than a clown. So in Bible History, while lesser
kings keep their dignity, great Solomon's wit is outwitted by the
riddles of some countryman; and Lucifer himself, known in Kiltartan as
"the proudest of the angels, thinking himself equal with God," has been
seen in Sligo rolling down a road in the form of the _Irish Times_. The
gods of ancient Ireland have not escaped. Mananaan, Son of the Sea,
Rider of the Horses of the Sea, was turned long ago into a juggler doing
tricks, and was hunted in the shape of a hare. Brigit, the "Fiery
Arrow," the nurse of poets, later a saint and the Foster-mother of
Christ, does her healing of the poor in the blessed wells of to-day as
"a very civil little fish, very pleasant, wagging its tail."

Giobniu, the divine smith of the old times, made a new sword and a new
spear for every one that was broken in the great battle between the gods
and the mis-shapen Fomor. "No spearpoint that is made by my hand," he
said, "will ever miss its mark; no man it touches will ever taste life
again." It was his father who, with a cast of a hatchet, could stop the
inflowing of the tide; and it was he himself whose ale gave lasting
youth: "No sickness or wasting ever comes on those who drink at
Giobniu's Feast." Later he became a saint, a master builder, builder of
a house "more shining than a garden; with its stars, with its sun, with
its moon." To-day he is known as the builder of the round towers of the
early Christian centuries, and of the square castles of the
Anglo-Normans. And the stories I have given of him, called as he now is,
"the Goban Saor," show that he has fallen still farther in legend from
his high origin.

As to O'Connell, perhaps because his name, like that of Finn and the
Goban, is much in the mouths of the people, there is something of the
absurd already coming into his legend. The stories of him show more than
any others how swiftly myths and traditions already in the air may
gather around a memory much loved and much spoken of. He died only sixty
years ago, and many who have seen and heard him are still living; and
yet he has already been given a miraculous birth, and the power of a
saint is on its way to him. I have charged my son, and should I live
till he comes to sensible years, I will charge my grandson, to keep
their ears open to the growth of legend about him who was once my
husband's friendly enemy, and afterwards his honoured friend.

I do not take the credit or the discredit of the opinions given by the
various speakers, nor do I go bail for the facts; I do but record what
is already in "the Book of the People." The history of England and
Ireland was shut out of the schools and it became a passion. As to why
it was shut out, well, I heard someone whisper "Eugene Aram hid the body
away, being no way anxious his scholars should get a sight of it." But
this also was said in the barony of Kiltartan.

The illustrations are drawn from some delft figures, ornaments in a
Kiltartan house.


A. GREGORY.

COOLE PARK, _November_, 1909.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Kiltartan History Book, by Lady I. A. Gregory

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE KILTARTAN HISTORY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 11260.txt or 11260.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/1/2/6/11260/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Garrett Alley, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
