well-pleased if he had been killed outright, but the chirurgeon in
attendance pronounced that he was only stunned by the blow.




CHAPTER XIV.

The private Cabinet of Sir Giles Mompesson.


A small room, and rendered yet smaller by the numerous chests and strong
boxes encroaching upon its narrow limits. In some cases these boxes are
piled, one upon another, till they touch the ceiling. All of them look
stout enough, yet many are further strengthened by iron hoops and
broad-headed nails, and secured by huge padlocks. The door is cased with
iron, within and without, and has a ponderous lock, of which the master
of the room always keeps the key, and never trusts it out of his own
hand.

This small chamber is the private cabinet of Sir Giles Mompesson.

No one is permitted to enter it without him. Though his myrmidons are
fully aware of its existence, and can give a shrewd guess at its
contents, only two of them have set foot within it. The two thus
privileged are Clement Lanyere and Lupo Vulp. Neither the promoter nor
the scrivener are much in the habit of talking over their master's
affairs, even with their comrades, and are almost as habitually reserved
as he is himself; still, from the few words let fall by them from time
to time, the myrmidons have picked up a tolerable notion of the private
cabinet, of its hidden cupboards in the walls, its drawers with secret
springs; its sliding planks with hollows beneath them; its chests full
of treasure, or what is the same thing as treasure, bonds,
mortgage-deeds, and other securities; and its carefully concealed hoards
of plate, jewels, and other valuables. Some of the least scrupulous
among them--such as Staring, Hugh, Cutting Dick, and old Tom
Wootton--have often discussed the possibility of secretly visiting it,
and making a perquisition of its stores; but they have been hitherto
restrained by their fears of their terrible and vindictive master.

On looking into the cabinet we find Sir Giles seated at a table, with a
large chest open beside him, from which he has taken for examination
sundry yellow parchments, with large seals attached to them. He is now
occupied with a deed, on one of the skins of which the plan of an
important estate is painted, and on this his attention becomes fixed.
His countenance is cadaverous, and its ghastly hue adds to its grimness
of expression. A band is tied round his head, and there is an expression
of pain in his face, and an air of languor and debility in his manner,
very different from what is usual with him. It is plain he has not yet
recovered from the effects of the crushing blow he received at the
jousts.

Opposite him sits his partner, Sir Francis Mitchell; and the silence
that has reigned between them for some minutes is first broken by the
old usurer.

"Well, Sir Giles," he inquires, "are you satisfied with your
examination of these deeds of the Mounchensey property? The estates have
been in the family, as you see, for upwards of two centuries--ever since
the reign of Henry IV., in fact--and you have a clear and undisputed
title to all the property depicted on that plan--to an old hall with a
large park around it, eight miles in circumference, and almost as well
stocked with deer as the royal chase of Theobald's; and you have a title
to other territorial domains extending from Mounchensey Place and Park
to the coast, a matter of twelve miles as the crow flies, Sir
Giles,--and including three manors and a score of little villages. Will
not these content you? Methinks they should. I' faith, my worthy
partner, when I come to reckon up all your possessions, your houses and
lands, and your different sources of revenue--the sums owing to you in
bond and mortgage--your monopolies and your patents--when I reckon up
all these, I say, and add thereunto the wealth hoarded in this cabinet,
which you have not placed out at usance--I do not hesitate to set you
down as one of the richest of my acquaintance. There be few whose
revenue is so large as yours, Sir Giles. 'Tis strange, though I have had
the same chance as yourself of making money, I have not a hundredth part
of your wealth."

"Not a whit strange," replied Sir Giles, laying down the deed and
regarding his partner somewhat contemptuously. "I waste not what I
acquire. I have passions as well as yourself, Sir Francis; but I keep
them under subjection. I drink not--I riot not--I shun all idle company.
I care not for outward show, or for the vanities of dress. I have only
one passion which I indulge,--Revenge. You are a slave to sensuality,
and pamper your lusts at any cost. Let a fair woman please your eye, and
she must be bought, be the price what it may. No court prodigal was ever
more licentious or extravagant than you are."

"Sir Giles! Sir Giles! I pray you, spare me. My enemies could not report
worse of me."

"Nay, your enemies would say that your extravagance is your sole merit,
and that therein you are better than I," rejoined Sir Giles, with a
sardonic laugh. "But I rejoice to think I am free from all such
weaknesses. The veriest enchantress could not tempt me. I am proof
against all female seductions. Think you the damsel lives who could
induce me to give for her half these broad lands in Norfolk--this
ancient hall, and its wide-spread domains? I trow not."

"Perchance I have given too much," cried the old usurer, eagerly; "if
so, it is not too late to amend our contract. Between us, there should
be fair dealing, Sir Giles."

"There is none other than fair dealing on my part," replied the
extortioner sternly; "and the terms of our agreement cannot be departed
from. What I have just said applies to your general mode of life; but
you have better reason for your conduct in this instance than is usual
with you, since you combine the gratification of revenge with the
indulgence of your other passions. You obtain a fair young bride, and at
the same time deprive the person whom you hate most of all others, of
the mistress of his affections. This is as it should be. Vengeance
cannot be too dearly purchased, and the more refined the vengeance, the
higher must necessarily be the price paid for it. In no way can you so
cruelly injure this detested Mounchensey, as by robbing him of his
mistress. And the blow dealt by you, shall be followed by others not
less severe on my part."

"Ay, ay, Sir Giles, you have to wipe out the outrage he inflicted upon
you in the tilt-yard. As I am a true gentleman, that was worse than the
indignity I endured from him in the court-yard of the palace. It must be
confessed that the villain hath a powerful hand as well as a sharp
tongue, and follows up his bitter words by bold deeds. The stroke he
dealt you with his sword was like a blow from a sledge hammer, Sir
Giles. He felled you from your horse as a butcher felleth an ox; and, in
good truth, I at first thought the ox's fate had been yours, and that
you would never rise again. Your helmet was dinted in as if by a great
shot. And for twelve hours and upwards you were senseless and
speechless;--But thanks to my care and the skill of Luke Hatton the
apothecary who tended you, you have been brought round. After such
treatment, I cannot wonder that you are eager for revenge upon Sir
Jocelyn. How will you deal with him Sir Giles? How will you deal with
him?"

"I will hurl him from the proud position he now holds," replied the
other, "and immure him in the Fleet."

"While I revel in the bliss he panted to enjoy," cried the old usurer,
chuckling. "Take it altogether, 'tis the sweetest scheme we ever
planned, and the most promising, Sir Giles! But when am I to claim
Aveline? when shall I make her mine?"

"You shall claim her to-morrow, and wed her as soon after as you list."

"Nay, there shall be no delay on my part, Sir Giles. I am all
impatience. When such a dainty repast is spread out before me, I am not
likely to be a laggard. But now, to the all-important point on which the
whole affair hinges! How am I to assert my claim to her hand--how
enforce it when made? Explain that to me, Sir Giles, I beseech you."

"Readily," replied the extortioner. "But before doing so let me give you
a piece of information which will surprise you, and which will show you
that my tenure of this great Norfolk property is not quite so secure as
you suppose it. You are aware that Sir Ferdinando Mounchensey had a
younger brother, Osmond--"

"Who disappeared when very young, and died, it was concluded,"
interrupted Sir Francis, "for he was never heard of more. And it was
lucky for us he did so die, or he might have proved a serious obstacle
to our seizure of these estates, for I remember it being stated at the
time, by one of the judges, that had he been living, he might have
procured a reversal of the Star-Chamber sentence upon Sir Ferdinando in
his favour."

"Precisely so, and that judge's opinion was correct," said Sir Giles.
"Now listen to me, Sir Francis. It is quite true that Osmond Mounchensey
quitted his home when very young, owing to some family quarrel; but it
is not true that he died. On the contrary, I have recently ascertained,
beyond a doubt, that he is still alive. Hitherto, I have failed in
tracing him out, though I have got a clue to him; but he has enveloped
himself in so much mystery that he is difficult of detection. Yet I
trust to succeed ere long; and my great business will be to prevent his
re-appearance, which would be fraught with danger to us both. I have a
scheme on foot in reference to him which will answer more than one
purpose. You will learn it anon. And now, to give you the explanation
you require in respect to Aveline."

And he stamped upon the floor.

"You are not about to invoke a spirit of darkness to our councils?" said
Sir Francis, staring at him in astonishment and alarm.

"You will see," rejoined the extortioner with a grim smile.

After a brief pause, the door was almost noiselessly opened, and Clement
Lanyere entered the chamber.

"What has Lanyere to do with the matter?" cried Sir Francis,
suspiciously regarding the promoter, who was without his mask.

"You will hear," replied Sir Giles. "Be pleased to inform Sir Francis,
good Lanyere, how you come to be in a position to demand the hand of
fair Mistress Aveline Calveley?"

"He demand it! I understand you not, Sir Giles!" exclaimed the old
usurer.

"Let him speak, I pray you, Sir Francis," returned the other. "You will
the sooner learn what you desire to know."




CHAPTER XV.

Clement Lanyere's Story.


"My tale shall be briefly told," said Lanyere. "You are aware, Sir
Francis, that in the pursuit of my avocation I am often led into the
most dangerous quarters of the metropolis, and at hours when the peril
to any honest man is doubled. Adventures have not unfrequently occurred
to me when so circumstanced, and I have been indebted to my right hand
and my good sword for deliverance from many a desperate risk. Late one
night, I chanced to be in the neighbourhood of Whitefriars, in a place
called the Wilderness, when, hearing cries for help, accompanied by the
clash of steel, I rushed towards a narrow court, whence the clatter and
vociferations resounded, and perceived by the light of the moon, which
fortunately happened to be shining brightly at the time, one man engaged
with four others, who were evidently bent upon cutting his throat in
order to take his purse. He defended himself gallantly, but the odds
were too great, and he must have been speedily slain--for the villains
swore with great oaths they would murder him if he continued to resist
them--if I had not come to the rescue. I arrived just in time. They were
pressing him hard. I struck down the point of a rapier which was within
an inch of his breast--gave the swashbuckler who carried it a riposta he
did not expect, and sent him off bowling--and then addressed myself to
the others with such good effect, that in a brief space the stranger and
I were alone together. I had been slightly wounded in the fray; but I
thought nothing of it--a mere scratch. It seemed something more to the
gentleman I had preserved. He expressed great concern for me, and bound
his handkerchief round my arm. I was about to depart, but he detained me
to renew his professions of gratitude for the service I had rendered
him, and his earnest wish that he might be able to requite me. From his
discourse, and from the texts of Scripture he mixed up with it, I knew
him to be a Puritan; and I might have supposed him to be a preacher of
the Gospel, had he not carried a sword, and borne himself so manfully in
the encounter. However, he left me no doubt on the subject, for he told
me he was named Hugh Calveley, and that he had served in the wars with
more honour to himself than profit. He added, that if the knaves had
succeeded in their design, and robbed and slain him, they would have
deprived his daughter of her sole protector; and, indeed, of all means
of subsistence, since the little they had would be lost with him. On
hearing this, a thought struck me, and I said to him--'You have
expressed an earnest desire to requite the service I have just been
fortunate enough to render you, and as I am well assured your
professions are not idly made, I shall not hesitate to proffer a request
to you.' 'Ask what you will; if I have it to give, it shall be yours,'
he replied. 'You make that promise solemnly, and before heaven?' I said.
'I make it solemnly,' he replied. 'And to prove to you that I mean it to
be binding upon me, I will confirm it by an oath upon the Bible.' And as
he spoke he took the sacred volume from his doublet, and reverently
kissed it. Then I said to him--'Sir, you have told me you have a
daughter, but you have not told me whether she is marriageable or not?'
He started at the question, and answered somewhat sternly. 'My daughter
has arrived at womanhood. But wherefore the inquiry? Do you seek her
hand in marriage?' 'If I did so, would you refuse her to me?' A pause
ensued, during which I observed he was struggling with deep emotion, but
he replied at last, 'I could not do so after my solemn promise to you;
but I pray you not to make the demand.' I then said to him: 'Sir, you
cannot lay any restrictions upon me. I shall exact fulfilment of your
promise. Your daughter must be mine.' Again he seemed to be torn by
emotion, and to meditate a refusal; but after a while he suppressed his
feelings, and replied. 'My word is plighted. She shall be yours.--Ay,
though it cost me my life, she shall be yours.' He then inquired my name
and station, and I gave him a different name from that by which I am
known; in fact, I adopted one which chanced to be familiar to him, and
which instantly changed his feelings towards me into those of warmest
friendship. As you may well suppose, I did not think fit to reveal my
odious profession, and though I was unmasked, I contrived so to muffle
my hateful visage with my cloak, that it was in a great degree concealed
from him. After this, I told him that I had no intention of pressing my
demand immediately; that I would take my own means of seeing his
daughter without her being conscious of my presence; and that I would
not intrude upon her in any way without his sanction. I used some other
arguments, which seemed perfectly to satisfy him, and we separated, he
having previously acquainted me that he lived at Tottenham. Not many
days elapsed before I found an opportunity of viewing his daughter, and
I found her exquisitely beautiful. I had indeed gained a prize; and I
resolved that no entreaties on his part, or on hers, should induce me to
abandon my claim. I took care not to be seen by her, being sensible that
any impression I might make would be prejudicial to me; and I
subsequently learnt from her father that he had not disclosed to her the
promise he had been rash enough to make to me. I had an interview with
him--the third and last that ever took place between us--on the morning
of the day on which he made an attempt upon the life of the King. I rode
over to Tottenham, and arrived there before daybreak. My coming was
expected, and he himself admitted me by a private door into his garden,
and thence into the house. I perceived that his mind was much disturbed,
and he told me he had passed the whole night in prayer. Without
acquainting me with his desperate design, I gathered from what he said,
that he meditated some fearful act, and that he considered his own life
in great jeopardy. If he fell, and he anticipated he should fall, he
committed his daughter to my care; and he gave me a written injunction,
wherein, as you will find, his blessing is bestowed upon her for
obedience to him, and his curse laid upon her in the event of a breach
of duty; commanding her, by all her hopes of happiness hereafter, to
fulfil the solemn promise he had made me--provided I should claim her
hand within a twelvemonth of his death. The unfortunate man, as you
know, died within two days of that interview, having, as I have since
ascertained, reiterated the same solemn charge, and in terms equally
impressive, to his daughter."

"A strange story truly," observed Sir Francis, who had listened
attentively to the relation; "but though Aveline may consent to be bound
by her father's promise to you, I see not how Lean enforce the claim."

"Hugh Calveley, when dying, disclosed no name to his daughter," said Sir
Giles. "There is no name mentioned in the paper confided by him to
Lanyere; and, possessed of that authority, you will represent the party
entitled to make the claim, and can act as Lanyere would have acted."

"She will not resist the demand," said the promoter. "That I can avouch,
for I overheard her declare as much to Sir Jocelyn."

"If such be the case, I am content," cried the old usurer. "Give me the
authority," he added to Lanyere.

"I have it with me, Sir Francis," rejoined the promoter; "but Sir Giles
will explain to you that there is something to be done before I can
yield it to you."

"What does he require?" asked the old usurer, glancing uneasily at his
partner.

"Merely all these title-deeds of the Mounchensey estates in exchange for
that paper," replied Sir Giles.

"Not merely the deeds," said Lanyere; "but an assignment on your part,
Sir Giles, and on yours, Sir Francis, of all your joint interest in
those estates. I must have them absolutely secured to me; and stand
precisely as you stand towards them."

"You shall have all you require," replied Mompesson.

"Amazement!" exclaimed Sir Francis. "Can you really mean to relinquish
this noble property to him, Sir Giles? I thought I was assigning my
share to you, and little dreamed that the whole estates would be made
over in this way."

"I have told you, Sir Francis," rejoined the other, "that
vengeance--ample, refined vengeance--cannot be too dearly purchased; and
you will now perceive that I am willing to pay as extravagantly as
yourself for the gratification of a whim. On no other terms than these
would Lanyere consent to part with the authority he possesses, which
while it will ensure you the hand of Aveline, will ensure me the keenest
revenge upon Sir Jocelyn. I have therefore acceded to his terms. Thou
hast got a rare bargain, Lanyere; and when the crack-brained Puritan
gave thee that paper, he little knew the boon he bestowed upon thee."

"The exchange would, indeed, seem to be in my favour, Sir Giles," he
said; "but you may believe me when I say, that though I gain these large
estates, I would rather have had the damsel."

"Well, let the business be completed," said Sir Giles; "and that it may
be so with all dispatch, do you, Lanyere, summon Lupo Vulp to us. You
will find him in his chamber, and bid him bring with him the deed of
assignment to you of the Mounchensey estates which he has already
prepared, and which only requires my signature and that of Sir Francis."

"I obey you, Sir Giles," replied Lanyere, departing on the errand.

As soon as they were alone, the old usurer observed to his partner--"I
am lost in astonishment at what you are about to do, Sir Giles. That I
should make a sacrifice for a dainty damsel, whose charms are doubled
because she should belong to an enemy, is not surprising; but that you
should give up so easily a property you have so long coveted--I confess
I cannot understand it."

A strange smile crossed the extortioner's countenance.

"And do you really think I would give it up thus, Sir Francis?" he said.

"But if we sign that deed--'tis his. How are you to get it back again?"

"Ask me not _how_--I have no time for explanation. Recollect what I told
you of Osmond Mounchensey, and the possibility of his re-appearance."

"I will not seek to penetrate your scheme, Sir Giles," observed the old
usurer; "but I would have you beware of Lanyere. He is cunning and
determined."

"He will scarcely prove a match for me, I think," observed the
extortioner--"but here he comes."

And as he spoke, the promoter again entered the chamber, followed by
Lupo Vulp, with a parchment under his arm.

"Give me the deed, good Lupo," said Sir Giles, taking it from him. "It
must be first executed by me--there!--and now your signature, Sir
Francis," he added, passing the instrument to him. "Now thou shalt
witness it, Lupo. 'Tis well!--'tis well!" he cried, snatching it back
