
OBLIGATIONS OF THE INDIVIDUAL TO GOD.

Into what two groups do the ten words in Exodus 20 fall?  And what
is the theme of each?  Is there a real difference between the
command of Exodus 34, "Thou shalt worship no other gods" and that
of Exodus 20, "Thou shall have no other gods before me"?  Did the
Hebrews as a matter of fact tolerate the worship of other gods in
their midst centuries after the days of Moses?  May the Hebrews
have originally interpreted the command of Exodus 20 as a demand
that Jehovah be given the first place in the worship and faith of
Israel?  How did later prophets like Elijah and Isaiah interpret
it?  (See I Kings 18:21 and Is. 6:1-8; 8:13.)  The older command in
Exodus 34, "Thou shall make thee no molten gods," was probably
intended to guard the Israelites from imitating the religious
customs of their heathen neighbors, such as the Egyptians and the
Moabites.  The command to make no graven image was, it seems,
directed not against the public idols but against the private
images.  These were usually made of wood and were cherished in many
a Hebrew family, as for example, that of Jacob (cf. the story of
his flight from Laban, Gen. 31) or of David (I Sam. 19).  The
spirit of the law is truly interpreted by the later priestly
commentator who places completely under the ban all attempts
visibly to represent the Deity.  Is the spirit of this command
disregarded by the modern Greek church?  In certain parts of the
Roman Catholic world?  In any phases of Protestant worship?

How is the third command interpreted to-day?  The exact meaning of
the original Hebrew is not entirely clear.  It may be interpreted
literally: "Thou shall not invoke the name of Jehovah, thy God, in
vain."  The interpretation turns on the meaning of the phrase, in
vain.  This admits of four different translations: (1)
Purposelessly, and therefore needlessly or irreverently; (2) for
destruction, as when a man calls down a curse upon another; (3) for
nothing, that is in swearing to what is not true; and (4) in the
practice of sorcery or witchcraft, for this word was frequently
used by the Hebrews as a scornful designation of heathen
abominations.  Is it possible that the original command was
intended to guard against each of these evils?  If so, it broadens
and deepens its modern application.  Its fundamental idea is
evidently reverence and sincerity.

Why did the Hebrew law-givers place these three laws, which
emphasize absolute loyalty to Jehovah, at the beginning of the
decalogue?  What do we mean to-day by loyalty to God?  Loyalty to
Jehovah was not only the corner stone of Israel's religion but also
of the Hebrew state.  During the wilderness period and far down
into later periods it was the chief and at times practically the
only bond that bound together the individual members of the tribe
and nation.  Disloyalty to Jehovah was treason, and even the mild
code found in the book of Deuteronomy directs that apostasy be
punished by public stoning.  Loyalty to God or at least to the
individual sense of right to-day as in the past is the first
essential of effective citizenship.  Which is the more essential
for the welfare of the state, the manual, the mental or the
religious training of its citizens?  Where is the chief emphasis
placed to-day?  Is this right?


III.

THE SOCIAL AND ETHICAL BASIS OF THE SABBATH LAW.

The institution of the Sabbath in different countries apparently
has a long and complex history.  Many explanations have been given
of its origin, aside from the direct divine command.  The simplest
and most satisfactory is probably that it was originally connected
with the worship of the moon.  There are many indications in Hebrew
history that the early ancestors of the Israelites were moon
worshippers.  To-day as in the distant past the inhabitants of the
deserts from whence came the forefathers of the Hebrews make their
journeys under the clear, cool light of the moon, avoiding the hot,
piercing rays of the mid-day sun.  The moon with its marvelous
transformations is unquestionably the most striking and
awe-inspiring object in the heavens.  It is not strange, therefore,
that many primitive peoples and especially the nomadic desert
dwellers worshipped it as the supreme embodiment of beauty and
power.

In China feast days once a month were doubtless connected with the
phases of the moon.  Among the American Indians time was reckoned
by numbers of moons.  The custom of observing as sacred the four
days, which marked the transition from one quarter of the moon to
another, was also widespread.  In the Hebrew religion the feast of
the New Moon was closely identified with that of the Sabbath.  The
Hebrew month was also the lunar month of approximately twenty-eight
days.  The new moon, therefore, marked the beginning of the month
and each succeeding Sabbath a new phase of the moon.  The fourth
commandment seems, therefore, like the others to have a basis in
nature, and also, as we shall note, a social reason.  Would a
commandment be truly divine if it did not have a natural and
reasonable basis?  By the ancients rest from labor was regarded as
one of the essential elements in the sacred day.  The prophet Amos
denounced the merchants of Northern Israel because they were
constantly saying,

  When shall the new moon pass that we may sell grain,
  And the Sabbath that we may open the corn?

In its earlier ceremonial interpretation, to abstain from all labor
on the Sabbath was clearly regarded as a primary obligation.  Like
fasting, it is probably regarded as an offering due to Jehovah.
The word "holy" in the Hebrew means set apart, distinct.  The
Sabbath, therefore, was to differ from the other days of the week.
The great ethical prophets of the Assyrian period were the first
completely to divest this ancient institution of its heathen
significance and give it a deeper religious, and therefore social
and humanitarian interpretation.  They gave it its true and eternal
content, declaring that God decreed that all who labor should have
their needed rest.  The prophet who added the noble interpretation
in Deuteronomy 5:14, 15, declares that it was not only that old and
young, master and slave, might rest, but also that even the toiling
ox and ass and the resident alien might have the relaxation which
their tired bodies required.  Thus these inspired prophets traced
the ultimate basis of the institution of the Sabbath to God's
providence for the innate needs of man.  They recognized that it
was essential for the physical, mental and spiritual well-being of
the individual and, therefore, for the welfare of the State.  That
the Hebrews might not forget this obligation, the prophets appealed
to the memory of the days when the Israelites themselves were
slaves in the land of Egypt and the thought of how Jehovah
delivered them from their slavery.

Tuan Fang, the great Manchu viceroy who only recently met martyrdom
at the hands of his warring countrymen, said when visiting America
a few years ago, "I think that when I return to China I will
introduce Sunday in my province."  When asked whether he would make
it the seventh day, he replied, "Yes, for I think that the seventh
day is far better than the tenth.  Furthermore, for the convenience
and economy of all, I will make it correspond to the Christian
Sunday.  From my study of the conditions in America and of the
needs in China I am convinced that the Sabbath is a most valuable
and essential institution."

Later Judaism revived the earlier heathen content of the Sabbath,
and lost sight of its deeper political, social and humanitarian
significance.  Unfortunately the Christian church and above all our
Puritan fathers followed the guidance of the later priests rather
than of the early prophets.  Jesus with his clear insight into
human hearts and needs, and with his glowing love for men,
repudiated the harsh, mechanical interpretation of the Sabbath
current in his day and reasserted the teachings of the great
prophets that preceded him; "The Sabbath was made for man, not man
for the Sabbath."

Does the social and humanitarian interpretation of the Sabbath
obscure or deepen its religious significance?  Does the great body
of the Christian church to-day accept the interpretation of the
prophets and of Jesus, or that of early heathenism and later
Judaism?  Does the interpretation of the prophets and of Jesus
furnish a basis on which all classes in the state can unite in
appreciating and in jealously guarding the Sabbath?  Does the
acceptance of one or the other of these interpretations
fundamentally affect our actual observance of the Sabbath?  Our
motives and our spirit?  Our attitude toward our fellow men?


IV.

IMPORTANCE OF CHILDREN'S LOYALTY TO PARENTS

It is generally recognized by scientists that the place of animals
in the scale of being is dependent upon the length of their period
of infancy.  The lower forms of animal life are mature almost as
soon as they are born.  Minnows never come under the care of their
genitors, but are independent as soon as they are hatched.  The
young of the less developed quadrupeds are soon weaned and
forgotten by their parents.  The longer the young remain in the
care of their parents the higher the form of the animal.  The great
difference between men and most of the higher animals is thought by
many to be dependent upon the length of childhood, and the
consequent care and attention given by the parents.  Even among
human beings it is scarcely too much to say that the longer the
time of education and training under proper supervision lasts, the
more successful finally at the end of life the man will be.  When
one considers that Aristotle, who is perhaps generally accepted as
the world's greatest thinker, associated with his great teacher,
Plato, twenty years, until he was thirty-eight years of age and
produced nearly all his important works only after that time, we
may see one example of the profound importance of training.  The
care of parents for their children throughout all of their early
years would naturally imply loyalty of children to the parents as a
mark of gratitude for the time and affection expended upon them.

In one of his characteristic poems, filled with wise suggestion,
Lowell speaks of obedience as that "great tap root" of the state
and civilization.  The habit of obedience is one of the finest
characteristics in family life, and obedience to parents normally
becomes obedience to law in the citizen, one of the surest bonds of
society and one of the most necessary conditions of social progress.

This fact was so fully recognized in the patriarchal stage of
society that the head of the family within the tribe had the power
even of life and death over the members of his household.  In
practically all early societies we find this authority of the
parent and the obedience of the child insisted upon as fundamental.
In the Orient, even to the present day, this respect of children
for their parents is closely bound up with their religion and their
civilization.  The first wish of every man is that be may have a
son to sacrifice to his memory after he has gone.  And not only in
China, but in many other states we find ancestral worship springing
from this relation of father and son.

The primitive Hebrew laws (Ex. 21:15, 17) made death the penalty
for a child who struck or cursed his parents.  In many countries
parricide is considered the worse type of murder.  The very old
Sumerian law of ancient Babylon punished with slavery the son who
repudiated his father.  In the fifth commandment no penalty is
named for disrespect toward one's parents.  The religious sanction
only is implied, though the penalty of death was inflicted by the
law of the tribe.

In society to-day our aim in education is to develop individuality
and for a country with a democratic form of government this type of
education should be encouraged.  Disobedience or disrespect ho
parents has no longer a legal penalty, although the children may be
compelled by law to support their parents.  But gratitude toward
parents and a normal affectionate family life are practically
essential to social welfare.  Aside from its civic aspect, there is
nothing in society more beautiful than the right relationship
between parents and children.  Jesus, who represented the kingdom
of God as a household, found that the best analogy for the
relationship of men to God and the best descriptions of the divine
nature are based upon this relationship.


V.

PRIMARY OBLIGATIONS OF MAN TO MAN.

The second five commandments of the decalogue deal with the
obligations of man to man.  These commands still find a central
place in modern society as the best guarantees of social stability,
security and peace.  All of the crimes with which they deal, except
that of covetousness, were punished, in Hebrew custom and law, by
definite penalties.  In many instances these penalties were still
more severe among other early peoples.

As soon as society emerges from the savage state, the crime of
adultery is always forbidden.  Nothing else stirs the worst of
human passions as does sexual jealousy.  Even to-day probably no
other cause is more productive of murder and suicide.  In early
societies, like that of the Israelites, to this normal human
feeling of personal wrong was added that of the loss of property,
for wives or concubines were considered as property.  Hence the
penalty for adultery among the Hebrews, as with many ancient and
many modern peoples, was death.

As soon as society develops from the savage into the pastoral
stage, private property is recognized in the flocks and herds.  In
the development of society additional types of property rights
appear under various forms of ownership, until it is not too much
to say that modern society is based largely upon property rights.
The evils associated with property are many, but as yet, at any
rate, the rights of property are a benefit to the state, provided
those rights are exercised under proper legal supervision.  It
should be recognized, however, that the command, "Thou shall not
steal," may well have various meanings, dependent upon the laws of
property.  Our law restricts the right of legacy, the sale or even
the possession of poisons and often of dangerous weapons.
Similarly the degree of ownership of other goods is often limited.

The ninth command, not to bear false witness against one's
neighbor, is often interpreted as simply a violation of one's oath
in court, or when appended to formal legal papers.  But in most
modern countries the command is also interpreted so as to include
lying.  If this crime is defined in its broadest sense, as lack of
truth and trustworthiness, it is in many ways the greatest sin man
can commit against society.  Practically all modern economic and
social relations are based upon the security of contracts and upon
the readiness of business men and citizens to keep their word.  It
may be well questioned whether the crime of murder is as dangerous
to society as the habit of deception, for the temptation of murder
is rare as compared with that of deception; while the evil is often
less far-reaching in its consequence and less despicable.

In the last command, that directed against covetousness, the
law-giver goes beyond the external act to the motive and spirit in
the mind of the individual.  If this command is kept in spirit, the
others are practically unnecessary.  This command is like in kind
to that of Jesus in the New Testament, where all the commandments
are summed up into one: "Love one another."


VI.

THE PRESENT-DAY AUTHORITY OF THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

The various books that make up our Bible were each written to meet
the needs of the people of its day; but inasmuch as the prophets
and law-givers from the days of Moses to those of Jesus touched
upon the most vital questions of human life and society, these
principles are most of them universal and applicable to all tribes
and nations and races and peoples.

Necessarily there are many variations in the specific methods by
which these commands are to be carried out.  The honor and
reverence due everywhere to mother and father may well have
different applications, depending upon the type of civilization,
the customs of living and the type of home life that exist in the
different countries.  The injunction to keep the Sabbath may well
be carried out with the same spirit in various ways.  What
constitutes theft depends upon the law of the separate state and
upon the rights of property granted by that law, but everywhere the
primary obligations of the individual to God, to society and to his
fellow men remain substantially the same.  As he develops a more
tender conscience, a more just and kindly attitude toward his
fellows, a greater reverence toward his Creator, the spirit with
which be keeps these commandments is becoming continually more
urgent, whatever may be the specific way in which they may be
carried out for the benefit of his fellow men and of society.


_Questions for Further Consideration_.

Does idol worship exist in any part of the civilized world to-day?
If so, where and in what forms?

Are those addicted to profanity necessarily and intentionally
irreverent?  What is the origin of this habit?  How may it be
eradicated?  What are some of the best methods by which children
may be guarded against it?

Do you think it is right for the state to become responsible for
the religious education of its citizens?

What is the fundamental difference between the so-called
"Continental Sabbath" and that observed by Jesus?

In what way may Sunday be made a day of greater profit and
significance to the working man?

What attitude should one take regarding so-called "white" or
"society lies"?  Under what circumstances, if any, is it right to
lie?


_Subjects for Further Study_.

(1) The Decalogues in Exodus 20-23.  _Hist. Bible_ II, 209-24.

(2) Jesus' Version of the Ancient Prophetic Decalogue.  See Matt.
5:17, 18; 6:19-21; 12:1-12, 31, 32; 15:3-5; 22: 36-39.

(3) Compare the Moral Ideals of the Decalogue with those of the
Present-Day Socialists.  Cross, _The Essentials of Socialism_;
Walling, _Socialism as It Is_; Spargo, _Elements of Socialism_.




STUDY XI

THE EARLY TRAINING OF A RACE.

ISRAEL'S EXPERIENCE IN THE WILDERNESS AND EAST OF THE JORDAN--Num.
11-14; 21:21-31; 32:39-42.

_Parallel Readings_.

  _Hist. Bible_ I, 204-29.
  Edward Jenks, _Hist. of Politics_, Chap, III.

Then as they journeyed from the mountain of Jehovah the ark of
Jehovah went before them, to seek out a halting place for them.
And whenever the ark started, Moses would say,

  Arise, O Jehovah,
  And let thine enemies be scattered,
  And let those who hate thee flee before thee.

And when it rested, he would say,

Return, O Jehovah, to the ten thousand of thousands of
Israel.--_Num. 10:33, 35, 36_.

As an eagle stirreth up her nest, hovereth over her young, taketh
them, beareth them upon her wings, so the Lord his God did lead him
and there was no strange God with him.--_Deut. 32: 11_.

Before man made us citizens, great Nature made us men--_Lowell_.

  Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain
    shall meet
  Till earth and sky stand presently at God's great
    judgment seat;
  But there is neither East, nor West, border nor breed
    nor birth
  When two strong men stand face to face, tho' they come
    from the ends of the earth.
      --_Rudyard Kipling_.

The measure of the success of our lives can only lie in the stature
of our manhood, in the growth in unworldliness and in the moral
elevation of our inner self.--_Henry Drummond_.


I.

THE WILDERNESS ENVIRONMENT.

The accounts regarding the experiences of the Israelites in the
wilderness lack the unity which characterizes the records of the
earlier and later periods.  They simply give occasional pictures of
the life of the Hebrew fugitives.  They must be interpreted in the
light of the peculiar background of the wilderness and of the
nomadic life which flourishes there to-day as it did in the past.
The Hebrews on escaping from Egypt entered the South Country, which
extends seventy miles from the rocky hills of Judah southward until
it merges into the barren desert.  During the later Roman period
the northern and northwestern portions of this territory were
partially reclaimed by agriculturalists; but in early periods, as
to-day, it was pre-eminently the home of wandering, nomadic tribes.
This wild, treeless region is divided by rocky ranges running from
east to west.  Parallel to these are deep, hot and for the most
part waterless valleys.  In the springtime these valleys are
covered by a sparse vegetation; from a few perennial springs flow
waters that irrigate the immediately surrounding land; but they
soon lose themselves in the thirsty desert.  During the summer the
vegetation disappears almost entirely, and the struggle for
subsistence becomes intense.  The nature of the country makes it
necessary for its inhabitants constantly to journey from one
pasture land and spring to another.

The home of the Hebrews at this time, like that of the modern
Arabs, was the tent.  The stories that have come down from this
period suggest the experiences through which they passed.  The
constant insistent problem in this region was and is how to secure
adequate supplies of food and water.  During the greater part of
the year the chief food of the people is the milk and curds
supplied by their herds.  At times, however, these fail to meet the
needs even of the modern Bedouin inhabitants of this South Country.
They then gather the gum that exudes from the tamarisk tree or the
lichens from the rocks.  From these they make a coarse flour and
bread which keeps them alive until the winter rains again bring
their supply of water and pasturage.  Some scholars hold that this
coarse food was the manna of the Biblical accounts.  They argue
that later generations, familiar with the barrenness of the
wilderness and believing that the Hebrews at this time numbered
many thousands, naturally concluded and reported that their
ancestors were miraculously fed.  At certain periods, also, the
meagre fare of the desert dweller is supplemented by the quails
which he is able to capture and these are a welcome relief to his
monotonous diet.  About the perennial springs, which gush forth
from the barren rock, there also grew up stories of a miraculous
provision for the needs of Jehovah's people; for all springs and
especially those in the desert were regarded by the ancients as
miracles.  Even in more fertile lands the Greeks reared beside such
springs temples to the god, whom they thought of as thus signally
revealing himself.  In the deeper sense each of these early Hebrew
stories is historical, for they all record the fundamental thought
and belief that through this strenuous, painful period, even as in
later crises in their history, Jehovah was guiding his people and
giving them not only food and water, but also that training in the
school of danger and privation which was essential for their
highest development.

Even more insistent than the constant struggle for food and water
were the dangers that came from the hostile tribes which already
occupied this much-contested territory.  For the possession of the
springs and pasture lands they fought with the energy and craft
that characterize the Bedouin tribes to-day.  Hence, to the
Hebrews, fresh from the fertile fields of Egypt, their life in the
wilderness represented constant hardship, privation, suffering and
danger.


II.

INFLUENCE OV THE NOMADIC LIFE UPON ISRAEL'S CHARACTER AND IDEALS.

The wilderness left a stamp upon Hebrew character and life that may
be traced even to-day in the later descendants of that race.  It
tightened their muscles and gave them that physical virility which
has enabled them to survive even amidst the most unfavorable
conditions.  It taught them how to subsist on the most meagre food
supply and to thrive where the citizen of a more prosperous land
would inevitably starve.

It is probable that in their early nomadic experiences the Hebrews
acquired those migratory habits which, intensified by unwonted
vicissitudes, have carried them to almost every civilized land.  In
the wilderness they also learned the art of nomadic warfare which,
to win victories, depended not so much upon open attack as upon
strategy.  The common dangers of the wilderness life tightened the
racial and religious bonds that held them together.  Only by the
closest union could they resist the perils that beset them.  Upon
the complete devotion of each man to the interest of the tribe hung
his fate, as well as that of the community as a whole.  Hence arose
that devotion to race, that readiness to avenge every wrong and to
protect each individual, even if it cost the life-blood of the
tribe, which is illustrated in many of the stories that come from
this early period.  How far has this racial characteristic survived?

In a community thus closely bound together the morality of each
individual was guarded with a jealousy unknown in more settled
prosperous communities.  Thus, for example, adultery from the first
appears to have been punished by public stoning.  How far has this
characteristic survived to the glory of the Jewish race?

The tribal organization also cherished the freedom of each
individual.  His voice was heard in its council and his rights were
carefully protected.  The free atmosphere of the desert tolerated
no despotism, and the sheik was the servant of all.  These
fundamental conceptions of government persisted even when, under
the influence of a new agricultural environment, the Hebrews
established the kingship and monarchy.  It was the struggle between
these inherited democratic ideals and those of the neighbors who
were ruled by despots, that ultimately disrupted the Hebrew kingdom
and called forth those great champions of liberty and social
justice, the prophets of the Assyrian period.  It was this same
democratic atmosphere that made possible the work of those
prophets, who openly denounced the crimes of king and people.  How
far have the Jews throughout all their history allied themselves
with democratic movements?


III.

THE INFLUENCE OF THE WILDERNESS LIFE UPON ISRAEL'S FAITH.

The pressure of constant danger intensified the sense of dependence
upon a power outside and above themselves.  It led them to look
constantly to Jehovah as their sole guide and deliverer.  A
continued attitude crystallized into a habit.  Hence, throughout
their troubled career the Hebrews have been conscious of the
presence of God and have found in him their defender and personal
friend as has no other people in human history.

As later generations meditated on the perils of the wilderness
through which their ancestors passed, they naturally felt that only
under the immediate guidance of a divine power could they have
escaped.  They were familiar with the way in which the caravans
travel through the desert: in front of the leader is borne aloft a
brazier filled with coals.  From this smouldering fire there arises
by day a column of smoke that, in the clear air of the desert, can
be easily seen afar by any who may straggle behind.  At night these
glowing coals seem like a pillar of fire, telling of the presence
of their leader and protector.  With the same vivid imagery,
according to some interpreters, the later Hebrews pictured the
march of their ancestors through the wilderness, and thereby
symbolized the belief that Jehovah was then present and that
through his prophet Moses he was personally guiding his people.
How far have these Old Testament narratives been thus interpreted
by modern western readers?  Does it change their spiritual
significance to seek to learn their origin and real literary
character?  Are there still to be found, often in humble walks of
life, earnest Christians who have similar deep spiritual
experiences and describe them with the same vivid imagery and
concreteness?  Is the value of our conception of God's presence and
activity in human history deepened and strengthened or lessened by
the thought that in the past, even as to-day, he accomplished his
ends by natural rather than contra-natural methods?  Are the faith
and institutions of nations and individuals developed most through
special revelations or through ordinary, constant, daily training
and experience?  Is it not true that to us all there come at times
experiences akin to those that underlie these wonderful narratives?


IV.

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE EAST-JORDAN CONQUESTS.

Desert dwellers take little account of the lapse of time.  It is
not strange that the data regarding the duration of the sojourn in
the wilderness are late and exceedingly vague.  The number forty in
the Bible is the concrete Hebrew equivalent of many.  Ordinarily
the forty years represent a generation.  A period of about forty
years accords well with the facts of contemporary Egyptian
chronology.  If the Hebrews fled from Egypt about 1200, during the
period of anarchy following the breakdown of the nineteenth
Egyptian dynasty, they could not have entered Palestine much before
