
Now I was ashamed to have taken them, for she was so plainly alone
and helpless, and I could not understand altogether how it could be
so. I was sure that she was Danish, too.

"How is it that you have not fled, lady?" I asked. "Surely you
should have gone."

"Ay; but the thralls fled when they heard the news. Has not my
father sent you back for me?"

This seemed a terrible plight for the maiden, and I knew not what
to say or do. She could not be left in the way of our Saxons if
they came on the morrow, and I could not take her to Poole. And so,
lest I should terrify her altogether, I made up my mind even as she
looked to me for an answer.

"I think your father is kept in Wareham in some way. Does he look
for you there?"

"Ay, surely," she answered; but there was a note as of some new
fear in her voice. "Has aught befallen him? Have the Saxons come?"

"All is well in Wareham yet," I answered. "Now we will take you to
your father. But we are strangers, as you may see."

Then I called to Kolgrim, who was listening open eyed to all this,
and backed away from the door a little.

"What is this madness, master?" he whispered hoarsely.

"No madness at all. Ten minutes' ride to Wareham with the maiden,
give her to the fisherman to take to her friends, and then ride
away--that is all. Then we shall be in Poole long before any look
for us, for we are in luck's way."

Kolgrim laughed.

"Strange dangers must I run with you, master; but that is what one
might look for with Ranald of the Sword."

Then I got off the horse, which was very strong and seemed quiet,
and went to the maiden again.

"It will be best for you to come with us, lady," I said "we will
see you safely to Wareham."

The light fell on my arms now, and they were splendid enough, being
Harald Fairhair's gift, which I had put on for the fight, seeing
that the men loved to see their king go bravely, and being,
moreover, nowise loth to do so myself. She seemed to take
heart--for she was well nigh weeping now--when she saw that I was
not some wandering soldier of the great host.

"My horses, two of them should be here," she said. "I bade the
thralls leave them when they fled."

So she thought not that we had loosed them, and did not know her
own in the moonlight. Maybe she had no knowledge as to which of
many had been left, and I was glad of that, for so her fear was
less.

"You must ride with us," I said, "and I would ask you to come
quickly; even now the host is leaving Wareham."

"Ay, is that so? Then my father is busy," she said, and then she
faltered a little, and looked at me questioningly. "I cannot go
without my nurse, and she is very sick. I think she sleeps now. Men
feared her sickness so that we brought her here from the town. But
indeed there is nought to fear; there is no fever or aught that
another might take from her."

Then I grew fairly anxious, for this was more than I had looked
for. I knew that it was likely that she would soon be missed and
sought for; yet I could not think of leaving her to that chance,
with the bridge broken moreover.

I gave the bridle to Kolgrim then to hold.

"Let me see your nurse," I said gently; "I have some skill in these
troubles."

She led me into the house without a word. All the lower story was
in one great room, with a hearth and bright fire thereon in the
centre. Beyond that was a low bed, to which the maiden went. A very
old woman, happed in furs and heavy blankets, lay on it, and it
needed but one look to tell me that she needed no care but the
last. Past need of flight was she, for she was dead, though so
peacefully that her watcher had not known it.

"The sleep is good, is it not?" the maiden said, looking anxiously
into my face.

"It is good, lady," I answered, taking off my helm. "It is the best
sleep of all--the sleep that heals all things."

The maiden looked once at the quiet face, and once more at me, with
wide eyes, and then she knew what I meant, and turned quickly from
me and wept silently.

I stood beside her, not daring to speak, and yet longing to be on
the road. And so still were we that Kolgrim got off his horse and
came to the door and called me, though not loudly.

I stepped back to him.

"Come again in a few minutes and say one word--'Saxons'" I
whispered, "then we shall go."

He nodded and drew back. I think the maiden had not heard me move,
for she was bent over the bed and what lay thereon. It seemed very
long to me before I heard my comrade at the door.

"Saxons, master!" he said loudly.

"Say you so?" I answered, and then I touched the maiden's arm
gently.

"Lady, we must go quickly," I said. "The dame is past all help of
ours, and none can harm her. Come, I pray you."

She stood up then, still looking away from me, and I drew the
covering over the still face she gazed at.

"You must leave her, and I know these Saxons will not wrong the
dead," said I gently. "Your father will miss you."

"I am keeping you also in danger," she answered bravely. "I will
come."

"Loth to go am I," she said, as she gathered her wrappings to her
and made ready very quickly, "for it seems hard. But hard things
come to many in time of war."

After that she ceased weeping, and was, as I thought, very brave in
this trouble, which was indeed great to her. And when she was clad
in outdoor gear, she bent once more over the bed as in farewell,
while I turned away to Kolgrim and made ready the horses. Then she
came, and mounted behind me on a skin that I had taken from a chair
before the hearth.

Then we were away, and I was very glad. The good horse made nothing
of the burden, and we went quickly. Many a time had I ridden
double, with the rough grip of some mail-shirted warrior round my
waist, as we hurried back to the ships after a foray; but this was
the first time I had had charge of a lady, and it was in a strange
time and way enough. I do not know if it was in the hurry of
flight, or because they had none, but the horses had no saddles
such as were for ladies' use.

So I did not speak till we were half a mile from the house, and
then came a hill, and we walked, because I feared to discomfort my
companion. Then I said:

"Lady, we are strangers, and know not to whom we speak nor to whom
we must take you."

There was a touch of surprise in her voice as she answered:

"I am the Lady Thora, Jarl Osmund's daughter."

Then I understood how this was the chief to whom the man I spoke
with first had bidden me go for orders. It was plain now that he
was up and down among the host ordering all things, and deeming his
daughter in safety all the while. He had not had time to learn how
his cowardly folk had fled and left their mistress, fearing perhaps
the sickness of the old dame as much as the Saxon levies.

Now no more was said till we came to the riverside, where the flood
tide was roaring through the broken timbers of the bridge. The
fisher slept soundly despite the noise of wind and water, and
Kolgrim had some trouble in waking him.

"How goes the flight?" I asked him when he came ashore with the
boat's painter in his hand.

"Faith, master, I know not. I have slept well," he said.

Now by this time it seemed to me that I ought to take the lady into
a safe place, and I would go myself rather than leave her to the
fisherman, who was rough, and hated the Danes heartily, as I knew.
Moreover, I had a new plan in my head which pleased me mightily.
Then I thought that if I were to meet any man who suspected me,
which was not likely, the Lady Thora would be pass enough for me.
So I told Kolgrim to bide here for me, and he said at first that he
must be with me. However, I made him stay against his will at last,
telling him what I thought.

Then the fisher put us across quickly, and went back to the far
side to wait my return.

I asked Thora where I must take her to find the jarl.

"To his house, surely," she said.

"I do not know the way from here," I answered; "I fear you must
lead me."

"As you will," she said, wondering. "It is across the town
certainly."

That was bad for me, perhaps, but I should find that out presently.
So we went across the open, and came to the road through the town
along which I had been before. It was clearer, though there were
yet many people about.

Now when we were in the shadow of the first houses, Thora stopped
suddenly and looked hard at me.

"Will you tell me if I am heading you into danger?" she said.

"What danger is possible?" I answered. "There are no Saxons here
yet."

"Not one?" she said meaningly. "I may be wrong--it does seem
unlikely but I think you do not belong to us. Your speech is not
like ours altogether, and your helm is gold encircled, as if you
were a king."

"Lady," I said, "why should you think that I am not of your people?
Let us go on to the jarl."

"Now I know that you are not. Oh, how shall I thank you for this?"

Then she glanced at my helm again, and drew a sudden little quick
breath.

"Is it possible that you are Alfred of Wessex? It were like what
they say of him to do as you have done for a friendless maiden."

Then she caught my hand and held it in both of hers, looking half
fearfully at me.

"Lady," I said, "I am not King Alfred, nor would I be. Come, let us
hasten."

"I will take you no further," she said then. "Now I am sure that
you are of the Northmen that were seen with the Saxons. You are not
of us, and I shall lose you your life."

Then came the quick trot of horses, and I saw a little troop coming
down the street, their arms flashing in the streaks of moonlight
between the houses.

"I will see you in good hands, Lady Thora," I answered. "Who are
these coming?"

"It is my father," she said, and drew me back deeper into shadow.

After the horsemen and beside them ran men who bore planks and
ropes, and it was plain that the jarl had found out his loss, and
hastened to bridge the gap and cross the river.

I saw that I could keep up the pretence no longer.

"Let me walk behind you as your servant," I said. "If any heed me,
I pray you make what tale you can for me."

"What can I say to you in thanks?" she cried quickly, and letting
go my hand which she yet held. "If you are slain, it is my fault.
Tell me your name at least."

"Ranald Vemundsson, a Northman of King Alfred's," I said. "Now I am
your servant--ever."

Then Thora left my side suddenly, and ran forward to meet the
foremost horseman--for they were close to us--calling aloud to
Osmund to stay. And he reined up and leaped from his horse with a
cry of joy, and took her in his arms for a moment.

I got my cloak around me, pulling the hood over my helm, and stood
in the shadow where I was. I saw the jarl lift his daughter into
the saddle, and the whole troop turned to go back. The footmen cast
down their burdens where each happened to be, and went quickly
after them; and I was turning to go my way also, when a man came
riding back towards me.

"Ho, comrade," he said, "hasten after us. Mind not the things left
in the boat. There is supper ere we go."

I lifted my hand, and he turned his horse and rode away, paying no
more heed to me. That was a good tale of things left that Thora had
made in case I was seen to be going back to the boat.

Then I waxed light hearted enough, and thought of my other plan.
Kolgrim saw me coming, and the boat was ready.

"Have you flint and steel?" I said to the fisher as I got into the
boat.

"Ay, master, and tinder moreover, dry in my cap."

"Well, then, take me to those ships we saw. I have a mind to scare
these Danes."

It was a heavy pull against the sea to where they lay afloat now,
though it was not far. I fired all three in the cabins under the
fore deck, so that, as their bows were towards the town, the light
would not be seen till I was away.

Then we went swiftly back to Kolgrim, and as I mounted and rode
off, the blaze flared up behind us, for the tarred timbers burned
fiercely in the wind.

"That will tell Odda that the Danes are flying. And maybe it will
save Wareham town from fire, for they will think we are on them. So
I have spoiled Jarl Osmund's supper for him."

Then I minded that this would terrify the Lady Thora maybe, and
that put me out of conceit with my doings for a moment. But it was
plain that she was brave enough, for there were many things to fray
her in the whole of this matter, though perhaps it was because
Kolgrim stayed beyond the river that she made so sure that I was a
man of King Alfred's and no friend to the Danes.

