propitiatory offering to the powers of the unseen world, in order to bring
victory to the Roman arms. His father had sacrificed himself in the same
way at the battle of Veseris (close to Vesuvius) in 340, fought against the
Latins and Campanians. -- DEVOVERAT: Liv. 10, 28, 13 (speech of Decius)
_datum hoc: nostro generi est ut luendis periculis publicis piacula simus;
iam ego mecum hostium legiones mactandas Telluri et dis Manibus dabo_. --
ALIQUID etc.: 'some principle'; in his philosophical works Cicero often
confounds the Epicureans by quoting the action of the Decii and others like
it, as showing that pleasure is not the end of existence. Cf. especially
Fin. 2, 61 _P. Decius cum se devoverat et equo admisso in mediam aciem
Latinorum irruebat, aliquid de voluptatibus suis cogitabat?_ Cf. also
below, 75. With regard to _natura_ see n. on 5. -- SUA SPONTE: 'for its own
sake'; 'on its own account'. Cf. Leg. 1, 45 _vera et falsa sua sponte non
aliena iudicantur_, where a few lines later _sua natura_ occurs as
equivalent to _sua sponte_. -- EX PETERETUR: em. for _peteretur_ in the
MSS. The words _expetere_, _expetendum_ are technically used in Cicero's
philosophical works to express the Greek [Greek: haireisthai], [Greek:
haireton] as applied to the _finis_ or [Greek: telos], the supreme aim of
moral action. _Pulchrum_ above is a translation of the Greek [Greek:
kalon], a term constantly applied to the [Greek: telos], particularly by
the Stoics. -- SPRETA ET CONTEMPTA: the first word is much the stronger of
the two; _spernere_ is [Greek: kataphronein], 'to scorn'; _contemnere_
[Greek: oligoreisthai], 'to make light of', 'hold of no account'.
_Contemnere_ is often no stronger in sense than _omittere_, 'to pass by,
neglect'. Cf. 65 _contemni_, _despici_. -- OPTIMUS QUISQUE: see A. 93, _c_;
G. 305; H. 458, 1.

P. 19. -- 44. CRUDITATE: 'indigestion'. -- INSOMNIIS: 'sleeplessness'; the
singular _insomnium_ occurs only once in prose (Tac. Ann. 11, 4).
_Insomnia, ae_ is found only in poetry and late prose. -- DIVINE: this word
in Cic. often means nothing more than 'splendidly', 'extraordinarily'. --
ESCAM MALORUM: 'an enticement to evil' (_esca_ = _ed-ca_, from the root of
_edo_). Plato in the Timaeus 69 D (a dialogue translated into Latin by
Cicero, a fragment of whose translation is still preserved) has [Greek:
hedonen megiston kakou delear]. Cf. also Cic. Hortensius fr. 76 (ed. Halm)
_voluptates corporis quae vere et graviter a Platone dictae sunt illecebrae
esse atque escae malorum_. -- MODICIS: for the sake of variety Cic. chooses
this, not _moderatis_, as the opposite of _immoderatis_. Trans. 'a moderate
amount of goodfellowship'. -- M.F. = _Marci filium_. -- DEVICERAT:
pluperfect where a modern would incline to use a perfect. The battle
referred to is that of Mylae, fought in 260; its memory was perpetuated by
the decking of the _forum_ with the _rostra_ of the captured ships; the
_columna rostrata_ bore a long inscription, a restored version of which
still exists. -- CENA: so best spelt; some good texts still print _caena_,
but _coena_ is decidedly wrong, being based on the fiction that the Latin
borrowed the Greek word [Greek: koine] and turned it into _coena_. -- CEREO
FUNALI: 'the torch-light'; _cereo_, the em. of Mommsen for _crebro_; the
_funale_ was a torch composed of withs or twigs twisted into a rope
(_funis_) and dipped in pitch or oil. -- SIBI ... SUMPSERAT: Cic. seems to
think that Duillius assumed these honors on his own authority. This was
probably not the case; they were most likely conferred on him by a vote of
the _comitia tributa_. Cf. Liv. epit. 17 _C. Duillius primus omnium
Romanorum ducum navalis victoriae duxit triumphum, ob quam causam ei
perpetuus quoque honos habitus est, ut revertenti a cena tibicine canente
funale praeferretur_. No other instance is known where these particular
distinctions were decreed; the nearest parallel lies in the right accorded
to Paulus Macedonicus and to Pompeius to wear the triumphal _toga picta_
for life on each occasion of the _ludi_. It may be conjectured that the
music and the torch were part of the ceremony on the evening of a triumph
when the _triumphator_ was escorted home. Cf. Florus 1, 18, 10, ed. Halm.
-- NULLO EXEMPLO: 'without any precedent'. -- PRIVATUS: any person is
_privatus_ who is not actually in office at the moment referred to, whether
he has led a public life or not. -- LICENTIAE: a strong word is used to
mark the heinousness of Duillius' supposed offence against ancestral
custom.

45. ALIOS: _sc. nomino_. -- PRIMUM: the corresponding _deinde_ is omitted,
as often. -- SODALIS: the _sodalitates_ or _sodalitia_, brotherhoods for
the perpetuation of certain rites accompanied with feasting, were
immemorial institutions at Rome. The clause _sodalitates ... acceptis_ must
not be taken to mean that Cicero supposed these brotherhoods to have been
first instituted in the time of Cato; it is only introduced to show that
Cato, so far from being averse to good living, assisted officially in the
establishment of new clubs. Most of the _sodalitates_ were closely
connected with the _gens_; all members of a _gens_ were _sodales_ and met
together to keep up the old _sacra_, but in historical times fictitious
kinship largely took the place of real kinship, and feasting became almost
the sole raison d'etre of these clubs. [See Mommsen's treatise _De
collegiis et sodaliciis Romanis_] The parallel of the London City Companies
readily suggests itself. The national _sodalitates_ or priesthoods such as
those of the _Sodales Titii, Luperci, Augustales_ etc. were somewhat
different. -- AUTEM: for the form of the parenthesis cf. 7. -- MAGNAE
MATRIS: the image of Cybele was brought to Rome in 204 B.C. from Pessinus
in Phrygia. See Liv. 29, 10. The _Sacra_ are called _Idaea_ from Mount Ida
in Phrygia, which was a great centre of the worship of Cybele. _Acceptis_,
sc. _in civitatem_; the worship of strange gods was in principle illegal at
Rome unless expressly authorized by the State. -- IGITUR: the construction
of the sentence is broken by the introduction of the parenthesis, and a
fresh start is made with _epulabar igitur. Igitur_ is often thus used, like
our 'well then', to pick up the broken thread of a sentence. So often _sed_
or _ergo_. -- FERVOR: Cf. Hor. Od. 1, 16, 22 _me quoque pectoris temptavit
in dulci iuventa fervor_. -- AETATIS, QUA PROGREDIENTE: 'belonging to that
time of life, but as life advances'. The word _aetas_ has really two senses
here; in the first place it is _bona aetas_ or _iuventus_ (cf. 39 where
_aetas = senectus_), in the second place _vita_ (for which see n. on 5). --
NEQUE ENIM: the _enim_ refers to _modice_. -- COETU ... SERMONIBUS: for the
order of the words see n. on 1 _animi tui_. -- METIEBAR: cf. n. on 43
_referenda_. -- ACCUBITIONEM: a _vox Ciceroniana_, rarely found in other
authors. -- VITAE CONIUNCTIONEM: 'a common enjoyment of life'. -- TUM ...
TUM: here purely temporal, 'sometimes ... sometimes'; often however = 'both
... and'; cf. 7. -- COMPOTATIONEM etc.: cf. Epist. ad Fam. 9, 24, 3.
_Compotatio_ = [Greek: symposion]; _concenatio_ = [Greek: syndeipnon]. --
IN EO GENERE: see n. on 4. -- ID: _i.e._ eating and drinking.

46. TEMPESTIVIS ... CONVIVIIS: 'even in protracted banquets'. Those
banquets which began _early_ in order that they might last long were
naturally in bad repute, so that the phrase _tempestivum convivium_ often
has almost the sense of 'a debauch'. Thus in Att. 9, 1, 3 Cicero describes
himself as being evil spoken of _in tempestivis conviviis, i.e._ in
dissolute society. Cf. pro Arch. 13. The customary dinner hour at Rome was
about three o'clock in the afternoon. The word _tempestivus_, which in 5
means 'at the right time', here means 'before the right time'. So in
English 'in good time' often means 'too early'. See Becker's Gallus, p. 451
_et seq_. -- QUI PAUCI: the substitution of the nominative of the relative
for the partitive genitive (_quorum_) is not uncommon. A. 216, _e_; G. 368,
Rem. 2; H. 397, 2, n. -- PAUCI ADMODUM: Cic. usually says _admodum pauci_
rather than _pauci admodum_. -- VESTRA AETATE: = _eis qui sunt vestra
aetate_. Cf. n. on 26 _senectus_. -- SERMONIS ... SUSTULIT: notice the
indicatives _auxit, sustulit_, the relative clauses being attributive,
though they might fairly have been expected here to be causal. G. 627; H.
517, 2. In this passage Cic. imitates Plato, Rep. 328 D. -- BELLUM
INDICERE: common in the metaphorical sense; _e.g._ De Or. 2, 155 _miror cur
philosophiae prope bellum indixeris_; Hor. Sat. 1, 5, 7 _ventri indico
bellum_. -- CUIUS EST etc.: _i.e._ nature sanctions a certain amount of
pleasure. This is the Peripatetic notion of the _mean_, to which Cicero
often gives expression, as below, 77; also in Acad. 1, 39; 2, 139; and in
De Off.; so Hor. Sat. 1, 1, 106 _sunt certi denique fines quos ultra
citraque nequit consistere rectum_; cf. Od. 2, 10. -- NON INTELLEGO NE: for
the negatives cf. nn. on 24, 27.

P. 20. -- MAGISTERIA: generally explained as referring to the practice of
appointing at each dinner a 'master of the feast', _arbiter bibendi_ or
[Greek: symposiarches]. This explanation is not quite correct. Mommsen
shows in his work '_de collegiis_' that each one of the _collegia_ or
_sodalicia_ annually appointed a _magister cenarum_ whose duty it was to
attend to the club-dinners during his year of office and no doubt to
preside at them. That some office is meant more important than that of the
_arbiter bibendi_ appointed for a particular feast is shown by the words _a
maioribus instituta_. It is scarcely likely that Cicero was ignorant of the
Greek origin of the custom of appointing an _arbiter bibendi_. -- ET IS
SERMO etc.: 'and the kind of talk in which following the fashion of our
fathers we engage, beginning at the upper table, as the cup goes round'.
The cup circulated from left to right, not, as with us, from right to left.
The guests at a Roman dinner reclined on three couches, placed at three
tables; two of the couches (_lecti_) were parallel, and the third was at
right angles to the other two. The _lectus_ at which the cup began to
circulate was _summus_, the next _medius_, the last _imus_. For a _summo_
cf. _da (sc. bibere) a summo_ in Plaut. Asin. 5, 2, 41. See Becker's
Gallus, p. 471 _et seq_. -- SICUT ... EST: 'as we find'; so Off. 1, 32 _ut
in fabulis est_, and often. -- IN SYMPOSIO: 2, 26. -- MINUTA: see n. on 52.
-- RORANTIA: here with an active sense, 'besprinkling', representing
[Greek: epipsekazein] in Xenophon; often however not different in sense
from _'roscida'_. -- REFRIGERATIO ... HIBERNUS: cf. closely 57 _ubi et
seq_. Note the changes of expression in passing from _refrigeratio_ to
_sol_ (_apricatio_ would have more exactly corresponded with
_refrigeratio_) and from _aestate_ to _hibernus_ (for _hieme_). -- IN
SABINIS: 'when with the Sabines', who were celebrated for their simplicity
of life. Cato had an estate in the Sabine district. -- CONVIVIUM VICINORUM
COMPLEO: 'I make up (_i.e._ to the proper number) a company of my
neighbors'. -- QUOD ... PRODUCIMUS: 'and we continue our companionship to
as late an hour as we can, with changing talk'. The phrases _multa nocte_
or _de nocte_ 'late in the night', _multo die_ 'late in the day', are
common; cf. also Att. 13, 9, 1 _multus sermo ad multum diem_; Rep. 6, 10
_sermonem in multam noctem produximus_.

47. AT: so in 21, where see n. -- QUASI TITILLATIO: the _quasi_, as often
in Cicero's writings, marks a translation from the Greek. Here the
Epicurean word [Greek: gargalismos] is referred to; it is often in Cic.
represented by _titillatio_; cf. N.D. 1, 113; Fin. 1, 39; Tusc. 3, 47. --
BENE: _sc. dixit_. -- AFFECTO AETATE: 'wrought on by age'. Cf. De Or. 1,
200 _in eius infirmissima valetudine affectaque iam aetate_. -- UTERETURNE
etc.: 'whether he still took pleasure in love'; _uti = frui_. Cf. Ovid,
Met. 4, 259 _dementer amoribus uti_ with Cic. Tusc. 4, 68 _venereis
voluptatibus frui_. -- DI MELIORA: _sc. duint_; this archaic form usually
occurs when the phrase is given in full. The story of Sophocles is taken by
Cicero from Plato (Rep. 329 B) who has [Greek: euphemei]. -- ISTINC etc.:
cf. the passage in Plato, Rep. 1, 329 C. For _istinc_ used otherwise than
of place cf. _unde_ in 12 with n. -- AGRESTI: 'boorish'; _rusticus_ denotes
simply an ordinary countryman. -- QUAMQUAM ... ERGO: these words may be
scanned as a hexameter line, but the pause before _ergo_ would prevent them
from being taken as a verse. -- HOC NON DESIDERARE: 'this absence of
regret'; the words form the subject of _est_. So _hoc non dolere_ in Fin.
2, 18. For the pronoun in agreement with the infinitive treated as noun cf.
Persius 1, 9 _istud vivere_; 1, 122 _hoc ridere meum_. H. 538, 3.

48. SI: 'even if', 'granting that'. -- BONA AETAS: 'the good time of life',
_i.e._ youth. Tischer qu. Varro de Re Rustica 2, 6, 2 _mares feminaeque
bona aetate_ = 'young'. For _bona aetas = homines bona aetate_ cf. n. on 26
_senectus_. -- UT DIXIMUS: not expressly, but the opinion is implied in 44,
45. -- TURPIONE AMBIVIO: L. Ambivius Turpio was the most famous actor of
Cato's time, and appeared especially in Terence's plays. In old Latin
commonly, occasionally in the Latin of the best period, and often in
Tacitus, the _cognomen_ is placed before the _nomen_ when the _praenomen_
is not mentioned. Cf. Att. 11, 12, 1 _Balbo Cornelio_. The usage is more
common in Cicero's writings than in those of his contemporaries. -- PRIMA
CAVEA: 'the lower tier'. The later Roman theatres consisted of semicircular
or elliptic galleries, with rising tiers of seats; the level space
partially enclosed by the curve was the _orchestra_, which was bounded by
the stage in front. There can be little doubt that Cicero is guilty of an
anachronism here; his words do not suit the circumstances of Cato's time.
Till nearly the end of the Republic the theatres were rude structures of
wood, put up temporarily; it is even doubtful whether they contained seats
for the audience. Cato himself frustrated an attempt to establish a
permanent theatre. -- PROPTER: 'close by'. The adverbial use of _propter_
(rarely, if ever, met with outside of Cicero) is denied by some scholars,
but is well attested by MSS. here and elsewhere. -- TANTUM ... EST: these
words qualify _delectatur_.

49. ILLA: put for _illud_, as in Greek [Greek: tauta] and [Greek: tade] are
often put for [Greek: touto] and [Greek: tode]. The words from _animum_ to
the end of the sentence are explanatory of _illa_. -- QUANTI: 'how
valuable!' but the word may have exactly the opposite meaning if the
context require it; thus in N.D. 1, 55 and Rep. 6, 25 the sense is 'how
worthless!' -- STIPENDIIS: 'campaigns'. The four words from _libidinis_ to
_inimicitiarum_ are to be taken in pairs, while _cupiditatum_ sums them up
and is in apposition to all. -- SECUM ESSE: cf. Tusc. 1, 75; Pers. 4, 52
_tecum habita_. -- SI ... ALIQUOD: the sense is scarcely different from
that of _si ... quod_; the distinction is as slight as that in English
between 'if' followed by 'some', and 'if' followed by 'any'. Cf. n. on
Lael. 24 _si quando aliquid_. -- PABULUM: for the metaphorical sense
rendered less harsh by _tamquam_, cf. Acad. 2, 127; Tusc. 5, 66 _pastus
animorum_. -- STUDI: an explanatory genitive dependent on _pabulum_. --
OTIOSA SENECTUTE: 'leisured age'; _otium_ in the Latin of Cicero does not
imply idleness, but freedom from public business and opportunity for the
indulgence of literary and scientific tastes. -- VIDEBAMUS: for the tense
cf. Lael. 37 _Gracchum rem publicam vexantem ab amicis derelictum
videbamus, i.e._ 'we saw over a considerable period'. See also 50, 79. --
IN STUDIO etc.: 'busied with the task of almost measuring bit by bit
(_di-metiendi_) the heavens and the earth'. For the sense cf. Hor. Od. 1,
28 (of Archytas). -- GALLUM: consul in 157 B.C., famous as an astronomer
and as the first Roman who predicted an eclipse before the battle of Pydna.
See Liv. 44, 37.

P. 21. -- DESCRIBERE: technically used of the drawing of mathematical
figures. _Ingredior_ often has an infinitive dependent on it even in the
best Latin; _e.g._ Cic. Top. 1 _nos maiores res scribere ingressos_.

50. ACUTIS: requiring keenness of intellect. -- NAEVIUS: see n. on 20. --
TRUCULENTO ... PSEUDOLO: these plays of Plautus (lived from 254 to 184
B.C.) we still possess. The Truculentus is so named from one of the
characters, a slave of savage disposition who is wheedled; the Pseudolus
from a cheating slave. The latter name is commonly supposed to be a
transcription from a Greek word [Greek: pseudulos], which however nowhere
occurs; and as the change from Greek [Greek: u] to Latin _o_ is not found
before _l_, Corssen assumes [Greek: pseudalos] as the original word. The
form _Pseudulus_ of the name is probably later than _Pseudolus_. -- LIVIUM:
Livius Andronicus, the founder of Latin literature (lived from about 285 to
204 B.C.), who translated the Odyssey, also many Greek tragedies. Livius
was a Greek captured by Livius Salinator at Tarentum in 275 B.C.; for a
time he was the slave of Livius, and, according to custom, took his name
when set free. For an account of his writings see Cruttwell's Hist. of
Roman Literature, Ch. 3; Sellar, Roman Poets of the Rep., Ch. 3. --
DOCUISSET: 'had brought on to the stage'. _Docere_ (like [Greek: didaskein]
in Greek, which has the same use) meant originally to instruct the
performers in the play. -- CENTONE TUDITANOQUE CONSULIBUS: _i.e._ in 240
B.C. The use of _que_ here is noticeable; when a date is given by reference
to the consuls of the year it is usual to insert _et_ (not _que_ or
_atque_, which rarely occur) between the two names, if only the _cognomina_
(as here) be given. If the full names be given, then they are put side by
side without _et_. Cf. n. on 10. -- CRASSI: see n. on 27. -- PONTIFICI ET
CIVILIS IURIS: the _ius pontificium_ regarded mainly the proper modes of
conducting religious ceremonial. _Ius civile_, which is often used to
denote the whole body of Roman Law, here includes only the secular portion
of that Law. Cf. n. on 38. -- HUIUS P. SCIPIONIS: 'the present P. Scipio'.
So in 14 _hi consules_ 'the present consuls'; Rep. 1, 14 _Africanus hic,
Pauli filius_, and often. The P. Scipio who is meant here is not Africanus,
but Nasica Corculum. -- FLAGRANTIS: 'all aglow'; so _ardere studio_ in
Acad. 2, 65. -- SENES: = _cum senes essent_, so _senem_ below. -- SUADAE
MEDULLAM: 'the essence (lit. marrow) of persuasiveness'. The lines of
Ennius are preserved by Cicero, Brut. 58. _Suada_ is a translation of
[Greek: peitho], which the Greek rhetoricians declared to be the end and
aim of oratory. This Cethegus was consul in 204 and in 203 defeated Mago in
the N. of Italy. -- EXERCERI: here reflexive in meaning. A. 111, n. 1; G.
209; H. 465. -- VIDEBAMUS: see n. on 49. -- COMPARANDAE: for the idea of
_possibility_ which the gerundive sometimes has (but only in negative
sentences or interrogative sentences implying a negative answer, and in
conditional clauses) see Madvig, 420, Obs.; Roby, 1403. -- HAEC QUIDEM: a
short summary of the preceding arguments, preparatory to a transition to a
new subject, introduced by _venio nunc ad_. The succession of two clauses
both containing _quidem_ seems awkward, but occurs in Fin. 5, 80 and
elsewhere. -- HONESTUM SIT: 'does him honor'. -- UT ANTE DIXI: in 26, where
see the notes. -- POTEST ESSE: Meissner (n. on 27) says that Cicero's rule
is to say _potest esse, debet esse_ and the like, not _esse potest_ and the
like. It is true that _esse_ in such cases is very seldom separated from
the word on which it depends, but _esse potest_ is just as common as
_potest esse_; the difference to the sense is one of emphasis only, the
_esse_ having more emphasis thrown on it in the latter case.

51. MIHI ... VIDENTUR: see Introd. -- HABENT RATIONEM CUM 'they have their
reckonings with', 'their dealings with'; a phrase of book-keeping. --
IMPERIUM: so Verg. Georg. 1, 99 _exercetque frequens tellurem atque imperat
agris_; ib. 2, 369 _dura exerce imperia et ramos compesce fluentes_; Tac.
Germ. 26 _sola terrae seges imperatur._ -- SED ALIAS ... FAENORE: put for
_sed semper cum faenore, alias minore, plerumque maiore_. -- VIS AC NATURA:
'powers and constitution'. These two words are very often used by Cic.
together, as in Fin. 1, 50 _vis ac natura rerum_. -- GREMIO: so Lucret. 1,
250 _pereunt imbres ubi eos pater aether In gremium matris terrai
praecipitavit_, imitated by Verg. Georg. 2, 325. -- MOLLITO AC SUBACTO:
_i.e._ by the plough. _Subigere_, 'subdue', is a technical word of
agriculture; so Verg. Georg. 2, 50 _scrobibus subactis_; see also below,
59.

P. 22. -- OCCAECATUM: 'hidden'. _Caecus_ has the sense of 'unseen' as well
as that of 'unseeing' or 'blind'. -- OCCATIO: Cicero's derivation, as well
as Varro's (De Re Rust. 1, 31, 1) from _occidere_, because the earth is cut
up, is unsound. _Occa_ is _rastrum_, probably from its _sharp_ points (root
_ak-_); _occatio_ therefore is 'harrowing'. -- VAPORE: 'heat'. This word
has not in the best Latin the meaning of our 'vapor'. -- COMPRESSU: a word
found only here in Cicero's writings and elsewhere in Latin only in the
ablative case, like so many other nouns whose stem ends in _-u_. --
DIFFUNDIT ET ELICIT: 'expands and lures forth'. -- HERBESCENTEM: this word
occurs nowhere else in Latin. -- NIXA: A. 254, _b_; G. 403, Rem. 3; H. 425,
1, 1), n. -- FIBRIS STIRPIUM: so Tusc. 3, 13 _radicum fibras_. --
GENICULATO: 'knotted'. The verb _geniculo_, from _genu_, scarcely occurs
excepting in the passive participle, which is always used, as here, of
plants. So Plin. Nat. Hist. 16, 158 _geniculata cetera gracilitas nodisque
distincta_, speaking of the _harundo_. -- SPICI: besides _spica_, the forms
_spicum_ and _spicus_ are occasionally found. _Spici_ here is explanatory
_frugem_. -- VALLO: for the metaphor compare N.D. 2, 143 _munitae sunt
palpebrae tamquam vallo pilorum_; Lucr. 2, 537.

52. QUID EGO ... COMMEMOREM: this and similar formulae for passing to a new
subject are common; cf. 53 _quid ego ... proferam_ etc.; often _nam_
precedes the _quid_, as in Lael. 104. The _ego_ has a slight emphasis. Cato
implies that his own devotion to grape-culture was so well known as not to
need description. -- ORTUS SATUS INCREMENTA: 'origin, cultivation, and
growth'. For the omission of the copula see n. on 53. -- UT: final, and
slightly elliptic ('I say this that etc.'); so in 6 (where see n.), 24, 56,
59, 82. -- REQUIETEM: the best MSS. of Cic. sometimes give the other form
_requiem_, as in Arch. 13. -- VIM IPSAM: 'the inherent energy'. -- OMNIUM
... TERRA: a common periphrasis for 'all plants'; cf. _e.g._ N.D. 2, 120.
The Latin has no one word to comprehend all vegetable products. -- QUAE ...
PROCREET: 'able to generate'. -- TANTULO: strictly elliptic, implying
_quantulum re vera est_. In such uses _tantus_ and _tantulus_ differ
slightly from _magnus_ and _parvus_; they are more emphatic. -- ACINI
VINACEO: 'a grape-stone'. -- MINUTISSIMIS: used here for _minimis_.
Strictly speaking _minutus_ ought to be used of things which are fragments
of larger things, _minutus_ being really the participle passive of _minuo_.
In a well-known passage (Orat. 94) Cic. himself calls attention to the
theoretical incorrectness of the use, which, however, is found throughout
Latin literature. Cf. 46 _pocula minuta_; also below, 85 _minuti
philosophi_. -- MALLEOLI: vine-cuttings; so called because a portion of the
parent stem was cut away with the new shoot, leaving the cutting in the
shape of a mallet. -- PLANTAE: 'suckers', shoots springing out of the
trunk. -- SARMENTA: 'scions', shoots cut from branches not from the trunk.
-- VIVIRADICES: 'quicksets', new plants formed by dividing the roots of the
mother plant. -- PROPAGINES: 'layers', new plants formed by rooting a shoot
in the earth without severing it from the parent plant; Verg. Georg. 2, 26.
-- EADEM: n. on 4 _eandem_. -- CLAVICULIS: cf. N.D. 2, 120 _vites sic
claviculis_. -- ARS AGRICOLARUM: _agricolae arte freti_, a strong instance
of the abstract put for the concrete.

53. EIS: _sc. sarmentis_, those which have not been pruned away by the
knife. -- EXSISTIT: 'springs up'. _Exsistere_ in good Latin never has the
meaning of our 'exist', _i.e._ '_to be in_ existence', but always means
'_to come into_ existence'. -- ARTICULOS: 'joints'; cf. 51 _culmo
geniculato_. The word _tamquam_ softens the metaphor in _articuli_, which
would properly be used only of the joints in the limbs of animals. --
GEMMA: Cicero took the meaning 'gem' or 'jewel' to be the primary sense of
_gemma_ and considered that the application to a bud was metaphorical. See
the well-known passages, Orat. 81 and De Or. 3, 155. -- VESTITA PAMPINIS:
'arrayed in the young foliage'. -- FRUCTU ... ASPECTU: ablatives of
respect, like _gustatu_ above. -- CAPITUM IUGATIO: 'the linking together of
their tops'; _i.e._ the uniting of the tops of the stakes by cross-stakes.
So the editors; but Conington on Verg. Georg. 2, 355 seems to take _capita_
of the top-foliage of the vines, an interpetation which is quite possible.
Those editors are certainly wrong who remove the comma after _iugatio_ and
place it after _religatio_, as though _et_ were omitted between the two
words. In enumerations of more than two things Cic. either omits the copula
altogether or inserts it before each word after the first; but in
enumerating two things _et_ cannot be omitted, except where there are
several _sets_ or _pairs_ of things. Cf. n. on 13. -- RELIGATIO: _i.e._ the
tying down of shoots so as to cause them to take root in the earth.
_Religatio_ seems to occur only here.

P. 23. -- ALIORUM IMMISSIO: 'the granting of free scope to others'.
_Immissio_ scarcely occurs elsewhere in good Latin. The metaphor is from
letting loose the reins in driving; cf. Verg. Georg. 2, 364; Plin. N.H. 16,
141 _cupressus immittitur in perticas asseresque amputatione ramorum_;
Varro, R.R. 1, 31, 1 _vitis immittitur ad uvas pariendas_. Some, referring
to Columella de Arbor, c. 7, take the word to mean the setting in the earth
of a shoot in order that it may take root before being separated from the
parent stem. The context, however, is against this interpretation. --
IRRIGATIONES etc.: the plurals denote more prominently than singulars would
the repetition of the actions expressed by these words. -- REPASTINATIONES:
'repeated hoeings'. The _pastinum_ was a kind of pitchfork, used for
turning over the ground round about the vines, particularly when the young
plants were being put in. -- MULTO TERRA FECUNDIOR: see n. on 3 _parum ...
auctoritatis_.

54. IN EO LIBRO: see Introd. -- DOCTUS: often used of poets, not only by
Cicero but by most other Latin writers, more particularly by the elegiac
poets; see also n. on 13. -- HESIODUS: the oldest Greek poet after Homer.
The poem referred to here is the [Greek: Erga kai Hemerai] which we still
possess, along with the Theogony and the Shield of Heracles. -- CUM:
concessive. -- SAECULIS: 'generations', as in 24. -- FUIT: = _vixit_. --
LAERTEN: the passage referred to is no doubt the touching scene in Odyss.
24, 226, where Odysseus, after killing the suitors, finds his unhappy old
father toiling in his garden. In that passage nothing is said of
_manuring_. -- LENIENTEM: see n. on 11 _dividenti_. -- COLENTEM etc.: the
introduction of another participle to explain _lenientem_ is far from
elegant. _Cultione agri_ or something of the kind might have been expected.
The collocation of _appetentem_ with _occupatum_ in 56 is no less awkward.
-- FACIT: n. on 3 _facimus_. -- RES RUSTICAE LAETAE SUNT: 'the farmer's
life is gladdened'. -- APIUM: this form is oftener found in the best MSS.,
of prose writers at least, than the other form _apum_, which probably was
not used by Cic. -- OMNIUM: = _omnis generis_. -- CONSITIONES ...
INSITIONES: 'planting ... grafting'. On the varieties of grafting and the
skill required for it see Verg. Georg. 2, 73 _seq._

55. POSSUM: see n. on 24. -- IGNOSCETIS: 'you will excuse (me)'. --
PROVECTUS SUM: 'I have been carried away'. Cicero often uses _prolabi_ in
the same sense. -- IN HAC ... CONSUMPSIT: Cic. probably never, as later
writers did, used _consumere_ with a simple ablative. -- CURIUS: see n. on
15. -- A ME: = _a mea villa;_ cf. n. on 3 _apud quem_. -- ADMIRARI SATIS
NON POSSUM: a favorite form of expression with Cicero; _e.g._ De Or. 1,
165. -- DISCIPLINAM: 'morals'; literally 'teaching'.

56. CURIO: Plutarch, Cat. 2, says the ambassadors found him cooking a
dinner of herbs, and that Curius sent them away with the remark that a man
who dined in that way had no need of gold. The present was not brought as a
bribe, since the incident took place after the war. Curius had become
_patronus_ of the Samnites, and they were bringing the customary offering
of _clientes_; see Rep. 3, 40. -- NE: here = num, a rare use; so Fin. 3,
44; Acad. 2, 116. -- SED VENIO AD: so in 51 _venio nunc ad. Redeo ad_ (see
n. on 32) might have been expected here. -- IN AGRIS ERANT: 'lived on their
farms'. For _erant_ cf. n. on 21 _sunt_. -- ID EST SENES: cf. 19 n. on
_senatum_. -- SI QUIDEM: often written as one word _siquidem_ = [Greek:
eiper]. -- ARANTI: emphatic position. -- CINCINNATO: L. Quinctius
Cincinnatus is said to have been dictator twice; in 458 B.C., when he saved
the Roman army, which was surrounded by the Aequians, and ended the war in
sixteen days from his appointment; in 439, when Maelius was killed and
Cincinnatus was eighty years old. In our passage Cic. seems to assume only
one dictatorship. The story of Cincinnatus at the plough is told in Livy 3,
26. -- FACTUM: the technical term was _dicere dictatorem_, since he was
nominated by the consul on the advice of the senate. -- DICTATORIS: in
apposition with _cuius_.

P. 24. -- MAELIUM: a rich plebeian, who distributed corn in time of famine
and was charged with courting the people in order to make himself a king.
Ahala summoned him before the dictator, and because he did not immediately
obey, killed him with his own hand. For this, Ahala became one of the
heroes of his nation. See Liv. 4, 13. Cicero often mentions him with
praise. Cf. in Catil. I. 3; p. Sestio 143, etc. -- APPETENTEM: = _quia
appetebat_; so _occupatum_ = _cum occupasset_. -- VIATORES: literally
'travellers', so 'messengers'. They formed a regularly organized
corporation at Rome and were in attendance on many of the magistrates.
Those officers who had the _fasces_ had also lictors, who, however,
generally remained in close attendance and were not despatched on distant
errands. The statement of Cic. in the text is repeated almost _verbatim_ by
Plin. N.H. 18, 21. -- MISERABILIS: 'to be pitied'. The word does not quite
answer to our 'miserable'. -- AGRI CULTIONE: a rare expression, found
elsewhere only in Verr. 3, 226; then not again till the 'Fathers'. -- HAUD
SCIO AN NULLA: since _haud scio an_ is affirmative in Cicero, not negative
as in some later writers, _nulla_ must be read here, not _ulla_. Cf. 73
_haud scio an melius Ennius_, 'probably Ennius speaks better'; also 74
_incertium an hoc ipso die_, 'possibly to-day'. Roby, 2256; G. 459, Rem.;
H. 529, II. 3, 20, n. 2. -- QUAM DIXI: = _de qua dixi_, as in 53. --
SATURITATE: the word is said to occur nowhere else in Latin. -- QUIDAM:
_i.e._ the authors of the _tertia vituperatio senectutis_, whom Cato
refutes in 39, 59. -- PORCO ... GALLINA: these words are used collectively,
as _rosa_ often is; so Fin. 2, 65 _potantem in rosa Thorium_. -- IAM:
'further'. -- SUCCIDIAM ALTERAM: 'a second meat-supply'. The word seems to
be connected with _caedo_, and probably originally meant 'slaughter'. In a
fragment of Cato preserved by Gellius 13, 24, 12 (in some editions 13, 25,
12) we find _succidias humanas facere_. Varro, R.R. 2, 14 has the word in
the sense of 'meat'. -- CONDITIORA FACIT: 'adds a zest to'; cf. _condita_
in 10. -- SUPERVACANEIS OPERIS: 'by the use of spare time'; literally 'by
means of toils that are left over', _i.e._ after completing the ordinary
work of the farm.

57. ORDINIBUS: cf. 59 _ordines_. -- BREVI PRAECIDAM: 'I will cut the matter
short', for _praecidam_ (_sc. rem_ or _sermonem_) cf. Acad. 2, 133
_praecide_ (_sc. sermonem_); for _brevi_ (= 'in brief', [Greek: en
brachei]) cf. De Or. 1, 34 _ne plura consecter comprehendam brevi_. -- USU
UBERIUS: cf. 53 _fructu laetius ... aspectu pulchrius_. -- AD QUEM ...
RETARDAT: some have thought that there is zeugma here, supposing _ad_ to be
suited only to _invitat_, not to _retardat_. That this is not the case is
clear from such passages as Caes. B.G. 7, 26, 2 _palus Romanos ad
insequendum tardabat_ (= _tardos faciebat_); Cic. Sull. 49 _nullius
amicitia ad pericula propulsanda impedimur_. On _fruendum_ see Madvig, 421,
_a_, Obs. 2 and 265, Obs. 2; G. 428, Rem. 3, exc.; H. 544, 2, n. 5. --
INVITAT ATQUE ALLECTAT: one of the 'doublets' of which Cicero is so fond;
cf. Lael. 99 _allectant et invitant_.

58. SIBI HABEANT: _sc. iuvenes_; contemptuous, as in Lael. 18 _sibi habeant
sapientiae nomen_ Sull. 26 _sibi haberent honores, sibi imperia_ etc.; cf.
the formula of Roman divorce, _tu tuas res tibi habeto_. -- HASTAS: in
practising, the point was covered by a button, _pila_; cf. Liv. 26, 51
_praepilatis missilibus iaculati sunt_. -- CLAVAM: cf. Vegetius de Re Mil.
1, 11 _clavas ligneas pro gladiis tironibus dabant, eoque modo exercebantur
ad palos_; Iuv. 6, 246. The _palus_ is called _stipes_ by Martial 7, 32. --
PILAM ... VENATIONES ... CURSUS: all national amusements, well known to
readers of Horace; see Becker's Gallus. _Venationes_, em. for _nataliones_.
-- TALOS ... TESSERAS: _tali_, 'knucklebones', were oblong, and rounded at
the two ends; the sides were numbered 1 and 6 (1 being opposite to 6), 3
and 4. Four _tali_ were used at a time and they, like the _tesserae_, were
generally thrown from a box, _fritillus_. The _tesserae_, of which three
were used at a time, were cubes, with the sides numbered from 1 to 6 in
such a way that the numbers on two opposite sides taken together always
made 7. A separate name was used by dicers for almost every possible throw
of the _tesserae_ and _tali_. The two best known are _canis_, when all the
dice turned up with the same number uppermost; and _venus_, when they all
showed different numbers. The word _alea_ was general and applicable to
games of chance of every kind. These games, which were forbidden by many
ineffectual laws ('_vetita legibus alea_') were held to be permissible for
old men; see Mayor on Iuv. 14, 4. -- ID IPSUM: sc. _faciunt_; the omission
of _facere_ is not uncommon. Roby, 1441; H. 368, 3, n. 1. -- UT: em. for
ordinary readings _unum_ and _utrum_.

59. LEGITE: 'continue to read'. Cf. De Or. 1, 34 _pergite, ut facitis,
adulescentes_. In Tusc. 2, 62 it is stated that Africanus was a great
reader of Xenophon.

P. 25. -- LIBRO QUI EST DE: so in Fat. 1 _libris qui sunt de natura
deorum,_ and similarly elsewhere; but the periphrasis is often avoided, as
in Off. 2, 16 _Dicaearchi liber de interitu hominum_. -- QUI: _quique_
might have been expected, but the words above, _qui ... familiari,_ are
regarded as parenthetical. -- OECONOMICUS: Cicero translates from this work
c. 4, 20-25. -- INSCRIBITUR: see n. on 13. -- REGALE: 'worthy of a king';
different from _regium_, which would mean 'actually characteristic of
kings'. Yet Cic. sometimes interchanges the words; thus _regalis potestas_
in Har. Resp. 54 is the same as _regia potestas_ in Phil. 1, 3. -- LOQUITUR
CUM CRITOBULO etc.: 'discourses with Critobulus of how Cyrus etc.'. The
construction of _loqui_ with acc. and inf. belongs to colloquial Latin, as
does the construction _loqui aliquam rem_ for _de aliqua re_; cf. Att. 1,
5, 6 _mecum Tadius locutus est te ita scripsisse_; ib. 9, 13, 1 _mera
scelera loquuntur_. -- CYRUM MINOREM: Cyrus the younger (cf. 79 _Cyrus
maior_), well known from Xenophon's _Anabasis_. As Cyrus never arrived at
the throne (having been killed at Cunaxa in 401 in his attempt to oust his
brother the king with the help of the 10,000 Greeks) _regem_ is used in the
sense of 'prince', as in Verr. 4, 61 and elsewhere; [Greek: basileus] is
used in exactly the same way in a passage of the Oeconomicus which comes a
little before the one Cic. is here rendering (4, 16). -- LYSANDER: the
great commander who in 405 B.C. won the battle of Aegospotamos against the
Athenians. -- SARDIS: acc. pl.; _-is_ represents Gk. [Greek: -eis]. --
CONSAEPTUM AGRUM: 'park'; the phrase is a translation of Xenophon's [Greek:
paradeison]; this will account for the omission of _et_ before _diligenter
consitum_. -- DILIGENTER: 'carefully'. -- PROCERITATES: the plural probably
indicates the height of each _kind_ of tree. -- QUINCUNCEM:
thus:.:.:.:.:.:.: This was the order of battle in the Roman army during a
great part of its history. The cause for this application of the term is
rather difficult to see; it originally meant five-twelfths of an _uncia_;
possibly it was thus applied because by drawing lines between the points
