the room wherein she was and knocked twice.  But none answered, and,
venturing to enter, I heard the sound of a stifled sob.  She had thrown
herself on a settle, her face turned to the wall, and the afternoon sun
was shining on her yellow hair, which lay loose upon her shoulders.

I dared to say no word, and she only made a motion of her hand towards
me, that I should begone, without showing me the light of her
countenance.  On this I went forth stealthily, my heart again very heavy,
for the Maiden had spoken of learning good tidings; and wherefore should
my mistress weep, who, an hour agone, had been so merry?  Difficult are
the ways of women, a language hard to be understood, wherefore "love," as
the Roman says, "is full of anxious fears."

Much misdoubting how I fared in Elliot's heart, and devising within
myself what this new sorrow of Elliot's might signify, I half forgot my
own danger, yet not so much as to fare forth of the doors, or even into
the booth, where customers might come, and I be known.  Therefore I
passed into a room behind the booth, where my master was wont to instruct
me in my painting; and there, since better might not be, I set about
grinding and mixing such colours as I knew that he required.

I had not been long about this task, when I heard him enter the booth
from without, whence he walked straight into my workroom.  I looked up
from my colours, whereat his face, which was ruddy, grew wan, he
staggered back, and, being lame, reeled against the wall.  There he
brought up, crossing himself, and making the sign of the cross at me.

"Avaunt!" he said, "in the name of this holy sign, whether thou art a
wandering spirit, or a devil in a dead man's semblance."

"Master," I said, "I am neither spirit nor devil.  Was it ever yet heard
that brownie or bogle mixed colours for a painter?  Nay, touch me, and
see whether I am not of sinful Scots flesh and blood"; and thereon I
laughed aloud, knowing what caused his fear, and merry at the sight of
it, for he had ever held tales of "diablerie," and of wraiths and freits
and fetches, in high scorn.

He sat him down on a chair and gaped upon me, while I could not contain
myself from laughing.

"For God's sake," said he, "bring me a cup of red wine, for my wits are
wandering.  Deil's buckie," he said in the Scots, "will water not drown
you?  Faith, then, it is to hemp that you were born, as shall shortly be
seen."

I drew him some wine from a cask that stood in the corner, on draught.  He
drank it at one venture, and held out the cup for more, the colour coming
back into his face.

"Did the archers tell me false, then, when they said that you had fired
up at a chance word, and flung yourself and the sentinel into the moat?
And where have you been wasting your time, and why went you from the
bridge ere I came back, if the archers took another prentice lad for
Norman Leslie?"

"They told you truth," I said.

"Then, in the name of Antichrist--that I should say so!--how scaped you
drowning, and how came you here?"

I told him the story, as briefly as might be.

"Ill luck go with yon second-sighted wench that has bewitched Elliot, and
you too, for all that I can see.  Never did I think to be frayed with a
bogle, {14} and, as might have been deemed, the bogle but a prentice
loon, when all was done.  To my thinking all this fairy work is no more
true than that you are a dead man's wraith.  But they are all wild about
it, at the castle, where I was kept long, doing no trade, and listening
to their mad clatter."

He took out of his pouch a parcel heedfully wrapped in soft folds of
silk.

"Here is this Book of Hours," he said, "that I have spent my eyesight,
and gold, purple, and carmine, and cobalt upon, these three years past; a
jewel it is, though I say so.  And I had good hope to sell it to Hugh
Kennedy, for he has of late had luck in taking two English knights
prisoners at Orleans--the only profitable trade that men now can
drive,--and the good knight dearly loves a painted book of devotion;
especially if, like this of mine, it be adorned with the loves of
Jupiter, and the Swan, and Danae, and other heathen pliskies.  We were
chaffering over the price, and getting near a bargain, when in comes
Patrick Ogilvie with a tale of this second-sighted Maid, and how she had
been called to see the King, and of what befell.  First, it seems, she
boded the death of that luckless limb of a sentinel, and then you took it
upon you to fulfil her saying, and so you and he were drowned, and I left
prenticeless.  Little comfort to me it was to hear Kennedy and Ogilvie
praise you for a good Scot and true, and say that it was great pity of
your death."

At this hearing my heart leaped for joy, first, at my own praise from
such good knights, and next, because I saw a blink of hope, having
friends at Court.  My master went on--

"Next, Ogilvie told how he had been in hall, with the Dauphin, the
Chancellor Tremouille, and some scores of knights and nobles, a great
throng.  They were all waiting on this Lorrainer wench, for the Dauphin
had been told, at last, that she brought a letter from Baudricourt, but
before he would not see her.  This letter had been kept from him, I guess
by whom, and there was other clash of marvels wrought by her, I know not
what.  So their wisdom was set on putting her to a kind of trial, foolish
enough!  A young knight was dressed in jewels and a coronet of the
King's, and the King was clad right soberly, and held himself far back in
the throng, while the other stood in front, looking big.  So the wench
comes in, and, walking straight through the press of knights, with her
head high, kneels to the King, where he stood retired, and calls him
'gentle Dauphin'!

"'Nay, ma mie,' says he, ''tis not I who am the Dauphin, but his Highness
yonder,'--pointing to the young knight, who showed all his plumage like a
muircock in spring.

"Nay, gentle Dauphin," she answers, so Ogilvie said, "it is to thee that
I am sent, and no other, and I am come to save the good town of Orleans,
and to lead thee to thy sacring at Rheims."

"Here they were all struck amazed, and the King not least, who then had
some words apart with the girl.  And he has given her rooms in the Tour
Coudraye within the castle; and the clergy and the doctors are to examine
her straitly, whether she be from a good airt, {15} or an ill, and all
because she knew the King, she who had never seen him before.  Why should
she never have seen him--who warrants me of it?--she dwelling these last
days nigh the castle!  Freits are folly, to my thinking, and fools they
that follow them.  Lad, you gave me a gliff; pass me another stoup of
wine!  Freits, forsooth!"

I served him, and he sat and chuckled in his chair, being pleasured by
the thought of his own wisdom.  "Not a word of this to Elliot, though,"
he said suddenly; "when there is a woman in a house--blessings on her!--it
is anything for a quiet life!  But, 'nom Dieu!' what with the fright you
gave me, sitting there, whereas I deemed you were meat for eels and carp,
and what with thy tale--ha, ha!--and my tale, and the wine, maybe, I
forgot your own peril, my lad.  Faith, your neck is like to be longer, if
we be not better advised."

Hearing him talk of that marvellous thing, wrought through inspiration by
the Maid--whereat, as his manner was, he mocked, I had clean forgotten my
own jeopardy.  Now this was instant, for who knew how much the archer
might have guessed, that followed with the Maid and me, and men-at-arms
might anon be at our door.

"It may be," said I, "that Sir Patrick Ogilvie and Sir Hugh Kennedy would
say a word for me in the King's ear."

"Faith, that is our one chance, and, luckily for you, the lad you
drowned, though in the King's service, came hither in the following of a
poor knight, who might take blood-ransom for his man.  Had he been La
Tremouille's man, you must assuredly have fled the country."

He took up his Book of Hours, with a sigh, and wrapped it again in its
silken parcel.

"This must be your price with Kennedy," he said, "if better may not be.
It is like parting with the apple of my eye, but, I know not well how, I
love you, my lad, and blood is thicker than water.  Give me my staff; I
must hirple up that weary hill again, and you, come hither."

He led me to his own chamber, where I had never been before, and showed
me how, in the chimney-neuk, was a way into a certain black hole of
little ease, wherein, if any came in search for me, I might lie hidden.
And, fetching me a cold fish (Lenten cheer), a loaf, and a stoup of wine,
whereof I was glad enough, he left me, groaning the while at his
ill-fortune, but laden with such thanks as I might give for all his great
kindness.

There then, I sat, when I had eaten, my ears pricked to listen for the
tramp of armed men below and the thunder of their summons at the door.
But they came not, and presently my thought stole back to Elliot, who,
indeed, was never out of my mind then--nay, nor now is.  But whether that
memory be sinful in a man of religion or not, I leave to the saints and
to good confession.  Much I perplexed myself with marvelling why she did
so weep; above all, since I knew what hopeful tidings she had gotten of
her friend and her enterprise.  But no light came to me in my
meditations.  I did not know then that whereas young men, and many lasses
too, are like the Roman lad who went with his bosom bare, crying "Aura
veni," and sighing for the breeze of Love to come, other maidens are
wroth with Love when he creeps into their hearts, and would fain cast him
out--being in a manner mad with anger against Love, and against him whom
they desire, and against themselves.  This mood, as was later seen, was
Elliot's, for her heart was like a wild bird trapped, that turns with
bill and claw on him who comes to set it free.  Moreover, I have since
deemed that her passion of faith in the Maid made war on her love for me;
one breast being scantly great enough to contain these two affections,
and her pride taking, against the natural love, the part of the love
which was divine.

But all these were later thoughts, that came to me in musing on the
sorrows of my days; and, like most wisdom, this knowledge arrived too
late, and I, as then, was holden in perplexity.




CHAPTER VIII--OF CERTAIN QUARRELS THAT CAME ON THE HANDS OF NORMAN LESLIE


Belike I had dropped asleep, outwearied with what had befallen me, mind
and body, but I started up suddenly at the sound of a dagger-hilt smitten
against the main door of the house, and a voice crying, "Open, in the
name of the Dauphin."  They had come in quest of me, and when I heard
them, it was as if a hand had given my heart a squeeze, and for a moment
my breath seemed to be stopped.  This past, I heard the old serving-woman
fumbling with the bolts, and peering from behind the curtain of my
casement, I saw that the ways were dark, and the narrow street was lit up
with flaring torches, the lights wavering in the wind.  I stepped to the
wide ingle, thinking to creep into the secret hiding-hole.  But to what
avail?  It might have served my turn if my escape alive from the moat had
only been guessed, but now my master must have told all the story, and
the men-at-arms must be assured that I was within.  Thinking thus, I
stood at pause, when a whisper came, as if from within the ingle--

"Unbar the door, and hide not."

It must be Elliot's voice, speaking through some tube contrived in the
ingle of the dwelling-room below or otherwise.  Glad at heart to think
that she took thought of me, I unbarred the door, and threw myself into a
chair before the fire, trying to look like one unconcerned.  The bolts
were now drawn below; I heard voices, rather Scots than French, to my
sense.  Then the step of one man climbed up the stair, heavily, and with
the tap of a staff keeping tune to it.  It was my master.  His face was
pale, and falling into a chair, he wiped the sweat from his brow.
"Unhappy man that I am!" he said, "I have lost my apprentice."

I gulped something down in my throat ere I could say, "Then it is death?"

"Nay," he said, and smiled.  "But gliff for gliff, {16} you put a fear on
me this day, and now we are even."

"Yet I scarce need a cup of wine for my recovery, master," I said,
filling him a beaker from the flagon on the table, which he drained
gladly, being sore wearied, so steep was the way to the castle, and hard
for a lame man.  My heart was as light as a leaf on a tree, and the
bitterness of shameful death seemed gone by.

"I have lost my prentice another way," he said, setting down the cup on
the table.  "I had much a do to see Kennedy, for he was at the dice with
other lords.  At length, deeming there was no time to waste, I sent in
the bonny Book of Hours, praying him to hear me for a moment on a weighty
matter.  That brought him to my side; he leaped at the book like a trout
at a fly, and took me to his own chamber.  There I told him your story.
When it came to the wench in the King's laundry, and Robin Lindsay, and
you clad in girl's gear, and kissed in the guard-room, he struck hand on
thigh and laughed aloud.

"Then I deemed your cause as good as three parts won, and he could not
hold in, but led me to a chamber where were many lords, dicing and
drinking: Tremouille, Ogilvie, the Bishop of Orleans--that holy man, who
has come to ask for aid from the King,--La Hire, Xaintrailles, and I know
not whom.  There I must tell all the chronicle again; and some said this,
and some that, and Tremouille mocks, that the Maid uttered her prophecy
to no other end but to make you fulfil it, and slay her enemy for the
sake of her 'beaux yeux.'  The others would hear nothing of this, and,
indeed, though I am no gull, I wot that Tremouille is wrong here, and
over cunning; he trusts neither man nor woman.  Howsoever it be, he went
with the story to the King, who is keen to hear any new thing.  And, to
be short, the end of it is this: that you have your free pardon, on these
terms, namely, that you have two score of masses said for the dead man,
and yourself take service under Sir Hugh Kennedy, that the King may not
lose a man-at-arms."

Never, sure, came gladder tidings to any man than these to me.  An hour
ago the rope seemed tight about my neck; one day past, and I was but a
prentice to the mean craft of painting and limning, arts good for a monk,
or a manant, but, save for pleasure, not to be melled or meddled with by
a man of gentle blood.  And now I was to wear arms, and that in the best
of causes, under the best of captains, one of my own country--a lord in
Ayrshire.

"Ay, even so," my master said, marking the joy in my face, "you are right
glad to leave us--a lass and a lameter. {17} Well, well, such is youth,
and eld is soon forgotten."

I fell on my knees at his feet, and kissed his hands, and I believe that
I wept.

"Sir," I said, "you have been to me as a father, and more than it has
been my fortune to find my own father.  Never would I leave you with my
will, and for the gentle demoiselle, your daughter--"  But here I
stinted, since in sooth I knew not well what words to say.

"Ay, we shall both miss you betimes; but courage, man!  After all, this
new life beseems you best, and, mark me, a lass thinks none the worse of
a lad because he wears not the prentice's hodden grey, but a Scots
archer's green, white, and red, and Charles for badge on breast and
sleeve, and a sword by his side.  And as for the bonny Book of
Hours--'Master,' I said with shame, 'was that my ransom?'

"Kennedy would have come near my price, and strove to make me take the
gold.  But what is bred in the bone will out; I am a gentleman born, not
a huckster, and the book I gave him freely.  May it profit the good
knight in his devotions!  But now, come, they are weary waiting for us;
the hour waxes late, and Elliot, I trow, is long abed.  You must begone
to the castle."

In the stairs, and about the door, some ten of Sir Hugh's men were
waiting, all countrymen of my own, and the noise they made and their
speech were pleasant to me.  They gave me welcome with shouts and
laughter, and clasped my hands: "for him that called us wine-sacks, you
have given him water to his wine, and the frog for his butler," they
said, making a jest of life and death.  But my own heart for the nonce
was heavy enough again, I longing to take farewell of Elliot, which might
not be, nor might she face that wild company.  Howbeit, thinking it good
to have a friend at court, I made occasion to put in the hand of the old
serving-woman all of such small coins as I had won in my life servile,
deeming myself well quit of such ill-gotten gear.  And thereafter, with
great mirth and noise, they set forth to climb the hill towards the
castle, where I was led, through many a windy passage, to the chamber of
Sir Hugh Kennedy.  There were torches lit, and the knight, a
broad-shouldered, fair-haired man, with a stern, flushed face, was
turning over and gazing at his new Book of Hours, like a child busy with
a fresh toy.  He laid the book down when we entered, and the senior of
the two archers who accompanied me told him that I was he who had been
summoned.

"Your name?" he asked; and I gave it.

"You are of gentle blood?"  And I answering "Yes," he replied, "Then see
that you are ready to shed it for the King.  Your life that was justly
forfeit, is now, by his Royal mercy, returned to you, to be spent in his
service.  Rutherford and Douglas, go take him to quarters, and see that
to-morrow he is clad as beseems a man of my command.  Now good night to
you--but stay!  You, Norman Leslie, you will have quarrels on your hand.
Wait not for them, but go to meet them, if they are with the French men-
at-arms, and in quarrel see that you be swift and deadly.  For the
townsfolk, no brawling, marauding, or haling about of honest wenches.
Here we are strangers, and my men must be respected."

He bowed his head: his words had been curt, no grace or kindness had he
shown me of countenance.  I felt in my heart that to him I was but a pawn
in the game of battle.  Now I seemed as far off as ever I was from my
foolish dream of winning my spurs; nay, perchance never had I sunk lower
in my own conceit.  Till this hour I had been, as it were, the hinge on
which my share of the world turned, and now I was no more than a wheel in
the carriage of a couleuvrine, an unconsidered cog in the machine of war.
I was to be lost in a multitude, every one as good as myself, or better;
and when I had thought of taking service, I had not foreseen the manner
of it and the nature of the soldier's trade.  My head, that I had carried
high, somewhat drooped, as I saluted, imitating my companions, and we
wheeled forth of the room.

"Hugh has taken the pride out of you, lad, or my name is not Randal
Rutherford," said the Border man who had guided me.  "Faith, he has a
keen tongue and a short way with him, but there are worse commanders.  And
now you must to your quarters, for the hour is late and the guard-room
shut."

He led me to our common sleeping-place, where, among many snoring men-at-
arms in a great bare hall, a pallet was laid for me, and my flesh crept
as I remembered how this was the couch of him whom I had slain.  Howbeit,
being well weary, despite the strangeness of the place, after brief
orisons I slept sound till a trumpet called us in the morning.

Concerning the strangeness of this waking, to me who had been gently
