whom usually might was right. At the end of three or four years, he
practically monopolized the law business of the district; and he soon
became by far the most popular man in it, despite a hot-headed
disposition which made him many enemies, which involved him in
numberless quarrels, and which resulted in his fighting at least one
duel, in which he killed his opponent and was himself dangerously
wounded.

It was inevitable, of course, that he should enter politics, and equally
inevitable that he should be successful there. Eight years after his
arrival from Carolina, at the age of twenty-nine, he was elected to
represent his state in Congress, and covered the eight hundred miles to
Philadelphia on horseback. From the House, he was appointed to serve in
the Senate, resigned from it to accept an election as Judge of the
Supreme Court of Tennessee, was chosen major-general of the Tennessee
militia, and so began that military career which was to have a
remarkable culmination.

On the 25th of June, 1812, apprised of the outbreak of the second war
with England, Jackson offered to the President his own services and
those of the twenty-five hundred militia men of his district.
The offer was at once accepted, and Jackson, getting his troops
together, proceeded down the river to New Orleans. But jealousies at
headquarters intervened, he was informed that New Orleans was in no
present danger, his force was disbanded and left to get back home as
best it could. Jackson, wild with rage, pledged his own resources to
furnish this transportation, but was afterwards reimbursed by the
government.

It was while he was getting his men back home again that Jackson
received the nickname of "Old Hickory," which clung to him all the rest
of his life, and which was really a good description of him. The story
also illustrates how it was that his men came to idolize him, and why it
was that he appealed so strongly to the common people. Jackson had three
good horses, on that weary journey, but instead of riding one of them
himself, he loaned all three to sick men who were unable to walk, and
himself trudged along at the head of his men.

"The general is tough, isn't he?" one of them remarked, glancing at the
tall, sturdy figure.

"Tough!" echoed another. "I should say he is--as tough as hickory!"

Jackson was lying in bed with a bullet in his shoulder, which he had
received in an affray with Jesse Benton, and also, no doubt, nursing his
chagrin over his treatment by the War Department, when news came of a
great Indian uprising in Alabama. The Creeks had gone on the warpath and
had opened proceedings by capturing Fort Mims, at the junction of the
Alabama and Tombigbee rivers, on August 30, 1813, and massacring over
five hundred people who had taken refuge there. Alabama was almost
abandoned by the whites, and Georgia and Tennessee at once rushed to her
relief by voting men and money to put down the Indians.

Jackson forgot wound and chagrin and took the field as soon as he was
able to stir. He at once quarrelled with the other officers; but his men
believed in him, though lack of food and the expiring of the short term
of enlistment created so much insubordination that, on one occasion, he
had to use half his army to prevent the other half from marching home.
His energy was remarkable; he pushed forward into the Creek country, cut
the Indians to pieces at Horseshoe Bend, and drove the survivors into
Florida. At the end of seven months, the war was over, and the Creeks
had been so punished that there was never any further need to fear them.

The campaign had another result--it established Jackson's reputation as
a fighter, and soon afterwards he was appointed a major-general in the
army of the United States, and was given command of the Department of
the South. The pendulum had swung the other way, with a vengeance! But
Jackson rose magnificently to this increased responsibility. He
discovered that the English were in force at Pensacola, which was in
Florida and therefore on Spanish territory; but he did not hesitate. He
marched against the place with an army of three thousand, stormed the
town, captured it, blew up the forts, which the Spaniards hastily
surrendered, and so made it untenable as an English base. Perhaps no
other exploit of his career was so audacious, or so well carried out.
Pensacola subdued, he hastened to New Orleans, which was in the gravest
danger.

The overthrow of Napoleon and his banishment to Elba had given England a
breathing-space, and the veteran troops which had been with Wellington
in Spain were left free for use against the Americans. A great
expedition was at once organized to attack and capture New Orleans, and
at its head was placed General Pakenham, the brilliant commander of the
column which had delivered the fatal blow at Salamanca. A fleet of fifty
vessels, manned by the best sailors of England, was got ready, ten
thousand men put aboard, and in December, a week after Jackson's arrival
at New Orleans, this great fleet anchored off the broad lagoons of the
Mississippi delta. Seventeen thousand men, in all, counting the sailors,
who could, of course, be employed in land operations; and a mighty
equipment of artillery, for which the guns of the fleet could also be
used. The few American gunboats were overpowered, and Pakenham proceeded
leisurely to land his force for the advance against the city, which it
seemed that nothing could save. On December 23d, his advance-guard of
two thousand men was but ten miles below New Orleans.

On the afternoon of that very day, the vanguard of Jackson's
Tennesseans marched into New Orleans, clad in hunting-shirts of
buckskin or homespun, wearing coonskin caps, and carrying on their
shoulders the long rifles they knew how to use so well. They had made
one of the most remarkable marches in history, in their eagerness to
meet the enemy, and Jackson at once hurried them forward for a night
attack. It was delivered with the greatest fury, and the British were so
roughly handled that they were forced to halt until the main body of the
army came up.

When they did advance, they found that Jackson had made good use of the
delay. With the first light of the dawn which followed the battle, he
had commenced throwing up a rude breastwork, one end resting on the
river, the other on a swamp, and by nightfall, it was nearly done. Mud
and logs had been used, and bales of cotton, until it formed a fairly
strong position. The British were hurrying forward reinforcements, and
little did either side suspect that on that very day, at Ghent,
thousands of miles away, a treaty of peace had been signed between the
United States and England, and that the blood they were about to spill
would be spilled uselessly.

In a day or two, the British had got up their artillery, and tried to
batter down the breastworks, but without success; then, Pakenham,
forgetting Bunker Hill, determined to try a frontal assault. He had no
doubt of victory, for he had three times as many men as Jackson; troops,
too, seasoned by victories won over the most renowned marshals of
Napoleon. At Toulouse they had driven Marshal Soult from a position
infinitely stronger than this rude breastworks; time after time
they had charged and carried fortifications, manned by the best
soldiers in Europe. What chance, then, had this little force of
backwoodsmen, commanded by an ignorant and untrained general? So
Pakenham ordered that the assault should take place on the morning of
January 8th.

From the bustle and stir in the British camp, the Americans knew that
something unusual was afoot, and long before dawn, the riflemen were
awake, had their breakfast, and then took their places behind the mud
walls, their rifles ready. At last the sun rose, the fog lifted, and
disclosed the splendid and gleaming lines of the British infantry, ready
for the advance. As soon as the air was clear, Pakenham gave the word,
and the columns moved steadily forward. From the American breastworks
not a rifle cracked. Half the distance was covered, three-fourths; and
then, as one man, those sturdy riflemen rose and fired, line upon line.
Under that terrible fire, the British column broke and paused, then
surged forward again, almost to the foot of the breastworks. But not a
man lived to mount them. No column could stand under such a fire, and
the British broke and ran.

Mad with rage, Pakenham rallied his men and placed himself at their
head. Again came the word to charge, and again that gleaming column
rushed forward, only to be again met by that deadly hail of lead.
Pakenham, mortally wounded, reeled and fell from his saddle, officer
after officer was picked off by those unequalled marksmen, the field was
covered with dead and dying. Even the British saw, at last, the folly of
the movement, and retired sullenly to their lines. For a week they lay
there; then, abandoning their heavy artillery, they marched back to
their ships and sailed for England. The men who had conquered the
conquerors of Europe had themselves met defeat.

The battle had lasted less than half an hour, but the British left
behind them no less than twenty-six hundred men--seven hundred killed,
fourteen hundred wounded, five hundred prisoners. The American loss was
eight killed and thirteen wounded.

News of this brilliant victory brought sudden joy to a depressed people,
for elsewhere on land the war had been waged disgracefully enough, and
Jackson's name was on everyone's lips. His journey to Washington was a
kind of triumphal march, and his popularity grew by leaps and bounds.
People journeyed scores of miles to see him, for there was a strange
fascination about the rugged old fighter which few could resist, and
already his friends were urging him as a candidate for the presidency.
There could be no doubt that he was the people's choice, and at last, in
the campaign of 1823, he was formally placed in nomination, his chief
opponent being John Quincy Adams, of Massachusetts. The result of that
contest has already been told. Jackson received more electoral votes
than any other candidate, but not enough to elect, and the contest was
decided by the House of Representatives. On that occasion, Henry Clay
came nearer committing political suicide than ever again in his life,
for he threw his influence against Jackson, and lost a portion of
his popularity which he never recovered.

Jackson bided his time, and spent the four years following in careful
preparation for the next contest. So well did he build his fences that,
when the electoral vote was cast, he received the overwhelming majority
of 178 votes to 83 for Adams.

Never before had the city of Washington seen such an inauguration as
took place on the fourth of March following. It seemed as though the
whole population of the country had assembled there to see the old
fighter take the oath of office. Daniel Webster wrote of it, "I never
saw such a crowd here before. Persons came five hundred miles to see
General Jackson and really seem to think that our country is rescued
from some dreadful danger." As, perhaps, it was.

Jackson began his administration with characteristic vigor. It was he
who first put into practice the principle, "To the victors belong the
spoils." There was about him no academic courtesy, and he proceeded at
once to displace many Federal officeholders and to replace them with his
own adherents. The Senate tried for a time to stem the tide, but was
forced to give it up. There was no withstanding that fierce and dominant
personality. Jackson was more nearly a dictator than any President had
ever been before him, or than any will ever be again. His great
popularity seemed rather to increase than to diminish, and in 1832, he
received no less than 219 electoral votes.

[Illustration: JACKSON]

Let us do him justice. Prejudiced and ignorant and
wrong-headed as he was, he was a pure patriot, laboring for his
country's good. Nothing proves this more strongly than his attitude on
the nullification question, in other words, the right of a state to
refuse to obey a law of the United States, and to withdraw from the
Union, should it so desire. This is not the place to go into the
constitutional argument on this question. It is, of course, all but
certain that the original thirteen states had no idea, when they
ratified the Constitution, that they were entering an alliance from
which they would forever be powerless to withdraw; and the right of
withdrawal had been asserted in New England more than once. South
Carolina was the hot-bed of nullification sentiment, arising partly from
the growing anti-slavery feeling at the North, and partly because of the
enactment of a tariff law which was felt to be unjust, and on October
25, 1832, the South Carolina legislature passed an ordinance asserting
that, since the state had entered the Union of its free will, it could
withdraw from it at any time and resume the sovereign and independent
position which it had held at the close of the Revolution, and that it
would do so should there be any attempt to enforce the tariff laws
within the state.

Jackson's attitude on this question was already well known. At a banquet
celebrating Jefferson's birthday, two years before, at which Calhoun and
others had given toasts and made addresses in favor of nullification,
Jackson had startled his audience by rising, glass in hand,
and giving the toast, "Our Federal Union--it must be preserved!" That
toast had fallen like a bombshell among the ranks of the nullifiers, and
had electrified the whole Nation. Since then, he had become a stronger
nationalist than ever; besides, he was always ready for a fight, and
whenever he saw a head had the true Irishman's impulse to hit it. So he
responded to the South Carolina nullification ordinance by sending two
men-of-war to Charleston harbor and collecting a force of United States
troops along the Carolina border. "I consider the power to annul a law
of the United States, assumed by one state, incompatible with the
existence of the Union," he wrote; and when a South Carolina
congressman, about to go home, asked the President if he had any
commands for his friends in that state, Jackson retorted:

"Yes, I have; please give my compliments to my friends in your state,
and say to them that if a single drop of blood shall be shed there in
opposition to the laws of the United States, I will hang the first man I
can lay my hands on, engaged in such treasonable conduct, upon the first
tree I can reach."

Whether or not this message was delivered history does not say, but the
whole Nation arose in wrath behind its President, state after state
denounced nullification and disunion, and the South Carolina ordinance
was finally repealed. So the storm passed for the moment. It left
Jackson more of a popular hero than ever; it was as though he had won
another battle of New Orleans. One cannot but wonder what would have
happened had he been acting as President, instead of Buchanan, in those
trying years after 1856.

He retired from the presidency broken in health and fortune, for however
well he took care of the interests of his friends, he was always
careless about his own. The last eight years of his life were spent at
his Tennessee estate, The Hermitage. The end came in 1845, but his name
has remained as a kind of watchword among the common people--a synonym
for rugged honesty, and bluff sincerity. His career is, all in all, by
far the most remarkable of any man who ever held the high office of
President--with one possible exception, that of Abraham Lincoln.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jackson was one of the most perfect political manipulators and
machine-builders this country ever saw, and he had so perfected his
machine at the close of his second term that he was able to name as his
successor and the heir of his policies, Martin Van Buren, of New York, a
man who had been one of Jackson's most valued lieutenants from the
first, an astute politician, but not remarkable in any way, nor able to
impress himself upon the country. He announced at his inauguration that
it was his intention, to tread in the footsteps of his "illustrious
predecessor," but none for a moment imagined that he was big enough to
fill Jackson's shoes. Indeed, Jackson, was by far the most important
figure at the inauguration.

Van Buren's term as President witnessed nothing more
momentous than the great panic of 1837, which he faced with a calmness
and clear-sightedness surprising even to his friends, but which
nevertheless assisted a collection of malcontents, under the leadership
of Henry Clay, calling themselves National Republicans or Whigs, to
defeat him for re-election. There was really no valid reason why he
should have been re-elected; he had little claim, upon the country, but
was for the most part, merely a clever politician, the first to attain
the presidency. His life had been marked by an orderly advance from
local to state, and then to national offices--an advance obtained not
because he stood for any great principle, but because he knew how to
make friends and build his political fences.

His nomination and election to the presidency was in no sense an
accident, as was Taylor's, Pierce's, Hayes's and Garfield's, but was
carefully prearranged and thoroughly understood. Yet let us do him the
justice to add that his public services were, in some respects, of a
high order, and that he was not wholly unworthy of the last great honor
paid him. He was a candidate for the nomination in 1844, but was
defeated by James K. Polk; and four years later, secured the nomination,
but was defeated at the polls by Zachary Taylor. That ended his
political career.

In the campaign against him of 1840, the Whigs were fortunate in having
for their candidate William Henry Harrison, a man of immense personal
popularity, resembling Jackson in that his reputation had been made as
an Indian fighter in the West, where he had defeated Tecumseh at the
battle of Tippecanoe, and by a successful campaign in the war of 1812.
Since then, he had been living quietly on his farm in Ohio, with no
expectation of anything but passing his remaining years in quiet, for he
was nearly seventy years of age. But Clay, with a sort of prophetic
insight, picked him out as the Whig leader, and "Tippecanoe and Tyler
Too" became the rallying cry of a remarkable campaign, which swept the
country from end to end and effectually swamped Van Buren. It was too
strenuous for a man as old as Harrison, and he died at the White House
within a month of taking the oath of office.

The "Tyler Too" was John Tyler, who had been elected Vice-President, and
who assumed the office of President upon Harrison's death. His accession
was little less than a bomb-shell to the party which had nominated him
and secured his election. For he was a Virginian, a follower of Calhoun
and an ardent pro-slavery man, while the Whigs were first, last and all
the time anti-slavery. He had been placed on the ticket with Harrison,
who was strongly anti-slavery, in the hope of securing the votes of some
disaffected Democrats, but to see him President was the last thing the
Whigs desired. The result was that he soon became involved in a bitter
quarrel with Clay and the other leaders of the party, which effectually;
killed any chance of renomination he may have had. He became the mark
for perhaps the most unrestrained abuse ever aimed at a
holder of the presidency.

It was largely unmerited, for Tyler was a capable man, had seen service
in Congress and as governor of his state; but he was dry and
uninspiring, and not big enough for the presidency, into which he could
never have come except by accident. His administration was marked by few
important events except the annexation of Texas, which will be dealt
with more particularly when we come to consider the lives of Sam Houston
and the other men who brought the annexation about. He retired to
private life at the close of his term, appearing briefly twenty years
later as a member of a "congress" which endeavored to prevent the war
between the states, and afterwards as a member of the Confederate
Congress, in which he served until his death.

Clay secured the Whig nomination for himself, in the campaign of 1844,
and his opponent on the Democratic ticket was James Knox Polk, a native
of North Carolina, but afterwards removing to Tennessee. He had been a
member of Congress for fourteen years, and governor of Tennessee for
three, and was a consistent exponent of Democratic principles. Two great
questions were before the country: the annexation of Texas and the right
to Oregon. Polk was for the immediate annexation of Texas and for the
acquisition of Oregon up to 54 deg. 40" north latitude, regardless of Great
Britain's claims, and "Fifty-four forty or fight!" became one of the
battle-cries of the campaign. Clay, inveterate trimmer and
compromiser that he was, professed to be for the annexation of Texas,
