"Certainly; why not?"

"They'd laugh in your face if you were to volunteer," Dillon said.

"But I shouldn't volunteer; I should just go and do it."

"Yes, but after it was done, instead of getting praise--that is, if
you weren't killed--you'd be simply told you had no right to
undertake such an affair."

"But I should never say anything about it," Rupert said. "I should
just do it because it would be a good thing to do, and would save
the lives of some of our grenadiers, who will, likely enough, lead
the assault. Besides, it would be an adventure, like any other."

Dillon looked at him for some time.

"You are a curious fellow, Holliday. I would agree to join you in
the matter, but I cannot swim a stroke. Pat Dillon cares as little
for his life as any man; and after all, there's no more danger in
it than in going out in a duel; and I could do that without
thinking twice."

"Well, I shall try it," Rupert said quietly. "Hugh can swim as well
as I can, and I'll take him. But can you get me the petards?"

"I dare say I could manage that," Dillon said, entering into the
scheme with all an Irishman's love of excitement. "But don't you
think I could go too, though I can't swim? I could stick tight to
the planks, you know."

"No," Rupert said seriously, "that would not do. We may be
detected, and may have to dive, and all sorts of things. No,
Dillon, it would not do. But if you can get the petards, you will
have the satisfaction of knowing that you have done your share of
the work; and then you might, if you could, ride round in the
evening with my uniform and Hugh's in your valise. If you go on to
the bank half a mile or so below the town, every one will be
watching the assault, and we can get ashore, put on our clothes,
and get back home without a soul being the wiser."

"And suppose you are killed?"

"Pooh, I shall not be killed!" Rupert said. "But I shall leave a
letter, which you can find in the morning if I do not come back,
saying I have undertaken this adventure in hope of benefiting
her Majesty's arms; that I do it without asking permission; but
that I hope that my going beyond my duty will be forgiven, in
consideration that I have died in her Majesty's service."

The next day at two o'clock, Lieutenant Dillon, who had been away
for an hour, beckoned to Rupert that he wanted to speak to him
apart.

"I have seen my cousin Gerald, but he will not let me have the
petards unless he knows for what purpose they are to be used. I
said as much as I could without betraying your intentions, but I
think he guessed them; for he said, 'Look here, Pat, if there is
any fun and adventure on hand, I will make free with her gracious
Majesty's petards, on condition that I am in it.' He's up to fun of
every kind, Gerald is; and can, I know, swim like a fish. What do
you say, shall I tell him?"

"Do, by all means," Rupert said. "I have warned Hugh of what I am
going to do, and he would never forgive me if I did not take him;
but if your cousin will go, all the better, for he will know far
better than I how to fix the petards. You can tell him I shall be
glad to act under his orders; and if it succeeds, and he likes to
let it be known the part which he has played in the matter--which
indeed would seem to be within the scope of his proper duties, he
being an engineer--I shall be glad for him to do so, it always
being understood that he does not mention my name in any way."

Half-an-hour later Dillon entered, to say that his cousin agreed heartily
to take a part in the adventure, and that he would shortly come up to
arrange the details with Rupert. Rupert had met Gerald Dillon before,
and knew him to be as wild, adventurous, and harum-scarum a young officer
as his cousin Pat; and in half-an-hour's talk the whole matter was settled.

Gerald would take two petards, which weighed some twenty pounds
each, to his tent, one by one. Hugh should fetch them in a basket,
one by one, to the river bank, at the spot where a balk of wood had
been washed ashore by some recent floods. At seven in the evening
Gerald should call upon his cousin, and on leaving, accompany
Rupert to the river bank, where Hugh would be already in waiting.
When they had left, Pat Dillon should start on horseback with the
three uniforms in his valise, the party hiding the clothes in which
they left the camp, under the bank at their place of starting.

The plan was carried out as arranged, and soon after seven o'clock
Rupert Holliday and Gerald Dillon, leaving the camp, strolled down
to the river, on whose bank Hugh was already sitting. The day had
been extremely hot, and numbers of soldiers were bathing in the
river. It was known that the assault was to take place that night,
but as the cavalry would take no part in it, the soldiers, with
their accustomed carelessness, paid little heed to the matter. As
it grew dusk, the bathers one by one dressed and left, until only
the three watchers remained. Then Rupert called Hugh, who had been
sitting at a short distance, to his side; they then stripped, and
carefully concealed their clothes. The petards were taken out from
beneath a heap of stones, where Hugh had hid them, and were fixed
on the piece of timber, one end of which was just afloat in the
stream. By their side was placed some lengths of fuse, a brace of
pistols, a long gimlet, some hooks, and cord. Then just as it was
fairly dark the log was silently pushed into the water, and
swimming beside it, with one hand upon it, the little party started
upon their adventurous expedition.

The log was not very large, although of considerable length, and
with the petards upon it, it showed but little above water. The
point where they had embarked was fully two miles above the town,
and it was more than an hour before the stream took them abreast of
it. Although it was very dark, they now floated on their backs by
the piece of timber, so as to show as little as possible to any who
might be on the lookout, for of all objects the round outline of a
human head is one of the most easily recognized.

Presently they came, as they had expected, to a floating boom,
composed of logs of timber chained together. Here the piece of
timber came to a standstill. No talk was necessary, as the course
under these circumstances had been already agreed to. The petards
and other objects were placed on the boom, upon which Rupert, as
the lightest of the party, crept, holding in his hand a cord
fastened round the log. Hugh and Gerald Dillon now climbed upon one
end of the log, which at once sank into the water below the level
of the bottom of the boom, and the current taking it, swept it
beneath the obstacle. Rupert's rope directed its downward course,
and it was soon alongside the boom, but on the lower side.

The petards were replaced, and the party again proceeded; but now
Hugh swam on his back, holding a short rope attached to one end, so
as to keep the log straight, and prevent its getting across the
mooring chains of the boats forming the bridge; while Rupert and
Gerald, each with a rope also attached to the log, floated down
some ten or twelve yards on either side of the log, but a little
behind it. The plan answered admirably; the stream carried the log
end-foremost between two of the boats, which were moored twelve
feet apart, while Gerald and Rupert each floated on the other side
of the mooring chains of the boats; round these chains they twisted
the ropes, and by them the log lay anchored as it were under the
bridge, and between two of the boats forming it. If there were any
sentries on the bridge, these neither saw nor heard them, their
attention being absorbed by the expectation of an attack upon the
breaches of Fort Saint Michael.

The party now set to work. With the gimlet holes were made a couple
of feet above the water. In them the hooks were inserted, and from
these the petards were suspended by ropes, so as to lie against the
sides of the boats, an inch only above the water's level. The fuses
were inserted; and all being now in readiness for blowing a hole in
the side of the two boats, they regained the log, and awaited the
signal.

The time passed slowly; but as the church clocks of the town struck
eleven, a sudden outburst of musketry broke out round Saint
Michael's. In an instant the cannon of the fort roared out, the
bells clanged the alarm, blue fires were lighted, and the dead
silence was succeeded by a perfect chaos of sounds.

The party under the bridge waited quietly, until the noise as of a
large body of men coming upon the bridge from the town end was
heard. At the first outbreak Gerald Dillon had, with some
difficulty, lit first some tinder, and then a slow match, from a
flint and steel--all of these articles having been most carefully
kept dry during the trip, with the two pistols, which were intended
to fire the fuses, should the flint and steel fail to produce a
light.

As the sound of the reinforcements coming on to the bridge was
heard, Gerald Dillon on one side, Rupert Holliday on the other,
left the log, and swam with a slow match in hand to the boats. In
another instant the fuses were lighted, and the three companions
swam steadily downstream.

In twenty seconds a loud explosion was heard, followed almost
instantaneously by another, and the swimmers knew that their object
had been successful, that two of the boats forming the bridge would
sink immediately, and that, the connexion being thus broken, no
reinforcements from the town could reach the garrison of the Fort
Saint Michael. Loud shouts were heard upon the bridge as the
swimmers struck steadily down stream, while the roar of the
musketry from Fort Saint Michael was unremitting.

Half an hour later the three adventurers landed, at a point where a
lantern had, according to arrangement, been placed at the water's
edge by Pat Dillon, who was in waiting with their clothes, and who
received them with an enthusiastic welcome. Five minutes later they
were on their way back to their camp.

In the meantime the battle had raged fiercely round Fort Saint
Michael. The attack had been made upon two breaches. The British
column, headed by the grenadiers, and under the command of Lord
Cutts, attacked the principal breach. The French opposed a
desperate defence. With Lord Cutts as volunteers were Lord
Huntingdon, Lord Lorn, Sir Richard Temple, and Mr. Dalrymple, and
these set a gallant example to their men.

On arriving at a high breastwork, Lord Huntingdon, who was weakened
by recent attack of fever, was unable to climb over it.

"Five guineas," he shouted, "to the man who will help me over!"

Even among the storm of balls there was a shout of laughter as the
nobleman held out his purse, and a dozen willing hands soon lifted
him over the obstacle.

Then on the troops swept, stormed the covered way, carried the
ravelin, and forced their way up the breach. The French fought
staunchly; and well it was for the British that no reinforcements
could reach them from Venloo, and that the original 800 garrisoning
the fort were alone in their defence. As it was, the place was
stormed, 200 of the French made prisoners, and the rest either
killed or drowned in endeavouring to cross the river.

The French in Venloo, upon finding that the fort had fallen, broke
up the rest of the bridge; and although there was some surprise in
the British camp that no reinforcements had been sent over to aid
the garrison, none knew that the bridge had been broken at the
commencement of the attack, consequently there were neither talk
nor inquiries; and those concerned congratulated themselves that
their adventure had been successful, and that, as no one knew
anything of it, they could, should occasion offer, again undertake
an expedition on their own account.

The day after the capture of Saint Michael's, strong fatigue
parties were set to work, erecting batteries to play across the
river on the town. These were soon opened, and after a few days'
further resistance, the place surrendered, on the condition of the
garrison being free to march to Antwerp, then in French possession.

The towns of Ruremond and Stevenswort were now invested, and
surrendered after a short resistance; and thus the Maas was opened
as a waterway for the supplies for the army.

The Dutch Government, satisfied with the successes so far, would
have now had the army go into winter quarters; but Marlborough,
with great difficulty, persuaded them to consent to his undertaking
the siege of Liege, a most important town and fortress, whose
possession would give to the allies the command of the Meuse--or
Maas--into the very heart of Flanders.

Marshal Boufflers, ever watching the movements of Marlborough,
suspected that Liege would be his next object of attack, and
accordingly reconnoitred the ground round that city, and fixed on a
position which would, he thought, serve admirably for the
establishment of a permanent camp.

The news was, however, brought to Marlborough, who broke up his
camp the same night; and when the French army approached Liege,
they found the allies established on the very ground which the
Marshal had selected for their camp. All unsuspecting the presence
of the English, the French came on in order of march until within
cannon shot of the allies, and another splendid opportunity was
thus given to Marlborough to attack the main body of the enemy
under most advantageous circumstances.

The Dutch deputies again interposed their veto, and the English had
the mortification of seeing the enemy again escape from their
hands.

However, there was now nothing to prevent their undertaking the
siege of Liege, and on the 20th of October the regular investment
of the place was formed.

The strength of Liege consisted in its citadel and the Fort of
Chatreuse, both strongly fortified. The town itself, a wealthy
city, and so abounding in churches that it was called "Little
Rome," was defended only by a single wall. It could clearly offer
no defence against the besiegers, and therefore surrendered at the
first summons, the garrison, 5000 strong, retiring to the citadel
and Fort Saint Chatreuse, which mounted fifty guns. Siege was at
once laid to the citadel, and with such extraordinary vigour was
the attack pushed forward, under the direction of General Cohorn,
that upon the 23rd of October, three days only after the investment
commenced, the breaches in the counter-scarp were pronounced
practicable, and an assault was immediately ordered. The allies
attacked with extreme bravery, and the citadel was carried by
storm--here as at Venloo, the British troops being the first who
scaled the breach. Thus 2000 prisoners were taken; and the garrison
of Fort Chatreuse were so disheartened at the speedy fall of the
citadel, that they capitulated a few days later.

This brought the first campaign of the war to an end. It had been
very short, but its effect had been great. Kaiserwerth had been
taken, and the Lower Rhine opened; four fortified places on the
Meuse had been captured; the enemy had been driven back from the
borders of Holland; and the allied army had, in the possession of
Liege, an advanced post in the heart of Flanders for the
recommencement of the campaign in the spring. And all this had been
done in the face of a large French army, which had never ventured
to give battle even to save the beleaguered fortresses.

The army now went into winter quarters, and Marlborough returned at
once to England.

Upon the voyage down the Meuse, in company with the Dutch
commissioners, he had a very narrow escape. The boat was captured
by a French partisan leader, who had made an incursion to the
river. The earl had with him an old servant named Gill, who, with
great presence of mind, slipped into his master's hand an old
passport made out in the name of General Churchill. The French,
intent only upon plunder, and not recognizing under the name of
Churchill their great opponent Marlborough, seized all the plate
and valuables in the boat, made prisoners of the small detachment
of soldiers on board, but suffered the rest of the passengers,
including the earl and the Dutch commissioners, to pass unmolested.

Thus, had it not been for the presence of mind of an old servant,
the Earl of Marlborough would have been taken a prisoner to France;
and since it was his genius and diplomatic power alone which kept
the alliance together, and secured victory for their arms, the
whole issue of the war, the whole future of Europe, would have been
changed.



Chapter 8: The Old Mill.

A considerable portion of the allied army were quartered in the
barracks and forts of Liege, in large convents requisitioned for
the purpose, and in outlying villages. The 5th dragoons had
assigned to them a convent some two miles from the town. The monks
had moved out, and gone to an establishment of the same order in
the town, and the soldiers were therefore left to make the best
they could of their quarters. There was plenty of room for the men,
but for the horses there was some difficulty. The cloisters were
very large, and these were transformed into stables, and boards
were fastened up on the open faces to keep out the cold; others
were stalled in sheds and outbuildings; and the great refectory, or
dining hall, was also strewn thick with straw, and filled with four
rows of horses.

In the afternoon the officers generally rode or walked down into
the town. One day, Rupert Holliday with Pat Dillon had met their
friends Lord Fairholm and Sir John Loveday, whose regiment was
quartered in the town, at the principal wine shop, a large
establishment, which was the great gathering place of the officers
of the garrison. There an immense variety of bright uniforms were
to be seen; English, German, and Dutch, horse, foot, and artillery;
while the serving men hurried about through the throng with trays
piled with beer mugs, or with wine and glasses.

"Who is that officer," Dillon asked, "in the Hessian cavalry
uniform? Methinks he eyes you with no friendly look."

Rupert and his friends glanced at the officer pointed out.

"It is that fellow Fulke," Sir John said. "I heard he had managed
to obtain a commission in the army of the Landgrave of Hesse. You
must keep a smart lookout, Master Rupert, for his presence bodes
you no good. He is in fitting company; that big German officer next
to him is the Graff Muller, a turbulent swashbuckler, but a famous
swordsman--a fellow who would as soon run you through as look at
you, and who is a disgrace to the Margrave's army, in which I
wonder much that he is allowed to stay."

"Who is the fellow you are speaking of?" Dillon asked.

"A gentleman with whom our friend Rupert had a difference of
opinion," Sir John Loveday laughed. "There is a blood feud between
them. Seriously, the fellow has a grudge against our friend, and as
he is the sort of man to gratify himself without caring much as to
the means he uses, I should advise Master Holliday not to trust
himself out alone after dark. There are plenty of ruined men in
these German regiments who would willingly cut a throat for a
guinea, especially if offered them by one of their own officers."

"The scoundrel is trying to get Muller to take up his quarrel, or I
am mistaken," Lord Fairholm, who had been watching the pair
closely, said. "They are glancing this way, and Fulke has been
talking earnestly. But ruffian as he is, Muller is of opinion that
for a notorious swordsman like him to pick a quarrel with a lad
like our friend would be too rank, and would, if he killed him,
look so much like murder that even he dare not face it; he has
shaken his head very positively."

"But why should not this Fulke take the quarrel in his own hands?"
Dillon asked, surprised. "Unless he is the rankest of cowards he
might surely consider himself a match for our little cornet?"

"Our little cornet has a neat hand with the foils," Lord Fairholm
said drily, "and Master Fulke is not unacquainted with the fact."

"Why, Rupert," Dillon said, turning to him, "you have never said
that you ever had a foil in your hand!"

"You never asked me," Rupert said, smiling. "But I have practised
somewhat with the colonel my grandfather. And now it is time to be
off, Dillon; we have to walk back."

Four days later, as Rupert Holliday was standing in the barrack
yard, his troop having just been dismissed drill, a trooper of the
1st dragoons rode into the yard, and after asking a question of one
of the men, rode up to him and handed him a note.

Somewhat surprised he opened it, and read as follows:

"My dear Master Holliday--Sir John Loveday and myself are engaged
in an adventure which promises some entertainment, albeit it is not
without a spice of danger. We need a good comrade who can on
occasion use his sword, and we know that we can rely on you. On
receipt of this, please mount your horse and ride to the old mill
which lies back from the road in the valley beyond Dettinheim.
There you will find your sincere friend, Fairholm.

"P.S. It would be as well not to mention whither you are going to
ride."

It was the first note that Rupert had received from Lord Fairholm,
and delighted at the thought of an adventure, he called Hugh, and
