realized to what the discovery of America would lead.  Did Radisson
realize what the discovery of the Great Northwest meant?

Here is what he says, in that curious medley of idioms which so often
results when a speaker knows many languages but is master of none:--

"The country was so pleasant, so beautiful, and so fruitful, that it
grieved me to see that the world could not discover such inticing
countries to live in.  This, I say, because the Europeans fight for a
rock in the sea against one another, or for a steril land . . .  where
the people by changement of air engender sickness and die. . . .
Contrariwise, these kingdoms are so delicious and under so temperate a
climate, plentiful of all things, and the earth brings forth its fruit
twice a year, that the people live long and lusty and wise in their
way.  What a conquest would this be, at little or no cost?  What
pleasure should people have . . . instead of misery and poverty!  Why
should not men reap of the love of God here?  Surely, more is to be
gained converting souls here than in differences of creed, when wrongs
are committed under pretence of religion! . . .  It is true, I
confess, . . . that access here is difficult . . . but nothing is to be
gained without labor and pains." [11]

[Illustration: Father Marquette, from an old painting discovered in
Montreal by Mr. McNab.  The date on the picture is 1669.]

Here Radisson foreshadows all the best gains that the West has
accomplished for the human race.  What are they?  Mainly room,--room to
live and room for opportunity; equal chances for all classes, high and
low; plenty for all classes, high and low; the conquests not of war but
of peace.  The question arises,--when Radisson discovered the Great
Northwest ten years before Marquette and Jolliet, twenty years before
La Salle, a hundred years before De la Verendrye, why has his name been
slurred over and left in oblivion?[12]  The reasons are plain.
Radisson was a Christian, but he was not a slave to any creed.  Such
liberality did not commend itself to the annalists of an age that was
still rioting in a very carnival of religious persecution.  Radisson
always invoked the blessing of Heaven on his enterprises and rendered
thanks for his victories; but he was indifferent as to whether he was
acting as lay helper with the Jesuits, or allied to the Huguenots of
London and Boston.  His discoveries were too important to be ignored by
the missionaries.  They related his discoveries, but refrained from
mentioning his name, though twice referring to Groseillers.  What hurt
Radisson's fame even more than his indifference to creeds was his
indifference to nationality.  Like Columbus, he had little care what
flag floated at the prow, provided only that the prow pushed on and on
and on,--into the Unknown.  He sold his services alternately to France
and England till he had offended both governments; and, in addition to
withstanding a conspiracy of silence on the part of the Church, his
fame encountered the ill-will of state historians.  He is mentioned as
"the adventurer," "the hang-dog," "the renegade."  Only in 1885, when
the manuscript of his travels was rescued from oblivion, did it become
evident that history must be rewritten.  Here was a man whose
discoveries were second only to those of Columbus, and whose
explorations were more far-ranging and important than those of
Champlain and La Salle and De la Verendrye put together.


The spring of 1659 found the explorers still among the prairie tribes
of the Mississippi.  From these people Radisson learned of four other
races occupying vast, undiscovered countries.  He heard of the Sioux, a
warlike nation to the west, who had no fixed abode but lived by the
chase and were at constant war with another nomadic tribe to the
north--the Crees.  The Crees spent the summer time round the shores of
salt water, and in winter came inland to hunt.  Between these two was a
third,--the Assiniboines,--who used earthen pots for cooking, heated
their food by throwing hot stones in water, and dressed themselves in
buckskin.  These three tribes were wandering hunters; but the people of
the fire told Radisson of yet another nation, who lived in villages
like the Iroquois, on "a great river that divided itself in two," and
was called "the Forked River," because "it had two branches, the one
toward the west, the other toward the south, . . . toward Mexico."
These people were the Mandans or Omahas, or Iowas, or other people of
the Missouri.[13]

A whole world of discoveries lay before them.  In what direction should
they go?  "We desired not to go to the north till we had made a
discovery in the south," explains Radisson.  The people of the fire
refused to accompany the explorers farther; so the two "put themselves
in hazard," as Radisson relates, and set out alone.  They must have
struck across the height of land between the Mississippi and the
Missouri; for Radisson records that they met several nations having
villages, "all amazed to see us and very civil.  The farther we
sojourned, the delightfuller the land became.  I can say that in all my
lifetime I have never seen a finer country, for all that I have been in
Italy.  The people have very long hair.  They reap twice a year.  They
war against the Sioux and the Cree. . . .  It was very hot there. . . .
Being among the people they told us . . . of men that built great
cabins and have beards and have knives like the French."  The Indians
showed Radisson a string of beads only used by Europeans.  These people
must have been the Spaniards of the south.  The tribes on the Missouri
were large men of well-formed figures.  There were no deformities among
the people.  Radisson saw corn and pumpkins in their gardens.  "Their
arrows were not of stone, but of fish bones. . . .  Their dishes were
made of wood. . . .  They had great calumets of red and green
stone . . . and great store of tobacco. . . .  They had a kind of drink
that made them mad for a whole day." [14]  "We had not yet seen the
Sioux," relates Radisson.  "We went toward the south and came back by
the north."  The _Jesuit Relations_ are more explicit.  Written the
year that Radisson returned to Quebec, they state: "Continuing their
wanderings, our two young Frenchmen visited the Sioux, where they found
five thousand warriors.  They then left this nation for another warlike
people, who with bows and arrows had rendered themselves redoubtable."
These were the Crees, with whom, say the Jesuits, wood is so rare and
small that nature has taught them to make fire of a kind of coal and to
cover their cabins with skins of the chase.  The explorers seem to have
spent the summer hunting antelope, buffalo, moose, and wild turkey.
The Sioux received them cordially, supplied them with food, and gave
them an escort to the next encampments.  They had set out southwest to
the Mascoutins, Mandans, and perhaps, also, the Omahas.  They were now
circling back northeastward toward the Sault between Lake Michigan and
Lake Superior.  How far westward had they gone?  Only two facts gave
any clew.  Radisson reports that mountains lay far inland; and the
Jesuits record that the explorers were among tribes that used coal.
This must have been a country far west of the Mandans and Mascoutins
and within sight of at least the Bad Lands, or that stretch of rough
country between the prairie and outlying foothills of the Rockies.[15]
The course of the first exploration seems to have circled over the
territory now known as Wisconsin, perhaps eastern Iowa and Nebraska,
South Dakota, Montana, and back over North Dakota and Minnesota to the
north shore of Lake Superior.  "The lake toward the north is full of
rocks, yet great ships can ride in it without danger," writes Radisson.
At the Sault they found the Crees and Sautaux in bitter war.  They also
heard of a French establishment, and going to visit it found that the
Jesuits had established a mission.

Radisson had explored the Southwest.  He now decided to essay the
Northwest.  When the Sautaux were at war with the Crees, he met the
Crees and heard of the great salt sea in the north.  Surely this was
the Sea of the North--Hudson Bay--of which the Nipissing chief had told
Groseillers long ago.  Then the Crees had great store of beaver pelts;
and trade must not be forgotten.  No sooner had peace been arranged
between Sautaux and Crees, than Cree hunters flocked out of the
northern forests to winter on Lake Superior.  A rumor of Iroquois on
the war-path compelled Radisson and Groseillers to move their camp back
from Lake Superior higher up the chain of lakes and rivers between what
is now Minnesota and Canada, toward the country of the Sioux.  In the
fall of 1659 Groseillers' health began to fail from the hardships; so
he remained in camp for the winter, attending to the trade, while
Radisson carried on the explorations alone.

This was one of the coldest winters known in Canada.[16]  The snow fell
so heavily in the thick pine woods of Minnesota that Radisson says the
forest became as sombre as a cellar.  The colder the weather the better
the fur, and, presenting gifts to insure safe conduct, Radisson set out
with a band of one hundred and fifty Cree hunters for the Northwest.
They travelled on snow-shoes, hunting moose on the way and sleeping at
night round a camp-fire under the stars.  League after league, with no
sound through the deathly white forest but the soft crunch-crunch of
the snowshoes, they travelled two hundred miles toward what is now
Manitoba.  When they had set out, the snow was like a cushion.  Now it
began to melt in the spring sun, and clogged the snow-shoes till it was
almost impossible to travel.  In the morning the surface was glazed
ice, and they could march without snow-shoes.  Spring thaw called a
halt to their exploration.  The Crees encamped for three weeks to build
boats.  As soon as the ice cleared, the band launched back down-stream
for the appointed rendezvous on Green Bay.  All that Radisson learned
on this trip was that the Bay of the North lay much farther from Lake
Superior than the old Nipissing chief had told Dreuillettes and
Groseillers.[17]

Groseillers had all in readiness to depart for Quebec; and five hundred
Indians from the Upper Country had come together to go down the Ottawa
and St. Lawrence with the explorers.  As they were about to embark,
_coureurs_ came in from the woods with news that more than a thousand
Iroquois were on the war-path, boasting that they would exterminate the
French.[18]  Somewhere along the Ottawa a small band of Hurons had been
massacred.  The Indians with Groseillers and Radisson were terrified.
A council of the elders was called.

"Brothers, why are ye so foolish as to put yourselves in the hands of
those that wait for you?" demanded an old chief, addressing the two
white men.  "The Iroquois will destroy you and carry you away captive.
Will you have your brethren, that love you, slain?  Who will baptize
our children?"  (Radisson and Groseillers had baptized more than two
hundred children.[19])  "Stay till next year!  Then you may freely go!
Our mothers will send their children to be taught in the way of the
Lord!"

Fear is like fire.  It must be taken in the beginning, or it spreads.
The explorers retired, decided on a course of action, and requested the
Indians to meet them in council a second time.  Eight hundred warriors
assembled, seating themselves in a circle.  Radisson and Groseillers
took their station in the centre.[20]

"Who am I?" demanded Groseillers, hotly.  "Am I a foe or a friend?  If
a foe, why did you suffer me to live?  If a friend, listen what I say!
You know that we risked our lives for you!  If we have no courage, why
did you not tell us?  If you have more wit than we, why did you not use
it to defend yourselves against the Iroquois?  How can you defend your
wives and children unless you get arms from the French!"

"Fools," cried Radisson, striking a beaver skin across an Indian's
shoulder, "will you fight the Iroquois with beaver pelts?  Do you not
know the French way?  We fight with guns, not robes.  The Iroquois will
coop you up here till you have used all your powder, and then despatch
you with ease!  Shall your children be slaves because you are cowards?
Do what you will!  For my part I choose to die like a man rather than
live like a beggar.  Take back your beaver robes.  We can live without
you--" and the white men strode out from the council.

Consternation reigned among the Indians.  There was an uproar of
argument.  For six days the fate of the white men hung fire.  Finally
the chiefs sent word that the five hundred young warriors would go to
Quebec with the white men.  Radisson did not give their ardor time to
cool.  They embarked at once.  The fleet of canoes crossed the head of
the lakes and came to the Upper Ottawa without adventure.  Scouts went
ahead to all the _portages_, and great care was taken to avoid an
ambush when passing overland.  Below the Chaudiere Falls the scouts
reported that four Iroquois boats had crossed the river.  Again
Radisson did not give time for fear.  He sent the lightest boats in
pursuit; and while keeping the enemy thus engaged with half his own
company on guard at the ends of the long _portage_, he hurriedly got
cargoes and canoes across the landing.  The Iroquois had fled.  By that
Radisson knew they were weak.  Somewhere along the Long Sault Rapids,
the scouts saw sixteen Iroquois canoes.  The Indians would have thrown
down their goods and fled, but Radisson instantly got his forces in
hand and held them with a grip of steel.  Distributing loaded muskets
to the bravest warriors, he pursued the Iroquois with a picked company
of Hurons, Algonquins, Sautaux, and Sioux.  Beating their paddles,
Radisson's company shouted the war-cry till the hills rang; but all the
warriors were careful not to waste an ounce of powder till within
hitting range.  The Iroquois were not used to this sort of defence.
They fled.  The Long Sault was always the most dangerous part of the
Ottawa.  Radisson kept scouts to rear and fore, but the Iroquois had
deserted their boats and were hanging on the flanks of the company to
attempt an ambush.  It was apparent that a fort had been erected at the
foot of the rapids.  Leaving half the band in their boats, Radisson
marched overland with two hundred warriors.  Iroquois shots spattered
from each side; but the Huron muskets kept the assailants at a
distance, and those of Radisson's warriors who had not guns were armed
with bows and arrows, and wore a shield of buffalo skin dried hard as
metal.  The Iroquois rushed for the barricade at the foot of the Sault.
Five of them were picked off as they ran.  For a moment the Iroquois
were out of cover, and their weakness was betrayed.  They had only one
hundred and fifty men, while Radisson had five hundred; but the odds
would not long be in his favor.  Ammunition was running out, and the
enemy must be dislodged without wasting a shot.  Radisson called back
encouragement to his followers.  They answered with a shout.  Tying the
beaver pelts in great bundles, the Indians rolled the fur in front
nearer and nearer the Iroquois boats, keeping under shelter from the
shots of the fort.  The Iroquois must either lose their boats and be
cut off from escape, or retire from the fort.  It was not necessary for
Radisson's warriors to fire a shot.  Abandoning even their baggage and
glad to get off with their lives, the Iroquois dashed to save their
boats.

[Illustration: Voyageurs running the Rapids of the Ottawa River.]

A terrible spectacle awaited Radisson inside the enclosure of the
palisades.[21]  The scalps of dead Indians flaunted from the pickets.
Not a tree but was spattered with bullet marks as with bird shot.  Here
and there burnt holes gaped in the stockades like wounds.  Outside
along the river bank lay the charred bones of captives who had been
burned.  The scarred fort told its own tale.  Here refugees had been
penned up by the Iroquois till thirst and starvation did their work.
In the clay a hole had been dug for water by the parched victims, and
the ooze through the mud eagerly scooped up.  Only when he reached
Montreal did Radisson learn the story of the dismantled fort.  The
rumor carried to the explorers on Lake Michigan of a thousand Iroquois
going on the war-path to exterminate the French had been only too true.
Half the warriors were to assault Quebec, half to come down on Montreal
from the Ottawa.  One thing only could save the French--to keep the
bands apart.  Those on the Ottawa had been hunting all winter and must
necessarily be short of powder.  To intercept them, a gallant band of
seventeen French, four Algonquins, and sixty Hurons led by Dollard took
their stand at the Long Sault.  The French and their Indian allies were
boiling their kettles when two hundred Iroquois broke from the woods.
There was no time to build a fort.  Leaving their food, Dollard and his
men threw themselves into the rude palisades which Indians had erected
the previous year.  The Iroquois kept up a constant fire and sent for
reinforcements of six hundred warriors, who were on the Richelieu.  In
defiance the Indians fighting for the French sallied out, scalped the
fallen Iroquois, and hoisted the sanguinary trophies on long poles
above the pickets.  The enraged Iroquois redoubled their fury.  The
fort was too small to admit all the Hurons; and when the Iroquois came
up from the Richelieu with Huron renegades among their warriors, the
Hurons deserted their French allies and went over in a body to the
enemy.  For two days the French had fought against two hundred
Iroquois.  For five more days they fought against eight hundred.  "The
worst of it was," relates Radisson, "the French had no water, as we
plainly saw; for they had made a hole in the ground out of which they
could get but little because the fort was on a hill.  It was pitiable.
There was not a tree but what was shot with bullets.  The Iroquois had
rushed to make a breach (in the wall). . . . The French set fire to a
barrel of powder to drive the Iroquois back . . . but it fell inside
the fort. . . . Upon this, the Iroquois entered . . . so that not one
of the French escaped. . . .  It was terrible . . . for we came there
eight days after the defeat." [22]

Without a doubt it was Dollard's splendid fight that put fear in the
hearts of the Iroquois who fled before Radisson.  The passage to
Montreal was clear.  The boats ran the rapids without unloading; but
Groseillers almost lost his life.  His canoe caught on a rock in
midstream, but righting herself shot down safely to the landing with no
greater loss than a damaged keel.  The next day, after two years'
absence, Radisson and Groseillers arrived at Montreal.  A brief stop
was made at Three Rivers for rest till twenty citizens had fitted out
two shallops with cannon to escort the discoverers in fitting pomp to
Quebec.  As the fleet of canoes glided round Cape Diamond, battery and
bastion thundered a welcome.  Welcome they were, and thrice welcome;
for so ceaseless had been the Iroquois wars that the three French ships
lying at anchor would have returned to France without a single beaver
skin if the explorers had not come.  Citizens shouted from the terraced
heights of Chateau St. Louis, and bells rang out the joy of all New
France over the discoverers' return.  For a week Radisson and
Groseillers were feted.  Viscomte d'Argenson, the new governor,
presented them with gifts and sent two brigantines to carry them home
to Three Rivers.  There they rested for the remainder of the year,
Groseillers at his seigniory with his wife, Marguerite; Radisson, under
the parental roof.[23]


[1] Mr. Benjamin Sulte establishes this date as 1634.

[2] See _Jesuit Relations_, 1656-57-58.  I have purposely refrained
from entering into the heated controversy as to the identity of these
two men.  It is apart from the subject, as there is no proof these men
went beyond the Green Bay region.

[3] These routes were; (1) By the Saguenay, (2) by Three Rivers and the
St. Maurice, (3) by Lake Nipissing, (4) by Lake Huron, through the land
of the Sautaux, (5) by Lake Superior overland, (6) by the Ottawa.  See
_Jesuit Relations_ for detailed accounts of these routes.  Dreuillettes
went farther west to the Crees a few years later, but that does not
concern this narrative.

[4] The dispute as to whether eastern Minnesota was discovered on the
1654-55-56 trip, and whether Groseillers discovered it, is a point for
savants, but will, I think, remain an unsettled dispute.

[5] The _Relations_ do not give the names of these two Jesuits,
probably owing to the fact that the enterprise failed.  They simply
state that two priests set out, but were compelled to remain behind
owing to the caprice of the savages.

[6] Whether they were now on the Ottawa or the St. Lawrence, it is
impossible to tell.  Dr. Dionne thinks that the band went overland from
Lake Ontario to Lake Huron.  I know both waters--Lake Ontario and the
Ottawa--from many trips, and I think Radisson's description here
tallies with his other descriptions of the Ottawa.  It is certain that
they must have been on the Ottawa before they came to the Lake of the
Castors or Nipissing.  The noise of the waterfall seems to point to the
Chaudiere Falls of the Ottawa.  If so, the landing place would be the
tongue of land running out from Hull, opposite the city of Ottawa, and
the _portage_ would be the Aylmer Road beyond the rapids above the
falls.  Mr. Benjamin Sulte, the scholarly historian, thinks they went
by way of the Ottawa, not Lake Ontario, as the St. Lawrence route was
