discovered our flight," I said, my heart sinking.

Luckily we had had the forethought to draw the curtain across the
casement.  Bezers' people could therefore, from their window, see no
more than ours, dimly lighted and indistinct.  Yet they would no doubt
guess the way we had escaped, and hasten to cut off our retreat below.
For a moment I looked at the door of our room, half-minded to attack
it, and fight our way out, taking the chance of reaching the street
before Bezers' folk should have recovered from their surprise and gone
down.  But then I looked at Madame.  How could we ensure her safety in
the struggle? While I hesitated the choice was taken from us.  We heard
voices in the house below, and heavy feet on the stairs.

We were between two fires.  I glanced irresolutely round the bare
garret, with its sloping roof, searching for a better weapon.  I had
only my dagger.  But in vain.  I saw nothing that would serve.  "What
will you do?"  Madame de Pavannes murmured, standing pale and trembling
by the hearth, and looking from one to another.  Croisette plucked my
sleeve before I could answer, and pointed to the box-bed with its
scanty curtains.  "If they see us in the room," he urged softly, "while
they are half in and half out, they will give the alarm.  Let us hide
ourselves yonder. When they are inside--you understand?"

He laid his hand on his dagger.  The muscles of the lad's face grew
tense.  I did understand him.  "Madame," I said quickly, "you will not
betray us?"

She shook her head.  The colour returned to her cheek, and the
brightness to her eyes.  She was a true woman.  The sense that she was
protecting others deprived her of fear for herself.

The footsteps were on the topmost stair now, and a key was thrust with
a rasping sound into the lock.  But before it could be turned--it
fortunately fitted ill--we three had jumped on the bed and were
crouching in a row at the head of it, where the curtains of the alcove
concealed, and only just concealed us, from any one standing at the end
of the room near the door.

I was the outermost, and through a chink could see what passed. One,
two, three people came in, and the door was closed behind them.  Three
people, and one of them a woman!  My heart--which had been in my
mouth--returned to its place, for the Vidame was not one.  I breathed
freely; only I dared not communicate my relief to the others, lest my
voice should be heard.  The first to come in was the woman closely
cloaked and hooded.  Madame de Pavannes cast on her a single doubtful
glance, and then to my astonishment threw herself into her arms,
mingling her sobs with little joyous cries of "Oh, Diane!  oh, Diane!"

"My poor little one!"  the newcomer exclaimed, soothing her with tender
touches on hair and shoulder.  "You are safe now.  Quite safe!"

"You have come to take me away?"

"Of course we have!"  Diane answered cheerfully, still caressing her.
"We have come to take you to your husband.  He has been searching for
you everywhere.  He is distracted with grief, little one."

"Poor Louis!"  ejaculated the wife.

"Poor Louis, indeed!"  the rescuer answered.  "But you will see him
soon.  We only learned at midnight where you were.  You have to thank
M. le Coadjuteur here for that.  He brought me the news, and at once
escorted me here to fetch you."

"And to restore one sister to another," said the priest silkily, as he
advanced a step.  He was the very same priest whom I had seen two hours
before with Bezers, and had so greatly disliked! I hated his pale face
as much now as I had then.  Even the errand of good on which he had
come could not blind me to his thin-lipped mouth, to his mock humility
and crafty eyes.  "I have had no task so pleasant for many days," added
he, with every appearance of a desire to propitiate.

But, seemingly, Madame de Pavannes had something of the same feeling
towards him which I had myself; for she started at the sound of his
voice, and disengaging herself from her sister's arms--it seemed it was
her sister--shrank back from the pair. She bowed indeed in
acknowledgment of his words.  But there was little gratitude in the
movement, and less warmth.  I saw the sister's face--a brilliantly
beautiful face it was--brighter eyes and lips and more lovely auburn
hair I have never seen--even Kit would have been plain and dowdy beside
her--I saw it harden strangely.  A moment before, the two had been in
one another's arms.  Now they stood apart, somehow chilled and
disillusionised. The shadow of the priest had fallen upon them--had
come between them.

At this crisis the fourth person present asserted himself. Hitherto he
had stood silent just within the door:  a plain man, plainly dressed,
somewhat over sixty and grey-haired.  He looked disconcerted and
embarrassed, and I took him for Mirepoix--rightly as it turned out.

"I am sure," he now exclaimed, his voice trembling with anxiety, or it
might be with fear, "your ladyship will regret leaving here!  You will
indeed!  No harm would have happened to you. Madame d'O does not know
what she is doing, or she would not take you away.  She does not know
what she is doing!"  he repeated earnestly.

"Madame d'O!"  cried the beautiful Diane, her brown eyes darting fire
at the unlucky culprit, her voice full of angry disdain. "How dare
you--such as you--mention my name?  Wretch!"

She flung the last word at him, and the priest took it up.  "Ay,
wretch!  Wretched man indeed!"  he repeated slowly, stretching out his
long thin hand and laying it like the claw of some bird of prey on the
tradesman's shoulder, which flinched, I saw, under the touch.  "How
dare you--such as you--meddle with matters of the nobility?  Matters
that do not concern you?  Trouble!  I see trouble hanging over this
house, Mirepoix!  Much trouble!"

The miserable fellow trembled visibly under the covert threat. His face
grew pale.  His lips quivered.  He seemed fascinated by the priest's
gaze.  "I am a faithful son of the church," he muttered; but his voice
shook so that the words were scarcely audible.  "I am known to be such!
None better known in Paris, M. le Coadjuteur."

"Men are known by their works!"  the priest retorted.  "Now, now," he
continued, abruptly raising his voice, and lifting his hand in a kind
of exaltation, real or feigned, "is the appointed time! And now is the
day of salvation!  and woe, Mirepoix, woe! woe!  to the backslider, and
to him that putteth his hand to the plough and looketh back to-night!"

The layman cowered and shrank before his fierce denunciation; while
Madame de Pavannes gazed from one to the other as if her dislike for
the priest were so great that seeing the two thus quarrelling, she
almost forgave Mirepoix his offence.  "Mirepoix said he could explain,"
she murmured irresolutely.

The Coadjutor fixed his baleful eyes on him.  "Mirepoix," he said
grimly, "can explain nothing!  Nothing!  I dare him to explain!"

And certainly Mirepoix thus challenged was silent.  "Come," the priest
continued peremptorily, turning to the lady who had entered with him,
"your sister must leave with us at once.  We have no time to lose."

"But what what does it mean!"  Madame de Pavannes said, as though she
hesitated even now.  "Is there danger still?"

"Danger!"  the priest exclaimed, his form seeming to swell, and the
exaltation I had before read in his voice and manner again asserting
itself.  "I put myself at your service, Madame, and danger disappears!
I am as God to-night with powers of life and death!  You do not
understand me?  Presently you shall.  But you are ready.  We will go
then.  Out of the way, fellow!"  he thundered, advancing upon the door.

But Mirepoix, who had placed himself with his back to it, to my
astonishment did not give way.  His full bourgeois face was pale; yet
peeping through my chink, I read in it a desperate resolution.  And
oddly--very oddly, because I knew that, in keeping Madame de Pavannes a
prisoner, he must be in the wrong--I sympathised with him.  Low-bred
trader, tool of Pavannes though he was, I sympathised with him, when he
said firmly:

"She shall not go!"

"I say she shall!"  the priest shrieked, losing all control over
himself.  "Fool!  Madman!  You know not what you do!"  As the words
passed his lips, he made an adroit forward movement, surprised the
other, clutched him by the arms, and with a strength I should never
have thought lay in his meagre frame, flung him some paces into the
room.  "Fool!"  he hissed, shaking his crooked fingers at him in
malignant triumph.  "There is no man in Paris, do you hear--or woman
either--shall thwart me to-night!"

"Is that so?  Indeed?"

The words, and the cold, cynical voice, were not those of Mirepoix;
they came from behind.  The priest wheeled round, as if he had been
stabbed in the back.  I clutched Croisette, and arrested the cramped
limb I was moving under cover of the noise. The speaker was Bezers!  He
stood in the open door-way, his great form filling it from post to
post, the old gibing smile on his face.  We had been so taken up,
actors and audience alike, with the altercation, that no one had heard
him ascend the stairs.  He still wore the black and silver suit, but it
was half hidden now under a dark riding cloak which just disclosed the
glitter of his weapons.  He was booted and spurred and gloved as for a
journey.

"Is that so?"  he repeated mockingly, as his gaze rested in turn on
each of the four, and then travelled sharply round the room. "So you
will not be thwarted by any man in Paris, to-night, eh? Have you
considered, my dear Coadjutor, what a large number of people there are
in Paris?  It would amuse me very greatly now--and I'm sure it would
the ladies too, who must pardon my abrupt entrance--to see you put to
the test; pitted against--shall we say the Duke of Anjou?  Or M. de
Guise, our great man?  Or the Admiral?  Say the Admiral foot to foot?"

Rage and fear--rage at the intrusion, fear of the intruder--struggled
in the priest's face.  "How do you come here, and what do you want?"
he inquired hoarsely.  If looks and tones could kill, we three,
trembling behind our flimsy screen, had been freed at that moment from
our enemy.

"I have come in search of the young birds whose necks you were for
stretching, my friend!"  was Bezers' answer.  "They have vanished.
Birds they must be, for unless they have come into this house by that
window, they have flown away with wings."

"They have not passed this way," the priest declared stoutly, eager
only to get rid of the other and I blessed him for the words!  "I have
been here since I left you."

But the Vidame was not one to accept any man's statement.  "Thank you;
I think I will see for myself," he answered coolly. "Madame," he
continued, speaking to Madame de Pavannes as he passed her, "permit me."

He did not look at her, or see her emotion, or I think he must have
divined our presence.  And happily the others did not suspect her of
knowing more than they did.  He crossed the floor at his leisure, and
sauntered to the window, watched by them with impatience.  He drew
aside the curtain, and tried each of the bars, and peered through the
opening both up and down, An oath and an expression of wonder escaped
him.  The bars were standing, and firm and strong; and it did not occur
to him that we could have passed between them.  I am afraid to say how
few inches they were apart.

As he turned, he cast a casual glance at the bed--at us; and hesitated.
He had the candle in his hand, having taken it to the window the better
to examine the bars; and it obscured his sight. He did not see us.  The
three crouching forms, the strained white faces, the starting eyes,
that lurked in the shadow of the curtain escaped him.  The wild beating
of our hearts did not reach his ears.  And it was well for him that it
was so.  If he had come up to the bed I think that we should have
killed him, I know that we should have tried.  All the blood in me had
gone to my head, and I saw him through a haze--larger than life.  The
exact spot near the buckle of his cloak where I would strike him,
downwards and inwards, an inch above the collar-bone,--this only I saw
clearly.  I could not have missed it.  But he turned away, his face
darkening, and went back to the group near the door, and never knew the
risk he had run.



CHAPTER VI.

MADAME'S FRIGHT.

And we breathed again.  The agony of suspense, which Bezers' pause had
created, passed away.  But the night already seemed to us as a week of
nights.  An age of experience, an aeon of adventures cut us off--as we
lay shaking behind the curtain--from Caylus and its life.  Paris had
proved itself more treacherous than we had even expected to find it.
Everything and everyone shifted, and wore one face one minute, and one
another.  We had come to save Pavannes' life at the risk of our own; we
found him to be a villain!  Here was Mirepoix owning himself a
treacherous wretch, a conspirator against a woman; we sympathised with
him. The priest had come upon a work of charity and rescue; we loathed
the sound of his voice, and shrank from him, we knew not why, seeming
only to read a dark secret, a gloomy threat in each doubtful word he
uttered.  He was the strangest enigma of all. Why did we fear him?  Why
did Madame de Pavannes, who apparently had known him before, shudder at
the touch of his hand?  Why did his shadow come even between her and
her sister, and estrange them?  so that from the moment Pavannes' wife
saw him standing by Diane's side, she forgot that the latter had come
to save, and looked on her in doubt and sorrow, almost with repugnance.

We left the Vidame going back to the fireplace.  He stooped to set down
the candle by the hearth.  "They are not here," he said, as he
straightened himself again, and looked curiously at his companions.  He
had apparently been too much taken up with the pursuit to notice them
before.  "That is certain, so I have the less time to lose," he
continued.  "But I would--yes, my dear Coadjutor, I certainly would
like to know before I go, what you are doing here.  Mirepoix--Mirepoix
is an honest man.  I did not expect to find you in HIS house.  And two
ladies?  Two!  Fie, Coadjutor.  Ha!  Madame d'O, is it?  My dear lady,"
he continued, addressing her in a whimsical tone, "do not start at the
sound of your own name!  It would take a hundred hoods to hide your
eyes, or bleach your lips to the common colour; I should have known you
at once, had I looked at you.  And your companion?  Pheugh!"

He broke off, whistling softly.  It was clear that he recognised Madame
de Pavannes, and recognised her with astonishment.  The bed creaked as
I craned my neck to see what would follow.  Even the priest seemed to
think that some explanation was necessary, for he did not wait to be
questioned.

"Madame de Pavannes," he said in a dry, husky voice, and without
looking up, "was spirited hither yesterday; and detained against her
will by this good man, who will have to answer for it. Madame d'O
discovered her whereabouts, and asked me to escort her here without
loss of time to enforce her sister's release."

"And her restoration to her distracted husband?"

"Just so," the priest assented, acquiring confidence, I thought.

"And Madame desires to go?"

"Surely!  Why not?"

"Well," the Vidame drawled, his manner such as to bring the blood to
Madame de Pavannes' cheek, "it depends on the person who--to use your
phrase, M. le Coadjuteur--spirited her hither."

"And that," Madame herself retorted, raising her head, while her voice
quivered with indignation and anger, "was the Abbess of the Ursulines.
Your suspicions are base, worthy of you and unworthy of me, M. le
Vidame!  Diane!"  she continued sharply, taking her sister's arm, and
casting a disdainful glance at Bezers, "let us go.  I want to be with
my husband.  I am stifled in this room."

"We are going, little one," Diane murmured reassuringly.  But I noticed
that the speaker's animation, which had been as a soul to her beauty
when she entered the room, was gone.  A strange stillness was it fear
of the Vidame?  had taken its place.

"The Abbess of the Ursulines?"  Bezers continued thoughtfully. "SHE
brought you here, did she?"  There was surprise, genuine surprise, in
his voice.  "A good soul, and, I think I have heard, a friend of yours.
Umph!"

"A very dear friend," Madame answered stiffly.  "Now, Diane!"

