Bretagne_--how call you it in English?'

'Welsh uncles,' said Alice.

'They are the Count de St. Pol and the Bishop of Therouenne.  They came
to Dijon.  In another month I should have been seventeen, and been
admitted as a novice; but, alack! there were all the lands that came
through my grandmother, in Holland and in Flanders, all falling to me,
and Monseigneur of Therouenne, like almost all secular clergy, cannot
endure the religious orders, and would not hear of my becoming a Sister.
They took me away, and the Bishop declared my dedication null, and they
would have bestowed me in marriage at once, I believe, if Heaven had not
aided me, and they could not agree on the person.  And then my dear
Countess promised me that she would never let me be given without my free
will.'

'Then,' said Alice, 'the Bishop did cancel your dedication?'

'Yes,' said Esclairmonde; 'but none can cancel the dedication of my
heart.  So said the holy man at Zwoll.'

'How, lady?' anxiously inquired Malcolm; 'has not a bishop power to bind
and unloose?'

'Yea,' said Esclairmonde, 'such power that if my childish promise had
been made without purpose or conscience thereof, or indeed if my will
were not with it, it would bind me no more, there were no sin in wedlock
for me, no broken vow.  But my own conscience of my vow, and my sense
that I belong to my Heavenly Spouse, proved, he said, that it was not my
duty to give myself to another, and that whereas none have a parent's
right over me, if I have indeed chosen the better part, He to whom I have
promised myself will not let it be taken from me, though I might have to
bear much for His sake.  And when I said in presumption that such would
lie light on me, he bade me speak less and pray more, for I knew not the
cost.'

'He must have been a very holy man,' said Alice, 'and strict withal.  Who
was he?'

'One Father Thomas, a Canon Regular of the chapter of St. Agnes, a very
saint, who spends his life in copying and illuminating the Holy
Scripture, and in writing holy thoughts that verily seem to have been
breathed into him by special inspiration of God.  It was a sermon of his
in Lent, upon chastening and perplexity, that I heard when first I was
snatched from Dijon, that made me never rest till I had obtained his
ghostly counsel.  If I never meet him again, I shall thank Heaven for
those months at Zwoll all my life--ere the Duke of Burgundy made my
Countess resign Holland for twelve years to her uncle, and we left the
place.  Then, well-nigh against her will, they forced her into a marriage
with the Duke of Brabant, though he be her first cousin, her godson, and
a mere rude boy.  I cannot tell you how evil were the days we often had
then.  If he had been left to himself, Madame might have guided him; but
ill men came about him; they maddened him with wine and beer; they
excited him to show that he feared her not; he struck her, and more than
once almost put her in danger of her life.  Then, too, his mother married
the Bishop of Liege, her enemy--

'The Bishop!'

'He had never been consecrated, and had a dispensation.  That marriage
deprived my poor lady of even her mother's help.  All were against her
then; and for me too it went ill, for the Duke of Burgundy insisted on my
being given to a half-brother of his, one they call Sir Boemond of
Burgundy--a hard man of blood and revelry.  The Duke of Brabant was all
for him, and so was the Duchess-mother; and though my uncles would not
have chosen him, yet they durst not withstand the Duke of Burgundy.  I
tried to appeal to the Emperor Sigismund, the head of our house, but I
know not if he ever heard of my petition.  I was in an exceeding strait,
and had only one trust, namely, that Father Thomas had told me that the
more I threw myself upon God, the more He would save me from man.  But
oh! they seemed all closing in on me, and I knew that Sir Boemond had
sworn that I should pay heavily for my resistance.  Then one night my
Countess came to me.  She showed me the bruises her lord had left on her
arms, and told me that he was about to banish all of us, her ladies, into
Holland, and to keep her alone to bear his fury, and she was resolved to
escape, and would I come with her?  It seemed to me the message of
deliverance.  Her nurse brought us peasant dresses, high stiff caps,
black boddices, petticoats of many colours, and therein we dressed
ourselves, and stole out, ere dawn, to a church, where we knelt till the
Sieur d'Escaillon--the gentleman who attends Madame still--drove up in a
farmer's garb, with a market cart, and so forth from Bruges we drove.  We
cause to Valenciennes, to her mother; but we found that she, by
persuasion of the Duke, would give us both up; so the Sieur d'Escaillon
got together sixty lances, and therewith we rode to Calais, where never
were weary travellers more courteously received than we by Lord
Northumberland, the captain of Calais.'

'Oh, I am glad you came to us English!' cried Alice.  'Only I would it
had been my father who welcomed you.  And now?'

'Now I remain with my lady, as the only demoiselle she has from her
country; and, moreover, I am waiting in the trust that my kinsmen will
give up their purpose of bestowing me in marriage, now that I am beyond
their reach; and in time I hope to obtain sufficient of my own goods for
a dowry for whatever convent I may enter.'

'Oh, let it be an English one!' cried Alice.

'I have learnt to breathe freer since I have been on English soil,' said
Esclairmonde, smiling; 'but where I may rest at last, Heaven only knows!'

'This is a strange country,' said Malcolm.  'No one seems afraid of
violence and wrong here.'

'Is that so strange?' asked Alice, amazed.  'Why, men would be hanged if
they did violence!'

'I would we were as sure of justice at my home,' sighed Esclairmonde.
'King Henry will bring about a better rule.'

'Never doubt,' cried Salisbury's daughter.  'When France is once subdued,
there will be no more trouble, he will make your kinsmen do you right,
dear demoiselle, and oh! will you not found a beauteous convent?'

'King Henry has not conquered France yet,' was all Esclairmonde said.

'Ha!' cried the buxom Countess Jaqueline, as the ladies dismounted,
'never speak to me more, our solemn sister.  When have I done worse than
lure a young cavalier, and chain him all day with my tongue?'

'He is a gentle boy!' said Esclairmonde, smiling.

'Truly he looked like a calf turned loose among strange cattle!  How gat
he into the hall?'

'He is of royal Scottish blood,' said Esclairmonde 'cousin-german to King
James.'

'And our grave nun has a fancy to tame the wild Scots, like a second St.
Margaret!  A king's grandson! fie, fie! what, become ambitious,
Clairette?  Eh? you were so occupied, that I should have been left to no
one but Monseigneur of Gloucester, but that I was discreet, and rode with
my Lord Bishop of Winchester.  How he chafed! but I know better than to
have _tete-a-tetes_ with young sprigs of the blood royal!'

Esclairmonde laughed good-humouredly, partly in courtesy to her hoyden
mistress, but partly at the burning, blushing indignation she beheld in
the artless face of Alice Montagu.

The girl was as shy as a fawn, frightened at every word from knight or
lady, and much in awe of her future mother-in-law, a stiff and stately
dame, with all the Beaufort haughtiness; so that Lady Westmoreland gladly
and graciously consented to the offer of the Demoiselle de Luxemburg to
attend to the little maiden, and let her share her chamber and her bed.
And indeed Alice Montagu, bred up in strictness and in both piety and
learning, as was sometimes the case with the daughters of the nobility,
had in all her simplicity and bashfulness a purity and depth that made
her a congenial spirit with the grave votaress, whom she regarded on her
side with a young girl's enthusiastic admiration for a grown woman,
although in point of fact the years between them were few.

The other ladies of the Court were a little in awe of the Demoiselle de
Luxemburg, and did not seek her when they wished to indulge in the gossip
whose malice and coarseness she kept in check; but if they were anxious,
or in trouble, they always came to her as their natural consoler; and the
Countess Jaqueline, bold and hoydenish as she was, kept the license of
her tongue and manners under some shadow of restraint before her, and
though sometimes bantering her, often neglecting her counsel, evidently
felt her attendance a sort of safeguard and protection.

The gentlemen were mostly of the opinion of the Duke of Gloucester, who
said that the Lady Esclairmonde was so like Deborah, come out of a
Mystery, that it seemed to be always Passion-tide where she was; and she,
moreover, was always guarded in her manner towards them, keeping her
vocation in the recollection of all by her gravely and coldly courteous
demeanour, and the sober hues and fashion of her dress; but being aware
of Malcolm's destination, perceiving his loneliness, and really attracted
by his pensive gentleness, she admitted him to far more friendly
intercourse than any other young noble, while he revered and clung to her
much as Lady Alice did, as protector and friend.

King James was indeed so much absorbed in his own lady-love as to have
little attention to bestow on his young cousin, and he knew, moreover,
that to be left to such womanly training as ladies were bound to bestow
on young squires and pages was the best treatment for the youth, who was
really thriving and growing happier every day, as he lost his awkwardness
and acquired a freedom and self-confidence such as he could never have
imagined possible in his original brow-beaten state, though without
losing the gentle modesty and refinement that gave him such a charm.

A great sorrow awaited him, however, at Leicester, where Easter was to be
spent.  A messenger came from Durham, bringing letters from Coldingham to
announce the death of good Sir David Drummond, which had taken place two
days after Malcolm had left him, all but the youth himself having well
known that his state was hopeless.

In his grief, Malcolm found his chief comforter in Esclairmonde, who
kindly listened when he talked of the happy old times at Glenuskie, and
of the kindness and piety of his guardian; while she lifted his mind to
dwell on the company of the saints; and when he knew that her thoughts
went, like his, to his fatherly friend in the solemn services connected
with the departed, he was no longer desolate, and there was almost a
sweetness in the grief of which his fair saint had taken up a part.  She
showed him likewise some vellum pages on which her ghostly father, the
Canon of St. Agnes, had written certain dialogues between the Divine
Master and His disciple, which seemed indeed to have been whispered by
heavenly inspiration, and which soothed and hallowed his mourning for the
guide and protector of his youth.  He loved to dwell on her very name,
Esclairmonde--'light of the world.'  The taste of the day hung many a pun
and conceit upon names, and to Malcolm this--which had, in fact, been
culled out of romance--seemed meetly to express the pure radiance of
consolation and encouragement that seemed to him to shine from her, and
brighten the life that had hitherto been dull and gloomy--nay, even to
give him light and joy in the midst of his grief.

At that period Courts were not much burdened with etiquette.  No feudal
monarch was more than the first gentleman, and there was no rigid line of
separation of ranks, especially where, as among the kings of the Red
Rose, the boundaries were so faint between the princes and the nobility;
and as Catherine of Valois was fond of company, and indolently heedless
of all that did not affect her own dignity or ease, the whole Court,
including some of the princely captives, lived as one large family,
meeting at morning Mass in church or chapel, taking their meals in
common, riding, hunting, hawking, playing at bowls, tennis, or
stool-ball, or any other pastime, in such parties as suited their
inclinations; and spending the evening in the great hall, in conversation
varied by chess, dice, and cards, recitals of romance, and music,
sometimes performed by the choristers of the Royal chapel, or sometimes
by the company themselves, and often by one or other of the two kings,
who were both proficients as well with the voice as with the lute and
organ.

Thus Malcolm had many opportunities of being with the Demoiselle of
Luxemburg: and almost a right was established, that when she sat in the
deep embrasure of a window with her spinning, he should be on the
cushioned step beneath; when she mounted, he held the stirrup; and when
the church bells were ringing, he led her by her fair fingers to her
place in the nave, and back again to the hall; and when the manchet and
rere supper were brought into the hall, he mixed her wine and water, and
held the silver basin and napkin to her on bended knee, and had become
her recognized cavalier.  He was really thriving.  Even the high-spirited
son of Hotspur could not help loving and protecting him.

'Have a care,' said Ralf to a lad of ruder mould; 'I'll no more see that
lame young Scot maltreated than a girl.'

'He is no better than a girl,' growled his comrade; 'my little brother
Dick would be more than a match for him!'

'I wot not that,' said Percy; 'there's a drop of life and spirit at the
bottom; and for the rest, when he looks up with those eyes of his, and
smiles his smile, it is somehow as if it were beneath a man to vex him
wilfully.  And he sees so much meaning in everything, too, that it is a
dozen times better sport to hear him talk than one of you fellows, who
have only wit enough to know a hawk from a heron-schaw.'

After a grave Easter-tide spent at Leicester, the Court moved to
Westminster, where Henry had to meet his parliament, and obtain supplies
for the campaign which was to revenge the death of Clarence.

There was no great increase of gaiety even here, for Henry was extremely
occupied, both with regulating matters for government during his absence,
and in training the troops who began to flock to his standard; so that
the Queen complained that his presence in England was of little service
to her, since he never had any leisure, and there were no pastimes.

'Well, Dame,' said Henry, gaily, 'there is one revel for you.  I have
promised to knight the Lord Mayor, honest Whittington, and I hear he is
preparing a notable banquet in the Guild Hall.'

'A city mayor!' exclaimed Queen Catherine, with ineffable disgust.  'My
brothers would sooner cut off his _roturier_ head than dub him knight!'

'Belike,' said Henry, dryly; 'but what kind of friends have thy brothers
found at Paris?  Moreover, this Whittington may content thee as to blood.
Rougedragon hath been unfolding to me his lineage of a good house in
Gloucestershire.'

'More shame that he should soil his hands with trade!' said the Queen.

'See what you say when he has cased those fair hands in Spanish gloves.
You ladies should know better than to fall out with a mercer.'

'Ah!' said Duke Humfrey, 'they never saw the silks and samites wherewith
he fitted out my sister Philippa for the Swedes!  Lucky the bride whose
wardrobe is purveyed by honest Dick!'

'Is it not honour enough for the mechanical hinds that we wear their
stuffs,' said Countess Jaqueline, 'without demeaning ourselves to eat at
their boards?  The _outrecuidance_ of the rogues in the Netherlands would
be surpassing, did we feed it in that sort.'

''Tis you that will be fed, Dame Jac,' laughed Henry.  'I can tell you,
their sack and their pasties, their march-pane and blanc-manger, far
exceed aught that a poor soldier can set before you.'

'Moreover,' observed Humfrey, 'the ladies ought to see the romaunt of the
Cat complete.'

'How!' cried Jaqueline, 'is it, then, true that this Vittentone is the
miller's son whose cat wore boots and made his fortune?'

'I have heard my aunt of Orleans divert my father with that story,'
murmured Catherine.  'How went the tale?  I thought it folly, and marked
it not.  What became of the cat?'

'The cat desired to test his master's gratitude, so tells Straparola,'
said the Duke of Orleans, in his dry satirical tone; 'and whereas he had
been wont to promise his benefactor a golden coffin and state funeral,
Puss feigned death, and thereby heard the lady inform her husband that
the old cat was dead.  "_A la bonne heure_!" said the Marquis.  "Take him
by the tail, and fling him on the muck-heap beneath the window!"'

'Thereof I acquit Whittington, who never was thankless to man or brute,'
said King Henry.  'Moreover, his cat, or her grandchildren, must be now
in high preferment at the King of Barbary's Court.'

'A marvellous beast is that cat,' said James.  'When I was a child in
Scotland, we used to tell the story of her exchange for a freight of gold
and spices, only the ship sailed from Denmark,'

'Maybe,' said Henry; 'but I would maintain the truth of Whittington's cat
with my lance, and would gladly have no worse cause!  You'll see his cat
painted beside him in the Guild Hall, and may hear the tale from him, as
I loved to hear him when I was a lad.

   "Turn again, Whittington,
   Thrice Lord Mayor of London town!"

I told my good old friend I must have come over from France on purpose to
keep his third mayoralty.  So I am for the City on Thursday; and whoever
loves good wine, good sturgeon, good gold, or good men, had best come
with me.'

Such inducements were not to be neglected, and though Queen Catherine
minced and bridled, and apologized to Duchess Jaqueline for her husband's
taste for low company, neither princess wished to forego the chance of
amusement; and a brilliant cavalcade set forth in full order of
precedence.  The King and Queen were first; then, to his great disgust,
the King of Scots, with Duchess Jaqueline; Bedford, with Lady Somerset;
Gloucester, with the Countess of March; the Duke of Orleans, with the
Countess of Exeter; and Malcolm of Glenuskie found himself paired off
with his sovereign's lady-love, Joan Beaufort, and a good deal overawed
by the tall horned tower that crowned her flaxen locks, as well as by
knowing that her uncle, the Bishop of Winchester, the stateliest,
stiffest, and most unapproachable person in all the Court, was riding
just behind him, beside the Demoiselle de Luxemburg.

Temple Bar was closed, and there was a flourish of trumpets and a parley
ere the gate was flung open to admit the royal guests; but Malcolm, in
his place, could not see the aldermen on horseback, in their robes of
scarlet and white, drawn up to receive the King.  All that way up
Holborn, every house was hung with tapestry, and the citizens formed a
gorgeously-apparelled lane, shouting in unison, their greetings attuned
to bursts of music from trumpets and nakers.

Beautiful old St. Paul's, with the exquisite cross for open-air preaching
in front, rose on their view; and before the lofty west door the princely
guests dismounted, each gentleman leading his lady up the nave to the
seat prepared in such manner that he might be opposite to her.  The
clergy lined the stalls, and a magnificent mass was sung, and was
concluded by the advance of the King to the altar step, followed by a
fine old man in scarlet robes bordered with white fur, the collar of SS.
round his neck, and his silvery hair and lofty brow crowning a face as
sagacious as it was dignified and benevolent.

It seemed a reversal of the ordinary ceremonial when the slender agile
young man took in hand the sword, and laid the honour of knighthood on
the gray-headed substantial senior, whom he bade to arise Sir Richard
Whittington.  Jaqueline of Hainault had the bad taste to glance across to
Humfrey and titter, but the Duke valued popularity among the citizens,
and would not catch her eye; and in the line behind the royal ladies
there was a sweet elderly face, beautiful, though time-worn, with blue
eyes misty with proud glad tears, and a mouth trembling with tender
exultation.

After the ceremony was concluded, King Henry offered his hand to the Lady
Mayoress, Dame Alice Whittington, making her bright tears drop in glad
confusion at his frank, hearty congratulation and warm praise of her
husband; and though the fair Catherine could have shuddered when Sir
Richard advanced to lead her, she was too royal to compromise her dignity
by visible scorn, and she soon found that the merchant could speak much
better French than most of the nobles.

Malcolm felt as averse as did the French princesses to burgher wealth and
splendour, and his mind had not opened to understand burgher worth and
weight; and when he saw the princes John and Humfrey, and even his own
king, seeking out city dames and accosting them with friendly looks, it
seemed to him a degrading truckling to riches, from which he was anxious
to save his future queen; but when he would have offered his arm to Lady
Joan, he saw her already being led away by an alderman measuring at least
a yard across the shoulders; and the good-natured Earl of March, seeing
him at a loss, presented him to a round merry wife in a scarlet petticoat
and black boddice, its plump curves wreathed with geld chains, who began
pitying him for having been sent to the wars so young, being, as usual,
charmed into pity by his soft appealing eyes and unconscious grace; would
not believe his assertions that he was neither a captive nor a
