those things that ran with the current of a deep and narrow soul. He
passes from the New World stage, a marked and tragic figure. Behind him
his vengeances displeased even loyalist Virginia, willing on the whole
to let bygones be bygones among neighbors and kindred. It is said that;
when his ship went down the river, bonfires were lighted and cannon and
muskets fired for joy. And so beyond the eastward horizon fades the old
reactionary.

Herbert Jeffreys and then Sir Henry Chicheley follow Berkeley as
Governors of Virginia; they are succeeded by Lord Culpeper and he by
Lord Howard of Effingham. King Charles dies and James the Second rules
in England. Culpeper and Effingham play the Governor merely for what
they can get for themselves out of Virginia.* The price of tobacco goes
down, down. The crops are too large; the old poor remedies of letting
much acreage go unplanted, or destroying and burning where the measure
of production is exceeded, and of petitions to the King, are all
resorted to, but they procure little relief. Virginia cannot be called
prosperous. England hears that the people are still disaffected and
unquiet and England stolidly wonders why.

     * In 1684 the Crown purchased from Culpeper all his rights
     except in the Northern Neck.

During the reign of the second Charles, Maryland had suffered from
political unrest somewhat less than Virginia. The autocracy of Maryland
was more benevolent and more temperate than that of her southern
neighbor. The name of Calvert is a better symbol of wisdom than the name
of Berkeley. Cecil Calvert, second Lord Baltimore, dying in 1675, has
a fair niche in the temple of human enlightenment. His son Charles
succeeded, third Lord Baltimore and Lord Proprietary of Maryland.
Well-intentioned, this Calvert lacked something of the ability of either
his father or his grandfather. Though he lived in Maryland while his
father had lived in England, his government was not as wise as his
father's had been.

But in Maryland, even before the death of Cecil Calvert, inherent evils
were beginning to form of themselves a visible body. In Maryland, as in
Virginia, there set in after the Restoration a period of reaction,
of callous rule in the interests of an oligarchy. In 1669 a "packed"
Council and an "aristocratic" Assembly procured a restriction of the
franchise similar to that introduced into Virginia. As in Virginia,
an Assembly deemed of the right political hue was kept in being by the
device of adjournment from year to year. In Maryland, as in Virginia,
public officials were guilty of corruption and graft. In 1676 there
seems to have lacked for revolt, in Maryland, only the immediate
provocative of acute Indian troubles and such leaders as Bacon,
Lawrence, and Drummond. The new Lord Baltimore being for the time in
England, his deputy writes him that never were any "more replete with
malignancy and frenzy than our people were about August last, and they
wanted but a monstrous head to their monstrous body." Two leaders indeed
appeared, Davis and Pate by name, but having neither the standing nor
the strength of the Virginia rebels, they were finally taken and
hanged. What supporters they had dispersed, and the specter of armed
insurrection passed away.

The third Lord Baltimore, like his father, found difficulty in
preserving the integrity of his domain. His father had been involved in
a long wrangle over the alleged invasion of Maryland by the Dutch. Since
then, New Netherland had passed into English hands. Now there occurred
another encroachment on the territory of Maryland. This time the invader
was an Englishman named William Penn. Just as the idea of a New World
freedom for Catholics had appealed to the first Lord Baltimore, so now
to William Penn, the Quaker, came the thought of freedom there for
the Society of Friends. The second Charles owed an old debt to Penn's
father. He paid it in 1681 by giving to the son, whom he liked, a
province in America. Little by little, in order to gain for Penn access
to the sea, the terms of his grant were widened until it included,
beside the huge Pennsylvanian region, the tract that is now Delaware,
which was then claimed by Baltimore. Maryland protested against
the grant to Penn, as Virginia had protested against the grant to
Baltimore--and equally in vain. England was early set upon the road to
many colonies in America, destined later to become many States. One by
one they were carved out of the first great unity.

In 1685 the tolerant Charles the Second died. James the Second, a
Catholic, ruled England for about three years, and then fled before
the Revolution of 1688. William and Mary, sovereigns of a Protestant
England, came to the throne. We have seen that the Proprietary of
Maryland and his numerous kinsmen and personal adherents were Catholics.
Approximately one in eight of other Marylanders were fellows in that
faith. Another eighth of the people held with the Church of England. The
rest, the mass of the folk, were dissenters from that Church. And now
all the Protestant elements together--the Quakers excepted--solidified
into political and religious opposition to the Proprietary's rule.
Baltimore, still in England, had immediately, upon the accession of
William and Mary, dispatched orders to the Maryland Council to proclaim
them King and Queen. But his messenger died at sea, and there was delay
in sending another. In Maryland the Council would not proclaim the new
sovereigns without instructions, and it was even rumored that Catholic
Maryland meant to withstand the new order.

In effect the old days were over. The Protestants, Churchmen and
Dissenters alike, proceeded to organize under a new leader, one John
Coode. They formed "An Association in arms for the defense of the
Protestant religion, and for asserting the right of King William and
Queen Mary to the Province of Maryland and all the English Dominions."
Now followed a confused time of accusations and counter-accusations,
with assertions that Maryland Catholics were conspiring with the Indians
to perpetrate a new St. Bartholomew massacre of Protestants, and hot
counter-assertions that this is "a sleveless fear and imagination
fomented by the artifice of some ill-minded persons." In the end Coode
assembled a force of something less than a thousand men and marched
against St. Mary's. The Council, which had gathered there, surrendered,
and the Association for the Defense found itself in power. It proceeded
to call a convention and to memorialize the King and Queen, who in the
end approved its course. Maryland passed under the immediate government
of the Crown. Lord Baltimore might still receive quit-rents and customs,
but his governmental rights were absorbed into the monarchy. Sir Lionel
Copley came out as Royal Governor, and a new order began in Maryland.

The heyday of Catholic freedom was past. England would have a Protestant
America. Episcopalians were greatly in the minority, but their Church
now became dominant over both Catholic and Dissenter, and where the
freethinker raised his head he was smitten down. Catholic and Dissenter
and all alike were taxed to keep stable the Established Church. The old
tolerance, such as it was, was over. Maryland paced even with the rest
of the world.

Presently the old capital of St. Mary's was abandoned. The government
removed to the banks of the Severn, to Providence--soon, when Anne
should be Queen, to be renamed Annapolis. In vain the inhabitants of
St. Mary's remonstrated. The center of political gravity in Maryland had
shifted.

The third Lord Baltimore died in 1715. His son Benedict, fourth lord,
turned from the Catholic Church and became a member of the Church of
England. Dying presently, he left a young son, Charles, fifth Lord
Baltimore, to be brought up in the fold of the Established Church.
Reconciled now to the dominant creed, with a Maryland where Catholics
were heavily penalized, Baltimore resumed the government under favor of
the Crown. But it was a government with a difference. In Maryland, as
everywhere, the people were beginning to hold the reins. Not again the
old lord and the old underling! For years to come the lords would say
that they governed, but strong life arose beneath, around, and above
their governing.

Maryland had by 1715 within her bounds more than forty thousand white
men and nearly ten thousand black men. She still planted and shipped
tobacco, but presently found how well she might raise wheat, and
that it, too, was valuable to send away in exchange for all kinds of
manufactured things. Thus Maryland began to be a land of wheat still
more than a land of tobacco.

For the rest, conditions of life in Maryland paralleled pretty closely
those in Virginia. Maryland was almost wholly rural; her plantations
and farms were reached with difficulty by roads hardly more than
bridle-paths, or with ease by sailboat and rowboat along the innumerable
waterways. Though here and there manors--large, easygoing, patriarchal
places, with vague, feudal ways and customs--were to be found, the
moderate sized plantation was the rule. Here stood, in sight usually of
blue water, the planter's dwelling of brick or wood. Around it grew up
the typical outhouses, household offices, and storerooms; farther away
yet clustered the cabin quarters alike of slaves and indentured labor.
Then stretched the fields of corn and wheat, the fields of tobacco.
Here, at river or bay side, was the home wharf or landing. Here the
tobacco was rolled in casks; here rattled the anchor of the ship
that was to take it to England and bring in return a thousand and one
manufactured articles. There were no factories in Maryland or Virginia.
Yet artisans were found among the plantation laborers--"carpenters,
coopers, sawyers, blacksmiths, tanners, curriers, shoemakers, spinners,
weavers, and knitters." Throughout the colonies, as in every new
country, men and women, besides being agriculturists, produced homemade
much that men, women, and children needed. But many other articles and
all luxuries came in the ships from overseas, and the harvest of the
fields paid the account.



CHAPTER XIV. THE CAROLINAS

The first settlers on the banks of the James River, looking from beneath
their hands southward over plain land and a haze of endless forests,
called that unexplored country South Virginia. It stretched away to
those rivers and bays, to that island of Roanoke, whence had fled
Raleigh's settlers. Beyond that, said the James River men, was Florida.
Time passed, and the region of South Virginia was occasionally spoken of
as Carolina, though whether that name was drawn from Charles the First
of England, or whether those old unfortunate Huguenots in Florida had
used it with reference to Charles the Ninth of France, is not certainly
known.

South Virginia lay huge, unknown, unsettled. The only exception was the
country immediately below the southern banks of the lower James with the
promontory that partially closed in Chesapeake Bay. Virginia, growing
fast, at last sent her children into this region. In 1653 the Assembly
enacted: "Upon the petition of Roger Green, clarke, on the behalfe
of himselfe and inhabitants of Nansemund river, It is ordered by this
present Grand Assembly that tenn thousand acres of land be granted unto
one hundred such persons who shall first seate on Moratuck or Roanoke
river and the land lying upon the south side of Choan river and the
ranches thereof, Provided that such seaters settle advantageously for
security and be sufficiently furnished with amunition and strength...."

Green and his men, well furnished presumably with firelocks, bullets,
and powder-horns, went into this hinterland. At intervals there followed
other hardy folk. Quakers, subject to persecution in old Virginia,
fled into these wilds. The name Carolina grew to mean backwoods,
frontiersman's land. Here were forest and stream, Indian and bear and
wolf, blue waters of sound and sea, long outward lying reefs and shoals
and islets, fertile soil and a clime neither hot nor cold. Slowly the
people increased in number. Families left settled Virginia for the
wilderness; men without families came there for reasons good and bad.
Their cabins, their tiny hamlets were far apart; they practised a
hazardous agriculture; they hunted, fished, and traded with the Indians.
The isolation of these settlers bred or increased their personal
independence, while it robbed them of that smoothness to be gained where
the social particles rub together. This part of South Virginia was soon
to be called North Carolina.

Far down the coast was Cape Fear. In the year of the Restoration a
handful of New England men came here in a ship and made a settlement
which, not prospering, was ere long abandoned. But New Englanders traded
still in South Virginia as along other coasts. Seafarers, they entered
at this inlet and at that, crossed the wide blue sounds, and,
anchoring in mouths of rivers, purchased from the settlers their forest
commodities. Then over they ran to the West Indies, and got in exchange
sugar and rum and molasses, with which again they traded for tobacco in
Carolina, in Virginia, and in Maryland. These ships went often to New
Providence in the Bahamas and to Barbados. There began, through trade
and other circumstances, a special connection between the long coast
line and these islands that were peopled by the English. The restored
Kingdom of England had many adherents to reward. Land in America,
islands and main, formed the obvious Fortunatus's purse. As the second
Charles had divided Virginia for the benefit of Arlington and Culpeper,
so now, in 1663, to "our right trusty and right well-beloved cousins and
counsellors, Edward, Earl of Clarendon, our High Chancellor of England,
and George, Duke of Albemarle, Master of our Horse and CaptainGeneral of
all our Forces, our right trusty and well-beloved William, Lord Craven,
John, Lord Berkeley, our right trusty and well-beloved counsellor,
Anthony, Lord Ashley, Chancellor of our Exchequer, Sir George Carteret,
Knight and Baronet, Vice-Chamberlain of our Household, and our trusty and
well-beloved Sir William Berkeley, Knight, and Sir John Colleton, Knight
and Baronet," he gave South Virginia, henceforth called the Carolinas,
a region occupying five degrees of latitude, and stretching indefinitely
from the seacoast toward the setting sun.

This huge territory became, like Maryland, a province or palatinate. In
Maryland was one Proprietary; in Carolina there were eight, though
for distinction the senior of the eight was called the Palatine. As in
Maryland, the Proprietaries had princely rights. They owed allegiance to
England, and a small quit-rent went to the King. They were supposed
to govern, in the main, by English law and to uphold the religion of
England. They were to make laws at their discretion, with "the advice,
assent, and approbation of the freemen, or of their deputies, who were
to be assembled from time to time as seemed best."

John Locke, who wrote the "Essay Concerning Human Understanding",
wrote also, with Ashley at his side, "The Fundamental Constitutions of
Carolina, in number a Hundred and Twenty, agreed upon by the Palatine
and Lords Proprietors, to remain the sacred and unalterable form and
Rule of government of Carolina forever."

"Forever" is a long word with ofttimes a short history. The Lords
Proprietors have left their names upon the maps of North and South
Carolina. There are Albemarle Sound and the Ashley and Cooper rivers,
Clarendon, Hyde, Carteret, Craven, and Colleton Counties. But their
Fundamental Constitutions, "in number a hundred and twenty," written
by Locke in 1669, are almost all as dead as the leaves of the Carolina
forest falling in the autumn of that year.

The grant included that territory settled by Roger Green and his men.
Among the Proprietors sat Sir William Berkeley, Governor of Virginia,
the only lord of Carolina actually upon American ground. Following
instructions from his seven fellows Berkeley now declared this region
separated from Virginia and attached to Carolina. He christened it
Albemarle. Strangely enough, he sent as Governor that Scotchman, William
Drummond, whom some years later he would hang. Drummond should have
a Council of six and an Assembly of freemen that might inaugurate
legislation having to do with local matters but must submit its acts
to the Proprietaries for veto or approval. This was the settlement in
Carolina of Albemarle, back country to Virginia, gatherer thence of many
that were hardy and sound, many that were unfortunate, and many that
were shiftless and untamed. An uncouth nurse of a turbulent democracy
was Albemarle.

Cape Fear, far down the deeply frayed coast, seemed a proper place to
which to send a colony. The intrusive Massachusetts men were gone. But
"gentlemen and merchants" of Barbados were interested. It is a far
cry from Barbados to the Carolina shore, but so is it a far cry from
England. Many royalists had fled to Barbados during the old troubles, so
that its English population was considerable. A number may have welcomed
the chance to leave their small island for the immense continent; and an
English trading port as far south as Cape Fear must have had a general
appeal. So, in 1665, came Englishmen from Barbados and made, up the Cape
Fear River, a settlement which they named Clarendon, with John Yeamans
of Barbados as Governor. But the colony did not prosper. There arose the
typical colonial troubles--sickness, dissensions, improvidence, quarrels
with the aborigines. Nor was the site the best obtainable. The settlers
finally abandoned the place and scattered to various points along the
northern coast.

In 1669 the Lords Proprietaries sent out from England three ships,
the Carolina, the Port Royal, and the Albemarle, with about a hundred
colonists aboard. Taking the old sea road, they came at last to
Barbados, and here the Albemarle, seized by a storm, was wrecked. The
two other ships, with a Barbados sloop, sailed on anal were approaching
the Bahamas when another hurricane destroyed the Port Royal. The
Carolina, however, pushed on with the sloop, reached Bermuda, and rested
there; then, together with a small ship purchased in these islands, she
turned west by south and came in March of 1670 to the good harbor of
Port Royal, South Carolina.

Southward from the harbor where the ships rode, stretched old Florida,
held by the Spaniards. There was the Spanish town, St. Augustine. Thence
Spanish ships might put forth and descend upon the English newcomers.
The colonists after debate concluded to set some further space between
them and lands of Spain. The ships put again to sea, beat northward a
few leagues, and at last entered a harbor into which emptied two rivers,
presently to be called the Ashley and the Cooper. Up the Ashley they
went a little way, anchored, and the colonists going ashore began to
build upon the west bank of the river a town which for the King they
named Charles Town. Ten years later this place was abandoned in favor of
the more convenient point of land between the two rivers. Here then was
builded the second and more enduring Charles Town--Charleston, as we
call it now, in South Carolina.

Colonists came fast to this Carolina lying south. Barbados sent many;
England, Scotland, and Ireland contributed a share; there came Huguenots
from France, and a certain number of Germans. In ten years after
the first settling the population numbered twelve hundred, and this
presently doubled and went on to increase. The early times were taken up
with the wrestle with the forest, with the Indians, with Spanish alarms,
with incompetent governors, with the Lords Proprietaries' Fundamental
Constitutions, and with the restrictions which English Navigation Laws
imposed upon English colonies. What grains and vegetables and tobacco
they could grow, what cattle and swine they could breed and export,
preoccupied the minds of these pioneer farmers. There were struggling
for growth a rough agriculture and a hampered trade with Barbados,
Virginia, and New England--trade likewise with the buccaneers who
swarmed in the West Indian waters.

Five hundred good reasons allowed, and had long allowed, free bootery to
flourish in American seas. Gross governmental faults, Navigation
Acts, and a hundred petty and great oppressions, general poverty,
adventurousness, lawlessness, and sympathy of mishandled folk with
lawlessness, all combined to keep Brother of the Coast, Buccaneer, and
Filibuster alive, and their ships upon all seas. Many were no worse than
smugglers; others were robbers with violence; and a few had a dash of
the fiend. All nations had sons in the business. England to the south in
America had just the ragged coast line, with its off-lying islands and
islets, liked by all this gentry, whether smuggler or pirate outright.
Through much of the seventeenth century the settlers on these shores
never violently disapproved of the pirate. He was often a "good fellow."
He brought in needed articles without dues, and had Spanish gold in his
pouch. He was shrugged over and traded with.

He came ashore to Charles Town, and they traded with him there. At one
time Charles Town got the name of "Rogue's Harbor." But that was not
forever, nor indeed, as years are counted, for long. Better and better
emigrants arrived, to add to the good already there. The better type
prevailed, and gave its tone to the place. There set in, on the Ashley
and Cooper rivers, a fair urban life that yet persists.

South Carolina was trying tobacco and wheat. But in the last years of
the seventeenth century a ship touching at Charleston left there a bag
of Madagascar rice. Planted, it gave increase that was planted again.
Suddenly it was found that this was the crop for low-lying Carolina.
Rice became her staple, as was tobacco of Virginia.

For the rice-fields South Carolina soon wanted African slaves, and they
were consequently brought in numbers, in English ships. There began, in
this part of the world, even more than in Virginia, the system of large
plantations and the accompanying aristocratic structure of society. But
in Virginia the planter families lived broadcast over the land, each
upon its own plantation. In South Carolina, to escape heat and sickness,
the planters of rice and indigo gave over to employees the care of
their great holdings and lived themselves in pleasant Charleston. These
plantations, with their great gangs of slaves under overseers, differed
at many points from the more kindly, semi-patriarchal life of the
Virginian plantation. To South Carolina came also the indentured white
laborer, but the black was imported in increasing numbers.

From the first in the Carolinas there had been promised fair freedom
for the unorthodox. The charters provided, says an early Governor, "an
overplus power to grant liberty of conscience, although at home was a
hot persecuting time." Huguenots, Independents, Quakers, dissenters of
many kinds, found on the whole refuge and harbor. In every colony soon
began the struggle by the dominant color and caste toward political
liberty. King, Company, Lords Proprietaries, might strive to rule from
over the seas. But the new land fast bred a practical rough freedom. The
English settlers came out from a land where political change was in the
air. The stream was set toward the crumbling of feudalism, the rise of
democracy. In the New World, circumstances favoring, the stream became
a tidal river. Governors, councils, assemblies, might use a misleading
phraseology of a quaint servility toward the constituted powers in
England. Tory parties might at times seem to color the land their own
hue. But there always ran, though often roughly and with turbulence, a
set of the stream against autocracy.

In Carolina, South and North, by the Ashley and Cooper rivers, and in
that region called Albemarle, just back of Virginia, there arose and
went on, through the remainder of the seventeenth century and in the
eighteenth, struggles with the Lords Proprietaries and the Governors
that these named, and behind this a more covert struggle with the Crown.
The details differed, but the issues involved were much the same in
North and South Carolina. The struggle lasted for the threescore and
odd years of the proprietary government and renewed itself upon occasion
after 1729 when the Carolinas became royal colonies. Later, it was
swept, a strong affluent, into the great general stream of colonial
revolt, culminating in the Revolution.

Into North Carolina, beside the border population entering through
Virginia and containing much of a backwoods and derelict nature, came
many Huguenots, the best of folk, and industrious Swiss, and Germans
from the Rhine. Then the Scotch began to come in numbers, and families
of Scotch descent from the north of Ireland. The tone of society
consequently changed from that of the early days. The ruffian and the
shiftless sank to the bottom. There grew up in North Carolina a
people, agricultural but without great plantations, hardworking and
freedom-loving.

South Carolina, on the other hand, had great plantations, a town
society, suave and polished, a learned clergy, an aristocratic cast to
life. For long, both North and South clung to the sea-line and to the
lower stretches of rivers where the ships could come in. Only by degrees
did English colonial life push back into the forests away from the sea,
to the hills, and finally across the mountains.



CHAPTER XV. ALEXANDER SPOTSWOOD

In the spring of 1689, Virginians flocked to Jamestown to hear William
and Mary proclaimed Lord and Lady of Virginia. The next year there
entered, as Lieutenant-Governor, Francis Nicholson, an odd character
in whom an immediate violence of temper went with a statesmanlike
conception of things to be. Two years he governed here, then was
transferred to Maryland, and then in seven years came back to the James.
He had not been liked there, but while he was gone Virginia had endured
in his stead Sir Edmund Andros. That had been swapping the witch for the
devil. Virginia in 1698 seems to have welcomed the returning Nicholson.

Jamestown had been hastily rebuilt, after Bacon's burning, and then by
accident burned again. The word malaria was not in use, but all knew
that there had always been sickness on that low spit running out from
the marshes. The place might well seem haunted, so many had suffered
there and died there. Poetical imagination might have evoked a piece of
sad pageantry--starving times, massacres, quarrels, executions, cruel
and unusual punishments, gliding Indians. A practical question, however,
faced the inhabitants, and all were willing to make elsewhere a new
capital city.

Seven miles back from the James, about halfway over to the blue York,
stood that cluster of houses called Middle Plantation, where Bacon's men
had taken his Oath. There was planned and builded Williamsburg, which
was to be for nearly a hundred years the capital of Virginia. It
was named for King William, and there was in the minds of some loyal
colonists the notion, eventually abandoned, of running the streets in
the lines of a huge W and M. The long main street was called Duke of
Gloucester Street, for the short-lived son of that Anne who was soon
to become Queen. At one end of this thoroughfare stood a fair brick
capitol. At the other end nearly a mile away rose the brick William and
Mary College. Its story is worth the telling.

The formal acquisition of knowledge had long been a problem in Virginia.
Adult colonists came with their education, much or little, gained
already in the mother country. In most cases, doubtless, it was
little, but in many cases it was much. Books were brought in with other
household furnishing. When there began to be native-born Virginians,
these children received from parents and kindred some manner of
training. Ministers were supposed to catechise and teach. Well-to-do
and educated parents brought over tutors. Promising sons were sent to
England to school and university. But the lack of means to knowledge for
the mass of the colony began to be painfully apparent.

In the time of Charles the First one Benjamin Symms had left his means
for the founding of a free school in Elizabeth County, and his action
had been solemnly approved by the Assembly. By degrees there appeared
other similar free schools, though they were never many nor adequate.
But the first Assembly after the Restoration had made provision for a
college. Land was to have been purchased and the building completed as
speedily as might be. The intent had been good, but nothing more had
been done.

There was in Virginia, sent as Commissioner of the Established Church,
a Scotch ecclesiastic, Dr. James Blair. In virtue of his office he had a
seat in, the Council, and his integrity and force soon made him a
leader in the colony. A college in Virginia became Blair's dream. He
was supported by Virginia planters with sons to educate--daughters'
education being purely a domestic affair. Before long Blair had raised
in promised subscriptions what was for the time a large sum. With this
for a nucleus he sailed to England and there collected more. Tillotson,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Stillingfleet, Bishop of Worcester, helped
him much. The King and Queen inclined a favorable ear, and, though he
met with opposition in certain quarters, Blair at last obtained his
charter. There was to be built in Virginia and to be sustained by
taxation a great school, "a seminary of ministers of the gospel where
youths may be piously educated in good letters and manners; a certain
place of universal study, or perpetual college of divinity, philosophy,
languages and other good arts and sciences." Blair sailed back to
Virginia with the charter of the college, some money, a plan for the
main building drawn by Christopher Wren, and for himself the office of
President.

The Assembly, for the benefit of the college, taxed raw and tanned
hides, dressed buckskin, skins of doe and elk, muskrat and raccoon. The
construction of the new seat of learning was begun at Williamsburg. When
it was completed and opened to students, it was named William and Mary.
Its name and record shine fair in old Virginia. Colonial worthies
in goodly number were educated at William and Mary, as were later
revolutionary soldiers and statesmen, and men of name and fame in
the United States. Three American Presidents--Jefferson, Monroe, and
Tyler--were trained there, as well as Marshall, the Chief Justice, four
signers of the Declaration of Independence, and many another man of
mark.

The seventeenth century is about to pass. France and England are at war.
The colonial air vibrates with the struggle. There is to be a brief lull
after 1697, but the conflict will soon be resumed. The more northerly
colonies, the nearer to New France, feel the stronger pulsation, but
Virginia, too, is shaken. England and France alike play for the support
of the red man. All the western side of America lies open to incursion
from that pressed-back Indian sea of unknown extent and volume. Up and
down, the people, who have had no part in making that European war,
are sensitive to the menace of its dangers. In Virginia they build
blockhouses and they keep rangers on guard far up the great rivers.

All the world is changing, and the changes are fraught with significance
for America. Feudalism has passed; scholasticism has gone; politics,
commerce, philosophy, religion, science, invention, music, art, and
literature are rapidly altering. In England William and Mary pass away.
Queen Anne begins her reign of twelve years. Then, in 1714, enters the
House of Hanover with George the First. It is the day of Newton and
Locke and Berkeley, of Hume, of Swift, Addison, Steele, Pope, Prior, and
Defoe. The great romantic sixteenth century, Elizabeth's spacious time,
is gone. The deep and narrow, the intense, religious, individualistic
seventeenth century is gone. The eighteenth century, immediate parent of
the nineteenth, grandparent of the twentieth, occupies the stage.

In the year 1704, just over a decade since Dr. Blair had obtained the
charter for his College, the erratic and able Governor of Virginia,
Francis Nicholson, was recalled. For all that he was a wild talker, he
