Aphrodite. Come now, let us give place upon the chariot, neither rage
thou thus, I pray thee, in the forefront of battle, lest perchance thou
lose thy life."

Then stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him and said: "Speak to me no
word of flight, for I ween that thou shalt not at all persuade me; not
in my blood is it to fight a skulking fight or cower down; my force is
steadfast still. I have no mind to mount the chariot, nay, even as I am
will I go to face them; Pallas Athene biddeth me not be afraid. And as
for these, their fleet horses shall not take both back from us again,
even if one or other escape. And this moreover tell I thee, and lay thou
it to heart: if Athene rich in counsel grant me this glory, to slay them
both, then refrain thou here these my fleet horses, and bind the reins
tight to the chariot rim; and be mindful to leap upon Aineias' horses,
and drive them forth from the Trojans amid the well-greaved Achaians.
For they are of that breed whereof farseeing Zeus gave to Tros
recompense for Ganymede his child, because they were the best of all
horses beneath the daylight and the sun."

In such wise talked they one to the other, and anon those other twain
came near, driving their fleet horses. First to him spake Lykaon's
glorious son: "O thou strong-souled and cunning, son of proud Tydeus,
verily my swift dart vanquished thee not, the bitter arrow; so now will
I make trial with my spear if I can hit thee."

He spake and poised and hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon
Tydeides' shield; right through it sped the point of bronze and reached
the breastplate. So over him shouted loudly Lykaon's glorious son: "Thou
art smitten on the belly right through, and I ween thou shalt not long
hold up thine head; so thou givest me great renown."

But mighty Diomedes unaffrighted answered him: "Thou hast missed, and
not hit; but ye twain I deem shall not cease till one or other shall
have fallen and glutted with blood Ares the stubborn god of war."

So spake he and hurled; and Athene guided the dart upon his nose beside
the eye, and it pierced through his white teeth. So the hard bronze cut
through his tongue at the root and the point issued forth by the base of
the chin. He fell from his chariot, and his splendid armour gleaming
clanged upon him, and the fleet-footed horses swerved aside; so there
his soul and strength were unstrung.

Then Aineias leapt down with shield and long spear, fearing lest
perchance the Achaians might take from him the corpse; and strode over
him like a lion confident in his strength, and held before him his spear
and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoe'er should come to face
him, crying his terrible cry. Then Tydeides grasped in his hand a
stone--a mighty deed--such as two men, as men now are, would not avail
to lift; yet he with ease wielded it all alone. Therewith he smote
Aineias on the hip where the thigh turneth in the hip joint, and this
men call the "cup-bone." So he crushed his cup-bone, and brake both
sinews withal, and the jagged stone tore apart the skin. Then the hero
stayed fallen upon his knees and with stout hand leant upon the earth;
and the darkness of night veiled his eyes. And now might Aineias king of
men have perished, but that Aphrodite daughter of Zeus was swift to
mark. About her dear son wound she her white arms, and spread before his
face a fold of her radiant vesture, to be a covering from the darts,
lest any of the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into his
breast and take away his life.

So was she bearing her dear son away from battle; but the son of
Kapaneus forgat not the behest that Diomedes of the loud war-cry had
laid upon him; he refrained his own whole-hooved horses away from the
tumult, binding the reins tight to the chariot-rim, and leapt on the
sleek-coated horses of Aineias, and drave them from the Trojans to the
well-greaved Achaians, and gave them to Deipylos his dear comrade whom
he esteemed above all that were his age-fellows, because he was
like-minded with himself; and bade him drive them to the hollow ships.
Then did the hero mount his own chariot and take the shining reins and
forthwith drive his strong-hooved horses in quest of Tydeides, eagerly.
Now Tydeides had made onslaught with pitiless weapon on Kypris
[Aphrodite], knowing how she was a coward goddess and none of those that
have mastery in battle of the warriors. Now when he had pursued her
through the dense throng and come on her, then great-hearted Tydeus' son
thrust with his keen spear, and leapt on her and wounded the skin of her
weak hand; straight through the ambrosial raiment that the Graces
themselves had woven her pierced the dart into the flesh, above the
springing of the palm. Then flowed the goddess's immortal blood, such
ichor as floweth in the blessed gods; for they eat no bread neither
drink they gleaming wine, wherefore they are bloodless and are named
immortals. And she with a great cry let fall her son: him Phoebus Apollo
took into his arms and saved him in a dusky cloud, lest any of the
fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into his breast and take away
his life. But over her Diomedes of the loud war-cry shouted afar:
"Refrain thee, thou daughter of Zeus, from war and fighting. Is it not
enough that thou beguilest feeble women? But if in battle thou wilt
mingle, verily I deem that thou shalt shudder at the name of battle, if
thou hear it even afar off."

So spake he, and she departed in amaze and was sore troubled: and
wind-footed Iris took her and led her from the throng tormented with her
pain, and her fair skin was stained. There found she impetuous Ares
sitting, on the battle's left; and his spear rested upon a cloud, and
his fleet steeds. Then she fell on her knees and with instant prayer
besought of her dear brother his golden-frontleted steeds: "Dear
brother, save me and give me thy steeds, that I may win to Olympus,
where is the habitation of the immortals. Sorely am I afflicted with a
wound wherewith a mortal smote me, even Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus."

So spake she, and Ares gave her his golden-frontleted steeds, and she
mounted on the chariot sore at heart. By her side mounted Iris, and in
her hands grasped the reins and lashed the horses to start them; and
they flew onward nothing loth. Thus soon they came to the habitation of
the gods, even steep Olympus. There wind-footed fleet Iris loosed the
horses from the chariot and stabled them, and set ambrosial forage
before them; but fair Aphrodite fell upon Dione's knees that was her
mother. She took her daughter in her arms and stroked her with her hand,
and spake and called upon her name: "Who now of the sons of heaven, dear
child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly, as though thou wert a
wrong-doer in the face of all?"

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite made answer to her: "Tydeus' son wounded
me, high-hearted Diomedes, because I was saving from the battle my dear
son Aineias, who to me is dearest far of all men. For no more is the
fierce battle-cry for Trojans and Achaians, but the Danaans now are
fighting even the immortals."

Then the fair goddess Dione answered her: "Be of good heart, my child,
and endure for all thy pain; for many of us that inhabit the mansions of
Olympus have suffered through men, in bringing grievous woes one upon
another."

So saying with both hands she wiped the ichor from the arm; her arm was
comforted, and the grievous pangs assuaged. But Athene and Hera beheld,
and with bitter words provoked Zeus the son, of Kronos. Of them was the
bright-eyed goddess Athene first to speak: "Father Zeus, wilt thou
indeed be wroth with me whate'er I say? Verily I ween that Kypris was
urging some woman of Achaia to join her unto the Trojans whom she so
marvellously loveth; and stroking such an one of the fair-robed women of
Achaia, she tore upon the golden brooch her delicate hand."

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and called unto him
golden Aphrodite and said: "Not unto thee, my child, are given the works
of war; but follow thou after the loving tasks of wedlock, and to all
these things shall fleet Ares and Athene look."

Now while they thus spake in converse one with the other, Diomedes of
the loud war-cry leapt upon Aineias, knowing full well that Apollo
himself had spread his arms over him; yet reverenced he not even the
great god, but still was eager to slay Aineias and strip from him his
glorious armour. So thrice he leapt on him, fain to slay him, and thrice
Apollo beat back his glittering shield. And when the fourth time he
sprang at him like a god, then Apollo the Far-darter spake to him with
terrible shout: "Think, Tydeides, and shrink, nor desire to match thy
spirit with gods; seeing there is no comparison of the race of immortal
gods and of men that walk upon the earth."

So said he, and Tydeides shrank a short space backwards, to avoid the
wrath of Apollo the Far-darter. Then Apollo set Aineias away from the
throng in holy Pergamos where his temple stood. There Leto and Archer
Artemis healed him in the mighty sanctuary, and gave him glory; but
Apollo of the silver bow made a wraith like unto Aineias' self, and in
such armour as his; and over the wraith Trojans and goodly Achaians each
hewed the others' bucklers on their breasts, their round shields and
fluttering targes.

Then to impetuous Ares said Phoebus Apollo: "Ares, Ares, blood-stained
bane of mortals, thou stormer of walls, wilt thou not follow after this
man and withdraw him from the battle, this Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus? First in close fight he wounded Kypris in her
hand hard by the wrist, and then sprang he upon myself like unto a god."

So saying he sate himself upon the height of Pergamos, and baleful Ares
entered among the Trojan ranks and aroused them in the likeness of fleet
Akamas, captain of the Thracians. On the heaven-nurtured sons of Priam
he called saying: "O ye sons of Priam, the heaven-nurtured king, how
long will ye yet suffer your host to be slain of the Achaians? Shall it
be even until they fight about our well-builded gates? Low lieth the
warrior whom we esteemed like unto goodly Hector, even Aineias son of
Anchises great of heart. Go to now, let us save from the tumult our
valiant comrade."

So saying he aroused the spirit and soul of every man. Thereat Sarpedon
sorely chode noble Hector: "Hector, where now is the spirit gone that
erst thou hadst? Thou saidst forsooth that without armies or allies thou
wouldest hold the city, alone with thy sisters' husbands and thy
brothers; but now can I not see any of these neither perceive them, but
they are cowering like hounds about a lion; and we are fighting that are
but allies among you."

So spake Sarpedon, and his word stung Hector to the heart, Forthwith he
leapt from his chariot in his armour to the earth, and brandishing two
keen spears went everywhere through the host, urging them to fight, and
roused the dread battle-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face the
Achaians: and the Argives withstood them in close array and fled not.
Even as a wind carrieth the chaff about the sacred threshing-floors when
men are winnowing, and the chaff-heaps grow white--so now grew the
Achaians white with falling dust which in their midst the horses' hooves
beat up into the brazen heaven, as fight was joined again, and the
charioteers wheeled round. Thus bare they forward the fury of their
hands: and impetuous Ares drew round them a veil of night to aid the
Trojans in the battle, ranging everywhere. And Apollo himself sent forth
Aineias from his rich sanctuary and put courage in the heart of him,
shepherd of the hosts. So Aineias took his place amid his comrades, and
they were glad to see him come among them alive and sound and full of
valiant spirit. Yet they questioned him not at all, for all the toil
forbade them that the god of the silver bow was stirring and Ares bane
of men and Strife raging insatiably.

And on the other side the two Aiantes and Odysseus and Diomedes stirred
the Danaans to fight; yet these of themselves feared neither the
Trojans' violence nor assaults, but stood like mists that Kronos' son
setteth in windless air on the mountain tops, at peace, while the might
of the north wind sleepeth and of all the violent winds that blow with
keen breath and scatter apart the shadowing clouds. Even so the Danaans
withstood the Trojans steadfastly and fled not. And Atreides ranged
through the throng exhorting instantly: "My friends, quit you like men
and take heart of courage, and shun dishonour in one another's eyes amid
the stress of battle. Of men that shun dishonour more are saved than
slain, but for them that flee is neither glory found nor any safety."

So saying he darted swiftly with his javelin and smote a foremost
warrior, even great-hearted Aineias' comrade Deikoon son of Pergasos,
whom the Trojans held in like honour with Priam's sons, because he was
swift to do battle amid the foremost. Him lord Agamemnon smote with his
dart upon the shield, and it stayed not the spear, but the point passed
through, so that he drave it through the belt into his nethermost belly:
and he fell with a crash and his armour clanged upon him.

Then did Aineias slay two champions of the Danaans, even the sons of
Diokles, Krethon and Orsilochos. Like them, two lions on the mountain
tops are nurtured by their dam in the deep forest thickets; and these
harry the kine and goodly sheep and make havoc of the farmsteads of men,
till in their turn they too are slain at men's hands with the keen
bronze; in such wise were these twain vanquished at Aineias' hands and
fell like tall pine-trees.

But Menelaos dear to Ares had pity of them in their fall, and strode
through the forefront, harnessed in flashing bronze, brandishing his
spear; and Ares stirred his courage, with intent that he might fall
beneath Aineias' hand. But Antilochos, great-hearted Nestor's son,
beheld him, and strode through the forefront; because he feared
exceedingly for the shepherd of the host, lest aught befall him and
disappoint them utterly of their labour. So those two were now holding
forth their hands and sharp spears each against the other, eager to do
battle; when Antilochos came and stood hard by the shepherd of the host.
But Aineias faced them not, keen warrior though he was, when he beheld
two men abiding side by side; so these haled away the corpses to the
Achaians' host, and laid the hapless twain in their comrades' arms, and
themselves turned back and fought on amid the foremost.

But Hector marked them across the ranks, and sprang on them with a
shout, and the battalions of the Trojans followed him in their might:
and Ares led them on and dread Enyo, she bringing ruthless turmoil of
war, the while Ares wielded in his hands his monstrous spear, and ranged
now before Hector's face, and now behind.

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered to behold him; and even as a
shiftless man crossing a great plain cometh on a swift-streaming river
flowing on to the sea, and seeing it boil with foam springeth backwards,
even so now Tydeides shrank back and spake to the host: "Friends, how
marvel we that noble Hector is a spearman and bold man of war! Yet ever
is there beside him some god that wardeth off destruction; even as now
Ares is there by him in likeness of a mortal man. But with faces towards
the Trojans still give ground backwards, neither be desirous to fight
amain with gods."

Now the Argives before the face of Ares and mail-clad Hector neither
turned them round about toward their black ships, nor charged forward in
battle, but still fell backward, when they heard of Ares amid the
Trojans. But when the white-armed goddess Hera marked them making havoc
of the Argives in the press of battle, anon she spake winged words to
Athene: "Out on it, thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied
maiden! Was it for naught we pledged our word to Menelaos, that he
should not depart till he had laid waste well-walled Ilios,--if thus we
let baleful Ares rage? Go to now, let us twain also take thought of
impetuous valour."

So said she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not. So Hera
the goddess queen, daughter of Kronos, went her way to harness the
gold-frontleted steeds. And Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, cast
down at her father's threshold her woven vesture many-coloured, that
herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned, and put on her the
tunic of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and arrayed her in her armour for
dolorous battle. About her shoulders cast she the tasselled aegis
terrible, whereon is Panic as a crown all round about, and Strife is
therein and Valour and horrible Onslaught withal, and therein is the
dreadful monster's Gorgon head, dreadful and grim, portent of
aegis-bearing Zeus. Upon her head set she the two-crested golden helm
with fourfold plate, bedecked with men-at-arms of a hundred cities. Upon
the flaming chariot set she her foot, and grasped her heavy spear, great
and stout, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of men, even of heroes
with whom she of the awful sire is wroth. Then Hera swiftly smote the
horses with the lash; self-moving groaned upon their hinges the gates of
heaven whereof the Hours are warders, to whom is committed great heaven
and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick cloud or set it to. There
through the gates guided they their horses patient of the lash. And they
found the son of Kronos sitting apart from all the gods on the topmost
peak of many-ridged Olympus. Then the white-armed goddess Hera stayed
her horses and questioned the most high Zeus, the son of Kronos, and
said: "Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation with Ares for these violent
deeds? How great and goodly a company of Achaians hath he destroyed
recklessly and in unruly wise, unto my sorrow. But here in peace Kypris
and Apollo of the silver bow take their pleasure, having set on this mad
one that knoweth not any law. Father Zeus, wilt thou at all be wroth
with me if I smite Ares and chase him from the battle in sorry plight?"

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said to her: "Go to now, set
upon him Athene driver of the spoil, who most is wont to bring sore pain
upon him."

So spake he, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not, and
lashed her horses; they nothing loth flew on between earth and starry
heaven. As far as a man seeth with his eyes into the haze of distance as
he sitteth on a place of outlook and gazeth over the wine-dark sea, so
far leap the loudly neighing horses of the gods. Now when they came to
Troy and the two flowing rivers, even to where Simoeis and Skamandros
join their streams, there the white-armed goddess Hera stayed her horses
and loosed them from the car and poured thick mist round about them, and
Simoeis made ambrosia spring up for them to graze. So the goddesses went
their way with step like unto turtle-doves, being fain to bring succour
to the men of Argos. And when they were now come where the most and most
valiant stood, thronging about mighty Diomedes tamer of horses, in the
semblance of ravening lions or wild boars whose strength is nowise
feeble, then stood the white-armed goddess Hera and shouted in the
likeness of great-hearted Stentor with voice of bronze, whose cry was
loud as the cry of fifty other men: "Fie upon you, Argives, base things
of shame, so brave in semblance! While yet noble Achilles entered
continually into battle, then issued not the Trojans even from the
Dardanian gate; for they had dread of his terrible spear. But now fight
they far from the city at the hollow ships."

So saying she aroused the spirit and soul of every man. And to Tydeides'
side sprang the bright-eyed goddess Athene. That lord she found beside
his horses and chariot, cooling the wound that Pandaros with his dart
had pierced, for his sweat vexed it by reason of the broad baldrick of
his round shield; therewith was he vexed and his arm grew weary, so he
was lifting up the baldrick and wiping away the dusky blood. Then the
goddess laid her hand on his horses' yoke, and said: "Of a truth Tydeus
begat a son little after his own likeness. Tydeus was short of stature,
but a man of war."

And stalwart Diomedes made answer to her and said: "I know thee, goddess
daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus: therefore with my whole heart will I
tell thee my thought and hide it not. Neither hath disheartening terror
taken hold upon me, nor any faintness, but I am still mindful of thy
behest that thou didst lay upon me. Thou forbadest me to fight face to
face with all the blessed gods, save only if Zeus' daughter Aphrodite
should enter into battle, then to wound her with the keen bronze.
Therefore do I now give ground myself and have bidden all the Argives
likewise to gather here together; for I discern Ares lording it in the
fray."

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene answered him: "Diomedes son of
Tydeus, thou joy of mine heart, fear thou, for that, neither Ares nor
any other of the immortals; so great a helper am I to thee. Go to now,
at Ares first guide thou thy whole-hooved horses, and smite him hand to
hand, nor have any awe of impetuous Ares, raving here, a curse incarnate,
the renegade that of late in converse with me and Hera pledged him
to fight against the Trojans and give succour to the Argives, but now
consorteth with the Trojans and hath forgotten these."

So speaking, with her hand she drew back Sthenelos and thrust him from
the chariot to earth, and instantly leapt he down; so the goddess
mounted the car by noble Diomedes' side right eagerly. The oaken axle
creaked loud with its burden, bearing the dread goddess and the man of
might. Then Athene grasped the whip and reins; forthwith against Ares
first guided she the whole-hooved horses. Now he was stripping huge
Periphas, most valiant far of the Aitolians, Ochesios' glorious son. Him
was blood-stained Ares stripping; and Athene donned the helm of Hades,
that terrible Ares might not behold her. Now when Ares scourge of
mortals beheld noble Diomedes, he left huge Periphas lying there, where
at the first he had slain him and taken away his life, and made straight
at Diomedes tamer of horses. Now when they were come nigh in onset on
one another, first Ares thrust over the yoke and horse's reins with
spear of bronze, eager to take away his life. But the bright-eyed
goddess Athene with her hand seized the spear and thrust it up over the
car, to spend itself in vain. Next Diomedes of the loud war-cry attacked
with spear of bronze; and Athene drave it home against Ares' nethermost
belly, where his taslets were girt about him. There smote he him and
wounded him, rending through his fair skin, and plucked forth the spear
again. Then brazen Ares bellowed loud as nine thousand warriors or ten
thousand cry in battle as they join in strife and fray. Thereat
trembling gat hold of Achaians and Trojans for fear, so mightily
bellowed Ares insatiate of battle.

Even as gloomy mist appeareth from the clouds when after beat a stormy
wind ariseth, even so to Tydeus' son Diomedes brazen Ares appeared amid
clouds, faring to wide heaven. Swiftly came he to the gods' dwelling,
steep Olympus, and sat beside Zeus son of Kronos with grief at heart,
and shewed the immortal blood flowing from the wound, and piteously
spake to him winged words: "Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation to
behold these violent deeds? For ever cruelly suffer we gods by one
another's devices, in shewing men grace. With thee are we all at
variance, because thou didst beget that reckless maiden and baleful,
whose thought is ever of iniquitous deeds. For all the other gods that
are in Olympus hearken to thee, and we are subject every one; only her
thou chastenest not, neither in deed nor word, but settest her on,
because this pestilent one is thine own offspring. Now hath she urged on
Tydeus' son, even overweening Diomedes, to rage furiously against the
immortal gods. Kypris first he wounded in close fight, in the wrist of
her hand, and then assailed he me, even me, with the might of a god.
Howbeit my swift feet bare me away; else had I long endured anguish
there amid the grisly heaps of dead, or else had lived strengthless from
the smitings of the spear."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer looked sternly at him and said: "Nay, thou
renegade, sit not by me and whine. Most hateful to me art thou of all
gods that dwell in Olympus: thou ever lovest strife and wars and
battles. Truly thy mother's spirit is intolerable, unyielding, even
Hera's; her can I scarce rule with words. Therefore I deem that by her
prompting thou art in this plight. Yet will I no longer endure to see
thee in anguish; mine offspring art thou, and to me thy mother bare
thee."

So spake he and bade Paieon heal him.  And Paieon laid assuaging drugs
upon the wound. Even as fig juice maketh haste to thicken white milk,
that is liquid but curdleth speedily as a man stirreth, even so swiftly
healed he impetuous Ares. And Hebe bathed him, and clothed him in
gracious raiment, and he sate him down by Zeus son of Kronos, glorying
in his might.

Then fared the twain back to the mansion of great Zeus, even Hera and
Athene, having stayed Ares scourge of mortals from his man-slaying.

