


CHAPTER X

THE OATH OF SIHAMBA

Suzanne came home and told me her story, and when I heard it I was like
a mad woman; indeed, it would have gone ill with Swart Piet's eyes and
hair if I could have fallen in with him that night.

"Wait till your father returns, girl," I said.

"Yes, mother," she answered, "I wait for him--and Ralph."

"What is to be done with the little doctoress, Sihamba?" I asked,
adding, "I do not like such people about the place."

"Let her bide also till the men come back, mother," she answered, "and
then they will see to it. Meanwhile there is an empty hut down by the
cattle kraal where she can live."

So Sihamba stopped on and became a body servant to Suzanne, the best I
ever saw, though she would do no other work save that of attending to
sick animals.

Ten days afterwards Jan and Ralph returned safe and sound, leaving some
Kaffirs in charge of the cattle in the bush-veldt. Very glad we were to
see them, since, putting everything else aside, it was lonely work for
two women upon the place with no neighbour at hand, and in those days to
be lonely meant to be in danger.

When we were together Jan's first question to me was:

"Have those Englishmen been here?"

"They have been here," I answered, "and they have gone away."

Jan asked me nothing more of the matter, for he did not wish to know
what had passed between us. Only he looked at me queerly, and, as I
think, thought the worse of me afterwards, for he found out that
Suzanne and I had quarrelled about the song I sang in the ears of the
Englishmen, and what that song was he could guess very well. Yes, yes,
although he had been a party to the fraud, in his heart Jan put all the
blame of it upon me, for that is the way of men who are mean, and always
love to say "The woman tempted me," a vile habit which has come down to
them with their blood.

Meanwhile another talk was passing between Ralph and Suzanne. They had
rushed to meet each other like two separated colts bred in the same
meadow, but when they came together it was different. Ralph put out his
arms to embrace her, but she pushed him back and said, "No, not until we
have spoken together."

"This is a cold greeting," said Ralph, amazed and trembling, for he
feared lest Suzanne should have changed her mind as to their marriage.
"What is it that you have to tell me? Speak on, quickly."

"Two things, Ralph," she answered, and taking the least of them first,
she plunged straightway into a full account of the coming of the
Englishmen, of all that had passed then, and of her quarrel with me upon
the matter.

"And now, Ralph," she ended, "you will understand that you have been
cheated of your birthright, and this I think it just that you should
know, so that, if you will, you may change your mind about staying here,
for there is yet time, and follow these Englishmen to wherever it is
they have gone, to claim from them your heritage."

Ralph laughed and answered, "Why, Sweet, I thought that we had settled
all this long ago. That your mother did not tell the men quite the truth
is possible, but if she played with it, it was for the sake of all of us
and with my leave. Let them go and the fortune with them, for even if I
could come to England and find it there, I should be but as a wild
buck in a sheep kraal, out of place and unhappy. Moreover, we should be
separated, dear, for even if you would all consent, I could never take
you from your own people and the land where you were born. So now that
there is an end to this, once and for ever, let me kiss you in greeting,
Suzanne."

But she shook her head and denied him, saying, "No, for I have another
tale to tell you, and an uglier--so ugly indeed that after the hearing
of it I doubt much whether you will wish to kiss me any more."

"Be swift with it then," he answered, "for you torment me," and she
began her story.

She told how that, after he had gone away, Swart Piet began to persecute
her; how he had wished to kiss her and she had refused them, so that he
left her with threats. Then she paused suddenly and said:

"And now, before I finish the story, you shall swear an oath to me. You
shall swear that you will not attempt to kill Swart Piet because of it."

At first he would swear nothing, for already he was wild with anger
against the man, whereupon she answered that she would tell him nothing.

At last, when they had wrangled for a while, he asked her in a hoarse
voice, "Say now, Suzanne, have you come to any harm at the hands of this
fellow?"

"No," she answered, turning her head away. "God be thanked! I have come
to no harm of my body, but of my mind I have come to great harm."

Now he breathed more freely and said:

"Very well, then, on with your story, for I swear to you that I will not
try to kill Swart Piet because of this offence, whatever it may be."

So she went on, setting out everything exactly as it had happened,
and before she had finished Ralph was as one who is brain sick, for he
ground his teeth and stamped upon the earth like an angry bull. At last,
when Suzanne had told him all, she said:

"Now, Ralph, you will understand why I would not let you kiss me before
you had heard my story. It was because I feared that after hearing it
you would not wish to kiss me any more."

"You talk like a foolish girl," he answered, taking her into his arms
and embracing her, "and though the insult can only be paid back in
blood, I think no more of it than if some beast had splashed mud into
your face, which you had washed away at the next stream."

"Ah!" she cried, "you swore that you would not try to kill him for this
offence."

"Yes, Sweet, I swore, and I will keep my oath. This time I will not try
to kill Swart Piet."

Then they went into the house, and Ralph spoke to Jan about this matter,
of which indeed I had already told him something. Jan also was very
angry, and said that if he could meet Piet van Vooren it would go
hard with him. Afterwards he added, however, that this Piet was a very
dangerous man, and one whom it might be well to leave alone, especially
as Suzanne had taken no real hurt from him.

Nowadays, and here in Natal, such a villain could be made to answer
to the law, either for attempting the life of the Kaffir, or for the
assault upon the girl, or for both, but in those times it was different.
Then the Transkei had but few white people in it, living far apart, nor
was there any law to speak of; indeed each man did what was right in
his own eyes, according to the good or evil that was in his heart.
Therefore, as Jan said, it was not well to make a deadly enemy of one
who was restrained by the fear of neither God nor man, and who had great
wealth and power, since it might come about that he would work murder in
revenge or raise the Kaffirs on us, as he who had authority among them
could do very easily. Indeed as will be seen he did both these things,
or tried to do them.

When his anger had cooled a little Jan spoke to us in this sense and we
women agreed with him; but Ralph, who was young, fearless, and full of
rage, set his mouth and said nothing.

As for Sihamba Jan wished to send her away, but Suzanne, who had grown
fond of her, begged him that he would not do so, at least until he
had spoken with her. So he ordered one of the slaves to fetch her, and
presently the little woman came, and having saluted him, sat herself
down on the floor of the sitting room after the Kaffir fashion. She was
a strange little creature to see in her fur kaross and bead broidered
girdle, but for a native she was very clean and pretty, with her wise
woman's face set upon a body that had it been less rounded might almost
have been that of a child. Also she had adorned herself with great care,
not in the cast-off clothes of white people but after her own manner,
for her wavy hair which stood out from her head was powdered over with
that sparkling blue dust which the Kaffir women use, and round her neck
she wore a single string of large blue beads.

At first Jan spoke to her crossly, saying:

"You have brought trouble and disgrace upon my house, Sihamba, and I
wish you to begone from it."

"It is true," she answered, "but not of my own will did I bring the
trouble, O Father of Swallow," for so she always called Jan. Indeed, for
Sihamba, Suzanne was the centre of all things, and thus in her mouth the
three of us has no other names than "Father" or "Mother" or "Lover" of
Swallow.

"That may be so," answered Jan, "but, doubtless, Black Piet, who hates
you, will follow you here, and then we shall be called upon to defend
you, and there will be more trouble."

"It is not I whom Black Piet will follow," she replied, "for he has
stolen all I have, and as my life is safe there is nothing more to get
from me," and she looked at Suzanne.

"What do you mean, Sihamba? Speak plain words," said Jan.

"I mean," she answered, "that it is not I who am now in danger, but my
mistress, the Swallow, for he who has kissed her once will wish to kiss
her again."

Now at this Ralph cursed the name of Swart Piet aloud, and Jan answered,

"It is a bullet from my _roer_ that he shall kiss if he tries it, that I
swear."

"I hope it may be so," said Sihamba; "yet, Father of Swallow, I pray you
send me not away from her who bought me at a great price, and to whom my
life belongs. Look; I cost you but little to keep, and that little I
can earn by doctoring your horses and cattle, in which art I have some
skill, as you know well. Moreover I have many eyes and ears that can see
and hear things to which yours are deaf and blind, and I tell you that I
think a time will come when I shall be able to do service to all of you
who are of the nest of the Swallow. Now, if she bids me to go I will
go--for am I not her servant to obey?--yet I beseech you do not so
command her."

Sihamba had risen as she spoke, and now she stood before Jan, her head
thrown back, looking up into his eyes with such strange power that,
though he was great and strong and had no will to it, yet he found
himself forced to look down into hers. More, as he told me afterwards,
he saw many things in the eyes of Sihamba, or it may be that he thought
that he saw them, for Jan was always somewhat superstitious. At least
this is true that more than once during the terrible after years, when
some great event had happened to us he would cry out, "I have seen this
place, or thing, before, I know not where." Then if I bade him think he
would answer, "Now I remember; it was in the eyes of Sihamba that I saw
it, yonder in the Transkei before Ralph and Suzanne were married."

Presently she freed his eyes and turned her head, whereon Jan grew pale
and swayed as though he were about to fall. Recovering himself, however,
he said shortly,

"Stay if you will, Sihamba; you are welcome for so long as it shall
please you."

She lifted her little hand and saluted him, and I noticed that it was
after another fashion to that of the Kaffirs who lived thereabouts,
after the Zulu fashion indeed.

"I hear your words, chief," she said, "and I stay. Though I be but a
lizard in the thatch, yet the nest of the Swallow shall be my nest, and
in the fangs of the lizard, Sihamba, there is poison and woe to the hawk
of the air or the snake of the grass that would rob this nest wherein
you dwell. Listen now to my oath--you whom she loves. Cold shall this
heart be and stiff this hand, empty shall this head be of thoughts and
these eyes of sight, before shame or death shall touch the swift wings
of yonder Swallow who stained her breast for me. Remember this always,
you whom she loves, that while I live, I, Sihamba Ngenyanga, Sihamba the
walker by moonlight, she shall live, and if she dies I will die also."

Then once more she saluted and went, leaving us wondering, for we saw
that this woman was not altogether as other Kaffirs are, and it came
into our minds that in the time of need she would be as is a sharp spear
in the hand of one who is beset with foes.

That night as we lay abed I talked with Jan, saying:

"Husband, I think there are clouds upon our sky, which for many years
has been so blue. Trouble gathers round us because of the beauty of
Suzanne, and I fear Swart Piet, for he is not a man to be stopped by a
trifle. Now, Ralph loves Suzanne and Suzanne loves Ralph, and, though
they are young, they are man and woman full grown, able to keep a house
and bear its burdens. Why then should they not marry with as little
delay as may be, for when once they are wed Van Vooren will cease from
troubling them, knowing his suit to be hopeless?"

"As you will, wife, as you will," Jan answered, somewhat sharply, "but I
doubt if we shall get rid of our danger thus, for with you I think that
the tide of our lives has turned, and that it sets towards sorrow. Ay,"
he went on, sitting up in the bed, "and I will tell you when it turned;
it turned upon the day that you lied to the Englishmen."



CHAPTER XI

A FIGHT AND A SHOT

Early the next morning I sought for Ralph to speak to him on the
matter of his marriage, which, to tell truth, I longed to see safely
accomplished. But I could not find him anywhere, or learn where he had
gone, though one of the slaves told me that they had seen him mount his
horse at the stable.

I went down to the cattle kraal to look if he were there, and as I
returned, I saw Sihamba seated by the door of her hut engaged in combing
her hair and powdering it with the shining blue dust.

"Greeting, Mother of Swallow," she said. "Whom do you seek?"

"You know well," I answered.

"Yes, I know well. At the break of dawn he rode over yonder rise."

"Why?" I asked.

"How can I tell why? But Swart Piet lives out yonder."

"Had he his gun with him?" I asked again and anxiously.

"No, there was nothing but a sjambock, a very thick sjambock, in his
hand."

Then I went back to the house with a heavy heart, for I was sure that
Ralph had gone to seek Piet van Vooren, though I said nothing of it
to the others. So it proved indeed. Ralph had sworn to Suzanne that he
would not try to kill Piet, but here his oath ended, and therefore
he felt himself free to beat him if he could find him, for he was
altogether mad with hate of the man. Now he knew that when he was at
home it was Swart Piet's habit to ride of a morning, accompanied by one
Kaffir only, to visit a certain valley where he kept a large number of
sheep. Thither Ralph made his way, and when he reached the place he saw
that, although it was time for them to be feeding, the sheep were still
in their kraal, baa-ing, stamping, and trying to climb the gate, for
they were hungry to get at the green grass.

"So," thought Ralph, "Swart Piet means to count the flock out himself
this morning. He will be here presently."

Half an hour afterwards he came sure enough, and with him the one Kaffir
as was usual. Then the bars of the gate were let down, and the sheep
suffered to escape through them, Swart Piet standing upon one side and
the Kaffir upon the other, to take tale of their number. When all the
sheep were out, and one of the herds had been brought before him and
beaten by the Kaffir, because some lambs were missing, Swart Piet turned
to ride homewards, and in a little gorge near by came face to face with
Ralph, who was waiting for him. Now he started and looked to see if he
could escape, but there was no way of doing it without shame, so he rode
forward and bid Ralph good-day boldly, asking him if he had ever seen a
finer flock of sheep.

"I did not come here to talk of sheep," answered Ralph, eyeing him.

"Is it of a lamb, then, that you come to talk, Heer Kenzie, a ewe lamb,
the only one of your flock?" sneered Piet, for he had a gun in his hand
and he saw that Ralph had none.

"Aye," said Ralph, "it is of a white ewe lamb whose fleece has been
soiled by a bastard thief who would have stolen her," and he looked at
him.

"I understand," said Piet coldly, for he was a bold man; "and now, Heer
Kenzie, you had best let me ride by."

"Why should I let you ride by when I have come out to seek you?"

"For a very good reason, Heer Kenzie; because I have a gun in my hand
and you have none, and if you do not clear the road presently it may go
off."

"A good reason, indeed," said Ralph, "and one of which I admit the
weight," and he drew to one side of the path as though to let Piet pass,
which he began to do holding the muzzle of the gun in a line with the
other's head. Ralph sat upon his horse staring moodily at the ground, as
though he was trying to make up his mind to say something or other, but
all the time he was watching out of the corner of his quick eye. Just as
Swart Piet drew past him, and was shaking the reins to put his horse to
a canter, Ralph slid from the saddle, and springing upon him like light,
he slipped his strong arm round him and dragged him backwards to the
ground over the crupper of the horse. As Piet fell he stretched out
his hands to grip the saddle and save himself, so that the gun which he
carried resting on his knees dropped upon the grass. Ralph seized it
and fired it into the air; then he turned to face his enemy, who by this
time had found his feet.

"Now we are more equally matched, myn Heer van Vooren," he said, "and
can talk further about that ewe lamb, the only one of the flock. Nay,
you need not look for the Kaffir to help you, for he has run after your
horse, and at the best he will hardly dare to thrust himself between two
angry white men. Come, let us talk, myn Heer."

Black Piet made no answer, so for a while the two stood facing each
other, and they were a strange pair, as different as the light from the
darkness. Ralph fair-haired, grey-eyed, stern-faced, with thin
nostrils, that quivered like those of a well-bred horse, narrow-flanked,
broad-chested, though somewhat slight of limb and body, for he was but
young, and had scarcely come to a man's weight, but lithe and wiry as a
tiger. Piet taller and more massive, for he had the age of him by five
