and so swimmingly on a tide of truth, half wondering whether the
flowering beauty of her face in excitement had struck his sensibility.
He was cold and speculative.

"Ah!" she said, "if I were to ask my compatriots to put faith in a
woman's pure friendship for a man, I should know the answer; but you,
signor Powys, who have shown us that a man is capable of the purest
friendship for a woman, should believe me."

He led her down to the gates, where her coachman sat muffled in a three-
quarter sleep.  The word was given to drive to her own house; rejoiced by
which she called his attention deploringly to the condition of her
horses, requesting him to say whether he could imagine them the best
English, and confessing with regret, that she killed three sets a year--
loved them well, notwithstanding.  Merthyr saw enough of her to feel that
she was one of the weak creatures who are strong through our greater
weakness; and, either by intuition or quick wit, too lively and too
subtle to be caught by simple suspicion.  She even divined that
reflection might tell him she had evaded him by an artifice--a piece of
gross cajolery; and said, laughing: "Concerning friendship, I could offer
it to a boy, like Carlo Ammiani; not to you, signor Powys.  I know that I
must check a youth, and I am on my guard.  I should be eternally
tormented to discover whether your armour was proof."

"I dare say that a lady who had those torments would soon be able to make
them mine," said Merthyr.

"You could not pay a fairer compliment to some one else," she remarked.
In truth, the candid personal avowal seemed to her to hold up Vittoria's
sacred honour in a crystal, and the more she thought of it, the more she
respected him, for his shrewd intelligence, if not for his sincerity; but
on the whole she fancied him a loyal friend, not solely a clever maker of
phrases; and she was pleased with herself for thinking such a matter
possible, in spite of her education.

"I do most solemnly hope that you may not have to sustain Countess
Alessandra under any affliction whatsoever," she said at parting.

Violetta had escaped an exposure--a rank and naked accusation of her
character and deeds.  She feared nothing but that, being quite
indifferent to opinion; a woman who would not have thought it
preternaturally sad to have to walk as a penitent in the streets,
with the provision of a very thick veil to cover her.  She had escaped,
but the moment she felt herself free, she was surprised by a sharp twinge
of remorse.  She summoned her maid to undress her, and smelt her
favourite perfume, and lay in her bed, to complete her period of rest,
closing her eyes there with a child's faith in pillows.  Flying lights
and blood-blotches rushed within a span of her forehead.  She met this
symptom promptly with a medical receipt; yet she had no sleep; nor would
coffee give her sleep.  She shrank from opium as deleterious to the
constitution, and her mind settled on music as the remedy.

Some time after her craving for it had commenced, an Austrian foot
regiment, marching to the drum, passed under her windows.  The fife is a
merry instrument; fife and drum colour the images of battle gaily; but
the dull ringing Austrian step-drum, beating unaccompanied, strikes the
mind with the real nature of battles, as the salt smell of powder strikes
it, and more in horror, more as a child's imagination realizes bloodshed,
where the scene is a rolling heaven, black and red on all sides, with
pitiable men moving up to the mouth of butchery, the insufferable
flashes, the dark illumination of red, red of black, like a vision of the
shadows Life and Death in a shadow-fight over the dear men still living.
Sensitive minds may be excited by a small stimulant to see such pictures.
This regimental drum is like a song of the flat-headed savage in man.  It
has no rise or fall, but leads to the bloody business with an unvarying
note, and a savage's dance in the middle of the rhythm.  Violetta
listened to it until her heart quickened with alarm lest she should be
going to have a fever.  She thought of Carlo Ammiani, and of the name of
Nagen; she had seen him at the Lenkensteins.  Her instant supposition was
that Anna had perhaps paid heavily for the secret of Carlo's movements an
purpose to place Major Nagen on the Brescian high-road to capture him.
Capture meant a long imprisonment, if not execution.  Partly for the sake
of getting peace of mind--for she was shocked by her temporary inability
to command repose--but with some hope of convincing Carlo that she strove
to be of use to him, she sent for the spy Luigi, and at a cost of two
hundred and twenty Austrian florins, obtained his promise upon oath to
follow Count Ammiani into Brescia, if necessary, and deliver to him a
letter she had written, wherein Nagen's name was mentioned, and Carlo was
advised to avoid personal risks; the letter hinted that he might have
incurred a private enmity, and he had better keep among his friends.  She
knew the writing of this letter to be the foolishest thing she had ever
done.  Two hundred and twenty florins--the man originally stipulated to
have three hundred--was a large sum to pay for postage.  However,
sacrifices must now and then be made for friendship, and for sleep.  When
she had paid half the money, her mind was relieved, and she had the
slumber which preserves beauty.  Luigi was to be paid the other half on
his return.  "He may never return," she thought, while graciously
dismissing him.  The deduction by mental arithmetic of the two hundred
and twenty, or the one hundred and ten florins, from the large amount
Countess Anna was bound to pay her in turn, annoyed her, though she knew
it was a trifle.  For this lady, Milan, Turin, and Paris sighed deeply.

When he had left Violetta at her house in the Corso, Merthyr walked
briskly for exercise, knowing that he would have need of his health and
strength.  He wanted a sight of Alps to wash out the image of the woman
from his mind, and passed the old Marshal's habitation fronting the
Gardens, wishing that he stood in the field against the fine old warrior,
for whom he had a liking.  Near the walls he discovered Beppo sitting
pensively with his head between his two fists.  Beppo had not seen Count
Ammiani, but he had seen Barto Rizzo, and pointing to the walls, said
that Barto had dropped down there.  He had met him hurrying in the Corso
Francesco.  Barto took him to the house of Sarpo, the bookseller, who
possessed a small printing-press.  Beppo described vividly, with his
usual vivacity of illustration, the stupefaction of the man at the
apparition of his tormentor, whom he thought fast in prison; and how
Barto had compelled him to print a proclamation to the Piedmontese,
Lombards, and Venetians, setting forth that a battle had been fought
South of the Ticino, and that Carlo Alberto was advancing on Milan,
signed with the name of the Piedmontese Pole in command of the king's
army.  A second, framed as an order of the day, spoke of victory and the
planting of the green, white and red banner on the Adige, and forward to
the Isonzo.

"I can hear nothing of Carlo Alberto's victory," Beppo said; "no one has
heard of it.  Barto told us how the battle was fought, and the name of
the young lieutenant who discovered the enemy's flank march, and got the
artillery down on him, and pounded him so that--signore, it's amazing!
I'm ready to cry, and laugh, and howl!--fifteen thousand men capitulated
in a heap!"

"Don't you know you've been listening to a madman?"  said Merthyr,
irritated, and thoroughly angered to see Beppo's opposition to that view.

"Signore, Barto described the whole battle.  It began at five o'clock in
the morning."

"When it was dark!"

"Yes; when it was dark.  He said so.  And we sent up rockets, and caught
the enemy coming on, and the cavalry of Alessandria fell upon two
batteries of field guns and carried them off, and Colonel Romboni was
shot in his back, and cries he, 'Best give up the ghost if you're hit in
the rear.  Evviva l'Italia!'"

"A Piedmontese colonel, you fool! he would have shouted 'Viva Carlo
Alberto!'" said Merthyr, now critically disgusted with the tale, and
refusing to hear more.  Two hours later, he despatched Beppo to Carlo in
Brescia, warning him that for some insane purpose these two proclamations
had been printed by Barto Rizzo, and that they were false.

It was early on the morning of a second day, before sunrise, when
Vittoria sent for Merthyr to conduct her to the cathedral.  "There has
been a battle," she said.  Her lips hardly joined to frame the syllables
in speech.  Merthyr refrained from asking where she had heard of the
battle.  As soon as the Duomo doors were open, he led her in and left her
standing shrinking under the great vault with her neck fearfully drawn on
her shoulders, as one sees birds under thunder.  He thought that she was
losing courage.  Choosing to go out on the steps rather than look on her,
he was struck by the sight of two horsemen, who proved to be Austrian
officers, rattling at racing speed past the Duomo up the Corso.  The
sight of them made it seem possible that a battle had been fought.  As
soon as he was free, Merthyr went to the Duchess of Graatli, from whom he
had the news of Novara.  The officers he had seen were Prince Radocky and
Lieutenant Wilfrid Pierson, the old Marshal's emissaries of victory.
They had made a bet on the bloody field about reaching Milan first, and
the duchess affected to be full of the humour of this bet in order to
conceal her exultation.  The Lenkensteins called on her; the Countess of
Lenkenstein, Anna, and Lena; and they were less considerate, and drew
their joy openly from the source of his misery--a dreadful house for
Merthyr to remain in; but he hoped to see Wilfrid, having heard the
duchess rally Lena concerning the deeds of the white umbrella, which,
Lena said, was pierced with balls, and had been preserved for her.  "The
dear foolish fellow insisted on marching right into the midst of the
enemy with his absurd white umbrella; and wherever there was danger the
men were seen following it.  Prince Radocky told me the whole army was
laughing.  How he escaped death was a miracle!"  She spoke unaffectedly
of her admiration for the owner, and as Wilfrid came in she gave him
brilliant eyes.  He shook Merthyr's hand without looking at him.  The
ladies would talk of nothing but the battle, so he went up to Merthyr,
and under pretext of an eager desire for English news, drew him away.

"Her husband was not there?  not at Novara, I mean?"  he said.

"He's at Brescia," said Merthyr.

"Well, thank goodness he didn't stand in those ranks!"

Wilfrid murmured, puffing thoughtfully over the picture they presented to
his memory.

Merthyr then tried to hint to him that he had a sort of dull suspicion of
Carlo's being in personal danger, but of what kind he could not say.  He
mentioned Weisspriess by name; and Nagen; and Countess Anna.  Wilfrid
said, "I'll find out if there's anything, only don't be fancying it.  The
man's in a bad hole at Brescia.  Weisspriess, I believe, is at Verona.
He's an honourable fellow.  The utmost he would do would be to demand a
duel; and I'm sure he's heartily sick of that work.  Besides, he and
Countess Anna have quarrelled.  Meet me;--by the way, you and I mustn't
be seen meeting, I suppose.  The duchess is neutral ground.  Come here
to-night.  And don't talk of me, but say that a friend asks how she is,
and hopes--the best things you can say for me.  I must go up to their
confounded chatter again.  Tell her there's no fear, none whatever.  You
all hate us, naturally; but you know that Austrian officers are
gentlemen.  Don't speak my name to her just yet.  Unless, of course, she
should happen to allude to me, which is unlikely.  I had a dismal idea
that her husband was at Novara."

The tender-hearted duchess sent a message to Vittoria, bidding her not to
forget that she had promised her at Meran to 'love her always.'

"And tell her," she said to Merthyr, "that I do not think I shall have my
rooms open for the concert to-morrow night.  I prefer to let Antonio-
Pericles go mad.  She will not surely consider that she is bound by her
promise to him?  He drags poor Irma from place to place to make sure the
miserable child is not plotting to destroy his concert, as that man Sarpo
did.  Irma is half dead, and hasn't the courage to offend him.  She
declares she depends upon him for her English reputation.  She has
already caught a violent cold, and her sneezing is frightful.  I have
never seen so abject a creature.  I have no compassion at the sight of
her."

That night Merthyr heard from Wilfrid that a plot against Carlo Ammiani
did exist.  He repeated things he had heard pass between Countess
d'Isorella and Irma in the chamber of Pericles before the late battle.
Modestly confessing that he was 'for some reasons' in high favour with
Countess Lena, he added that after a long struggle he had brought her to
confess that her sister had sworn to have Countess Alessandra Ammiani
begging at her feet.

By mutual consent they went to consult the duchess.  She repelled the
notion of Austrian women conspiring.  "An Austrian noble lady--do you
think it possible that she would act secretly to serve a private hatred?
Surely I may ask you, for my sake, to think better of us?"

Merthyr showed her an opening to his ground by suggesting that Anna's
antipathy to Victoria might spring more from a patriotic than a private
source.

"Oh! I will certainly make inquiries, if only to save Anna's reputation
with her enemies," the duchess answered rather proudly.

It would have been a Novara to Pericles if Vittoria had refused to sing.
He held the pecuniarily-embarrassed duchess sufficiently in his power to
command a concert at her house; his argument to those who pressed him to
spare Vittoria in a season of grief running seriously, with visible
contempt of their intellects, thus: "A great voice is an ocean.  You
cannot drain it with forty dozen opera-hats.  It is something found--an
addition to the wealth of this life.  Shall we not enjoy what we find?
You do not wear out a picture by looking at it; likewise you do not wear
out a voice by listening to it.  A bird has wings;--here is a voice.  Why
were they given?  I should say, to go into the air.  Ah; but not if
grandmother is ill.  What is a grandmother to the wings and the voice?
If to sing would kill,--yes, then let the puny thing be silent!  But
Sandra Belloni has a soul that has not a husband--except her Art.  Her
body is husbanded; but her soul is above her body.  You would treat it as
below.  Art is her soul's husband!  Besides, I have her promise.  She is
a girl who will go up to a loaded gun's muzzle if she gives her word.
And besides, her husband may be shot to-morrow.  So, all she sings now is
clear gain."

Vittoria sent word to him that she would sing.

In the meantime a change had come upon Countess Anna.  Weisspriess, her
hero, appeared at her brother's house, fresh from the field of Novara,
whither he had hurried from Verona on a bare pretext, that was a breach
of military discipline requiring friendly interposition in high quarters.
Unable to obtain an audience with Count Lenkenstein, he remained in the
hall, hoping for things which he affected to care nothing for; and so it
chanced that he saw Lena, who was mindful that her sister had suffered
much from passive jealousy when Wilfrid returned from the glorious field,
and led him to Anna, that she also might rejoice in a hero.  Weisspriess
did not refrain from declaring on the way that he would rather charge
against a battery.  Some time after, Anna lay in Lena's arms, sobbing out
one of the wildest confessions ever made by woman:--she adored
Weisspriess; she hated Nagen; but was miserably bound to the man she
hated.  "Oh! now I know what love is."  She repeated this with
transparent enjoyment of the opposing sensations by whose shock the
knowledge was revealed to her.

"How can you be bound to Major Nagan?" asked Lena.

"Oh! why?  except that I have been possessed by devils."

Anna moaned.  "Living among these Italians has distempered my blood."
She exclaimed that she was lost.

"In what way can you be lost?"  said Lena.

"I have squandered more than half that I possess.  I am almost a beggar.
I am no longer the wealthy Countess Anna.  I am much poorer than anyone
of us."

"But Major Weisspriess is a man of honour, and if he loves you--"

"Yes; he loves me! he loves me! or would he come to me after I have sent
him against a dozen swords?  But he is poor; he must, must marry a
wealthy woman.  I used to hate him because I thought he had his eye on
money.  I love him for it now.  He deserves wealth; he is a matchless
hero.  He is more than the first swordsman of our army; he is a knightly
man.  Oh my soul Johann!"  She very soon fell to raving.  Lena was
implored by her to give her hand to Weisspriess in reward for his
heroism--"For you are rich," Anna said; "you will not have to go to him
feeling that you have made him face death a dozen times for your sake,
and that you thank him and reward him by being a whimpering beggar in his
arms.  Do, dearest!  Will you?  Will you, to please me, marry Johann?  He
is not unworthy of you."  And more of this hysterical hypocrisy, which
brought on fits of weeping.  "I have lived among these savages till I
have ceased to be human--forgotten everything but my religion," she said.
"I wanted Weisspriess to show them that they dared not stand up against a
man of us, and to tame the snarling curs.  He did.  He is brave.  He did
as much as a man could do, but I was unappeasable.  They seem to have
bitten me till I had a devouring hunger to humiliate them.  Lena, will
you believe that I have no hate for Carlo Ammiani or the woman he has
married?  None!  and yet, what have I done!"  Anna smote her forehead.
"They are nothing but little dots on a field for me.  I don't care
whether they live or die.  It's like a thing done in sleep."

"I want to know what you have done," said Lena caressingly.

"You at least will try to reward our truest hero, and make up to him for
your sister's unkindness, will you not?"  Anna replied with a cajolery
wonderfully like a sincere expression of her wishes.  "He will be a good
husband..  He has proved it by having been so faithful a--a lover.  So
you may be sure of him.  And when he is yours, do not let him fight
again, Lena, for I have a sickening presentiment that his next duel is
his last."

"Tell me," Lena entreated her, "pray tell me what horrible thing you have
done to prevent your marrying him."

"With their pride and their laughter," Anna made answer; "the fools!
were they to sting us perpetually and not suffer for it?  That woman, the
Countess Alessandra, as she's now called--have you forgotten that she
helped our Paul's assassin to escape?  was she not eternally plotting
against Austria?  And I say that I love Austria.  I love my country; I
plot for my country.  She and her husband plot, and I plot to thwart
them.  I have ruined myself in doing it.  Oh, my heart!  why has it
commenced beating again?  Why did Weisspriess come here?  He offended me.
He refused to do my orders, and left me empty-handed, and if he suffers.
too," Anna relieved a hard look with a smile of melancholy, "I hope he
will not; I cannot say more."

"And I'm to console him if he does?"  said Lena.

"At least, I shall be out of the way," said Anna.  "I have still money
enough to make me welcome in a convent."

"I am to marry him?"  Lena persisted, and half induced Anna to act a
feeble part, composed of sobs and kisses and full confession of her
plight.  Anna broke from her in time to leave what she had stated of
herself vague and self-justificatory, so that she kept her pride, and
could forgive, as she was ready to do even so far as to ask forgiveness
in turn, when with her awakened enamoured heart she heard Vittoria sing
at the concert of Pericles.  Countess Alessandra's divine gift, which she
would not withhold, though in a misery of apprehension; her grave eyes,
which none could accuse of coldness, though they showed no emotion; her
simple noble manner that seemed to lift her up among the forces
threatening her; these expressions of a superior soul moved Anna under
the influence of the incomparable voice to pass over envious contrasts,
and feel the voice and the nature were one in that bosom.  Could it be
the same as the accursed woman who had stood before her at Meran?  She
could hardly frame the question, but she had the thought sufficiently
firmly to save her dignity; she was affected by very strong emotion when
Vittoria's singing ended, and nothing but the revival of the recollection
of her old contempt preserved her from an impetuous desire to take the
singer by the hand and have all clear between them; for they were now of
