russet-coloured jacket and a petticoat of scanty longitude was her
whole dress; but these were clean, and neatly arranged. A piece of
scarlet embroidered cloth, called the snood, confined her hair, which
fell over it in a profusion of rich dark curls. The scarlet plaid,
which formed part of her dress, was laid aside, that it might not
impede her activity in attending the stranger. I should forget Alice's
proudest ornament were I to omit mentioning a pair of gold ear-rings
and a, golden rosary, which her father (for she was the daughter of
Donald Bean Lean) had brought from France, the plunder, probably, of
some battle or storm.

Her form, though rather large for her years, was very well
proportioned, and her demeanour had a natural and rustic grace, with
nothing of the sheepishness of an ordinary peasant. The smiles,
displaying a row of teeth of exquisite whiteness, and the laughing
eyes, with which, in dumb show, she gave Waverley that morning greeting
which she wanted English words to express, might have been interpreted
by a coxcomb, or perhaps by a young soldier who, without being such,
was conscious of a handsome person, as meant to convey more than the
courtesy of an hostess. Nor do I take it upon me to say that the little
wild mountaineer would have welcomed any staid old gentleman advanced
in life, the Baron of Bradwardine, for example, with the cheerful pains
which she bestowed upon Edward's accommodation. She seemed eager to
place him by the meal which she had so sedulously arranged, and to
which she now added a few bunches of cranberries, gathered in an
adjacent morass. Having had the satisfaction of seeing him seated at
his breakfast, she placed herself demurely upon a stone at a few yards'
distance, and appeared to watch with great complacency for some
opportunity of serving him.

Evan and his attendant now returned slowly along the beach, the latter
bearing a large salmon-trout, the produce of the morning's sport,
together with the angling-rod, while Evan strolled forward, with an
easy, self-satisfied, and important gait, towards the spot where
Waverley was so agreeably employed at the breakfast-table. After
morning greetings had passed on both sides, and Evan, looking at
Waverley, had said something in Gaelic to Alice, which made her laugh,
yet colour up to her eyes, through a complexion well en-browned by sun
and wind, Evan intimated his commands that the fish should be prepared
for breakfast. A spark from the lock of his pistol produced a light,
and a few withered fir branches were quickly in flame, and as speedily
reduced to hot embers, on which the trout was broiled in large slices.
To crown the repast, Evan produced from the pocket of his short jerkin
a large scallop shell, and from under the folds of his plaid a ram's
horn full of whisky. Of this he took a copious dram, observing he had
already taken his MORNING with Donald Bean Lean before his departure;
he offered the same cordial to Alice and to Edward, which they both
declined. With the bounteous air of a lord, Evan then proffered the
scallop to Dugald Mahony, his attendant, who, without waiting to be
asked a second time, drank it off with great gusto. Evan then prepared
to move towards the boat, inviting Waverley to attend him. Meanwhile,
Alice had made up in a small basket what she thought worth removing,
and flinging her plaid around her, she advanced up to Edward, and with
the utmost simplicity, taking hold of his hand, offered her cheek to
his salute, dropping at the same time her little curtsy. Evan, who was
esteemed a wag among the mountain fair, advanced as if to secure a
similar favour; but Alice, snatching up her basket, escaped up the
rocky bank as fleetly as a roe, and, turning round and laughing, called
something out to him in Gaelic, which he answered in the same tone and
language; then, waving her hand to Edward, she resumed her road, and
was soon lost among the thickets, though they continued for some time
to hear her lively carol, as she proceeded gaily on her solitary
journey.

They now again entered the gorge of the cavern, and stepping into the
boat, the Highlander pushed off, and, taking advantage of the morning
breeze, hoisted a clumsy sort of sail, while Evan assumed the helm,
directing their course, as it appeared to Waverley, rather higher up
the lake than towards the place of his embarkation on the preceding
night. As they glided along the silver mirror, Evan opened the
conversation with a panegyric upon Alice, who, he said, was both CANNY
and FENDY; and was, to the boot of all that, the best dancer of a
strathspey in the whole strath. Edward assented to her praises so far
as he understood them, yet could not help regretting that she was
condemned to such a perilous and dismal life.

'Oich! for that,' said Evan, 'there is nothing in Perthshire that she
need want, if she ask her father to fetch it, unless it be too hot or
too heavy.'

'But to be the daughter of a cattle-stealer--a common thief!' 'Common
thief!--no such thing: Donald Bean Lean never LIFTED less than a drove
in his life.'

'Do you call him an uncommon thief, then?'

'No; he that steals a cow from a poor widow, or a stirk from a cotter,
is a thief; he that lifts a drove from a Sassenach laird is a
gentleman-drover. And, besides, to take a tree from the forest, a
salmon from the river, a deer from the hill, or a cow from a Lowland
strath, is what no Highlander need ever think shame upon.'

'But what can this end in, were he taken in such an appropriation?'

'To be sure he would DIE FOR THE LAW, as many a pretty man has done
before him.'

'Die for the law!'

'Ay; that is, with the law, or by the law; be strapped up on the KIND
gallows of Crieff, [Footnote: See Note 16.] where his father died, and
his goodsire died, and where I hope he'll live to die himsell, if he's
not shot, or slashed, in a creagh.'

'You HOPE such a death for your friend, Evan?'

'And that do I e'en; would you have me wish him to die on a bundle of
wet straw in yon den of his, like a mangy tyke?'

'But what becomes of Alice, then?'

'Troth, if such an accident were to happen, as her father would not
need her help ony langer, I ken nought to hinder me to marry her
mysell.'

'Gallantly resolved,' said Edward; 'but, in the meanwhile, Evan, what
has your father-in-law (that shall be, if he have the good fortune to
be hanged) done with the Baron's cattle?'

'Oich,' answered Evan,'they were all trudging before your lad and Allan
Kennedy before the sun blinked ower Ben Lawers this morning; and
they'll be in the pass of Bally-Brough by this time, in their way back
to the parks of Tully-Veolan, all but two, that were unhappily
slaughtered before I got last night to Uaimh an Ri.'

'And where are we going, Evan, if I may be so bold as to ask?' said
Waverley.

'Where would you be ganging, but to the Laird's ain house of
Glennaquoich? Ye would not think to be in his country, without ganging
to see him? It would be as much as a man's life's worth.'

'And are we far from Glennaquoich?'

'But five bits of miles; and Vich Ian Vohr will meet us.'

In about half an hour they reached the upper end of the lake, where,
after landing Waverley, the two Highanders drew the boat into a little
creek among thick flags and reeds, where it lay perfectly concealed.
The oars they put in another place of concealment, both for the use of
Donald Bean Lean probably, when his occasions should next bring him to
that place.

The travellers followed for some time a delightful opening into the
hills, down which a little brook found its way to the lake. When they
had pursued their walk a short distance, Waverley renewed his questions
about their host of the cavern.

'Does he always reside in that cave?'

'Out, no! it's past the skill of man to tell where he's to be found at
a' times; there's not a dern nook, or cove, or corrie, in the whole
country that he's not acquainted with.'

'And do others beside your master shelter him?'

'My master? MY master is in Heaven,' answered Evan, haughtily; and then
immediately assuming his usual civility of manner, 'but you mean my
Chief;--no, he does not shelter Donald Bean Lean, nor any that are like
him; he only allows him (with a smile) wood and water.'

'No great boon, I should think, Evan, when both seem to be very plenty.'

'Ah! but ye dinna see through it. When I say wood and water, I mean the
loch and the land; and I fancy Donald would be put till 't if the Laird
were to look for him wi' threescore men in the wood of Kailychat
yonder; and if our boats, with a score or twa mair, were to come down
the loch to Uaimh an Ri, headed by mysell, or ony other pretty man.'

'But suppose a strong party came against him from the Low Country,
would not your Chief defend him?'

'Na, he would not ware the spark of a flint for him--if they came with
the law.'

'And what must Donald do, then?'

'He behoved to rid this country of himsell, and fall back, it may be,
over the mount upon Letter Scriven.'

'And if he were pursued to that place?'

'I'se warrant he would go to his cousin's at Rannoch.'

'Well, but if they followed him to Rannoch?'

'That,' quoth Evan, 'is beyond all belief; and, indeed, to tell you the
truth, there durst not a Lowlander in all Scotland follow the fray a
gun-shot beyond Bally-Brough, unless he had the help of the Sidier Dhu.'

'Whom do you call so?'

'The Sidier Dhu? the black soldier; that is what they call the
independent companies that were raised to keep peace and law in the
Highlands. Vich Ian Vohr commanded one of them for five years, and I
was sergeant mysell, I shall warrant ye. They call them Sidier Dhu
because they wear the tartans, as they call your men--King George's
men--Sidier Roy, or red soldiers.'

'Well, but when you were in King George's pay, Evan, you were surely
King George's soldiers?'

'Troth, and you must ask Vich Ian Vohr about that; for we are for his
king, and care not much which o' them it is. At ony rate, nobody can
say we are King George's men now, when we have not seen his pay this
twelve-month.'

This last argument admitted of no reply, nor did Edward attempt any; he
rather chose to bring back the discourse to Donald Bean Lean. 'Does
Donald confine himself to cattle, or does he LIFT, as you call it,
anything else that comes in his way?'

'Troth, he's nae nice body, and he'll just tak onything, but most
readily cattle, horse, or live Christians; for sheep are slow of
travel, and inside plenishing is cumbrous to carry, and not easy to put
away for siller in this country.'

'But does he carry off men and women?'

'Out, ay. Did not ye hear him speak o' the Perth bailie? It cost that
body five hundred merks ere he got to the south of Bally-Brough. And
ance Donald played a pretty sport. [Footnote: See Note 17.] There was
to be a blythe bridal between the Lady Cramfeezer, in the howe o' the
Mearns (she was the auld laird's widow, and no sae young as she had
been hersell), and young Gilliewhackit, who had spent his heirship and
movables, like a gentleman, at cock-matches, bull-baitings,
horse-races, and the like. Now, Donald Bean Lean, being aware that the
bridegroom was in request, and wanting to cleik the cunzie (that is, to
hook the siller), he cannily carried off Gilliewhackit ae night when he
was riding dovering hame (wi' the malt rather abune the meal), and with
the help of his gillies he gat him into the hills with the speed of
light, and the first place he wakened in was the cove of Uaimh an Ri.
So there was old to do about ransoming the bridegroom; for Donald would
not lower a farthing of a thousand punds--'

'The devil!'

'Punds Scottish, ye shall understand. And the lady had not the siller
if she had pawned her gown; and they applied to the governor o'
Stirling castle, and to the major o' the Black Watch; and the governor
said it was ower far to the northward, and out of his district; and the
major said his men were gane hame to the shearing, and he would not
call them out before the victual was got in for all the Cramfeezers in
Christendom, let alane the Mearns, for that it would prejudice the
country. And in the meanwhile ye'll no hinder Gilliewhackit to take the
small-pox. There was not the doctor in Perth or Stirling would look
near the poor lad; and I cannot blame them, for Donald had been
misguggled by ane of these doctors about Paris, and he swore he would
fling the first into the loch that he catched beyond the pass. However
some cailliachs (that is, old women) that were about Donald's hand
nursed Gilliewhackit sae weel that, between the free open air in the
cove and the fresh whey, deil an he did not recover maybe as weel as if
he had been closed in a glazed chamber and a bed with curtains, and fed
with red wine and white meat. And Donald was sae vexed about it that,
when he was stout and weel, he even sent him free home, and said he
would be pleased with onything they would like to gie him for the
plague and trouble which he had about Gilliewhackit to an unkenn'd
degree. And I cannot tell you precisely how they sorted; but they
agreed sae right that Donald was invited to dance at the wedding in his
Highland trews, and they said that there was never sae meikle siller
clinked in his purse either before or since. And to the boot of all
that, Gilliewhackit said that, be the evidence what it liked, if he had
the luck to be on Donald's inquest, he would bring him in guilty of
nothing whatever, unless it were wilful arson or murder under trust.'

With such bald and disjointed chat Evan went on illustrating the
existing state of the Highlands, more perhaps to the amusement of
Waverley than that of our readers. At length, after having marched over
bank and brae, moss and heather, Edward, though not unacquainted with
the Scottish liberality in computing distance, began to think that
Evan's five miles were nearly doubled. His observation on the large
measure which the Scottish allowed of their land, in comparison to the
computation of their money, was readily answered by Evan with the old
jest, 'The deil take them wha have the least pint stoup.'

[Footnote: The Scotch are liberal in computing their land and liquor;
the Scottish pint corresponds to two English quarts. As for their coin,
every one knows the couplet--

         How can the rogues pretend to sense?
         Their pound is only twenty pence.]

And now the report of a gun was heard, and a sportsman was seen, with
his dogs and attendant, at the upper end of the glen. 'Shough,' said
Dugald Mahony, 'tat's ta Chief.'

'It is not,' said Evan, imperiously. 'Do you think he would come to
meet a Sassenach duinhe-wassel in such a way as that?'

But as they approached a little nearer, he said, with an appearance of
mortification, 'And it is even he, sure enough; and he has not his tail
on after all; there is no living creature with him but Callum Beg.'

In fact, Fergus Mac-Ivor, of whom a Frenchman might have said as truly
as of any man in the Highlands, 'Qu'il connoit bien ses gens' had no
idea of raising himself in the eyes of an English young man of fortune
by appearing with a retinue of idle Highlanders disproportioned to the
occasion. He was well aware that such an unnecessary attendance would
seem to Edward rather ludicrous than respectable; and, while few men
were more attached to ideas of chieftainship and feudal power, he was,
for that very reason, cautious of exhibiting external marks of dignity,
unless at the time and in the manner when they were most likely to
produce an imposing effect. Therefore, although, had he been to receive
a brother chieftain, he would probably have been attended by all that
retinue which Evan described with so much unction, he judged it more
respectable to advance to meet Waverley with a single attendant, a very
handsome Highland boy, who carried his master's shooting-pouch and his
broadsword, without which he seldom went abroad.

When Fergus and Waverley met, the latter was struck with the peculiar
grace and dignity of the Chieftain's figure. Above the middle size and
finely proportioned, the Highland dress, which he wore in its simplest
mode, set off his person to great advantage. He wore the trews, or
close trowsers, made of tartan, chequed scarlet and white; in other
particulars his dress strictly resembled Evan's, excepting that he had
no weapon save a dirk, very richly mounted with silver. His page, as we
have said, carried his claymore; and the fowling-piece, which he held
in his hand, seemed only designed for sport. He had shot in the course
of his walk some young wild-ducks, as, though CLOSE TIME was then
unknown, the broods of grouse were yet too young for the sportsman. His
countenance was decidedly Scottish, with all the peculiarities of the
northern physiognomy, but yet had so little of its harshness and
exaggeration that it would have been pronounced in any country
extremely handsome. The martial air of the bonnet, with a single
eagle's feather as a distinction, added much to the manly appearance of
his head, which was besides ornamented with a far more natural and
graceful cluster of close black curls than ever were exposed to sale in
Bond Street.

An air of openness and affability increased the favorable impression
derived from this handsome and dignified exterior. Yet a skilful
physiognomist would have been less satisfied with the countenance on
the second than on the first view. The eyebrow and upper lip bespoke
something of the habit of peremptory command and decisive superiority.
Even his courtesy, though open, frank, and unconstrained, seemed to
indicate a sense of personal importance; and, upon any check or
accidental excitation, a sudden, though transient lour of the eye
showed a hasty, haughty, and vindictive temper, not less to be dreaded
because it seemed much under its owner's command. In short, the
countenance of the Chieftain resembled a smiling summer's day, in
which, notwithstanding, we are made sensible by certain, though slight
signs that it may thunder and lighten before the close of evening.

It was not, however, upon their first meeting that Edward had an
opportunity of making these less favourable remarks. The Chief received
him as a friend of the Baron of Bradwardine, with the utmost expression
of kindness and obligation for the visit; upbraided him gently with
choosing so rude an abode as he had done the night before; and entered
into a lively conversation with him about Donald Bean's housekeeping,
but without the least hint as to his predatory habits, or the immediate
occasion of Waverley's visit, a topic which, as the Chief did not
introduce it, our hero also avoided. While they walked merrily on
towards the house of Glennaquoich, Evan, who now fell respectfully into
the rear, followed with Callum Beg and Dugald Mahony.

We shall take the opportunity to introduce the reader to some
particulars of Fergus Mac-Ivor's character and history, which were not
completely known to Waverley till after a connection which, though
arising from a circumstance so casual, had for a length of time the
deepest influence upon his character, actions, and prospects. But this,
being an important subject, must form the commencement of a new chapter.





CHAPTER XIX

THE CHIEF AND HIS MANSION


The ingenious licentiate Francisco de Ubeda, when he commenced his
history of 'La Picara Justina Diez,'--which, by the way, is one of the
most rare books of Spanish literature,--complained of his pen having
caught up a hair, and forthwith begins, with more eloquence than common
sense, an affectionate expostulation with that useful implement,
upbraiding it with being the quill of a goose,--a bird inconstant by
nature, as frequenting the three elements of water, earth, and air
indifferently, and being, of course, 'to one thing constant never.' Now
I protest to thee, gentle reader, that I entirely dissent from
Francisco de Ubeda in this matter, and hold it the most useful quality
of my pen, that it can speedily change from grave to gay, and from
description and dialogue to narrative and character. So that if my
quill display no other properties of its mother-goose than her
mutability, truly I shall be well pleased; and I conceive that you, my
worthy friend, will have no occasion for discontent. From the jargon,
therefore, of the Highland gillies I pass to the character of their
Chief. It is an important examination, and therefore, like Dogberry, we
must spare no wisdom.

The ancestor of Fergus Mac-Ivor, about three centuries before, had set
up a claim to be recognised as chief of the numerous and powerful clan
to which he belonged, the name of which it is unnecessary to mention.
Being defeated by an opponent who had more justice, or at least more
force, on his side, he moved southwards, with those who adhered to him,
in quest of new settlements, like a second AEneas. The state of the
Perthshire Highlands favoured his purpose. A great baron in that
country had lately become traitor to the crown; Ian, which was the name
of our adventurer, united himself with those who were commissioned by
the king to chastise him, and did such good service that he obtained a
grant of the property, upon which he and his posterity afterwards
resided. He followed the king also in war to the fertile regions of
England, where he employed his leisure hours so actively in raising
subsidies among the boors of Northumberland and Durham, that upon his
return he was enabled to erect a stone tower, or fortalice, so much
admired by his dependants and neighbours that he, who had hitherto been
called Ian Mac-Ivor, or John the son of Ivor, was thereafter
distinguished, both in song and genealogy, by the high title of Ian nan
Chaistel, or John of the Tower. The descendants of this worthy were so
proud of him that the reigning chief always bore the patronymic title
of Vich Ian Vohr, i.e. the son of John the Great; while the clan at
large, to distinguish them from that from which they had seceded, were
denominated Sliochd nan Ivor, the race of Ivor.

The father of Fergus, the tenth in direct descent from John of the
Tower, engaged heart and hand in the insurrection of 1715, and was
forced to fly to France, after the attempt of that year in favour of
the Stuarts had proved unsuccessful. More fortunate than other
fugitives, he obtained employment in the French service, and married a
lady of rank in that kingdom, by whom he had two children, Fergus and
his sister Flora. The Scottish estate had been forfeited and exposed to
sale, but was repurchased for a small price in the name of the young
proprietor, who in consequence came to reside upon his native domains.
[Footnote: See Note 18.] It was soon perceived that he possessed a
character of uncommon acuteness, fire, and ambition, which, as he
became acquainted with the state of the country, gradually assumed a
mixed and peculiar tone, that could only have been acquired Sixty Years
Since.

Had Fergus Mac-Ivor lived Sixty Years sooner than he did, he would in
all probability have wanted the polished manner and knowledge of the
world which he now possessed; and had he lived Sixty Years later, his
ambition and love of rule would have lacked the fuel which his
situation now afforded. He was indeed, within his little circle, as
perfect a politician as Castruccio Castracani himself. He applied
himself with great earnestness to appease all the feuds and dissensions
which often arose among other clans in his neighbourhood, so that he
became a frequent umpire in their quarrels. His own patriarchal power
he strengthened at every expense which his fortune would permit, and
indeed stretched his means to the uttermost to maintain the rude and
plentiful hospitality which was the most valued attribute of a
chieftain. For the same reason he crowded his estate with a tenantry,
hardy indeed, and fit for the purposes of war, but greatly outnumbering
what the soil was calculated to maintain. These consisted chiefly of
his own clan, not one of whom he suffered to quit his lands if he could
possibly prevent it. But he maintained, besides, many adventurers from
the mother sept, who deserted a less warlike, though more wealthy chief
to do homage to Fergus Mac-Ivor. Other individuals, too, who had not
even that apology, were nevertheless received into his allegiance,
which indeed was refused to none who were, like Poins, proper men of
their hands, and were willing to assume the name of Mac-Ivor.

He was enabled to discipline these forces, from having obtained command
of one of the independent companies raised by government to preserve
the peace of the Highlands. While in this capacity he acted with vigour
and spirit, and preserved great order in the country under his charge.
He caused his vassals to enter by rotation into his company, and serve
for a certain space of time, which gave them all in turn a general
notion of military discipline. In his campaigns against the banditti,
it was observed that he assumed and exercised to the utmost the
discretionary power which, while the law had no free course in the
Highlands, was conceived to belong to the military parties who were
called in to support it. He acted, for example, with great and
suspicious lenity to those freebooters who made restitution on his
summons and offered personal submission to himself, while he rigorously
pursued, apprehended, and sacrificed to justice all such interlopers as
dared to despise his admonitions or commands. On the other hand, if any
officers of justice, military parties, or others, presumed to pursue
thieves or marauders through his territories, and without applying for
his consent and concurrence, nothing was more certain than that they
would meet with some notable foil or defeat; upon which occasions
Fergus Mac-Ivor was the first to condole with them, and after gently
blaming their rashness, never failed deeply to lament the lawless state
of the country. These lamentations did not exclude suspicion, and
matters were so represented to government that our Chieftain was
deprived of his military command. [Footnote: See Note 19.]

Whatever Fergus Mac-Ivor felt on this occasion, he had the art of
entirely suppressing every appearance of discontent; but in a short
time the neighbouring country began to feel bad effects from his
disgrace. Donald Bean Lean, and others of his class, whose depredations
had hitherto been confined to other districts, appeared from
thenceforward to have made a settlement on this devoted border; and
their ravages were carried on with little opposition, as the Lowland
gentry were chiefly Jacobites, and disarmed. This forced many of the
inhabitants into contracts of black-mail with Fergus Mac-Ivor, which
not only established him their protector, and gave him great weight in
all their consultations, but, moreover, supplied funds for the waste of
his feudal hospitality, which the discontinuance of his pay might have
otherwise essentially diminished.

In following this course of conduct, Fergus had a further object than
merely being the great man of his neighbourhood, and ruling
despotically over a small clan. From his infancy upward he had devoted
himself to the cause of the exiled family, and had persuaded himself,
not only that their restoration to the crown of Britain would be
speedy, but that those who assisted them would be raised to honour and
rank. It was with this view that he laboured to reconcile the
Highlanders among themselves, and augmented his own force to the
utmost, to be prepared for the first favourable opportunity of rising.
With this purpose also he conciliated the favour of such Lowland
gentlemen in the vicinity as were friends to the good cause; and for
the same reason, having incautiously quarrelled with Mr. Bradwardine,
who, notwithstanding his peculiarities, was much respected in the
country, he took advantage of the foray of Donald Bean Lean to solder
up the dispute in the manner we have mentioned. Some, indeed, surmised
that he caused the enterprise to be suggested to Donald, on purpose to
pave the way to a reconciliation, which, supposing that to be the case,
cost the Laird of Bradwardine two good milch cows. This zeal in their
behalf the House of Stuart repaid with a considerable share of their
confidence, an occasional supply of louis-d'or, abundance of fair
words, and a parchment, with a huge waxen seal appended, purporting to
be an earl's patent, granted by no less a person than James the Third
King of England, and Eighth King of Scotland, to his right feal,
trusty, and well-beloved Fergus Mac-Ivor of Glennaquoich, in the county
of Perth, and kingdom of Scotland.

With this future coronet glittering before his eyes, Fergus plunged
deeply into the correspondence and plots of that unhappy period; and,
like all such active agents, easily reconciled his conscience to going
certain lengths in the service of his party, from which honour and
pride would have deterred him had his sole object been the direct
advancement of his own personal interest. With this insight into a
bold, ambitious, and ardent, yet artful and politic character, we
resume the broken thread of our narrative.

The chief and his guest had by this time reached the house of
Glennaquoich, which consisted of Ian nan Chaistel's mansion, a high
rude-looking square tower, with the addition of a lofted house, that
is, a building of two stories, constructed by Fergus's grandfather when
he returned from that memorable expedition, well remembered by the
western shires under the name of the Highland Host. Upon occasion of
this crusade against the Ayrshire Whigs and Covenanters, the Vich Ian
Vohr of the time had probably been as successful as his predecessor was
in harrying Northumberland, and therefore left to his posterity a rival
edifice as a monument of his magnificence.

Around the house, which stood on an eminence in the midst of a narrow
Highland valley, there appeared none of that attention to convenience,
far less to ornament and decoration, which usually surrounds a
gentleman's habitation. An inclosure or two, divided by dry-stone
walls, were the only part of the domain that was fenced; as to the
rest, the narrow slips of level ground which lay by the side of the
brook exhibited a scanty crop of barley, liable to constant
depredations from the herds of wild ponies and black cattle that grazed
upon the adjacent hills. These ever and anon made an incursion upon the
arable ground, which was repelled by the loud, uncouth, and dissonant
shouts of half a dozen Highland swains, all running as if they had been
mad, and every one hallooing a half-starved dog to the rescue of the
forage. At a little distance up the glen was a small and stunted wood
of birch; the hills were high and heathy, but without any variety of
surface; so that the whole view was wild and desolate rather than grand
and solitary. Yet, such as it was, no genuine descendant of Ian nan
Chaistel would have changed the domain for Stow or Blenheim.

There was a sight, however, before the gate, which perhaps would have
afforded the first owner of Blenheim more pleasure than the finest view
in the domain assigned to him by the gratitude of his country. This
consisted of about a hundred Highlanders, in complete dress and arms;
at sight of whom the Chieftain apologised to Waverley in a sort of
negligent manner. 'He had forgot,' he said, 'that he had ordered a few
of his clan out, for the purpose of seeing that they were in a fit
condition to protect the country, and prevent such accidents as, he was
sorry to learn, had befallen the Baron of Bradwardine. Before they were
dismissed, perhaps Captain Waverley might choose to see them go through
a part of their exercise.'

Edward assented, and the men executed with agility and precision some
of the ordinary military movements. They then practised individually at
a mark, and showed extraordinary dexterity in the management of the
pistol and firelock. They took aim, standing, sitting, leaning, or
lying prostrate, as they were commanded, and always with effect upon
the target. Next, they paired off for the broadsword exercise; and,
having manifested their individual skill and dexterity, united in two
bodies, and exhibited a sort of mock encounter, in which the charge,
the rally, the flight, the pursuit, and all the current of a heady
fight, were exhibited to the sound of the great war bagpipe.

On a signal made by the Chief, the skirmish was ended. Matches were
then made for running, wrestling, leaping, pitching the bar, and other
sports, in which this feudal militia displayed incredible swiftness,
strength, and agility; and accomplished the purpose which their
Chieftain had at heart, by impressing on Waverley no light sense of
their merit as soldiers, and of the power of him who commanded them by
his nod. [Footnote: See Note 20.]

'And what number of such gallant fellows have the happiness to call you
leader?' asked Waverley.

'In a good cause, and under a chieftain whom they loved, the race of
Ivor have seldom taken the field under five hundred claymores. But you
are aware, Captain Waverley, that the disarming act, passed about
twenty years ago, prevents their being in the complete state of
preparation as in former times; and I keep no more of my clan under
arms than may defend my own or my friends' property, when the country
is troubled with such men as your last night's landlord; and
government, which has removed other means of defence, must connive at
our protecting ourselves.'

'But, with your force, you might soon destroy or put down such gangs as
that of Donald Bean Lean.'

'Yes, doubtless; and my reward would be a summons to deliver up to
General Blakeney, at Stirling, the few broadswords they have left us;
there were little policy in that, methinks. But come, captain, the
sound of the pipes informs me that dinner is prepared. Let me have the
honour to show you into my rude mansion.'





CHAPTER XX

A HIGHLAND FEAST


Ere Waverley entered the banqueting hall, he was offered the
patriarchal refreshment of a bath for the feet, which the sultry
weather, and the morasses he had traversed, rendered highly acceptable.
He was not, indeed, so luxuriously attended upon this occasion as the
heroic travellers in the Odyssey; the task of ablution and abstersion
being performed, not by a beautiful damsel, trained

    To chafe the limb, and pour the fragrant oil,

but by a smoke-dried skinny old Highland woman, who did not seem to
think herself much honoured by the duty imposed upon her, but muttered
between her teeth, 'Our fathers' herds did not feed so near together
that I should do you this service.' A small donation, however, amply
reconciled this ancient handmaiden to the supposed degradation; and, as
Edward proceeded to the hall, she gave him her blessing in the Gaelic
proverb, 'May the open hand be filled the fullest.'

The hall, in which the feast was prepared, occupied all the first story
of lan nan Chaistel's original erection, and a huge oaken table
extended through its whole length. The apparatus for dinner was simple,
even to rudeness, and the company numerous, even to crowding. At the
head of the table was the Chief himself, with Edward, and two or three
Highland visitors of neighbouring clans; the elders of his own tribe,
wadsetters and tacksmen, as they were called, who occupied portions of
his estate as mortgagers or lessees, sat next in rank; beneath them,
their sons and nephews and foster-brethren; then the officers of the
Chief's household, according to their order; and lowest of all, the
tenants who actually cultivated the ground. Even beyond this long
perspective, Edward might see upon the green, to which a huge pair of
folding doors opened, a multitude of Highlanders of a yet inferior
description, who, nevertheless, were considered as guests, and had
their share both of the countenance of the entertainer and of the cheer
of the day. In the distance, and fluctuating round this extreme verge
of the banquet, was a changeful group of women, ragged boys and girls,
beggars, young and old, large greyhounds, and terriers, and pointers,
and curs of low degree; all of whom took some interest, more or less
immediate, in the main action of the piece.

This hospitality, apparently unbounded, had yet its line of economy.
Some pains had been bestowed in dressing the dishes of fish, game,
etc., which were at the upper end of the table, and immediately under
the eye of the English stranger. Lower down stood immense clumsy joints
of mutton and beef, which, but for the absence of pork, [Footnote: See
Note 21.] abhorred in the Highlands, resembled the rude festivity of
the banquet of Penelope's suitors. But the central dish was a yearling
lamb, called 'a hog in har'st,' roasted whole. It was set upon its
legs, with a bunch of parsley in its mouth, and was probably exhibited
in that form to gratify the pride of the cook, who piqued himself more
on the plenty than the elegance of his master's table. The sides of
this poor animal were fiercely attacked by the clansmen, some with
dirks, others with the knives which were usually in the same sheath
with the dagger, so that it was soon rendered a mangled and rueful
spectacle. Lower down still, the victuals seemed of yet coarser
quality, though sufficiently abundant. Broth, onions, cheese, and the
fragments of the feast regaled the sons of Ivor who feasted in the open
air.

The liquor was supplied in the same proportion, and under similar
regulations. Excellent claret and champagne were liberally distributed
among the Chief's immediate neighbours; whisky, plain or diluted, and
strong beer refreshed those who sat near the lower end. Nor did this
inequality of distribution appear to give the least offence. Every one
present understood that his taste was to be formed according to the
rank which he held at table; and, consequently, the tacksmen and their
dependants always professed the wine was too cold for their stomachs,
and called, apparently out of choice, for the liquor which was assigned
to them from economy. [Footnote: See Note 22.] The bag-pipers, three in
number, screamed, during the whole time of dinner, a tremendous
war-tune; and the echoing of the vaulted roof, and clang of the Celtic
tongue, produced such a Babel of noises that Waverley dreaded his ears
would never recover it. Mac-Ivor, indeed, apologised for the confusion
occasioned by so large a party, and pleaded the necessity of his
situation, on which unlimited hospitality was imposed as a paramount
duty. 'These stout idle kinsmen of mine,' he said, 'account my estate
as held in trust for their support; and I must find them beef and ale,
while the rogues will do nothing for themselves but practise the
broadsword, or wander about the hills, shooting, fishing, hunting,
drinking, and making love to the lasses of the strath. But what can I
do, Captain Waverley? everything will keep after its kind, whether it
be a hawk or a Highlander.' Edward made the expected answer, in a
compliment upon his possessing so many bold and attached followers.

'Why, yes,' replied the Chief, 'were I disposed, like my father, to put
myself in the way of getting one blow on the head, or two on the neck,
I believe the loons would stand by me. But who thinks of that in the
present day, when the maxim is, "Better an old woman with a purse in
her hand than three men with belted brands"?' Then, turning to the
company, he proposed the 'Health of Captain Waverley, a worthy friend
of his kind neighbour and ally, the Baron of Bradwardine.'

'He is welcome hither,' said one of the elders, 'if he come from Cosmo
Comyne Bradwardine.'

'I say nay to that,' said an old man, who apparently did not mean to
pledge the toast; 'I say nay to that. While there is a green leaf in
the forest, there will be fraud in a Comyne.

'There is nothing but honour in the Baron of Bradwardine,' answered
another ancient; 'and the guest that comes hither from him should be
welcome, though he came with blood on his hand, unless it were blood of
the race of Ivor.'

The old man whose cup remained full replied, 'There has been blood
enough of the race of Ivor on the hand of Bradwardine.'

'Ah! Ballenkeiroch,' replied the first, 'you think rather of the flash
of the carbine at the mains of Tully-Veolan than the glance of the
sword that fought for the cause at Preston.'

'And well I may,' answered Ballenkeiroch; 'the flash of the gun cost me
a fair-haired son, and the glance of the sword has done but little for
King James.'

The Chieftain, in two words of French, explained to Waverley that the
Baron had shot this old man's son in a fray near Tully-Veolan, about
seven years before; and then hastened to remove Ballenkeiroch's
prejudice, by informing him that Waverley was an Englishman,
unconnected by birth or alliance with the family of Bradwardine; upon
which the old gentleman raised the hitherto-untasted cup and
courteously drank to his health. This ceremony being requited in kind,
the Chieftain made a signal for the pipes to cease, and said aloud,
'Where is the song hidden, my friends, that Mac-Murrough cannot find
it?'

Mac-Murrough, the family bhairdh, an aged man, immediately took the
hint, and began to chant, with low and rapid utterance, a profusion of
Celtic verses, which were received by the audience with all the
applause of enthusiasm. As he advanced in his declamation, his ardour
seemed to increase. He had at first spoken with his eyes fixed on the
ground; he now cast them around as if beseeching, and anon as if
commanding, attention, and his tones rose into wild and impassioned
notes, accompanied with appropriate gestures. He seemed to Edward, who
attended to him with much interest, to recite many proper names, to
lament the dead, to apostrophise the absent, to exhort, and entreat,
and animate those who were present. Waverley thought he even discerned
his own name, and was convinced his conjecture was right from the eyes
of the company being at that moment turned towards him simultaneously.
