to remove the body into the hut. This the young Highlander
performed, not without examining the pockets of the defunct,
which, however, he remarked had been pretty well spunged. He took
the cloak, however, and proceeding with the provident caution of a
spaniel hiding a bone, concealed it among some furze and carefully
marked the spot, observing that, if he chanced to return that way,
it would be an excellent rokelay for his auld mother Elspat.

It was by a considerable exertion that they regained their place
in the marching column, which was now moving rapidly forward to
occupy the high grounds above the village of Tranent, between
which and the sea lay the purposed march of the opposite army.

This melancholy interview with his late sergeant forced many
unavailing and painful reflections upon Waverley's mind. It was
clear from the confession of the man that Colonel Gardiner's
proceedings had been strictly warranted, and even rendered
indispensable, by the steps taken in Edward's name to induce the
soldiers of his troop to mutiny. The circumstance of the seal he
now, for the first time, recollected, and that he had lost it in
the cavern of the robber, Bean Lean. That the artful villain had
secured it, and used it as the means of carrying on an intrigue in
the regiment for his own purposes, was sufficiently evident; and
Edward had now little doubt that in the packet placed in his
portmanteau by his daughter he should find farther light upon his
proceedings. In the meanwhile the repeated expostulation of
Houghton--'Ah, squire, why did you leave us?' rung like a knell in
his ears.

'Yes,' he said, 'I have indeed acted towards you with thoughtless
cruelty. I brought you from your paternal fields, and the
protection of a generous and kind landlord, and when I had
subjected you to all the rigour of military discipline, I shunned
to bear my own share of the burden, and wandered from the duties I
had undertaken, leaving alike those whom it was my business to
protect, and my own reputation, to suffer under the artifices of
villainy. O, indolence and indecision of mind, if not in
yourselves vices--to how much exquisite misery and mischief do you
frequently prepare the way!'





CHAPTER XLVI

THE EVE OF BATTLE


Although the Highlanders marched on very fast, the sun was
declining when they arrived upon the brow of those high grounds
which command an open and extensive plain stretching northward to
the sea, on which are situated, but at a considerable distance
from each other, the small villages of Seaton and Cockenzie, and
the larger one of Preston. One of the low coastroads to Edinburgh
passed through this plain, issuing upon it from the enclosures of
Seaton House, and at the town or village of Preston again entering
the denies of an enclosed country. By this way the English general
had chosen to approach the metropolis, both as most commodious for
his cavalry, and being probably of opinion that by doing so he
would meet in front with the Highlanders advancing from Edinburgh
in the opposite direction. In this he was mistaken; for the sound
judgment of the Chevalier, or of those to whose advice he
listened, left the direct passage free, but occupied the strong
ground by which it was overlooked and commanded.

When the Highlanders reached the heights above the plain
described, they were immediately formed in array of battle along
the brow of the hill. Almost at the same instant the van of the
English appeared issuing from among the trees and enclosures of
Seaton, with the purpose of occupying the level plain between the
high ground and the sea; the space which divided the armies being
only about half a mile in breadth. Waverley could plainly see the
squadrons of dragoons issue, one after another, from the defiles,
with their videttes in front, and form upon the plain, with their
front opposed to that of the Prince's army. They were followed by
a train of field-pieces, which, when they reached the flank of the
dragoons, were also brought into line and pointed against the
heights. The march was continued by three or four regiments of
infantry marching in open column, their fixed bayonets showing
like successive hedges of steel, and their arms glancing like
lightning, as, at a signal given, they also at once wheeled up,
and were placed in direct opposition to the Highlanders. A second
train of artillery, with another regiment of horse, closed the
long march, and formed on the left flank of the infantry, the
whole line facing southward.

While the English army went through these evolutions, the
Highlanders showed equal promptitude and zeal for battle. As fast
as the clans came upon the ridge which fronted their enemy, they
were formed into line, so that both armies got into complete order
of battle at the same moment. When this was accomplished, the
Highlanders set up a tremendous yell, which was re-echoed by the
heights behind them. The regulars, who were in high spirits,
returned a loud shout of defiance, and fired one or two of their
cannon upon an advanced post of the Highlanders. The latter
displayed great earnestness to proceed instantly to the attack,
Evan Dhu urging to Fergus, by way of argument, that 'the SIDIER
ROY was tottering like an egg upon a staff, and that they had a'
the vantage of the onset, for even a haggis (God bless her!) could
charge down hill.'

But the ground through which the mountaineers must have descended,
although not of great extent, was impracticable in its
character, being not only marshy but intersected with walls of dry
stone, and traversed in its whole length by a very broad and deep
ditch, circumstances which must have given the musketry of the
regulars dreadful advantages before the mountaineers could have
used their swords, on which they were taught to rely. The
authority of the commanders was therefore interposed to curb the
impetuosity of the Highlanders, and only a few marksmen were sent
down the descent to skirmish with the enemy's advanced posts and
to reconnoitre the ground.

Here, then, was a military spectacle of no ordinary interest or
usual occurrence. The two armies, so different in aspect and
discipline, yet each admirably trained in its own peculiar mode of
war, upon whose conflict the temporary fate at least of Scotland
appeared to depend, now faced each other like two gladiators in
the arena, each meditating upon the mode of attacking their enemy.
The leading officers and the general's staff of each army could be
distinguished in front of their lines, busied with spy-glasses to
watch each other's motions, and occupied in despatching the orders
and receiving the intelligence conveyed by the aides-de-camp and
orderly men, who gave life to the scene by galloping along in
different directions, as if the fate of the day depended upon
the speed of their horses. The space between the armies was at
times occupied by the partial and irregular contest of individual
sharp-shooters, and a hat or bonnet was occasionally seen to
fall, as a wounded man was borne off by his comrades. These,
however, were but trifling skirmishes, for it suited the views
of neither party to advance in that direction. From the
neighbouring hamlets the peasantry cautiously showed themselves,
as if watching the issue of the expected engagement; and at no
great distance in the bay were two square-rigged vessels, bearing
the English flag, whose tops and yards were crowded with less
timid spectators.

When this awful pause had lasted for a short time, Fergus, with
another chieftain, received orders to detach their clans towards
the village of Preston, in order to threaten the right flank of
Cope's army and compel him to a change of position. To enable him
to execute these orders, the Chief of Glennaquoich occupied the
church-yard of Tranent, a commanding situation, and a convenient
place, as Evan Dhu remarked, 'for any gentleman who might have the
misfortune to be killed, and chanced to be curious about Christian
burial.' To check or dislodge this party, the English general
detached two guns, escorted by a strong party of cavalry. They
approached so near that Waverley could plainly recognise the
standard of the troop he had formerly commanded, and hear the
trumpets and kettle-drums sound the signal of advance which he had
so often obeyed. He could hear, too, the well-known word given in
the English dialect by the equally well-distinguished voice of the
commanding officer, for whom he had once felt so much respect. It
was at that instant, that, looking around him, he saw the wild
dress and appearance of his Highland associates, heard their
whispers in an uncouth and unknown language, looked upon his own
dress, so unlike that which he had worn from his infancy, and
wished to awake from what seemed at the moment a dream, strange,
horrible, and unnatural. 'Good God!' he muttered, 'am I then a
traitor to my country, a renegade to my standard, and a foe, as
that poor dying wretch expressed himself, to my native England!'

Ere he could digest or smother the recollection, the tall military
form of his late commander came full in view, for the purpose of
reconnoitring. 'I can hit him now,' said Callum, cautiously
raising his fusee over the wall under which he lay couched, at
scarce sixty yards' distance.

Edward felt as if he was about to see a parricide committed in his
presence; for the venerable grey hair and striking countenance of
the veteran recalled the almost paternal respect with which his
officers universally regarded him. But ere he could say 'Hold!' an
aged Highlander who lay beside Callum Beg stopped his arm. 'Spare
your shot,' said the seer, 'his hour is not yet come. But let him
beware of to-morrow; I see his winding-sheet high upon his
breast.'

Callum, flint to other considerations, was penetrable to
superstition. He turned pale at the words of the _taishatr_, and
recovered his piece. Colonel Gardiner, unconscious of the danger
he had escaped, turned his horse round and rode slowly back to the
front of his regiment.

By this time the regular army had assumed a new line, with one
flank inclined towards the sea and the other resting upon the
village of Preston; and, as similar difficulties occurred in
attacking their new position, Fergus and the rest of the
detachment were recalled to their former post. This alteration
created the necessity of a corresponding change in General Cope's
army, which was again brought into a line parallel with that of
the Highlanders. In these manoeuvres on both sides the daylight
was nearly consumed, and both armies prepared to rest upon their
arms for the night in the lines which they respectively occupied.

'There will be nothing done to-night,' said Fergus to his friend
Waverley; 'ere we wrap ourselves in our plaids, let us go see what
the Baron is doing in the rear of the line.'

When they approached his post, they found the good old careful
officer, after having sent out his night patrols and posted his
sentinels, engaged in reading the Evening Service of the Episcopal
Church to the remainder of his troop. His voice was loud and
sonorous, and though his spectacles upon his nose, and the
appearance of Saunders Saunderson, in military array, performing
the functions of clerk, had something ludicrous, yet the
circumstances of danger in which they stood, the military costume
of the audience, and the appearance of their horses saddled and
picqueted behind them, gave an impressive and solemn effect to the
office of devotion.

'I have confessed to-day, ere you were awake,' whispered Fergus to
Waverley; 'yet I am not so strict a Catholic as to refuse to join
in this good man's prayers.'

Edward assented, and they remained till the Baron had concluded
the service.

As he shut the book, 'Now, lads,' said he, 'have at them in the
morning with heavy hands and light consciences.' He then kindly
greeted Mac-Ivor and Waverley, who requested to know his opinion
of their situation. Why, you know Tacitus saith, "In rebus
bellicis maxime dominalur Fortuna," which is equiponderate with
our vernacular adage, "Luck can maist in the mellee." But credit
me, gentlemen, yon man is not a deacon o' his craft. He damps the
spirits of the poor lads he commands by keeping them on the
defensive, whilk of itself implies inferiority or fear. Now will
they lie on their arms yonder as anxious and as ill at ease as a
toad under a harrow, while our men will be quite fresh and blithe
for action in the morning. Well, good-night. One thing troubles
me, but if to-morrow goes well off, I will consult you about it,
Glennaquoich.'

'I could almost apply to Mr. Bradwardine the character which Henry
gives of Fluellen,' said Waverley, as his friend and he walked
towards their bivouac:

    'Though it appears a little out of fashion,
    There is much care and valour in this "Scotchman."'

'He has seen much service,' answered Fergus, 'and one is sometimes
astonished to find how much nonsense and reason are mingled in his
composition. I wonder what can be troubling his mind; probably
something about Rose. Hark! the English are setting their watch.'

The roll of the drum and shrill accompaniment of the fifes swelled
up the hill--died away--resumed its thunder--and was at length
hushed. The trumpets and kettle-drums of the cavalry were next
heard to perform the beautiful and wild point of war appropriated
as a signal for that piece of nocturnal duty, and then finally
sunk upon the wind with a shrill and mournful cadence.

The friends, who had now reached their post, stood and looked
round them ere they lay down to rest. The western sky twinkled
with stars, but a frost-mist, rising from the ocean, covered the
eastern horizon, and rolled in white wreaths along the plain where
the adverse army lay couched upon their arms. Their advanced posts
were pushed as far as the side of the great ditch at the bottom of
the descent, and had kindled large fires at different intervals,
gleaming with obscure and hazy lustre through the heavy fog which
encircled them with a doubtful halo.

The Highlanders, 'thick as leaves in Vallombrosa,' lay stretched
upon the ridge of the hill, buried (excepting their sentinels) in
the most profound repose. 'How many of these brave fellows will
sleep more soundly before to-morrow night, Fergus!' said Waverley,
with an involuntary sigh.

'You must notthink of that,' answered Fergus, whose ideas were
entirely military. 'You must only think of your sword, and by whom
it was given. All other reflections are now TOO LATE.'

With the opiate contained in this undeniable remark Edward
endeavoured to lull the tumult of his conflicting feelings. The
Chieftain and he, combining their plaids, made a comfortable and
warm couch. Callum, sitting down at their head (for it was his
duty to watch upon the immediate person of the Chief), began a
long mournful song in Gaelic, to a low and uniform tune, which,
like the sound of the wind at a distance, soon lulled them to
sleep.





CHAPTER XLVII

THE CONFLICT


When Fergus Mac-Ivor and his friend had slept for a few hours,
they were awakened and summoned to attend the Prince. The distant
village clock was heard to toll three as they hastened to the
place where he lay. He was already surrounded by his principal
officers and the chiefs of clans. A bundle of pease-straw, which
had been lately his couch, now served for his seat. Just as Fergus
reached the circle, the consultation had broken up. 'Courage, my
brave friends!' said the Chevalier, 'and each one put himself
instantly at the head of his command; a faithful friend [Footnote:
See Note 7.] has offered to guide us by a practicable, though
narrow and circuitous, route, which, sweeping to our right,
traverses the broken ground and morass, and enables us to gain the
firm and open plain upon which the enemy are lying. This
difficulty surmounted, Heaven and your good swords must do the
rest.'

The proposal spread unanimous joy, and each leader hastened to get
his men into order with as little noise as possible. The army,
moving by its right from off the ground on which they had rested,
soon entered the path through the morass, conducting their march
with astonishing silence and great rapidity. The mist had not
risen to the higher grounds, so that for some time they had the
advantage of star-light. But this was lost as the stars faded
before approaching day, and the head of the marching column,
continuing its descent, plunged as it were into the heavy ocean of
fog, which rolled its white waves over the whole plain, and over
the sea by which it was bounded. Some difficulties were now to be
encountered, inseparable from darkness, a narrow, broken, and
marshy path, and the necessity of preserving union in the march.
These, however, were less inconvenient to Highlanders, from their
habits of life, than they would have been to any other troops, and
they continued a steady and swift movement.

As the clan of Ivor approached the firm ground, following the
track of those who preceded them, the challenge of a patrol was
heard through the mist, though they could not see the dragoon by
whom it was made--'Who goes there?'

'Hush!' cried Fergus, 'hush! let none answer, as he values his
life; press forward'; and they continued their march with silence
and rapidity.

The patrol fired his carabine upon the body, and the report was
instantly followed by the clang of his horse's feet as he galloped
off. 'Hylax in limine latrat,' said the Baron of Bradwardine, who
heard the shot;'that loon will give the alarm.'

The clan of Fergus had now gained the firm plain, which had lately
borne a large crop of corn. But the harvest was gathered in, and
the expanse was unbroken by tree, bush, or interruption of any
kind. The rest of the army were following fast, when they heard
the drums of the enemy beat the general. Surprise, however, had
made no part of their plan, so they were not disconcerted by this
intimation that the foe was upon his guard and prepared to receive
them. It only hastened their dispositions for the combat, which
were very simple.

The Highland army, which now occupied the eastern end of the wide
plain, or stubble field, so often referred to, was drawn up in two
lines, extending from the morass towards the sea. The first was
destined to charge the enemy, the second to act as a reserve. The
few horse, whom the Prince headed in person, remained between the
two lines. The adventurer had intimated a resolution to charge in
person at the head of his first line; but his purpose was
deprecated by all around him, and he was with difficulty induced
to abandon it.

Both lines were now moving forward, the first prepared for instant
combat. The clans of which it was composed formed each a sort of
separate phalanx, narrow in front, and in depth ten, twelve, or
fifteen files, according to the strength of the following. The
best-armed and best-born, for the words were synonymous, were
placed in front of each of these irregular subdivisions. The
others in the rear shouldered forward the front, and by their
pressure added both physical impulse and additional ardour and
confidence to those who were first to encounter the danger.
