had in his possession the maddening potion, which he was to have given to
the captain of the transport-boat, and it was open to him still to
receive Pentaur either as a guest or as a prisoner.  Pentaur might injure
him, whether Katuti's project failed or succeeded.

Ameni left the pavilion to go to see old Gagabu, who had stood so long in
the heat of the sun during the ceremony of receiving the conqueror, that
he had been at last carried fainting to the tent which he shared with the
high-priest, and which was not far from that of the Regent.  He found the
old man much revived, and was preparing to mount his chariot to go to the
banquet, when the Regent's myrmidons led Pentaur past in front of him.
Ameni looked doubtfully at the tall and noble figure of the prisoner, but
Pentaur recognized him, called him by his name, and in a moment they
stood together, hand clasped in hand.  The guards showed some uneasiness,
but Ameni explained who he was.

The high-priest was sincerely rejoiced at the preservation and
restoration of his favorite disciple, whom for many months he had mourned
as dead; he looked at his manly figure with fatherly tenderness, and
desired the guards, who bowed to his superior dignity, to conduct his
friend, on his responsibility; to his tent instead of to Ani's.

There Pentaur found his old friend Gagabu, who wept with delight at his
safety.  All that his master had accused him of seemed to be forgotten.
Ameni had him clothed in a fresh white robe, he was never tired of
looking at him, and over and over again clapped his hand upon his
shoulder, as if he were his own son that had been lost and found again.

Pentaur was at once required to relate all that had happened to him, and
the poet told the story of his captivity and liberation at Mount Sinai,
his meeting with Bent-Anat, and how he had fought in the battle of
Kadesh, had been wounded by an arrow, and found and rescued by the
faithful Kaschta.  He concealed only his passion for Bent-Anat, and the
fact that he had preserved the king's life.

"About an hour ago," he added, "I was sitting alone in my tent, watching
the lights in the palace yonder, when the watch who are outside brought
me an order from the Regent to accompany them to his tent.  What can he
want with me?  I always thought he owed me a grudge."

Gagabu and Ameni glanced meaningly at each other, and the high-priest
then hastened away, as already he had remained too long away from the
banquet.  Before he got into his chariot he commanded the guard to return
to their posts, and took it upon himself to inform the Regent that his
guest would remain in his tent till the festival was over; the soldiers
unhesitatingly obeyed him.

Ameni arrived at the palace before them, and entered the banqueting-hall
just as Ani was assigning a place to each of his guests.  The high-priest
went straight up to him, and said, as he bowed before him:

"Pardon my long delay, but I was detained by a great surprise.  The poet
Pentaur is living--as you know.  I have invited him to remain in my tent
as my guest, and to tend the prophet Gagabu."

The Regent turned pale, he remained speechless and looked at Ameni with a
cold ghastly smile; but he soon recovered himself.

"You see," he said, "how you have injured me by your unworthy suspicions;
I meant to have restored your favorite to you myself to-morrow."

"Forgive me, then, for having anticipated your plan," said Ameni, taking
his seat near the king.  Hundreds of slaves hurried to and fro loaded
with costly dishes.  Large vessels of richly wrought gold and silver were
brought into the hall on wheels, and set on the side-boards.  Children
were perched in the shells and lotus-flowers that hung from the painted
rafters; and from between the pillars, that were hung with cloudy
transparent tissues, they threw roses and violets down on the company.
The sounds of harps and songs issued from concealed rooms, and from an
altar, six ells high, in the middle of the hall, clouds of incense were
wafted into space.

The king-one of whose titles was "Son of the Sun,"--was as radiant as the
sun himself.  His children were once more around him, Mena was his
cupbearer as in former times, and all that was best and noblest in the
land was gathered round him to rejoice with him in his triumph and his
return.  Opposite to him sat the ladies, and exactly in front of him, a
delight to his eyes, Bent-Anat and Nefert.  His injunction to Mena to
hold the wine cup steadily seemed by no means superfluous, for his looks
constantly wandered from the king's goblet to his fair wife, from whose
lips he as yet had heard no word of welcome, whose hand he had not yet
been so happy as to touch.

All the guests were in the most joyful excitement.  Rameses related the
tale of his fight at Kadesh, and the high-priest of Heliopolis observed
In later times the poets will sing of thy deeds."

"Their songs will not be of my achievements," exclaimed the king, "but of
the grace of the Divinity, who so miraculously rescued your sovereign,
and gave the victory to the Egyptians over an innumerable enemy."

"Did you see the God with your own eyes? and in what form did he appear
to you?" asked Bent-Anat.  "It is most extraordinary," said the king,
"but he exactly resembled the dead father of the traitor Paaker.  My
preserver was of tall stature, and had a beautiful countenance; his voice
was deep and thrilling, and he swung his battle-axe as if it were a mere
plaything."

Ameni had listened eagerly to the king's words, now he bowed low before
him and said humbly: "If I were younger I myself would endeavor, as was
the custom with our fathers, to celebrate this glorious deed of a God and
of his sublime son in a song worthy of this festival; but melting tones
are no longer mine, they vanish with years, and the car of the listener
lends itself only to the young.  Nothing is wanting to thy feast, most
lordly Ani, but a poet, who might sing the glorious deeds of our monarch
to the sound of his lute, and yet--we have at hand the gifted Pentaur,
the noblest disciple of the House of Seti."

Bent-Anat turned perfectly white, and the priests who were present
expressed the utmost joy and astonishment, for they had long thought the
young poet, who was highly esteemed throughout Egypt, to be dead.

The king had often heard of the fame of Pentaur from his sons and
especially from Rameri, and he willingly consented that Ameni should
send for the poet, who had himself borne arms at Kadesh, in order that
he should sing a song of triumph.  The Regent gazed blankly and uneasily
into his wine cup, and the high-priest rose to fetch Pentaur himself into
the presence of the king.

During the high-priest's absence, more and more dishes were served to the
company; behind each guest stood a silver bowl with rose water, in which
from time to time he could dip his fingers to cool and clean them; the
slaves in waiting were constantly at hand with embroidered napkins to
wipe them, and others frequently changed the faded wreaths, round the
heads and shoulders of the feasters, for fresh ones.

"How pale you are, my child!"  said Rameses turning to Bent-Anat.
"If you are tired, your uncle will no doubt allow you to leave the hall;
though I think you should stay to hear the performance of this much-
lauded poet.  After having been so highly praised he will find it
difficult to satisfy his hearers.  But indeed I am uneasy about you, my
child--would you rather go?"  The Regent had risen and said earnestly,
"Your presence has done me honor, but if you are fatigued I beg you to
allow me to conduct you and your ladies to the apartments intended for
you."

"I will stay," said Bent-Anat in a low but decided tone, and she kept her
eyes on the floor, while her heart beat violently, for the murmur of
voices told her that Pentaur was entering the hall.  He wore the long
white robe of a priest of the temple of Seti, and on his forehead the
ostrich-feather which marked him as one of the initiated.  He did not
raise his eyes till he stood close before the king; then he prostrated
himself before him, and awaited a sign from the Pharaoh before he rose
again.

But Rameses hesitated a long time, for the youthful figure before him,
and the glance that met his own, moved him strangely.  Was not this the
divinity of the fight?  Was not this his preserver?  Was he again deluded
by a resemblance, or was he in a dream?

The guests gazed in silence at the spellbound king, and at the poet; at
last Rameses bowed his head,

Pentaur rose to his feet, and the bright color flew to his face as close
to him he perceived Bent-Anat.

"You fought at Kadesh?"  asked the king.  "As thou sayest," replied
Pentaur.

"You are well spoken of as a poet," said Rameses, "and we desire to hear
the wonderful tale of my preservation celebrated in song.  If you will
attempt it, let a lute be brought and sing."

The poet bowed.  "My gifts are modest," he said, "but I will endeavor to
sing of the glorious deed, in the presence of the hero who achieved it,
with the aid of the Gods."

Rameses gave a signal, and Ameni caused a large golden harp to be brought
in for his disciple.  Pentaur lightly touched the strings, leaned his
head against the top of the tall bow of the harp, for some time lest in
meditation; then he drew himself up boldly, and struck the chords,
bringing out a strong and warlike music in broad heroic rhythm.

Then he began the narrative: how Rameses had pitched his camp before
Kadesh, how he ordered his troops, and how he had taken the field against
the Cheta, and their Asiatic allies.  Louder and stronger rose his tones
when he reached the turning-point of the battle, and began to celebrate
the rescue of the king; and the Pharaoh listened with eager attention as
Pentaur sang:--[A literal translation of the ancient Egyptian poem called
"The Epos of Pentaur"]


         "Then the king stood forth, and, radiant with courage,
          He looked like the Sun-god armed and eager for battle.
          The noble steeds that bore him into the struggle
          'Victory to Thebes' was the name of one, and the other
          Was called 'contented Nura'--were foaled in the stables
          Of him we call 'the elect,' 'the beloved of Amon,'
          'Lord of truth,' the chosen vicar of Ra.

          Up sprang the king and threw himself on the foe,
          The swaying ranks of the contemptible Cheta.
          He stood alone-alone, and no man with him.
          As thus the king stood forth all eyes were upon him,
          And soon he was enmeshed by men and horses,
          And by the enemy's chariots: two thousand five hundred.
          The foe behind hemmed him in and enclosed him.
          Dense the array of the contemptible Cheta,
          Dense the swarm of warriors out of Arad,
          Dense the Mysian host, the Pisidian legions.
          Every chariot carried three bold warriors,
          All his foes, and all allied like brothers.

         "Not a prince is with me, not a captain,
          Not an archer, none to guide my horses!
          Fled the riders! fled my troops and horse
          By my side not one is now left standing."
          Thus the king, and raised his voice in prayer.
          "Great father Amon, I have known Thee well.
          And can the father thus forget his son?
          Have I in any deed forgotten Thee?
          Have I done aught without Thy high behest
          Or moved or staid against Thy sovereign will?
          Great am I--mighty are Egyptian kings
          But in the sight of Thy commanding might,
          Small as the chieftain of a wandering tribe.
          Immortal Lord, crush Thou this unclean people;
          Break Thou their necks, annihilate the heathen.

          And I--have I not brought Thee many victims,
          And filled Thy temple with the captive folk?
          And for thy presence built a dwelling place
          That shall endure for countless years to come?
          Thy garners overflow with gifts from me.
          I offered Thee the world to swell Thy glory,
          And thirty thousand mighty steers have shed
          Their smoking blood on fragrant cedar piles.
          Tall gateways, flag-decked masts, I raised to Thee,
          And obelisks from Abu I have brought,
