for the blind queen's eyes, her windows were shaded by curtains of green
Indian silk.  The floor was covered with a thick Babylonian carpet, soft
as moss under the foot.  The walls were faced with a mosaic of ivory,
tortoise-shell, gold, silver, malachite, lapis-lazuli, ebony and amber.
The seats and couches were of gold covered with lions' skins, and a table
of silver stood by the side of the blind queen.  Kassandane was seated in
a costly arm-chair.  She wore a robe of violet-blue, embroidered with
silver, and over her snow-white hair lay a long veil of delicate lace,
woven in Egypt, the ends of which were wound round her neck and tied in a
large bow beneath her chin.  She was between sixty and seventy years old;
her face, framed, as it were, into a picture by the lace veil, was
exquisitely symmetrical in its form, intellectual, kind and benevolent
in its expression.

The blind eyes were closed, but those who gazed on her felt that,
if open, they would shine with the gentle light of stars.  Even when
sitting, her attitude and height showed a tall and stately figure.
Indeed her entire appearance was worthy the widow of the great and
good Cyrus.

On a low seat at her feet, drawing long threads from a golden spindle,
sat the queen's youngest child Atossa, born to her late in life.
Cambyses was standing before her, and behind, hardly visible in the dim
light, Nebenchari, the Egyptian oculist.

As Nitetis entered, Cambyses came towards her and led her to his mother.
The daughter of Amasis fell on her knees before this venerable woman, and
kissed her hand with real affection.

"Be welcome here!" exclaimed the blind queen, feeling her way to the
young girl's head, on which she laid her hand, "I have heard much in your
praise, and hope to gain in you a dear and loving daughter."

Nitetis kissed the gentle, delicate hand again, saying in a low voice:
"O how I thank you for these words!  Will you, the wife of the great
Cyrus, permit me to call you mother?  My tongue has been so long
accustomed to this sweet word; and now after long weeks of silence,
I tremble with joy at the thought that I may say 'my mother' once more!
I will indeed try to deserve your love and kindness; and you--you will be
to me all that your loving countenance seems to promise?  Advise and
teach me; let me find a refuge at your feet, if sometimes the longing for
home becomes too strong, and my poor heart too weak to bear its grief or
joy alone.  Oh, be my mother! that one word includes all else!"

The blind queen felt the warm tears fall on her hand; she pressed her
lips kindly on the weeping girl's forehead, and answered: "I can
understand your feelings.  My apartments shall be always open to you,
my heart ready to welcome you here.  Come when you will, and call me your
mother with the same perfect confidence with which I, from my whole
heart, name you my daughter.  In a few months you will be my son's wife,
and then the gods may grant you that gift, which, by implanting within
you the feelings of a mother, will prevent you from feeling the need of
one."

"May Ormuszd hear and give his blessing!"  said Cambyses.  "I rejoice,
mother, that my wife pleases you, and I know that when once she becomes
familiar with our manners and customs she will be happy here.  If Nitetis
pay due heed, our marriage can be celebrated in four months."

"But the law--" began his mother.

"I command--in four months, and should like to see him who dare raise an
objection.  Farewell!  Nebenchari, use your best skill for the queen's
eyes, and if my wife permit, you, as her countryman, may visit her
to-morrow.  Farewell!  Bartja sends his parting greetings.  He is on the
road to the Tapuri."

Atossa wiped away a tear in silence, but Kassandane answered: "You would
have done well to allow the boy to remain here a few months longer.  Your
commander, Megabyzus, could have subdued that small nation alone."

"Of that I have no doubt," replied the king, "but Bartja desired an
opportunity of distinguishing himself in the field; and for that reason
I sent him."

"Would he not gladly have waited until the war with the Massageta; where
more glory might be gained?"  asked the blind woman.

"Yes," said Atossa, "and if he should fall in this war, you will have
deprived him of the power of fulfilling his most sacred duty, of avenging
the soul of our father!"

"Be silent!"  cried Cambyses in an overbearing tone, "or I shall have to
teach you what is becoming in women and children.  Bartja is on far too
good terms with fortune to fall in the war.  He will live, I hope, to
deserve the love which is now so freely flung into his lap like an alms."

"How canst thou speak thus?"  cried Kassandane.  "In what manly virtue is
Bartja wanting?  Is it his fault, that he has had no such opportunity of
distinguishing himself in the field as thou hast had?  You are the king
and I am bound to respect your commands, but I blame my son for depriving
his blind mother of the greatest joy left to her in her old age.  Bartja
would have gladly remained here until the Massagetan war, if your self-
will had not determined otherwise."

"And what I will is good!"  exclaimed Cambyses interrupting his mother,
and pale with anger, "I desire that this subject be not mentioned again."

So saying, he left the room abruptly and went into the reception-hall,
followed by the immense retinue which never quitted him, whithersoever he
might direct his steps.

An hour passed, and still Nitetis and the lovely Atossa were sitting side
by side, at the feet of the queen.  The Persian women listened eagerly to
all their new friend could tell them about Egypt and its wonders.

"Oh!  how I should like to visit your home!"  exclaimed Atossa.  "It must
be quite, quite different from Persia and everything else that I have
seen yet.  The fruitful shores of your great river, larger even than the
Euphrates, the temples with their painted columns, those huge artificial
mountains, the Pyramids, where the ancient kings be buried--it must all
be wonderfully beautiful.  But what pleases me best of all is your
description of the entertainments, where men and women converse together
as they like.  The only meals we are allowed to take in the society of
men are on New Year's Day and the king's birthday, and then we are
forbidden to speak; indeed it is not thought right for us even to raise
our eyes.  How different it is with you!  By Mithras! mother, I should
like to be an Egyptian, for we poor creatures are in reality nothing but
miserable slaves; and yet I feel that the great Cyrus was my father too,
and that I am worth quite as much as most men.  Do I not speak the truth?
can I not obey as well as command?  have I not the same thirst and
longing for glory?  could not I learn to ride, to string a bow, to fight
and swim, if I were taught and inured to such exercises?"

The girl had sprung from her seat while speaking, her eyes flashed and
she swung her spindle in the air, quite unconscious that in so doing she
was breaking the thread and entangling the flax.

"Remember what is fitting," reminded Kassandane.  "A woman must submit
with humility to her quiet destiny, and not aspire to imitate the deeds
of men."

"But there are women who lead the same lives as men," cried Atossa.
"There are the Amazons who live on the shores of the Thermodon in
Themiscyra, and at Comana on the Iris; they have waged great wars, and
even to this day wear men's armor."

"Who told you this?"

"My old nurse, Stephanion, whom my father brought a captive from Sinope
to Pasargadae."

"But I can teach you better," said Nitetis.  "It is true that in
Themiscyra and Comana there are a number of women who wear soldier's
armor; but they are only priestesses, and clothe themselves like the
warlike goddess they serve, in order to present to the worshippers a
manifestation of the divinity in human form.  Croesus says that an army
of Amazons has never existed, but that the Greeks, (always ready and able
to turn anything into a beautiful myth), having seen these priestesses,
at once transformed the armed virgins dedicated to the goddess into a
nation of fighting women."

"Then they are liars!"  exclaimed the disappointed girl.

"It is true, that the Greeks have not the same reverence for truth as you
have," answered Nitetis, "but they do not call the men who invent these
beautiful stories liars; they are called poets."

"Just as it is with ourselves," said Kassandane.  "The poets, who sing
the praises of my husband, have altered and adorned his early life in a
marvellous manner; yet no one calls them liars.  But tell me, my
daughter, is it true that these Greeks are more beautiful than other men,
and understand art better even than the Egyptians?"

"On that subject I should not venture to pronounce a judgment.  There is
such a great difference between the Greek and Egyptian works of art.
When I went into our own gigantic temples to pray, I always felt as if I
must prostrate myself in the dust before the greatness of the gods, and
entreat them not to crush so insignificant a worm; but in the temple of
Hera at Samos, I could only raise my hands to heaven in joyful
thanksgiving, that the gods had made the earth so beautiful.  In Egypt I
always believed as I had been taught: 'Life is asleep; we shall not awake
to our true existence in the kingdom of Osiris till the hour of death;'
but in Greece I thought: 'I am born to live and to enjoy this cheerful,
bright and blooming world.'"

"Ah! tell us something more about Greece," cried Atossa; "but first
Nebenchari must put a fresh bandage on my mother's eyes."

The oculist, a tall, grave man in the white robes of an Egyptian priest,
came forward to perform the necessary operation, and after being kindly
greeted by Nitetis, withdrew once more silently into the background.  At
the same time a eunuch entered to enquire whether Croesus might be
allowed to pay his respectful homage to the king's mother.

The aged king soon appeared, and was welcomed as the old and tried friend
of the Persian royal family.  Atossa, with her usual impetuosity, fell on
the neck of the friend she had so sorely missed during his absence; the
queen gave him her hand, and Nitetis met him like a loving daughter.

"I thank the gods, that I am permitted to see you again," said Croesus.
"The young can look at life as a possession, as a thing understood and
sure, but at my age every year must be accepted as an undeserved gift
from the gods, for which a man must be thankful."

"I could envy you for this happy view of life," sighed Kassandane.
"My years are fewer than yours, and yet every new day seems to me a
punishment sent by the Immortals."

"Can I be listening to the wife of the great Cyrus?"  asked Croesus.
"How long is it since courage and confidence left that brave heart?
I tell you, you will recover sight, and once more thank the gods for a
good old age.  The man who recovers, after a serious illness, values
health a hundred-fold more than before; and he who regains sight after
blindness, must be an especial favorite of the gods.  Imagine to yourself
the delight of that first moment when your eyes behold once more the
bright shining of the sun, the faces of your loved ones, the beauty of
all created things, and tell me, would not that outweigh even a whole
life of blindness and dark night?  In the day of healing, even if that
come in old age, a new life will begin and I shall hear you confess that
my friend Solon was right."

"In what respect?"  asked Atossa.

"In wishing that Mimnermos, the Colophonian poet, would correct the poem
in which he has assigned sixty years as the limit of a happy life, and
would change the sixty into eighty."

"Oh no!"  exclaimed Kassandane.  "Even were Mithras to restore my sight,
such a long life would be dreadful.  Without my husband I seem to myself
like a wanderer in the desert, aimless and without a guide."

"Are your children then nothing to you, and this kingdom, of which you
have watched the rise and growth?"

"No indeed! but my children need me no longer, and the ruler of this
kingdom is too proud to listen to a woman's advice."

On hearing these words Atossa and Nitetis seized each one of the queen's
hands, and Nitetis cried: "You ought to desire a long life for our sakes.
What should we be without your help and protection?"

Kassandane smiled again, murmuring in a scarcely audible voice: "You are
right, my children, you will stand in need of your mother."

"Now you are speaking once more like the wife of the great Cyrus," cried
Croesus, kissing the robe of the blind woman.  "Your presence will indeed
be needed, who can say how soon?  Cambyses is like hard steel; sparks
fly wherever he strikes.  You can hinder these sparks from kindling a
destroying fire among your loved ones, and this should be your duty.
You alone can dare to admonish the king in the violence of his passion.
He regards you as his equal, and, while despising the opinion of others,
feels wounded by his mother's disapproval.  Is it not then your duty to
abide patiently as mediator between the king, the kingdom and your loved
ones, and so, by your own timely reproofs, to humble the pride of your
son, that he may be spared that deeper humiliation which, if not thus
averted, the gods will surely inflict."

"You are right," answered the blind woman, "but I feel only too well that
my influence over him is but small.  He has been so much accustomed to
have his own will, that he will follow no advice, even if it come from
his mother's lips."

