fascination proved irresistible, and besides, I was bursting with all
my untold news, longing to share your feast, and to tell you, over the
viands and the wine, things that you have not even allowed yourselves to
dream of."

Kallias settled himself comfortably on one of the cushions, and before
beginning to tell his news, produced and presented to Rhodopis a
magnificent gold bracelet in the form of a serpent's, which he had bought
for a large sum at Samos, in the goldsmith's workshop of the very
Theodorus who was now sitting with him at table.

"This I have brought for you,"' he said, turning to the delighted
Rhodopis, "but for you, friend Phanes, I have something still better.
Guess, who won the four-horse chariot-race?"

"An Athenian?"  asked Phanes, and his face glowed with excitement; for
the victory gained by one citizen at the Olympic games belonged to his
whole people, and the Olympic olive-branch was the greatest honor and
happiness that could fall to the lot, either of a single Hellene, or an
entire Greek tribe.

"Rightly guessed, Phanes!"  cried the bringer of this joyful news, "The
first prize has been carried off by an Athenian; and not only so, your
own cousin Cimon, the son of Kypselos, the brother of that Miltiades,
who, nine Olympiads ago, earned us the same honor, is the man who has
conquered this year; and with the same steeds that gained him the prize
at the last games.

     [The second triumph won by the steeds of Cimon must have taken
     place, as Duneker correctly remarks, about the year 528.  The same
     horses won the race for the third time at the next Olympic games,
     consequently four years later.  As token of his gratitude Cimon
     caused a monument to be erected in their honor in "the hollow way"
     near Athens.  We may here remind our readers that the Greeks made
     use of the Olympic games to determine the date of each year.  They
     took place every four years.  The first was fixed 776 B. C.  Each
     separate year was named the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th of such or such an
     Olympiad.]

"The fame of the Alkmaeonidae is, verily, darkening more and more before
the Philaidae.  Are not you proud, Phanes? do not you feel joy at the
glory of your family?"

In his delight Phanes had risen from his seat, and seemed suddenly to
have increased in stature by a whole head.

With a look of ineffable pride and consciousness of his own position, he
gave his hand to the messenger of victory.  The latter, embracing his
countryman, continued:

"Yes, we have a right to feel proud and happy, Phanes; you especially,
for no sooner had the judges unanimously awarded the prize to Cimon, than
he ordered the heralds to proclaim the tyrant Pisistratus as the owner of
the splendid team, and therefore victor in the race.  Pisistratus at once
caused it to be announced that your family was free to return to Athens,
and so now, Phanes, the long-wished for hour of your return home is
awaiting you."

But at these words Phanes turned pale, his look of conscious pride
changed into one of indignation, and he exclaimed:

"At this I am to rejoice, foolish Kallias?  rather bid me weep that a
descendant of Ajax should be capable of laying his well-won fame thus
ignominiously at a tyrant's feet!  No!  I swear by Athene, by Father
Zeus, and by Apollo, that I will sooner starve in foreign lands than take
one step homeward, so long as the Pisistratidae hold my country in
bondage.  When I leave the service of Amasis, I shall be free, free as a
bird in the air; but I would rather be the slave of a peasant in foreign
lands, than hold the highest office under Pisistratus.  The sovereign
power in Athens belongs to us, its nobles; but Cimon by laying his
chaplet at the feet of Pisistratus has acknowledged the tyrants, and
branded himself as their servant.  He shall hear that Phanes cares little
for the tyrant's clemency.  I choose to remain an exile till my country
is free, till her nobles and people govern themselves, and dictate their
own laws.  Phanes will never do homage to the oppressor, though all the
Philaidae, the Alkmaeonidae, and even the men of your own house, Kallias,
the rich Daduchi, should fall down at his feet!"

With flashing eyes he looked round on the assembly; Kallias too
scrutinized the faces of the guests with conscious pride, as if he would
say:

"See, friends, the kind of men produced by my glorious country!"

Taking the hand of Phanes again, he said to him: "The tyrants are as
hateful to me as to you, my friend; but I have seen, that, so long as
Pisistratus lives, the tyranny cannot be overthrown.  His allies,
Lygdamis of Naxos and Polykrates of Samos, are powerful; but the greatest
danger for our freedom lies in his own moderation and prudence.  During
my recent stay in Greece I saw with alarm that the mass of the people in
Athens love their oppressor like a father.  Notwithstanding his great
power, he leaves the commonwealth in the enjoyment of Solon's
constitution.  He adorns the city with the most magnificent buildings.
They say that the new temple of Zeus, now being built of glorious marble
by Kallaeschrus, Antistates and Porinus (who must be known to you,
Theodorus), will surpass every building that has yet been erected by the
Hellenes.  He understands how to attract poets and artists of all kinds
to Athens, he has had the poems of Homer put into writing, and the
prophecies of Musaeus collected by Onomakritus.  He lays out new streets
and arranges fresh festivals; trade flourishes under his rule, and the
people find themselves well off, in spite of the many taxes laid upon
them.  But what are the people? a vulgar multitude who, like the gnats,
fly towards every thing brilliant, and, so long as the taper burns, will
continue to flutter round it, even though they burn their wings in doing
so.  Let Pisistratus' torch burn out, Phanes, and I'll swear that the
fickle crowd will flock around the returning nobles, the new light, just
as they now do around the tyrant.

"Give me your hand once more, you true son of Ajax; for you, my friends,
I have still many an interesting piece of news untold.

"The chariot-race, as I have just related, was won by Cimon who gave the
olive-branch to Pisistratus.  Four finer horses than his I never saw.
Arkesilaus of Cyrene, Kleosthenes of Epidamnus, Aster of Sybaris,
Hekataeus of Miletus and many more had also sent splendid teams.  Indeed
the games this time were more than brilliant.  All Hellas had sent
deputies.  Rhoda of the Ardeates, in distant Iberia, the wealthy
Tartessus, Sinope in the far East on the shores of Pontus, in short,
every tribe that could boast of Hellenic descent was well represented.
The Sybarite deputies were of a dazzling beauty; the Spartans, homely and
simple, but handsome as Achilles, tall and strong as Hercules; the
Athenians remarkable for their supple limbs and graceful movements, and
the men of Crotona were led by Milo, strongest of mortal birth.  The
Samian and Milesian deputies vied in splendor and gorgeousness of attire
with those from Corinth and Mitylene: the flower of the Greek youth was
assembled there, and, in the space allotted to spectators, were seated,
not only men of every age, class and nation, but many virgins, fair and
lovely maidens, who had come to Olympia, more especially from Sparta, in
order to encourage the men during the games by their acclamations and
applause.  The market was set up beyond the Alphaeus, and there traders
from all parts of the world were to be seen; Greeks, Carthaginians,
Lydians, Phrygians and shrewd Phoenicians from Palestine settled weighty
business transactions, or offered their goods to the public from tents
and booths.  But how can I possibly describe to you the surging throngs
of the populace, the echoing choruses, the smoking festal hecatombs,
the bright and variegated costumes, the sumptuousness of the equipages,
the clang of the different dialects and the joyful cries of friends
meeting again after years of separation; or the splendid appearance of
the envoys, the crowds of lookers-on and venders of small wares, the
brilliant effect produced by the masses of spectators, who filled to
overflowing the space allotted to them, the eager suspense during the
progress of the games, and the never ending shouts of joy when the
victory was decided; the solemn investiture with the olive-branch, cut
with a golden knife by the Elean boy, (whose parents must both be
living), from the sacred tree in the Altis planted so many centuries ago
by Hercules himself; or lastly, the prolonged acclamations which, like
peals of thunder, resounded in the Stadium, when Milo of Crotona
appeared, bearing on his shoulders the bronze statue of himself cast by
Dameas, and carried it through the Stadium into the Altis without once
tottering.  The weight of the metal would have crushed a bull to the
earth: but borne by Milo it seemed like a child in the arms of its
Lacedaemonian nurse.

"The highest honors (after Cimon's) were adjudged to a pair of Spartan
brothers, Lysander and Maro, the sons of Aristomachus.  Maro was victor
in the foot race, but Lysander presented himself, amidst the shouts of
the spectators, as the opponent of Milo!  Milo the invincible, victor at
Pisa, and in the Pythian and Isthmian combats.  Milo was taller and
stouter than the Spartan, who was formed like Apollo, and seemed from his
great youth scarcely to have passed from under the hands of the
schoolmaster.

"In their naked beauty, glistening with the golden oil, the youth and the
man stood opposite to one another, like a panther and a lion preparing
for the combat.  Before the onset, the young Lysander raised his hands
imploringly to the gods, crying: 'For my father, my honor, and the glory
of Sparta!'  The Crotonian looked down on the youth with a smile of
superiority; just as an epicure looks at the shell of the languste he is
preparing to open.

"And now the wrestling began.  For some time neither could succeed in
grasping the other.  The Crotonian threw almost irresistible weight into
his attempts to lay hold of his opponent, but the latter slipped through
the iron grip like a snake.  This struggle to gain a hold lasted long,
and the immense multitude watched silently, breathless from excitement.
Not a sound was to be heard but the groans of the wrestlers and the
singing of the nightingales in the grove of the Altis.  At last, the
youth succeeded, by means of the cleverest trick I ever saw, in clasping
his opponent firmly.  For a long time, Milo exerted all his strength to
shake him oft, but in vain, and the sand of the Stadium was freely
moistened by the great drops of sweat, the result of this Herculean
struggle.

"More and more intense waxed the excitement of the spectators, deeper and
deeper the silence, rarer the cries of encouragement, and louder the
groans of the wrestlers.  At last Lysander's strength gave way.
Immediately a thousand voices burst forth to cheer him on.  He roused
himself and made one last superhuman effort to throw his adversary: but
it was too late.  Milo had perceived the momentary weakness.  Taking
advantage of it, he clasped the youth in a deadly embrace; a full black
stream of blood welled from Lysander's beautiful lips, and he sank
lifeless to the earth from the wearied arms of the giant.  Democedes,
the most celebrated physician of our day, whom you Samians will have
known at the court of Polycrates, hastened to the spot, but no skill
could now avail the happy Lysander,--he was dead.

"Milo was obliged to forego the victor's wreath"; and the fame of this
youth will long continue to sound through the whole of Greece.

     [By the laws of the games the wrestler, whose adversary died, had no
     right to the prize of victory.]

I myself would rather be the dead Lysander, son of Aristomachus, than the
living Kallias growing old in inaction away from his country.  Greece,
represented by her best and bravest, carried the youth to his grave, and
his statue is to be placed in the Altis by those of Milo of Crotona and
Praxidamas of AEgina".  At length the heralds proclaimed the sentence of
the judges: 'To Sparta be awarded a victor's wreath for the dead, for the
noble Lysander hath been vanquished, not by Milo, but by Death, and he
who could go forth unconquered from a two hours' struggle with the
strongest of all Greeks, hath well deserved the olive-branch.'"

Here Kallias stopped a moment in his narrative.  During his animated
description of these events, so precious to every Greek heart, he had
forgotten his listeners, and, gazing into vacancy, had seen only the
figures of the wrestlers as they rose before his remembrance.  Now, on
looking round, he perceived, to his astonishment, that the grey-haired
man with the wooden leg, whom he had already noticed, though without
recognizing him, had hidden his face in his hands and was weeping.
Rhodopis was standing at his right hand.  Phanes at his left, and the
other guests were gazing at the Spartan, as if he had been the hero of
Kallias's tale.  In a moment the quick Athenian perceived that the aged
man must stand in some very near relation to one or other of the victors
at Olympia; but when he heard that he was Aristomachus-the father of that
glorious pair of brothers, whose wondrous forms were constantly hovering
before his eyes like visions sent down from the abodes of the gods, then
he too gazed on the sobbing old man with mingled envy and admiration, and
made no effort to restrain the tears which rushed into his own eyes,
usually so clear and keen.  In those days men wept, as well as women,
hoping to gain relief from the balm of their own tears.  In wrath, in
ecstasy of delight, in every deep inward anguish, we find the mighty
heroes weeping, while, on the other hand, the Spartan boys would submit
to be scourged at the altar of Artemis Orthia, and would bleed and even
die under the lash without uttering a moan, in order to obtain the praise
of the men.

For a time every one remained silent, out of respect to the old man's
