"My favour, if she will trust me."

"Proculejus and I will continue to strengthen her confidence.  And if we
succeed--?"

"Then, as I have said, she will have my favour--a generous abundance of
favour."

"But her future destiny?  What fate will you bestow on her and her
children?"

"Whatever the degree of her confidence deserves."

Here he hesitated, for he met Dolabella's earnest, troubled gaze, which
was blended with a shade of reproach.

Octavianus desired to retain the enthusiastic admiration of the youth,
who perhaps was destined to lofty achievements, so he continued in a
confidential tone: "To you, my young friend, I can venture to speak more
frankly.  I will gladly grant the most aspiring wishes of this
fascinating and, I repeat, very remarkable woman, but first I need her
for my triumph.  The Romans would have cause to reproach me if I deprived
them of the sight of this Queen, this peerless woman, in many respects
the first of her time.  We shall soon set out for Syria.  The Queen and
her children I shall send in three days to Rome.  If, in the triumphal
procession there, she creates the sensation I anticipate from a spectacle
so worthy of admiration, she shall learn how I reward those who oblige
me."

Dolabella had listened in silence.  When the Caesar entered the carriage,
he requested permission to remain behind.

Octavianus drove alone eastward to the camp where, in the vicinity of the
Hippodrome, men were surveying the ground on which the suburb of
Nikopolis--city of victory--was to be built to commemorate for future
generations the victory of the first Emperor over Antony and Cleopatra.
It grew, but never attained any great importance.

The noble Cornelius gazed indignantly after his sovereign's fiery steeds;
then, drawing up his stately figure to its full height, he entered the
palace with a firm step.  The act might cost him his life, but he would
do what he believed to be his duty to the noble woman who had honoured
him with her friendship.  This rare sovereign was too good to feast the
eyes of the rabble.

A few minutes later Cleopatra knew her impending ignominy.




CHAPTER XXV.

The next morning the Queen had many whispered conversations with
Charmian, and the latter with Anukis.  The day before, Archibius's
gardener had brought to his master's sister some unusually fine figs,
which grew in the old garden of Epicurus.  This fruit was also mentioned,
and Anukis went to Kanopus, and thence, in the steward's carriage, with a
basket of the very best ones to the fish-market.  There she had a great
deal to say to Pyrrhus, and the freedman went to his boat with the figs.

Shortly after the Nubian's return the Queen came back to the palace from
the mausoleum.  Her features bore an impress of resolution usually alien
to them; nay, the firmly compressed lips gave them an expression of
actual sternness.  She knew what duty required, and regarded her
approaching end as an inevitable necessity.  Death seemed to her like a
journey which she must take in order to escape the most terrible
disgrace.  Besides, life after the death of Antony was no longer the
same; it had been only a tiresome delay and waiting for the children's
sake.

The visit to the tomb had been intended, as it were, to announce her
coming to her husband.  She had remained a long time in the silent hall,
where she had garlanded the coffin with flowers, kissed it, talked to the
dead man as if he were still alive, and told him that the day had come
when what he had mentioned in his will as the warmest desire of his
heart--to rest beside her in the same tomb--would be fulfilled.  Among
the thousand forms of suffering which had assailed her, nothing had
seemed so hard to bear as to be deprived of his society and love.

Then she had gone into the garden, embraced and kissed the children, and
entreated them to remember her tenderly.  Her purpose had not been
concealed from Archibius, but Charmian had told him the menace of the
future, and he approved her decision.  By the exertion of all his innate
strength of will, he succeeded in concealing the grief which rent his
faithful heart.  She must die.  The thought of seeing her adorn the
triumphal procession of Octavianus was unbearable to him also.  Her
thanks and entreaties to be an affectionate guardian to the children were
received with an external calmness which afterwards seemed to him utterly
incomprehensible.

When she spoke of her approaching meeting with her lover, he asked
whether she had entirely abandoned the teachings of Epicurus, who
believed that death absolutely ended existence.

Cleopatra eagerly assented, saying: "Absence of pain has ceased to appear
to me the chief earthly blessing, since I have known that love does not
bring pleasure only, since I have learned that pain is the inseparable
companion of love.  I will not give it up, nor will I part from my lover.
Whoever experiences what fate has allotted to me has learned to know
other gods than those whom the master described as dwelling happily in
undisturbed repose.  Rather eternal torture in another world, united to
the man I love, than painless, joyless mere existence in a desolate,
incomprehensible, unknown region!  You will be the last to teach the
children to yearn for freedom from pain--"

"Because, like you," cried Archibius, "I have learned how great a
blessing is love, and that love is pain."

As he spoke he bent over her hand to kiss it, but she took his temples
between her hands and, bending hastily, pressed her lips on his broad
brow.

Then his self-control vanished, and, sobbing aloud, he hurried back to
the children.

Cleopatra gazed after him with a sorrowful smile, and leaning on
Charmian's arm, she entered the palace.

There she was bathed and, robed in costly mourning garments, reclined
among her cushions to take breakfast, which was usually served at this
hour.  Iras and Charmian shared it.

When dessert was carried in, the Nubian brought a basket filled with
delicious figs.  A peasant, she told Epaphroditus, who was watching the
meal, had given them to her because they were so remarkably fine.  Some
had already been snatched by the guards.

The Queen and her companions ate a little of the fruit, and Proculejus,
who had come to greet Cleopatra, was also persuaded to taste one of the
finest figs.

At the end of the meal Cleopatra wished to rest.  The Roman gentlemen and
the guards retired.  At last the women were alone, and gazed at each
other silently.

Charmian timidly lifted the upper layer of the fruit, but the Queen said
mournfully:

"The wife of Antony dragged through the streets of Rome behind the
victor's chariot, a spectacle for the populace and envious matrons!
"Then, starting up, she exclaimed: "What a thought!  Was it too great for
Octavianus, or too petty?  He who so loudly boasts his knowledge of
mankind expects this impossibility from the woman who revealed her inmost
soul to him as fully as he concealed his from her.  We will show him how
small is his comprehension of human nature, and teach him modesty."

A contemptuous smile flitted over her beautiful lips as, with rapid
movements, she flung handful after handful of figs on the table, till she
saw some thing stirring under the fruit, and with a sigh of relief
exclaimed under her breath:

"There it is!" as with hasty resolution she held out her arm towards the
asp, which hissed at her.

While gazing intently at the movements of the viper, which seemed afraid
to fulfil the dread office, she said to her attendants:

"I thank you-thank you for everything.  Be calm.  You know, Iras, it will
cause no pain.  They say it is like falling asleep."  Then she shuddered
slightly, adding: "Death is a solemn thing; yet it must be.  Why does the
serpent delay?  There, there; I will keep firm.  Ambition and love were
the moving forces of my life.  Men shall praise my memory.--I follow you,
Mark Antony!"  Charmian bent over the left arm of her royal mistress,
which hung loosely at her side, and, weeping aloud, covered it with
kisses, while Cleopatra, watching the motions of the asp still more
closely, added:

"The peace of our garden of Epicurus will begin to-day.  Whether it will
be painless, who can tell?  Yet--there I agree with  Archibius--life's
greatest joy--love--is blended with pain, as yonder branch of exquisite
roses from Dolabella, the last gift of friendship, has its sharp thorns.
I think you have both experienced this.  The twins and my little darling
--When they think of their mother and her end, will not the children--"

Here she uttered a low cry.  The asp had struck its fangs into the upper
part of her arm like an icy flash of lightning, and a few instants later
Cleopatra sank back upon her pillows lifeless.

Iras, pale but calm, pointed to her, saying "Like a sleeping child.
Bewitching even in death.  Fate itself was constrained to do her will and
fulfil the last desire of the great Queen, the victorious woman, whom no
heart resisted.  Its decree shatters the presumptuous plan of Octavianus.
The victor will show himself to the Romans without thee, thou dear one."

Sobbing violently, she bent over the inanimate form, closed the eyes, and
kissed the lips and brow.  The weeping Charmian did the same.

Then the footsteps of men were heard in the anteroom, and Iras, who was
the first to notice them, cried eagerly:

"The moment is approaching!  I am glad it is close at hand.  Does it not
seem to you also as if the very sun in the heavens was darkened?"
Charmian nodded assent, and whispered, "The poison?"

"Here!"  replied Iras calmly, holding out  a plain pin.  "One little
prick, and the deed will be done.  Look!  But no.  You once inflicted the
deepest suffering upon me.  You know--Dion, the playmate of my childhood
--It is forgiven.  But now--you will do me a kindness.  You will spare my
using the pin myself.  Will you not?  I will repay you.  If you wish, my
hand shall render you the same service."

Charmian clasped her niece to her heart, kissed her, pricked her arm
lightly, and gave her the other pin, saying:

