
It was scorchingly hot in the enclosed garden-plot, surrounded by
buildings, and open to the sun; not a human creature was in sight; the
house seemed dead.  The gaudy flag-staffs and trellis-work, and the
pillars of the verandah, which had all been newly painted in honor of his
return and were still wreathed with garlands, exhaled a smell, to him
quite sickening, of melting resin, drying varnish and faded flowers.
Though there was no breath of air the atmosphere quivered, as it seemed
from the fierce rays of the sun, which were reflected like arrows from
everything around him.  The butterflies and dragonflies appeared to Orion
to move their wings more languidly as they hovered over the plants and
flowers, the very fountain danced up more lazily and not so high as
usual: everything about him was hot, sweltering, oppressive; and the man
who had always been so independent and looked up to, who for years had
been free to career through life uncontrolled, and guarded by every good
Genius now felt trammelled, hemmed in and harassed.

In his father's cool fountain-room he could breathe more freely; but only
for a moment.  The blood faded from his cheeks, and he had to make a
strong effort to greet his father calmly and in his usual manner; for in
front of the divan where the governor commonly reclined, lay the Persian
hanging, and close by stood his mother and the Arab merchant.  Sebek, the
steward awaited his master's orders, in the background in the attitude of
humility which was torture to his old back, but in which he was never
required to remain:  Orion now signed to him to stand up:

The Arab's mild features wore a look of extreme gravity, and deep
vexation could be read in his kindly eyes.  As the young man entered he
bowed slightly; they had already met that morning.  The Mukaukas, who was
lying deathly pale with colorless lips, scarcely opened his eyes at his
son's greeting.  It might have been thought that a bier was waiting in
the next room and that the mourners had assembled here.

The piece of work was only half unrolled, but Orion at once saw the spot
whence its crowning glory was now missing--the large emerald which, as he
alone could know, was on its way to Constantinople.  His theft had been
discovered.  How fearful, how fatal might the issue be!

"Courage, courage!"  he said to himself.  "Only preserve your presence
of mind.  What profit is life with loss of honor?  Keep your eyes open;
everything depends on that, Orion!"

He succeeded in hastily collecting his thoughts, and exclaimed in a voice
which lacked little of its usual eager cheerfulness:

"How dismal you all look!  It is indeed a terrible disaster that the dog
should have handled the poor girl so roughly, and that our people should
have behaved so outrageously; but, as I told you this morning, worthy
Merchant, the guilty parties shall pay for it with their lives.  My
father, I am sure, will agree that you should deal with them according to
your pleasure, and our leech Philippus, in spite of his youth, is a
perfect Hippocrates I can assure you!  He will patch up the fine fellow--
your head-man I mean, and as to any question of compensation, my father
--well, you know he is no haggler."

"I beg you not to add insult to the injury that I have suffered under
your roof," interrupted Haschim.  "No amount of money can buy off my
wrath over the spilt blood of a friend--and Rustem was my friend--a free
and valiant youth.  As to the punishment of the guilty: on that I insist.
Blood cries for blood.  That is our creed; and though yours, to be sure,
enjoins the contrary, so far as I know you act by the same rule as we.
All honor to your physician; but it goes to my heart, and raises my gall
to see such things take place in the house of the man to whom the Khaliff
has confided the weal or woe of Egyptian Christians.  Your boasted
tolerance has led to the death of an honest though humble man in a time
of perfect peace--or at least maimed him for life.  As to your honesty,
it would seem.  .  ."

"Who dares impugn it?"  cried Orion.

"I, young man," replied the merchant with the calm dignity of age.
"I, who sold this piece of work last evening, and find it this morning
robbed of its most precious ornament."

"The great emerald has been cut from the hanging during the night."  Dame
Neforis explained.  "You yourself went with the man who carried it to the
tablinum and saw it laid there."

"And in the very cloth in which your people had wrapped it," added Orion.
"Our good old Sebek there was with me.  Who fetched away the bale this
morning; who brought it here and opened it?"

"Happily for us," said the Arab, "it was your lady mother herself, with
that man--your steward if I mistake not--and your own slaves."

"Why was it not left where it was?"  asked Orion, giving vent to the
annoyance which at this moment he really felt.

"Because I had assured your father, and with good reason, that the beauty
of this splendid work and of the gems that decorate it show to much
greater advantage by daylight and in the sunshine than under the lamps
and torches."

"And besides, your father wished to see his new purchase once more,"
Neforis broke in, "and to ask the merchant how the gems might be removed
without injury to the work itself.  So I went to the tablinum myself with
Sebek."

"But I had the key!"  cried Orion putting his hand into the breast of his
robe.

"That I had forgotten," replied his mother.  "But unfortunately we did
not need it.  The tablinum was open."

"I locked it yesterday;  you saw me do it, Sebek.  .  ."

"So I told the mistress," replied the steward.  "I perfectly recollect
hearing the snap of the strong lock."

Orion shrugged his shoulders, and his mother went on:

But the bronze doors must have been opened during the night with a false
key, or by some other means; for part of the hanging had been pulled out
of the wrapper, and when we looked closely we saw that the large emerald
had been wrenched out of the setting."

"Shameful!"  exclaimed Orion.

"Disgraceful!"  added the governor, vehemently starting up.  He had
fallen a prey to fearful unrest and horror: he thought that his Lord and
Saviour, to whom he had dedicated the precious jewel, regarded him as so
sinful and worthless that He would not accept the gift at his hands.
But perhaps it was only Satan striving to hinder him from approaching the
Most High with so noble an offering.  At any rate, human cunning had been
at work, so he said with stern resolution:

"The matter shall be enquired into, and in the name of Jesus Christ, to
whom the stone already belongs, I will never rest nor cease till the
criminal is in my hands."

"And in the name of Allah and the Prophet," added the Arab, "I will aid
thee, if I have to appeal for help to the great chief Amru, the Khaliff's
representative in this country.--A word was spoken here just now that I
cannot and will not forget.  And the tone you have chosen to adopt, young
man, seems to spring from the same fount: the old fox, you think, put a
false gem of impossible size into the hanging, and has had it stolen that
his fraud may not be detected when a jeweller examines the work by
daylight.  This is too much!  I am an honest man, Sirs, and I am fain to
add a rich one; and the man who tries to cast a stain on the character I
have borne through a long life shall learn, to his ruing, that old
Haschim has greater and more powerful friends to back him than you may
care to meet!"

As he uttered this threat the merchant's eyes glistened through tears; it
grieved him to be unjustly suspected and to be forced to express himself
so hardly to the Mukaukas for whom he felt both reverence and pity.  It
was clear from the tone of his speech that he was in fact a determined
and a powerful personage, and Orion interrupted him with the eager
enquiry: "Who has dared to think so basely of you?"

"Your own mother, I regret to say," replied the Moslem sadly, with an
oriental shrug of distress and annoyance--his shoulders up to his ears.

"Forget it, I beg of you," said the governor.  "God knows women have
softer hearts than men, and yet they more readily incline to think evil
of their fellow-creatures, and particularly of the enemies of their
faith.  On the other hand they are more sensitive to kindness.  A woman's
hair is long and her wits short, says the saw."

"You have plenty to say against us women!"  retorted Neforis.  "But scold
away--scold if it is a comfort to you!"  But she added, while she
affectionately turned her husband's pillows and gave him another of his
white pillules: "I will submit to the worst to-day for I am in the wrong.
I have already asked your pardon, worthy Haschim, and I do so again, with
all my heart."

As she spoke, she went up to the Arab and held out her hand; he took it,
but lightly, however, and quickly released it, saying:

"I do not find it hard to forgive.  But I find it impossible, here or
anywhere, to let so much as a grain of dust rest on my bright good name.
I shall follow up this affair, turning neither to the right hand nor to
the left.--And now, one question: Is the dog that guarded the tablinum a
watchful, savage beast?"

"How savage he is he unfortunately proved on the person of the poor
Persian slave; and his watchfulness is known to all the household," cried
Orion.

"But I would beg you, worthy merchant," said Neforis, "and in the name
of all present, to give us the help of your experience.  I myself--wait
a little wait: in spite of her long hair and her short wits a woman often
has a happy idea.  I, probably, was the first to come on the robber's
track.  It is clear that he must belong to the household since the dog
did not attack him.  Paula, who was so wonderfully quick in coming to the
rescue of the Persian, is of course not to be thought of.  .  ."

Here her husband interrupted her with an angry exclamation: "Leave the
girl quite out of the question wife!"

"As if I supposed her to be the thief!"  retorted Neforis indignantly,
and she shrugged her shoulders as Orion, in mild reproach, also cried:
"Mother!  consider.  .  .  ."  and the merchant asked:

"Do you mean the young girl from whom I had to take such hard words last
night?--Well, then, I will stake my whole fortune on her innocence.  That
beautiful, passionate creature is incapable of any underhand dealings."

"Passionate!"  Neforis smiled.  "Her heart is as cold and as hard as the
lost emerald; we have proved that by experience."

"Nevertheless," said Orion, "she is incapable of baseness."

"How zealous men can be for a pair of fine eyes!"  interrupted his
mother.  "But I have not the most remote suspicion of her; I have
something quite different in my mind.  A pair of man's shoes were found
lying by the wounded girl.  Did you do what my lord Orion ordered,
Sebek?"

"At once, Mistress," replied the steward, "and I have been expecting the
captain of the watch for some time; for Psamtik. . . ."

But here he was interrupted: the officer in question, who for more than
twenty years had commanded the Mukaukas' guard of honor, was shown into
the room; after answering a few preliminary enquiries he began his report
in a voice so loud that it hurt the governor, and his wife was obliged to
request the soldier to speak more gently.

The bloodhounds and terriers had been let out after being allowed to
smell at the shoes, and a couple of them had soon found their way to the
side-door where Hiram had waited for Paula.  There they paused, sniffing
about on all sides, and had then jumped up a few steps.

"And those stairs lead to Paula's room," observed Neforis with a shrug.

"But they were on a false scent," the officer eagerly added.  "The little
toads might have thrown suspicion on an innocent person.  The curs
immediately after rushed into the stables, and ran up and down like Satan
after a lost soul.  The pack had soon pulled down the boy--the son of the
freedman who came here from Damascus with the daughter of the great
Thomas--and they went quite mad in his father's room: Heaven and earth!
what a howling and barking and yelping.  They poked their noses into
every old rag, and now we knew where the hole in the wine-skin was.--
I am sorry for the man.  He stammered horribly, but as a trainer, and in
all that has to do with horses, all honor to him!--The shoes are Hiram's
as surely as my eyes are in my head; but we have not caught him yet.  He
is across the river, for a boat is missing and where it had been lying
the dogs began again.  Unless the unbelievers over there give him shelter
we are certain to have him."

"Then we know who is the criminal!"  cried Orion, with a sigh as deep as
