
'Surely it is our duty to do something for them in return,' I said; but
I was silenced with assurances that if I wished to preserve the wardship
of my child, I must conform in everything; nay, that my own liberty was
in danger.

Solivet had hinted as much, and the protection of my child was a
powerful engine; but--shall I confess it?--it galled and chafed me
terribly to feel myself taken once more into leading-strings. I, who
had for three years governed my house as a happy honoured wife, and for
three more had been a chatelaine, complimented by the old uncle, and
after his death, the sole ruler of my son's domain; I was not at all
inclined to return into tutelage, and I could not look on my mother
after these six years, as quite the same conclusive authority as
I thought her when I left her. The spirit of self-assertion and
self-justification was strong within me, and though I hope I did not
reply with ingratitude or disrespect, I would make no absolute promise
till I had heard what my brother Walwyn said of my position in its
secular aspect, and the Abbe Bonchamps in its religious point of view.
So I bade my mother good-night, and went to see how Cecile fared in her
new quarters, which, to her grief, were in a wing separated from mine by
a long corridor.

My mother had arranged everything, ruling naturally as if she were the
mistress of the house. Thus she installed me in the great room where I
had seen the old Marquis, though I would rather she had retained it,
and given me that which I had occupied when I was there with my husband.
However, I made no objection, for I felt so much vexed that I was
extremely afraid of saying something to show that I thought she ought to
remember that this was my house, and that she was my guest. I would not
for the world have uttered anything so ungenerous and unfilial; and all
I could do that night was to pray that she might not drive me to lose my
self-command, and that I might both do right and keep my child.

I was too restless and unhappy to sleep much, for I knew my feelings
were wrong, and yet I was sure I was in the right in my wish to do
good to the poor; and the sense of being bridled, and put into
leading-strings, poisoned the pleasure I had at first felt in my return
to my own family. I cannot describe the weary tumult of thought
and doubt that tossed me, till, after a brief sleep, I heard the
church-bells. I rose and dressed for early mass, taking my boy, who
always awoke betimes, leaving the house quietly, and only calling my
trusty lackey Nicolas to take me to the nearest Church, which was not
many steps off. I do not think I found peace there: there was too much
SELF in me to reach that as yet; but at any rate I found the resolution
to try to bend my will in what might be indifferent, and to own it to be
wholesome for me to learn submission once more.

As I was about to enter our court, I heard a little cough, and looking
round I saw a gentleman and lady coming towards the house. They were my
brother and sister, who had been to the daily prayers at the house of
Sir Richard Browne, the English ambassador. I was struck at my first
glance with the lightsome free look of Annora's face but it clouded ad
grew constrained in an instant when I spoke to her.

They said my mother would not be awake nor admit us for an hour or two,
and in the meantime Eustace was ready to come to my apartments, for
indeed we had hardly seen one another. Annora anxiously reminded him
that he must take his chocolate, and orders were given that this should
be served in my cabinet for us both.

There is no describing what that interview was to us. We, who had been
one throughout our childhood, but had been parted all through the change
to man and woman, now found ourselves united again, understanding one
another as no other being could do, and almost without words, entering
into full sympathy with one another. Yes, without words, for I was as
certain as if he had told me that Eustace had undergone some sorrow
deeper than even loss of health, home, and country. I felt it in the
chastened and sobered tone in which he talked to me of my cares, as if
he likewise had crossed the stream of tears that divides us from the
sunshine of our lives.

He did not think what I had attempted in Anjou foolish and
chimerical--he could look at the matter with the eyes of an English
lord of the manor, accustomed not to view the peasant as a sponge to be
squeezed for the benefit of the master, but to regard the landlord as
accountable for the welfare, bodily and spiritual, of his people. He
thought I had done right, though it might be ignorantly and imprudently
in the present state of things; but his heart had likewise burned within
him at the oppression of the peasantry, and, loyal cavalier as he was,
he declared that he should have doubted on which side to draw his sword
had things thus in England. He had striven to make my mother and Queen
Henrietta understand the meaning of what I had been doing, and he
said the complaints sent up had evidently been much exaggerated, and
envenomed by spite and distrust of me as a foreigner. He could well
enter into my grief at the desertion of my poor people, for how was it
with those at Walwyn, deprived of the family to whom they had been used
to look, with many widows and orphans made by the war, and the Church
invaded by a loud-voiced empty-headed fanatic, who had swept away all
that had been carefully preserved and honoured! Should he ever see the
old home more?

However, he took thought for my predicament. I had no choice, he said,
but to give way. To resist would only make me be treated as a suspected
person, and be relegated to a convent, out of reach of influencing my
son, whom I might bring up to be a real power for good.

Then my dear brother smiled his sweetest smile, the sweeter for the
sadness that had come into it, and kissed my fingers chivalrously, as he
said that after all he could not but be grateful to the edict that had
brought back to him the greatest delight that was left to him. 'Ah,' I
said, 'if it had only been in Anjou!'

'If it had only been in Dorset, let us say at once,' he answered.

Then came the other question whether I might not stay at home with
the children, and give myself to devotion and good works, instead of
throwing off my mourning and following my mother to all the gaieties of
the court.

'My poor mother!' said Eustace. 'You would not wish to make your example
a standing condemnation of her?'

'I cannot understand how she can find pleasure in these things,' I
cried.

'There is much in her that we find it hard to understand,' Eustace said;
'but you must remember that this is her own country, and that though she
gave it up for my father's sake, England has always been a land of exile
to her, and we cannot wonder at her being glad to return to the society
of her old friends.'

'She has Annora to be with her. Is not that enough?'

'Ah, Meg, I trusted to you to soothe poor Annora and make her more
comfortable.'

'She seems to have no intention of putting herself under my influence,'
I said, rather hurt.

'She soon will, when she finds out your English heart,' said Eustace.
'The poor child is a most unwilling exile, and is acting like our old
friends the urchins, opposing the prickles to all. But if my mother has
Annora to watch over, you also have a charge. A boy of this little man's
rank,' he said, stroking the glossy curls of Gaspard, who was leaning on
my lap, staring up in wonder at the unknown tongue spoken by his uncle,
'and so near the age of the king, will certainly be summoned to attend
at court, and if you shut yourself up, you will be unable to follow him
and guide him by your counsel.'

That was the chief of what my dear brother said to me on that morning.
I wrote it down at the moment because, though I trusted his wisdom and
goodness with all my heart, I thought his being a Protestant might bias
his view in some degree, and I wanted to know whether the Abbe thought
me bound by my plans of devotion, which happily had not been vows.

And he fully thought my brother in the right, and that it was my duty to
remain in the world, so long as my son needed me there; while, as to
any galling from coming under authority again, that was probably exactly
what my character wanted, and it would lessen the danger of dissipation.
Perhaps I might have been in more real danger in queening it at Nid de
Merle than in submitting at Paris.




CHAPTER XI. -- THE TWO QUEENS.



After all, I was put to shame by finding that I had done my poor mother
an injustice in supposing that she intended to assume the government of
the house, for no sooner was I admitted to her room than she gave me up
the keys, and indeed I believe she was not sorry to resign them, for she
had not loved housewifery in her prosperous days, and there had been a
hard struggle with absolute poverty during the last years in England.

She was delighted likewise that I was quite ready to accompany her to
thank Queen Henrietta for her intercession, and to take her advice for
the future, nor did she object for that day to my mourning costume, as
I was to appear in the character of a suppliant. When I caught Annora's
almost contemptuous eyes, I was ready to have gone in diamonds and
feathers.

However, forth we set, attended by both my brothers. Lord Walwyn indeed
held some appointment at the little court, and in due time we were
ushered into the room where Queen Henrietta was seated with a pretty
little girl playing at her feet with a dog, and a youth of about
seventeen leaning over the elbow of her couch telling her something
with great animation, while a few ladies were at work, with gentlemen
scattered among them. How sociable and friendly it looked, and how
strangely yet pleasantly the English tones fell on my ear! And I was
received most kindly too. 'Madame has brought her--our little--nay, our
great conspirator, the Firebrand of the Bocage. Come, little Firebrand,'
exclaimed the Queen, and as I knelt to kiss her hand she threw her arms
round me in an affectionate embrace, and the Prince of Wales claimed me
as an old acquaintance, saluted me, and laughed, as he welcomed me to
their court of waifs and strays, cast up one by one by the tide.

His little sister, brought by the faithful Lady Morton in the disguise
of a beggar boy, had been the last thus to arrive. A very lovely child
she was, and Prince Charles made every one laugh by taking her on his
knee and calling her Piers the beggar boy, when she pointed to her white
frock, called herself 'Pincess, pincess, not beggar boy,' and when he
persisted, went into a little rage and pulled his black curls.

My poor Queen, whom I had left in the pride and mature bloom of beauty,
was sadly changed; she looked thin and worn, and was altogether the
brown old French-woman; but she was still as lively and vivacious, and
full of arch kindness as ever, a true daughter of the Grand Monarque,
whose spirits no disasters could break. When the little one became too
noisy, she playfully ordered off both the children, as she called them,
and bade me sit down on the footstool before her couch, and tell her
what I had been doing to put intendants, cardinals and Queens themselves
into commotion. The little Lady Henrietta was carried off by one of the
attendants, but the Prince would not go; he resumed his former position,
saying that he was quite sure that Madame de Bellaise was in need of an
English counsel to plead her cause. He had grown up from a mischievous
imp of a boy to a graceful elegant-looking youth. His figure, air, and
address were charming, I never saw them equaled; but his face was as
ugly as ever, though with a droll ugliness that was more winning than
most men's beauty, lighted up as it was by the most brilliant of black
eyes and the most engaging of smiles. You remember that I am speaking
of him as he was when he had lately arrived from Jersey, before his
expedition to Scotland. He became a very different person after his
return, but he was now a simple-hearted, innocent lad, and I met him
again as an old friend and playfellow, whose sympathy was a great
satisfaction in the story I had to tell, though I was given in a
half-mocking way. My mother began by saying:

'The poor child, it is as I told your Majesty; she has only been a
little too charitable.'

'Permit me, Madame,' I said, 'I did not give half so much as most
charitable ladies.'

Then the explanation came, and the Queen shook her head and told me such
things would not do here, that my inexperience might be pardonable, but
that the only way to treat such creatures was to feed them and clothe
them for the sake of our own souls.

Here the Prince made his eyes first flash and then wink at me.

'But as to teach them or elevating them, my dear, it is as bad for them
as for ourselves. You must renounce all such chimeras, and if you had
a passion for charity there is good Father Vincent to teach you safe
methods.'

I brightened up when I heard of Father Vincent, and my mother engaged
for me that I should do all that was right, and appealed to my brother
De Solivet to assure the Queen that there had been much malignant
exaggeration about the presumption of my measures and the discontent of
other people's peasants.

Queen Henrietta was quite satisfied, and declared that she would at once
conduct me to her sister-in-law, the Queen-Regent, at the Tuileries,
since she had of course the 'petites entrees,' take her by storm as it
were, and it was exactly the right hour when the Queen would be resting
after holding council.

She called for a looking-glass, and made one of her women touch up her
dress and bring her a fan, asking whether I had ever been presented. No,
my first stay in Paris had been too short; besides, my rank did not make
it needful, as my husband was only Viscount by favour of his uncle, who
let him hold the estate.

'Then,' said the Prince, 'you little know what court is!'

'Can you make a curtsey?' asked the Queen anxiously.

I repeated the one I had lately made to her Majesty, and they all cried
out:

'Oh, oh! that was all very well at home.'

'Or here before I married,' added Queen Henrietta. 'Since Spanish
etiquette has come in, we have all been on our good behaviour.'

'Having come from a barbarous isle,' added the Prince.

The Queen therewith made the reverence which you all know, my
grand-daughters, but which seemed to me unnatural, and the Prince's face
twinkled at the incredulity he saw in mine; but at the moment a private
door was opening to give admission to a figure, not in itself very tall,
but looking twice its height from its upright, haughty bearing. There
was the Bourbon face fully marked, with a good deal of fair hair in
curls round it, and a wonderful air of complete self-complacency.

This was la grande Mademoiselle, daughter of Gaston Duke of Orleans,
and heiress through her mother of the great old Montpensier family, who
lived at the Palais Royal with her father, but was often at the Louvre.
She stood aghast, as well she might, thinking how little dignity her
aunt, the Queen of England, had to be acting as mistress of deportment
to a little homely widow. The Prince turned at once.

'There is my cousin,' said he, 'standing amazed to see how we have
caught a barbarous islander of our own, and are trying to train her to
civilization. Here--let her represent the Queen-Regent. Now, Meg--Madame
de Bellaise, I mean--imitate me while my mother presents me,' he ran
on in English, making such a grotesque reverence that nobody except
Mademoiselle could help laughing, and his mother made a feint of laying
her fan about his ears, while she pronounced him a madcap and begged her
niece to excuse him.

'For profaning the outskirts of the majesty of the Most Christian King,'
muttered the Prince, while his mother explained the matter to her niece,
adding that her son could not help availing himself of the opportunity
of paying her his homage.

Mademoiselle was pacified, and was graciously pleased to permit me to
be presented to her, also to criticize the curtsey which I had now to
perform, my good Queen being so kind in training me that I almost lost
the sense of the incongruity of such a lesson at my age and in my weeds.
In fact, with my mother and my godmother commanding me, and Eustace and
the Prince of Wales looking on, it was like a return to one's childhood.
At last I satisfied my royal instructress, and as she agreed with my
mother that my mourning befitted the occasion off we set en grande tenue
to cross the court to the Tuileries in a little procession, the Queen,
attended by my mother and Lady Morton as her ladies, and by Lord Jermyn
and Eustace as her gentlemen-in-waiting.

Mademoiselle also came, out of a sort of good-natured curiosity, but the
Prince of Wales shook his head.

'I have no mind to show Madame the value of a tabouret,' he said.
'Believe me, Meg, I may sit on such an eminence in the august presence
of my mother and my regent aunt, but if my small cousin, the Most
Christian King, should enter, I must be dethroned, and a succession of
bows must ensue before we can either of us be seated. I always fear that
I shall some day break out with the speech of King Lear's fool: 'Cry you
mercy, I took you for a joint stool.''

This passed while I, who came in the rear of the procession, was waiting
to move on, and I believe Queen Henrietta was descanting to her niece
on the blessing that her son's high spirits never failed him through all
their misfortunes.

However, in due time we reached the apartments of the Queen-Regent, the
way lined with guards, servants, and splendid gentlemen, who all either
presented arms or bowed as our English Queen passed along, with an easy,
frank majesty about her that bespoke her a daughter of the place, and
at home there. But what gave me the most courage was that as the door
of her bedroom was opened to admit Queen Henrietta, Mademoiselle, my
mother, and myself, I saw a black cassock, and a face I knew again as
that of the Holy Father Vincent de Paul, who had so much impressed me,
and had first given me comfort.

It was a magnificent room, and more magnificent bed, and sitting up
among her lace and cambric pillows and coverlets was Queen Anne of
Austria, in a rich white lace cap and bedgown that set off her smooth,
fair, plump beauty, and exquisite hands and arms. Ladies stood round the
bed. I did not then see who any of them were, for this was the crisis
of my fate, and my heart beat and my eyes swam with anxiety. Queen
Henrietta made her low reverence, as of course we did, and some words of
sisterly greeting ensued, after which the English queen said:

'My sister, I have made you this early visit to bring you my little
suppliant. Allow me to present to your Majesty, Madame la Vicomtesse de
Bellaise, who is sincerely sorry to have offended you.'

(That was true; I was sincerely sorry that what I had done could
offend.)

My kind godmother went on to that I had offended only out of ignorance
of the rights of seigneurs, and from my charitable impulses, of which
she knew that her Majesty would approve, glancing significantly
towards Father Vincent as she did so. She was sure, she added, that Her
Majesty's tenderness of heart must sympathise with a young widow, whose
husband had fallen in the service of the King, and who had an only son
to bring up. I felt the Regent's beautiful blue eyes scanning me, but it
was not unkindly, though she said:

'How is this, Madame? I hear that you have taught the peasants to
complain of the seigniorial rights, and to expect to have the corvee and
all other dues remitted.'

I made answer that in truth all I had done was to remit those claims
here and there which had seemed to me to press hard upon the tenants of
our own estate; and I think the Regent was moved by a look from Father
Vincent to demand an example, so I mentioned that I would not have the
poor forced to carry our crops on the only fine day in a wet season.

'Ah, bah!' said Queen Anne; 'that was an over-refinement, Madame. It
does not hurt those creatures to get wet.'

She really had not the least notion that a wetting ruined their crops;
and when I would have answered, my godmother and mother made me a sign
to hold my tongue, while Queen Henrietta spoke:

'Your Majesty sees how it is; my godchild has the enthusiasm of charity,
and you, my sister, with your surroundings, will not blame her if she
has carried it a little into excess.'

'Your Majesty will pardon me for asking if there can be excess?' said
Father Vincent. 'I think I recognize this lady. Did I not meet Madame at
the little village of St. Felix?'

'Oh yes, my father,' I replied. 'I have ever since blessed the day, when
you comforted me and gave me the key of life.'

'There, father,' said the Regent, 'it is your doing; it is you that have
made her a firebrand. You must henceforth take the responsibility.'

'I ask no better of your Majesty,' said the holy man.

'Ah! your Majesty, I can ask no better,' I said fervently; and I knelt
to kiss the beautiful hand which Anne of Austria extended to me in token
of pardon.

'It is understood, then,' said she, in a gracious though languid way,
as if weary of the subject, 'that your Majesty undertakes that Madame
becomes more prudent in the future, and puts her benevolence under the
rule of our good father, who will never let her go beyond what is wise
in the bounds of a young woman's discretion.'

It might be hard to believe that I had been indiscreet, but the
grand stately self-possession of that Spanish lady, and the evident
gratification of my mother and Queen Henrietta, quite overpowered me
into feeling like a criminal received to mercy, and I returned thanks
with all the genuine humility they could desire; after which the regent
overpowered my mother with wonder at her graciousness by inquiring a day
for him to kiss the King's hand in the Tuileries gardens.

By this time her breakfast was being brought in (it was about one
o'clock), and Queen Henrietta carried us off without waiting for the
ceremony of the breakfast, or of the toilet, which began with the
little King presenting his mother with her chemise, with a tender kiss.
Mademoiselle remained, and so did Father Vincent, whom the regent was
wont to consult at her breakfast, both on matters of charity and of
Church patronage.

My mother was delighted that I had come off so well; she only regretted
my being put under Father Vincent, who would, she feared, render me too
devout.

The next afternoon, which was Sunday, we went, all except my brother and
sister, who had what my mother called Puritan notions as to Sunday, to
see royalty walk in the Tuileries gardens. The Queen was there, slowly
pacing along with one of her sons on each side, and beautiful boys they
were, in their rich dresses of blue velvet and white satin, with rich
lace garnishings, their long fair hair on their shoulders, and their
plumed hats less often on their heads than in their hands, as they
gracefully acknowledged the homage that met them at each step. Perhaps I
thought my Gaspard quite as beautiful, but every widow's only son is THE
king of her heart; and we had so trained the boy that he did his part
to perfection kneeling and kissing the hand which King Louis extended
to him. Yet it had--to me who was fresh to such scenes--something of the
air of a little comedy, to see such gestures of respect between the two
children so splendidly dressed, and neither of them yet nine years old.
