the women. At a side door, reclined on a couch, two guards of the
haram, with their naked swords grasped in their hands, and features
fiendishly contorted between sleep and dissolution, seemed to menace
death to any who should venture to approach. This threat deterred not
Artavan de Hautlieu. He approached the entrance, when the doors, like
those of the great entrance to the Castle, made themselves instantly
accessible to him. A guard-room of the same effeminate soldiers
received him, nor could the strictest examination have discovered to
him whether it was sleep or death which arrested the eyes that seemed
to look upon and prohibit his advance. Unheeding the presence of these
ghastly sentinels, Artavan pressed forward into an inner apartment,
where female slaves of the most distinguished beauty were visible in
the attitude of those who had already assumed their dress for the
night. There was much in this scene which might have arrested so young
a pilgrim as Artavan of Hautlieu; but his heart was fixed on achieving
the freedom of the beautiful Princess, nor did he suffer himself to be
withdrawn from that object by any inferior consideration. He passed on,
therefore, to a little ivory door, which, after a moment's pause, as if
in maidenly hesitation, gave way like the rest, and yielded access to
the sleeping apartment of the Princess herself. A soft light,
resembling that of evening, penetrated into a chamber where every thing
seemed contrived to exalt the luxury of slumber. The heaps of cushions,
which formed a stately bed, seemed rather to be touched than impressed
by the form of a nymph of fifteen, the renowned Princess of Zulichium."

"Without interrupting you, good father," said the Countess Brenhilda,
"it seems to me that we can comprehend the picture of a woman asleep
without much dilating upon it, and that such a subject is little
recommended either by our age or by yours."

"Pardon me, noble lady," answered Agelastes, "the most approved part of
my story has ever been this passage, and while I now suppress it in
obedience to your command, bear notice, I pray you, that I sacrifice
the most beautiful part of the tale."

"Brenhilda," added the Count, "I am surprised you think of interrupting
a story which has hitherto proceeded with so much fire; the telling of
a few words more or less will surely have a much greater influence
upon, the sense of the narrative, than such an addition can possibly
possess over our sentiments of action."

"As you will," said his lady, throwing herself carelessly back upon the
seat; "but methinks the worthy father protracts this discourse, till it
becomes of a nature more trifling than interesting."

"Brenhilda," said the Count, "this is the first time I have remarked in
you a woman's weakness."

"I may as well say, Count Robert, that it is the first time," answered
Brenhilda, "that you have shown to me the inconstancy of your sex."

"Gods and goddesses," said the philosopher, "was ever known a quarrel
more absurdly founded! The Countess is jealous of one whom her husband
probably never will see, nor is there any prospect that the Princess of
Zulichium will be hereafter better known, to the modern world, than if
the curtain hung before her tomb."

"Proceed," said Count Robert of Paris; "if Sir Artavan of Hautlieu has
not accomplished the enfranchisement of the Princess of Zulichium, I
make a vow to our Lady of the Broken Lances,"--

"Remember," said his lady interfering, "that you are already under a
vow to free the Sepulchre of God; and to that, methinks, all lighter
engagements might give place."

"Well, lady--well," said Count Robert, but half satisfied with this
interference, "I will not engage myself, you may be assured, on any
adventure which may claim precedence of the enterprise of the Holy
Sepulchre, to which we are all bound."

"Alas!" said Agelastes, "the distance of Zulichium from the speediest
route to the sepulchre is so small that"--

"Worthy father," said the Countess, "we will, if it pleases you, hear
your tale to an end, and then determine what we will do. We Norman
ladies, descendants of the old Germans, claim a voice with our lords in
the council which precedes the battle; nor has our assistance in the
conflict been deemed altogether useless."

The tone in which this was spoken conveyed an awkward innuendo to the
philosopher, who began to foresee that the guidance of the Norman
knight would be more difficult than he had foreseen, while his consort
remained by his side. He took up, therefore, his oratory on somewhat a
lower key than before, and avoided those warm descriptions which had
given such offence to the Countess Brenhilda.

"Sir Artavan de Hautlieu, says the story, considered in what way he
should accost the sleeping damsel, when it occurred to him in what
manner the charm would be most likely to be reversed. I am in your
judgment, fair lady, if he judged wrong in resolving that the method of
his address should be a kiss upon the lips." The colour of Brenhilda
was somewhat heightened, but she did not deem the observation worthy of
notice.

"Never had so innocent an action," continued the philosopher, "an
effect more horrible. The delightful light of a summer evening was
instantly changed into a strange lurid hue, which, infected with
sulphur, seemed to breathe suffocation through the apartment. The rich
hangings, and splendid furniture of the chamber, the very walls
themselves, were changed into huge stones tossed together at random,
like the inside of a wild beast's den, nor was the den without an
inhabitant. The beautiful and innocent lips to which Artavan de
Hautlieu had approached his own, were now changed into the hideous and
bizarre form, and bestial aspect of a fiery dragon. A moment she
hovered upon the wing, and it is said, had Sir Artavan found courage to
repeat his salute three times, he would then have remained master of
all the wealth, and of the disenchanted princess. But the opportunity
was lost, and the dragon, or the creature who seemed such, sailed out
at a side window upon its broad pennons, uttering loud wails of
disappointment."

Here ended the story of Agelastes. "The Princess," he said, "is still
supposed to abide her doom in the Island of Zulichium, and several
knights have undertaken the adventure; but I know not whether it was
the fear of saluting the sleeping maiden, or that of approaching the
dragon into which she was transformed, but so it is, the spell remains
unachieved. I know the way, and if you say the word, you may be
to-morrow on the road to the castle of enchantment."

The Countess heard this proposal with the deepest anxiety, for she knew
that she might, by opposition, determine her husband irrevocably upon
following out the enterprise. She stood therefore with a timid and
bashful look, strange in a person whose bearing was generally so
dauntless, and prudently left it to the uninfluenced mind of Count
Robert to form the resolution which should best please him.

"Brenhilda," he said, taking her hand, "fame and honour are dear to thy
husband as ever they were to knight who buckled a brand upon his side.
Thou hast done, perhaps, I may say, for me, what I might in vain have
looked for from ladies of thy condition; and therefore thou mayst well
expect a casting voice in such points of deliberation.--Why dost thou
wander by the side of a foreign and unhealthy shore, instead of the
banks of the lovely Seine?--Why dost thou wear a dress unusual to thy
sex?--Why dost thou seek death, and think it little in comparison of
shame?--Why? but that the Count of Paris may have a bride worthy of
him.--Dost thou think that this affection is thrown away? No, by the
saints! Thy knight repays it as he best ought, and sacrifices to thee
every thought which thy affection may less than entirely approve."

Poor Brenhilda, confused as she was by the various emotions with which
she was agitated, now in vain endeavoured to maintain the heroic
deportment which her character as an Amazon required from her. She
attempted to assume the proud and lofty look which was properly her
own, but failing in the effort, she threw herself into the Count's
arms, hung round his neck, and wept like a, village maiden, whose true
love is pressed for the wars. Her husband, a little ashamed, while he
was much moved by this burst of affection in one to whose character it
seemed an unusual attribute, was, at the same time, pleased and proud
that he could have awakened an affection so genuine and so gentle in a
soul so high-spirited and so unbending.

"Not thus," he said, "my Brenhilda! I would not have it thus, either
for thine own sake or for mine. Do not let this wise old man suppose
that thy heart is made of the malleable stuff which forms that of other
maidens; and apologize to him, as may well become thee, for having
prevented my undertaking the adventure of Zulichium, which he
recommends."

It was not easy for Brenhilda to recover herself, after having afforded
so notable an instance how nature can vindicate her rights, with
whatever rigour she may have been disciplined and tyrannized over. With
a look of ineffable affection, she disjoined herself from her husband,
still keeping hold of his hand, and turning to the old man with a
countenance in which the half-effaced tears were succeeded by smiles of
pleasure and of modesty, she spoke to Agelastes as she would to a
person whom she respected, and towards whom she had some offence to
atone. "Father," she said, respectfully, "be not angry with me that I
should have been an obstacle to one of the best knights that ever
spurred steed, undertaking the enterprise of thine enchanted Princess;
but the truth is, that in our land, where knighthood and religion agree
in permitting only one lady love, and one lady wife, we do not quite so
willingly see our husbands run into danger--especially of that kind
where lonely ladies are the parties relieved--and--and kisses are the
ransom paid. I have as much confidence in my Robert's fidelity, as a
lady can have in a loving knight, but still"--

"Lovely lady," said Agelastes, who, notwithstanding his highly
artificial character, could not help being moved by the simple and
sincere affection of the handsome young pair, "you have done no evil.
The state of the Princess is no worse than it was, and there cannot be
a doubt that the knight fated to relieve her, will appear at the
destined period." The Countess smiled sadly, and shook her head. "You
do not know," she said, "how powerful is the aid of which I have
unhappily deprived this unfortunate lady, by a jealousy which I now
feel to have been alike paltry and unworthy; and, such is my regret,
that I could find in my heart to retract my opposition to Count
Robert's undertaking this adventure." She looked at her husband with
some anxiety, as one that had made an offer she would not willingly see
accepted, and did not recover her courage until he said, decidedly,
"Brenhilda, that may not be."

"And why, then, may not Brenhilda herself take the adventure,"
continued the Countess, "since she can neither fear the charms of the
Princess nor the terrors of the dragon?"

"Lady," said Agelastes, "the Princess must be awakened by the kiss of
love, and not by that of friendship."

"A sufficient reason," said the Countess, smiling, "why a lady may not
wish her lord to go forth upon an adventure of which the conditions are
so regulated."

"Noble minstrel, or herald, or by whatever name this country calls
you," said Count Robert, "accept a small remuneration for an hour
pleasantly spent, though spent, unhappily, in vain. I should make some
apology for the meanness of my offering, but French knights, you may
have occasion to know, are more full of fame than of wealth."

"Not for that, noble sir," replied Agelastes, "would I refuse your
munificence; a besant from your worthy hand, or that of your
noble-minded lady, were centupled in its value, by the eminence of the
persons from whom it came. I would hang it round my neck by a string of
pearls, and when I came into the presence of knights and of ladies, I
would proclaim that this addition to my achievement of armorial
distinction, was bestowed by the renowned Count Robert of Paris, and
his unequalled lady." The Knight and the Countess looked on each other,
and the lady, taking from her finger a ring of pure gold, prayed the
old man to accept of it, as a mark of her esteem and her husband's.
"With one other condition," said the philosopher, "which I trust you
will not find altogether unsatisfactory. I have, on the way to the city
by the most pleasant road, a small kiosk, or hermitage, where I
sometimes receive my friends, who, I venture to say, are among the most
respectable personages of this empire. Two or three of these will
probably honour my residence today, and partake of the provision it
affords. Could I add to these the company of the noble Count and
Countess of Paris, I should deem my poor habitation honoured for ever."

"How say you, my noble wife?" said the Count. "The company of a
minstrel befits the highest birth, honours the highest rank, and adds
to the greatest achievements; and the invitation does us too much
credit to be rejected."

"It grows somewhat late," said the Countess: "but we came not here to
shun a sinking sun or a darkening sky, and I feel it my duty, as well
as my satisfaction, to place at the command of the good father every
pleasure which it is in my power to offer to him, for having been the
means of your neglecting his advice."

"The path is so short," said Agelastes, "that we had better keep our
present mode of travelling, if the lady should not want the assistance
of horses."

"No horses on my account," said the Lady Brenhilda. "My waiting-woman,
Agatha, has what necessaries I may require; and, for the rest, no
knight ever travelled so little embarrassed with baggage as my husband."

Agelastes, therefore, led the way through the deepening wood, which was
freshened by the cooler breath of evening, and his guests accompanied
him.




CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.

     Without, a ruin, broken, tangled, cumbrous,
     Within, it was a little paradise,
     Where Taste had made her dwelling. Statuary,
     First-born of human art, moulded her images,
     And bade men. mark and worship.
                                    ANONYMOUS.


The Count of Paris and his lady attended the old man, whose advanced
age, his excellence in the use of the French language, which he spoke
to admiration,--above all, his skill in applying it to poetical and
romantic subjects, which was essential to what was then termed history
and belles lettres,--drew from the noble hearers a degree of applause,
which, as Agelastes had seldom been vain enough to consider as his due,
so, on the part of the Knight of Paris and his lady, had it been but
rarely conferred. They had walked for some time by a path which
sometimes seemed to hide itself among the woods that came down to the
shore of the Propontis, sometimes emerged from concealment, and skirted
the open margin of the strait, while, at every turn, it seemed guided
by the desire to select a choice and contrast of beauty. Variety of
scenes and manners enlivened, from their novelty, the landscape to the
pilgrims. By the sea-shore, nymphs were seen dancing, and shepherds
piping, or beating the tambourine to their steps, as represented in
some groups of ancient statuary. The very faces had a singular
resemblance to the antique. If old, their long robes, their attitudes,
and magnificent heads, presented the ideas which distinguish prophets
and saints; while, on the other hand, the features of the young
recalled the expressive countenances of the heroes of antiquity, and
the charms of those lovely females by whom their deeds were inspired.
But the race of the Greeks was no longer to be seen, even in its native
country, unmixed, or in absolute purity; on the contrary, they saw
groups of persons with features which argued a different descent.

In a retiring bosom of the shore, which was traversed by the path, the
rocks, receding from the beach, rounded off a spacious portion of level
sand, and, in some degree, enclosed it. A party of heathen Scythians
whom they beheld, presented the deformed features of the demons they
were said to worship--flat noses with expanded nostrils, which seemed
to admit the sight to their very brain; faces which extended rather in
breadth than length, with strange unintellectual eyes placed in the
extremity; figures short and dwarfish, yet garnished with legs and arms
of astonishing sinewy strength, disproportioned to their bodies. As the
travellers passed, the savages held a species of tournament, as the
Count termed it. In this they exercised themselves by darting at each
other long reeds, or canes, balanced for the purpose, which, in this
rude sport, they threw with such force, as not unfrequently to strike
each other from their steeds, and otherwise to cause serious damage.
Some of the combatants being, for the time, out of the play, devoured
with greedy looks the beauty of the Countess, and eyed her in such a
manner, that she said to Count Robert,--"I have never known fear, my
husband, nor is it for me to acknowledge it now; but if disgust be an
ingredient of it, these misformed brutes are qualified to inspire it."
"What, ho, Sir Knight!" exclaimed one of the infidels, "your wife, or
your lady love, has committed a fault against the privileges of the
Imperial Scythians, and not small will be the penalty she has incurred.
You may go your way as fast as you will out of this place, which is,
for the present; our hippodrome, or atmeidan, call it which you will,
as you prize the Roman or the Saracen language; but for your wife, if
the sacrament has united you, believe my word, that she parts not so
soon or so easy."

"Scoundrel heathen," said the Christian Knight, "dost thou hold that
language to a Peer of France?"

Agelastes here interposed, and using the sounding language of a Grecian
courtier, reminded the Scythians, (mercenary soldiers, as they seemed,
of the empire,) that all violence against the European pilgrims was, by
the Imperial orders, strictly prohibited under pain of death.

"I know better," said the exulting savage, shaking one or two javelins
with broad steel heads, and wings of the eagle's feather, which last
were dabbled in blood. "Ask the wings of my javelin," he said, "in
whose heart's blood these feathers have been dyed. They shall reply to
you, that if Alexius Comnenus be the friend of the European pilgrims,
it is only while he looks upon them; and we are too exemplary soldiers
to serve our Emperor otherwise than he wishes to be served."

"Peace, Toxartis," said the philosopher, "thou beliest thine Emperor."

"Peace thou!" said Toxartis, "or I will do a deed that misbecomes a
soldier, and rid the world of a prating old man."

So saying, he put forth his hand to take hold of the Countess's veil.
With the readiness which frequent use had given to the warlike lady,
she withdrew herself from the heathen's grasp, and with her trenchant
sword dealt him so sufficient a blow, that Toxartis lay lifeless on the
plain. The Count leapt on the fallen leader's steed, and crying his
war-cry, "Son of Charlemagne, to the rescue!" he rode amid the rout of
heathen cavaliers with a battle-axe, which he found at the saddlebow of
the deceased chieftain, and wielding it with remorseless dexterity, he
soon slew or wounded, or compelled to flight, the objects of his
resentment; nor was there any of them who abode an instant to support
the boast which they had made. "The despicable churls!" said the
Countess to Agelastes; "it irks me that a drop of such coward blood
should stain the hands of a noble knight. They call their exercise a
tournament, although in their whole exertions every blow is aimed
behind the back, and not one has the courage to throw his windlestraw
while he perceives that of another pointed against himself."

"Such is their custom," said Agelastes; "not perhaps so much from
cowardice as from habit, in exercising before his Imperial Majesty. I
have seen that Toxartis literally turn his back upon the mark when he
bent his bow in full career, and when in the act of galloping the
farthest from his object, he pierced it through the very centre with a
broad arrow."

"A force of such soldiers," said Count Robert, who had now rejoined his
friends, "could not, methinks, be very formidable, where there was but
an ounce of genuine courage in the assailants."

"Mean time, let us pass on to my kiosk," said Agelastes, "lest the
fugitives find friends to encourage them in thoughts of revenge."

"Such friends," said Count Robert, "methinks the insolent heathens
ought not to find in any land which calls itself Christian; and if I
survive the conquest of the Holy Sepulchre, I shall make it my first
business to enquire by what right your Emperor retains in his service a
band of Paynim and unmannerly cut-throats, who dare offer injury upon
the highway, which ought to be sacred to the peace of God and the king,
and to noble ladies and inoffensive pilgrims. It is one of a list of
many questions which, my vow accomplished, I will not fail to put to
him; ay, and expecting an answer, as they say, prompt and categorical."

"You shall gain no answer from me though," said Agelastes to himself.
"Your demands, Sir Knight, are over-peremptory, and imposed under too
rigid conditions, to be replied to by those who can evade them." He
changed the conversation, accordingly, with easy dexterity; and they
had not proceeded much farther, before they reached a spot, the natural
beauties of which called forth the admiration of his foreign
companions. A copious brook, gushing out of the woodland, descended to
the sea with no small noise and tumult; and, as if disdaining a quieter
course, which it might have gained by a little circuit to the right, it
took the readiest road to the ocean, plunging over the face of a lofty
and barren precipice which overhung the sea-shore, and from thence led
its little tribute, with as much noise as if it had the stream of a
full river to boast of, to the waters of the Hellespont.

The rock, we have said, was bare, unless in so far as it was clothed
with the foaming waters of the cataract; but the banks on each side
were covered with plane-trees, walnut-trees, cypresses, and other kinds
of large timber proper to the East. The fall of water, always agreeable
in a warm climate, and generally produced by artificial means, was here
natural, and had been chosen, something like the Sibyl's temple at
Tivoli, for the seat of a goddess to whom the invention of Polytheism
had assigned a sovereignty over the department around. The shrine was
small and circular, like many of the lesser temples of the rustic
deities, and enclosed by the wall of an outer court. After its
desecration, it had probably been converted into a luxurious summer
retreat by Agelastes, or some Epicurean philosopher. As the building,
itself of a light, airy, and fantastic character, was dimly seen
through the branches and foliage on the edge of the rock, so the mode
by which it was accessible was not at first apparent amongst the mist
of the cascade. A pathway, a good deal hidden, by vegetation, ascended
by a gentle acclivity, and prolonged by the architect by means of a few
broad and easy marble steps, making part of the original approach,
conducted the passenger to a small, but exquisitely lovely velvet lawn,
in front of the turret or temple we have described, the back part of
which building overhung the cataract.




CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.

     The parties met. The wily, wordy Greek,
     Weighing each word, and canvassing each syllable;
     Evading, arguing, equivocating.
     And the stern Frank came with his two-hand sword,
     Watching to see which way the balance sways,
     That he may throw it in, and turn the scales.
                                        PALESTINE.


At a signal made by Agelastes, the door of this romantic retreat was
opened by Diogenes, the negro slave, to whom our readers have been
already introduced; nor did it escape the wily old man, that the Count
and his lady testified some wonder at his form and lineaments, being
the first African perhaps whom they had ever seen so closely. The
philosopher lost not the opportunity of making an impression on their
minds, by a display of the superiority of his knowledge.

"This poor being," he observed, "is of the race of Ham, the undutiful
son of Noah; for his transgressions against his parent, he was banished
to the sands of Africa, and was condemned to be the father of a race
doomed to be the slaves of the issue of his more dutiful brethren."

The knight and his lady gazed on the wonderful appearance before them,
and did not, it may be believed, think of doubting the information
which was so much of a piece with their prejudices, while their opinion
of their host was greatly augmented by the supposed extent of his
knowledge.

"It gives pleasure to a man of humanity," continued Agelastes, "when,
in old age, or sickness, we must employ the services of others, which
is at other times scarce lawful, to choose his assistants out of a race
of beings, hewers of wood and drawers of water--from their birth
upwards destined to slavery; and to whom, therefore, by employing them
as slaves, we render no injury, but carry into effect, in a slight
degree, the intentions of the Great Being who made us all."

"Are there many of a race," said the Countess, "so singularly unhappy
in their destination? I have hitherto thought the stories of black men
as idle as those which minstrels tell of fairies and ghosts."

"Do not believe so," said the philosopher; "the race is numerous as the
sands of the sea, neither are they altogether unhappy in discharging
the duties which their fate has allotted them. Those who are of worse
character suffer even in this life the penance due to their guilt; they
become the slaves of the cruel and tyrannical, are beaten, starved, and
mutilated. To those whose moral characters are better, better masters
are provided, who share with their slaves, as with their children, food
and raiment, and the other good things which they themselves enjoy. To
some, Heaven allots the favour of kings and of conquerors, and to a
few, but those the chief favourites of the species, hath been assigned
a place in the mansions of philosophy, where, by availing themselves of
the lights which their masters can afford, they gain a prospect into
that world which is the residence of true happiness."

"Methinks I understand you," replied the Countess, "and if so, I ought
rather to envy our sable friend here than to pity him, for having been
allotted in the partition of his kind to the possession of his present
master, from whom, doubtless, he has acquired the desirable knowledge
which you mention."

"He learns, at least," said Agelastes, modestly, "what I can teach,
and, above all, to be contented with his situation.--Diogenes, my good
child," said he, changing his address to the slave, "thou seest I have
company--What does the poor hermit's larder afford, with which he may
regale his honoured guests?"

Hitherto they had advanced no farther than a sort of outer room, or
hall of entrance, fitted up with no more expense than might have suited
one who desired at some outlay, and more taste, to avail himself of the
ancient building for a sequestered and private retirement. The chairs
and couches were covered with Eastern wove mats, and were of the
simplest and most primitive form. But on touching a spring, an interior
apartment was displayed, which had considerable pretension to splendour
and magnificence. The furniture and hangings of this apartment were of
straw-coloured silk, wrought on the looms of Persia, and crossed with
embroidery, which produced a rich, yet simple effect. The ceiling was
carved in Arabesque, and the four corners of the apartment were formed
into recesses for statuary, which had been produced in a better age of
the art than that which existed at the period of our story. In one
nook, a shepherd seemed to withdraw himself, as if ashamed to produce
his scantily-covered person, while he was willing to afford the
audience the music of the reed which he held in his hand. Three
damsels, resembling the Graces in the beautiful proportions of their
limbs, and the slender clothing which they wore, lurked in different
attitudes, each in her own niche, and seemed but to await the first
sound of the music, to bound forth from thence and join in the frolic
dance. The subject was beautiful, yet somewhat light, to ornament the
study of such a sage as Agelastes represented himself to be.

He seemed to be sensible that this might attract observation.--"These
figures," he said, "executed at the period of the highest excellence of
Grecian art, were considered of old as the choral nymphs assembled to
adore the goddess of the place, waiting but the music to join in the
worship of the temple. And, in truth, the wisest may be interested in
seeing how near to animation the genius of these wonderful men could
bring the inflexible marble. Allow but for the absence of the divine
afflatus, or breath of animation, and an unenlightened heathen might
suppose the miracle of Prometheus was about to be realized. But we,"
said he, looking upwards, "are taught to form a better judgment between
what man can do and the productions of the Deity."

Some subjects of natural history were painted on the walls, and the
philosopher fixed the attention of his guests upon the half-reasoning
elephant, of which he mentioned several anecdotes, which they listened
to with great eagerness.

A distant strain was here heard, as if of music in the woods,
penetrating by fits through the hoarse roar of the cascade, which, as
it sunk immediately below the windows, filled the apartment with its
deep voice.

"Apparently," said Agelastes, "the friends whom I expected are
approaching, and bring with them the means of enchanting another sense.
It is well they do so, since wisdom tells us that we best honour the
Deity by enjoying the gifts he has provided us."

These words called the attention of the philosopher's Frankish guests
to the preparations exhibited in this tasteful saloon. These were made
for an entertainment in the manner of the ancient Romans, and couches,
which were laid beside a table ready decked, announced that the male
guests, at least, were to assist at the banquet in the usual recumbent
posture of the ancients; while seats, placed among the couches, seemed
to say that females were expected, who would observe the Grecian
customs, in eating seated. The preparations for good cheer were such
as, though limited in extent, could scarce be excelled in quality,
either by the splendid dishes which decked Trimalchio's banquet of
former days, or the lighter delicacies of Grecian cookery, or the
succulent and highly-spiced messes indulged in by the nations of the
East, to whichever they happened to give the preference; and it was
with an air of some vanity that Agelastes asked his guests to share a
poor pilgrim's meal.

"We care little for dainties," said the Count; "nor does our present
course of life as pilgrims, bound by a vow, allow us much choice on
such subjects. Whatever is food for soldiers, suffices the Countess and
myself; for, with our will, we would at every hour be ready for battle,
and the less time we use in preparing for the field, it is even so much
the better. Sit then, Brenhilda, since the good man will have it so,
and let us lose no time in refreshment, lest we waste that which should
be otherwise employed." "A moment's forgiveness," said Agelastes,
"until the arrival of my other friends, whose music you may now hear is
close at hand, and who will not long, I may safely promise, divide you
from your meal."

"For that," said the Count, "there is no haste; and since you seem to
account it a part of civil manners, Brenhilda and I can with ease
postpone our repast, unless you will permit us, what I own would be
more pleasing, to take a morsel of bread and a cup of water presently;
and, thus refreshed, to leave the space clear for your more curious and
more familiar guests."

"The saints above forbid!" said Agelastes; "guests so honoured never
before pressed these cushions, nor could do so, if the sacred family of
the imperial Alexius himself even now stood at the gate."

He had hardly uttered these words, when the full-blown peal of a
trumpet, louder in a tenfold degree than the strains of music they had
before heard, was now sounded in the front of the temple, piercing
through the murmur of the waterfall, as a Damascus blade penetrates the
armour, and assailing the ears of the hearers, as the sword pierces the
flesh of him who wears the harness.

"You seem surprised or alarmed, father," said Count Robert. "Is there
danger near, and do you distrust our protection?"

"No," said Agelastes, "that would give me confidence in any extremity;
but these sounds excite awe, not fear. They tell me that some of the
Imperial family are about to be my guests. Yet fear nothing, my noble
friends--they, whose look is life, are ready to shower their favours
with profusion upon strangers so worthy of honour as they will see
here. Meantime, my brow must touch my threshold, in order duly to
welcome them." So saying, he hurried to the outer door of the building.

"Each land has its customs," said the Count, as he followed his host,
with his wife hanging on his arm; "but, Brenhilda, as they are so
various, it is little wonder that they appear unseemly to each other.
Here, however, in deference to my entertainer, I stoop my crest, in the
manner which seems to be required." So saying, he followed Agelastes
into the anteroom, where a new scene awaited them.




CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.


Agelastes gained his threshold before Count Robert of Paris and his
lady. He had, therefore, time to make his prostrations before a huge
animal, then unknown to the western world, but now universally
distinguished as the elephant. On its back was a pavilion or palanquin,
within which were enclosed the august persons of the Empress Irene, and
her daughter Anna Comnena. Nicephorus Briennius attended the Princesses
in the command of a gallant body of light horse, whose splendid armour
would have given more pleasure to the crusader, if it had possessed
less an air of useless wealth and effeminate magnificence. But the
effect which it produced in its appearance was as brilliant as could
well be conceived. The officers alone of this _corps de garde_ followed
Nicephorus to the platform, prostrated themselves while the ladies of
the Imperial house descended, and rose up again under a cloud of waving
plumes and flashing lances, when they stood secure upon the platform in
front of the building. Here the somewhat aged, but commanding form of
the Empress, and the still juvenile beauties of the fair historian,
were seen to great advantage. In the front of a deep back-ground of
spears and waving crests, stood the sounder of the sacred trumpet,
conspicuous by his size and the richness of his apparel; he kept his
post on a rock above the stone staircase, and, by an occasional note of
his instrument, intimated to the squadrons beneath that they should
stay their progress, and attend the motions of the Empress and the wife
of the Caesar.

The fair form of the Countess Brenhilda, and the fantastic appearance
of her half masculine garb, attracted the attention of the ladies of
Alexius' family, but was too extraordinary to command their admiration.
Agelastes became sensible there was a necessity that he should
introduce his guests to each other, if he desired they should meet on
satisfactory terms. "May I speak," he said, "and live? The armed
strangers whom you find now with me are worthy companions of those
myriads, whom zeal for the suffering inhabitants of Palestine has
brought from the western extremity of Europe, at once to enjoy the
countenance of Alexius Comnenus, and to aid him, since it pleases him
to accept their assistance, in expelling the Paynims from the bounds of
the sacred empire, and garrison those regions in their stead, as
vassals of his Imperial Majesty."

"We are pleased," said the Empress, "worthy Agelastes, that you should
be kind to those who are disposed to be so reverent to the Emperor. And
We are rather disposed to talk with them ourselves, that our daughter
(whom Apollo hath gifted with the choice talent of recording what she
sees) may become acquainted with one of those female warriors of the
West, of whom we have heard so much by common fame, and yet know so
little with certainty."

"Madam," said the Count, "I can but rudely express to you what I have
to find fault with in the explanation which this old man hath given of
our purpose in coming hither. Certain it is, we neither owe Alexius
fealty, nor had we the purpose of paying him any, when we took the vow
upon ourselves which brought us against Asia. We came, because we
understood that the Holy Land had been torn from the Greek Emperor by
the Pagans, Saracens, Turks, and other infidels, from whom we are come
to win it back. The wisest and most prudent among us have judged it
necessary to acknowledge the Emperor's authority, since there was no
such safe way of passing to the discharge of our vow, as that of
acknowledging fealty to him, as the best mode of preventing quarrels
among Christian States. We, though independent of any earthly king, do
not pretend to be greater men than they, and therefore have
condescended to pay the same homage."

The Empress coloured several times with indignation in the course of
this speech, which, in more passages than one, was at variance with
those imperial maxims of the Grecian court, which held its dignity so
high, and plainly intimated a tone of opinion which was depreciating to
the Emperor's power. But the Empress Irene had received instructions
from her imperial spouse to beware how she gave, or even took, any
ground of quarrel with the crusaders, who, though coming in the
appearance of subjects, were, nevertheless, too punctilious and ready
to take fire, to render them safe discussers of delicate differences.
She made a graceful reverence accordingly, as if she had scarce
understood what the Count of Paris had explained so bluntly.

At this moment the appearance of the principal persons on either hand
attracted, in a wonderful degree, the attention of the other party, and
there seemed to exist among them a general desire of further
acquaintance, and, at the same time, a manifest difficulty in
expressing such a wish.

Agelastes--to begin with the master of the house--had risen from the
ground indeed, but without venturing to assume an upright posture; he
remained before the Imperial ladies with his body and head still bent,
his hand interposed between his eyes and their faces, like a man that
would shade his eyesight from the level sun, and awaited in silence the
commands of those to whom he seemed to think it disrespectful to
propose the slightest action, save by testifying in general, that his
house and his slaves were at their unlimited command. The Countess of
Paris, on the other hand, and her warlike husband, were the peculiar
objects of curiosity to Irene, and her accomplished daughter, Anna
Comnena; and it occurred to both these Imperial ladies, that they had
never seen finer specimens of human strength and beauty; but by a
natural instinct, they preferred the manly bearing of the husband to
that of the wife, which seemed to her own sex rather too haughty and
too masculine to be altogether pleasing.

Count Robert and his lady had also their own object of attention in the
newly arrived group, and, to speak truth, it was nothing else than the
peculiarities of the monstrous animal which they now saw, for the first
time, employed as a beast of burden in the service of the fair Irene
and her daughter. The dignity and splendour of the elder Princess, the
grace and vivacity of the younger, were alike lost in Brenhilda's
earnest inquiries into the history of the elephant, and the use which
it made of its trunk, tusks, and huge ears, upon different occasions.

Another person, who took a less direct opportunity to gaze on Brenhilda
with a deep degree of interest, was the Caesar, Nicephorus. This Prince
kept his eye as steadily upon the Frankish Countess as he could well
do, without attracting the attention, and exciting perhaps the
suspicions, of his wife and mother-in-law; he therefore endeavoured to
restore speech to an interview which would have been awkward without
it. "It is possible," he said, "beautiful Countess, that this being
your first visit to the Queen, of the world, you have never hitherto
seen the singularly curious animal called the elephant."

"Pardon me," said the Countess, "I have been treated by this learned
gentleman to a sight, and some account of that wonderful creature."

By all who heard this observation, the Lady Brenhilda was supposed to
have made a satirical thrust at the philosopher himself, who, in the
imperial court, usually went by the name of the elephant.

"No one could describe the beast more accurately than Agelastes," said
the Princess, with a smile of intelligence, which went round her
attendants.

"He knows its docility, its sensibility, and its fidelity," said the
philosopher, in a subdued tone.

"True, good Agelastes," said the Princess; "we should not criticise the
animal which kneels to take us up.--Come, lady of a foreign land," she
continued, turning to the Frank Count, and especially his
Countess--"and you her gallant lord! When you return to your native
country, you shall say you have seen the imperial family partake of
their food, and in so far acknowledge themselves to be of the same clay
with other mortals, sharing their poorest wants, and relieving them in
the same manner."

"That, gentle lady, I can well believe," said Count Robert; "my
curiosity would be more indulged by seeing this strange animal at his
food."

"You will see the elephant more conveniently at his mess within doors,"
answered the Princess, looking at Agelastes.

"Lady," said Brenhilda, "I would not willingly refuse an invitation
given in courtesy, but the sun has waxed low unnoticed, and we must
return to the city."

"Be not afraid," said the fair historian; "you shall have the advantage
of our Imperial escort to protect you in your return."

"Fear?---afraid?--escort?--protect?--These are words I know not. Know,
lady, that my husband, the noble Count of Paris, is my sufficient
escort; and even were he not with me, Brenhilda de Aspramonte fears
nothing, and can defend herself."

"Fair daughter," said Agelastes, "if I may be permitted to speak, you
mistake the gracious intentions of the Princess, who expresses herself
as to a lady of her own land. What she desires is to learn from you
some of the most marked habits and manners of the Franks, of which you
are so beautiful an example; and in return for such information the
illustrious Princess would be glad to procure your entrance to those
spacious collections, where animals from all corners of the habitable
world have been assembled at the command of our Emperor Alexius, as if
to satisfy the wisdom of those sages to whom all creation is known,
from the deer so small in size that it is exceeded by an ordinary rat,
to that huge and singular inhabitant of Africa that can browse on the
tops of trees that are forty feet high, while the length of its
hind-legs does not exceed the half of that wondrous height."

"It is enough," said the Countess, with some eagerness; but Agelastes
had got a point of discussion after his own mind.

"There is also," he said, "that huge lizard, which, resembling in shape
the harmless inhabitant of the moors of other countries, is in Egypt a
monster thirty feet in length, clothed in impenetrable scales, and
moaning over his prey when he catches it, with the hope and purpose of
drawing others within his danger, by mimicking the lamentations of
humanity."

"Say no more, father!" exclaimed the lady. "My Robert, we will go--will
we not, where such objects are to be seen?"

"There is also," said Agelastes, who saw that he would gain his point
by addressing himself to the curiosity of the strangers, "the huge
animal, wearing on its back an invulnerable vestment, having on its
nose a horn, and sometimes two, the folds of whose hide are of the most
immense thickness, and which never knight was able to wound."

"We will go, Robert--will we not?" reiterated the Countess.

"Ay," replied the Count, "and teach, these Easterns how to judge of a
knight's sword, by a single blow of my trusty Tranchefer."

"And who knows," said Brenhilda, "since this is a land of enchantment,
but what some person, who is languishing in a foreign shape, may have
their enchantment unexpectedly dissolved by a stroke of the good
weapon?"

"Say no more, father!" exclaimed the Count. "We will attend this
Princess, since such she is, were her whole escort bent to oppose our
passage, instead of being by her command to be our guard. For know, all
who hear me, thus much of the nature of the Franks, that when you tell
us of danger and difficulties, you give us the same desire to travel
the road where they lie, as other men have in seeking either pleasure
or profit in the paths in which such are to be found."

As the Count pronounced these words, he struck his hand upon his
Tranchefer, as an illustration of the manner in which he purposed upon
occasion to make good his way. The courtly circle startled somewhat at
the clash of steel, and the fiery look of the chivalrous Count Robert.
The Empress indulged her alarm by retreating into the inner apartment
of the pavilion.

With a grace, which was rarely deigned to any but those in close
alliance with the Imperial family, Anna Comnena took the arm of the
noble Count. "I see," she said, "that the Imperial Mother has honoured
the house of the learned Agelastes, by leading the way; therefore, to
teach you Grecian breeding must fall to my share." Saying this she
conducted him to the inner apartment.

"Fear not for your wife," she said, as she noticed the Frank look
round; "our husband, like ourselves, has pleasure in showing attention
to the stranger, and will lead the Countess to our board. It is not the
custom of the Imperial family to eat in company with strangers; but we
thank Heaven for having instructed us in that civility, which can know
no degradation in dispensing with ordinary rules to do honour to
strangers of such merit as yours. I know it will be my mother's
request, that you will take your places without ceremony; and also,
although the grace be somewhat particular, I am sure that it will have
my Imperial father's approbation.

"Be it as your ladyship lists," said Count Robert. "There are few men
to whom I would yield place at the board, if they had not gone before
me in the battle-field. To a lady, especially so fair a one, I
willingly yield my place, and bend my knee, whenever I have the good
hap to meet her."

The Princess Anna, instead of feeling herself awkward in the discharge
of the extraordinary, and, as she might have thought it, degrading
office of ushering a barbarian chief to the banquet, felt, on the
contrary, flattered, at having bent to her purpose a heart so obstinate
as that of Count Robert, and elated, perhaps, with a certain degree of
satisfied pride while under his momentary protection.

The Empress Irene had already seated herself at the head of the table.
She looked with some astonishment, when her daughter and son-in-law,
taking their seats at her right and left hand, invited the Count and
Countess of Paris, the former to recline, the latter to sit at the
board, in the places next to themselves; but she had received the
strictest orders from her husband to be deferential in every respect to
the strangers, and did not think it right, therefore, to interpose any
ceremonious scruples.

The Countess took her seat, as indicated, beside the Caesar; and the
Count, instead of reclining in the mode of the Grecian men, also seated
himself in the European fashion by the Princess.

"I will not lie prostrate," said he, laughing, "except in consideration
of a blow weighty enough to compel me to do so; nor then either, if I
am able to start up and return it."

The service of the table then began, and, to say truth, it appeared to
be an important part of the business of the day. The officers who
attended to perform their several duties of deckers of the table,
sewers of the banquet, removers and tasters to the Imperial family,
thronged into the banqueting room, and seemed to vie with each other in
calling upon Agelastes for spices, condiments, sauces, and wines of
various kinds, the variety and multiplicity of their demands being
apparently devised _ex preposito_, for stirring the patience of the
philosopher. But Agelastes, who had anticipated most of their requests,
however unusual, supplied them completely, or in the greatest part, by
the ready agency of his active slave Diogenes, to whom, at the same
time, he contrived to transfer all blame for the absence of such
articles as he was unable to provide.

"Be Homer my witness, the accomplished Virgil, and the curious felicity
of Horace, that, trifling and unworthy as this banquet was, my note of
directions to this thrice unhappy slave gave the instructions to
procure every ingredient necessary to convey to each dish its proper
gusto.--Ill-omened carrion that thou art, wherefore placedst thou the
pickled cucumber so far apart from the boar's head? and why are these
superb congers unprovided with a requisite quantity of fennel? The
divorce betwixt the shell-fish and the Chian wine, in a presence like
this, is worthy of the divorce of thine own soul from thy body; or, to
say the least, of a lifelong residence in the Pistrinum." While thus
the philosopher proceeded with threats, curses, and menaces against his
slave, the stranger might have an opportunity of comparing the little
torrent of his domestic eloquence, which the manners of the times did
not consider as ill-bred, with the louder and deeper share of adulation
towards his guests. They mingled like the oil with the vinegar and
pickles which Diogenes mixed for the sauce. Thus the Count and Countess
had an opportunity to estimate the happiness and the felicity reserved
for those slaves, whom the Omnipotent Jupiter, in the plenitude of
compassion for their state, and in guerdon of their good morals, had
dedicated to the service of a philosopher. The share they themselves
took in the banquet, was finished with a degree of speed which gave
surprise not only to their host, but also to the Imperial guests.

The Count helped himself carelessly out of a dish which stood near him,
and partaking of a draught of wine, without enquiring whether it was of
the vintage which the Greeks held it matter of conscience to mingle
with that species of food, he declared himself satisfied; nor could the
obliging entreaties of his neighbour, Anna Comnena, induce him to
partake of other messes represented as being either delicacies or
curiosities. His spouse ate still more moderately of the food which
seemed most simply cooked, and stood nearest her at the board, and
partook of a cup of crystal water, which she slightly tinged with wine,
at the persevering entreaty of the Caesar. They then relinquished the
farther business of the banquet, and leaning back upon their seats,
occupied themselves in watching the liberal credit done to the feast by
the rest of the guests present.

A modern synod of gourmands would hardly have equalled the Imperial
family of Greece seated, at a philosophical banquet, whether in the
critical knowledge displayed of the science of eating in all its
branches, or in the practical cost and patience with which they
exercised it. The ladies, indeed, did not eat much of any one dish, but
they tasted of almost all that were presented to them, and their name
was Legion. Yet, after a short time, in Homeric phrase, the rage of
thirst and hunger was assuaged, or, more probably, the Princess Anna
Comnena was tired of being an object of some inattention to the guest
who sat next her, and who, joining his high military character to his
very handsome presence, was a person by whom few ladies would willingly
be neglected. There is no new guise, says our father Chaucer, but what
resembles an old one; and the address of Anna Comnena to the Frankish
Count might resemble that of a modern lady of fashion, in her attempts
to engage in conversation the _exquisite_, who sits by her side in an
apparently absent fit. "We have piped unto you," said the Princess,
"and you have not danced! We have sung to you the jovial chorus of
_Evoe, evoe,_ and you will neither worship Comus nor Bacchus! Are we
then to judge you a follower of the Muses, in whose service, as well as
in that of Phoebus, we ourselves pretend to be enlisted?"
