also attend to the education of his own family. The Governor's wife
has been accredited with "labouring diligently for the improvement of
the young women of Plymouth and to have been eminently worthy of her
high position." [Footnote: The Pilgrim Republic; John A. Goodwin,
p. 460.] She was the sole executrix of her husband's estate of
L1005,--a proof of her ability.

Sometimes her cheerfulness must have been taxed to comfort her
husband, as old age came upon him and he fell into the gloomy mood
reflected in such lines as these: [Footnote: New England Memorial;
Morton.]

    "In fears and wants, through weal and woe,
    A pilgrim passed I to and fro;
    Oft left of them whom I did trust,
    How vain it is to rest in dust!
    A man of sorrows I have been,
    And many changes I have seen,
    Wars, wants, peace, plenty I have known,
    And some advanc'd, others thrown down."

When Mistress Alice Bradford died she was "mourned, though aged" by
many. To her memory, Nathaniel Morton, her nephew, wrote some lines
which were more biographic than poetical, recalling her early life as
an exile with her father from England for the truth's sake, her first
marriage:

    "To one whose grace and virtue did surpasse,
    I mean good Edward Southworth whoe not long
    Continued in this world the saints amonge."

With extravagant words he extols the name of Bradford,--"fresh in
memory Which smeles with odoriferous fragrancye." This elegist records
also that, after her second widowhood, she lived a

    "life of holynes and faith,
    In reading of God's word and contemplation
    Which healped her to assurance of salvation."

This is not a very lively, graphic description of the woman most
honored, perhaps, of all the pioneer women of Plymouth, but we may
add, by imagination, a few sure traits of human kindliness and
grace. She was typical of those women who came in _The Mayflower_
and her sister ships. Although she escaped the tragic struggles and
illness of that first winter, yet she revealed the same qualities of
courage, good sense, fidelity and vision which were the watchwords of
that group of women in Plymouth colony. Yes,--they had vision to see
their part in the sincere purpose to establish a new standard of
liberty in state and church, to serve God and mankind with all their
integrity and resources.

As the leaders among the men were self-sacrificing and honorable in
their dealings with their financiers, with the Indians and with each
other, so the women were faithful and true in their homes and communal
life. They took scarcely any part in the civic administration, for
such responsibility did not come into the lives of seventeenth century
women. They were actively interested in the educational and religious
life of the colony. Their moral standards were high and inflexible;
they extolled, and practised, the virtues of thrift and industry. It
may be well for women in America today, who were querulous at the
restrictions upon sugar and electric lights, to consider the good
sense, and good cheer, with which these women of Plymouth Colony
directed their thrifty households.

We would not assume that they were free from the whims and foibles of
womankind,--and sometimes of man-kind,--of all ages. They were,
doubtless, contradictory and impulsive at times; they could scold and
they could gossip. We believe that they laughed sometimes, in the
midst of dire want and anxiety, and we know that they prayed with
sincerity and trust. They bore children gladly and they trained them
"in the fear and admonition of the Lord." They were the progenitors of
thousands of fine men and women in all parts of America today who
honor the _women_ as well as the _men_ of the old Plymouth
Colony,--the women who faithfully performed, without any serious
discontent,

          "that whole sweet round
    Of littles that large life compound."




INDEX TO PERSONS MENTIONED IN THE TEXT

     Alden, Augustus E.
       Elizabeth
       John
       Captain John
       Priscilla
       Ruth
       Sarah
       Timothy
     Allerton, Bartholomew
       Isaac
       Mary Norton
       Mary
       Remember
     Armstrong, Gregory
     Austin, Jane G.

     Bartlett, W. H.
     Bass, Ruth Alden
     Beckeet, Mary
     Billington, Francis
       Helen
       John
       John, Jr.
     Bowman, George Ernest
     Bradford, Alice
       Dorothy May
       John
       Mary
       Joseph
       Gov. William
       William, Jr.
     Brewster, Fear
       Jonathan
       Love
       Mary
       Patience
       William, Elder
       Wrestling
     Brown, Lydia Howland
       Peter

     Carpenter, Juliana
       Mary
       Priscilla
     Carter, Robert
     Carver, Catherine
       Gov. John
     Chandler, Isabella Chilton
       Roger
     Chilton, Ingle
       Isabella
       Isaac
     Chilton, James
       Jane
       Mary
       Mrs. James
       Nicolas
     Converse, Sarah
     Cooke, Francis
       Hester
       Jacob
       John
       Sarah
     Cooper, Humility
     Crakston, John
     Cromwell
     Cushman, Robert
       Thomas

     Davis, W. T.
     De La Noye, Philip
     De Rassieres
     Dean, Stephen
     Dexter, Henry M.
       Morton
     Doane, Deacon John
     Dotey, Edward

     Earle, Alice Morse
     Eaton, Francis
       Sarah
     Eliot, Charles W.

     Ford, Widow Martha
     Fuller, Ann
       Bridget
       Edward
       Mercy
       Samuel, Dr.
       Samuel
       William Hyslop

     Goodman, John
     Goodwin, John A.

     Heald, Giles
     Hicks, Robert
       Mrs. Robert
     Hobomok
     Hopkins, Caleb
       Constance, or Constanta
       Damaris
     Hopkins, Elizabeth
       Giles
       Oceanus
       Ruth
       Stephen
     Howland, Elizabeth Tilley
       Lydia (Brown)
       John
     Huiginn, E. V. J.

     Jenny, John
     Jeppson, William
       William
     Jones, Christopher, Capt.
       Thomas, Capt.

     Latham, William
     Lister, Edward
     Longfellow, Henry W.
     Lord, Arthur, VI

     Martin, Mrs. Christopher
     Masefield, John
     Massasoit
     Minter, Desire
       John
       Thomas
       William
     More, Ellen
       Richard
     Morton, George
       Juliana Carpenter
