delight. Even Paul Hubbard's cynical lips were wreathed with a smile of
the keenest satisfaction, and he threw upon Perez one of the few glances
of genuine admiration which men of his sardonic type ever have to spare
for anybody.

For a few moments Woodbridge hesitated, uncertain what to do. To remain
standing there, was impossible, with this crowd of his former vassals on
the broad grin at his discomfiture. To retire was to confess defeat.
The question was settled, however, when one of his official associates,
unable longer to endure the din of the drum, desperately clapped both
hands over his ears. At this the crowd began to guffaw uproariously, and
seeing that it was high time to see about saving what little dignity he
still retained, Woodbridge led the way into the tavern, whither he was
incontinently followed by his compeers.

Instantly, at a gesture from Perez, the drum ceased, and his voice
sounded strangely clear in the sudden and throbbing silence, as he
directed little Pete to head the column, and gave the order to march.
With a cheer, and a tread that shook the ground, the men set out. Perez
remained standing before the tavern, till the last man had passed, by
way of guarding against any new move by the selectmen, and then mounting
his horse, rode along the column.

They were about half a mile out of Stockbridge, when Abner, accompanied
by Paul Hubbard, approached Perez, and remarked:

"The fellers all on em says, ez haow ye'll hev tew be cap'n o' this ere
kumpny. Thar's no use o' shilly-shallyin the business, we've got tew hev
somebody ez kin speak up tew the silk stockins. Hain't that so, Paul?"

Hubbard nodded, but did not speak. It was gall and wormwood to his
jealous and ambitious spirit, to concede the leadership to another, but
his good sense forced him to recognize the necessity of so doing in the
present case.

"Abner," replied Perez, "you know I only want to get Reub out. That's
why I interfered when the plan looked like falling through. I don't want
to be captain, man, I'd no notion of that."

"Nuther had I," said Abner, "till ye tackled the Squire, an then I see
quick ez a flash that ye'd got ter be, an so'd all the other fellers. We
sh'd a kerflummuxed sure's taxes, ef ye hadn't done jess what ye did. An
naow, ye've got tew be cap'n, whether or no."

"Well," said Perez, "If I can do anything for you, I will. We're all
in the same boat, I suppose. But if I'm captain, you two must be
lieutenants."

"Yes, we're a gonter be," replied Abner. "Ye kin depend on us in a
scrimmage, but ye muss sass the silk stockins."

Meanwhile the men, as they marched along the road in some semblance of
military order, were eagerly discussing the recent passage between the
dreaded Squire and their new champion. Their feeling about Perez seemed
to be a certain odd mingling of respect, with an exultant sense of
proprietorship in him as a representative of their own class, a
farmer's son who had made himself as fine a gentleman as any of the silk
stockings, and could face down the Squire himself.

"Did ye see haow Squire looked at Perez wen Pete begun tew drum?"
observed Peleg. "I reckoned he wuz a gonter lay hans ontew him."

"Ef he had, by jimmeny, I b'leeve Cap'n would a hit him a crack ez would
a knocked him inter the middle o' nex week," said Meshech.

"Oh, gosh, I ony wisht he hed," cried Obadiah, quite carried away at
the wild thought of the mighty Squire rolling on the grass with a bloody
nose.

"I allers hearn ez them Hamlin boys hed good blood intew em," observed
a farmer. "Mrs. Hamlin's a Hawley, one o' them air River Gods, ez they
calls em daown Hampshire way. Her folks wuz riled wen she tuk up with
Elnathan, I hearn."




CHAPTER EIGHTH

GREAT GOINGS ON AT BARRINGTON


As the company from Stockbridge surmounted the crest of a hill, about
half way to Barrington, they saw a girl in a blue tunic, a brown rush
hat, and a short gown, of the usual butternut dye, trudging on in the
same direction, some distance ahead. As she looked back, in evident
amazement at the column of men marching after her, Perez thought that
he recognized the face, and on coming up with her, she proved to be, in
fact, no other than Prudence Fennell, the little lass who had called at
the house Sunday evening to inquire about her father down at the jail,
and whose piteous grief at the report Perez was obliged to give, had
determined Abner and him to attempt the rescue of George, as well as
Reub, at whatever additional risk.

Far enough were they then from dreaming that two days later would find
them leading a battalion of armed men, by broad daylight along the high
road, to free the captives by open force. As readily would they then
have counted on an earthquake to open the prison doors, as on this
sudden uprising of the people in their strength.

As the men came up, Prudence stopped to let them pass by, her fresh,
pretty face expressive of considerable dismay. As she shrunk closely
up to the rail fence that lined the highway, she looked with timid
recognition up at Perez, as if to claim his protection.

"Where are you going?" he asked kindly, stopping his horse.

"I'm going to see father," she said with a tremulous lip.

"Poor little lassie, were you going to walk all the way?"

"It is nothing," she said, "I could not wait, you know. He might die,"
and her bosom heaved with a sob that would fain break forth.

Perez threw himself from his horse.

"We are all going to the jail," he said. "You shall come with us, and
ride upon my horse. Men, she shall lead us."

The men, whose discipline was not as yet very rigid, had halted and
crowded around to listen to the dialogue, and received this proposition
with a cheer. Prudence would far rather had them go on, and leave her to
make her own way, but she was quite too much scared to resist as Perez
lifted her upon his saddle. He shortened one of the stirrups, to support
her foot, and then the column took up its march under the new captain,
Perez walking by her side and leading the horse.

Had he arranged this stroke beforehand, he could not have hit on a more
effective device for toning up the morals of the men. Those in whose
minds the old misgivings as to their course had succeeded the sudden
inspiration of Little Pete's drum, now felt that the child riding ahead
lent a new and sacred sanction to their cause. They all knew her story,
and to their eyes she seemed, at this moment, an embodiment of the
spirit of suffering and outraged humanity, which had nerved them for
this day's work. A more fitting emblem, a more inspiring standard, could
not have been borne before them. But it must not be supposed that even
this prevented, now and then, a conscience-stricken individual from
stopping to drink at some brook crossing the road, until the column had
passed the next bend in the road, and then slinking home cross-lots,
taking an early opportunity after arriving to pass the store, so as to
be seen and noted as not among the rioters. But whatever was lost in
this way, if the defection of such material can be called a loss, was
more than made up by the recruits which swelled the ranks from the
farmhouses along the road. And so, by the time they entered Muddy Brook,
a settlement just outside of Great Barrington, through which the road
from Stockbridge then passed, they numbered full one hundred and fifty.

Muddy Brook was chiefly inhabited by a poor and rather low class of
people, who, either from actual misery or mere riotous inclination,
might naturally be expected to join in any movement against constituted
authority. But instead of gaining any accession of forces here, the
Stockbridge party found the place almost deserted. Even the small boys,
and the dogs were gone, and apparently a large part of the able-bodied
women as well.

"What be all the folks?" called out Abner to a woman who stood with a
baby in arms at an open door.

"Over tew Barrington seein the fun. Thar be great dewins," she replied.

This news imparted valor to the most faint-hearted, for it was now
apparent that this was not a movement in which Stockbridge was alone
engaged, not a mere local revolt, but a general, popular uprising, whose
extent would be its justification. And yet, prepared as they thus were,
to find a goodly number of sympathizers already on the ground, it was
with mingled exultation and astonishment that, on topping the high hill
which separates Muddy Brook from Great Barrington, and gaining a view of
the latter place, they beheld the streets packed, and the green in front
of the court house fairly black with people.

There was a general outburst of surprise and satisfaction.

"By gosh, it looks like gineral trainin, or'n ordination."

"Looks kinder 'z if a good many fellers b'sides us hed business with the
jestices this mornin."

"I'd no idee courts wuz so pop'lar."

"They ain't stocks nuff in Berkshire fer all the fellers as is out
tidday, that's one sure thing, by gol."

"No, by Jock, nor Saddleback mounting ain't big nuff pillory to hold
em, nuther," were some of the ejaculations which at once expressed the
delight and astonishment of the men, and at the same time betrayed the
nature of their previous misgivings, as to the possible consequences of
this day's doings. Estimates of the number of the crowd in Barrington,
which were freely offered, ranged all the way from two thousand to ten
thousand, but Perez, practiced in such calculations, placed the number
at about eight or nine hundred men, half as many women and boys. What
gave him the liveliest satisfaction was the absence of any military
force, not indeed that he would have hesitated to fight if he could not
have otherwise forced access to the jail, but he had contemplated the
possibility of such a bloody collision between the people and militia,
with much concern.

"There'll be no fighting to-day, boys," he said, turning to the men,
"you'd better let off your muskets, so there may be no accidents. Fire
in the air," and thus with a ringing salvo, that echoed and reechoed
among the hills and was answered with acclamations from the multitude
in the village, the Stockbridge battalion, with the girl riding at its
head, entered Great Barrington, and breaking ranks, mingled with the
crowd.

"Bully, we be jess in time to see the fun," cried Obadiah delightedly,
as the courthouse bell rang out, thereby announcing that the justices
had left their lodgings to proceed to the courthouse and open court.

"I declar for't," exclaimed Jabez, "I wonder ef they be gonter try tew
hole court 'n spite o' all that crowd. Thar they be sure's rates."

And, indeed, as he spoke, the door of the residence of Justice Dwight
opened, and High Sheriff Israel Dickinson, followed by Justice Dwight
and the three other justices of the quorum, issued therefrom, and took
up their march directly toward the courthouse, seemingly oblivious of
the surging mass of a thousand men, which barred their way.

The sheriff advanced with a goose step, carrying his wand of office, and
the justices strode in Indian file behind him. They were dressed in fine
black suits, with black silk hose, silver buckles on their shoes, fine
white ruffled shirts, and ponderous cocked hats upon their heavily
powdered wigs. Their chests were well thrown out, their chins were
held in air, their lips were judicially pursed, and their eyes were
contemplatively fixed on vacancy, as if they had never for a moment
admitted the possibility that any impediment might be offered to their
progress. It must be admitted that their bearing worthily represented
the prestige of ancient authority and moral majesty of law. Nor did
the mob fail to render the tribute of an involuntary admiration to this
imposing and apparently invincible advance. It had evidently been taken
for granted that the mere assemblying and riotous attitude of so great
a multitude, bristling with muskets and bludgeons, would suffice to
prevent the justices from making any attempt to hold court. It was
with a certain awe, and a silence interrupted only by murmurs of
astonishment, that the people now awaited their approach. Perhaps had
the throng been less dense, it might have justified the serene and
haughty confidence of the justices, by opening a path for them. But
however disposed the first ranks might have been to give way, they could
not by reason of the pressure from behind, and on every side.

Still the sheriff continued to advance, with as much apparent confidence
of opening a way as if his wand were the veritable rod wherewith Moses
parted the Red Sea, until he almost trod on the toes of the shrinking
first rank. But there he was fain to pause. Moral force cannot penetrate
a purely physical obstacle.

And when the sheriff stopped, the justices marching behind him also
stopped. Not indeed that their honors so far forgot their dignity as to
appear to take direct cognizance of the vulgar and irregular impediment
before them. It was the sheriff's business to clear the way for them.
And although Justice Dwight's face was purple with indignation, he, as
well as his associates, continued to look away into vacancy, suffering
not their eyes to catch any of the glances of the people before them.

"Make way! Make way for the honorable justices of the Court of Common
Pleas of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts!" cried the sheriff, in loud,
imperative tones.

A dead silence of several moments followed, in which the rattling of a
farmer's cart, far down the street, as it brought in a belated load of
insurgents from Sheffield, was distinctly audible. Then somebody in the
back part of the crowd, impressed with a certain ludicrousness in
the situation, tittered. Somebody else tittered, then a number, and
presently a hoarse haw haw of derision, growing momentarily louder, and
soon after mingled with yells, hoots and catcalls, burst forth from a
thousand throats. The prestige of the honorable justices of the Court of
Common Pleas, was gone.

A moment still they hesitated. Then the sheriff turned and said
something to them in a low voice, and they forthwith faced about and
deliberately marched back toward their lodgings. In this retrograde
movement the sheriff acted as rear guard, and he had not gone above a
dozen steps, before a rotten egg burst on one shoulder of his fine new
coat, and as he wheeled around an apple took him in the stomach, and at
the same moment the cocked hat of Justice Goodrich of Pittsfield,
was knocked off with a stone. His honor did not apparently think it
expedient to stop just then to pick it up, and Obadiah Weeks, leaping
forward, made it a prey, and instantly elevated it on a pole, amid
roars of derisive laughter. The retreat of the justices had indeed so
emboldened the more ruffianly and irresponsible element of the crowd,
many of whom were drunk, that it was just as well for the bodily safety
of their honors that the distance to their lodgings was no greater. As
it was, stones were flying fast, and the mob was close on the heels of
the sheriff when the house was gained, and as he attempted to shut the
door after him, there was a rush of men, bent on entering with him. He
knocked down the first, but would have been instantly overpowered
and trampled on, had not Perez Hamlin, followed by Abner, Peleg, Abe
Konkapot and half a dozen other Stockbridge men, shouldered their way
through the crowd, and come to his relief. Where then had Perez been,
meantime?




CHAPTER NINTH

JUDGE DWIGHT'S SIGNATURE


As soon as the Stockbridge battalion had arrived on the green at Great
Barrington, and broken ranks, Perez had directed Abner to pass the word
to all who had friends in the jail, and presently a party of forty or
fifty men was following him, as he led the way toward that building,
accompanied by Prudence, who had not dismounted. The rest of them could
attend to the stopping of the court. His concern was with the rescue of
his brother. But he had not traversed over half the distance when the
cry arose:

"They're stoning the judges!"

Thus recalled to his responsibilities as leader of at least a part of
the mob, he had turned, and followed by a dozen men, had hurried back to
the rescue, arriving in the nick of time. Standing in the open door of
the house to which the justices had retired, the rescued sheriff just
behind him in the hall, he called out:

"Stand back! Stand back! What more do you want, men? The court is
stopped."

But the people murmured. The Great Barrington men did not know Perez,
and were not ready to accept his dictation.

"We've stopped court to-day, sartin," said one, "but wot's to hender
they're holden of it to-morrer, or ez soon's we be gone, an hevin every
one on us in jail?"

"What do you want, then?" asked Perez.

"We want some sartainty baout it."

"They've got tew 'gree not ter hold no more courts till the laws be
changed," were replies that seemed to voice the sentiments of the crowd.

"Leave it to me, and I'll get you what you want," said Perez, and he
went down the corridor to the kitchen at the back of the house, where
the sheriff had told him he would find the justices. Although the room
had been apparently chosen because it was the farthest removed from
the public, the mob had already found out their retreat, and a nose
was flattened against each pane of the windows. Tall men peered in over
short men's shoulders, and cudgels were displayed in a way not at all
reassuring to the inmates.

Their honors by no means wore the unruffled and remotely superior aspect
of a few minutes before. It must be frankly confessed, as regards the
honorable Justices Goodrich of Pittsfield, Barker of Cheshire, and
Whiting of Great Barrington, that they looked decidedly scared, as in
fact, they had some right to be. It might have been supposed, indeed,
that the valor of the entire quorum had gone into its fourth member,
Justice Elijah Dwight, who, at the moment Perez entered the room,
was being withheld by the combined strength of his agonized wife and
daughter from sallying forth with a rusty Queen's arm to defend his
mansion. His wig was disarranged with the struggle, and the powder
shaken from it streaked a countenance, scholarly enough in repose no
doubt, but just now purple with the three-fold wrath of one outraged in
the combined characters of householder, host, and magistrate.

"Your honors," said Perez, "the people will not be satisfied without
your written promise to hold no more courts till their grievances are
redressed. I will do what I can to protect you, but my power is slight."

"Who is this fellow who speaks for the rabble?" demanded Dwight.

"My name is Hamlin."

"You are a disgrace to the uniform you wear. Do you know you have
incurred the penalties of high treason?" exclaimed the justice.

"This is not the first time I have incurred those penalties in behalf
of my oppressed countrymen, as that same uniform shows," retorted the
other. "But it is not now a question of the penalties I have incurred,
but how are you to escape the wrath of the people," he continued
sharply.

"I shall live to see you hung, drawn and quartered for treason, you
rascal," roared Dwight.

"Nay, sir. Do but think this man holds your life in his hands. Entreat
him civilly," expostulated Madam Dwight.

"He means not so, sir," she added, turning to Perez.

