with great dignity and who forgave all those who hated him. He was
crucified amidst the howls and the laughter of the Jerusalem mob.

That is what Joseph told me, with tears running down his old cheeks. I
gave him a gold piece when I left him, but he refused it and asked me
to hand it to one poorer than himself. I also asked him a few questions
about your friend Paul. He had known him slightly. He seems to have been
a tent maker who gave up his profession that he might preach the words
of a loving and forgiving God, who was so very different from that
Jehovah of whom the Jewish priests are telling us all the time.
Afterwards, Paul appears to have travelled much in Asia Minor and in
Greece, telling the slaves that they were all children of one loving
Father and that happiness awaits all, both rich and poor, who have tried
to live honest lives and have done good to those who were suffering and
miserable.

I hope that I have answered your questions to your satisfaction. The
whole story seems very harmless to me as far as the safety of the state
is concerned. But then, we Romans never have been able to understand the
people of this province. I am sorry that they have killed your friend
Paul. I wish that I were at home again, and I am, as ever,

                         Your dutiful nephew,
                                   GLADIUS ENSA.




THE FALL OF ROME

THE TWILIGHT OF ROME


THE text-books of ancient History give the date 476 as the year in which
Rome fell, because in that year the last emperor was driven off his
throne. But Rome, which was not built in a day, took a long time
falling. The process was so slow and so gradual that most Romans did not
realise how their old world was coming to an end. They complained about
the unrest of the times--they grumbled about the high prices of food and
about the low wages of the workmen--they cursed the profiteers who had a
monopoly of the grain and the wool and the gold coin. Occasionally they
rebelled against an unusually rapacious governor. But the majority of
the people during the first four centuries of our era ate and drank
(whatever their purse allowed them to buy) and hated or loved (according
to their nature) and went to the theatre (whenever there was a free
show of fighting gladiators) or starved in the slums of the big
cities, utterly ignorant of the fact that their empire had outlived its
usefulness and was doomed to perish.

How could they realise the threatened danger? Rome made a fine showing
of outward glory. Well-paved roads connected the different provinces,
the imperial police were active and showed little tenderness for
highwaymen. The frontier was closely guarded against the savage tribes
who seemed to be occupying the waste lands of northern Europe. The whole
world was paying tribute to the mighty city of Rome, and a score of
able men were working day and night to undo the mistakes of the past and
bring about a return to the happier conditions of the early Republic.

But the underlying causes of the decay of the State, of which I have
told you in a former chapter, had not been removed and reform therefore
was impossible.

Rome was, first and last and all the time, a city-state as Athens and
Corinth had been city-states in ancient Hellas. It had been able to
dominate the Italian peninsula. But Rome as the ruler of the entire
civilised world was a political impossibility and could not endure. Her
young men were killed in her endless wars. Her farmers were ruined by
long military service and by taxation. They either became professional
beggars or hired themselves out to rich landowners who gave them board
and lodging in exchange for their services and made them "serfs," those
unfortunate human beings who are neither slaves nor freemen, but who
have become part of the soil upon which they work, like so many cows,
and the trees.

The Empire, the State, had become everything. The common citizen had
dwindled down to less than nothing. As for the slaves, they had heard
the words that were spoken by Paul. They had accepted the message of the
humble carpenter of Nazareth. They did not rebel against their masters.
On the contrary, they had been taught to be meek and they obeyed their
superiors. But they had lost all interest in the affairs of this world
which had proved such a miserable place of abode. They were willing to
fight the good fight that they might enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
But they were not willing to engage in warfare for the benefit of an
ambitious emperor who aspired to glory by way of a foreign campaign in
the land of the Parthians or the Numidians or the Scots.

And so conditions grew worse as the centuries went by. The first
Emperors had continued the tradition of "leadership" which had given the
old tribal chieftains such a hold upon their subjects. But the Emperors
of the second and third centuries were Barrack-Emperors, professional
soldiers, who existed by the grace of their body-guards, the so-called
Praetorians. They succeeded each other with terrifying rapidity,
murdering their way into the palace and being murdered out of it as soon
as their successors had become rich enough to bribe the guards into a
new rebellion.

Meanwhile the barbarians were hammering at the gates of the northern
frontier. As there were no longer any native Roman armies to stop their
progress, foreign mercenaries had to be hired to fight the invader. As
the foreign soldier happened to be of the same blood as his supposed
enemy, he was apt to be quite lenient when he engaged in battle.
Finally, by way of experiment, a few tribes were allowed to settle
within the confines of the Empire. Others followed. Soon these tribes
complained bitterly of the greedy Roman tax-gatherers, who took away
their last penny. When they got no redress they marched to Rome and
loudly demanded that they be heard.

This made Rome very uncomfortable as an Imperial residence. Constantine
(who ruled from 323 to 337) looked for a new capital. He chose
Byzantium, the gate-way for the commerce between Europe and Asia. The
city was renamed Constantinople, and the court moved eastward. When
Constantine died, his two sons, for the sake of a more efficient
administration, divided the Empire between them. The elder lived in
Rome and ruled in the west. The younger stayed in Constantinople and was
master of the east.

Then came the fourth century and the terrible visitation of the Huns,
those mysterious Asiatic horsemen who for more than two centuries
maintained themselves in Northern Europe and continued their career of
bloodshed until they were defeated near Chalons-sur-Marne in France in
the year 451. As soon as the Huns had reached the Danube they had begun
to press hard upon the Goths. The Goths, in order to save themselves,
were thereupon obliged to invade Rome. The Emperor Valens tried to stop
them, but was killed near Adrianople in the year 378. Twenty-two years
later, under their king, Alaric, these same West Goths marched westward
and attacked Rome. They did not plunder, and destroyed only a few
palaces. Next came the Vandals, and showed less respect for the
venerable traditions of the city. Then the Burgundians. Then the East
Goths. Then the Alemanni. Then the Franks. There was no end to the
invasions. Rome at last was at the mercy of every ambitious highway
robber who could gather a few followers.

In the year 402 the Emperor fled to Ravenna, which was a sea-port and
strongly fortified, and there, in the year 475, Odoacer, commander of a
regiment of the German mercenaries, who wanted the farms of Italy to
be divided among themselves, gently but effectively pushed Romulus
Augustulus, the last of the emperors who ruled the western division,
from his throne, and proclaimed himself Patriarch or ruler of Rome. The
eastern Emperor, who was very busy with his own affairs, recognised him,
and for ten years Odoacer ruled what was left of the western provinces.

A few years later, Theodoric, King of the East Goths, invaded the newly
formed Patriciat, took Ravenna, murdered Odoacer at his own dinner
table, and established a Gothic Kingdom amidst the ruins of the western
part of the Empire. This Patriciate state did not last long. In the
sixth century a motley crowd of Longobards and Saxons and Slavs and
Avars invaded Italy, destroyed the Gothic kingdom, and established a new
state of which Pavia became the capital.

Then at last the imperial city sank into a state of utter neglect and
despair. The ancient palaces had been plundered time and again. The
schools had been burned down. The teachers had been starved to death.
The rich people had been thrown out of their villas which were now
inhabited by evil-smelling and hairy barbarians. The roads had fallen
into decay. The old bridges were gone and commerce had come to a
standstill. Civilisation--the product of thousands of years of patient
labor on the part of Egyptians and Babylonians and Greeks and Romans,
which had lifted man high above the most daring dreams of his earliest
ancestors, threatened to perish from the western continent.

It is true that in the far east, Constantinople continued to be the
centre of an Empire for another thousand years. But it hardly counted
as a part of the European continent. Its interests lay in the east. It
began to forget its western origin. Gradually the Roman language was
given up for the Greek. The Roman alphabet was discarded and Roman
law was written in Greek characters and explained by Greek judges. The
Emperor became an Asiatic despot, worshipped as the god-like kings of
Thebes had been worshipped in the valley of the Nile, three thousand
years before. When missionaries of the Byzantine church looked for fresh
fields of activity, they went eastward and carried the civilisation of
Byzantium into the vast wilderness of Russia.

As for the west, it was left to the mercies of the Barbarians. For
twelve generations, murder, war, arson, plundering were the order of
the day. One thing--and one thing alone--saved Europe from complete
destruction, from a return to the days of cave-men and the hyena.

This was the church--the flock of humble men and women who for many
centuries had confessed themselves the followers of Jesus, the carpenter
of Nazareth, who had been killed that the mighty Roman Empire might be
saved the trouble of a street-riot in a little city somewhere along the
Syrian frontier.




RISE OF THE CHURCH

HOW ROME BECAME THE CENTRE OF THE CHRISTIAN WORLD


THE average intelligent Roman who lived under the Empire had taken very
little interest in the gods of his fathers. A few times a year he went
to the temple, but merely as a matter of custom. He looked on
patiently when the people celebrated a religious festival with a solemn
procession. But he regarded the worship of Jupiter and Minerva and
Neptune as something rather childish, a survival from the crude days
of the early republic and not a fit subject of study for a man who had
mastered the works of the Stoics and the Epicureans and the other great
philosophers of Athens.

This attitude made the Roman a very tolerant man. The government
insisted that all people, Romans, foreigners, Greeks, Babylonians, Jews,
should pay a certain outward respect to the image of the Emperor
which was supposed to stand in every temple, just as a picture of
the President of the United States is apt to hang in an American Post
Office. But this was a formality without any deeper meaning. Generally
speaking everybody could honour, revere and adore whatever gods he
pleased, and as a result, Rome was filled with all sorts of queer little
temples and synagogues, dedicated to the worship of Egyptian and African
and Asiatic divinities.

When the first disciples of Jesus reached Rome and began to preach their
new doctrine of a universal brotherhood of man, nobody objected. The man
in the street stopped and listened Rome, the capital of the world,
had always been full of wandering preachers, each proclaiming his
own "mystery." Most of the self-appointed priests appealed to the
senses--promised golden rewards and endless pleasure to the followers of
their own particular god. Soon the crowd in the street noticed that the
so-called Christians (the followers of the Christ or "anointed") spoke
a very different language. They did not appear to be impressed by great
riches or a noble position. They extolled the beauties of poverty and
humility and meekness. These were not exactly the virtues which had made
Rome the mistress of the world. It was rather interesting to listen to
a "mystery" which told people in the hey-day of their glory that their
worldly success could not possibly bring them lasting happiness.

Besides, the preachers of the Christian mystery told dreadful stories
of the fate that awaited those who refused to listen to the words of
the true God. It was never wise to take chances. Of course the old Roman
gods still existed, but were they strong enough to protect their friends
against the powers of this new deity who had been brought to Europe from
distant Asia? People began to have doubts. They returned to listen to
further explanations of the new creed. After a while they began to meet
the men and women who preached the words of Jesus. They found them very
different from the average Roman priests. They were all dreadfully
poor. They were kind to slaves and to animals. They did not try to gain
riches, but gave away whatever they had. The example of their unselfish
lives forced many Romans to forsake the old religion. They joined the
small communities of Christians who met in the back rooms of private
houses or somewhere in an open field, and the temples were deserted.

This went on year after year and the number of Christians continued to
increase. Presbyters or priests (the original Greek meant "elder") were
elected to guard the interests of the small churches. A bishop was made
the head of all the communities within a single province. Peter, who had
fol-lowed Paul to Rome, was the first Bishop of Rome. In due time his
successors (who were addressed as Father or Papa) came to be known as
Popes.

The church became a powerful institution within the Empire. The
Christian doctrines appealed to those who despaired of this world. They
also attracted many strong men who found it impossible to make a career
under the Imperial government, but who could exercise their gifts of
leadership among the humble followers of the Nazarene teacher. At last
the state was obliged to take notice. The Roman Empire (I have said this
before) was tolerant through indifference. It allowed everybody to
seek salvation after his or her own fashion. But it insisted that the
different sects keep the peace among themselves and obey the wise rule
of "live and let live."

The Christian communities however, refused to practice any sort of
tolerance. They publicly declared that their God, and their God alone,
was the true ruler of Heaven and Earth, and that all other gods
were imposters. This seemed unfair to the other sects and the police
discouraged such utterances. The Christians persisted.

Soon there were further difficulties. The Christians refused to go
through the formalities of paying homage to the emperor. They refused
to appear when they were called upon to join the army. The Roman
magistrates threatened to punish them. The Christians answered that this
miserable world was only the ante-room to a very pleasant Heaven and
that they were more than willing to suffer death for their principles.
The Romans, puzzled by such conduct, sometimes killed the offenders, but
more often they did not. There was a certain amount of lynching during
the earliest years of the church, but this was the work of that part
of the mob which accused their meek Christian neighbours of every
conceivable crime, (such as slaughtering and eating babies, bringing
about sickness and pestilence, betraying the country in times of danger)
because it was a harmless sport and devoid of danger, as the Christians
refused to fight back.

Meanwhile, Rome continued to be invaded by the Barbarians and when her
armies failed, Christian missionaries went forth to preach their gospel
of peace to the wild Teutons. They were strong men without fear of
death. They spoke a language which left no doubt as to the future of
unrepentant sinners. The Teutons were deeply impressed. They still had a
deep respect for the wisdom of the ancient city of Rome. Those men were
Romans. They probably spoke the truth. Soon the Christian missionary
became a power in the savage regions of the Teutons and the Franks. Half
a dozen missionaries were as valuable as a whole regiment of soldiers.
The Emperors began to understand that the Christian might be of great
use to them. In some of the provinces they were given equal rights with
those who remained faithful to the old gods. The great change however
came during the last half of the fourth century.

Constantine, sometimes (Heaven knows why) called Constantine the Great,
was emperor. He was a terrible ruffian, but people of tender qualities
could hardly hope to survive in that hard-fighting age. During a long
and checkered career, Constantine had experienced many ups and downs.
Once, when almost defeated by his enemies, he thought that he would try
the power of this new Asiatic deity of whom everybody was talking. He
promised that he too would become a Christian if he were successful in
the coming battle. He won the victory and thereafter he was convinced of
the power of the Christian God and allowed himself to be baptised.

From that moment on, the Christian church was officially recognised and
this greatly strengthened the position of the new faith.

But the Christians still formed a very small minority of all the people,
(not more than five or six percent,) and in order to win, they were
forced to refuse all compromise. The old gods must be destroyed. For a
short spell the emperor Julian, a lover of Greek wisdom, managed to save
the pagan Gods from further destruction. But Julian died of his wounds
during a campaign in Persia and his successor Jovian re-established the
church in all its glory. One after the other the doors of the ancient
temples were then closed. Then came the emperor Justinian (who built the
church of Saint Sophia in Constantinople), who discontinued the school
of philosophy at Athens which had been founded by Plato.

That was the end of the old Greek world, in which man had been allowed
to think his own thoughts and dream his own dreams according to his
desires. The somewhat vague rules of conduct of the philosophers had
proved a poor compass by which to steer the ship of life after a deluge
of savagery and ignorance had swept away the established order of
things. There was need of something more positive and more definite.
This the Church provided.

During an age when nothing was certain, the church stood like a rock and
never receded from those principles which it held to be true and sacred.
This steadfast courage gained the admiration of the multitudes and
carried the church of Rome safely through the difficulties which
destroyed the Roman state.

There was however, a certain element of luck in the final success of
the Christian faith. After the disappearance of Theodoric's Roman-Gothic
kingdom, in the fifth century, Italy was comparatively free from foreign
invasion. The Lombards and Saxons and Slavs who succeeded the Goths were
weak and backward tribes. Under those circumstances it was possible for
the bishops of Rome to maintain the independence of their city. Soon the
remnants of the empire, scattered throughout the peninsula, recognised
the Dukes of Rome (or bishops) as their political and spiritual rulers.

The stage was set for the appearance of a strong man. He came in the
year 590 and his name was Gregory. He belonged to the ruling classes of
ancient Rome, and he had been "prefect" or mayor of the city. Then he
had become a monk and a bishop and finally, and much against his will,
(for he wanted to be a missionary and preach Christianity to the heathen
of England,) he had been dragged to the Church of Saint Peter to be made
Pope. He ruled only fourteen years but when he died the Christian world
of western Europe had officially recognised the bishops of Rome, the
Popes, as the head of the entire church.

This power, however, did not extend to the east. In Constantinople the
Emperors continued the old custom which had recognised the successors of
Augustus and Tiberius both as head of the government and as High Priest
of the Established Religion. In the year 1453 the eastern Roman Empire
was conquered by the Turks. Constantinople was taken, and Constantine
Paleologue, the last Roman Emperor, was killed on the steps of the
Church of the Holy Sophia.

A few years before, Zoe, the daughter of his brother Thomas, had married
Ivan III of Russia. In this way did the grand-dukes of Moscow fall heir
to the traditions of Constantinople. The double-eagle of old Byzantium
(reminiscent of the days when Rome had been divided into an eastern and
a western part) became the coat of arms of modern Russia. The Tsar who
had been merely the first of the Russian nobles, assumed the aloofness
and the dignity of a Roman emperor before whom all subjects, both high
and low, were inconsiderable slaves.

The court was refashioned after the oriental pattern which the eastern
Emperors had imported from Asia and from Egypt and which (so they
flattered themselves) resembled the court of Alexander the Great. This
strange inheritance which the dying Byzantine Empire bequeathed to an
unsuspecting world continued to live with great vigour for six more
centuries, amidst the vast plains of Russia. The last man to wear
the crown with the double eagle of Constantinople, Tsar Nicholas, was
murdered only the other day, so to speak. His body was thrown into a
well. His son and his daughters were all killed. All his ancient rights
and prerogatives were abolished, and the church was reduced to the
position which it had held in Rome before the days of Constantine.

The eastern church however fared very differently, as we shall see
in the next chapter when the whole Christian world is going to be
threatened with destruction by the rival creed of an Arab camel-driver.




MOHAMMED

AHMED, THE CAMEL-DRIVER, WHO BECAME THE PROPHET OF THE ARABIAN DESERT
AND WHOSE FOLLOWERS ALMOST CONQUERED THE ENTIRE KNOWN WORLD FOR THE
GREATER GLORY OF ALLAH, THE ONLY TRUE GOD


SINCE the days of Carthage and Hannibal we have said nothing of the
Semitic people. You will remember how they filled all the chapters
devoted to the story of the Ancient World. The Babylonians, the
Assyrians, the Phoenicians, the Jews, the Arameans, the Chaldeans, all
of them Semites, had been the rulers of western Asia for thirty or forty
centuries. They had been conquered by the Indo-European Persians who had
come from the east and by the Indo-European Greeks who had come from the
west. A hundred years after the death of Alexander the Great, Carthage,
a colony of Semitic Phoenicians, had fought the Indo-European Romans
for the mastery of the Mediterranean. Carthage had been defeated and
destroyed and for eight hundred years the Romans had been masters of the
world. In the seventh century, however, another Semitic tribe appeared
upon the scene and challenged the power of the west. They were the
Arabs, peaceful shepherds who had roamed through the desert since the
beginning of time without showing any signs of imperial ambitions.

Then they listened to Mohammed, mounted their horses and in less than
a century they had pushed to the heart of Europe and proclaimed the
glories of Allah, "the only God," and Mohammed, "the prophet of the only
God," to the frightened peasants of France.

The story of Ahmed, the son of Abdallah and Aminah (usually known as
Mohammed, or "he who will be praised,"); reads like a chapter in the
"Thousand and One Nights." He was a camel-driver, born in Mecca.
He seems to have been an epileptic and he suffered from spells of
unconsciousness when he dreamed strange dreams and heard the voice of
the angel Gabriel, whose words were afterwards written down in a book
called the Koran. His work as a caravan leader carried him all over
Arabia and he was constantly falling in with Jewish merchants and with
Christian traders, and he came to see that the worship of a single God
was a very excellent thing. His own people, the Arabs, still revered
queer stones and trunks of trees as their ancestors had done, tens of
thousands of years before. In Mecca, their holy city, stood a little
square building, the Kaaba, full of idols and strange odds and ends of
Hoo-doo worship.

Mohammed decided to be the Moses of the Arab people. He could not well
be a prophet and a camel-driver at the same time. So he made himself
independent by marrying his employer, the rich widow Chadija. Then he
told his neighbours in Mecca that he was the long-expected prophet sent
by Allah to save the world. The neighbours laughed most heartily and
when Mohammed continued to annoy them with his speeches they decided to
kill him. They regarded him as a lunatic and a public bore who deserved
no mercy. Mohammed heard of the plot and in the dark of night he fled to
Medina together with Abu Bekr, his trusted pupil. This happened in the
year 622. It is the most important date in Mohammedan history and is
known as the Hegira--the year of the Great Flight.

In Medina, Mohammed, who was a stranger, found it easier to proclaim
