of that sex which ever, when lowliest, most comprehends the lofty, rose
superior both to love and to grief; and rising, she advanced, and placing
her slight hand on his stalwart shoulder, she said, half in pity, half in
reverence: "Never before, O Harold, did I feel so proud of thee: for
Edith could not love thee as she doth, and will till the grave clasp her,
if thou didst not love England more than Edith.  Harold, till this hour I
was a child, and I knew not my own heart: I look now into that heart, and
I see that I am woman. Harold, of the cloister I have now no fear: and
all life does not shrink--no, it enlarges, and it soars into one
desire--to be worthy to pray for thee!"

"Maid, maid!" exclaimed Harold, abruptly, and pale as the dead, "do not
say thou hast no fear of the cloister.  I adjure, I command thee, build
not up between us that dismal everlasting wall.  While thou art free Hope
yet survives--a phantom, haply but Hope still."

"As thou wilt I will," said Edith, humbly: "order my fate so as pleases
thee the best."

Then, not daring to trust herself longer, for she felt the tears rushing
to her eyes, she turned away hastily, and left him alone beside the
altar-stone and the tomb.




CHAPTER V.

The next day, as Harold was entering the palace of Westminster, with
intent to seek the King's lady, his father met him in one of the
corridors, and, taking him gravely by the hand said:

"My son, I have much on my mind regarding thee and our House; come with
me."

"Nay," said the Earl, "by your leave let it be later.  For I have it on
hand to see my sister, ere confessor, or monk, or schoolman, claim her
hours!"

"Not so, Harold," said the Earl, briefly.  "My daughter is now in her
oratory, and we shall have time enow to treat of things mundane ere she
is free to receive thee, and to preach to thee of things ghostly, the
last miracle at St. Alban's, or the last dream of the King, who would be
a great man and a stirring, if as restless when awake as he is in his
sleep.  Come."

Harold, in that filial obedience which belonged, as of course, to his
antique cast of character, made no farther effort to escape, but with a
sigh followed Godwin into one of the contiguous chambers.

"Harold," then said Earl Godwin, after closing the door carefully, "thou
must not let the King keep thee longer in dalliance and idleness: thine
earldom needs thee without delay.  Thou knowest that these East Angles,
as we Saxons still call them, are in truth mostly Danes and Norsemen;
people jealous and fierce, and free, and more akin to the Normans than to
the Saxons.  My whole power in England hath been founded, not less on my
common birth with the freefolk of Wessex--Saxons like myself, and
therefore easy for me, a Saxon, to conciliate and control--than on the
hold I have ever sought to establish, whether by arms or by arts, over
the Danes in the realm.  And I tell and I warn thee, Harold, as the
natural heir of my greatness, that he who cannot command the stout hearts
of the Anglo-Danes, will never maintain the race of Godwin in the post
they have won in the vanguard of Saxon England."

"This I wot well, my father," answered Harold; "and I see with joy, that
while those descendants of heroes and freemen are blended indissolubly
with the meeker Saxon, their freer laws and hardier manners are gradually
supplanting, or rather regenerating, our own."

Godwin smiled approvingly on his son, and then his brow becoming serious,
and the dark pupil of his blue eye dilating, he resumed:

"This is well, my son; and hast thou thought also, that while thou art
loitering in these galleries, amidst the ghosts of men in monk cowls,
Siward is shadowing our House with his glory, and all north the Humber
rings with his name?  Hast thou thought that all Mercia is in the hands
of Leofric our rival, and that Algar his son, who ruled Wessex in my
absence, left there a name so beloved, that had I stayed a year longer,
the cry had been 'Algar', not 'Godwin'?--for so is the multitude ever!
Now aid me, Harold, for my soul is troubled, and I cannot work alone; and
though I say naught to others, my heart received a death-blow when tears
fell from its blood-springs on the brow of Sweyn, my first-born."  The
old man paused, and his lip quivered.

"Thou, thou alone, Harold, noble boy, thou alone didst stand by his side
in the hall; alone, alone, and I blessed thee in that hour over all the
rest of my sons.  Well, well! now to earth again.  Aid me, Harold.  I
open to thee my web: complete the woof when this hand is cold.  The new
tree that stands alone in the plain is soon nipped by the winter; fenced
round with the forest, its youth takes shelter from its fellows [111].
So is it with a house newly founded; it must win strength from the allies
that it sets round its slender stein.  What had been Godwin, son of
Wolnoth, had he not married into the kingly house of great Canute?  It is
this that gives my sons now the right to the loyal love of the Danes.
The throne passed from Canute and his race, and the Saxons again had
their hour; and I gave, as Jephtha gave his daughter, my blooming Edith,
to the cold bed of the Saxon King. Had sons sprung from that union, the
grandson of Godwin, royal alike from Saxon and Dane, would reign on the
throne of the isle.  Fate ordered otherwise, and the spider must weave
web anew.  Thy brother, Tostig, has added more splendour than solid
strength of our line, in his marriage with the daughter of Baldwin the
Count.  The foreigner helps us little in England.  Thou, O Harold, must
bring new props to the House.  I would rather see thee wed to the child
of one of our great rivals than to the daughter of kaisar, or outland
king.  Siward hath no daughter undisposed of.  Algar, son of Leofric,
hath a daughter fair as the fairest; make her thy bride that Algar may
cease to be a foe.  This alliance will render Mercia, in truth, subject
to our principalities, since the stronger must quell the weaker.  It doth
more.  Algar himself has married into the royalty of Wales [112]. Thou
wilt win all those fierce tribes to thy side.  Their forces will gain
thee the marches, now held so feebly under Rolf the Norman, and in case
of brief reverse, or sharp danger, their mountains will give refuge from
all foes.  This day, greeting Algar, he told me he meditated bestowing
his daughter on Gryffyth, the rebel under-King of North Wales.
Therefore," continued the old Earl, with a smile, "thou must speak in
time, and win and woo in the same breath.  No hard task, methinks, for
Harold of the golden tongue."

"Sir, and father," replied the young Earl, whom the long speech addressed
to him had prepared for its close, and whose habitual self-control saved
him from disclosing his emotion, "I thank you duteously, for your care
for my future, and hope to profit by your wisdom.  I will ask the King's
leave to go to my East Anglians, and hold there a folkmuth, administer
justice, redress grievances, and make thegn and ceorl content with
Harold, their Earl.  But vain is peace in the realm, if there is strife
in the house.  And Aldyth, the daughter of Algar, cannot be house-wife to
me."

"Why?"  asked the old Earl, calmly, and surveying his son's face with
those eyes so clear yet so unfathomable.

"Because, though I grant her fair, she pleases not my fancy, nor would
give warmth to my hearth.  Because, as thou knowest well, Algar and I
have ever been opposed, both in camp and in council; and I am not the man
who can sell my love, though I may stifle my anger.  Earl Harold needs no
bride to bring spearmen to his back at his need; and his lordships he
will guard with the shield of a man, not the spindle of a woman."

"Said in spite and in error," replied the old Earl, coolly.  "Small pain
had it given thee to forgive Algar old quarrels, and clasp his hand as a
father-in-law--if thou hadst had for his daughter what the great are
forbidden to regard save as a folly."

"Is love a folly, my father?"

"Surely, yes," said the Earl, with some sadness--"surely, yes, for those
who know that life is made up of business and care, spun out in long
years, nor counted by the joys of an hour.  Surely, yes; thinkest thou
that I loved my first wife, the proud sister of Canute, or that Edith,
thy sister, loved Edward, when he placed the crown on her head?"

"My father, in Edith, my sister, our House has sacrificed enow to selfish
power."

"I grant it, to selfish power," answered the eloquent old man, "but not
enow for England's safety.  Look to it, Harold; thy years, and thy fame,
and thy state, place thee free from my control as a father, but not till
thou sleepest in thy cerements art thou free from that father--thy land!
Ponder it in thine own wise mind--wiser already than that which speaks to
it under the hood of grey hairs.  Ponder it, and ask thyself if thy
power, when I am dead, is not necessary to the weal of England? and if
aught that thy schemes can suggest would so strengthen that power, as to
find in the heart of the kingdom a host of friends like the Mercians;--or
if there could be a trouble and a bar to thy greatness, a wall in thy
path, or a thorn in thy side, like the hate or the jealousy of Algar, the
son of Leofric?"

Thus addressed, Harold's face, before serene and calm, grew overcast; and
he felt the force of his father's words when appealing to his reason--not
to his affections.  The old man saw the advantage he had gained, and
prudently forbore to press it.  Rising, he drew round him his sweeping
gonna lined with furs, and only when he reached the door, he added:

"The old see afar; they stand on the height of experience, as a warder on
the crown of a tower; and I tell thee, Harold, that if thou let slip this
golden occasion, years hence--long and many--thou wilt rue the loss of
the hour.  And that, unless Mercia, as the centre of the kingdom, be
reconciled to thy power, thou wilt stand high indeed--but on the shelf of
a precipice.  And if, as I suspect, thou lovest some other who now clouds
thy perception, and will then check thy ambition, thou wilt break her
heart with thy desertion, or gnaw thine own with regret.  For love dies
in possession--ambition has no fruition, and so lives forever."

"That ambition is not mine, my father," exclaimed Harold, earnestly; "I
have not thy love of power, glorious in thee, even in its extremes. I
have not thy----"

"Seventy years!" interrupted the old man, concluding the sentence. "At
seventy all men who have been great will speak as I do; yet all will have
known love.  Thou not ambitious, Harold?  Thou knowest not thyself, nor
knowest thou yet what ambition is.  That which I see far before me as thy
natural prize, I dare not, or I will not say.  When time sets that prize
within reach of thy spear's point, say then, 'I am not ambitious!'
Ponder and decide."

And Harold pondered long, and decided not as Godwin could have wished.
For he had not the seventy years of his father, and the prize lay yet in
the womb of the mountains; though the dwarf and the gnome were already
fashioning the ore to the shape of a crown.




CHAPTER VI.

While Harold mused over his father's words, Edith, seated on a low stool
beside the Lady of England, listened with earnest but mournful reverence
to her royal namesake.

The Queen's [113] closet opened like the King's on one hand to an
oratory, on the other to a spacious ante-room; the lower part of the
walls was covered with arras, leaving space for a niche that contained an
image of the Virgin.  Near the doorway to the oratory, was the stoupe or
aspersorium for holy-water; and in various cysts and crypts, in either
room, were caskets containing the relics of saints.  The purple light
from the stained glass of a high narrow window, shaped in the Saxon arch,
streamed rich and full over the Queen's bended head like a glory, and
tinged her pale cheek, as with a maiden blush; and she might have
furnished a sweet model for early artist, in his dreams of St. Mary the
Mother, not when, young and blest, she held the divine infant in her
arms, but when sorrow had reached even the immaculate bosom, and the
stone had been rolled over the Holy Sepulchre.  For beautiful the face
still was, and mild beyond all words; but, beyond all words also, sad in
its tender resignation.

And thus said the Queen to her godchild:

"Why dost thou hesitate and turn away?  Thinkest thou, poor child, in
thine ignorance of life, that the world ever can give thee a bliss
greater than the calm of the cloister?  Pause, and ask thyself, young as
thou art, if all the true happiness thou hast known, is not bounded to
hope.  As long as thou hopest, thou art happy."

Edith sighed deeply, and moved her young head in involuntary
acquiescence.

"And what is life to the nun, but hope.  In that hope, she knows not the
present, she lives in the future; she hears ever singing the chorus of
the angels, as St. Dunstan heard them sing at the birth of Edgar [114].
That hope unfolds to her the heiligthum of the future. On earth her body,
in heaven her soul!"

"And her heart, O Lady of England?" cried Edith, with a sharp pang.

The Queen paused a moment, and laid her pale hand kindly on Edith's
bosom.

"Not beating, child, as thine does now, with vain thoughts, and worldly
desires; but calm, calm as mine.  It is in our power," resumed the Queen,
after a second pause, "it is in our power to make the life within us all
soul; so that the heart is not, or is felt not; so that grief and joy
have no power over us; so that we look tranquil on the stormy earth, as
yon image of the Virgin, whom we make our example, looks from the silent
niche.  Listen, my godchild and darling."

"I have known human state, and human debasement.  In these halls I woke
Lady of England, and, ere sunset, my lord banished me, without one mark
of honour, without one word of comfort, to the convent of Wherwell;--my
father, my mother, my kin, all in exile; and my tears falling fast for
them, but not on a husband's bosom."

"Ah then, noble Edith," said the girl, colouring with anger at the
remembered wrong for her Queen, "ah then, surely, at least, thy heart
made itself heard."

"Heard, yea verily," said the Queen, looking up, and pressing her hands;
"heard, but the soul rebuked it.  And the soul said, 'Blessed are they
that mourn;' and I rejoiced at the new trial which brought me nearer to
Him who chastens those He loves."

"But thy banished kin--the valiant, the wise; they who placed thy lord on
the throne?"

"Was it no comfort," answered the Queen simply, "to think that in the
House of God my prayers for them would be more accepted than in the halls
of kings?  Yes, my child, I have known the world's honour, and the
world's disgrace, and I have schooled my heart to be calm in both."

"Ah, thou art above human strength, Queen and Saint," exclaimed Edith;
"and I have heard it said of thee, that as thou art now, thou wert from
thine earliest years [115]; ever the sweet, the calm, the holy--ever less
on earth than in heaven."

Something there was in the Queen's eyes, as she raised them towards Edith
at this burst of enthusiasm, that gave for a moment, to a face otherwise
so dissimilar, the likeness to her father; something, in that large
pupil, of the impenetrable unrevealing depth of a nature close and secret
in self-control.  And a more acute observer than Edith might long have
been perplexed and haunted with that look, wondering if, indeed, under
the divine and spiritual composure, lurked the mystery of human passion.

"My child," said the Queen, with the faintest smile upon her lips, and
drawing Edith towards her, "there are moments when all that breathe the
breath of life feel, or have felt, alike.  In my vain youth I read, I
mused, I pondered, but over worldly lore.  And what men called the
sanctity of virtue, was perhaps but the silence of thought.  Now I have
put aside those early and childish dreams and shadows, remembering them
not, save (here the smile grew more pronounced) to puzzle some poor
schoolboy with the knots and riddles of the sharp grammarian [116].  But
not to speak of my self have I sent for thee. Edith, again and again,
solemnly and sincerely, I pray thee to obey the wish of my lord the King.
And now, while yet in all the bloom of thought, as of youth, while thou
hast no memory save the child's, enter on the Realm of Peace."

"I cannot, I dare not, I cannot--ah, ask me not," said poor Edith,
covering her face with her hands.

Those hands the Queen gently withdrew; and looking steadfastly in the
changeful and half-averted face, she said mournfully, "Is it so, my
godchild? and is thy heart set on the hopes of earth--thy dreams on the
love of man?"

"Nay," answered Edith, equivocating; "but I have promised not to take the
veil."

"Promised to Hilda?"

"Hilda," exclaimed Edith readily, "would never consent to it.  Thou
knowest her strong nature, her distaste to--to----"

"The laws of our holy Church--I do; and for that reason it is, mainly,
that I join with the King in seeking to abstract thee from her influence.
But it is not Hilda that thou hast promised?"

Edith hung her head.

"Is it to woman or to man?"

Before Edith could answer the door from the ante-room opened gently, but
without the usual ceremony, and Harold entered.  His quick quiet eye
embraced both forms, and curbed Edith's young impulse, which made her
start from her seat, and advance joyously towards him as a protector.

"Fair day to thee, my sister," said the Earl, advancing; "and pardon, if
I break thus rudely on thy leisure; for few are the moments when beggar
and Benedictine leave thee free to receive thy brother."

"Dost thou reproach me, Harold?"

"No, Heaven forfend!" replied the Earl, cordially, and with a look at
once of pity and admiration; "for thou art one of the few, in this court
of simulators, sincere and true; and it pleases thee to serve the Divine
Power in thy way, as it pleases me to serve Him in mine."

"Thine, Harold?" said the Queen, shaking her head, but with a look of
some human pride and fondness in her fair face.

"Mine; as I learned it from thee when I was thy pupil, Edith; when to
those studies in which thou didst precede me, thou first didst lure me
from sport and pastime; and from thee I learned to glow over the deeds of
Greek and Roman, and say, 'They lived and died as men; like them may I
live and die!'"

"Oh, true--too true!" said the Queen, with a sigh; "and I am to blame
grievously that I did so pervert to earth a mind that might otherwise
have learned holier examples;--nay, smile not with that haughty lip, my
brother; for believe me--yea, believe me--there is more true valour in
the life of one patient martyr than in the victories of Caesar, or even
the defeat of Brutus."

"It may be so," replied the Earl, "but out of the same oak we carve the
spear and the cross; and those not worthy to hold the one, may yet not
guiltily wield the other.  Each to his path of life--and mine is chosen."
Then, changing his voice, with some abruptness, he said, "But what hast
thou been saying to thy fair godchild, that her cheek is pale, and her
eyelids seem so heavy?  Edith, Edith, my sister, beware how thou shapest
the lot of the martyr without the peace of the saint.  Had Algive the nun
been wedded to Sweyn our brother, Sweyn were not wending, barefooted and
forlorn, to lay the wrecks of desolated life at the Holy Tomb."

"Harold, Harold!" faltered the Queen, much struck with his words.

"But," the Earl continued--and something of the pathos which belongs to
deep emotion vibrated in the eloquent voice, accustomed to command and
persuade--"we strip not the green leaves for our yulehearths--we gather
them up when dry and sere.  Leave youth on the bough--let the bird sing
to it--let it play free in the airs of heaven.  Smoke comes from the
branch which, cut in the sap, is cast upon the fire, and regret from the
heart which is severed from the world while the world is in its May."

The Queen paced slowly, but in evident agitation, to and fro the room,
and her hands clasped convulsively the rosary round her neck; then, after
a pause of thought, she motioned to Edith and, pointing to the oratory,
said with forced composure, "Enter there, and there kneel; commune with
thyself, and be still.  Ask for a sign from above--pray for the grace
within.  Go; I would speak alone with Harold."

Edith crossed her arms on her bosom meekly, and passed into the oratory.
The Queen watched her for a few moments tenderly, as the slight,
child-like form bent before the sacred symbol.  Then she closed the door
gently, and coming with a quick step to Harold, said, in a low but clear
voice, "Dost thou love the maiden?"

"Sister," answered the Earl sadly, "I love her as a man should love
woman--more than my life, but less than the ends life lives for."

"Oh, world, world, world!" cried the Queen, passionately, "not even to
thine own objects art thou true.  O world! O world! thou desirest
happiness below, and at every turn, with every vanity, thou tramplest
happiness under foot!  Yes, yes; they said to me, 'For the sake of our
greatness, thou shalt wed King Edward.'  And I live in the eyes that
loathe me--and--and----"  The Queen, as if conscience-stricken, paused
aghast, kissed devoutly the relic suspended to her rosary, and continued,
with such calmness that it seemed as if two women were blent in one, so
startling was the contrast. "And I have had my reward, but not from the
world!  Even so, Harold the Earl, and Earl's son, thou lovest yon fair
child, and she thee; and ye might be happy, if happiness were earth's
end; but, though high-born, and of fair temporal possessions, she brings
thee not lands broad enough for her dowry, nor troops of kindred to swell
thy lithsmen, and she is not a markstone in thy march to ambition; and so
thou lovest her as man loves woman--'less than the ends life lives for!'"

"Sister," said Harold, "thou speakest as I love to hear thee speak--as my
bright-eyed, rose-lipped sister spoke in the days of old; thou speakest
as a woman with warm heart, and not as the mummy in the stiff cerements
of priestly form; and if thou art with me, and thou wilt give me
countenance, I will marry thy godchild, and save her alike from the dire
superstitions of Hilda, and the grave of the abhorrent convent."

"But my father--my father!" cried the Queen, "who ever bended that soul
of steel?"

"It is not my father I fear; it is thee and thy monks.  Forgettest thou
that Edith and I are within the six banned degrees of the Church?"

"True, most true," said the Queen, with a look of great terror; "I had
forgotten.  Avaunt, the very thought!  Pray--fast--banish it--my poor,
poor brother!" and she kissed his brow.

"So, there fades the woman, and the mummy speaks again!" said Harold,
bitterly.  "Be it so: I bow to my doom.  Well, there may be a time when
Nature on the throne of England shall prevail over Priestcraft; and, in
guerdon for all my services, I will then ask a King who hath blood in his
veins to win me the Pope's pardon and benison.  Leave me that hope, my
sister, and leave thy godchild on the shores of the living world."

The Queen made no answer, and Harold, auguring ill from her silence,
moved on and opened the door of the oratory.  But the image that there
met him, that figure still kneeling, those eyes, so earnest in the tears
that streamed from them fast and unheeded, fixed on the holy rood--awed
his step and checked his voice.  Nor till the girl had risen, did he
break silence; then he said, gently, "My sister will press thee no more,
Edith----"

"I say not that!" exclaimed the Queen.

"Or if she doth, remember thy plighted promise under the wide cope of
blue heaven, the old nor least holy temple of our common Father."

With these words he left the room.




CHAPTER VII.

Harold passed into the Queen's ante-chamber.  Here the attendance was
small and select compared with the crowds which we shall see presently in
the ante-room to the King's closet; for here came chiefly the more
learned ecclesiastics, attracted instinctively by the Queen's own mental
culture, and few indeed were they at that day (perhaps the most
illiterate known in England since the death of Alfred [117]); and here
came not the tribe of impostors, and the relic-venders, whom the
infantine simplicity and lavish waste of the Confessor attracted. Some
four or five priests and monks, some lonely widow, some orphan child,
humble worth, or protected sorrow, made the noiseless levee of the sweet,
sad Queen.

The groups turned, with patient eyes, towards the Earl as he emerged from
that chamber, which it was rare indeed to quit unconsoled, and marvelled
at the flush in his cheek; and the disquiet on his brow; but Harold was
dear to the clients of his sister; for, despite his supposed indifference
to the mere priestly virtues (if virtues we call them) of the decrepit
time, his intellect was respected by yon learned ecclesiastics; and his
character, as the foe of all injustice, and the fosterer of all that were
desolate, was known to yon pale-eyed widow and yon trembling orphan.

In the atmosphere of that quiet assembly, the Earl seemed to recover his
kindly temperament, and he paused to address a friendly or a soothing
word to each; so that when he vanished, the hearts there felt more light;
and the silence hushed before his entrance, was broken by many whispers
in praise of the good Earl.

Descending a staircase without the walls--as even in royal halls the
principal staircases were then--Harold gained a wide court, in which
loitered several house-carles [118] and attendants, whether of the King
or the visitors; and, reaching the entrance of the palace, took his way
towards the King's rooms, which lay near, and round, what is now called
"The Painted Chamber," then used as a bedroom by Edward on state
occasions.

And now he entered the ante-chamber of his royal brother-in-law. Crowded
it was, but rather seemed it the hall of a convent than the ante-room of
a king.  Monks, pilgrims, priests, met his eye in every nook; and not
there did the Earl pause to practise the arts of popular favour.  Passing
erect through the midst, he beckoned forth the officer, in attendance at
the extreme end, who, after an interchange of whispers, ushered him into
the royal presence.  The monks and the priests, gazing towards the door
which had closed on his stately form, said to each other:

"The King's Norman favourites at least honoured the Church."

"That is true," said an abbot; "and an it were not for two things, I
should love the Norman better than the Saxon."

"What are they, my father?" asked an aspiring young monk.

"Inprinis," quoth the abbot, proud of the one Latin word he thought he
knew, but, that, as we see, was an error; "they cannot speak so as to be
understood, and I fear me much they incline to mere carnal learning."

Here there was a sanctified groan:

"Count William himself spoke to me in Latin!" continued the abbot,
raising his eyebrows.

"Did he?--Wonderful!" exclaimed several voices.  "And what did you
answer, holy father?"

"Marry," said the abbot solemnly, "I replied, Inprinis."

"Good!" said the young monk, with a look of profound admiration.

"Whereat the good Count looked puzzled--as I meant him to be:--a heinous
fault, and one intolerant to the clergy, that love of profane tongues!
And the next thing against your Norman is (added the abbot, with a sly
wink), that he is a close man, who loves not his stoup; now, I say, that
a priest never has more hold over a sinner than when he makes the sinner
open his heart to him."

"That's clear!" said a fat priest, with a lubricate and shining nose.

"And how," pursued the abbot triumphantly, "can a sinner open his heavy
heart until you have given him something to lighten it?  Oh, many and
many a wretched man have I comforted spiritually over a flagon of stout
ale; and many a good legacy to the Church hath come out of a friendly
wassail between watchful shepherd and strayed sheep! But what hast thou
there?" resumed the abbot, turning to a man, clad in the lay garb of a
burgess of London, who had just entered the room, followed by a youth,
bearing what seemed a coffer, covered with a fine linen cloth.

"Holy father!" said the burgess, wiping his forehead, "it is a treasure
so great, that I trow Hugoline, the King's treasurer, will scowl at me
for a year to come, for he likes to keep his own grip on the King's
gold."

At this indiscreet observation, the abbot, the monks, and all the
priestly bystanders looked grim and gloomy, for each had his own special
design upon the peace of poor Hugoline, the treasurer, and liked not to
see him the prey of a layman.

"Inprinis!" quoth the abbot, puffing out the word with great scorn;
"thinkest thou, son of Mammon, that our good King sets his pious heart on
gew-gaw, and gems, and such vanities?  Thou shouldst take the goods to
Count Baldwin of Flanders; or Tostig, the proud Earl's proud son."

"Marry!" said the cheapman, with a smile; "my treasure will find small
price with Baldwin the scoffer, and Tostig the vain!  Nor need ye look at
me so sternly, my fathers; but rather vie with each other who shall win
this wonder of wonders for his own convent; know, in a word, that it is
the right thumb of St. Jude, which a worthy man bought at Rome for me,
for 3000 lb. weight of silver; and I ask but 500 lb. over the purchase
for my pains and my fee." [119]

"Humph!" said the abbot.

"Humph!" said the aspiring young monk; the rest gathered wistfully round
the linen cloth.

A fiery exclamation of wrath and disdain was here heard; and all turning,
saw a tall, fierce-looking thegn, who had found his way into that group,
like a hawk in a rookery.

"Dost thou tell me, knave," quoth the thegn, in a dialect that bespoke
him a Dane by origin, with the broad burr still retained in the north;
"Dost thou tell me that the King will waste his gold on such fooleries,
while the fort built by Canute at the flood of the Humber is all fallen
into ruin, without a man in steel jacket to keep watch on the war fleets
of Swede and Norwegian?"

"Worshipful minister," replied the cheapman, with some slight irony in
his tone, "these reverend fathers will tell thee that the thumb of St.
Jude is far better aid against Swede and Norwegian than forts of stone
and jackets of steel; nathless, if thou wantest jackets of steel, I have
some to sell at a fair price, of the last fashion, and helms with long
nose-pieces, as are worn by the Normans."

"The thumb of a withered old saint," cried the Dane, not heeding the last
words, "more defence at the mouth of the Humber than crenellated castles
and mailed men!"

"Surely, naught son," said the abbot, looking shocked, and taking part
with the cheapman.  "Dost thou not remember that, in the pious and famous
council of 1014, it was decreed to put aside all weapons of flesh against
thy heathen countrymen, and depend alone on St. Michael to fight for us?
Thinkest thou that the saint would ever suffer his holy thumb to fall
into the hands of the Gentiles?--never!  Go to, thou art not fit to have
conduct of the King's wars.  Go to, and repent, my son, or the King shall
hear of it."

"Ah, wolf in sheep's clothing!" muttered the Dane, turning on his heel;
"if thy monastery were but built on the other side the Humber!"

The cheapman heard him, and smiled.  While such the scene in the
ante-room, we follow Harold into the King's presence.

On entering, he found there a man in the prime of life, and though richly
clad in embroidered gonna, and with gilt ateghar at his side, still with
the loose robe, the long moustache, and the skin of the throat and right
hand punctured with characters and devices, which proved his adherence to
the fashions of the Saxon [120].  And Harold's eye sparkled, for in this
guest he recognized the father of Aldyth, Earl Algar, son of Leofric.
The two nobles exchanged grave salutations, and each eyed the other
wistfully.

The contrast between the two was striking.  The Danish race were men
generally of larger frame and grander mould than the Saxon [121]; and
though in all else, as to exterior, Harold was eminently Saxon, yet, in
common with his brothers, he took from the mother's side the lofty air
and iron frame of the old kings of the sea.  But Algar, below the middle
height, though well set, was slight in comparison with Harold. His
strength was that which men often take rather from the nerve than the
muscle; a strength that belongs to quick tempers and restless energies.
His light blue eye, singularly vivid and glittering; his quivering lip,
the veins swelling at each emotion on the fair white temples; the long
yellow hair, bright as gold, and resisting, in its easy curls, all
attempts to curb it into the smooth flow most in fashion; the nervous
movements of the gesture; the somewhat sharp and hasty tones of the
voice; all opposed, as much as if the two men were of different races,
the steady, deep eye of Harold, his composed mien, sweet and majestic,
his decorous locks parted on the king-like front, with their large single
curl where they touched the shoulder. Intelligence and will were apparent
in both the men; but the intelligence of one was acute and rapid, that of
the other profound and steadfast; the will of one broke in flashes of
lightning, that of the other was calm as the summer sun at noon.

"Thou art welcome, Harold," said the King, with less than his usual
listlessness, and with a look of relief as the Earl approached him.

"Our good Algar comes to us with a suit well worthy consideration, though
pressed somewhat hotly, and evincing too great a desire for goods
worldly; contrasting in this his most laudable father our well-beloved
Leofric, who spends his substance in endowing monasteries and dispensing
alms; wherefore he shall receive a hundred-fold in the treasure-house
above."

"A good interest, doubtless, my lord the King," said Algar; quickly, "but
one that is not paid to his heirs; and the more need, if my father (whom
I blame not for doing as he lists with his own) gives all he hath to the
monks--the more need, I say, to take care that his son shall be enabled
to follow his example.  As it is, most noble King, I fear me that Algar,
son of Leofric, will have nothing to give.  In brief, Earl Harold,"
continued Algar, turning to his fellow-thegn--"in brief, thus stands the
matter.  When our lord the King was first graciously pleased to consent
to rule in England, the two chiefs who most assured his throne were thy
father and mine: often foes, they laid aside feud and jealousy for the
sake of the Saxon line.  Now, since then, thy father hath strung earldom
to earldom, like links in a coat-mail.  And, save Northumbria and Mercia;
well-nigh all England falls to him and his sons: whereas my father
remains what he was, and my father's son stands landless and penceless.
In thine absence the King was graciously pleased to bestow on me thy
father's earldom; men say that I ruled it well.  Thy father returns, and
though" (here Algar's eyes shot fire, and his hand involuntarily rested
on his ateghar) "I could have held it, methinks, by the strong hand, I
gave it up at my father's prayer and the King's hest, with a free heart.
Now, therefore, I come to my lord, and I ask, 'What lands and what
lordships canst thou spare in broad England to Algar, once Earl of
Wessex, and son to the Leofric whose hand smoothed the way to thy
throne?'  My lord the King is pleased to preach to me contempt of the
world; thou dost not despise the world, Earl of the East Angles,--what
sayest thou to the heir of Leofric?"

"That thy suit is just," answered Harold, calmly, "but urged with small
reverence."

Earl Algar bounded like a stag that the arrow hath startled.

"It becomes thee, who hast backed thy suits with warships and mail, to
talk of reverence, and rebuke one whose fathers reigned over earldoms
[122], when thine were, no doubt, ceorls at the plough.  But for Edric
Streone, the traitor and low-born, what had been Wolnoth, thy grandsire?"

So rude and home an assault in the presence of the King, who, though
personally he loved Harold in his lukewarm way, yet, like all weak men,
was not displeased to see the strong split their strength against each
other, brought the blood into Harold's cheek; but he answered calmly:

"We live in a land, son of Leofric, in which birth, though not
disesteemed, gives of itself no power in council or camp.  We belong to a
land where men are valued for what they are, not for what their dead
ancestors might have been.  So has it been for ages in Saxon England,
where my fathers, through Godwin, as thou sayest, might have been ceorls;
and so, I have heard, it is in the land of the martial Danes, where my
fathers, through Githa, reigned on the thrones of the North."

"Thou dost well," said Algar, gnawing his lip, "to shelter thyself on the
spindle side, but we Saxons of pure descent think little of your kings of
the North, pirates and idolaters, and eaters of horseflesh; but enjoy
what thou hast, and let Algar have his clue."

"It is for the King, not his servant, to answer the prayer of Algar,"
said Harold, withdrawing to the farther end of the room.

Algar's eye followed him, and observing that the King was fast sinking
into one of the fits of religious reverie in which he sought to be
inspired with a decision, whenever his mind was perplexed, he moved with
a light step to Harold, put his band on his shoulder, and whispered:

"We do ill to quarrel with each other--I repent me of hot words--enough.
Thy father is a wise man, and sees far--thy father would have us friends.
Be it so.  Hearken my daughter Aldyth is esteemed not the least fair of
the maidens in England; I will give her to thee as thy wife, and as thy
morgen gift, thou shalt will for me from the King the earldom forfeited
by thy brother Sweyn, now parcelled out amongst sub-earls and
thegns--easy enow to control.  By the shrine of St. Alban, dost thou
hesitate, man?"

"No, not an instant," said Harold, stung to the quick.  "Not, couldst
thou offer me all Mercia as her dower, would I wed the daughter of Algar;
and bend my knee, as a son to a wife's father, to the man who despises my
