more to the laws than his good arm for his safety; but, letting this
pass, I beseech thee to avise me if my Lord Warwick be still in the
city?"

"Yes, marry, I know that by the hostelries, which swarm with his
badges, and the oxen, that go in scores to the shambles!  It is a
shame to the Estate to see one subject so great, and it bodes no good
to our peace.  The earl is preparing the most magnificent embassage
that ever crossed the salt seas--I would it were not to the French,
for our interests lie contrary; but thou hast some days yet to rest
here and grow stout, for I would not have thee present thyself with a
visage of chalk to a man who values his kind mainly by their thews and
their sinews.  Moreover, thou shouldst send for the tailor, and get
thee trimmed to the mark.  It would be a long step in thy path to
promotion, an' the earl would take thee in his train; and the gaudier
thy plumes, why, the better chance for thy flight.  Wherefore, since
thou sayest they are thus friendly to thee under this roof, bide yet a
while peacefully; I will send thee the mercer, and the clothier, and
the tailor, to divert thy impatience.  And as these fellows are
greedy, my gentle and dear Master Nevile, may I ask, without offence,
how thou art provided?"

"Nay, nay, I have moneys at the hostelrie, an' thou wilt send me my
mails.  For the rest, I like thy advice, and will take it."

"Good!" answered Nicholas.  "Hem! thou seemest to have got into a poor
house,--a decayed gentleman, I wot, by the slovenly ruin!"

"I would that were the worst," replied Marmaduke, solemnly, and under
his breath; and therewith he repeated to Nicholas the adventure on the
pastime-ground, the warnings of the timbrel-girls, and the "awsome"
learning and strange pursuits of his host. As for Sibyll, he was
evidently inclined to attribute to glamour the reluctant admiration
with which she had inspired him.  "For," said he, "though I deny not
that the maid is passing fair, there be many with rosier cheeks, and
taller by this hand!"

Nicholas listened, at first, with the peculiar expression of shrewd
sarcasm which mainly characterized his intelligent face, but his
attention grew more earnest before Marmaduke had concluded.

"In regard to the maiden," said he, smiling and shaking his head, "it
is not always the handsomest that win us the most,--while fair Meg
went a maying, black Meg got to church; and I give thee more
reasonable warning than thy timbrel-girls, when, in spite of thy cold
language, I bid thee take care of thyself against her attractions;
for, verily, my dear foster-brother, thou must mend and not mar thy
fortune, by thy love matters; and keep thy heart whole for some fair
one with marks in her gipsire, whom the earl may find out for thee.
Love and raw pease are two ill things in the porridge-pot.  But the
father!--I mind me now that I have heard of his name, through my
friend Master Caxton, the mercer, as one of prodigious skill in the
mathematics.  I should like much to see him, and, with thy leave (an'
he ask me), will tarry to supper.  But what are these?"--and Nicholas
took up one of the illuminated manuscripts which Sibyll had prepared
for sale.  "By the blood! this is couthly and marvellously blazoned."

The book was still in his hands when Sibyll entered.  Nicholas stared
at her, as he bowed with a stiff and ungraceful embarrassment, which
often at first did injustice to his bold, clear intellect, and his
perfect self-possession in matters of trade or importance.

"The first woman face," muttered Nicholas to himself, "I ever saw that
had the sense of a man's.  And, by the rood, what a smile!"

"Is this thy friend, Master Nevile?" said Sibyll, with a glance at the
goldsmith.  "He is welcome.  But is it fair and courteous, Master
Nelwyn--"

"Alwyn, an' it please you, fair mistress.  A humble name, but good
Saxon,--which, I take it, Nelwyn is not," interrupted Nicholas.

"Master Alwyn, forgive me; but can I forgive thee so readily for thy
espial of my handiwork, without license or leave?"

"Yours, comely mistress!" exclaimed Nicholas, opening his eyes, and
unheeding the gay rebuke--"why, this is a master-hand.  My Lord
Scales--nay, the Earl of Worcester himself--hath scarce a finer in all
his amassment."

"Well, I forgive thy fault for thy flattery; and I pray thee, in my
father's name, to stay and sup with thy friend."  Nicholas bowed low,
and still riveted his eyes on the book with such open admiration, that
Marmaduke thought it right to excuse his abstraction; but there was
something in that admiration which raised the spirits of Sibyll, which
gave her hope when hope was well-nigh gone; and she became so
vivacious, so debonair, so charming, in the flow of a gayety natural
to her, and very uncommon with English maidens, but which she took
partly, perhaps, from her French blood, and partly from the example of
girls and maidens of French extraction in Margaret's court, that
Nicholas Alwyn thought he had never seen any one so irresistible.
Madge had now served the evening meal, put in her head to announce it,
and Sibyll withdrew to summon her father.

"I trust he will not tarry too long, for I am sharp set!" muttered
Marmaduke.  "What thinkest thou of the damozel?" "Marry," answered
Alwyn, thoughtfully, "I pity and marvel at her.  There is eno' in her
to furnish forth twenty court beauties.  But what good can so much wit
and cunning do to an honest maiden?"

"That is exactly my own thought," said Marmaduke; and both the young
men sunk into silence, till Sibyll re-entered with her father.

To the surprise of Marmaduke, Nicholas Alwyn, whose less gallant
manner he was inclined to ridicule, soon contrived to rouse their host
from his lethargy, and to absorb all the notice of Sibyll; and the
surprise was increased, when he saw that his friend appeared not
unfamiliar with those abstruse and mystical sciences in which Adam was
engaged.

"What!" said Adam, "you know, then, my deft and worthy friend Master
Caxton!  He hath seen notable things abroad--"

"Which, he more than hints," said Nicholas, "will lower the value of
those manuscripts this fair damozel has so couthly enriched; and that
he hopes, ere long, to show the Englishers how to make fifty, a
hundred,--nay even five hundred exemplars of the choicest book, in a
much shorter time than a scribe would take in writing out two or three
score pages in a single copy."

"Verily," said Marmaduke, with a smile of compassion, "the poor man
must be somewhat demented; for I opine that the value of such
curiosities must be in their rarity; and who would care for a book, if
five hundred others had precisely the same?--allowing always, good
Nicholas, for thy friend's vaunting and over-crowing.  Five hundred!
By'r Lady, there would be scarcely five hundred fools in merry England
to waste good nobles on spoilt rags, specially while bows and mail are
so dear."

"Young gentleman," said Adam, rebukingly, "meseemeth that thou
wrongest our age and country, to the which, if we have but peace and
freedom, I trust the birth of great discoveries is ordained.  Certes,
Master Alwyn," he added, turning to the goldsmith, "this achievement
maybe readily performed, and hath existed, I heard an ingenious
Fleming say years ago, for many ages amongst a strange people [Query,
the Chinese?] known to the Venetians!  But dost thou think there is
much appetite among those who govern the State to lend encouragement
to such matters?"

"My master serves my Lord Hastings, the king's chamberlain, and my
lord has often been pleased to converse with me, so that I venture to
say, from my knowledge of his affection to all excellent craft and
lere, that whatever will tend to make men wiser will have his
countenance and favour with the king."

"That is it, that is it!" exclaimed Adam, rubbing his hands.  "My
invention shall not die!"

"And that invention--"

"Is one that will multiply exemplars of books without hands; works of
craft without 'prentice or journeyman; will move wagons and litters
without horses; will direct ships without sails; will--But, alack! it
is not yet complete, and, for want of means, it never may be."

Sibyll still kept her animated countenance fixed on Alwyn, whose
intelligence she had already detected, and was charmed with the
profound attention with which he listened.  But her eye glancing from
his sharp features to the handsome, honest face of the Nevile, the
contrast was so forcible, that she could not restrain her laughter,
though, the moment after, a keen pang shot through her heart.  The
worthy Marmaduke had been in the act of conveying his cup to his lips;
the cup stood arrested midway, his jaws dropped, his eyes opened to
their widest extent, an expression of the most evident consternation
and dismay spoke in every feature; and when he heard the merry laugh
of Sibyll, he pushed his stool from her as far as he well could, and
surveyed her with a look of mingled fear and pity.

"Alas! thou art sure my poor father is a wizard now?"

"Pardie!" answered the Nevile.  "Hath he not said so?  Hath he not
spoken of wagons without horses, ships without sails?  And is not all
this what every dissour and jongleur tells us of in his stories of
Merlin?  Gentle maiden," he added earnestly, drawing nearer to her,
and whispering in a voice of much simple pathos, "thou art young, and
I owe thee much.  Take care of thyself.  Such wonders and derring-do
are too solemn for laughter."

"Ah," answered Sibyll, rising, "I fear they are.  How can I expect the
people to be wiser than thou, or their hard natures kinder in their
judgment than thy kind heart?" Her low and melancholy voice went to
the heart thus appealed to.  Marmaduke also rose, and followed her
into the parlour, or withdrawing-closet, while Adam and the goldsmith
continued to converse (though Alwyn's eye followed the young hostess),
the former appearing perfectly unconscious of the secession of his
other listeners.  But Alwyn's attention occasionally wandered, and he
soon contrived to draw his host into the parlour.

When Nicholas rose, at last, to depart, he beckoned Sibyll aside.
"Fair mistress," said he, with some awkward hesitation, "forgive a
plain, blunt tongue; but ye of the better birth are not always above
aid, even from such as I am.  If you would sell these blazoned
manuscripts, I can not only obtain you a noble purchaser in my Lord
Scales, or in my Lord Hastings, an equally ripe scholar, but it may be
the means of my procuring a suitable patron for your father; and, in
these times, the scholar must creep under the knight's manteline."

"Master Alwyn," said Sibyll, suppressing her tears, "it was for my
father's sake that these labours were wrought.  We are poor and
friendless.  Take the manuscripts, and sell them as thou wilt, and God
and Saint Mary requite thee!"

"Your father is a great man," said Alwyn, after a pause.

"But were he to walk the streets, they would stone him," replied
Sibyll, with a quiet bitterness.

Here the Nevile, carefully shunning the magician, who, in the nervous
excitement produced by the conversation of a mind less uncongenial
than he had encountered for many years, seemed about to address him--
here, I say, the Nevile chimed in, "Hast thou no weapon but thy
bludgeon?  Dear foster-brother, I fear for thy safety."

"Nay, robbers rarely attack us mechanical folk; and I know my way
better than thou.  I shall find a boat near York House; so pleasant
night and quick cure to thee, honoured foster-brother.  I will send
the tailor and other craftsmen to-morrow."

"And at the same time," whispered Marmaduke, accompanying his friend
to the door, "send me a breviary, just to patter an ave or so.  This
gray-haired carle puts my heart in a tremble.  Moreover, buy me a
gittern--a brave one--for the damozel.  She is too proud to take
money, and, 'fore Heaven, I have small doubts the old wizard could
turn my hose into nobles an' he had a mind for such gear.  Wagons
without horses, ships without sails, quotha!"

As soon as Alwyn had departed, Madge appeared with the final
refreshment, called "the Wines," consisting of spiced hippocras and
confections, of the former of which the Nevile partook in solemn
silence.




CHAPTER VII.

THERE IS A ROD FOR THE BACK OF EVERY FOOL WHO WOULD BE WISER THAN HIS
GENERATION.

The next morning, when Marmaduke descended to the hall, Madge,
accosting him on the threshold, informed him that Mistress Sibyll was
unwell, and kept her chamber, and that Master Warner was never visible
much before noon.  He was, therefore, prayed to take his meal alone.
"Alone" was a word peculiarly unwelcome to Marmaduke Nevile, who was
an animal thoroughly social and gregarious.  He managed, therefore, to
detain the old servant, who, besides the liking a skilful leech
naturally takes to a thriving patient, had enough of her sex about her
to be pleased with a comely face and a frank, good-humoured voice.
Moreover, Marmaduke, wishing to satisfy his curiosity, turned the
conversation upon Warner and Sibyll, a theme upon which the old woman
was well disposed to be garrulous.  He soon learned the poverty of the
mansion and the sacrifice of the gittern; and his generosity and
compassion were busily engaged in devising some means to requite the
hospitality he had received, without wounding the pride of his host,
when the arrival of his mails, together with the visits of the tailor
and mercer, sent to him by Alwyn, diverted his thoughts into a new
channel.

Between the comparative merits of gowns and surcoats, broad-toed shoes
and pointed, some time was disposed of with much cheerfulness and
edification; but when his visitors had retired, the benevolent mind of
the young guest again recurred to the penury of his host. Placing his
marks before him on the table in the little withdrawing parlour, he
began counting them over, and putting aside the sum he meditated
devoting to Warner's relief.  "But how," he muttered, "how to get him
to take the gold.  I know, by myself, what a gentleman and a knight's
son must feel at the proffer of alms--pardie!  I would as lief Alwyn
had struck me as offered me his gipsire,--the ill-mannered,
affectionate fellow!  I must think--I must think--"

And while still thinking, the door softly opened, and Warner himself,
in a high state of abstraction and revery, stalked noiselessly into
the room, on his way to the garden, in which, when musing over some
new spring for his invention, he was wont to peripatize.  The sight of
the gold on the table struck full on the philosopher's eyes, and waked
him at once from his revery.  That gold--oh, what precious
instruments, what learned manuscripts it could purchase!  That gold,
it was the breath of life to his model!  He walked deliberately up to
the table, and laid his hand upon one of the little heaps.  Marmaduke
drew back his stool, and stared at him with open mouth.

"Young man, what wantest thou with all this gold?" said Adam, in a
petulant, reproachful tone.  "Put it up! put it up!  Never let the
poor see gold; it tempts them, sir,--it tempts them."  And so saying,
the student abruptly turned away his eyes, and moved towards the
garden.  Marmaduke rose and put himself in Adam's way.  "Honoured
sir," said the young man, "you say justly what want I with all this
gold?  The only gold a young man should covet is eno' to suffice for
the knight's spurs to his heels.  If, without offence, you would--that
is--ahem!--I mean,--Gramercy!  I shall never say it, but I believe my
father owed your father four marks, and he bade me repay them.  Here,
sir!"  He held out the glittering coins; the philosopher's hand closed
on them as the fish's maw closes on the bait.  Adam burst into a
laugh, that sounded strangely weird and unearthly upon Marmaduke's
startled ear.

"All this for me!" he exclaimed.  "For me!  No, no, no! for me, for
IT--I take it--I take it, sir!  I will pay it back with large usury.
Come to me this day year, when this world will be a new world, and
Adam Warner will be--ha! ha!  Kind Heaven, I thank thee!"  Suddenly
turning away, the philosopher strode through the hall, opened the
front door, and escaped into the street.

"By'r Lady," said Marmaduke, slowly recovering his surprise, "I need
not have been so much at a loss; the old gentleman takes to my gold as
kindly as if it were mother's milk.  'Fore Heaven, mine host's laugh
is a ghastly thing!"  So soliloquizing, he prudently put up the rest
of his money, and locked his mails.

As time went on, the young man became exceedingly weary of his own
company.  Sibyll still withheld her appearance; the gloom of the old
hall, the uncultivated sadness of the lonely garden, preyed upon his
spirits.  At length, impatient to get a view of the world without, he
mounted a high stool in the hall, and so contrived to enjoy the
prospect which the unglazed wicker lattice, deep set in the wall,
afforded.  But the scene without was little more animated than that
within,--all was so deserted in the neighbourhood,--the shops mean and
scattered, the thoroughfare almost desolate.  At last he heard a
shout, or rather hoot, at a distance; and, turning his attention
whence it proceeded, he beheld a figure emerge from an alley opposite
the casement, with a sack under one arm, and several books heaped
under the other.  At his heels followed a train of ragged boys,
shouting and hallooing, "The wizard! the wizard!--Ah!  Bah!  The old
devil's kin!"  At this cry the dull neighbourhood seemed suddenly to
burst forth into life.  From the casements and thresholds of every
house curious faces emerged, and many voices of men and women joined,
in deeper bass, with the shrill tenor of the choral urchins, "The
wizard! the wizard! out at daylight!"  The person thus stigmatized, as
he approached the house, turned his face with an expression of wistful
perplexity from side to side.  His lips moved convulsively, and his
face was very pale, but he spoke not.  And now, the children, seeing
him near his refuge, became more outrageous.  They placed themselves
menacingly before him, they pulled his robe, they even struck at him;
and one, bolder than the rest, jumped up, and plucked his beard.  At
this last insult, Adam Warner, for it was he, broke silence; but such
was the sweetness of his disposition, that it was rather with pity
than reproof in his voice, that he said,--

"Fie, little one!  I fear me thine own age will have small honour if
thou thus mockest mature years in me."

This gentleness only served to increase the audacity of his
persecutors, who now, momently augmenting, presented a formidable
obstacle to further progress.  Perceiving that he could not advance
without offensive measures on his own part, the poor scholar halted;
and looking at the crowd with mild dignity, he asked, "What means
this, my children?  How have I injured you?"

"The wizard! the wizard!" was the only answer he received.  Adam
shrugged his shoulders, and strode on with so sudden a step, that one
of the smaller children, a curly-headed laughing rogue, of about eight
years old, was thrown down at his feet, and the rest gave way.  But
the poor man, seeing one of his foes thus fallen, instead of pursuing
his victory, again paused, and forgetful of the precious burdens he
carried, let drop the sack and books, and took up the child in his
arms.  On seeing their companion in the embrace of the wizard, a
simultaneous cry of horror broke from the assemblage, "He is going to
curse poor Tim!"

"My child!  my boy!" shrieked a woman, from one of the casements; "let
go my child!"

On his part, the boy kicked and shrieked lustily, as Adam, bending his
noble face tenderly over him, said, "Thou art not hurt, child.  Poor
boy! thinkest thou I would harm thee?"  While he spoke a storm of
missiles--mud,  dirt,  sticks, bricks, stones--from the enemy, that
had now fallen back in the rear, burst upon him.  A stone struck him
on the shoulder.  Then his face changed; an angry gleam shot from his
deep, calm eyes; he put down the child, and, turning steadily to the
grown people at the windows, said, "Ye train your children ill;"
picked up his sack and books, sighed, as he saw the latter stained by
the mire, which he wiped with his long sleeve, and too proud to show
fear, slowly made for his door.  Fortunately Sibyll had heard the
clamour, and was ready to admit her father, and close the door upon
the rush which instantaneously followed his escape.  The baffled rout
set up a yell of wrath, and the boys were now joined by several foes
more formidable from the adjacent houses; assured in their own minds
that some terrible execration had been pronounced upon the limbs and
body of Master Tim, who still continued bellowing and howling,
probably from the excitement of finding himself raised to the dignity
of a martyr, the pious neighbours poured forth, with oaths and curses,
and such weapons as they could seize in haste, to storm the wizard's
fortress.

From his casement Marmaduke Nevile had espied all that had hitherto
passed, and though indignant at the brutality of the persecutors, he
had thought it by no means unnatural.  "If men, gentlemen born, will
read uncanny books, and resolve to be wizards, why, they must reap
what they sow," was the logical reflection that passed through the
mind of that ingenuous youth; but when he now perceived the arrival of
more important allies, when stones began to fly through the wicker
lattice, when threats of setting fire to the house and burning the
sorcerer who muttered spells over innocent little boys were heard,
seriously increasing in depth and loudness, Marmaduke felt his
chivalry called forth, and with some difficulty opening the rusty
wicket in the casement, he exclaimed: "Shame on you, my countrymen,
for thus disturbing in broad day a peaceful habitation!  Ye call mine
host a wizard.  Thus much say I on his behalf: I was robbed and
wounded a few nights since in your neighbourhood, and in this house
alone I found shelter and healing."

The unexpected sight of the fair young face of Marmaduke Nevile, and
the healthful sound of his clear ringing voice, produced a momentary
effect on the besiegers, when one of them, a sturdy baker, cried out,
"Heed him not,--he is a goblin.  Those devil-mongers can bake ye a
dozen such every moment, as deftly as I can draw loaves from the
oven!"

This speech turned the tide, and at that instant a savage-looking man,
the father of the aggrieved boy, followed by his wife, gesticulating
and weeping, ran from his house, waving a torch in his right hand, his
arm bare to the shoulder; and the cry of "Fire the door!" was
universal.

In fact, the danger now grew imminent: several of the party were
already piling straw and fagots against the threshold, and Marmaduke
began to think the only chance of life to his host and Sibyll was in
flight by some back way, when he beheld a man, clad somewhat in the
fashion of a country yeoman, a formidable knotted club in his hand,
pushing his way, with Herculean shoulders, through the crowd; and
stationing himself before the threshold and brandishing aloft his
formidable weapon, he exclaimed, "What!  In the devil's name, do you
mean to get yourselves all hanged for riot?  Do you think that King
Edward is as soft a man as King Henry was, and that he will suffer any
one but himself to set fire to people's houses in this way?  I dare
say you are all right enough in the main, but by the blood of Saint
Thomas, I will brain the first man who advances a step,--by way of
preserving the necks of the rest!"

"A Robin! a Robin!" cried several of the mob.  "It is our good friend
Robin.  Harken to Robin.  He is always right."

"Ay, that I am!" quoth the defender; "you know that well enough.  If I
had my way, the world should be turned upside down, but what the poor
folk should get nearer to the sun!  But what I say is this, never go
against law, while the law is too strong.  And it were a sad thing to
see fifty fine fellows trussed up for burning an old wizard.  So, be
off with you, and let us, at least all that can afford it, make for
Master Sancroft's hostelrie and talk soberly over our ale.  For
little, I trow, will ye work now your blood's up."

This address was received with a shout of approbation.  The father of
the injured child set his broad foot on his torch, the baker chucked
up his white cap, the ragged boys yelled out, "A Robin! a Robin!" and
in less than two minutes the place was as empty as it had been before
the appearance of the scholar.  Marmaduke, who, though so ignorant of
books, was acute and penetrating in all matters of action, could not
help admiring the address and dexterity of the club-bearer; and the
danger being now over, withdrew from the casement, in search of the
inmates of the house.  Ascending the stairs, he found on the landing-
