placed two seats of state, and, from the dais, at the same time,
advanced the Duke and Duchess of Clarence.  The king prevented their
kneeling, and kissed Isabel slightly and gravely on the forehead.
"Thus, noble lady, I greet the entrance of the Duchess of Clarence
into the royalty of England."

Without pausing for reply, he passed on and seated himself on the
throne, while Isabel and her husband took possession of the state
chairs on either hand.  At a gesture of the king's the countess and
Anne placed themselves on seats less raised, but still upon the dais.
But now as Edward sat, the hall grew gradually full of lords and
knights who commanded in Warwick's train, while the earl and the
archbishop stood mute in the centre, the one armed cap-a-pie, leaning
on his sword, the other with his arms folded in his long robes.

The king's eye, clear, steady, and majestic, roved round that martial
audience, worthy to be a monarch's war-council, and not one of whom
marched under a monarch's banner!  Their silence, their discipline,
the splendour of their arms, the greater splendour of their noble
names, contrasted painfully with the little mutinous camp of Olney,
and the surly, untried recruits of Anthony Woodville.  But Edward,
whose step, whose form, whose aspect, proclaimed the man conscious of
his rights to be lord of all, betrayed not to those around him the
kingly pride, the lofty grief, that swelled within his heart.  Still
seated, he raised his left hand to command silence; with the right he
replaced his plumed cap upon his brow.

"Lords and gentlemen," he said (arrogating to himself at once, as a
thing of course, that gorgeous following), "we have craved leave of
our host to address to you some words,--words which it pleases a king
to utter, and which may not be harsh to the ears of a loyal subject.
Nor will we, at this great current of unsteady fortune, make excuse,
noble ladies, to you, that we speak of war to knighthood, which is
ever the sworn defender of the daughter and the wife,--the daughters
and the wife of our cousin Warwick have too much of hero-blood in
their blue veins to grow pale at the sight of heroes.  Comrades in
arms! thus far towards our foe upon the frontier we have marched,
without a sword drawn or an arrow launched from an archer's bow.  We
believe that a blessing settles on the head of a true king, and that
the trumpet of a good angel goes before his path, announcing the
victory which awaits him.  Here, in the hall of the Earl of Warwick,
our captain-general, we thank you for your cheerful countenance and
your loyal service; and here, as befits a king, we promise to you
those honours a king alone worthily can bestow."  He paused, and his
keen eye glanced from chief to chief as he resumed: "We are informed
that certain misguided and traitor lords have joined the Rose of
Lancaster.  Whoever so doth is attainted, life and line, evermore!
His lands and dignities are forfeit to enrich and to ennoble the men
who strike for me.  Heaven grant I may have foes eno' to reward all my
friends!  To every baron who owns Edward IV. king (ay, and not king in
name, king in banquet and in bower, but leader and captain in the
war), I trust to give a new barony, to every knight a new knight's
fee, to every yeoman a hyde of land, to every soldier a year's pay.
What more I can do, let it be free for any one to suggest,--for my
domains of York are broad, and my heart is larger still!"

A murmur of applause and reverence went round.  Vowed, as those
warriors were, to the earl, they felt that A MONARCH was amongst them.

"What say you, then?  We are ripe for glory.  Three days will we halt
at Middleham, guest to our noble subject."

"Three days, sire!" repeated Warwick, in a voice of surprise.

"Yes; and this, fair cousin, and ye, lords and gentlemen, is my reason
for the delay.  I have despatched Sir William, Lord de Hastings, to
the Duke of Gloucester, with command to join us here (the archbishop
started, but instantly resumed his earnest, placid aspect); to the
Lord Montagu, Earl of Northumberland, to muster all the vassals of our
shire of York.  As three streams that dash into the ocean, shall our
triple army meet and rush to the war.  Not even, gentlemen, not even
to the great Earl of Warwick will Edward IV. be so beholden for
roiaulme and renown, as to march but a companion to the conquest. If
ye were raised in Warwick's name, not mine,--why, be it so!  I envy
him such friends; but I will have an army of mine own, to show mine
English soldiery how a Plantagenet battles for his crown.  Gentlemen,
ye are dismissed to your repose.  In three days we march! and if any
of you know in these fair realms the man, be he of York or of
Lancaster, more fit to command brave subjects than he who now
addresses you, I say to that man, turn rein, and leave us!  Let
tyrants and cowards enforce reluctant service,--my crown was won by
the hearts of my people!  Girded by those hearts, let me reign, or,
mourned by them, let me fall!  So God and Saint George favour me as I
speak the truth!"

And as the king ceased, he uncovered his head, and kissed the cross of
his sword.  A thrill went through the audience.  Many were there,
disaffected to his person, and whom Warwick's influence alone could
have roused to arms; but at the close of an address spirited and loyal
in itself, and borrowing thousand-fold effect by the voice and mien of
the speaker, no feeling but that of enthusiastic loyalty, of almost
tearful admiration, was left in those steel-clad breasts.

As the king lifted on high the cross of his sword, every blade leaped
from its scabbard, and glittered in the air; and the dusty banners in
the hall waved, as to a mighty blast, when, amidst the rattle of
armour, burst forth the universal cry, "Long live Edward IV.!  Long
live the king!"

The sweet countess, even amidst the excitement, kept her eyes
anxiously fixed on Warwick, whose countenance, however shaded by the
black plumes of his casque, though the visor was raised, revealed
nothing of his mind.  Her daughters were more powerfully affected; for
Isabel's intellect was not so blinded by her ambition but that the
kingliness of Edward forced itself upon her with a might and solemn
weight, which crushed, for the moment, her aspiring hopes.

Was this the man unfit to reign?  This the man voluntarily to resign a
crown?  This the man whom George of Clarence, without fratricide,
could succeed?  No!--there spoke the soul of the First and the Third
Edward!  There shook the mane and there glowed the eye of the
indomitable lion of the august Plantagenets!  And the same conviction,
rousing softer and holier sorrow, sat on the heart of Anne; she saw,
as for the first time, clearly before her the awful foe with whom her
ill-omened and beloved prince had to struggle for his throne.  In
contrast beside that form, in the prime of manly youth--a giant in its
strength, a god in its beauty--rose the delicate shape of the
melancholy boy who, afar in exile, coupled in his dreams, the sceptre
and the bride!  By one of those mysteries which magnetism seeks to
explain, in the strong intensity of her emotions, in the tremor of her
shaken nerves, fear seemed to grow prophetic.  A stream as of blood
rose up from the dizzy floors.  The image of her young prince, bound
and friendless, stood before the throne of that warrior-king.  In the
waving glitter of the countless swords raised on high, she saw the
murderous blade against the boy-heir of Lancaster descend--descend!
Her passion, her terror, at the spectre which fancy thus evoked,
seized and overcame her; and ere the last hurrah sent its hollow echo
to the raftered roof, she sank from her chair to the ground, hueless
and insensible as the dead.

The king had not without design permitted the unwonted presence of the
women in this warlike audience,--partly because he was not unaware of
the ambitious spirit of Isabel, partly because he counted on the
affection shown to his boyhood by the countess, who was said to have
singular influence over her lord, but principally because in such a
presence he trusted to avoid all discussion and all questioning, and
to leave the effect of his eloquence, in which he excelled all his
contemporaries, Gloucester alone excepted, single and unimpaired; and
therefore, as he rose, and returned with a majestic bend the
acclamation of the warriors, his eye now turned towards the chairs
where the ladies sat, and he was the first to perceive the swoon of
the fair Anne.

With the tender grace that always characterized his service to women,
he descended promptly from his throne, and raised the lifeless form in
his stalwart arms; and Anne, as he bent over her, looked so strangely
lovely in her marble stillness, that even in that hour a sudden thrill
shot through a heart always susceptible to beauty as the harp-string
to the breeze.

"It is but the heat, lady," said he, to the alarmed countess, "and let
me hope that interest which my fair kinswoman may take in the fortunes
of Warwick and of York, hitherto linked together--"

"May they ever be so!" said Warwick, who, on seeing his daughter's
state, had advanced hastily to the dais; and, moved by the king's
words, his late speech, the evils that surrounded his throne, the
gentleness shown to the beloved Anne, forgetting resentment and
ceremony alike, he held out his mailed hand.  The king, as he resigned
Anne to her mother's arms, grasped with soldierly frankness, and with
the ready wit of the cold intellect which reigned beneath the warm
manner, the hand thus extended, and holding still that iron gauntlet
in his own ungloved and jewelled fingers, he advanced to the verge of
the dais, to which, in the confusion occasioned by Anne's swoon, the
principal officers had crowded, and cried aloud,--

"Behold!  Warwick and Edward thus hand in hand, as they stood when the
clarions sounded the charge at Towton! and that link what swords
forged on a mortal's anvil can rend or sever?"

In an instant every knee there knelt; and Edward exultingly beheld
that what before had been allegiance to the earl was now only homage
to the king.




CHAPTER IX.

WEDDED CONFIDENCE AND LOVE--THE EARL AND THE PRELATE--THE PRELATE AND
THE KING--SCHEMES--WILES--AND THE BIRTH OF A DARK THOUGHT DESTINED TO
ECLIPSE A SUN.

While, preparatory to the banquet, Edward, as was then the daily
classic custom, relaxed his fatigues, mental or bodily, in the
hospitable bath, the archbishop sought the closet of the earl.

"Brother," said he, throwing himself with some petulance into the only
chair the room, otherwise splendid, contained, "when you left me to
seek Edward in the camp of Anthony Woodville, what was the
understanding between us?"

"I know of none," answered the earl, who having doffed his armour, and
dismissed his squires, leaned thoughtfully against the wall, dressed
for the banquet, with the exception of the short surcoat, which lay
glittering on the tabouret.

"You know of none?  Reflect!  Have you brought hither Edward as a
guest or as a prisoner?"

The earl knit his brows--"A prisoner, archbishop?"

The prelate regarded him with a cold smile.

"Warwick, you, who would deceive no other man, now seek to deceive
yourself."  The earl drew back, and his hardy countenance grew a shade
paler.  The prelate resumed: "You have carried Edward from his camp,
and severed him from his troops; you have placed him in the midst of
your own followers; you have led him, chafing and resentful all the
way, to this impregnable keep; and you now pause, amazed by the
grandeur of your captive,--a man who leads to his home a tiger, a
spider who has entangled a hornet in its web!"

"Nay, reverend brother," said the earl, calmly, "ye churchmen never
know what passes in the hearts of those who feel and do not scheme.
When I learned that the king had fled to the Woodvilles, that he was
bent upon violating the pledge given in his name to the insurgent
commons, I vowed that he should redeem my honour and his own, or that
forever I would quit his service.  And here, within these walls which
sheltered his childhood, I trusted, and trust still, to make one last
appeal to his better reason."

"For all that, men now, and history hereafter, will consider Edward as
your captive."

"To living men my words and deeds can clear themselves; and as for
history, let clerks and scholars fool themselves in the lies of
parchment!  He who has acted history, despises the gownsmen who sit in
cloistered ease, and write about what they know not."  The earl
paused, and then continued: "I confess, however, that I have had a
scheme.  I have wished to convince the king how little his mushroom
lords can bestead him in the storm; and that he holds his crown only
from his barons and his people."

"That is, from the Lord Warwick!"

"Perhaps I am the personation of both seignorie and people; but I
design this solely for his welfare.  Ah, the gallant prince--how well
he bore himself to-day!"

"Ay, when stealing all hearts from thee to him."

"And, Vive Dieu, I never loved him so well as when he did!  Methinks
it was for a day like this that I reared his youth and achieved his
crown.  Oh, priest, priest, thou mistakest me.  I am rash, hot,
haughty, hasty; and I love not to bow my knees to a man because they
call him king, if his life be vicious and his word be false.  But
could Edward be ever as to-day, then indeed should I hail a sovereign
whom a baron may reverence and a soldier serve!"

Before the archbishop could reply, the door gently opened, and the
countess appeared.  Warwick seemed glad of the interruption; he turned
quickly--"And how fares my child?"

"Recovered from her strange swoon, and ready to smile at thy return.
Oh, Warwick, thou art reconciled to the king?"

"That glads thee, sister?" said the archbishop.

"Surely.  Is it not for my lord's honour?"

"May he find it so!" said the prelate, and he left the room.

"My priest-brother is chafed," said the earl, smiling.  "Pity he was
not born a trader, he would have made a shrewd hard bargain.  Verily,
our priests burn the Jews out of envy!  Ah, m'amie, how fair thou art
to-day!  Methinks even Isabel's cheek less blooming."  And the warrior
drew the lady towards him, and smoothed her hair, and tenderly kissed
her brow.  "My letter vexed thee, I know, for thou lovest Edward, and
blamest me not for my love to him.  It is true that he hath paltered
with me, and that I had stern resolves, not against his crown, but to
leave him to his fate, and in these halls to resign my charge.  But
while he spoke, and while he looked, methought I saw his mother's
face, and heard his dear father's tone, and the past rushed over me,
and all wrath was gone.  Sonless myself, why would he not be my son?"
The earl's voice trembled, and the tears stood in his dark eyes.

