my knight shall find a venture such as bold knights love, and my debt
shall be paid, and my father none the wiser, and one rogue the less in
the world. Say, is not that a brave plan?"

"Nay, lady, it is a thought which is unworthy of you. How can such as
you speak of violence and of vengeance. Are none to be gentle and kind,
none to be piteous and forgiving? Alas! it is a hard, cruel world, and I
would that I had never left my abbey cell. To hear such words from your
lips is as though I heard an angel of grace preaching the devil's own
creed."

She started from him as a young colt who first feels the bit. "Gramercy
for your rede, young sir!" she said, with a little curtsey. "As I
understand your words, you are grieved that you ever met me, and look
upon me as a preaching devil. Why, my father is a bitter man when he is
wroth, but hath never called me such a name as that. It may be his right
and duty, but certes it is none of thine. So it would be best, since you
think so lowly of me, that you should take this path to the left while
I keep on upon this one; for it is clear that I can be no fit companion
for you." So saying, with downcast lids and a dignity which was somewhat
marred by her bedraggled skirt, she swept off down the muddy track,
leaving Alleyne standing staring ruefully after her. He waited in vain
for some backward glance or sign of relenting, but she walked on with
a rigid neck until her dress was only a white flutter among the leaves.
Then, with a sunken head and a heavy heart, he plodded wearily down the
other path, wroth with himself for the rude and uncouth tongue which had
given offence where so little was intended.

He had gone some way, lost in doubt and in self-reproach, his mind all
tremulous with a thousand new-found thoughts and fears and wonderments,
when of a sudden there was a light rustle of the leaves behind him, and,
glancing round, there was this graceful, swift-footed creature, treading
in his very shadow, with her proud head bowed, even as his was--the
picture of humility and repentance.

"I shall not vex you, nor even speak," she said; "but I would fain keep
with you while we are in the wood."

"Nay, you cannot vex me," he answered, all warm again at the very sight
of her. "It was my rough words which vexed you; but I have been thrown
among men all my life, and indeed, with all the will, I scarce know how
to temper my speech to a lady's ear."

"Then unsay it," cried she quickly; "say that I was right to wish to
have vengeance on the Socman."

"Nay, I cannot do that," he answered gravely.

"Then who is ungentle and unkind now?" she cried in triumph. "How stern
and cold you are for one so young! Art surely no mere clerk, but bishop
or cardinal at the least. Shouldst have crozier for staff and mitre
for cap. Well, well, for your sake I will forgive the Socman and take
vengeance on none but on my own wilful self who must needs run into
danger's path. So will that please you, sir?"

"There spoke your true self," said he; "and you will find more pleasure
in such forgiveness than in any vengeance."

She shook her head, as if by no means assured of it, and then with a
sudden little cry, which had more of surprise than of joy in it, "Here
is Bertrand with the horses!"

Down the glade there came a little green-clad page with laughing eyes,
and long curls floating behind him. He sat perched on a high bay horse,
and held on to the bridle of a spirited black palfrey, the hides of both
glistening from a long run.

"I have sought you everywhere, dear Lady Maude," said he in a
piping voice, springing down from his horse and holding the stirrup.
"Troubadour galloped as far as Holmhill ere I could catch him. I trust
that you have had no hurt or scath?" He shot a questioning glance at
Alleyne as he spoke.

"No, Bertrand," said she, "thanks to this courteous stranger. And now,
sir," she continued, springing into her saddle, "it is not fit that I
leave you without a word more. Clerk or no, you have acted this day as
becomes a true knight. King Arthur and all his table could not have done
more. It may be that, as some small return, my father or his kin may
have power to advance your interest. He is not rich, but he is honored
and hath great friends. Tell me what is your purpose, and see if he may
not aid it."

"Alas! lady, I have now no purpose. I have but two friends in the world,
and they have gone to Christchurch, where it is likely I shall join
them."

"And where is Christchurch?"

"At the castle which is held by the brave knight, Sir Nigel Loring,
constable to the Earl of Salisbury."

To his surprise she burst out a-laughing, and, spurring her palfrey,
dashed off down the glade, with her page riding behind her. Not one word
did she say, but as she vanished amid the trees she half turned in her
saddle and waved a last greeting. Long time he stood, half hoping that
she might again come back to him; but the thud of the hoofs had died
away, and there was no sound in all the woods but the gentle rustle and
dropping of the leaves. At last he turned away and made his way back to
the high-road--another person from the light-hearted boy who had left it
a short three hours before.



CHAPTER X. HOW HORDLE JOHN FOUND A MAN WHOM HE MIGHT FOLLOW.


If he might not return to Beaulieu within the year, and if his brother's
dogs were to be set upon him if he showed face upon Minstead land, then
indeed he was adrift upon earth. North, south, east, and west--he might
turn where he would, but all was equally chill and cheerless. The Abbot
had rolled ten silver crowns in a lettuce-leaf and hid them away in the
bottom of his scrip, but that would be a sorry support for twelve long
months. In all the darkness there was but the one bright spot of the
sturdy comrades whom he had left that morning; if he could find them
again all would be well. The afternoon was not very advanced, for all
that had befallen him. When a man is afoot at cock-crow much may be done
in the day. If he walked fast he might yet overtake his friends ere they
reached their destination. He pushed on therefore, now walking and now
running. As he journeyed he bit into a crust which remained from his
Beaulieu bread, and he washed it down by a draught from a woodland
stream.

It was no easy or light thing to journey through this great forest,
which was some twenty miles from east to west and a good sixteen from
Bramshaw Woods in the north to Lymington in the south. Alleyne, however,
had the good fortune to fall in with a woodman, axe upon shoulder,
trudging along in the very direction that he wished to go. With his
guidance he passed the fringe of Bolderwood Walk, famous for old ash
and yew, through Mark Ash with its giant beech-trees, and on through
the Knightwood groves, where the giant oak was already a great tree,
but only one of many comely brothers. They plodded along together, the
woodman and Alleyne, with little talk on either side, for their thoughts
were as far asunder as the poles. The peasant's gossip had been of the
hunt, of the bracken, of the gray-headed kites that had nested in Wood
Fidley, and of the great catch of herring brought back by the boats of
Pitt's Deep. The clerk's mind was on his brother, on his future--above
all on this strange, fierce, melting, beautiful woman who had broken
so suddenly into his life, and as suddenly passed out of it again. So
_distrait_ was he and so random his answers, that the woodman took
to whistling, and soon branched off upon the track to Burley, leaving
Alleyne upon the main Christchurch road.

Down this he pushed as fast as he might, hoping at every turn and rise
to catch sight of his companions of the morning. From Vinney Ridge to
Rhinefield Walk the woods grow thick and dense up to the very edges of
the track, but beyond the country opens up into broad dun-colored moors,
flecked with clumps of trees, and topping each other in long, low curves
up to the dark lines of forest in the furthest distance. Clouds of
insects danced and buzzed in the golden autumn light, and the air was
full of the piping of the song-birds. Long, glinting dragonflies shot
across the path, or hung tremulous with gauzy wings and gleaming bodies.
Once a white-necked sea eagle soared screaming high over the traveller's
head, and again a flock of brown bustards popped up from among the
bracken, and blundered away in their clumsy fashion, half running, half
flying, with strident cry and whirr of wings.

There were folk, too, to be met upon the road--beggars and couriers,
chapmen and tinkers--cheery fellows for the most part, with a rough jest
and homely greeting for each other and for Alleyne. Near Shotwood he
came upon five seamen, on their way from Poole to Southampton--rude
red-faced men, who shouted at him in a jargon which he could scarce
understand, and held out to him a great pot from which they had been
drinking--nor would they let him pass until he had dipped pannikin in
and taken a mouthful, which set him coughing and choking, with the tears
running down his cheeks. Further on he met a sturdy black-bearded man,
mounted on a brown horse, with a rosary in his right hand and a long
two-handed sword jangling against his stirrup-iron. By his black robe
and the eight-pointed cross upon his sleeve, Alleyne recognized him
as one of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem, whose
presbytery was at Baddesley. He held up two fingers as he passed, with a
"_Benedic, fili mi!_" whereat Alleyne doffed hat and bent knee, looking
with much reverence at one who had devoted his life to the overthrow of
the infidel. Poor simple lad! he had not learned yet that what men are
and what men profess to be are very wide asunder, and that the Knights
of St. John, having come into large part of the riches of the ill-fated
Templars, were very much too comfortable to think of exchanging their
palace for a tent, or the cellars of England for the thirsty deserts of
Syria. Yet ignorance may be more precious than wisdom, for Alleyne as he
walked on braced himself to a higher life by the thought of this other's
sacrifice, and strengthened himself by his example which he could scarce
have done had he known that the Hospitaller's mind ran more upon malmsey
than on Mamelukes, and on venison rather than victories.

As he pressed on the plain turned to woods once more in the region of
Wilverley Walk, and a cloud swept up from the south with the sun shining
through the chinks of it. A few great drops came pattering loudly
down, and then in a moment the steady swish of a brisk shower, with
the dripping and dropping of the leaves. Alleyne, glancing round for
shelter, saw a thick and lofty holly-bush, so hollowed out beneath that
no house could have been drier. Under this canopy of green two men were
already squatted, who waved their hands to Alleyne that he should join
them. As he approached he saw that they had five dried herrings laid
out in front of them, with a great hunch of wheaten bread and a leathern
flask full of milk, but instead of setting to at their food they
appeared to have forgot all about it, and were disputing together with
flushed faces and angry gestures. It was easy to see by their dress and
manner that they were two of those wandering students who formed about
this time so enormous a multitude in every country in Europe. The one
was long and thin, with melancholy features, while the other was fat and
sleek, with a loud voice and the air of a man who is not to be gainsaid.

"Come hither, good youth," he cried, "come hither! _Vultus ingenui
puer_. Heed not the face of my good coz here. _Foenum habet in cornu_,
as Don Horace has it; but I warrant him harmless for all that."

"Stint your bull's bellowing!" exclaimed the other. "If it come to
Horace, I have a line in my mind: _Loquaces si sapiat_----How doth it
run? The English o't being that a man of sense should ever avoid a great
talker. That being so, if all were men of sense then thou wouldst be a
lonesome man, coz."

"Alas! Dicon, I fear that your logic is as bad as your philosophy or
your divinity--and God wot it would be hard to say a worse word than
that for it. For, hark ye: granting, _propter argumentum_, that I am a
talker, then the true reasoning runs that since all men of sense should
avoid me, and thou hast not avoided me, but art at the present moment
eating herrings with me under a holly-bush, ergo you are no man of
sense, which is exactly what I have been dinning into your long ears
ever since I first clapped eyes on your sunken chops."

"Tut, tut!" cried the other. "Your tongue goes like the clapper of
a mill-wheel. Sit down here, friend, and partake of this herring.
Understand first, however, that there are certain conditions attached to
it."

"I had hoped," said Alleyne, falling into the humor of the twain, "that
a tranchoir of bread and a draught of milk might be attached to it."

"Hark to him, hark to him!" cried the little fat man. "It is even thus,
Dicon! Wit, lad, is a catching thing, like the itch or the sweating
sickness. I exude it round me; it is an aura. I tell you, coz, that no
man can come within seventeen feet of me without catching a spark. Look
at your own case. A duller man never stepped, and yet within the week
you have said three things which might pass, and one thing the day we
left Fordingbridge which I should not have been ashamed of myself."

"Enough, rattle-pate, enough!" said the other. "The milk you shall have
and the bread also, friend, together with the herring, but you must hold
the scales between us."

"If he hold the herring he holds the scales, my sapient brother," cried
the fat man. "But I pray you, good youth, to tell us whether you are a
learned clerk, and, if so, whether you have studied at Oxenford or at
Paris."

"I have some small stock of learning," Alleyne answered, picking at his
herring, "but I have been at neither of these places. I was bred amongst
the Cistercian monks at Beaulieu Abbey."

"Pooh, pooh!" they cried both together. "What sort of an upbringing is
that?"

"_Non cuivis contingit adire Corinthum_," quoth Alleyne.

"Come, brother Stephen, he hath some tincture of letters," said the
melancholy man more hopefully. "He may be the better judge, since he
hath no call to side with either of us. Now, attention, friend, and let
your ears work as well as your nether jaw. _Judex damnatur_--you know
the old saw. Here am I upholding the good fame of the learned Duns
Scotus against the foolish quibblings and poor silly reasonings of
Willie Ockham."

"While I," quoth the other loudly, "do maintain the good sense
and extraordinary wisdom of that most learned William against the
crack-brained fantasies of the muddy Scotchman, who hath hid such little
wit as he has under so vast a pile of words, that it is like one drop of
Gascony in a firkin of ditch-water. Solomon his wisdom would not suffice
to say what the rogue means."

"Certes, Stephen Hapgood, his wisdom doth not suffice," cried the other.
"It is as though a mole cried out against the morning star, because he
could not see it. But our dispute, friend, is concerning the nature of
that subtle essence which we call thought. For I hold with the learned
Scotus that thought is in very truth a thing, even as vapor or fumes,
or many other substances which our gross bodily eyes are blind to. For,
look you, that which produces a thing must be itself a thing, and if a
man's thought may produce a written book, then must thought itself be a
material thing, even as the book is. Have I expressed it? Do I make it
plain?"

"Whereas I hold," shouted the other, "with my revered preceptor,
_doctor, praeclarus et excellentissimus_, that all things are but
thought; for when thought is gone I prythee where are the things then?
Here are trees about us, and I see them because I think I see them, but
if I have swooned, or sleep, or am in wine, then, my thought having gone
forth from me, lo the trees go forth also. How now, coz, have I touched
thee on the raw?"

Alleyne sat between them munching his bread, while the twain disputed
across his knees, leaning forward with flushed faces and darting
hands, in all the heat of argument. Never had he heard such jargon of
scholastic philosophy, such fine-drawn distinctions, such cross-fire of
major and minor, proposition, syllogism, attack and refutation. Question
clattered upon answer like a sword on a buckler. The ancients, the
fathers of the Church, the moderns, the Scriptures, the Arabians, were
each sent hurtling against the other, while the rain still dripped and
the dark holly-leaves glistened with the moisture. At last the fat man
seemed to weary of it, for he set to work quietly upon his meal, while
his opponent, as proud as the rooster who is left unchallenged upon the
midden, crowed away in a last long burst of quotation and deduction.
Suddenly, however, his eyes dropped upon his food, and he gave a howl of
dismay.

"You double thief!" he cried, "you have eaten my herrings, and I without
bite or sup since morning."

"That," quoth the other complacently, "was my final argument, my
crowning effort, or _peroratio_, as the orators have it. For, coz, since
all thoughts are things, you have but to think a pair of herrings, and
then conjure up a pottle of milk wherewith to wash them down."

"A brave piece of reasoning," cried the other, "and I know of but one
reply to it." On which, leaning forward, he caught his comrade a rousing
smack across his rosy cheek. "Nay, take it not amiss," he said, "since
all things are but thoughts, then that also is but a thought and may be
disregarded."

This last argument, however, by no means commended itself to the pupil
of Ockham, who plucked a great stick from the ground and signified his
dissent by smiting the realist over the pate with it. By good fortune,
the wood was so light and rotten that it went to a thousand splinters,
but Alleyne thought it best to leave the twain to settle the matter at
their leisure, the more so as the sun was shining brightly once
more. Looking back down the pool-strewn road, he saw the two excited
philosophers waving their hands and shouting at each other, but their
babble soon became a mere drone in the distance, and a turn in the road
hid them from his sight.

And now after passing Holmesley Walk and the Wooton Heath, the forest
began to shred out into scattered belts of trees, with gleam of
corn-field and stretch of pasture-land between. Here and there by the
wayside stood little knots of wattle-and-daub huts with shock-haired
laborers lounging by the doors and red-cheeked children sprawling in
the roadway. Back among the groves he could see the high gable ends and
thatched roofs of the franklins' houses, on whose fields these men found
employment, or more often a thick dark column of smoke marked their
position and hinted at the coarse plenty within. By these signs Alleyne
knew that he was on the very fringe of the forest, and therefore no
great way from Christchurch. The sun was lying low in the west and
shooting its level rays across the long sweep of rich green country,
glinting on the white-fleeced sheep and throwing long shadows from the
red kine who waded knee-deep in the juicy clover. Right glad was the
traveller to see the high tower of Christchurch Priory gleaming in the
mellow evening light, and gladder still when, on rounding a corner, he
came upon his comrades of the morning seated astraddle upon a fallen
tree. They had a flat space before them, on which they alternately threw
little square pieces of bone, and were so intent upon their occupation
that they never raised eye as he approached them. He observed with
astonishment, as he drew near, that the archer's bow was on John's
back, the archer's sword by John's side, and the steel cap laid upon the
tree-trunk between them.

"Mort de ma vie!" Aylward shouted, looking down at the dice. "Never had
I such cursed luck. A murrain on the bones! I have not thrown a good
main since I left Navarre. A one and a three! En avant, camarade!"

"Four and three," cried Hordle John, counting on his great fingers,
"that makes seven. Ho, archer, I have thy cap! Now have at thee for thy
jerkin!"

"Mon Dieu!" he growled, "I am like to reach Christchurch in my shirt."
Then suddenly glancing up, "Hola, by the splendor of heaven, here is our
cher petit! Now, by my ten finger bones! this is a rare sight to mine
eyes." He sprang up and threw his arms round Alleyne's neck, while
John, no less pleased, but more backward and Saxon in his habits, stood
grinning and bobbing by the wayside, with his newly won steel cap stuck
wrong side foremost upon his tangle of red hair.

"Hast come to stop?" cried the bowman, patting Alleyne all over in his
delight. "Shall not get away from us again!"

"I wish no better," said he, with a pringling in the eyes at this hearty
greeting.

"Well said, lad!" cried big John. "We three shall to the wars together,
and the devil may fly away with the Abbot of Beaulieu! But your feet
and hosen are all besmudged. Hast been in the water, or I am the more
mistaken."

"I have in good sooth," Alleyne answered, and then as they journeyed
on their way he told them the many things that had befallen him, his
meeting with the villein, his sight of the king, his coming upon his
brother, with all the tale of the black welcome and of the fair damsel.
They strode on either side, each with an ear slanting towards him, but
ere he had come to the end of his story the bowman had spun round upon
his heel, and was hastening back the way they had come, breathing loudly
through his nose.

"What then?" asked Alleyne, trotting after him and gripping at his
jerkin.

"I am back for Minstead, lad."

"And why, in the name of sense?"

"To thrust a handful of steel into the Socman. What! hale a demoiselle
against her will, and then loose dogs at his own brother! Let me go!"

"Nenny, nenny!" cried Alleyne, laughing. "There was no scath done. Come
back, friend"--and so, by mingled pushing and entreaties, they got his
head round for Christchurch once more. Yet he walked with his chin upon
his shoulder, until, catching sight of a maiden by a wayside well, the
smiles came back to his face and peace to his heart.

"But you," said Alleyne, "there have been changes with you also. Why
should not the workman carry his tools? Where are bow and sword and
cap--and why so warlike, John?"

"It is a game which friend Aylward hath been a-teaching of me."

"And I found him an over-apt pupil," grumbled the bowman. "He hath
stripped me as though I had fallen into the hands of the tardvenus. But,
by my hilt! you must render them back to me, camarade, lest you bring
discredit upon my mission, and I will pay you for them at armorers'
prices."

"Take them back, man, and never heed the pay," said John. "I did but
wish to learn the feel of them, since I am like to have such trinkets
hung to my own girdle for some years to come."

"Ma foi, he was born for a free companion!" cried Aylward, "He hath the
very trick of speech and turn of thought. I take them back then, and
indeed it gives me unease not to feel my yew-stave tapping against my
leg bone. But see, mes garcons, on this side of the church rises the
square and darkling tower of Earl Salisbury's castle, and even from here
I seem to see on yonder banner the red roebuck of the Montacutes."

"Red upon white," said Alleyne, shading his eyes; "but whether roebuck
or no is more than I could vouch. How black is the great tower, and
how bright the gleam of arms upon the wall! See below the flag, how it
twinkles like a star!"

"Aye, it is the steel head-piece of the watchman," remarked the archer.
"But we must on, if we are to be there before the drawbridge rises at
the vespers bugle; for it is likely that Sir Nigel, being so renowned a
soldier, may keep hard discipline within the walls, and let no man enter
after sundown." So saying, he quickened his pace, and the three comrades
were soon close to the straggling and broad-spread town which centered
round the noble church and the frowning castle.

It chanced on that very evening that Sir Nigel Loring, having supped
before sunset, as was his custom, and having himself seen that Pommers
and Cadsand, his two war-horses, with the thirteen hacks, the five
jennets, my lady's three palfreys, and the great dapple-gray roussin,
had all their needs supplied, had taken his dogs for an evening
breather. Sixty or seventy of them, large and small, smooth and
shaggy--deer-hound, boar-hound, blood-hound, wolf-hound, mastiff, alaun,
talbot, lurcher, terrier, spaniel--snapping, yelling and whining, with
score of lolling tongues and waving tails, came surging down the narrow
lane which leads from the Twynham kennels to the bank of Avon. Two
russet-clad varlets, with loud halloo and cracking whips, walked
thigh-deep amid the swarm, guiding, controlling, and urging. Behind
came Sir Nigel himself, with Lady Loring upon his arm, the pair walking
slowly and sedately, as befitted both their age and their condition,
while they watched with a smile in their eyes the scrambling crowd in
front of them. They paused, however, at the bridge, and, leaning their
elbows upon the stonework, they stood looking down at their own faces in
the glassy stream, and at the swift flash of speckled trout against the
tawny gravel.

Sir Nigel was a slight man of poor stature, with soft lisping voice and
gentle ways. So short was he that his wife, who was no very tall woman,
had the better of him by the breadth of three fingers. His sight having
been injured in his early wars by a basketful of lime which had been
emptied over him when he led the Earl of Derby's stormers up the breach
at Bergerac, he had contracted something of a stoop, with a blinking,
peering expression of face. His age was six and forty, but the constant
practice of arms, together with a cleanly life, had preserved his
activity and endurance unimpaired, so that from a distance he seemed to
have the slight limbs and swift grace of a boy. His face, however, was
tanned of a dull yellow tint, with a leathery, poreless look, which
spoke of rough outdoor doings, and the little pointed beard which he
wore, in deference to the prevailing fashion, was streaked and shot with
gray. His features were small, delicate, and regular, with clear-cut,
curving nose, and eyes which jutted forward from the lids. His dress was
simple and yet spruce. A Flandrish hat of beevor, bearing in the band
the token of Our Lady of Embrun, was drawn low upon the left side to
hide that ear which had been partly shorn from his head by a Flemish
man-at-arms in a camp broil before Tournay. His cote-hardie, or tunic,
and trunk-hosen were of a purple plum color, with long weepers which
hung from either sleeve to below his knees. His shoes were of red
leather, daintily pointed at the toes, but not yet prolonged to the
extravagant lengths which the succeeding reign was to bring into
fashion. A gold-embroidered belt of knighthood encircled his loins, with
his arms, five roses gules on a field argent, cunningly worked upon the
clasp. So stood Sir Nigel Loring upon the bridge of Avon, and talked
lightly with his lady.

And, certes, had the two visages alone been seen, and the stranger been
asked which were the more likely to belong to the bold warrior whose
name was loved by the roughest soldiery of Europe, he had assuredly
selected the lady's. Her face was large and square and red, with fierce,
thick brows, and the eyes of one who was accustomed to rule. Taller and
broader than her husband, her flowing gown of sendall, and fur-lined
tippet, could not conceal the gaunt and ungraceful outlines of her
figure. It was the age of martial women. The deeds of black Agnes of
Dunbar, of Lady Salisbury and of the Countess of Montfort, were still
fresh in the public minds. With such examples before them the wives of
the English captains had become as warlike as their mates, and ordered
their castles in their absence with the prudence and discipline of
veteran seneschals. Right easy were the Montacutes of their Castle
of Twynham, and little had they to dread from roving galley or French
squadron, while Lady Mary Loring had the ordering of it. Yet even in
that age it was thought that, though a lady might have a soldier's
heart, it was scarce as well that she should have a soldier's face.
There were men who said that of all the stern passages and daring deeds
by which Sir Nigel Loring had proved the true temper of his courage, not
the least was his wooing and winning of so forbidding a dame.

"I tell you, my fair lord," she was saying, "that it is no fit training
for a demoiselle: hawks and hounds, rotes and citoles singing a French
rondel, or reading the Gestes de Doon de Mayence, as I found her
yesternight, pretending sleep, the artful, with the corner of the scroll
thrusting forth from under her pillow. Lent her by Father Christopher of
the priory, forsooth--that is ever her answer. How shall all this help
her when she has castle of her own to keep, with a hundred mouths all
agape for beef and beer?"

"True, my sweet bird, true," answered the knight, picking a comfit from
his gold drageoir. "The maid is like the young filly, which kicks heels
and plunges for very lust of life. Give her time, dame, give her time."

"Well, I know that my father would have given me, not time, but a good
hazel-stick across my shoulders. Ma foi! I know not what the world is
