sound came. He shut his eyes and pushed out his hand in the air as if to
stop the voice of the writer of comedies.

"Come," said Heywood, with deep feeling; "thou canst not quarrel with me
yet--nay, though thou dost try thy very worst. It would be a sorry story
for my soul or thine to tell to hers."

Carew groaned. The rest of the players had passed on, and the three
stood there alone. "Don't, Tom, don't!" he cried.

"Then how can ye have the heart?" the other asked again.

The master-player lifted up his head, and his lips were trembling. "'T
is not the heart, Tom," he cried bitterly, "upon my word, and on the
remnant of mine honour! 'Tis the head which doeth this. For, Tom, I
cannot leave him go. Why, Tom, hast thou not heard him sing? A voice
which would call back the very dead that we have loved if they might
only hear. Why, Tom, 'tis worth a thousand pound! How can I leave
him go?"

"Oh, fie for shame upon the man I took thee for!" cried Heywood.

"But, Tom," cried Carew, brokenly, "look it straightly in the face; I
am no such player as I was,--this reckless life hath done the trick for
me, Tom,--and here is ruin staring Henslowe and Alleyn in the eye. They
cannot keep me master if their luck doth not change soon; and Burbage
would not have me as a gift. So, Tom, what is there left to do? How can
I shift without the boy? Nay, Tom, it will not serve. There's
Cicely--not one penny laid by for her against a rainy day; and I'll be
gone, Tom, I'll be gone--it is not morning all day long--we cannot last
forever. Nay, I cannot leave him go!"

"But, sir," broke in Nick, wretchedly, holding fast to Hey wood's arm,
"ye said that I should go!"

"Said!" cried the master-player, with a bitter smile; "why, Nick, I'd
say ten times more in one little minute just to hear thee sing than I
would stand to in a month of Easters afterward. Come, Nick, be fair.
I'll feed thee full and dress thee well and treat thee true--all for
that song of thine."

"But, sir, my mother--"

"Why, Carew, hath the boy a mother, too?" cried the writer of comedies.

"Now, Heywood, on thy soul, no more of this!" cried the master-player,
with quivering lips. "Ye will make me out no man, or else a fiend. I
cannot let the fellow go--I will not let him go." His hands were
twitching, and his face was pale, but his lips were set determinedly.
"And, Tom, there's that within me will not abide even _thy_ pestering.
So come, no more of it! Upon my soul, I sour over soon!"

So they came on gloomily past the bear-houses and the Queen's kennels.
The river-wind was full of the wild smell of the bears; but what were
bears to poor Nick, whose last faint hope that the master-player meant
to keep his word and send him home again was gone?

They passed the Paris Garden and the tall round play-house that Francis
Langley had just built. A blood-red banner flaunted overhead, with a
large white swan painted thereon; but Nick saw neither the play-house
nor the swan; he saw only, deep in his heart, a little gable-roof among
old elms, with blue smoke curling softly up among the rippling leaves;
an open door with tall pink hollyhocks beside it; and in the door,
watching for him till he came again, his own mother's face. He began to
cry silently.

"Nay, Nick, my lad, don't cry," said Heywood, gently; "'twill only make
bad matters worse. _Never_ is a weary while; but the longest lane will
turn at last: some day thou'lt find thine home again all in the
twinkling of an eye. Why, Nick, 'tis England still, and thou an
Englishman. Come, give the world as good as it can send."

Nick raised his head again, and, throwing the hair back from his eyes,
walked stoutly along, though the tears still trickled down his cheeks.

"Sing thou my songs," said Heywood, heartily, "and I will be thy
friend--let this be thine earnest." As he spoke he slipped upon the
boy's finger a gold ring with a green stone in it cut with a tall tree:
this was his seal.

They had now come through the garden to the Rose Theatre, where the Lord
Admiral's company played; and Carew was himself again. "Come,
Nicholas," said he, half jestingly, "be done with thy doleful
dumps--care killed a cat, they say, lad. Why, if thy hateful looks could
stab, I'd be a dead man forty times. Come, cheer up, lad, that I may
know thou lovest me."

"But I do na love thee!" cried Nick, indignantly.

"Tut! Do not be so dour. Thou'lt soon be envied by ten thousand men.
Come, don't make a face at thy good fortune as though it were a tripe
fried in tar. Come, lad, be pleased; thou'lt be the pet of every
high-born dame in London town."

"I'd rather be my mother's boy," Nick answered simply.




CHAPTER XIX


THE ROSE PLAY-HOUSE

The play-house was an eight-sided, three-storied, tower-like building of
oak and plastered lath, upon a low foundation of yellow brick. Two
outside stairways ran around the wall, and the roof was of bright-red
English tiles with a blue lead gutter at the eaves. There was a little
turret, from the top of which a tall ash stave went up; and on the
stave, whenever there was to be a play, there floated a great white flag
on which was a crimson rose with a golden heart, just like the one that
Nick with such delight had seen come up the Oxford road a few short
days before.

Under the stairway was a narrow door marked "For the Playeres Onelie";
and in the doorway stood a shrewd-faced, common-looking man, writing
upon a tablet which he held in his hand. There was a case of quills at
his side, with one of which he was scratching busily, now and then
prodding the ink-horn at his girdle. He held his tongue in his cheek,
and moved his head about as the pen formed the letters: he was no
expert penman, this Phil Henslowe, the stager of plays.

He looked up as they came to the step.

"A poor trip, Carew," said he, running his finger down the column of
figures he was adding. "The play was hardly worth the candle--cleared
but five pound; and then, after I had paid the carman three shilling fip
to bring the stuff down from the City, 'twas lost in the river from the
barge at Paul's wharf! A good two pound."

"Hard luck!" said Carew.

"Hard? Adamantine, I say! Why, 'tis very stones for luck, and the whole
road rocky! Here's Burbage, Condell, and Will Shakspere ha' rebuilt
Blackfriars play-house in famous shape; and, marry, where are we?"

Nick started. An idea came creeping into his head. Will Shakspere had
married his mother's own cousin, Anne Hathaway of Shottery; and he had
often heard his mother say that Master Shakspere had ever been her own
good friend when they were young.

"He and Jonson be thick as thieves," said Henslowe; "and Chettle says
that Will hath near done the book of a new play for the autumn--a master
fine thing!--'Romulus and Juliana,' or something of that Italian sort,
to follow Ben Jonson's comedy. Ned Alleyn played a sweet fool about
Ben's comedy. Called it monstrous bad; and now it has taken the money
out of our mouths to the tune of nine pound six the day--and here, while
ye were gone, I ha' played my Lord of Pembroke's men in your 'Robin
Hood,' Heywood, to scant twelve shilling in the house!"

Heywood flushed.

"Nay, Tom, don't be nettled; 'tis not the fault of thy play. There's
naught will serve. We've tried old Marlowe and Robin Greene, Peele,
Nash, and all the rest; but, what! they will not do--'tis Shakspere,
Shakspere; our City flat-caps will ha' nothing but Shakspere!"

Nick listened eagerly. Master Will Shakspere must indeed be somebody in
London town! He stared across into the drifting cloud of mist and smoke
which hid the city like a pall, and wondered how and where, in that
terrible hive of more than a hundred thousand men, he could find
one man.

"I tell thee, Tom Heywood, there's some magic in the fellow, or my
name's not Henslowe!" cried the manager. "His very words bewitch one's
wits as nothing else can do. Why, I've tried them with 'Pierce
Penniless,' 'Groat's Worth of Wit,' 'Friar Bacon,' 'Orlando,' and the
'Battle of Alcazar.' Why, tush! they will not even listen! And here I've
put Martin Gosset into purple and gold, and Jemmy Donstall into a
peach-colored gown laid down with silver-gilt, for 'Volteger'; and what?
Why, we play to empty stools; and the rascals owe me for those costumes
yet--sixty shillings full! A murrain on Burbage and Will Shakspere
too!--but I wish we had him back again. We'd make their old Blackfriars
sick!" He shook his fist at a great gray pile of buildings that rose
above the rest out of the fog by the landing-place beyond the river.

Nick stared. _That_ the play-house of Master Shakspere and the Burbages?
Will Shakspere playing there, just across the river? Oh, if Nick could
only find him, he would not let the son of his wife's own cousin be
stolen away!

Nick looked around quickly.

The play-house stood a bowshot from the river, in the open fields. There
was a moated manor-house near by, and beyond it a little stream with
some men fishing. Between the play-house and the Thames were gardens and
trees, and a thin fringe of buildings along the bank by the landings. It
was not far, and there were places where one could get a boat every
fifty yards or so at the Bankside.

But--"Come in, come in," said Henslowe. "Growling never fed a dog; and
we must be doing."

"Go ahead, Nick," said Carew, pushing him by the shoulder, and they all
went in. The door opened on a flight of stairs leading to the lowest
gallery at the right of the stage, where the orchestra sat. A man was
tuning up a viol as they came in.

"I want you to hear this boy sing," said Carew to Henslowe. "'Tis the
best thing ye ever lent ear to."

"Oh, this is the boy?" said the manager, staring at Nick. "Why, Alleyn
told me he was a country gawk!"

"He lied, then," said Carew, very shortly. "'Twas cheaper than the
truth at my price. There, Nick, go look about the place--we have
business."

Nick went slowly along the gallery. His hands were beginning to tremble
as he put them out touching the stools. Along the rail were ornamental
columns which supported the upper galleries and looked like beautiful
blue-veined white marble; but when he took hold of them to steady
himself he found they were only painted wood.

There were two galleries above. They ran all around the inside of the
building, like the porches of the inn at Coventry, and he could see them
across the house. There were no windows in the gallery where he was, but
there were some in the second one. They looked high. He went on around
the gallery until he came to some steps going down into the open space
in the center of the building. The stage was already set up on the
trestles, and the carpenters were putting a shelter-roof over it on
copper-gilt pillars; for it was beginning to drizzle, and the middle of
the play-house was open to the sky.

The spectators were already coming into the pit at a penny apiece,
although the play would not begin until early evening. Those for the
galleries paid another penny to a man in a red cloak at the foot of the
stairs where Nick was standing. There was a great uproar at the
entrance. Some apprentices had caught a cutpurse in the crowd, and were
beating him unmercifully. Every one pushed and shoved about, cursing the
thief, and those near enough kicked and struck him.

Nick looked back. Carew and the manager had gone into the tiring-room
behind the stage. He took hold of the side-rail and started down the
steps. The man in the red cloak looked up. "Go back there," said he,
sharply; "there's enough down here now." Nick went on around
the gallery.

At the back of the stage were two doors for the players, and between
them hung a painted cloth or arras behind which the prompter stood. Over
these doors were two plastered rooms, twopenny private boxes for
gentlefolk. In one of them were three young men and a beautiful girl,
wonderfully dressed. The men were speaking to her, but she looked down
at Nick instead. "What a pretty boy!" she said, and tossed him a flower
that one of the men had just given her. It fell at Nick's feet. He
started back, looking up. The girl smiled, so he took off his cap and
bowed; but the men looked sour.

At the side of the stage was a screen with long leather fire-buckets and
a pole-ax hanging upon it, and behind it was a door through which Nick
saw the river and the gray walls of the old Dominican friary. As he came
down to it, some one thrust out a staff and barred the way. It was the
bandy-legged man with the ribbon in his ear, Nick looked out longingly;
it seemed so near!

"Master Carew saith thou art not to stir outside--dost hear?" said the
bandy-legged man.

"Ay," said Nick, and turned back.

There was a narrow stairway leading to the second gallery. He went up
softly. There was no one in the gallery, and there was a window on the
side next to the river; he had seen it from below. He went toward it
slowly that he might not arouse suspicion. It was above his head.

[Illustration: "NICK PUT ONE LEG OVER THE SILL AND LOOKED BACK."]

There were stools for hire standing near. He brought one and set it
under the window. It stood unevenly upon the floor, and made a wabbling
noise. He was afraid some one would hear him; but the apprentices in
the pit were rattling dice, and two or three gentlemen's pages were
wrangling for the best places on the platform; while, to add to the
general riot, two young gallants had brought gamecocks and were fighting
them in one corner, amid such a whooping and swashing that one could
hardly have heard the skies fall.

A printer's man was bawling, "Will ye buy a new book?" and the
fruit-sellers, too, were raising such a cry of "Apples, cherries, cakes,
and ale!" that the little noise Nick might make would be lost in the
wild confusion.

Master Carew and the manager had not come out of the tiring-room. Nick
got up on the stool and looked out. It was not very far to the
ground--not so far as from the top of the big haycock in Master John
Combe's field from which he had often jumped.

The sill was just breast-high when he stood upon the stool. Putting his
hands upon it, he gave a little spring, and balanced on his arms a
moment. Then he put one leg over the window-sill and looked back. No one
was paying the slightest attention to him. Over all the noise he could
hear the man tuning the viol. Swinging himself out slowly and silently,
with his toes against the wall to steady him, he hung down as far as he
could, gave a little push away from the house with his feet, caught a
quick breath, and dropped.




CHAPTER XX


DISAPPOINTMENT

Nick landed upon a pile of soft earth. It broke away under his feet and
threw him forward upon his hands and knees. He got up, a little shaken
but unhurt, and stood close to the wall, looking all about quickly. A
party of gaily dressed gallants were haggling with the horse-boys at the
sheds; but they did not even look at him. A passing carter stared up at
the window, measuring the distance with his eye, whistled incredulously,
and trudged on.

Nick listened a moment, but heard only the clamor of voices inside, and
the zoon, zoon, zoon of the viol. He was trembling all over, and his
heart was beating like a trip-hammer. He wanted to run, but was fearful
of exciting suspicion. Heading straight for the river, he walked as fast
as he could through the gardens and the trees, brushing the dirt from
his hose as he went.

There was a wherry just pushing out from Old Marigold stairs with a
single passenger, a gardener with a basket of truck.

"Holloa!" cried Nick, hurrying down; "will ye take me across?"

"For thrippence," said the boatman, hauling the wherry alongside again
with his hook.

Thrippence? Nick stopped, dismayed. Master Carew had his gold
rose-noble, and he had not thought of the fare. They would soon find
that he was gone.

"Oh, I must be across, sir!" he cried. "Can ye na take me free? I be
little and not heavy; and I will help the gentleman with his basket."

The boatman's only reply was to drop his hook and push off with the oar.

But the gardener, touched by the boy's pitiful expression, to say
nothing of being tickled by Nick's calling him gentleman, spoke up:
"Here, jack-sculler," said he; "I'll toss up wi' thee for it." He pulled
a groat from his pocket and began spinning it in the air. "Come, thou
lookest a gamesome fellow--cross he goes, pile he stays; best two in
three flips--what sayst?"

"Done!" said the waterman. "Pop her up!"

Up went the groat.

Nick held his breath.

"Pile it is," said the gardener. "One for thee--and up she goes again!"
The groat twirled in the air and came down _clink_ upon the thwart.

"Aha!" cried the boatman, "'tis mine, or I'm a horse!"

"Nay, jack-sculler," laughed the gardener; "cross it is! Ka me, ka thee,
my pretty groat--I never lose with this groat."

"Oh, sir, do be brisk!" begged Nick, fearing every instant to see the
master-player and the bandy-legged man come running down the bank.

"More haste, worse speed," said the gardener; "only evil weeds grow
fast!" and he rubbed the groat on his jerkin. "Now, jack-sculler, hold
thy breath; for up she goes again!"

A man came running over the rise. Nick gave a little frightened cry. It
was only a huckster's knave with a roll of fresh butter. The groat came
down with a splash in the bottom of the wherry. The boatman picked it up
out of the water and wiped it with his sleeve. "Here, boy, get aboard,"
said he, shoving off; "and be lively about it!"

The huckster's knave came running down the landing. He pushed Nick
aside, and scrambled into the wherry, puffing for breath. The boat fell
off into the current. Nick, making a plunge for it into the water, just
managed to catch the gunwale and get aboard, wet to the knees. But he
did not care for that; for although there were people going up Paris
Garden lane, and a crowd about the entrance of the Rose, he could not
see Master Carew or the bandy-legged man anywhere. So he breathed a
little freer, yet kept his eyes fast upon the play-house until the
wherry bumped against Blackfriars stairs.

Picking up the basket of truck, he sprang ashore, and, dropping it upon
the landing, took to his heels up the bank, without stopping to thank
either gardener or boatman.

The gray walls of the old friary were just ahead, scarcely a stone's
throw from the river. With heart beating high, he ran along the close,
looking eagerly for the entrance. He came to a wicket-gate that was
standing half ajar, and went through it into the old cloisters.

Everything there was still. He was glad of that, for the noise and the
rush of the crowd outside confused him.

The place had once been a well-kept garden-plot, but now was become a
mere stack of odds and ends of boards and beams, shavings, mortar, and
broken brick. A long-legged fellow with a green patch over one eye was
building a pair of stairs to a door beside which a sign read: "Playeres
Here: None Elles."

Nick doffed his cap. "Good-day," said he; "is Master Will Shakspere in?"

The man put down his saw and sat back upon one of the trestles, staring
stupidly. "Didst za-ay zummat?"

"I asked if Master Will Shakspere was in?"

The fellow scratched his head with a bit of shaving. "Noa; Muster Wull
Zhacksper beant in."

Nick's heart stopped with a thump. "Where is he--do ye know?"

"A's gone awa-ay," drawled the workman, vaguely.

"Away? Whither!"

"A's gone to Ztratvoard to-own, whur's woife do li-ive--went
a-yesterday."

Nick sat blindly down upon the other trestle. He did not put his cap on
again: he had quite forgotten it.

Master Will Shakspere gone to Stratford--and only the day before!

Too late--just one little day too late! It seemed like cruel mockery.
Why, he might be almost home! The thought was more than he could bear:
who could be brave in the face of such a blow? The bitter tears ran
down his face again.

"Here, here, odzookens, lad!" grinned the workman, stolidly, "thou'lt
vetch t' river up if weeps zo ha-ard. Ztop un, ztop un; do now."

Nick sat staring at the ground. A beetle was trying to crawl over a
shaving. It was a curly shaving, and as fast as the beetle crept up to
the top the shaving rolled over, and dropped the beetle upon its back in
the dust; but it only got up and tried again. Nick looked up.

"Is--is Master Richard Burbage here, then?"

Perhaps Burbage, who had been a Stratford man, would help him.

"Noa," drawled the carpenter; "Muster Bubbage beant here; doan't want
un, nuther--nuvver do moind a's owen business--always jawin' volks. A
beant here, an' doan't want un, nuther."

Nick's heart went down. "And where is he?"

"Who? Muster Bubbage? Whoy, a be-eth out to Zhoreditch, a-playin' at t'
theater."

