
The prince looked at Grimaud, Grimaud looked at the clock; it was hardly
a quarter-past six. The escape was fixed to take place at seven o'clock;
there was therefore three-quarters of an hour to wait.

The duke, in order to pass away another quarter of an hour, pretended to
be reading something that interested him and muttered that he wished
they would allow him to finish his chapter. La Ramee went up to him and
looked over his shoulder to see what sort of a book it was that had so
singular an influence over the prisoner as to make him put off taking
his dinner.

It was "Caesar's Commentaries," which La Ramee had lent him, contrary to
the orders of the governor; and La Ramee resolved never again to disobey
these injunctions.

Meantime he uncorked the bottles and went to smell if the pie was good.

At half-past six the duke arose and said very gravely:

"Certainly, Caesar was the greatest man of ancient times."

"You think so, my lord?" answered La Ramee.

"Yes."

"Well, as for me, I prefer Hannibal."

"And why, pray, Master La Ramee?" asked the duke.

"Because he left no Commentaries," replied La Ramee, with his coarse
laugh.

The duke vouchsafed no reply, but sitting down at the table made a sign
that La Ramee should seat himself opposite. There is nothing so
expressive as the face of an epicure who finds himself before a well
spread table, so La Ramee, when receiving his plate of soup from
Grimaud, presented a type of perfect bliss.

The duke smiled.

"Zounds!" he said; "I don't suppose there is a more contented man at
this moment in all the kingdom than yourself!"

"You are right, my lord duke," answered the officer; "I don't know any
pleasanter sight on earth than a well covered table; and when, added to
that, he who does the honors is the grandson of Henry IV., you will, my
lord duke, easily comprehend that the honor fairly doubles the pleasure
one enjoys."

The duke, in his turn, bowed, and an imperceptible smile appeared on the
face of Grimaud, who kept behind La Ramee.

"My dear La Ramee," said the duke, "you are the only man to turn such
faultless compliments."

"No, my lord duke," replied La Ramee, in the fullness of his heart; "I
say what I think; there is no compliment in what I say to you----"

"Then you are attached to me?" asked the duke.

"To own the truth, I should be inconsolable if you were to leave
Vincennes."

"A droll way of showing your affliction." The duke meant to say
"affection."

"But, my lord," returned La Ramee, "what would you do if you got out?
Every folly you committed would embroil you with the court and they
would put you into the Bastile, instead of Vincennes. Now, Monsieur de
Chavigny is not amiable, I allow, but Monsieur du Tremblay is
considerably worse."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the duke, who from time to time looked at the clock,
the fingers of which seemed to move with sickening slowness.

"But what can you expect from the brother of a capuchin monk, brought up
in the school of Cardinal Richelieu? Ah, my lord, it is a great
happiness that the queen, who always wished you well, had a fancy to
send you here, where there's a promenade and a tennis court, good air,
and a good table."

"In short," answered the duke, "if I comprehend you aright, La Ramee, I
am ungrateful for having ever thought of leaving this place?"

"Oh! my lord duke, 'tis the height of ingratitude; but your highness has
never seriously thought of it?"

"Yes," returned the duke, "I must confess I sometimes think of it."

"Still by one of your forty methods, your highness?"

"Yes, yes, indeed."

"My lord," said La Ramee, "now we are quite at our ease and enjoying
ourselves, pray tell me one of those forty ways invented by your
highness."

"Willingly," answered the duke, "give me the pie!"

"I am listening," said La Ramee, leaning back in his armchair and
raising his glass of Madeira to his lips, and winking his eye that he
might see the sun through the rich liquid that he was about to taste.

The duke glanced at the clock. In ten minutes it would strike seven.

Grimaud placed the pie before the duke, who took a knife with a silver
blade to raise the upper crust; but La Ramee, who was afraid of any harm
happening to this fine work of art, passed his knife, which had an iron
blade, to the duke.

"Thank you, La Ramee," said the prisoner.

"Well, my lord! this famous invention of yours?"

"Must I tell you," replied the duke, "on what I most reckon and what I
determine to try first?"

"Yes, that's the thing, my lord!" cried his custodian, gaily.

"Well, I should hope, in the first instance, to have for keeper an
honest fellow like you."

"And you have me, my lord. Well?"

"Having, then, a keeper like La Ramee, I should try also to have
introduced to him by some friend or other a man who would be devoted to
me, who would assist me in my flight."

"Come, come," said La Ramee, "that's not a bad idea."

"Capital, isn't it? for instance, the former servingman of some brave
gentleman, an enemy himself to Mazarin, as every gentleman ought to be."

"Hush! don't let us talk politics, my lord."

"Then my keeper would begin to trust this man and to depend upon him,
and I should have news from those without the prison walls."

"Ah, yes! but how can the news be brought to you?"

"Nothing easier; in a game of tennis, for example."

"In a game of tennis?" asked La Ramee, giving more serious attention to
the duke's words.

"Yes; see, I send a ball into the moat; a man is there who picks it up;
the ball contains a letter. Instead of returning the ball to me when I
call for it from the top of the wall, he throws me another; that other
ball contains a letter. Thus we have exchanged ideas and no one has seen
us do it."

"The devil it does! The devil it does!" said La Ramee, scratching his
head; "you are in the wrong to tell me that, my lord. I shall have to
watch the men who pick up balls."

The duke smiled.

"But," resumed La Ramee, "that is only a way of corresponding."

"And that is a great deal, it seems to me."

"But not enough."

"Pardon me; for instance, I say to my friends, Be on a certain day, on a
certain hour, at the other side of the moat with two horses."

"Well, what then?" La Ramee began to be uneasy; "unless the horses have
wings to mount the ramparts and come and fetch you."

"That's not needed. I have," replied the duke, "a way of descending from
the ramparts."

"What?"

"A rope ladder."

"Yes, but," answered La Ramee, trying to laugh, "a ladder of ropes can't
be sent around a ball, like a letter."

"No, but it may be sent in something else."

"In something else--in something else? In what?"

"In a pate, for example."

"In a pate?" said La Ramee.

"Yes. Let us suppose one thing," replied the duke "let us suppose, for
instance, that my maitre d'hotel, Noirmont, has purchased the shop of
Pere Marteau----"

"Well?" said La Ramee, shuddering.

"Well, La Ramee, who is a gourmand, sees his pates, thinks them more
attractive than those of Pere Marteau and proposes to me that I shall
try them. I consent on condition that La Ramee tries them with me. That
we may be more at our ease, La Ramee removes the guards, keeping only
Grimaud to wait on us. Grimaud is the man whom a friend has sent to
second me in everything. The moment for my escape is fixed--seven
o'clock. Well, at a few minutes to seven----"

"At a few minutes to seven?" cried La Ramee, cold sweat upon his brow.

"At a few minutes to seven," returned the duke (suiting the action to
the words), "I raise the crust of the pie; I find in it two poniards, a
ladder of rope, and a gag. I point one of the poniards at La Ramee's
breast and I say to him, 'My friend, I am sorry for it, but if thou
stirrest, if thou utterest one cry, thou art a dead man!'"

The duke, in pronouncing these words, suited, as we have said, the
action to the words. He was standing near the officer and he directed
the point of the poniard in such a manner, close to La Ramee's heart,
that there could be no doubt in the mind of that individual as to his
determination. Meanwhile, Grimaud, still mute as ever, drew from the pie
the other poniard, the rope ladder and the gag.

La Ramee followed all these objects with his eyes, his alarm every
moment increasing.

"Oh, my lord," he cried, with an expression of stupefaction in his face;
"you haven't the heart to kill me!"

"No; not if thou dost not oppose my flight."

"But, my lord, if I allow you to escape I am a ruined man."

"I will compensate thee for the loss of thy place."

"You are determined to leave the chateau?"

"By Heaven and earth! This night I am determined to be free."

"And if I defend myself, or call, or cry out?"

"I will kill thee, on the honor of a gentleman."

At this moment the clock struck.

"Seven o'clock!" said Grimaud, who had not spoken a word.

La Ramee made one movement, in order to satisfy his conscience. The duke
frowned, the officer felt the point of the poniard, which, having
penetrated through his clothes, was close to his heart.

"Let us dispatch," said the duke.

"My lord, one last favor."

"What? speak, make haste."

"Bind my arms, my lord, fast."

"Why bind thee?"

"That I may not be considered as your accomplice."

"Your hands?" asked Grimaud.

"Not before me, behind me."

"But with what?" asked the duke.

"With your belt, my lord!" replied La Ramee.

The duke undid his belt and gave it to Grimaud, who tied La Ramee in
such a way as to satisfy him.

"Your feet, too," said Grimaud.

La Ramee stretched out his legs, Grimaud took a table-cloth, tore it
into strips and tied La Ramee's feet together.

"Now, my lord," said the poor man, "let me have the poire d'angoisse. I
ask for it; without it I should be tried in a court of justice because I
did not raise the alarm. Thrust it into my mouth, my lord, thrust it
in."

Grimaud prepared to comply with this request, when the officer made a
sign as if he had something to say.

"Speak," said the duke.

"Now, my lord, do not forget, if any harm happens to me on your account,
that I have a wife and four children."

"Rest assured; put the gag in, Grimaud."

In a second La Ramee was gagged and laid prostrate. Two or three chairs
were thrown down as if there had been a struggle. Grimaud then took from
the pocket of the officer all the keys it contained and first opened the
door of the room in which they were, then shut it and double-locked it,
and both he and the duke proceeded rapidly down the gallery which led to
the little inclosure. At last they reached the tennis court. It was
completely deserted. No sentinels, no one at any of the windows. The
duke ran to the rampart and perceived on the other side of the ditch,
three cavaliers with two riding horses. The duke exchanged a signal with
them. It was indeed for him that they were there.

Grimaud, meantime, undid the means of escape.

This was not, however, a rope ladder, but a ball of silk cord, with a
narrow board which was to pass between the legs, the ball to unwind
itself by the weight of the person who sat astride upon the board.

"Go!" said the duke.

"First, my lord?" inquired Grimaud.

"Certainly. If I am caught, I risk nothing but being taken back again to
prison. If they catch thee, thou wilt be hung."

"True," replied Grimaud.

And instantly, Grimaud, sitting upon the board as if on horseback,
commenced his perilous descent.

The duke followed him with his eyes, with involuntary terror. He had
gone down about three-quarters of the length of the wall when the cord
broke. Grimaud fell--precipitated into the moat.

The duke uttered a cry, but Grimaud did not give a single moan. He must
have been dreadfully hurt, for he did not stir from the place where he
fell.

Immediately one of the men who were waiting slipped down into the moat,
tied under Grimaud's shoulders the end of a cord, and the remaining two,
who held the other end, drew Grimaud to them.

"Descend, my lord," said the man in the moat. "There are only fifteen
feet more from the top down here, and the grass is soft."

The duke had already begun to descend. His task was the more difficult,
as there was no board to support him. He was obliged to let himself down
by his hands and from a height of fifty feet. But as we have said he was
active, strong, and full of presence of mind. In less than five minutes
he arrived at the end of the cord. He was then only fifteen feet from
the ground, as the gentlemen below had told him. He let go the rope and
fell upon his feet, without receiving any injury.

He instantly began to climb up the slope of the moat, on the top of
which he met De Rochefort. The other two gentlemen were unknown to him.
Grimaud, in a swoon, was tied securely to a horse.

"Gentlemen," said the duke, "I will thank you later; now we have not a
moment to lose. On, then! on! those who love me, follow me!"

And he jumped on his horse and set off at full gallop, snuffing the
fresh air in his triumph and shouting out, with an expression of face
which it would be impossible to describe:

"Free! free! free!"




24. The timely Arrival of D'Artagnan in Paris.


At Blois, D'Artagnan received the money paid to him by Mazarin for any
future service he might render the cardinal.

From Blois to Paris was a journey of four days for ordinary travelers,
but D'Artagnan arrived on the third day at the Barriere Saint Denis. In
turning the corner of the Rue Montmartre, in order to reach the Rue
Tiquetonne and the Hotel de la Chevrette, where he had appointed Porthos
to meet him, he saw at one of the windows of the hotel, that friend
himself dressed in a sky-blue waistcoat, embroidered with silver, and
gaping, till he showed every one of his white teeth; whilst the people
passing by admiringly gazed at this gentleman, so handsome and so rich,
who seemed to weary of his riches and his greatness.

D'Artagnan and Planchet had hardly turned the corner when Porthos
recognized them.

"Eh! D'Artagnan!" he cried. "Thank God you have come!"

"Eh! good-day, dear friend!" replied D'Artagnan.

Porthos came down at once to the threshold of the hotel.

"Ah, my dear friend!" he cried, "what bad stabling for my horses here."

"Indeed!" said D'Artagnan; "I am most unhappy to hear it, on account of
those fine animals."

"And I, also--I was also wretchedly off," he answered, moving backward
and forward as he spoke; "and had it not been for the hostess," he
added, with his air of vulgar self-complacency, "who is very agreeable
and understands a joke, I should have got a lodging elsewhere."

The pretty Madeleine, who had approached during this colloquy, stepped
back and turned pale as death on hearing Porthos's words, for she
thought the scene with the Swiss was about to be repeated. But to her
great surprise D'Artagnan remained perfectly calm, and instead of being
angry he laughed, and said to Porthos:

"Yes, I understand, the air of La Rue Tiquetonne is not like that of
Pierrefonds; but console yourself, I will soon conduct you to one much
better."

"When will you do that?"

"Immediately, I hope."

"Ah! so much the better!"

To that exclamation of Porthos's succeeded a groaning, low and profound,
which seemed to come from behind a door. D'Artagnan, who had just
dismounted, then saw, outlined against the wall, the enormous stomach of
Mousqueton, whose down-drawn mouth emitted sounds of distress.

"And you, too, my poor Monsieur Mouston, are out of place in this poor
hotel, are you not?" asked D'Artagnan, in that rallying tone which may
indicate either compassion or mockery.

"He finds the cooking detestable," replied Porthos.

"Why, then, doesn't he attend to it himself, as at Chantilly?"

"Ah, monsieur, I have not here, as I had there, the ponds of monsieur le
prince, where I could catch those beautiful carp, nor the forests of his
highness to provide me with partridges. As for the cellar, I have
searched every part and poor stuff I found."

"Monsieur Mouston," said D'Artagnan, "I should indeed condole with you
had I not at this moment something very pressing to attend to."

Then taking Porthos aside:

"My dear Du Vallon," he said, "here you are in full dress most
fortunately, for I am going to take you to the cardinal's."

"Gracious me! really!" exclaimed Porthos, opening his great wondering
eyes.

"Yes, my friend."

"A presentation? indeed!"

"Does that alarm you?"

"No, but it agitates me."

"Oh! don't be distressed; you have to deal with a cardinal of another
kind. This one will not oppress you by his dignity."

"'Tis the same thing--you understand me, D'Artagnan--a court."

"There's no court now. Alas!"

"The queen!"

"I was going to say, there's no longer a queen. The queen! Rest assured,
we shall not see her."

"And you say that we are going from here to the Palais Royal?"

"Immediately. Only, that there may be no delay, I shall borrow one of
your horses."

"Certainly; all the four are at your service."

"Oh, I need only one of them for the time being."

"Shall we take our valets?"

"Yes, you may as well take Mousqueton. As to Planchet, he has certain
reasons for not going to court."

"And what are they?"

"Oh, he doesn't stand well with his eminence."

"Mouston," said Porthos, "saddle Vulcan and Bayard."

"And for myself, monsieur, shall I saddle Rustaud?"

"No, take a more stylish horse, Phoebus or Superbe; we are going with
some ceremony."

"Ah," said Mousqueton, breathing more freely, "you are only going, then,
to make a visit?"

"Oh! yes, of course, Mouston; nothing else. But to avoid risk, put the
pistols in the holsters. You will find mine on my saddle, already
loaded."

Mouston breathed a sigh; he couldn't understand visits of ceremony made
under arms.

"Indeed," said Porthos, looking complacently at his old lackey as he
went away, "you are right, D'Artagnan; Mouston will do; Mouston has a
very fine appearance."

D'Artagnan smiled.

"But you, my friend--are you not going to change your dress?"

"No, I shall go as I am. This traveling dress will serve to show the
cardinal my haste to obey his commands."

They set out on Vulcan and Bayard, followed by Mousqueton on Phoebus,
and arrived at the Palais Royal at about a quarter to seven. The streets
were crowded, for it was the day of Pentecost, and the crowd looked in
wonder at these two cavaliers; one as fresh as if he had come out of a
bandbox, the other so covered with dust that he looked as if he had but
just come off a field of battle.

Mousqueton also attracted attention; and as the romance of Don Quixote
was then the fashion, they said that he was Sancho, who, after having
lost one master, had found two.

On reaching the palace, D'Artagnan sent to his eminence the letter in
which he had been ordered to return without delay. He was soon ordered
to the presence of the cardinal.

"Courage!" he whispered to Porthos, as they proceeded. "Do not be
intimidated. Believe me, the eye of the eagle is closed forever. We have
only the vulture to deal with. Hold yourself as bolt upright as on the
day of the bastion of St. Gervais, and do not bow too low to this
Italian; that might give him a poor idea of you."

"Good!" answered Porthos. "Good!"

Mazarin was in his study, working at a list of pensions and benefices,
of which he was trying to reduce the number. He saw D'Artagnan and
Porthos enter with internal pleasure, yet showed no joy in his
countenance.

"Ah! you, is it? Monsieur le lieutenant, you have been very prompt. 'Tis
well. Welcome to ye."

"Thanks, my lord. Here I am at your eminence's service, as well as
Monsieur du Vallon, one of my old friends, who used to conceal his
nobility under the name of Porthos."

Porthos bowed to the cardinal.

"A magnificent cavalier," remarked Mazarin.

Porthos turned his head to the right and to the left, and drew himself
up with a movement full of dignity.

"The best swordsman in the kingdom, my lord," said D'Artagnan.

Porthos bowed to his friend.

Mazarin was as fond of fine soldiers as, in later times, Frederick of
Prussia used to be. He admired the strong hands, the broad shoulders and
the steady eye of Porthos. He seemed to see before him the salvation of
his administration and of the kingdom, sculptured in flesh and bone. He
remembered that the old association of musketeers was composed of four
persons.

"And your two other friends?" he asked.

Porthos opened his mouth, thinking it a good opportunity to put in a
word in his turn; D'Artagnan checked him by a glance from the corner of
his eye.

"They are prevented at this moment, but will join us later."

Mazarin coughed a little.

"And this gentleman, being disengaged, takes to the service willingly?"
he asked.

"Yes, my lord, and from pure devotion to the cause, for Monsieur de
Bracieux is rich."

"Rich!" said Mazarin, whom that single word always inspired with a great
respect.

"Fifty thousand francs a year," said Porthos.

These were the first words he had spoken.

"From pure zeal?" resumed Mazarin, with his artful smile; "from pure
zeal and devotion then?"

"My lord has, perhaps, no faith in those words?" said D'Artagnan.

"Have you, Monsieur le Gascon?" asked Mazarin, supporting his elbows on
his desk and his chin on his hands.

"I," replied the Gascon, "I believe in devotion as a word at one's
baptism, for instance, which naturally comes before one's proper name;
every one is naturally more or less devout, certainly; but there should
be at the end of one's devotion something to gain."

"And your friend, for instance; what does he expect to have at the end
of his devotion?"

"Well, my lord, my friend has three magnificent estates: that of Vallon,
at Corbeil; that of Bracieux, in the Soissonais; and that of
Pierrefonds, in the Valois. Now, my lord, he would like to have one of
his three estates erected into a barony."

"Only that?" said Mazarin, his eyes twinkling with joy on seeing that he
could pay for Porthos's devotion without opening his purse; "only that?
That can be managed."

"I shall be baron!" explained Porthos, stepping forward.

"I told you so," said D'Artagnan, checking him with his hand; "and now
his eminence confirms it."

"And you, Monsieur D'Artagnan, what do you want?"

"My lord," said D'Artagnan, "it is twenty years since Cardinal de
Richelieu made me lieutenant."

"Yes, and you would be gratified if Cardinal Mazarin should make you
captain."

D'Artagnan bowed.

"Well, that is not impossible. We will see, gentlemen, we will see. Now,
Monsieur de Vallon," said Mazarin, "what service do you prefer, in the
town or in the country?"

Porthos opened his mouth to reply.

"My lord," said D'Artagnan, "Monsieur de Vallon is like me, he prefers
service extraordinary--that is to say, enterprises that are considered
mad and impossible."

That boastfulness was not displeasing to Mazarin; he fell into
meditation.

"And yet," he said, "I must admit that I sent for you to appoint you to
quiet service; I have certain apprehensions--well, what is the meaning
of that?"

In fact, a great noise was heard in the ante-chamber; at the same time
the door of the study was burst open and a man, covered with dust,
rushed into it, exclaiming:

"My lord the cardinal! my lord the cardinal!"

Mazarin thought that some one was going to assassinate him and he drew
back, pushing his chair on the castors. D'Artagnan and Porthos moved so
as to plant themselves between the person entering and the cardinal.

"Well, sir," exclaimed Mazarin, "what's the matter? and why do you rush
in here, as if you were about to penetrate a crowded market-place?"

"My lord," replied the messenger, "I wish to speak to your eminence in
secret. I am Monsieur du Poins, an officer in the guards, on duty at the
donjon of Vincennes."

Mazarin, perceiving by the paleness and agitation of the messenger that
he had something of importance to say, made a sign that D'Artagnan and
Porthos should give place.

D'Artagnan and Porthos withdrew to a corner of the cabinet.

"Speak, monsieur, speak at once!" said Mazarin "What is the matter?"

"The matter is, my lord, that the Duc de Beaufort has contrived to
escape from the Chateau of Vincennes."

Mazarin uttered a cry and became paler than the man who had brought the
news. He fell back, almost fainting, in his chair.

"Escaped? Monsieur de Beaufort escaped?"

"My lord, I saw him run off from the top of the terrace."

"And you did not fire on him?"

"He was out of range."

"Monsieur de Chavigny--where was he?"

"Absent."

"And La Ramee?"

"Was found locked up in the prisoner's room, a gag in his mouth and a
poniard near him."

"But the man who was under him?"

"Was an accomplice of the duke's and escaped along with him."

Mazarin groaned.

"My lord," said D'Artagnan, advancing toward the cardinal, "it seems to
me that your eminence is losing precious time. It may still be possible
to overtake the prisoner. France is large; the nearest frontier is sixty
leagues distant."

"And who is to pursue him?" cried Mazarin.

"I, pardieu!"

"And you would arrest him?"

"Why not?"

"You would arrest the Duc de Beaufort, armed, in the field?"

"If your eminence should order me to arrest the devil, I would seize him
by the horns and would bring him in."

"So would I," said Porthos.

"So would you!" said Mazarin, looking with astonishment at those two
men. "But the duke will not yield himself without a furious battle."

"Very well," said D'Artagnan, his eyes aflame, "battle! It is a long
time since we have had a battle, eh, Porthos?"

"Battle!" cried Porthos.

"And you think you can catch him?"

"Yes, if we are better mounted than he."

"Go then, take what guards you find here, and pursue him."

"You command us, my lord, to do so?"

"And I sign my orders," said Mazarin, taking a piece of paper and
writing some lines; "Monsieur du Vallon, your barony is on the back of
the Duc de Beaufort's horse; you have nothing to do but to overtake it.
As for you, my dear lieutenant, I promise you nothing; but if you bring
him back to me, dead or alive, you may ask all you wish."

"To horse, Porthos!" said D'Artagnan, taking his friend by the hand.

"Here I am," smiled Porthos, with his sublime composure.

They descended the great staircase, taking with them all the guards they
found on their road, and crying out, "To arms! To arms!" and immediately
put spur to horse, which set off along the Rue Saint Honore with the
speed of the whirlwind.

"Well, baron, I promise you some good exercise!" said the Gascon.

"Yes, my captain."

As they went, the citizens, awakened, left their doors and the street
dogs followed the cavaliers, barking. At the corner of the Cimetiere
Saint Jean, D'Artagnan upset a man; it was too insignificant an
occurrence to delay people so eager to get on. The troop continued its
course as though their steeds had wings.

Alas! there are no unimportant events in this world and we shall see
that this apparently slight incident came near endangering the monarchy.




25. An Adventure on the High Road.


The musketeers rode the whole length of the Faubourg Saint Antoine and
of the road to Vincennes, and soon found themselves out of the town,
then in a forest and then within sight of a village.

The horses seemed to become more lively with each successive step; their
nostrils reddened like glowing furnaces. D'Artagnan, freely applying his
spurs, was in advance of Porthos two feet at the most; Mousqueton
followed two lengths behind; the guards were scattered according to the
varying excellence of their respective mounts.

From the top of an eminence D'Artagnan perceived a group of people
collected on the other side of the moat, in front of that part of the
donjon which looks toward Saint Maur. He rode on, convinced that in this
direction he would gain intelligence of the fugitive. In five minutes he
had arrived at the place, where the guards joined him, coming up one by
one.

The several members of that group were much excited. They looked at the
cord, still hanging from the loophole and broken at about twenty feet
from the ground. Their eyes measured the height and they exchanged
conjectures. On the top of the wall sentinels went and came with a
frightened air.

A few soldiers, commanded by a sergeant, drove away idlers from the
place where the duke had mounted his horse. D'Artagnan went straight to
the sergeant.

"My officer," said the sergeant, "it is not permitted to stop here."

"That prohibition is not for me," said D'Artagnan. "Have the fugitives
been pursued?"

"Yes, my officer; unfortunately, they are well mounted."

"How many are there?"

"Four, and a fifth whom they carried away wounded."

"Four!" said D'Artagnan, looking at Porthos. "Do you hear, baron? They
are only four!"

A joyous smile lighted Porthos's face.

"How long a start have they?"

"Two hours and a quarter, my officer."

"Two hours and a quarter--that is nothing; we are well mounted, are we
not, Porthos?"

Porthos breathed a sigh; he thought of what was in store for his poor
horses.

"Very good," said D'Artagnan; "and now in what direction did they set
out?"

"That I am forbidden to tell."

D'Artagnan drew from his pocket a paper. "Order of the king," he said.

"Speak to the governor, then."

"And where is the governor?"

"In the country."

Anger mounted to D'Artagnan's face; he frowned and his cheeks were
colored.

"Ah, you scoundrel!" he said to the sergeant, "I believe you are
impudent to me! Wait!"

He unfolded the paper, presented it to the sergeant with one hand and
with the other took a pistol from his holsters and cocked it.

"Order of the king, I tell you. Read and answer, or I will blow out your
brains!"

The sergeant saw that D'Artagnan was in earnest. "The Vendomois road,"
he replied.

"And by what gate did they go out?"

"By the Saint Maur gate."

"If you are deceiving me, rascal, you will be hanged to-morrow."

"And if you catch up with them you won't come back to hang me," murmured
the sergeant.

D'Artagnan shrugged his shoulders, made a sign to his escort and
started.

"This way, gentlemen, this way!" he cried, directing his course toward
the gate that had been pointed out.

But, now that the duke had escaped, the concierge had seen fit to fasten
the gate with a double lock. It was necessary to compel him to open it,
as the sergeant had been compelled to speak, and this took another ten
minutes. This last obstacle having been overcome, the troop pursued
their course with their accustomed ardor; but some of the horses could
no longer sustain this pace; three of them stopped after an hour's
gallop, and one fell down.

D'Artagnan, who never turned his head, did not perceive it. Porthos told
him of it in his calm manner.

"If only we two arrive," said D'Artagnan, "it will be enough, since the
duke's troop are only four in number."

"That is true," said Porthos

And he spurred his courser on.

At the end of another two hours the horses had gone twelve leagues
without stopping; their legs began to tremble, and the foam they shed
whitened the doublets of their masters.

"Let us rest here an instant to give these poor creatures breathing
time," said Porthos.

"Let us rather kill them! yes, kill them!" cried D'Artagnan; "I see
fresh tracks; 'tis not a quarter of an hour since they passed this
place."

In fact, the road was trodden by horses' feet, visible even in the
approaching gloom of evening.

They set out; after a run of two leagues, Mousqueton's horse sank.

"Gracious me!" said Porthos, "there's Phoebus ruined."

"The cardinal will pay you a hundred pistoles."

"I'm above that."

"Let us set out again, at full gallop."

"Yes, if we can."

But at last the lieutenant's horse refused to go on; he could not
breathe; one last spur, instead of making him advance, made him fall.

"The devil!" exclaimed Porthos; "there's Vulcan foundered."

"Zounds!" cried D'Artagnan, "then we must stop! Give me your horse,
Porthos. What the devil are you doing?"

"By Jove, I am falling, or rather, Bayard is falling," answered Porthos.

All three then cried: "All's over."

"Hush!" said D'Artagnan.

"What is it?"

"I hear a horse."

"It belongs to one of our companions, who is overtaking us."

"No," said D'Artagnan, "it is in advance."

"That is another thing," said Porthos; and he listened toward the
quarter indicated by D'Artagnan.

"Monsieur," said Mousqueton, who, abandoning his horse on the high road,
had come on foot to rejoin his master, "Phoebus could no longer hold out
and----"

"Silence!" said Porthos.

In fact, at that moment a second neighing was borne to them on the night
wind.

"It is five hundred feet from here, in advance," said D'Artagnan.

"True, monsieur," said Mousqueton; "and five hundred feet from here is a
small hunting-house."

"Mousqueton, thy pistols," said D'Artagnan.

"I have them at hand, monsieur."

"Porthos, take yours from your holsters."

"I have them."

"Good!" said D'Artagnan, seizing his own; "now you understand, Porthos?"

"Not too well."

"We are out on the king's service."

"Well?"

"For the king's service we need horses."

"That is true," said Porthos.

"Then not a word, but set to work!"

They went on through the darkness, silent as phantoms; they saw a light
glimmering in the midst of some trees.

"Yonder is the house, Porthos," said the Gascon; "let me do what I
please and do you what I do."

They glided from tree to tree till they arrived at twenty steps from the
house unperceived and saw by means of a lantern suspended under a hut,
four fine horses. A groom was rubbing them down; near them were saddles
and bridles.

D'Artagnan approached quickly, making a sign to his two companions to
remain a few steps behind.

"I buy those horses," he said to the groom.

The groom turned toward him with a look of surprise, but made no reply.

"Didn't you hear, fellow?"

"Yes, I heard."

"Why, then, didn't you reply?"

"Because these horses are not to be sold," was the reply.

"I take them, then," said the lieutenant.

And he took hold of one within his reach; his two companions did the
same thing.

"Sir," cried the groom, "they have traversed six leagues and have only
been unsaddled half an hour."

"Half an hour's rest is enough," replied the Gascon.

The groom cried aloud for help. A kind of steward appeared, just as
D'Artagnan and his companions were prepared to mount. The steward
attempted to expostulate.

"My dear friend," cried the lieutenant, "if you say a word I will blow
out your brains."

"But, sir," answered the steward, "do you know that these horses belong
to Monsieur de Montbazon?"

"So much the better; they must be good animals, then."

"Sir, I shall call my people."

"And I, mine; I've ten guards behind me, don't you hear them gallop? and
I'm one of the king's musketeers. Come, Porthos; come, Mousqueton."

They all mounted the horses as quickly as possible.

"Halloo! hi! hi!" cried the steward; "the house servants, with the
carbines!"

"On! on!" cried D'Artagnan; "there'll be firing! on!"

They all set off, swift as the wind.

"Here!" cried the steward, "here!" whilst the groom ran to a neighboring
building.

"Take care of your horses!" cried D'Artagnan to him.

"Fire!" replied the steward.

A gleam, like a flash of lightning, illumined the road, and with the
flash was heard the whistling of balls, which were fired wildly in the
air.

"They fire like grooms," said Porthos. "In the time of the cardinal
people fired better than that, do you remember the road to Crevecoeur,
Mousqueton?"

"Ah, sir! my left side still pains me!"

"Are you sure we are on the right track, lieutenant?"

"Egad, didn't you hear? these horses belong to Monsieur de Montbazon;
well, Monsieur de Montbazon is the husband of Madame de Montbazon----"

"And----"

"And Madame de Montbazon is the mistress of the Duc de Beaufort."

"Ah! I understand," replied Porthos; "she has ordered relays of horses."

"Exactly so."

"And we are pursuing the duke with the very horses he has just left?"

"My dear Porthos, you are really a man of most superior understanding,"
said D'Artagnan, with a look as if he spoke against his conviction.

"Pooh!" replied Porthos, "I am what I am."

They rode on for an hour, till the horses were covered with foam and
dust.

"Zounds! what is yonder?" cried D'Artagnan.

"You are very lucky if you see anything such a night as this," said
Porthos.

"Something bright."

"I, too," cried Mousqueton, "saw them also."

"Ah! ah! have we overtaken them?"

"Good! a dead horse!" said D'Artagnan, pulling up his horse, which
shied; "it seems their horses, too, are breaking down, as well as ours."

"I seem to hear the noise of a troop of horsemen," exclaimed Porthos,
leaning over his horse's mane.

"Impossible."

"They appear to be numerous."

"Then 'tis something else."

"Another horse!" said Porthos.

"Dead?"

"No, dying."

"Saddled?"

"Yes, saddled and bridled."

"Then we are upon the fugitives."

"Courage, we have them!"

"But if they are numerous," observed Mousqueton, "'tis not we who have
them, but they who have us."

"Nonsense!" cried D'Artagnan, "they'll suppose us to be stronger than
themselves, as we're in pursuit; they'll be afraid and will disperse."

"Certainly," remarked Porthos.

"Ah! do you see?" cried the lieutenant.

"The lights again! this time I, too, saw them," said Porthos.

"On! on! forward! forward!" cried D'Artagnan, in his stentorian voice;
"we shall laugh over all this in five minutes."

And they darted on anew. The horses, excited by pain and emulation,
raced over the dark road, in the midst of which was now seen a moving
mass, denser and more obscure than the rest of the horizon.




26. The Rencontre.


They rode on in this way for ten minutes. Suddenly two dark forms seemed
to separate from the mass, advanced, grew in size, and as they loomed up
larger and larger, assumed the appearance of two horsemen.

"Aha!" cried D'Artagnan, "they're coming toward us."

"So much the worse for them," said Porthos.

"Who goes there?" cried a hoarse voice.

The three horsemen made no reply, stopped not, and all that was heard
was the noise of swords drawn from the scabbards and the cocking of the
pistols with which the two phantoms were armed.

"Bridle in mouth!" said D'Artagnan.

Porthos understood him and he and the lieutenant each drew with the left
hand a pistol from their bolsters and cocked it in their turn.

"Who goes there?" was asked a second time. "Not a step forward, or
you're dead men."

"Stuff!" cried Porthos, almost choked with dust and chewing his bridle
as a horse chews his bit. "Stuff and nonsense; we have seen plenty of
dead men in our time."

Hearing these words, the two shadows blockaded the road and by the light
of the stars might be seen the shining of their arms.

"Back!" shouted D'Artagnan, "or you are dead!"

Two shots were the reply to this threat; but the assailants attacked
their foes with such velocity that in a moment they were upon them; a
third pistol-shot was heard, aimed by D'Artagnan, and one of his
adversaries fell. As for Porthos, he assaulted the foe with such
violence that, although his sword was thrust aside, the enemy was thrown
off his horse and fell about ten steps from it.

"Finish, Mouston, finish the work!" cried Porthos. And he darted on
beside his friend, who had already begun a fresh pursuit.

"Well?" said Porthos.
