in health, the mind perhaps sympathising with the body, she is wayward
and uncertain in temper, but sensitive and keenly alive to kindness, and
with a shrewdness beyond her years. At the risk of offending my mother,
for I felt confident I was acting rightly, I have endeavoured to instil
religious principles into her heart, and to inspire her with a love of
truth. Sometimes she has listened to me; and I have observed strange
struggles in her nature, as if the good were obtaining mastery of the
evil principle, and I have striven the more to convince her, and win her
over, but never with entire success, for my efforts have been overcome
by pernicious counsels, and sceptical sneers. Oh, dear young lady, what
would I not do to be the instrument of her salvation!"

"You pain me much by this relation, Alizon," said Dorothy Assheton, who
had listened with profound attention, "and I now wish more ardently than
ever to take you from such a family."

"I cannot leave them, dear young lady," replied Alizon; "for I feel I
may be of infinite service--especially to Jennet--by staying with them.
Where there is a soul to be saved, especially the soul of one dear as a
sister, no sacrifice can be too great to make--no price too heavy to
pay. By the blessing of Heaven I hope to save her! And that is the great
tie that binds me to a home, only so in name."

"I will not oppose your virtuous intentions, dear Alizon," replied
Dorothy; "but I must now mention a circumstance in connexion with your
mother, of which you are perhaps in ignorance, but which it is right you
should know, and therefore no false delicacy on my part shall restrain
me from mentioning it. Your grandmother, Old Demdike, is in very ill
depute in Pendle, and is stigmatised by the common folk, and even by
others, as a witch. Your mother, too, shares in the opprobrium attaching
to her."

"I dreaded this," replied Alizon, turning deadly pale, and trembling
violently, "I feared you had heard the terrible report. But oh, believe
it not! My poor mother is erring enough, but she is not so bad as that.
Oh, believe it not!"

"I will not believe it," said Dorothy, "since she is blessed with such a
daughter as you. But what I fear is that you--you so kind, so good, so
beautiful--may come under the same ban."

"I must run this risk also, in the good work I have appointed myself,"
replied Alizon. "If I am ill thought of by men, I shall have the
approval of my own conscience to uphold me. Whatever betide, and
whatever be said, do not you think ill of me, dear young lady."

"Fear it not," returned Dorothy, earnestly.

While thus conversing, they gradually strayed away from the cherry-tree,
and taking a winding path leading in that direction, entered the
conventual church, about the middle of the south aisle. After gazing
with wonder and delight at the still majestic pillars, that, like ghosts
of the departed brethren, seemed to protest against the desolation
around them, they took their way along the nave, through broken arches,
and over prostrate fragments of stone, to the eastern extremity of the
fane, and having admired the light shafts and clerestory windows of the
choir, as well as the magnificent painted glass over the altar, they
stopped before an arched doorway on the right, with two Gothic niches,
in one of which was a small stone statue of Saint Agnes with her lamb,
and in the other a similar representation of Saint Margaret, crowned,
and piercing the dragon with a cross. Both were sculptures of much
merit, and it was wonderful they had escaped destruction. The door was
closed, but it easily opened when tried by Dorothy, and they found
themselves in a small but beautiful chapel. What struck them chiefly in
it was a magnificent monument of white marble, enriched with numerous
small shields, painted and gilt, supporting two recumbent figures,
representing Henry de Lacy, one of the founders of the Abbey, and his
consort. The knight was cased in plate armour, covered with a surcoat,
emblazoned with his arms, and his feet resting upon a hound. This superb
monument was wholly uninjured, the painting and gilding being still
fresh and bright. Behind it a flag had been removed, discovering a
flight of steep stone steps, leading to a vault, or other subterranean
chamber.

After looking round this chapel, Dorothy remarked, "There is something
else that has just occurred to me. When a child, a strange dark tale was
told me, to the effect that the last ill-fated Abbot of Whalley laid his
dying curse upon your grandmother, then an infant, predicting that she
should be a witch, and the mother of witches."

"I have heard the dread tradition, too," rejoined Alizon; "but I cannot,
will not, believe it. An all-benign Power will never sanction such
terrible imprecations."

"Far be it from me to affirm the contrary," replied Dorothy; "but it is
undoubted that some families have been, and are, under the influence of
an inevitable fatality. In one respect, connected also with the same
unfortunate prelate, I might instance our own family. Abbot Paslew is
said to be unlucky to us even in his grave. If such a curse, as I have
described, hangs over the head of your family, all your efforts to
remove it will be ineffectual."

"I trust not," said Alizon. "Oh! dear young lady, you have now
penetrated the secret of my heart. The mystery of my life is laid open
to you. Disguise it as I may, I cannot but believe my mother to be under
some baneful influence. Her unholy life, her strange actions, all
impress me with the idea. And there is the same tendency in Jennet."

"You have a brother, have you not?" inquired Dorothy.

"I have," returned Alizon, slightly colouring; "but I see little of him,
for he lives near my grandmother, in Pendle Forest, and always avoids me
in his rare visits here. You will think it strange when I tell you I
have never beheld my grandmother Demdike."

"I am glad to hear it," exclaimed Dorothy.

"I have never even been to Pendle," pursued Alizon, "though Jennet and
my mother go there frequently. At one time I much wished to see my aged
relative, and pressed my mother to take me with her; but she refused,
and now I have no desire to go."

"Strange!" exclaimed Dorothy. "Every thing you tell me strengthens the
idea I conceived, the moment I saw you, and which my brother also
entertained, that you are not the daughter of Elizabeth Device."

"Did your brother think this?" cried Alizon, eagerly. But she
immediately cast down her eyes.

"He did," replied Dorothy, not noticing her confusion. "'It is
impossible,' he said, 'that that lovely girl can be sprung from'--but I
will not wound you by adding the rest."

"I cannot disown my kindred," said Alizon. "Still, I must confess that
some notions of the sort have crossed me, arising, probably, from my
mother's extraordinary treatment, and from many other circumstances,
which, though trifling in themselves, were not without weight in leading
me to the conclusion. Hitherto I have treated it only as a passing
fancy, but if you and Master Richard Assheton"--and her voice slightly
faltered as she pronounced the name--"think so, it may warrant me in
more seriously considering the matter."

"Do consider it most seriously, dear Alizon," cried Dorothy. "I have
made up my mind, and Richard has made up his mind, too, that you are not
Mother Demdike's grand-daughter, nor Elizabeth Device's daughter, nor
Jennet's sister--nor any relation of theirs. We are sure of it, and we
will have you of our mind."

The fair and animated speaker could not help noticing the blushes that
mantled Alizon's cheeks as she spoke, but she attributed them to other
than the true cause. Nor did she mend the matter as she proceeded.

"I am sure you are well born, Alizon," she said, "and so it will be
found in the end. And Richard thinks so, too, for he said so to me; and
Richard is my oracle, Alizon."

In spite of herself Alizon's eyes sparkled with pleasure; but she
speedily checked the emotion.

"I must not indulge the dream," she said, with a sigh.

"Why not?" cried Dorothy. "I will have strict inquiries made as to your
history."

"I cannot consent to it," replied Alizon. "I cannot leave one who, if
she be not my parent, has stood to me in that relation. Neither can I
have her brought into trouble on my account. What will she think of me,
if she learns I have indulged such a notion? She will say, and with
truth, that I am the most ungrateful of human beings, as well as the
most unnatural of children. No, dear young lady, it must not be. These
fancies are brilliant, but fallacious, and, like bubbles, burst as soon
as formed."

"I admire your sentiments, though I do not admit the justice of your
reasoning," rejoined Dorothy. "It is not on your own account merely,
though that is much, that the secret of your birth--if there be
one--ought to be cleared up; but, for the sake of those with whom you
may be connected. There may be a mother, like mine, weeping for you as
lost--a brother, like Richard, mourning you as dead. Think of the sad
hearts your restoration will make joyful. As to Elizabeth Device, no
consideration should be shown her. If she has stolen you from your
parents, as I suspect, she deserves no pity."

"All this is mere surmise, dear young lady," replied Alizon.

At this juncture they were startled, by seeing an old woman come from
behind the monument and plant herself before them. Both uttered a cry,
and would have fled, but a gesture from the crone detained them. Very
old was she, and of strange and sinister aspect, almost blind, bent
double, with frosted brows and chin, and shaking with palsy.

"Stay where you are," cried the hag, in an imperious tone. "I want to
speak to you. Come nearer to me, my pretty wheans; nearer--nearer."

And as they complied, drawn towards her by an impulse they could not
resist, the old woman caught hold of Alizon's arm, and said with a
chuckle. "So you are the wench they call Alizon Device, eh!"

"Ay," replied Alizon, trembling like a dove in the talons of a hawk.

"Do you know who I am?" cried the hag, grasping her yet more tightly.
"Do you know who I am, I say? If not, I will tell you. I am Mother
Chattox of Pendle Forest, the rival of Mother Demdike, and the enemy of
all her accursed brood. Now, do you know me, wench? Men call me witch.
Whether I am so or not, I have some power, as they and you shall find.
Mother Demdike has often defied me--often injured me, but I will have my
revenge upon her--ha! ha!"

"Let me go," cried Alizon, greatly terrified.

"I will run and bring assistance," cried Dorothy. And she flew to the
door, but it resisted her attempts to open it.

"Come back," screamed the hag. "You strive in vain. The door is fast
shut--fast shut. Come back, I say. Who are you?" she added, as the maid
drew near, ready to sink with terror. "Your voice is an Assheton's
voice. I know you now. You are Dorothy Assheton--whey-skinned, blue-eyed
Dorothy. Listen to me, Dorothy. I owe your family a grudge, and, if you
provoke me, I will pay it off in part on you. Stir not, as you value
your life."

The poor girl did not dare to move, and Alizon remained as if fascinated
by the terrible old woman.

"I will tell you what has happened, Dorothy," pursued Mother Chattox. "I
came hither to Whalley on business of my own; meddling with no one;
harming no one. Tread upon the adder and it will bite; and, when
molested, I bite like the adder. Your cousin, Nick Assheton, came in my
way, called me 'witch,' and menaced me. I cursed him--ha! ha! And then
your brother, Richard--"

[Illustration: MOTHER CHATTOX, ALIZON, AND DOROTHY.]

"What of him, in Heaven's name?" almost shrieked Alizon.

"How's this?" exclaimed Mother Chattox, placing her hand on the beating
heart of the girl.

"What of Richard Assheton?" repeated Alizon.

"You love him, I feel you do, wench," cried the old crone with fierce
exultation.

"Release me, wicked woman," cried Alizon.

"Wicked, am I? ha! ha!" rejoined Mother Chattox, chuckling maliciously,
"because, forsooth, I read thy heart, and betray its secrets. Wicked,
eh! I tell thee wench again, Richard Assheton is lord and master here.
Every pulse in thy bosom beats for him--for him alone. But beware of his
love. Beware of it, I say. It shall bring thee ruin and despair."

"For pity's sake, release me," implored Alizon.

"Not yet," replied the inexorable old woman, "not yet. My tale is not
half told. My curse fell on Richard's head, as it did on Nicholas's. And
then the hell-hounds thought to catch me; but they were at fault. I
tricked them nicely--ha! ha! However, they took my Nance--my pretty
Nance--they seized her, bound her, bore her to the Calder--and there
swam her. Curses light on them all!--all!--but chief on him who did it!"

"Who was he?" inquired Alizon, tremblingly.

"Jem Device," replied the old woman--"it was he who bound her--he who
plunged her in the river, he who swam her. But I will pinch and plague
him for it, I will strew his couch with nettles, and all wholesome food
shall be poison to him. His blood shall be as water, and his flesh
shrink from his bones. He shall waste away slowly--slowly--slowly--till
he drops like a skeleton into the grave ready digged for him. All
connected with him shall feel my fury. I would kill thee now, if thou
wert aught of his."

"Aught of his! What mean you, old woman?" demanded Alizon.

"Why, this," rejoined Mother Chattox, "and let the knowledge work in
thee, to the confusion of Bess Device. Thou art not her daughter."

"It is as I thought," cried Dorothy Assheton, roused by the intelligence
from her terror.

"I tell thee not this secret to pleasure thee," continued Mother
Chattox, "but to confound Elizabeth Device. I have no other motive. She
hath provoked my vengeance, and she shall feel it. Thou art not her
child, I say. The secret of thy birth is known to me, but the time is
not yet come for its disclosure. It shall out, one day, to the confusion
of those who offend me. When thou goest home tell thy reputed mother
what I have said, and mark how she takes the information. Ha! who comes
here?"

The hag's last exclamation was occasioned by the sudden appearance of
Mistress Nutter, who opened the door of the chapel, and, staring in
astonishment at the group, came quickly forward.

"What makes you here, Mother Chattox?" she cried.

"I came here to avoid pursuit," replied the old hag, with a cowed
manner, and in accents sounding strangely submissive after her late
infuriated tone.

"What have you been saying to these girls?" demanded Mistress Nutter,
authoritatively.

"Ask them," the hag replied.

"She declares that Alizon is not the daughter of Elizabeth Device,"
cried Dorothy Assheton.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Mistress Nutter quickly, and as if a spring of
extraordinary interest had been suddenly touched. "What reason hast thou
for this assertion?"

"No good reason," replied the old woman evasively, yet with evident
apprehension of her questioner.

"Good reason or bad, I will have it," cried Mistress Nutter.

"What you, too, take an interest in the wench, like the rest!" returned
Mother Chattox. "Is she so very winning?"

"That is no answer to my question," said the lady. "Whose child is she?"

"Ask Bess Device, or Mother Demdike," replied Mother Chattox; "they know
more about the matter than me."

"I will have thee speak, and to the purpose," cried the lady, angrily.

"Many an one has lost a child who would gladly have it back again," said
the old hag, mysteriously.

"Who has lost one?" asked Mistress Nutter.

"Nay, it passeth me to tell," replied the old woman with affected
ignorance. "Question those who stole her. I have set you on the track.
If you fail in pursuing it, come to me. You know where to find me."

"You shall not go thus," said Mistress Nutter. "I will have a direct
answer now."

And as she spoke she waved her hands twice or thrice over the old woman.
In doing this her figure seemed to dilate, and her countenance underwent
a marked and fearful change. All her beauty vanished, her eyes blazed,
and terror sat on her wrinkled brow. The hag, on the contrary, crouched
lower down, and seemed to dwindle less than her ordinary size. Writhing
as from heavy blows, and with a mixture of malice and fear in her
countenance, she cried, "Were I to speak, you would not thank me. Let me
go."

"Answer," vociferated Mistress Nutter, disregarding the caution, and
speaking in a sharp piercing voice, strangely contrasting with her
ordinary utterance. "Answer, I say, or I will beat thee to the dust."

And she continued her gestures, while the sufferings of the old hag
evidently increased, and she crouched nearer and nearer to the ground,
moaning out the words, "Do not force me to speak. You will repent
it!--you will repent it!"

"Do not torment her thus, madam," cried Alizon, who with Dorothy looked
at the strange scene with mingled apprehension and wonderment. "Much as
I desire to know the secret of my birth, I would not obtain it thus."

As she uttered these words, the old woman contrived to shuffle off, and
disappeared behind the tomb.

"Why did you interpose, Alizon," cried Mistress Nutter, somewhat
angrily, and dropping her hands. "You broke the power I had over her. I
would have compelled her to speak."

"I thank you, gracious lady, for your consideration," replied Alizon,
gratefully; "but the sight was too painful."

"What has become of her--where is she gone?" cried Dorothy, peeping
behind the tomb. "She has crept into this vault, I suppose."

"Do not trouble yourelf about her more, Dorothy," said Mistress Nutter,
resuming her wonted voice and wonted looks. "Let us return to the house.
Thus much is ascertained, Alizon, that you are no child of your supposed
parent. Wait a little, and the rest shall be found out for you. And,
meantime, be assured that I take strong interest in you."

"That we all do," added Dorothy.

"Thank you! thank you!" exclaimed Alizon, almost overpowered.

With this they went forth, and, traversing the shafted aisle, quitted
the conventual church, and took their way along the alley leading to the
garden.

"Say not a word at present to Elizabeth Device of the information you
have obtained, Alizon," observed Mistress Nutter. "I have reasons for
this counsel, which I will afterwards explain to you. And do you keep
silence on the subject, Dorothy."

"May I not tell Richard?" said the young lady.

"Not Richard--not any one," returned Mistress Nutter, "or you may
seriously affect Alizon's prospects."

"You have cautioned me in time," cried Dorothy, "for here comes my
brother with our cousin Nicholas."

And as she spoke a turn in the alley showed Richard and Nicholas
Assheton advancing towards them.

A strange revolution had been produced in Alizon's feelings by the
events of the last half hour. The opinions expressed by Dorothy
Assheton, as to her birth, had been singularly confirmed by Mother
Chattox; but could reliance be placed on the old woman's assertions?
Might they not have been made with mischievous intent? And was it not
possible, nay, probable, that, in her place of concealment behind the
tomb, the vindictive hag had overheard the previous conversation with
Dorothy, and based her own declaration upon it? All these suggestions
occurred to Alizon, but the previous idea having once gained admission
to her breast, soon established itself firmly there, in spite of doubts
and misgivings, and began to mix itself up with new thoughts and
wishes, with which other persons were connected; for she could not help
fancying she might be well-born, and if so the vast distance heretofore
existing between her and Richard Assheton might be greatly diminished,
if not altogether removed. So rapid is the progress of thought, that
only a few minutes were required for this long train of reflections to
pass through her mind, and it was merely put to flight by the approach
of the main object of her thoughts.

On joining the party, Richard Assheton saw plainly that something had
happened; but as both his sister and Alizon laboured under evident
embarrassment, he abstained from making inquiries as to its cause for
the present, hoping a better opportunity of doing so would occur, and
the conversation was kept up by Nicholas Assheton, who described, in his
wonted lively manner, the encounter with Mother Chattox and Nance
Redferne, the swimming of the latter, and the trickery and punishment of
Potts. During the recital Mistress Nutter often glanced uneasily at the
two girls, but neither of them offered any interruption until Nicholas
had finished, when Dorothy, taking her brother's hand, said, with a look
of affectionate admiration, "You acted like yourself, dear Richard."

Alizon did not venture to give utterance to the same sentiment, but her
looks plainly expressed it.

"I only wish you had punished that cruel James Device, as well as saved
poor Nance," added Dorothy.

"Hush!" exclaimed Richard, glancing at Alizon.

"You need not be afraid of hurting her feelings," cried the young lady.
"She does not mind him now."

"What do you mean, Dorothy?" cried Richard, in surprise.

"Oh, nothing--nothing," she replied, hastily.

"Perhaps you will explain," said Richard to Alizon.

"Indeed I cannot," she answered in confusion.

"You would have laughed to see Potts creep out of the river," said
Nicholas, turning to Dorothy; "he looked just like a drowned
rat--ha!--ha!"

"You have made a bitter enemy of him, Nicholas," observed Mistress
Nutter; "so look well to yourself."

"I heed him not," rejoined the squire; "he knows me now too well to
meddle with me again, and I shall take good care how I put myself in his
power. One thing I may mention, to show the impotent malice of the
knave. Just as he was setting off, he said, 'This is not the only
discovery of witchcraft I have made to-day. I have another case nearer
home.' What could he mean?"

"I know not," replied Mistress Nutter, a shade of disquietude passing
over her countenance. "But he is quite capable of bringing the charge
against you or any of us."

"He is so," said Nicholas. "After what has occurred, I wonder whether
he will go over to Rough Lee to-morrow?"

"Very likely not," replied Mistress Nutter, "and in that case Master
Roger Nowell must provide some other person competent to examine the
boundary-line of the properties on his behalf."

"Then you are confident of the adjudication being in your favour?" said
Nicholas.

"Quite so," replied Mistress Nutter, with a self-satisfied smile.

"The result, I hope, may justify your expectation," said Nicholas; "but
it is right to tell you, that Sir Ralph, in consenting to postpone his
decision, has only done so out of consideration to you. If the division
of the properties be as represented by him, Master Nowell will
unquestionably obtain an award in his favour."

"Under such circumstances he may," said Mistress Nutter; "but you will
find the contrary turn out to be the fact. I will show you a plan I have
had lately prepared, and you can then judge for yourself."

While thus conversing, the party passed through a door in the high stone
wall dividing the garden from the court, and proceeded towards the
principal entrance of the mansion. Built out of the ruins of the Abbey,
which had served as a very convenient quarry for the construction of
this edifice, as well as for Portfield, the house was large and
irregular, planned chiefly with the view of embodying part of the old
abbot's lodging, and consisting of a wide front, with two wings, one of
which looked into the court, and the other, comprehending the long
gallery, into the garden. The old north-east gate of the Abbey, with its
lofty archway and embattled walls, served as an entrance to the great
court-yard, and at its wicket ordinarily stood Ned Huddlestone, the
porter, though he was absent on the present occasion, being occupied
with the May-day festivities. Immediately opposite the gateway sprang a
flight of stone steps, with a double landing-place and a broad
balustrade of the same material, on the lowest pillar of which was
placed a large escutcheon sculptured with the arms of the
family--argent, a mullet sable--with a rebus on the name--an ash on a
tun. The great door to which these steps conducted stood wide open, and
before it, on the upper landing-place, were collected Lady Assheton,
Mistress Braddyll, Mistress Nicholas Assheton, and some other dames,
laughing and conversing together. Some long-eared spaniels, favourites
of the lady of the house, were chasing each other up and down the steps,
disturbing the slumbers of a couple of fine blood-hounds in the
court-yard; or persecuting the proud peafowl that strutted about to
display their gorgeous plumage to the spectators.

On seeing the party approach, Lady Assheton came down to meet them.

"You have been long absent," she said to Dorothy; "but I suppose you
have been exploring the ruins?"

"Yes, we have not left a hole or corner unvisited," was the reply.

"That is right," said Lady Assheton. "I knew you would make a good
guide, Dorothy. Of course you have often seen the old conventual church
before, Alizon?"

"I am ashamed to say I have not, your ladyship," she replied.

"Indeed!" exclaimed Lady Assheton; "and yet you have lived all your life
in the village?"

"Quite true, your ladyship," answered Alizon; "but these ruins have been
prohibited to me."

"Not by us," said Lady Assheton; "they are open to every one."

"I was forbidden to visit them by my mother," said Alizon. And for the
first time the word "mother" seemed strange to her.

Lady Assheton looked surprised, but made no remark, and mounting the
steps, led the way to a spacious though not very lofty chamber, with
huge uncovered rafters, and a floor of polished oak. Over a great
fireplace at one side, furnished with immense andirons, hung a noble
pair of antlers, and similar trophies of the chase were affixed to other
parts of the walls. Here and there were likewise hung rusty skull-caps,
breastplates, two-handed and single-handed swords, maces, halberts, and
arquebusses, with chain-shirts, buff-jerkins, matchlocks, and other
warlike implements, amongst which were several shields painted with the
arms of the Asshetons and their alliances. High-backed chairs of gilt
leather were ranged against the walls, and ebony cabinets inlaid with
ivory were set between them at intervals, supporting rare specimens of
glass and earthenware. Opposite the fireplace, stood a large clock,
curiously painted and decorated with emblematical devices, with the
signs of the zodiac, and provided with movable figures to strike the
hours on a bell; while from the centre of the roof hung a great
chandelier of stag's horn.

Lady Assheton did not tarry long within the entrance hall, for such it
was, but conducted her guests through an arched doorway on the right
into the long gallery. One hundred and fifty feet in length, and
proportionately wide and lofty, this vast chamber had undergone little
change since its original construction by the old owners of the Abbey.
Panelled and floored with lustrous oak, and hung in some parts with
antique tapestry, representing scriptural subjects, one side was pierced
with lofty pointed windows, looking out upon the garden, while the
southern extremity boasted a magnificent window, with heavy stone
mullions, though of more recent workmanship than the framework,
commanding Whalley Nab and the river. The furniture of the apartment was
grand but gloomy, and consisted of antique chairs and tables belonging
to the Abbey. Some curious ecclesiastical sculptures, wood carvings, and
saintly images, were placed at intervals near the walls, and on the
upper panels were hung a row of family portraits.

Quitting the rest of the company, and proceeding to the southern
window, Dorothy invited Alizon and her brother to place themselves
beside her on the cushioned seats of the deep embrasure. Little
conversation, however, ensued; Alizon's heart being too full for
utterance, and recent occurrences engrossing Dorothy's thoughts, to the
exclusion of every thing else. Having made one or two unsuccessful
efforts to engage them in talk, Richard likewise lapsed into silence,
and gazed out on the lovely scenery before him. The evening has been
described as beautiful; and the swift Calder, as it hurried by, was
tinged with rays of the declining sun, whilst the woody heights of
Whalley Nab were steeped in the same rosy light. But the view failed to
interest Richard in his present mood, and after a brief survey, he stole
a look at Alizon, and was surprised to find her in tears.

"What saddening thoughts cross you, fair girl?" he inquired, with deep
interest.

"I can hardly account for my sudden despondency," she replied; "but I
have heard that great happiness is the precursor of dejection, and the
saying I suppose must be true, for I have been happier to-day than I
ever was before in my life. But the feeling of sadness is now past," she
added, smiling.

"I am glad of it," said Richard. "May I not know what has occurred to
you?"

"Not at present," interposed Dorothy; "but I am sure you will be pleased
when you are made acquainted with the circumstance. I would tell you now
if I might."

"May I guess?" said Richard.

"I don't know," rejoined Dorothy, who was dying to tell him. "May he?"

"Oh no, no!" cried Alizon.

"You are very perverse," said Richard, with a look of disappointment.
"There can be no harm in guessing; and you can please yourself as to
giving an answer. I fancy, then, that Alizon has made some discovery."

Dorothy nodded.

"Relative to her parentage?" pursued Richard.

Another nod.

"She has found out she is not Elizabeth Device's daughter?" said
Richard.

"Some witch must have told you this," exclaimed Dorothy.

"Have I indeed guessed rightly?" cried Richard, with an eagerness that
startled his sister. "Do not keep me in suspense. Speak plainly."

"How am I to answer him, Alizon?" said Dorothy.

"Nay, do not appeal to me, dear young lady," she answered, blushing.

"I have gone too far to retreat," rejoined Dorothy, "and therefore,
despite Mistress Nutter's interdiction, the truth shall out. You have
guessed shrewdly, Richard. A discovery _has_ been made--a very great
discovery. Alizon is not the daughter of Elizabeth Device."

"The intelligence delights me, though it scarcely surprises me," cried
Richard, gazing with heartfelt pleasure at the blushing girl; "for I was
sure of the fact from the first. Nothing so good and charming as Alizon
could spring from so foul a source. How and by what means you have
derived this information, as well as whose daughter you are, I shall
wait patiently to learn. Enough for me you are not the sister of James
Device--enough you are not the grandchild of Mother Demdike."

"You know all I know, in knowing thus much," replied Alizon, timidly.
"And secrecy has been enjoined by Mistress Nutter, in order that the
rest may be found out. But oh! should the hopes I have--perhaps too
hastily--indulged, prove fallacious--"

"They cannot be fallacious, Alizon," interrupted Richard, eagerly. "On
that score rest easy. Your connexion with that wretched family is for
ever broken. But I can see the necessity of caution, and shall observe
it. And so Mistress Nutter takes an interest in you?"

"The strongest," replied Dorothy; "but see! she comes this way."

But we must now go back for a short space.

While Mistress Nutter and Nicholas were seated at a table examining a
plan of the Rough Lee estates, the latter was greatly astonished to see
the door open and give admittance to Master Potts, who he fancied snugly
lying between a couple of blankets, at the Dragon. The attorney was clad
in a riding-dress, which he had exchanged for his wet habiliments, and
was accompanied by Sir Ralph Assheton and Master Roger Nowell. On seeing
Nicholas, he instantly stepped up to him.

"Aha! squire," he cried, "you did not expect to see me again so soon,
eh! A pottle of hot sack put my blood into circulation, and having,
luckily, a change of raiment in my valise, I am all right again. Not so
easily got rid of, you see!"

"So it appears," replied Nicholas, laughing.

"We have a trifling account to settle together, sir," said the attorney,
putting on a serious look.

"Whenever you please, sir," replied Nicholas, good-humouredly, tapping
the hilt of his sword.

"Not in that way," cried Potts, darting quickly back. "I never fight
with those weapons--never. Our dispute must be settled in a court of
law, sir--in a court of law. You understand, Master Nicholas?"

"There is a shrewd maxim, Master Potts, that he who is his own lawyer
has a fool for his client," observed Nicholas, drily. "Would it not be
better to stick to the defence of others, rather than practise in your
own behalf?"

"You have expressed my opinion, Master Nicholas," observed Roger
Nowell; "and I hope Master Potts will not commence any action on his own
account till he has finished my business."

"Assuredly not, sir, since you desire it," replied the attorney,
obsequiously. "But my motives must not be mistaken. I have a clear case
of assault and battery against Master Nicholas Assheton, or I may
proceed against him criminally for an attempt on my life."

"Have you given him no provocation, sir?" demanded Sir Ralph, sternly.

"No provocation can justify the treatment I have experienced, Sir
Ralph," replied Potts. "However, to show I am a man of peace, and
harbour no resentment, however just grounds I may have for such a
feeling, I am willing to make up the matter with Master Nicholas,
provided--"

"He offers you a handsome consideration, eh?" said the squire.

"Provided he offers me a handsome apology--such as a gentleman may
accept," rejoined Potts, consequentially.

"And which he will not refuse, I am sure," said Sir Ralph, glancing at
his cousin.

"I should certainly be sorry to have drowned you," said the
squire--"very sorry."

"Enough--enough--I am content," cried Potts, holding out his hand, which
Nicholas grasped with an energy that brought tears into the little man's
eyes.

"I am glad the matter is amicably adjusted," observed Roger Nowell, "for
I suspect both parties have been to blame. And I must now request you,
Master Potts, to forego your search, and inquiries after witches, till
such time as you have settled this question of the boundary line for me.
One matter at a time, my good sir."

"But, Master Nowell," cried Potts, "my much esteemed and singular good
client--"

"I will have no nay," interrupted Nowell, peremptorily.

"Hum!" muttered Potts; "I shall lose the best chance of distinction ever
thrown in my way."

"I care not," said Nowell.

"Just as you came up, Master Nowell," observed Nicholas, "I was
examining a plan of the disputed estates in Pendle Forest. It differs
from yours, and, if correct, certainly substantiates Mistress Nutter's
claim."

"I have mine with me," replied Nowell, producing a plan, and opening it.
"We can compare the two, if you please. The line runs thus:--From the
foot of Pendle Hill, beginning with Barley Booth, the boundary is marked
by a stone wall, as far as certain fields in the occupation of John
Ogden. Is it not so?"

"It is," replied Nicholas, comparing the statement with the other plan.

"It then runs on in a northerly direction," pursued Nowell, "towards
Burst Clough, and here the landmarks are certain stones placed in the
moor, one hundred yards apart, and giving me twenty acres of this land,
and Mistress Nutter ten."

"On the contrary," replied Nicholas. "This plan gives Mistress Nutter
twenty acres, and you ten."

"Then the plan is wrong," cried Nowell, sharply.

"It has been carefully prepared," said Mistress Nutter, who had
approached the table.

"No matter; it is wrong, I say," cried Nowell, angrily.

"You see where the landmarks are placed, Master Nowell," said Nicholas,
pointing to the measurement. "I merely go by them."

"The landmarks are improperly placed in that plan," cried Nowell.

"I will examine them myself to-morrow," said Potts, taking out a large
memorandum-hook; "there cannot be an error of ten acres--ten perches--or
ten feet, possibly, but acres--pshaw!"

"Laugh as you please; but go on," said Mrs. Nutter.

"Well, then," pursued Nicholas, "the line approaches the bank of a
rivulet, called Moss Brook--a rare place for woodcocks and snipes that
Moss Brook, I may remark--the land on the left consisting of five acres
of waste land, marked by a sheepfold, and two posts set up in a line
with it, belonging to Mistress Nutter."

"To Mistress Nutter!" exclaimed Nowell, indignantly. "To me, you mean."

"It is here set down to Mistress Nutter," said Nicholas.

"Then it is set down wrongfully," cried Nowell. "That plan is altogether
incorrect."

"On which side of the field does the rivulet flow?" inquired Potts.

"On the right," replied Nicholas.

"On the left," cried Nowell.

"There must be some extraordinary mistake," said Potts. "I shall make a
note of that, and examine it to-morrow.--N.B. Waste land--sheepfold--
rivulet called Moss Brook, flowing on the left."

"On the right," cried Mistress Nutter.

"That remains to be seen," rejoined Potts, "I have made the entry as on
the left."

"Go on, Master Nicholas," said Nowell, "I should like to see how many
other errors that plan contains."

"Passing the rivulet," pursued the squire, "we come to a footpath
leading to the limestone quarry, about which there can be no mistake.
Then by Cat Gallows Wood and Swallow Hole; and then by another path to
Worston Moor, skirting a hut in the occupation of James Device--ha! ha!
Master Jem, are you here? I thought you dwelt with your grandmother at
Malkin Tower--excuse me, Master Nowell, but one must relieve the dulness
of this plan by an exclamation or so--and here being waste land again,
the landmarks are certain stones set at intervals towards Hook Cliff,
and giving Mistress Nutter two-thirds of the whole moor, and Master
Roger Nowell one-third."

"False again," cried Nowell, furiously. "The two-thirds are mine, the
one-third Mistress Nutter's."

"Somebody must be very wrong," cried Nicholas.

"Very wrong indeed," added Potts; "and I suspect that that somebody
is--"

"Master Nowell," said Mistress Nutter.

"Mistress Nutter," cried Master Nowell.

"Both are wrong and both right, according to your own showing," said
Nicholas, laughing.

"To-morrow will decide the question," said Potts.

"Better wait till then," interposed Sir Ralph. "Take both plans with
you, and you will then ascertain which is correct."

"Agreed," cried Nowell. "Here is mine."

"And here is mine," said Mistress Nutter. "I will abide by the
investigation."

"And Master Potts and I will verify the statements," said Nicholas.

"We will, sir," replied the attorney, putting his memorandum book in his
pocket. "We will."

The plans were then delivered to the custody of Sir Ralph, who promised
to hand them over to Potts and Nicholas on the morrow.

The party then separated; Mistress Nutter shaping her course towards the
window where Alizon and the two other young people were seated, while
Potts, plucking the squire's sleeve, said, with a very mysterious look,
that he desired a word with him in private. Wondering what could be the
nature of the communication the attorney desired to make, Nicholas
withdrew with him into a corner, and Nowell, who saw them retire, and
could not help watching them with some curiosity, remarked that the
squire's hilarious countenance fell as he listened to the attorney,
while, on the contrary, the features of the latter gleamed with
malicious satisfaction.

Meanwhile, Mistress Nutter approached Alizon, and beckoning her towards
her, they quitted the room together. As the young girl went forth, she
cast a wistful look at Dorothy and her brother.

"You think with me, that that lovely girl is well born?" said Dorothy,
as Alizon disappeared.

"It were heresy to doubt it," answered Richard.

"Shall I tell you another secret?" she continued, regarding him
fixedly--"if, indeed, it be a secret, for you must be sadly wanting in
discernment if you have not found it out ere this. She loves you."

"Dorothy!" exclaimed Richard.

"I am sure of it," she rejoined. "But I would not tell you this, if I
were not quite equally sure that you love her in return."

"On my faith, Dorothy, you give yourself credit for wonderful
penetration," cried Richard.

"Not a whit more than I am entitled to," she answered. "Nay, it will not
do to attempt concealment with me. If I had not been certain of the
matter before, your manner now would convince me. I am very glad of it.
She will make a charming sister, and I shall he very fond of her."

"How you do run on, madcap!" cried her brother, trying to look
displeased, but totally failing in assuming the expression.

"Stranger things have come to pass," said Dorothy; "and one reads in
