
But ouer all the Land, Iles, or other impediments, you may well see
them sixteene or eighteene leagues from their situation. Segocket is
the next; then Nufconcus, Pemmaquid, and Sagadahock. Vp this Riuer
where was the Westerne plantation are Aumuckcawgen, Kinnebeck, and
diuers others, where there is planted some corne fields. Along this
Riuer 40 or 50 miles, I saw nothing but great high cliffes of barren
Rocks, ouergrowne with wood: but where the Saluages dwelt there the
ground is exceeding fat & fertill. Westward of this Riuer, is the
Countrey of Aucocisco, in the bottome of a large deepe Bay, full of
runny great Iles, which diuides it into many good harbours. Sowocotuck
is the next, in the edge of a large sandy Bay, which bath many Rocks
and Iles, but few good harbours, but for Barks, I yet know. But all
this Coast to Pennobscot, and as farre I could see Eastward of it is
nothing but such high craggy Cliffy Rocks & stony Iles that I wondered
such great trees could growe vpon so hard foundations. It is a
Countrie rather to affright, then delight one. And how to describe a
more plaine spectacle of desolation or more barren I knowe not. Yet
the Sea there is the strangest fish-pond I euer saw; and those barren
Iles so furnished with good woods, springs, fruits, fish, and foule,
that it makes mee thinke though the Coast be rockie, and thus
affrightable; the Values, Plaines, and interior parts, may well
(notwithstanding) be verie fertile.

But there is no kingdome so fertile bath not some part barren: and New
England is great enough, to make many Kingdomes and Countries, were it
all inhabited. As you passe the Coast still Westward, Accominticus and
Passataquack are two conuenient harbors for small barks; and a good
Countrie, within their craggie cliffs. Angoam is the next; This place
might content a right curious iudgement: but there are many sands at
the entrance of the harbor: and the worst is, it is inbayed too farre
from the deepe Sea. Heere are many rising hilles, and on their tops
and descents many come fields, and delightfull groues. On the East, is
an Ile of two or three leagues in length; the one halfe, plaine morish
grasse fit for pasture, with many faire high groues of mulberrie trees
gardens: and there is also Okes, Pines, and other woods to make this
place an excellent habitation, beeing a good and safe harbor.

Naimkeek though it be more rockie ground (for Angoam is sandie) not
much inferior; neither for the harbor, nor any thing I could perceiue,
but the multitude of people. From hence doth stretch into the sea the
faire headland Tragabigzanda, fronted with three lies called the three
Turks heads: to the North of this, doth enter a great Bay, where wee
founde some habitations and corne fields: they report a great
Riuer[2], and at least thirtie habitations, doo possesse this
Countrie. But because the French had got their Trade, I had no leasure
to discouer it.

The Iles of Mattahunts are on the West side of this Bay, where are
many Iles, and questionlesse good harbors: and then the Countrie of
the Massachusets, which is the Paradise of all those parts: for, heere
are many lies all planted with corne; groues, mulberries, saluage
gardens, and good harbors: the Coast is for the most part, high clayie
sandie cliffs. The Sea Coast as you passe, shewes you all along large
corne fields, and great troupes of well proportioned people: but the
French hauing remained heere neere sixe weekes, left nothing, for vs
to take occasion to examine the inhabitants relations, viz, if there
be neer three thousand people vpon these Iles; and that the Riuer doth
pearce many daies iourneies the intralles of that Countrey. We found
the people in those parts verie kinde; but in their furie no lesse
valiant. For, vpon a quarrell wee had with one of them, hee onely with
three others crossed the harbor of Quonahassit to certaine rocks
whereby wee must passe; and there let flie their arrowes for our shot,
till we were out of danger.

Then come you to Accomack, an excellent good harbor, good land; and no
want of any thing, but industrious people. After much kindnesse, vpon
a small occasion, wee fought also with fortie or fiftie of those:
though some were hurt, and some slaine; yet within an houre after they
became friendes. Cape Cod is the next presents it selfe; which is
onely a headland of high hils of sand, ouergrowne with shrubbie pines,
hurts, and such trash; but an excellent harbor for all weathers. This
Cape is made by the maine Sea on the one side, and a great Bay on the
other in forme of a sickle: on it doth inhabit the people of Pawmet:
and in the bottome of the Bay, the people of Chawum.

    [1] From Smith's "Description of New England," published in London
    in 1616. Smith's exploration of New England was made after he had
    become separated from the Jamestown colony, of which in 1608, he
    had been president. He went there under an engagement with London
    merchants to fish for cod, barter for furs and explore the country
    for settlement. It was he who at the request of Prince Charles
    named the country New England.

    [2] Probably the Merrimac.




THE FIRST VOYAGE OF THE "MAYFLOWER"

(1620)

BY GOVERNOR WILLIAM BRADFORD[1]


Sept^r: 6. These troubls being blowne over, and now all being compacte
togeather in one shipe, they put to sea againe with a prosperus winde,
which continued diverce days togeather, which was some incouragemente
unto them; yet according to y^e usuall maner many were afflicted with
sea-sicknes....

After they had injoyed faire winds and weather for a season, they were
incountred many times with crosse winds, and mette with many feirce
stormes, with which y^e shipe was shroudly shaken, and her upper works
made very leakie; and one of the maine beames in y^e midd ships was
bowed & craked, which put them in some fear that y^e shipe could not
be able to performe y^e vioage. So some of y^e cheefe of y^e company,
perceiving y^e mariners to feare y^e suffisiencie of y^e shipe, as
appeared by their mutterings, they entred into serious consulltation
with y^e m^r. & other officers of y^e ship, to consider in time of y^e
danger; and rather to returne then to cast them selves into a
desperate & inevitable perill. And truly ther was great distraction &
differance of opinion amongst y^e mariners themselves; faine would
they doe what could be done for their wages sake, (being now halfe the
seas over,) and on y^e other hand they were loath to hazard their
lives too desperatly. But in examening of all opinions, the m^r. &
others affirmed they knew y^e ship to be stronge & firme under water;
and for the buckling of y^e maine beame, ther was a great iron scrue
y^e passengers brought out of Holland, which would raise y^e beame
into his place; y^e which being done, the carpenter & m^r. affirmed
that with a post put under it, set firme in y^e lower deck, &
otherways bounde, he would make it sufficiente.

And as for y^e decks & uper workes they would calke them as well as
they could, and though with y^e workeing of y^e ship they would not
longe keepe stanch, yet ther would otherwise be no great danger, if
they did not overpress her with sails. So they comited them selves to
y^e will of God, & resolved to proseede. In sundrie of these stormes
the winds were so feirce, & y^e seas so high, as they could not beare
a knote of saile, but were forced to hull, for diverce days togither.
And in one of them, as they thus lay at hull, in a mighty storme, a
lustie yonge man (called John Rowland) coming upon some occasion above
y^e grattings, was, with a seele of y^e shipe throwne into [y^e] sea;
but it pleased God y^t he caught hould of y^e tope-saile halliards,
which hunge over board, & rane out at length; y^et he held his hould
(though he was sundrie fadomes under water) till he was hald up by y^e
same rope to y^e brime of y^e water, and then with a boat hooke &
other means got into y^e shipe againe, & his life saved; and though he
was something ill with it, y^et he lived many years after, and became
a profitable member both in church & comone wealthe. In all this siage
ther died but one of y^e passengers, which was William Butten, a
youth, servant to Samuel Fuller, when they drew near y^e coast....

But to omite other things, (that I may be breefe,) after longe beating
at sea they fell with that land which is called Cape Cod; the which
being made & certainly knowne to be it, they were not a little
joyfull. After some deliberation had amongst them selves & with y^e
m^r. of y^e ship, they tacked aboute and resolved to stande for y^e
southward (y^e wind & weather being faire) to find some place aboute
Hudsons river for their habitation. But after they had sailed y^t
course aboute half y^e day, they fell amongst deangerous shoulds and
roring breakers, and they were so farr intangled ther with as they
conceived them selves in great danger; & y^e wind shrinking upon them
withall, they resolved to bear up againe for the Cape, and thought
them selves hapy to gett out of those dangers before night overtooke
them, as by Gods providence they did. And y^e next day they gott into
y^e Cape-harbor wher they ridd in saftie.[2] A word or too by y^e way
of this cape; it was thus first named by Capten Gosnole & his company,
An^o: 1602, and after by Capten Smith was caled Cape James; but it
retains y^e former name amongst sea-men. Also y^t pointe which first
shewed those dangerous shoulds unto them, they called Point Care, &
Tuckers Terrour; but y^t French & Dutch to this day call it Malabarr,
by reason of those perilous shoulds, and y^e losses they have suffered
their.

Being thus arived in a good harbor and brought safe to land, they fell
upon their knees & blessed y^e God of heaven, who had brought them
over y^e vast & furious ocean, and delivered them from all y^e periles
& miseries thereof, againe to set their feete on y^e firme and stable
earth, their proper elemente. And no marvell if they were thus
joyefull, seeing wise Seneca was so affected with sailing a few miles
on y^e coast of his owne Italy; as he affirmed, that he had rather
remaine twentie years on his way by land, then pass by sea to any
place in a short time; so tedious & dreadfull was y^e same unto
him....

But hear I cannot but stay and make a pause, and stand half amased at
this poore peoples presente condition; and so I thinke will the reader
too, when he well considers yo same. Being thus passed y^e vast ocean,
and a sea of troubles before in their preparation (as may be remembred
by y^t which wente before), they had now no friends to well come them,
nor inns to entertaine or refresh their weatherbeaten bodys, no houses
or much less townes to repaire too, to seeke for succoure. It is
recorded in scripture as a mercie to y^e apostle & his shipwraked
company, y^t the barbarians shewed them no smale kindnes in refreshing
them, but these savage barbarians, when they mette with them (as after
will appeare) were readier to fill their sids full of arrows then
otherwise. And for y^e season it was winter, and they that know y^e
winters of y^t cuntrie know them to be sharp & violent, & subjecte to
cruell & feirce stormes, deangerous to travill to known places, much
more to serch an unknown coast. Besids, what could they see but a
hidious & desolate wildernes, full of wild beasts & willd men? and
what multituds ther might be of them they knew not. Nether could they,
as it were, goe up to y^e tope of Pisgah, to vew from this willdernes
a more goodly cuntrie to feed their hops; for which way soever they
turnd their eys (save upward to y^e heavens) they could have little
solace or content in respecte of any outward objects.

For sumer being done, all things stand upon them with a wetherbeaten
face; and y^e whole countrie, full of woods & thickets, represented a
wild & savage view. If they looked behind them, ther was y^e mighty
ocean which they had passed, and was now as a maine barr & goulfe to
seperate them from all y^e civil parts of y^e world. If it be said
they had a ship to sucour them, it is trew; but what heard they daly
from y^e m^r. & company? but y^e with speede they should looke out a
place with their shallop, wher they would be at some near distance;
for y^e season was shuch as he would not stirr from thence till a safe
harbor was discovered by them wher they would be, and he might goe
without danger; and that victells consumed apace, but he must & would
keepe sufficient for them selves & their returne. Yea, it was muttered
by some, that if they gott not a place in time, they would turne them
& their goods ashore & leave them.

Let it also be considred what weake hopes of supply & succoure they
left behinde them, y^e might bear up their minds in this sade
condition and trialls they were under; and they could not but be very
smale. It is true, indeed, y^e affections & love of their brethren at
Leyden was cordiall & entire towards them, but they had litle power to
help them, or them selves; and how y^e case stode between them & y^e
marchants at their coming away, hath allready been declared. What
could now sustaine them but y^e spirite of God & his grace?...

Being thus arrived at Cape-Codd y^e 11. of November, and necessitie
calling them to looke out a place for habitation, (as well as the
maisters & mariners importunitie,) they having brought a large shalop
with them out of England, stowed in quarters in y^e ship, they now
gott her out & sett their carpenters to worke to trime her up; but
being much brused & shatered in y^e shipe w^th foule weather, they saw
she would be longe in mending. Whereupon a few of them tendered them
selves to goe by land and discovere those nearest places, whilst y^e
shallop was in mending; and y^e rather because as they wente into y^t
harbor ther seemed to be an opening some 2. or 3. leagues of, which
y^e maister judged to be a river. It was conceived ther might be some
danger in y^e attempte yet seeing them resolute, they were permited to
goe, being 16. of them well armed, under y^e conduct of Captain
Standish, having shuch instructions given them as was thought meete.

They sett forth y^e 15. of Nove^br: and when they had marched aboute
y^e space of a mile by y^e sea side, they espied 5. or 6. persons with
a dogg coming towards them, who were salvages; but they fled from
them, & rane up into y^e woods, and y^e English followed them, partly
to see if they could speake with them, and partly to discover if ther
might not be more of them lying in ambush. But y^e Indeans seeing them
selyes thus followed, they again forsooke the woods, & rane away on
y^e sands as hard as they could, so as they could not come near them,
but followed them by y^e tracte of their feet sundrie miles, and saw
that they had come the same way. So, night coming on, they made their
randevous & set out ther sentinels, and rested in quiete y^e night,
and the next morning followed their tracte till they had headed a
great creeke, & so left the sands, & turned an other way into y^e
woods. But they still followed them by guess, hopeing to find their
dwellings; but they soone lost both them & them selves, falling into
shuch thickets as were ready to tear their cloaths & armore in peeces,
but were most distressed for wante of drinke.

But at length they found water & refreshed them selves, being y^e
first New-England water they drunke of, and was now in thir great
thirste as pleasante unto them as wine or bear had been in for-times.
Afterwards they directed their course to come to y^e other shore, for
they knew it was a necke of land they were to crosse over, and so at
length gott to y^e sea-side, and marched to this supposed river, & by
y^e way found a pond of clear fresh water, and shortly after a good
quantitie of clear ground wher y^e Indeans had formerly set corne, and
some of their graves. And proceeding furder they saw new-stuble wher
corne had been set y^e same year, also they found wher latly a house
had been, wher some planks and a great ketle was remaining, and heaps
of sand newly padled with their hands, which they, digging up, found
in them diverce faire Indean baskets filled with corne, and some in
eares, faire and good, of diverce collours, which seemed to them a
very goodly sight, (haveing never seen any shuch before).

The month of November being spente in these affairs, & much foule
weather falling in, the 6. of Desem^r: they sente out their shallop
againe with 10. of their principall men, & some sea men, upon further
discovery, intending to circulator that deepe bay of Cape-Codd. The
weather was very could, & it frose so hard as y^e sprea of y^e sea
lighting on their coats, they were as if they had been glased; yet
that night betimes they gott downe into y^e botome of y^e bay, and as
they dine nere y^e shore they saw some 10. or 12. Indeans very busie
aboute some thing. They landed about a league or 2. from them, and had
much flats. Being landed, it grew late, and they made themselves a
barricade with loggs & bowes as well as they could in y^e time, & set
out their sentenill & betooke them to rest, and saw y^e smoake of y^e
fire y^e savages made y^t night.

When morning was come they devided their company, some to coast alonge
y^e shore in y^e boate, and the rest marched throw y^e woods to see
y^e land, if any fit place might be for their dwelling. They came also
to y^e place whom they saw the Indeans y^e night before, & found they
had been cuting up a great fish like a grampus, being some 2. inches
thike of fate like a hogg, some peeces wher of they had left by y^e
way; and y^e shallop found 2. more of these fishes dead on y^e sands,
thing usuall after storms in y^t place, by reason of y^e great flats
of sand that lye of. So they ranged up and doune all y^t day, but
found no people, nor any place they liked. When y^e sune grue low,
they hasted out of y^e woods to meete with their shallop, to whom them
made signes to come to them into a creeke hardby, which they did at
high-water; of which they were very glad, for they had not seen each
other all y^t day, since y^e morning.

So they made them a barricado (as usually they did every night) with
loggs, staks, & thike pine bowes, y^e height of a man, leaving it open
to leeward, partly to shelter them from y^e could & wind (making their
fire in y^e midle, & lying round aboute it), and partly to defend them
from any sudden assaults of y^e savags, if they should surround them.
So being very weary, they betooke them to rest. But about midnight
they heard a hideous & great crie, and their sentinall caled, "Arme,
arme"; so they bestired them & stood to their armes, & shote of a
cupple of moskets, and then the noys seased. They concluded it was a
companie of wolves, or such like willd beasts; for one of y^e sea men
