nurtured, and the rough life, and profane words which I must hear (not,
indeed, that they had been wholly banished from our wild days at St.
Andrews), it is needless that I should tell.  Seeing that I was come
among rude neighbours, I even made shift to fall back, in semblance, on
such manners as I had used among the students before I left Scotland,
though many perils, and the fear wherein I stood of Brother Thomas, and
the company of the maid Elliot, had caused me half to forget my
swaggering ways.  So, may God forgive me! I swore roundly; I made as if I
deemed lightly of that Frenchman's death, and, in brief, I so bore me
that, ere noon (when I behoved to go into Chinon with Randal Rutherford,
and there provide me with the rich apparel of our company), I had three
good quarrels on my hand.

First, there was the man-at-arms who had kissed me in the guard-room.  He,
in a "bourde" and mockery, making pretence that he would repeat his
insult, got that which was owing him, and with interest, for indeed he
could see out of neither of his squint eyes when I had dealt with him.
And for this cause perforce, if he needed more proof of my manhood than
the weight of my fist, he must tarry for the demonstration which he
desired.

Then there was Robin Lindsay, and at his wrath I make no marvel, for the
tale of how he came late to tryst, and at second-hand (with many such
rude and wanton additions as soldiers use to make), was noised abroad all
over the castle.  His quarrel was no matter for fisticuffs; so, being
attired in helmet, vambrace rere-brace, gauntlets, and greaves out of the
armoury, where many such suits were stored, I met him in a certain quiet
court behind the castle, where quarrels were usually voided.  And now my
practice of the sword at home and the lessons of our smith came handily
to my need.  After much clashing of steel and smiting out of sparks, I
chanced, by an art known to me, to strike his sword out of his hand.
Then, having him at an avail, I threw down my own blade, and so plainly
told him the plain truth, and how to his mistress I owed my life, which I
would rather lose now at his hand than hear her honour blamed, that he
forgave me, and we embraced as friends.  Neither was this jest anew cast
up against either of us, men fearing to laugh, as we say, with the wrong
side of their mouths.

After this friendly bout at point and edge, Robin and Randal Rutherford,
being off duty, must needs carry me to the Tennis Court, where Tremouille
and the King were playing two young lords, and that for such a stake as
would have helped to arm a hundred men for the aid of Orleans.  It was
pretty to see the ball fly about basted from the walls, and the players
bounding and striking; and, little as I understood the game, so eager was
I over the sport, that a gentleman within the "dedans" touched me twice
on the shoulder before I was aware of him.

"I would have a word with you, sir, if your grace can spare me the
leisure."

"May it not be spoken here?" I asked, for I was sorry to lose the
spectacle of the tennis, which was new to me, and is a pastime wherein
France beats the world.  Pity it is that many players should so curse and
blaspheme God and His saints!

"My business," replied the stranger, "is of a kind that will hardly
endure waiting."

With that I rose and followed him out into the open courtyard, much
marvelling what might be toward.

"You are that young gentleman," said my man, "for a gentleman I take you
to be, from your aspect and common report, who yesterday were the death
of Gilles de Puiseux?"

"Sir, to my sorrow, and not by my will, I am he, and but now I was going
forth to have certain masses said for his soul's welfare": which was
true, Randal Rutherford having filled my purse against pay-day.

"I thank you, sir, for your courtesy, and perchance may have occasion to
do the like gentle service for you.  Gilles de Puiseux was of my blood
and kin; he has none other to take up his feud for him in this place, and
now your quickness of comprehension will tell you that the business
wherewith I permit myself to break your leisure will brook no tarrying.
Let me say that I take it not upon me to defend the words of my cousin,
who insulted a woman, and, as I believe, a messenger from the blessed
Saints that love France."

I looked at him in some amazement.  He was a young man of about my own
years, delicately and richly clad in furs, silks, and velvets, a great
gold chain hanging in loops about his neck, a gold brooch with an ancient
Roman medal in his cap.  But the most notable thing in him was his thick
golden hair, whence La Hire had named him "Capdorat," because he was so
blond, and right keen in war, and hardy beyond others.  And here he was
challenging me, who stood before him in a prentice's hodden grey!

"Sir," I said, "I could wish you a better quarrel, but not more courtesy.
Many a gentleman seeing me such as I am, would bid me send, ere he
crossed swords with me, to my own country for my bor-brief, {18} which I
came away in too great haste to carry with me.  Nay, I was but now to set
forth and buy me a sword and other accoutrements; natheless, from the
armoury here they may equip me with sword and body armour."

"Of body-armour take no thought," he answered, "for this quarrel is of a
kind that must needs be voided in our smocks"; he meaning that it was "a
outrance," till one of us fell.

Verily, now I saw that this was not to be a matter of striking sparks
from steel, as Robin and I had done, but of life and death.

"I shall be the more speedily at your service," I made answer; and as I
spoke Randal and Robin came forth from the "dedans," the sport being
over.  They joined me, and I told them in few words my new business, my
adversary tarrying, cap in hand, till I had spoken, and then proclaiming
himself Aymar de Puiseux, a gentleman of Dauphine, as indeed my friends
knew.

"I shall wait on you, with your leave, at the isle in the river, where it
is of custom, opposite the booths of the gold-workers," quoth he, "about
the hour of noon"; and so, saluting us, he went, as he said, to provide
himself with friends.

"Blood of Judas!" quoth Robin, who swore terribly in his speech, "you
have your hands full, young Norman.  He is but now crept out of the rank
of pages, but when the French and English pages fought a valliance of
late, under Orleans, none won more praise than he, who was captain of the
French party."

"He played a good sword?" I asked.

"He threw a good stone!  Man, it was a stone bicker, and they had lids of
baskets for targes."

"And he challenges me to the field," I said hotly, "By St. Andrew!  I
will cuff his ears and send him back to the other boys."

"Norman, my lad, when were you in a stone bicker last?" quoth Randal; and
I hung my head, for it was not yet six months gone since the sailors and
we students were stoning each other in North Street.

"Yet he does play a very good sword, and is cunning of fence, for your
comfort," said Randal.  So I hummed the old lilt of the Leslies, whence,
they say, comes our name--

   Between the less lea and the mair,
   He slew the knight and left him there;--

for I deemed it well to show a good face.  Moreover, I had some conceit
of myself as a swordsman, and Randal was laughing like a foolbody at my
countenance.

"Faith, you will make a spoon or spoil a horn, and--let me have my laugh
out--you bid well for an archer," said Randal; and Robin counselling me
to play the same prank on the French lad's sword as late I had done on
his own, they took each of them an arm of mine, and so we swaggered down
the steep ways into Chinon.

First I would go to the tailor and the cordwainer, and be fitted for my
new splendours as an archer of the guard.

They both laughed at me again, for, said they very cheerfully, "You may
never live to wear these fine feathers."

But Randal making the reflection that, if I fell, there would be none to
pay the shopmaster, they both shouted with delight in the street, so that
passers-by turned and marvelled at them.  Clearly I saw that to go to
fight a duel is one thing, and to go and look on is another, and much
more gay, for my heart had no desire of all this merriment.  Rather would
I have recommended my case to the saints, and chiefly to St. Andrew, for
whose cause and honour I was about to put my life in jeopardy.  But
shame, and the fear of seeming fearful, drove me to jest with the
others--such risks of dying unconfessed are run by sinful men!

Howbeit, they helped me to choose cloth of the best colour and fashion,
laughing the more because I, being short of stature and slim, the tailor,
if I fell, might well find none among the archers to purchase that for
which, belike, I should have no need.

"We must even enlist the Pucelle in our guard, for she might wear this
apparel," quoth Randal.

Thus boisterously they bore themselves, but more gravely at the
swordsmith's, where we picked out a good cut-and-thrust blade, well
balanced, that came readily to my hand.  Then, I with sword at side, like
a gentleman, we made to the river, passing my master's booth, where I
looked wistfully at the windows for a blink of Elliot, but saw none that
I knew, only, from an open casement, the little jackanapes mopped and
mowed at me in friendly fashion.  Hard by the booth was a little pier,
and we took boat, and so landed on the island, where were waiting for us
my adversary and two other gentlemen.  Having saluted each other, we
passed to a smooth grassy spot, surrounded on all sides by tall poplar
trees.  Here in places daffodils were dancing in the wind; but otherwhere
the sward was much trampled down, and in two or three spots were black
patches that wellnigh turned my courage, for I was not yet used to the
sight of men's blood, here often shed for little cause.

The friends of us twain adversaries, for enemies we could scarce be
called, chose out a smooth spot with a fair light, the sun being veiled,
and when we had stripped to our smocks, we drew and fell to work.  He was
very quick and light in his movements, bounding nimbly to this side or
that, but I, using a hanging guard, in our common Scots manner, did
somewhat perplex him, to whom the fashion was new.  One or two scratches
we dealt each other, but, for all that, I could see we were well matched,
and neither closed, as men rarely do in such a combat, till they are
wroth with hurts and their blood warm.  Now I gashed his thigh, but not
deeply, and with that, as I deemed, his temper fired, for he made a full
sweep at my leg above the knee.  This I have always reckoned a fool's
stroke, as leaving the upper part of the body unguarded, and avoiding
with my right leg, I drove down with all my force at his head.  But, even
as I struck, came a flash and the sudden deadness of a deep wound, for he
had but feinted, and then, avoiding me so that I touched him not, he
drove his point into my breast.  Between the force of my own blow and
this stab I fell forward on my face, and thence rolled over on my back,
catching at my breast with my hands, as though to stop the blood, but, in
sooth, not well knowing what I did.

He had thrown down his sword, and now was kneeling by my side.

"I take you to witness," he said, "that this has befallen to my great
sorrow, and had I been where this gentleman was yesterday, and heard my
cousin blaspheme, I would myself have drawn on him, but--"  And here, as
I later heard, he fainted from loss of blood, my sword having cut a great
vein; and I likewise lost sense and knowledge.  Nor did I know more till
they lifted me and laid me on a litter of poplar boughs, having stanched
my wound as best they might.  In the boat, as they ferried us across the
river, I believe that I fainted again; and so, "between home and hell,"
as the saying is, I lay on my litter and was carried along the street
beside the water.  Folk gathered around us as we went.  I heard their
voices as in a dream, when lo! there sounded a voice that I knew right
well, for Elliot was asking of the people "who was hurt?"  At this
hearing I hove myself up on my elbow, beckoning with my other hand; and I
opened my mouth to speak, but, in place of words, came only a wave of
blood that sickened me, and I seemed to be dreaming, in my bed, of Elliot
and her jackanapes; and then feet were trampling, and at length I was
laid down, and so seemed to fall most blessedly asleep, with a little
hand in mine, and rarely peaceful and happy in my heart, though wherefore
I knew not.  After many days of tossing on the waves of the world, it was
as if I had been brought into the haven where I would be.  Of what was
passing I knew or I remember nothing.  Later I heard that a good priest
had been brought to my bedside, and perchance there was made some such
confession as the Church, in her mercy, accepts from sinful men in such
case as mine.  But I had no thought of life or death, purgatory or
paradise; only, if paradise be rest among those we love, such rest for an
unknown while, and such sense of blissful companionship, were mine.  But
whether it was well to pass through and beyond this scarce sensible joy,
or whether that peace will ever again be mine and unending, I leave with
humility to them in whose hands are Christian souls.




CHAPTER IX--OF THE WINNING OF ELLIOT


The days of fever and of dreams went by and passed, leaving me very weak,
but not ignorant of where I was, and of what had come and gone.  My
master had often been by my bedside, and Elliot now and again; the old
housewife also watched me by night, and gave me drink when I thirsted.
Most of the while I deemed I was at home, in the house of Pitcullo; yet I
felt there was something strange, and that there was pain somewhere in
the room.  But at length, as was said, I came to knowledge of things, and
could see Elliot and remember her, when she knelt praying by my bed, as
oft she did, whiles I lay between life and death.  I have heard speak of
men who, being inflamed with love, as I had been, fell into a fever of
the body, and when that passed, lo! their passion had passed with it, and
their longing.  And so it seemed to be with me.  For some days I was not
permitted to utter a word, and later, I was as glad in Elliot's company
as you may have seen a little lad and lass, not near come to full age,
who go playing together with flowers and such toys.  So we were merry
together, the jackanapes keeping us company, and making much game and
sport.

Perchance these were my most blessed days, as of one who had returned to
the sinless years, when we are happier than we know, and not yet
acquainted with desire.  Now and again Rutherford and Lindsay would come
to visit me, seeming strangely still and gentle, speaking little, but
looking at me with kind eyes, and vowing that my tailor should yet be
paid for his labour.  Capdorat also came, for he had but suffered a flesh
wound with much loss of blood, and we showed each other the best
countenance.  So time went by, while I grew stronger daily; and now it
was ordained by the leech, a skilful man, that I might leave my bed, and
be clothed, and go about through the house, and eat stronger food,
whereof I had the greatest desire, and would ever be eating like a
howlet. {19}  Now, when I was to rise, I looked that they should bring me
my old prentice's gabardine and hose, but on the morning of that day
Elliot came, bearing in her arms a parcel of raiment very gay and costly.

"Here is your fine clothing new come from the tailor's booth," she cried
merrily.  "See, you shall be as bright as spring, in green, and white,
and red!"

There was the bonnet, with its three coloured plumes, and the doublet,
with Charles wrought in silver on the arm and breast, and all other
things seemly--a joy to mine eyes.

She held them up before me, her face shining like the return of life,
with a happy welcome; and my heart beat to see and hear her as of old it
was wont to do.

"And wherefore should not I go to the wars," she cried, "and fight beside
the Maid?  I am as tall as she, if scantly so strong, and brave--oh, I am
very brave Glacidas, I bid you beware!" she said, putting the archer's
bonnet gallantly cocked on her beautiful head, and drawing forth the
sword from his scabbard, as one in act to fight, but in innocent
unwarlike wise.

There she stood before me in the sunlight, like the Angel of Victory, all
glad and fair, and two blue rays from her eyes shot into my heart, and
lo! I was no more a child, but a man again and a lover.

"O Elliot," I said, ere ever I wist what I was saying, and I caught her
left hand into mine--"O Elliot, I love you!  Give me but your love, and I
shall come back from the wars a knight, and claim my love to be my lady."

She snatched her hand suddenly, as if angered, out of mine, and
therewith, being very weak, I gave a cry, my wound fiercely paining me.
Then her face changed from rose-red to lily-white, she dropped on her
knees by my bed, and her arms were about my neck, and all over my face
her soft, sweet-scented hair and her tears.

"Oh, I have slain you, I have slain you, my love!" she sobbed, making a
low, sweet moan, as a cushat in the wild wood, for I lay deadly still,
being overcome with pain and joy.  And there I was, my love comforting me
as a mother comforts her child.

I moved my hand, to take hers in mine--her little hand; and so, for a
space, there was silence between us, save for her kind moaning, and in my
heart was such gladness as comes but once to men, and may not be spoken
in words of this world.

There was silence between us; then she rose very gently and tossed back
her hair, showing her face wet with tears, but rosy-red with happiness
and sweet shame.  Had it not been for that chance hurt, how long might I
have wooed ere I won her?  But her heart was molten by my anguish.

"Hath the pain passed?" she whispered.

"Sweet was the pain, my love, and sweetly hast thou healed it with thy
magic."

Then she kissed me, and so fled from the room, as one abashed, and came
not back that day, when, indeed, I did not rise, nor for two days more,
being weaker than we had deemed.  But happiness is the greatest leech on
earth, and does the rarest miracles of healing; so in three days' space I
won strength to leave my bed and my room, and could sit by the door, at
noon, in the sun of spring, that is warmer in France than in our own
country.

Now it could not be but that Elliot and I must meet, when her father was
in town about his affairs, or busy in the painting-room, and much work he
had then on his hands.  But Elliot was right coy, hiding herself from me,
who watched warily, till one day, when my master was abroad, I had the
fortune to find her alone in the chamber, putting spring flowers in a
very fair vessel of glass.  I made no more ado, but coming in stealthily,
I caught her boldly about the body, saying--

"Yield you, rescue or no rescue, and strive not against me, lest you slay
a wounded man-at-arms."

For very fear, as I believe, lest she might stir my wound again, she was
still as a bird that lies in your hands when once you have caught it.  And
all that passes of kiss and kind word between happy lovers passed between
us, till I prayed of her grace, that I might tell her father how things
