provided it could be accomplished without war with Mexico, which was
arrant nonsense, since Mexico had given notice that she would consider
annexation an act of war. The result of Clay's attitude, and of a
widespread distrust of his policies, was that Polk was elected by a
large majority.

His administration was destined to be a brilliant one, for Texas was at
once annexed, and the brief war with Mexico which followed, one of the
most successful ever waged by any country, carried the southwestern
boundary of the United States to the Rio Grande, and added New Mexico
and California to the national domain, while a treaty with England
secured for the country the present great state of Oregon, although here
Polk receded from his position and accepted a compromise which confined
Oregon below the forty-ninth parallel. But even this was something of a
triumph. With that triumph, the name of Marcus Whitman is most closely
associated, through a brilliant but rather useless feat of his, of which
we shall speak later on. Polk seems to have been an able and
conscientious man, without any pretensions to genius--just a good,
average man, like any one of ten thousand other Americans. He refused a
renomination because of ill-health, and died soon after retiring from
office.

The Democratic party had by this time become hopelessly disrupted over
the slavery question, which had become more and more acute. The great
strength of the state rights party had always been in the
South, and southern statesmen had always opposed any aggression on the
part of the national government. The North, on the other hand, had
always leaned more or less toward a strong centralization of power. So
it followed that while the Democratic party was paramount in the South,
its opponents, by whatever name known, found their main strength in the
North.

Yet, even in the North, there was a strong Democratic element, and, but
for the intrusion of the slavery question, the party would have
controlled the government for many years to come. But the North was
gradually coming to feel that the slavery question was more important
than the more abstract one of national aggression; the more so since, by
insisting upon the enforcement of such measures as the Fugitive Slave
Law, the South was, as it were, keeping open and bleeding a wound which
might to some extent have healed. In 1848 the split came, and the
Democratic party put two candidates in the field, Lewis Cass for the
South, and Martin Van Buren for the North.

The Whig Party, taking advantage of the knowledge gained in previous
campaigns, looked around for a famous general, and managed to agree upon
Zachary Taylor, who had made an exceedingly brilliant record in the war
with Mexico. He was sixty-five years old at the time, a sturdy giant of
a man, reared on the frontier, hardened by years of Indian warfare,
whose nickname of "Old Rough and Ready" was not a bad description. He
caught the popular fancy, for he possessed those qualities
which appeal to the plain people, and this, assisted by the division in
the ranks of his opponents, won him a majority of the electoral votes.
He took the oath of office on March 4, 1849, but, after sixteen months
of troubled administration, died suddenly on July 9, 1850.

Millard Fillmore, who had been elected Vice-President, at once took the
oath of office as chief executive. He was a New York man, a lawyer, had
been a member of Congress, and, as Vice-President, had presided over the
bitter slavery debates in the Senate. His sympathies were supposed to be
anti-slavery, yet he signed the Fugitive Slave Law, when it was placed
before him, much to the chagrin of many people who had voted for him. He
signed his own political death-warrant at the same time, for, at the
Whig National Convention in 1852, he was defeated for the nomination for
President, after a long struggle, by General Winfield Scott, another
veteran of the Mexican war. Four years later, Fillmore, having managed
to regain, the confidence of his party, secured the Whig nomination
unanimously, but was defeated at the polls, and spent the remaining
years of his life quietly at his home in Buffalo.

Against General Scott, the Democrats nominated Franklin Scott Pierce,
the nomination being in the nature of an accident, though Pierce was in
every way a worthy candidate. His family record begins with his father,
Benjamin Pierce, who, as a lad of seventeen, stirred by the tidings of
the fight at Lexington, left his home in Chelmsford, musket
on shoulder, to join the patriot army before Boston. He settled in New
Hampshire after the Revolution, and his son Franklin was born there in
1804. He followed the usual course of lawyer, congressman and senator,
and served throughout the war with Mexico, rising to the rank of
brigadier-general, and securing a reputation second only to that of
Scott and Taylor.

At the Democratic convention of 1852, Pierce was not a candidate for the
nomination, and did not know that any one intended to mention his name,
or even thought of him in that connection. But the convention was unable
to agree on a candidate, and on the fourth day and thirty-third ballot,
some delegate cast his vote for General Franklin Pierce, of New
Hampshire. The name attracted attention, Pierce's career had been
distinguished and above reproach, other delegates voted for him, until,
on the forty-ninth ballot, he was declared the unanimous choice of the
convention. His election was overwhelming, as he carried twenty-seven
states out of thirty-one.

Once in the presidential chair, however, this popularity gradually
slipped away from him. He found himself in an impossible position,
between two fires, for the slavery question was dividing the country
more and more and there seemed no possible way to reconcile the warring
sections. Pierce, perhaps, made the mistake of trying to placate both,
instead of taking his stand firmly with one or the other; and the
consequence was that at the convention of 1856, he received a few votes
from courtesy, but was never seriously in the running, which resulted in
the nomination of James Buchanan. Pierce returned to his home in New
Hampshire, to find his friends and neighbors estranged from him by his
supposed pro-slavery views, which had yet not been radical enough to win
him the friendship of the South; but time changed all that, and his last
years were spent in honored and opulent retirement.

James Buchanan was, like Andrew Jackson, of Scotch-Irish descent, but
there the resemblance between the two ended, for Buchanan had little of
Jackson's tremendous positiveness and strength of character. His
disposition was always to compromise, while Jackson's was to fight. Now
compromise is often a very admirable thing, but where it shows itself to
be impossible and leaves fighting the only resource, the wise man puts
all thought of it behind him and prepares for battle. Which is precisely
what Buchanan did not do. He had been a lawyer and congressman, minister
to Russia, senator, secretary of state and minister to England, and so
had the widest possible political acquaintanceship; he was a man of
somewhat unusual culture; but, alas! he found that something more than
culture was needed to guide him in the troublous times amid which he
fell. I have often thought that Buchanan's greatest handicap was his
wide friendship, which often made it almost impossible to say no,
however much he may have wished to do so. An unknown backwoodsman, like
Andrew Jackson, with no favors to return and no friendships to be
remembered, could have acted far more effectively.

Buchanan's opponent for the presidency was John C. Fremont, and there
was a great stir and bustle among the people who were supposed to
support him, but Buchanan won easily, and at once found himself in the
midst of the most perplexing difficulties. Kansas was in a state of
civil war; two days after his inauguration the Supreme Court handed down
the famous Dred Scott decision, declaring the right of any slave-holder
to take his slaves as property into any territory; while the young
Republican party was siding openly with the abolitionists, and, a very
firebrand in a powder-house, in 1859, John Brown seized Harper's Ferry,
Virginia, and attempted to start a slave insurrection. Now a slave
insurrection was the one thing which the South feared more than any
other--it was the terror which was ever present. And so John Brown's mad
attempt excited a degree of hysteria almost unbelievable.

Small wonder that Buchanan was soon at his wits' ends. His sympathies
were with the slave-holders; he doubted his right to coerce a seceding
state; his friendships were largely with southern statesmen--and yet, to
his credit be it stated, on January 8, 1860, after secession had become
a thing assured, he seems suddenly to have seen his duty clearly, and in
a special message, declared his intention to collect the revenues and
protect public property in all the states, and to use force
if necessary. Taken all in all, his attitude in those trying days was a
creditable one--as creditable as could be expected from any average man.
What the time needed was a genius, and fortunately one rose to the
occasion. Buchanan, harried and despondent, must have breathed a deep
sigh of relief when he surrendered the helm to the man who had been
chosen to succeed him--the man, by some extraordinary chance, in all the
land best fitted to steer the ship of state to safety--the man who was
to be the dominant figure of the century in American history.




SUMMARY


WASHINGTON, GEORGE. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, February 22
(old style, February 11), 1732; sent on a mission to the French beyond
the Alleghenies, 1753-54; appointed lieutenant-colonel, 1754; defeated
by the French at Fort Necessity, July 3, 1754; aide-de-camp to Braddock,
1755; commanded on the frontier, 1755-57; led the advance-guard for the
reduction of Fort Duquesne, 1758; married Martha Custis, January 9,
1759; delegate to Continental Congress, 1774-75; appointed
commander-in-chief of the continental forces, June 15, 1775; assumed
command of the army, July 3, 1775; compelled evacuation of Boston, March
17, 1776; defeated at battle of Long Island, August 27, 1776; defeated
at White Plains, October 28, 1776; surprised the British at Trenton,
December 26, 1776; won the battle of Princeton, January, 1777; defeated
at Brandywine and Germantown in 1777; at Valley Forge, during the winter
of 1777-78; won the battle of Monmouth, June 28, 1778; captured
Yorktown and the army of Cornwallis, October 19, 1781; resigned his
commission as commander-in-chief, December 23, 1783; president of the
Constitutional Convention, 1787; unanimously elected President of the
United States, January, 1789; inaugurated at New York, April 30, 1789;
unanimously re-elected, 1793; issued farewell address to the people,
September, 1796; retired to Mount Vernon, March, 1797; died there,
December 14, 1799.

ADAMS, JOHN. Born at Braintree, now Quincy, Massachusetts, October 30,
1735; graduated at Harvard, 1755; studied law, took a leading part in
opposing Stamp Act, was counsel for the British soldiers charged with
murder in connection with the "Boston massacre" in 1770, and became a
leader of the patriot party; member of Revolutionary Congress of
Massachusetts, 1774; delegate to first and second Continental Congress,
1774-75; commissioner to France, 1777; negotiated treaties with the
Netherlands, Great Britain and Prussia, 1782-83; minister to London,
1785-88; Federal Vice-President, 1789-97; President, 1797-1801; defeated
for re-election and retired to Quincy, 1801; died there, July 4, 1886.

JEFFERSON, THOMAS. Born at Shadwell, Albemarle County, Virginia, April
2, 1743; member of the Virginia House of Burgesses, 1769-75, and
1776-78, and of the Continental Congress, 1775-76; drafted Declaration
of Independence, 1776; governor of Virginia, 1779-81; member of
Congress, 1783-84; minister to France, 1784-89; secretary of state,
1789-93; Vice-President, 1797-1801; President, 1801-09; died at
Monticello, Albemarle County, Virginia, July 4, 1826.

MADISON, JAMES. Born at Port Conway, Virginia, March 16, 1751;
graduated at Princeton, 1771; delegate to Congress, 1780-83, and to the
Constitutional Convention, 1787; member of Congress, 1789-97; secretary
of state, 1801-09; President, 1809-1817; died at Montpelier, Orange
County, Virginia, June 28, 1836.

MONROE, JAMES. Born in Westmoreland County, Virginia, April 28, 1758;
member of Virginia assembly, 1782; member of Congress, 1783-86; United
States senator, 1790-94; minister to France, 1794-96; governor of
Virginia, 1799-1802; minister to Great Britain, 1803-07; secretary of
state, 1811-17; President, 1817-25, an administration, known as "the era
of good feeling"; died at New York City, July 4, 1831.

ADAMS, JOHN QUINCY. Born at Braintree, Massachusetts, July 11, 1767;
graduated at Harvard, 1788; admitted to the bar, 1791; minister to the
Netherlands, 1794-97; and to Prussia, 1797-1801; United States senator,
1803-08; minister to Russia, 1809-14; minister to England, 1815-17;
secretary of state, 1817-25; President, 1825-29; member of Congress,
1831-48; died at Washington, February 23, 1848.

JACKSON, ANDREW. Born at the Waxham settlement, North Carolina (?),
March 15, 1767; member of Congress, 1796-97; United States senator,
1797-98; justice of the Supreme Court of Tennessee, 1798-1804; defeated
the Creeks at Talladega, 1813, and at Horseshoe Bend, 1814; captured
Pensacola from the English, 1814; won the battle of New Orleans, January
8, 1815; commanded against the Seminoles, 1817-18; governor of Florida,
1821; United States senator, 1823-25; defeated for President by J.Q.
Adams, 1824; President, 1829-37; died at the Hermitage, near
Nashville, Tennessee, June 8, 1845.

VAN BUREN, MARTIN. Born at Kinderhook, New York, December 5, 1782;
admitted to the bar, 1803; entered New York State Senate, 1812; United
States senator, 1821-28; governor of New York, 1828-29; secretary of
state, 1829-31; Vice-President, 1833-37; President, 1837-41; defeated
for President, 1840, 1844, 1848; died at Kinderhook, July 24, 1862.

HARRISON, WILLIAM HENRY. Born at Berkeley, Charles City County,
Virginia, February 9, 1773; governor of Indiana Territory, 1801-13; won
victory of Tippecanoe, 1811, and of the Thames, 1813; member of
Congress, 1816-19; United States senator, 1825-28; minister to Colombia,
1828-29; defeated for Presidency, 1836; elected President in the
"log-cabin and hard-cider" campaign, 1840; inaugurated, March 4, 1841;
died at Washington, April 4, 1841.

TYLER, JOHN. Born at Greenway, Charles City County, Virginia, March 29,
1790; admitted to the bar, 1809; member of Virginia legislature,
1811-16; member of Congress, 1816-21; governor of Virginia, 1825-27;
United States senator, 1827-36; elected Vice-President, 1840, and
succeeded to Presidency on the death of General Harrison, April 4, 1841;
president of the peace convention of 1861, favored secession and served
as member of the Confederate provisional Congress; died at Richmond,
Virginia, January 18, 1862.

POLK, JAMES KNOX. Born in Mecklenburg County, North Carolina, November
2, 1795; admitted to the bar, 1820; member of Congress,
1825-39; speaker of the House of Representatives, 1835-39; governor of
Tennessee, 1839-41; President, 1845-49; died at Nashville, Tennessee,
June 15, 1849.

TAYLOR, ZACHARY. Born in Orange County, Virginia, September 24, 1784;
entered the army as first lieutenant, 1808; served in War of 1812,
attaining rank of major; served in Black Hawk's war, 1832, with rank of
colonel; defeated Seminole Indians, 1837; commander-in-chief of Florida,
1838; took command of the army in Texas, 1845; won battle of Palo Alto,
May 8, 1846, and that of Reseca de la Palma, May 9, 1846; captured
Matamoras, May 18, and Monterey, September 24, 1846; defeated Santa Anna
at Buena Vista, February 22-23, 1847; appointed major-general, June 29,
1846; elected President, 1848; inaugurated, March 4, 1849; died at
Washington, July 9, 1850.

FILLMORE, MILLARD. Born at Summer Hill, Cayuga County, New York, January
7, 1800; admitted to the bar, 1823; member of New York State
legislature, 1829-31; member of Congress, 1833-35, 1837-43; elected
Vice-President, 1848, and succeeded to presidency on the death of
Taylor, July 9, 1850; died at Buffalo, New York, March 8, 1874.

PIERCE, FRANKLIN. Born at Hillsborough, New Hampshire, November 23,
1804; member of Congress, 1833-37; United States senator, 1837-42;
served with distinction in Mexican war; President, 1853-57; died at
Concord, New Hampshire, October 8, 1869.

BUCHANAN, JAMES. Born at Stony Batter, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
April 22, 1791; member of Congress, 1821-31; minister to
Russia, 1831-33; United States senator, 1833-45; secretary of state,
1845-49; minister to Great Britain, 1853-56; President, 1857-61; died at
Wheatland, Lancaster, Pennsylvania, June 1, 1868.


       *       *       *       *       *




CHAPTER IV

LINCOLN AND HIS SUCCESSORS


And so we have come down through the years to Abraham Lincoln--that
patient and gentle man whose memory ranks with Washington's as America's
priceless heritage. A blessing and an inspiration--a mystery, too; an
enigma among men, lonely and impressive; not fully understood nor
understandable to the depths of that great heart of his; not fully
explainable, for what strange power was it lifted that ignorant,
ill-bred, uncouth, backwoods boy to a station among the stars?

Seldom has any man who started so low mounted so high. Abraham Lincoln's
early life was of the most miserable description. His father, Thomas
Lincoln, was a worthless rover; his mother, Nancy Hanks, was of a "poor
white" Virginia family with an unenviable record. His birthplace was a
squalid log cabin in Washington County, Kentucky. His surroundings were
such as are commonly encountered in a coarse, low, ignorant,
poverty-stricken family. His father was at the very bottom of the social
scale, so ignorant he could scarcely write his name. His mother
inherited the shiftlessness and carelessness which is part and parcel of
"poor white." These things are incontestable, they must be looked in
the face. And yet, in spite of them, in spite of such a handicap as few
other great men even approximated, Abraham Lincoln emerged to be the
leader of a race.

In 1816, Thomas Lincoln decided he would remove to Indiana. Abraham was
at that time seven years old, and for a year after the removal, the
family lived in what was called a "half-faced camp," fourteen feet
square--that is to say, a covered shed of three sides, the fourth side
being open to the weather. Then the family achieved the luxury of a
cabin, but a cabin without floor or door or window. Amid this
wretchedness, Lincoln's mother died, and was laid away in a rough coffin
of slabs at the edge of the little clearing. Three months later, a
passing preacher read the funeral service above the grave.

Thomas Lincoln soon married again and, strangely enough, made a wise
choice, for his new wife not only possessed furniture enough to fill a
four-horse wagon, but, what was of more importance, was endowed with a
thrifty and industrious temperament. That she should have consented to
marry the ne'er-do-well is a mystery; perhaps he was not without his
redeeming virtues, after all. She made him put a floor and windows in
his cabin, and she was a better mother to his children than their real
one had ever been. For the first time, young Abraham got some idea of
the comforts and decencies of life, and, as his step-mother put it,
"began to look a little human." He was not an attractive object, even at
best, for he was lanky and clumsy, with great hands and feet, and a
skin prematurely wrinkled and shrivelled. By the time he was seventeen,
he was six feet tall, and he soon added two more inches to his stature.
Needless to say, his clothes never caught up with him, but were always
too small.

His schooling was of the most meagre description; in fact, in his whole
life, he went to school less than one year. Yet there soon awakened
within the boy a trace of unusual spirit. He actually liked to read. He
saw few books, but such as he could lay his hands on, he read over and
