him the best companion he had met for many a long day. All night long,
over his tobacco-pipe, Castlewood did not cease to talk to Harry Esmond
in praise of his new friend, and in fact did not leave off speaking of
him until his lordship was so tipsy that he could not speak plainly any
more.

At breakfast next day it was the same talk renewed; and when my lady
said there was something free in the Lord Mohun's looks and manner of
speech which caused her to mistrust him, her lord burst out with one of
his laughs and oaths; said that he never liked man, woman, or beast,
but what she was sure to be jealous of it; that Mohun was the prettiest
fellow in England; that he hoped to see more of him whilst in the
country; and that he would let Mohun know what my Lady Prude said of
him.

"Indeed," Lady Castlewood said, "I liked his conversation well enough.
'Tis more amusing than that of most people I know. I thought it, I own,
too free; not from what he said, as rather from what he implied."

"Psha! your ladyship does not know the world," said her husband; "and
you have always been as squeamish as when you were a miss of fifteen."

"You found no fault when I was a miss at fifteen."

"Begad, madam, you are grown too old for a pinafore now; and I hold
that 'tis for me to judge what company my wife shall see," said my lord,
slapping the table.

"Indeed, Francis, I never thought otherwise," answered my lady, rising
and dropping him a curtsy, in which stately action, if there was
obedience, there was defiance too; and in which a bystander, deeply
interested in the happiness of that pair as Harry Esmond was, might see
how hopelessly separated they were; what a great gulf of difference and
discord had run between them.

"By G-d! Mohun is the best fellow in England; and I'll invite him here,
just to plague that woman. Did you ever see such a frigid insolence as
it is, Harry? That's the way she treats me," he broke out, storming, and
his face growing red as he clenched his fists and went on. "I'm nobody
in my own house. I'm to be the humble servant of that parson's daughter.
By Jove! I'd rather she should fling the dish at my head than sneer at
me as she does. She puts me to shame before the children with her d--d
airs; and, I'll swear, tells Frank and Beaty that papa's a reprobate,
and that they ought to despise me."

"Indeed and indeed, sir, I never heard her say a word but of respect
regarding you," Harry Esmond interposed.

"No, curse it! I wish she would speak. But she never does. She
scorns me, and holds her tongue. She keeps off from me, as if I was a
pestilence. By George! she was fond enough of her pestilence once. And
when I came a-courting, you would see miss blush--blush red, by George!
for joy. Why, what do you think she said to me, Harry? She said herself,
when I joked with her about her d--d smiling red cheeks: ''Tis as they
do at St. James's; I put up my red flag when my king comes.' I was the
king, you see, she meant. But now, sir, look at her! I believe she would
be glad if I was dead; and dead I've been to her these five years--ever
since you all of you had the small-pox: and she never forgave me for
going away."

"Indeed, my lord, though 'twas hard to forgive, I think my mistress
forgave it," Harry Esmond said; "and remember how eagerly she watched
your lordship's return, and how sadly she turned away when she saw your
cold looks."

"Damme!" cries out my lord; "would you have had me wait and catch the
small-pox? Where the deuce had been the good of that? I'll bear danger
with any man--but not useless danger--no, no. Thank you for nothing.
And--you nod your head, and I know very well, Parson Harry, what you
mean. There was the--the other affair to make her angry. But is a woman
never to forgive a husband who goes a-tripping? Do you take me for a
saint?"

"Indeed, sir, I do not," says Harry, with a smile.

"Since that time my wife's as cold as the statue at Charing Cross. I
tell thee she has no forgiveness in her, Henry. Her coldness blights
my whole life, and sends me to the punch-bowl, or driving about the
country. My children are not mine, but hers, when we are together. 'Tis
only when she is out of sight with her abominable cold glances, that
run through me, that they'll come to me, and that I dare to give them so
much as a kiss; and that's why I take 'em and love 'em in other people's
houses, Harry. I'm killed by the very virtue of that proud woman.
Virtue! give me the virtue that can forgive; give me the virtue that
thinks not of preserving itself, but of making other folks happy.
Damme, what matters a scar or two if 'tis got in helping a friend in ill
fortune?"

And my lord again slapped the table, and took a great draught from the
tankard. Harry Esmond admired as he listened to him, and thought how the
poor preacher of this self-sacrifice had fled from the small-pox, which
the lady had borne so cheerfully, and which had been the cause of so
much disunion in the lives of all in this house. "How well men preach,"
thought the young man, "and each is the example in his own sermon. How
each has a story in a dispute, and a true one, too, and both are right
or wrong as you will!" Harry's heart was pained within him, to watch the
struggles and pangs that tore the breast of this kind, manly friend and
protector.

"Indeed, sir," said he, "I wish to God that my mistress could hear you
speak as I have heard you; she would know much that would make her life
the happier, could she hear it." But my lord flung away with one of his
oaths, and a jeer; he said that Parson Harry was a good fellow; but that
as for women, all women were alike--all jades and heartless. So a man
dashes a fine vase down, and despises it for being broken. It may be
worthless--true: but who had the keeping of it, and who shattered it?

Harry, who would have given his life to make his benefactress and her
husband happy, bethought him, now that he saw what my lord's state of
mind was, and that he really had a great deal of that love left in his
heart, and ready for his wife's acceptance if she would take it, whether
he could not be a means of reconciliation between these two persons,
whom he revered the most in the world. And he cast about how he should
break a part of his mind to his mistress, and warn her that in his,
Harry's opinion, at least, her husband was still her admirer, and even
her lover.

But he found the subject a very difficult one to handle, when he
ventured to remonstrate, which he did in the very gravest tone, (for
long confidence and reiterated proofs of devotion and loyalty had given
him a sort of authority in the house, which he resumed as soon as ever
he returned to it,) and with a speech that should have some effect, as,
indeed, it was uttered with the speaker's own heart, he ventured most
gently to hint to his adored mistress that she was doing her husband
harm by her ill opinion of him, and that the happiness of all the family
depended upon setting her right.

She, who was ordinarily calm and most gentle, and full of smiles and
soft attentions, flushed up when young Esmond so spoke to her, and rose
from her chair, looking at him with a haughtiness and indignation that
he had never before known her to display. She was quite an altered being
for that moment; and looked an angry princess insulted by a vassal.

"Have you ever heard me utter a word in my lord's disparagement?" she
asked hastily, hissing out her words, and stamping her foot.

"Indeed, no," Esmond said, looking down.

"Are you come to me as his ambassador--YOU?" she continued.

"I would sooner see peace between you than anything else in the world,"
Harry answered, "and would go of any embassy that had that end."

"So YOU are my lord's go-between?" she went on, not regarding this
speech. "You are sent to bid me back into slavery again, and inform me
that my lord's favor is graciously restored to his handmaid? He is weary
of Covent Garden, is he, that he comes home and would have the fatted
calf killed?"

"There's good authority for it, surely," said Esmond.

"For a son, yes; but my lord is not my son. It was he who cast me away
from him. It was he who broke our happiness down, and he bids me to
repair it. It was he who showed himself to me at last, as he was, not
as I had thought him. It is he who comes before my children stupid and
senseless with wine--who leaves our company for that of frequenters of
taverns and bagnios--who goes from his home to the City yonder and his
friends there, and when he is tired of them returns hither, and expects
that I shall kneel and welcome him. And he sends YOU as his chamberlain!
What a proud embassy! Monsieur, I make you my compliment of the new
place."

"It would be a proud embassy, and a happy embassy too, could I bring you
and my lord together," Esmond replied.

"I presume you have fulfilled your mission now, sir. 'Twas a pretty
one for you to undertake. I don't know whether 'tis your Cambridge
philosophy, or time, that has altered your ways of thinking," Lady
Castlewood continued, still in a sarcastic tone. "Perhaps you too have
learned to love drink, and to hiccup over your wine or punch;--which is
your worship's favorite liquor? Perhaps you too put up at the 'Rose'
on your way to London, and have your acquaintances in Covent Garden. My
services to you, sir, to principal and ambassador, to master and--and
lackey."

"Great heavens! madam," cried Harry. "What have I done that thus, for a
second time, you insult me? Do you wish me to blush for what I used to
be proud of, that I lived on your bounty? Next to doing you a service
(which my life would pay for), you know that to receive one from you is
my highest pleasure. What wrong have I done you that you should wound me
so, cruel woman?"

"What wrong?" she said, looking at Esmond with wild eyes. "Well,
none--none that you know of, Harry, or could help. Why did you bring
back the small-pox," she added, after a pause, "from Castlewood village?
You could not help it, could you? Which of us knows whither fate leads
us? But we were all happy, Henry, till then." And Harry went away from
this colloquy, thinking still that the estrangement between his patron
and his beloved mistress was remediable, and that each had at heart a
strong attachment to the other.

The intimacy between the Lords Mohun and Castlewood appeared to increase
as long as the former remained in the country; and my Lord of Castlewood
especially seemed never to be happy out of his new comrade's sight.
They sported together, they drank, they played bowls and tennis: my Lord
Castlewood would go for three days to Sark, and bring back my Lord Mohun
to Castlewood--where indeed his lordship made himself very welcome to
all persons, having a joke or a new game at romps for the children, all
the talk of the town for my lord, and music and gallantry and plenty of
the beau langage for my lady, and for Harry Esmond, who was never tired
of hearing his stories of his campaigns and his life at Vienna, Venice,
Paris, and the famous cities of Europe which he had visited both in
peace and war. And he sang at my lady's harpsichord, and played cards
or backgammon, or his new game of billiards with my lord (of whom he
invariably got the better) always having a consummate good-humor, and
bearing himself with a certain manly grace, that might exhibit somewhat
of the camp and Alsatia perhaps, but that had its charm, and stamped
him a gentleman: and his manner to Lady Castlewood was so devoted and
respectful, that she soon recovered from the first feelings of dislike
which she had conceived against him--nay, before long, began to be
interested in his spiritual welfare, and hopeful of his conversion,
lending him books of piety, which he promised dutifully to study. With
her my lord talked of reform, of settling into quiet life, quitting the
court and town, and buying some land in the neighborhood--though it
must be owned that, when the two lords were together over their Burgundy
after dinner, their talk was very different, and there was very little
question of conversion on my Lord Mohun's part. When they got to their
second bottle, Harry Esmond used commonly to leave these two noble
topers, who, though they talked freely enough, heaven knows, in his
presence (Good Lord, what a set of stories, of Alsatia and Spring
Garden, of the taverns and gaming-houses, of the ladies of the
court, and mesdames of the theatres, he can recall out of their godly
conversation!)--although, I say, they talked before Esmond freely, yet
they seemed pleased when he went away, and then they had another
bottle, and then they fell to cards, and then my Lord Mohun came to her
ladyship's drawing-room; leaving his boon companion to sleep off his
wine.

'Twas a point of honor with the fine gentlemen of those days to lose
or win magnificently at their horse-matches, or games of cards and
dice--and you could never tell, from the demeanor of these two lords
afterwards, which had been successful and which the loser at their
games. And when my lady hinted to my lord that he played more than she
liked, he dismissed her with a "pish," and swore that nothing was more
equal than play betwixt gentlemen, if they did but keep it up long
enough. And these kept it up long enough, you may be sure. A man of
fashion of that time often passed a quarter of his day at cards, and
another quarter at drink: I have known many a pretty fellow, who was
a wit too, ready of repartee, and possessed of a thousand graces, who
would be puzzled if he had to write more than his name.

There is scarce any thoughtful man or woman, I suppose, but can look
back upon his course of past life, and remember some point, trifling
as it may have seemed at the time of occurrence, which has nevertheless
turned and altered his whole career. 'Tis with almost all of us, as
in M. Massillon's magnificent image regarding King William, a grain de
sable that perverts or perhaps overthrows us; and so it was but a light
word flung in the air, a mere freak of perverse child's temper, that
brought down a whole heap of crushing woes upon that family whereof
Harry Esmond formed a part.

Coming home to his dear Castlewood in the third year of his academical
course, (wherein he had now obtained some distinction, his Latin Poem
on the death of the Duke of Gloucester, Princess Anne of Denmark's son,
having gained him a medal, and introduced him to the society of the
University wits,) Esmond found his little friend and pupil Beatrix grown
to be taller than her mother, a slim and lovely young girl, with cheeks
mantling with health and roses: with eyes like stars shining out
of azure, with waving bronze hair clustered about the fairest young
forehead ever seen: and a mien and shape haughty and beautiful, such
as that of the famous antique statue of the huntress Diana--at one time
haughty, rapid, imperious, with eyes and arrows that dart and kill.
Harry watched and wondered at this young creature, and likened her in
his mind to Artemis with the ringing bow and shafts flashing death upon
the children of Niobe; at another time she was coy and melting as
Luna shining tenderly upon Endymion. This fair creature, this lustrous
Phoebe, was only young as yet, nor had nearly reached her full splendor:
but crescent and brilliant, our young gentleman of the University, his
head full of poetical fancies, his heart perhaps throbbing with desires
undefined, admired this rising young divinity; and gazed at her (though
only as at some "bright particular star," far above his earth) with
endless delight and wonder. She had been a coquette from the earliest
times almost, trying her freaks and jealousies, her wayward frolics and
winning caresses, upon all that came within her reach; she set her women
quarrelling in the nursery, and practised her eyes on the groom as she
rode behind him on the pillion.

She was the darling and torment of father and mother. She intrigued with
each secretly; and bestowed her fondness and withdrew it, plied them
with tears, smiles, kisses, cajolements;--when the mother was angry, as
happened often, flew to the father, and sheltering behind him, pursued
her victim; when both were displeased, transferred her caresses to the
domestics, or watched until she could win back her parents' good graces,
either by surprising them into laughter and good-humor, or appeasing
them by submission and artful humility. She was saevo laeta negotio,
like that fickle goddess Horace describes, and of whose "malicious joy"
a great poet of our own has written so nobly--who, famous and heroic as
he was, was not strong enough to resist the torture of women.

It was but three years before that the child, then but ten years old,
had nearly managed to make a quarrel between Harry Esmond and his
comrade, good-natured, phlegmatic Thomas Tusher, who never of his own
seeking quarrelled with anybody: by quoting to the latter some silly
joke which Harry had made regarding him--(it was the merest idlest jest,
though it near drove two old friends to blows, and I think such a battle
would have pleased her)--and from that day Tom kept at a distance from
her; and she respected him, and coaxed him sedulously whenever they met.
But Harry was much more easily appeased, because he was fonder of the
child: and when she made mischief, used cutting speeches, or caused her
friends pain, she excused herself for her fault, not by admitting and
deploring it, but by pleading not guilty, and asserting innocence so
constantly, and with such seeming artlessness, that it was impossible to
question her plea. In her childhood, they were but mischiefs then which
she did; but her power became more fatal as she grew older--as a kitten
first plays with a ball, and then pounces on a bird and kills it. 'Tis
not to be imagined that Harry Esmond had all this experience at this
early stage of his life, whereof he is now writing the history--many
things here noted were but known to him in later days. Almost everything
Beatrix did or undid seemed good, or at least pardonable, to him then,
and years afterwards.

It happened, then, that Harry Esmond came home to Castlewood for his
last vacation, with good hopes of a fellowship at his college, and a
contented resolve to advance his fortune that way. 'Twas in the first
year of the present century, Mr. Esmond (as far as he knew the period of
his birth) being then twenty-two years old. He found his quondam pupil
shot up into this beauty of which we have spoken, and promising yet
more: her brother, my lord's son, a handsome high-spirited brave lad,
generous and frank, and kind to everybody, save perhaps his sister,
with whom Frank was at war (and not from his but her fault)--adoring his
mother, whose joy he was: and taking her side in the unhappy matrimonial
differences which were now permanent, while of course Mistress Beatrix
ranged with her father. When heads of families fall out, it must
naturally be that their dependants wear the one or the other party's
color; and even in the parliaments in the servants' hall or the stables,
Harry, who had an early observant turn, could see which were my lord's
adherents and which my lady's, and conjecture pretty shrewdly how their
unlucky quarrel was debated. Our lackeys sit in judgment on us. My
lord's intrigues may be ever so stealthily conducted, but his valet
knows them; and my lady's woman carries her mistress's private history
to the servants' scandal market, and exchanges it against the secrets of
other abigails.




CHAPTER XIII.

MY LORD LEAVES US AND HIS EVIL BEHIND HIM.


My Lord Mohun (of whose exploits and fame some of the gentlemen of the
University had brought down but ugly reports) was once more a guest at
Castlewood, and seemingly more intimately allied with my lord even than
before. Once in the spring those two noblemen had ridden to Cambridge
from Newmarket, whither they had gone for the horse-racing, and had
honored Harry Esmond with a visit at his rooms; after which Doctor
Montague, the master of the College, who had treated Harry somewhat
haughtily, seeing his familiarity with these great folks, and that my
Lord Castlewood laughed and walked with his hand on Harry's shoulder,
relented to Mr. Esmond, and condescended to be very civil to him; and
some days after his arrival, Harry, laughing, told this story to Lady
Esmond, remarking how strange it was that men famous for learning and
renowned over Europe, should, nevertheless, so bow down to a title, and
cringe to a nobleman ever so poor. At this Mistress Beatrix flung up her
head, and said it became those of low origin to respect their betters;
that the parsons made themselves a great deal too proud, she thought;
and that she liked the way at Lady Sark's best, where the chaplain,
though he loved pudding, as all parsons do, always went away before the
custard.

"And when I am a parson," says Mr. Esmond, "will you give me no custard,
Beatrix?"

"You--you are different," Beatrix answered. "You are of our blood."

"My father was a parson, as you call him," said my lady.

"But mine is a peer of Ireland," says Mistress Beatrix, tossing her
head. "Let people know their places. I suppose you will have me go down
on my knees and ask a blessing of Mr. Thomas Tusher, that has just been
made a curate and whose mother was a waiting-maid."

And she tossed out of the room, being in one of her flighty humors then.

When she was gone, my lady looked so sad and grave, that Harry asked
the cause of her disquietude. She said it was not merely what he said
of Newmarket, but what she had remarked, with great anxiety and
terror, that my lord, ever since his acquaintance with the Lord
Mohun especially, had recurred to his fondness for play, which he had
renounced since his marriage.

"But men promise more than they are able to perform in marriage," said
my lady, with a sigh. "I fear he has lost large sums; and our property,
always small, is dwindling away under this reckless dissipation. I heard
of him in London with very wild company. Since his return, letters
and lawyers are constantly coming and going: he seems to me to have a
constant anxiety, though he hides it under boisterousness and laughter.
I looked through--through the door last night, and--and before," said
my lady, "and saw them at cards after midnight; no estate will bear that
extravagance, much less ours, which will be so diminished that my son
will have nothing at all, and my poor Beatrix no portion!"

"I wish I could help you, madam," said Harry Esmond, sighing, and
wishing that unavailingly, and for the thousandth time in his life.

"Who can? Only God," said Lady Esmond--"only God, in whose hands we
are." And so it is, and for his rule over his family, and for
his conduct to wife and children--subjects over whom his power is
monarchical--any one who watches the world must think with trembling
sometimes of the account which many a man will have to render. For in
our society there's no law to control the King of the Fireside. He is
master of property, happiness--life almost. He is free to punish,
to make happy or unhappy--to ruin or to torture. He may kill a wife
gradually, and be no more questioned than the Grand seignior who drowns
a slave at midnight. He may make slaves and hypocrites of his children;
or friends and freemen; or drive them into revolt and enmity against the
natural law of love. I have heard politicians and coffee-house wiseacres
talking over the newspaper, and railing at the tyranny of the French
King, and the Emperor, and wondered how these (who are monarchs, too,
in their way) govern their own dominions at home, where each man rules
absolute. When the annals of each little reign are shown to the Supreme
Master, under whom we hold sovereignty, histories will be laid bare of
household tyrants as cruel as Amurath, and as savage as Nero, and as
reckless and dissolute as Charles.

If Harry Esmond's patron erred, 'twas in the latter way, from a
disposition rather self-indulgent than cruel; and he might have been
brought back to much better feelings, had time been given to him to
bring his repentance to a lasting reform.

As my lord and his friend Lord Mohun were such close companions,
Mistress Beatrix chose to be jealous of the latter; and the two
gentlemen often entertained each other by laughing, in their rude
boisterous way, at the child's freaks of anger and show of dislike.
"When thou art old enough, thou shalt marry Lord Mohun," Beatrix's
father would say: on which the girl would pout and say, "I would rather
marry Tom Tusher." And because the Lord Mohun always showed an extreme
gallantry to my Lady Castlewood, whom he professed to admire devotedly,
one day, in answer to this old joke of her father's, Beatrix said, "I
think my lord would rather marry mamma than marry me; and is waiting
till you die to ask her."

The words were said lightly and pertly by the girl one night before
supper, as the family party were assembled near the great fire. The two
lords, who were at cards, both gave a start; my lady turned as red as
scarlet, and bade Mistress Beatrix go to her own chamber; whereupon the
girl, putting on, as her wont was, the most innocent air, said, "I am
sure I meant no wrong; I am sure mamma talks a great deal more to Harry
Esmond than she does to papa--and she cried when Harry went away, and
she never does when papa goes away! and last night she talked to Lord
Mohun for ever so long, and sent us out of the room, and cried when we
came back, and--"

"D--n!" cried out my Lord Castlewood, out of all patience. "Go out of
the room, you little viper!" and he started up and flung down his cards.

"Ask Lord Mohun what I said to him, Francis," her ladyship said, rising
up with a scared face, but yet with a great and touching dignity and
candor in her look and voice. "Come away with me, Beatrix." Beatrix
sprung up too; she was in tears now.

"Dearest mamma, what have I done?" she asked. "Sure I meant no harm."
And she clung to her mother, and the pair went out sobbing together.

"I will tell you what your wife said to me, Frank," my Lord Mohun cried.
"Parson Harry may hear it; and, as I hope for heaven, every word I say
is true. Last night, with tears in her eyes, your wife implored me to
play no more with you at dice or at cards, and you know best whether
what she asked was not for your good."

"Of course, it was, Mohun," says my lord in a dry hard voice. "Of course
you are a model of a man: and the world knows what a saint you are."

My Lord Mohun was separated from his wife, and had had many affairs of
honor: of which women as usual had been the cause.

"I am no saint, though your wife is--and I can answer for my actions as
other people must for their words," said my Lord Mohun.

"By G--, my lord, you shall," cried the other, starting up.

"We have another little account to settle first, my lord," says Lord
Mohun. Whereupon Harry Esmond, filled with alarm for the consequences
to which this disastrous dispute might lead, broke out into the most
vehement expostulations with his patron and his adversary. "Gracious
heavens!" he said, "my lord, are you going to draw a sword upon your
friend in your own house? Can you doubt the honor of a lady who is as
pure as heaven, and would die a thousand times rather than do you a
wrong? Are the idle words of a jealous child to set friends at variance?
Has not my mistress, as much as she dared do, besought your lordship, as
the truth must be told, to break your intimacy with my Lord Mohun; and
to give up the habit which may bring ruin on your family? But for my
Lord Mohun's illness, had he not left you?"

"'Faith, Frank, a man with a gouty toe can't run after other men's
wives," broke out my Lord Mohun, who indeed was in that way, and with
a laugh and a look at his swathed limb so frank and comical, that the
other dashing his fist across his forehead was caught by that infectious
good-humor, and said with his oath, "---- it, Harry, I believe thee,"
and so this quarrel was over, and the two gentlemen, at swords drawn but
just now, dropped their points, and shook hands.

Beati pacifici. "Go, bring my lady back," said Harry's patron. Esmond
went away only too glad to be the bearer of such good news. He found her
at the door; she had been listening there, but went back as he came. She
took both his hands, hers were marble cold. She seemed as if she would
fall on his shoulder. "Thank you, and God bless you, my dear brother
Harry," she said. She kissed his hand, Esmond felt her tears upon it:
and leading her into the room, and up to my lord, the Lord Castlewood,
with an outbreak of feeling and affection such as he had not exhibited
for many a long day, took his wife to his heart, and bent over and
kissed her and asked her pardon.

"'Tis time for me to go to roost. I will have my gruel a-bed," said my
Lord Mohun: and limped off comically on Harry Esmond's arm. "By George,
that woman is a pearl!" he said; "and 'tis only a pig that wouldn't
value her. Have you seen the vulgar traipsing orange-girl whom
Esmond"--but here Mr. Esmond interrupted him, saying, that these were
not affairs for him to know.

My lord's gentleman came in to wait upon his master, who was no sooner
in his nightcap and dressing-gown than he had another visitor whom his
host insisted on sending to him: and this was no other than the Lady
Castlewood herself with the toast and gruel, which her husband bade her
make and carry with her own hands in to her guest.

Lord Castlewood stood looking after his wife as she went on this errand,
and as he looked, Harry Esmond could not but gaze on him, and remarked
in his patron's face an expression of love, and grief, and care, which
very much moved and touched the young man. Lord Castlewood's hands fell
down at his sides, and his head on his breast, and presently he said,--

"You heard what Mohun said, parson?"

"That my lady was a saint?"

"That there are two accounts to settle. I have been going wrong these
five years, Harry Esmond. Ever since you brought that damned small-pox
into the house, there has been a fate pursuing me, and I had best have
died of it, and not run away from it like a coward. I left Beatrix with
her relations, and went to London; and I fell among thieves, Harry, and
I got back to confounded cards and dice, which I hadn't touched since
my marriage--no, not since I was in the Duke's Guard, with those wild
Mohocks. And I have been playing worse and worse, and going deeper and
deeper into it; and I owe Mohun two thousand pounds now; and when it's
paid I am little better than a beggar. I don't like to look my boy in
the face; he hates me, I know he does. And I have spent Beaty's little
portion: and the Lord knows what will come if I live; the best thing I
can do is to die, and release what portion of the estate is redeemable
for the boy."

Mohun was as much master at Castlewood as the owner of the Hall itself;
and his equipages filled the stables, where, indeed, there was room
and plenty for many more horses than Harry Esmond's impoverished patron
could afford to keep. He had arrived on horseback with his people; but
when his gout broke out my Lord Mohun sent to London for a light chaise
he had, drawn by a pair of small horses, and running as swift, wherever
roads were good, as a Laplander's sledge. When this carriage came, his
lordship was eager to drive the Lady Castlewood abroad in it, and did so
many times, and at a rapid pace, greatly to his companion's enjoyment,
who loved the swift motion and the healthy breezes over the downs which
lie hard upon Castlewood, and stretch thence towards the sea. As this
amusement was very pleasant to her, and her lord, far from showing
any mistrust of her intimacy with Lord Mohun, encouraged her to be his
companion--as if willing by his present extreme confidence to make up
for any past mistrust which his jealousy had shown--the Lady Castlewood
enjoyed herself freely in this harmless diversion, which, it must be
owned, her guest was very eager to give her; and it seemed that she grew
the more free with Lord Mohun, and pleased with his company, because of
some sacrifice which his gallantry was pleased to make in her favor.

Seeing the two gentlemen constantly at cards still of evenings, Harry
Esmond one day deplored to his mistress that this fatal infatuation
of her lord should continue; and now they seemed reconciled together,
begged his lady to hint to her husband that he should play no more.

But Lady Castlewood, smiling archly and gayly, said she would speak to
him presently, and that, for a few nights more at least, he might be let
to have his amusement.

"Indeed, madam," said Harry, "you know not what it costs you; and 'tis
easy for any observer who knows the game, to see that Lord Mohun is by
far the stronger of the two."

"I know he is," says my lady, still with exceeding good-humor; "he is
not only the best player, but the kindest player in the world."

"Madam, madam!" Esmond cried, transported and provoked. "Debts of honor
must be paid some time or other; and my master will be ruined if he goes
on."

"Harry, shall I tell you a secret?" my lady replied, with kindness and
pleasure still in her eyes. "Francis will not be ruined if he goes on;
he will be rescued if he goes on. I repent of having spoken and thought
unkindly of the Lord Mohun when he was here in the past year. He is full
of much kindness and good; and 'tis my belief that we shall bring him
to better things. I have lent him 'Tillotson' and your favorite
'Bishop Taylor,' and he is much touched, he says; and as a proof of his
repentance--(and herein lies my secret)--what do you think he is doing
with Francis? He is letting poor Frank win his money back again. He hath
won already at the last four nights; and my Lord Mohun says that he will
not be the means of injuring poor Frank and my dear children."

"And in God's name, what do you return him for the sacrifice?" asked
Esmond, aghast; who knew enough of men, and of this one in particular,
to be aware that such a finished rake gave nothing for nothing. "How, in
heaven's name, are you to pay him?"

"Pay him! With a mother's blessing and a wife's prayers!" cries my lady,
clasping her hands together. Harry Esmond did not know whether to
laugh, to be angry, or to love his dear mistress more than ever for the
obstinate innocency with which she chose to regard the conduct of a man
of the world, whose designs he knew better how to interpret. He told the
lady, guardedly, but so as to make his meaning quite clear to her, what
he knew in respect of the former life and conduct of this nobleman; of
other women against whom he had plotted, and whom he had overcome;
of the conversation which he, Harry himself, had had with Lord Mohun,
wherein the lord made a boast of his libertinism, and frequently avowed
that he held all women to be fair game (as his lordship styled this
pretty sport), and that they were all, without exception, to be won. And
the return Harry had for his entreaties and remonstrances was a fit
of anger on Lady Castlewood's part, who would not listen to his
