Frenchman;--'don't tell her, when he spoke like a stranger, and halted
from a wound.'

Colouring to the ears, he explained that he had never walked otherwise;
whereupon her pity redoubled, and she by turns advised him to consult
Master Doctor Caius, and to obtain a recipe from Mistress--she meant
Dame--Alice Whittington, the kindest soul living, and, Lady Mayoress as
she was, with no more pride than the meanest scullion.  Pity she had no
child--yet scarce pity either, since she and the good Lord Mayor were
father and mother to all orphans and destitute--nay, to all who had any
care on their minds.

Malcolm was in extreme alarm lest he should be walked up to the Lady
Mayoress for inspection before all the world when they entered the Guild
Hall, a building of grand proportions, which, as good Mistress Bolt
informed him, had lately been paved and glazed at Sir Richard
Whittington's own expense.  The bright new red and yellow tiles, and the
stained glass of the tall windows high up, as well as the panels of the
wainscot, were embellished with trade-marks and the armorial bearings of
the guilds; and the long tables, hung with snowy napery, groaned with
gold and silver plate, such as, the Duke of Orleans observed to
Catherine, no citizens would dare exhibit in France to any prince or
noble, at peril of being mulcted of all, with or without excuse.

On an open hearth beneath the louvre, or opening for smoke, burnt a fire
diffusing all around an incense-like fragrance, from the logs, composed
of cinnamon and other choice woods and spices, that fed the flame.  The
odour and the warmth on a bleak day of May were alike delicious; and King
Henry, after heading Dame Alice up to it, stood warming his hands and
extolling the choice scent, adding: 'You spoil us, Sir Richard.  How are
we to go back to the smoke of wood and peat, and fires puffed with our
own mouths, after such pampering as this--the costliest fire I have seen
in the two realms?'

'It shall be choicer yet, Sir,' said Sir Richard Whittington, who had
just handed the Queen to her seat.

'Scarce possible,' replied Henry, 'unless I threw in my crown, and that I
cannot afford.  I shall be pawning it ere long.'

Instead of answering, the Lord Mayor quietly put his hand into his furred
pouch, and drawing out a bundle of parchments tied with a ribbon, held
them towards the King, with a grave smile.

'Lo you now, Sir Richard,' said Henry, with a playful face of disgust;
'this is to save your dainty meats, by spoiling my appetite by that
unwelcome sight.  What, man! have you bought up all the bonds I gave in
my need to a whole synagogue of Jews and bench of Loin-bards?  I shall
have to send for my crown before you let me go; though verily,' he added,
with frank, open face, 'I'm better off with a good friend like you for my
creditor--only I'm sorry for you, Sir Richard.  I fear it will be long
ere you see your good gold in the stead of your dirty paper, even though
I gave you an order on the tolls.  How now!  What, man, Dick Whittington!
Art raving?  Here, the tongs!'

For Sir Richard, gently smiling, had placed the bundle of bonds on the
glowing bed of embers.

Henry, even while calling for the tongs, was raking them out with his
sword, and would have grasped them in his hand in a moment, but the Lord
Mayor caught his arm.

'Pardon, my lord, and grant your new knight's boon.'

'When he is not moon-struck!' said Henry, still guarding the documents.
'Why, my Lady Mayoress, know you what is here?'

'Sixty thousand, my liege,' composedly answered Dame Alice.  'My husband
hath his whims, and I pray your Grace not to hinder what he hath so long
been preparing.'

'Yea, Sir,' added Whittington, earnestly.  'You wot that God hath
prospered us richly.  We have no child, and our nephews are well endowed.
How, then, can our goods belong to any save God, our king, and the poor?'

Henry drew one hand over his eyes, and with the other wrung that of
Whittington.  'Had ever king such a subject?' he murmured.

'Had ever subject such a king?' was Whittington's return.

'Thou hast conquered, Whittington,' said the King, presently looking up
with a sunny smile.  'To send me over the seas a free man, beholden to
you in heart though not by purse, is, as I well believe, worth all that
sum to thy loyal heart.  Thou art setting me far on my way to Jerusalem,
my dear friend!  Thank him, Kate--he hath done much for thine husband!'

Catherine looked amiable, and held out a white hand to be kissed, aware
that the King was pleased, though hardly understanding why he should be
glad that an odour of singed parchment should overpower the gums and
cinnamon.  This was soon remedied by the fresh handful of spices that
were cast into the flame, and the banquet began, magnificent with
peacocks, cranes, and swans in full plumage; the tusky bear crunched his
apple, deer's antlers adorned the haunch, the royal sturgeon floated in
wine, fountains of perfumed waters sprang up from shells, towers of
pastry and of jelly presented the endless allegorical devices of mediaeval
fancy, and, pre-eminent over all, a figure of the cat, with emerald eyes,
fulfilled, as Henry said, the proverb, 'A cat might look at a king;' and
truly the cat and her master had earned the right; therefore his first
toast was, 'To the Cat!'

Each guest found at his or her place a beautiful fragrant pair of gloves,
in Spanish leather, on the back of which was once more embroidered, in
all her tabby charms, the cat's face.  Therewith began a lengthy meal;
and Malcolm Stewart rejoiced at finding himself seated next to the Lady
Esclairmonde, but he grudged her attention to her companion, a slender,
dark, thoughtful representative of the Goldsmiths' Company, to whom she
talked with courtesy such as Malcolm had scorned to show his city dame.

'Who,' said Esclairmonde, presently, 'was a dame in a religious garb whom
I marked near the door here?  She hooked like one of the Beguines of my
own country.'

'We have no such order here, lady,' said the goldsmiths, puzzled.

'Hey, Master Price,' cried Mistress Bolt, speaking across Malcolm, 'I can
tell the lady who it was.  'Twas good Sister Avice Rodney, to whom the
Lady Mayoress promised some of these curious cooling drinks for the poor
shipwright who hath well-nigh cloven off his own foot with his axe.'

'Yea, truly,' returned the goldsmith; 'it must have been one of the
bedeswomen of St. Katharine's whom the lady has seen.'

'What order may that be?' asked Esclairmonde.  'I have seen nothing so
like my own country since I came hither.'

'That may well be, madam,' said Mistress Belt, 'seeing that these
bedeswomen were first instituted by a countrywoman of your own--Queen
Philippa, of blessed memory.'

'By your leave, Mistress Bolt,' interposed Master Price, 'the hospital of
St. Katharine by the Tower is of far older foundation.'

'By _your_ leave, sir, I know what I say.  The hospital was founded I
know not when, but these bedeswomen were especially added by the good
Queen, by the same token that mine aunt Cis, who was tirewoman to the
blessed Lady Joan, was one of the first.'

'How was it?  What is their office?' eagerly inquired Esclairmonde.  And
Mistress Bolt arranged herself for a long discourse.

'Well, fair sirs and sweet lady, though you be younger than I, you have
surely heard of the Black Death.  Well named was it, for never was
pestilence more dire; and the venom was so strong, that the very lips and
eyelids grew livid black, and then there was no hope.  Little thought of
such disease was there, I trow, in kings' houses, and all the fair young
lords and ladies, the children of King Edward, as then was, were full of
sport and gamesomeness as you see these dukes be now.  And never a one
was blither than the Lady Joan--she they called Joan of the Tower, being
a true Londoner born--bless her!  My aunt Cis would talk by the hour of
her pretty ways and kindly mirth.  But 'twas even as the children have
the game in the streets--

   "There come three knights all out of Spain,
   Are come to fetch your daughter Jane."

'Twas for the King of Castille, that same Peter for whom the Black Prince
of Wales fought, and of whom such grewsome tales were told.  The pretty
princess might almost have had a boding what sort of husband they had for
her, for she begged and prayed, even on her knees, that her father would
leave her; but her sisters were all espoused, and there was no help for
it.  But, as one comfort to her, my aunt Cis, who had been about her from
her cradle, was to go with her; and oft she would tell of the long
journey in litters through France, and how welcome were the English
tongues they heard again at Bordeaux, and how when poor Lady Joan saw her
brother, the Prince, she clung about his neck and sobbed, and how he
soothed her, and said she would soon laugh at her own unwillingness to go
to her husband.  But even then the Black Death was in Bordeaux, and being
low and mournful at heart, the sweet maid contracted it, and lay down to
die ere she had made two days' journey, and her last words were, "My God
hath shown me more pity than father or brother;" and so she died like a
lamb, and mine aunt was sent by the Prince to bear home the tidings to
the good Queen, who was a woeful woman.  And therewith, here was the
pestilence in London, raging among the poor creatures that lived in the
wharves and on the river bank, in damp and filth, so that whole
households lay dead at once, and the contagion, gathering force, spread
into the city, and even to the nobles and their ladies.  Then my good
aunt, having some knowledge of the sickness already, and being without
fear, went among the sick, and by her care, and the food, wine, and
clothing she brought, saved a many lives.  And from whom should the
bounties come, save from the good Queen, who ever had a great pity for
those touched like her own fair child?  Moreover, when she heard from my
aunt how the poor things lived in uncleanness and filth, and how, what
with many being strangers coming by sea, and others being serfs fled from
home, they were a nameless, masterless sort, who knew not where to seek a
parish priest, and whom the friars shunned for their poverty, she devised
a fresh foundation to be added to the hospital of St. Katharine's in the
Docks, providing for a chapter of ten bedeswomen, gentle and
well-nurtured, who should both sing in choir, and likewise go forth
constantly among the poor, to seek out the children, see that they learn
their Credo, Ave, and Pater Noster, bring the more toward to be further
taught in St. Katharine's school, and likewise to stir poor folk up to go
to mass and lead a godly life; to visit the sick, feed and tend them, and
so instruct them, that they may desire the Sacraments of the Church.'

'Ah! good Flemish Queen!' cried Esclairmonde.  'She learnt that of our
Beguines!'

'If your ladyship will have it so,' said Mrs. Bolt; 'but my aunt Cicely
began!'

'Who nominates these bedeswomen?' asked Esclairmonde.

'That does the Queen,' said Mistress Bolt.  'Not this young Queen, as
yet, for Queen Joan, the late King's widow, holds the hospital till her
death, unless it should be taken from her for her sorceries, from which
Heaven defend us!'

'Can it be visited?' said Esclairmonde.  'I feel much drawn thither, as I
ever did to the Beguines.'

'Ay, marry may it!' cried delighted Mrs. Bolt.  'I have more than one
gossip there, foreby Sister Avice, who was godchild to Aunt Cis; and if
the good lady would wish to see the hospital, I would bear her company
with all my heart.'

To Malcolm's disgust, Esclairmonde caught at the proposal, which the
Scottish haughtiness that lay under all his gentleness held somewhat
degrading to the cousin of the Emperor.  He fell into a state of gloom,
which lasted till the loving-cup had gone round and been partaken of in
pairs.

After hands had been washed in rose-water, the royal party took their
seats in barges to return to Westminster by the broad and beautiful
highway of the Thames.

Here at once Alice Montagu nestled to Esclairmonde's side, delighted with
her cat gloves, and further delighted with an old captain of trained
bands, to whose lot she had fallen, and who, on finding that she was the
daughter of the Earl of Salisbury, under whom he had served, had launched
forth by the hour into the praises of that brave nobleman, both for his
courage and his kindness to his troops.

'No wonder King Henry loves his citizens so well!' cried Esclairmonde.
'Would that our Netherlandish princes and burghers could take pride and
pleasure in one another's wealth and prowess, instead of grudging and
fearing thereat!'

'To my mind,' said Malcolm, 'they were a forward generation.  That city
dame will burst with pride, if you, lady, go with her to see those
bedeswomen.'

'I trust not,' laughed Esclairmonde, 'for I mean to try.'

'Nay, but,' said Malcolm, 'what should a mere matter of old rockers and
worn-out tirewomen concern a demoiselle of birth?'

'I honour them for doing their Master's work,' said Esclairmonde, 'and
would fain be worthy to follow in their steps.'

'Surely,' said Malcolm, 'there are houses fit for persons of high and
princely birth to live apart from gross contact with the world.'

'There are,' said Esclairmonde; 'but I trust I may be pardoned for saying
that such often seem to me to play at humility when they stickle for
birth and dower with the haughtiest.  I never honoured any nuns so much
as the humble Sisters of St. Begga, who never ask for sixteen
quarterings, but only for a tender hand, soft step, pure life, and pious
heart.'

'I deemed,' said Malcolm, 'that heavenly contemplation was the purpose of
convents.'

'Even so, for such as can contemplate like the holy man I have told you
of,' said Esclairmonde; 'but labour hath been greatly laid aside in
convents of late, and I doubt me if it be well, or if their prayers be
the better for it.'

'And so,' said Alice, 'I heard my Lord of Winchester saying how it were
well to suppress the alien priories, and give their wealth to found
colleges like that founded by Bishop Wykeham.'

For in truths the spirit of the age was beginning to set against
monasticism.  It was the period when perhaps there was more of license
and less of saintliness than at any other, and when the long continuance
of the Great Schism had so injured Church discipline that the clergy and
ecclesiastics were in the worst state of all, especially the monastic
orders, who owned no superior but the Pope, and between the two rivals
could avoid supervision altogether.  Such men as Thomas a Kempis, or the
great Jean Gerson, were rare indeed; and the monasteries had let
themselves lose their missionary character, and become mere large farms,
inhabited by celibate gentlemen and their attendants, or by the
superfluous daughters of the nobles and gentry.  Such devotion as led
Esclairmonde to the pure atmosphere of prayer and self-sacrifice had well-
nigh died out, and almost every other lady of the time would have
regarded her release from the vows made for her its her babyhood a happy
escape.

Still less, at a time when no active order of Sisters, save that of the
Beguines in Holland, had been invented, and when no nun ever dreamt of
carrying her charity beyond the quadrangle of her own convent, could any
one be expected to enter into Esclairmonde's admiration and longing for
out-of-door works; but the person whom she had chiefly made her friend
was the King's almoner and chaplain, sometimes called Sir Martin Bennet,
at others Dr. Bennet, a great Oxford scholar, bred up among William of
Wykeham's original seventy at Winchester and New College, and now much
trusted and favoured by the King, whom he everywhere accompanied.  That
Sir Martin was a pluralist must be confessed, but he was most
conscientious in providing substitutes, and was a man of much thought and
of great piety, in whom the fair pupil of the Canon of St. Agnes found a
congenial spirit.




CHAPTER VI: MALCOLM'S SUIT


'That is a gentle and gracious slip of the Stewart.  What shall you do
with him?' asked King Henry of James, as they stood together at one end
of the tilt-yard at Westminster, watching Malcolm Stewart and Ralf Percy,
who were playing at closhey, the early form of nine-pins.

'I know what I should like to do,' said James.

'What may that be?'

'To marry him to the Lady Esclairmonde de Luxemburg.'

Henry gave a long whistle.

'Have you other views for her?'

'Not I!  Am I to have designs on every poor dove who flies into my tent
from the hawk?  Besides, are not they both of them vowed to a religious
life?'

'Neither vow is valid,' replied James.

'To meddle with such things is what I should not _dare_,' said Henry.

'Monks and friars are no such holy beings, that I should greatly concern
me about keeping an innocent had out of their company,' said James.

'Nor do I say they are,' said Henry; 'but it is ill to cross a vow of
devotion, and to bring a man back to the world is apt to render him not
worth the having.  You may perchance get him down lower than you
intended.'

'This boy never had any real vocation at all,' said James; 'it was only
the timidity born of ill-health, and the longing for food for the mind.'

'Maybe so,' replied the English king, 'and you may be in the right; but
why fix on that grand Luxemburg wench, who ought to be a Lady Abbess of
Fontainebleau at least, or a very St. Hilda, to rule monks and nuns
alike?'

'Because they have fixed on each other.  Malcolm needs a woman like her
to make a man of him; and with her spirit and fervent charity, we should
have them working a mighty change in Scotland.'

'If you get her there!'

'Have I your consent, Harry?'

'Mine?  It's no affair of mine!  You must settle it with Madame of
Hainault; but you had best take care.  You are more like to make your
tame lambkin into a ravening wolf, than to get that Deborah the
prophetess to herd him.'

James in sooth viewed this warning as another touch of Lancastrian
superstition, and only considered how to broach the question.  Malcolm,
meantime, was balancing between the now approaching decision between
Oxford and France.  He certainly felt something of his old horror of
warlike scenes; but even this was lessening; he was aware that battles
were not every-day occurrences, and that often there was no danger at
all.  He would not willingly be separated from his king; and if the
female part of the Court were to accompany the campaign, it would be
losing sight of all he cared for, if he were left among a set of stranger
shavelings at Oxford.  Yet he was reluctant to break with the old habits
that had hitherto been part of his nature; he felt, after every word of
Esclairmonde--nay, after every glance towards her--as though it were a
blessed thing to have, like her, chosen the better part; he knew she
would approve his resort to the home of piety and learning; he was aware
that when with Ralf Percy and the other youths of the Court he was
ashamed of his own scrupulousness, and tempted to neglect observances
that they might call monkish and unmanly; and he was not at all sure that
in face of the enemy a panic might not seize him and disgrace him for
ever!  In effect he did not know what he wished, even when he found that
the Queen had decided against going across the sea, and that therefore
all the ladies would remain with her at Shene or Windsor.

He should probably never again see Esclairmonde, the guiding star of his
recent life, the embodiment of all that he had imagined when conning the
quaint old English poems that told the Legend of Seynct Katharine; and as
he leant musingly against a lattice, feeling as if the brightness of his
life was going out, King James merrily addressed him:--

