upon your head.  I am a lady; I have been your hostess, with however
little will; and I desire that this random acquaintance of yours with my
family will cease and determine.'

I believe I must have coloured.  'Madam,' said I, 'the notes are of no
importance; and your least pleasure ought certainly to be my law.  You
have felt, and you have been pleased to express, a doubt of me.  I tear
them up.'  Which you may be sure I did thoroughly.

'There's a good lad!' said the dragon, and immediately led the way to the
front lawn.

The brother and sister were both waiting us here, and, as well as I could
make out in the imperfect light, bore every appearance of having passed
through a rather cruel experience.  Ronald seemed ashamed to so much as
catch my eye in the presence of his aunt, and was the picture of
embarrassment.  As for Flora, she had scarce the time to cast me one look
before the dragon took her by the arm, and began to march across the
garden in the extreme first glimmer of the dawn without exchanging
speech.  Ronald and I followed in equal silence.

There was a door in that same high wall on the top of which I had sat
perched no longer gone than yesterday morning.  This the old lady set
open with a key; and on the other side we were aware of a rough-looking,
thick-set man, leaning with his arms (through which was passed a
formidable staff) on a dry-stone dyke.  Him the old lady immediately
addressed.

'Sim,' said she, 'this is the young gentleman.'

Sim replied with an inarticulate grumble of sound, and a movement of one
arm and his head, which did duty for a salutation.

'Now, Mr. St. Ives,' said the old lady, 'it's high time for you to be
taking the road.  But first of all let me give the change of your
five-guinea bill.  Here are four pounds of it in British Linen notes, and
the balance in small silver, less sixpence.  Some charge a shilling, I
believe, but I have given you the benefit of the doubt.  See and guide it
with all the sense that you possess.'

'And here, Mr. St. Ives,' said Flora, speaking for the first time, 'is a
plaid which you will find quite necessary on so rough a journey.  I hope
you will take it from the hands of a Scotch friend,' she added, and her
voice trembled.

'Genuine holly: I cut it myself,' said Ronald, and gave me as good a
cudgel as a man could wish for in a row.

The formality of these gifts, and the waiting figure of the driver, told
me loudly that I must be gone.  I dropped on one knee and bade farewell
to the aunt, kissing her hand.  I did the like--but with how different a
passion!--to her niece; as for the boy, I took him to my arms and
embraced him with a cordiality that seemed to strike him speechless.
'Farewell!' and 'Farewell!' I said.  'I shall never forget my friends.
Keep me sometimes in memory.  Farewell!' With that I turned my back and
began to walk away; and had scarce done so, when I heard the door in the
high wall close behind me.  Of course this was the aunt's doing; and of
course, if I know anything of human character, she would not let me go
without some tart expressions.  I declare, even if I had heard them, I
should not have minded in the least, for I was quite persuaded that,
whatever admirers I might be leaving behind me in Swanston Cottage, the
aunt was not the least sincere.




CHAPTER X--THE DROVERS


It took me a little effort to come abreast of my new companion; for
though he walked with an ugly roll and no great appearance of speed, he
could cover the around at a good rate when he wanted to.  Each looked at
the other: I with natural curiosity, he with a great appearance of
distaste.  I have heard since that his heart was entirely set against me;
he had seen me kneel to the ladies, and diagnosed me for a 'gesterin'
eediot.'

'So, ye're for England, are ye?' said he.

I told him yes.

'Weel, there's waur places, I believe,' was his reply; and he relapsed
into a silence which was not broken during a quarter of an hour of steady
walking.

This interval brought us to the foot of a bare green valley, which wound
upwards and backwards among the hills.  A little stream came down the
midst and made a succession of clear pools; near by the lowest of which I
was aware of a drove of shaggy cattle, and a man who seemed the very
counterpart of Mr. Sim making a breakfast upon bread and cheese.  This
second drover (whose name proved to be Candlish) rose on our approach.

'Here's a mannie that's to gang through with us,' said Sim.  'It was the
auld wife, Gilchrist, wanted it.'

'Aweel, aweel,' said the other; and presently, remembering his manners,
and looking on me with a solemn grin, 'A fine day!' says he.

I agreed with him, and asked him how he did.

'Brawly,' was the reply; and without further civilities, the pair
proceeded to get the cattle under way.  This, as well as almost all the
herding, was the work of a pair of comely and intelligent dogs, directed
by Sim or Candlish in little more than monosyllables.  Presently we were
ascending the side of the mountain by a rude green track, whose presence
I had not hitherto observed.  A continual sound of munching and the
crying of a great quantity of moor birds accompanied our progress, which
the deliberate pace and perennial appetite of the cattle rendered
wearisomely slow.  In the midst my two conductors marched in a contented
silence that I could not but admire.  The more I looked at them, the more
I was impressed by their absurd resemblance to each other.  They were
dressed in the same coarse homespun, carried similar sticks, were equally
begrimed about the nose with snuff, and each wound in an identical plaid
of what is called the shepherd's tartan.  In a back view they might be
described as indistinguishable; and even from the front they were much
alike.  An incredible coincidence of humours augmented the impression.
Thrice and four times I attempted to pave the way for some exchange of
thought, sentiment, or--at the least of it--human words.  An _Ay_ or an
_Nhm_ was the sole return, and the topic died on the hill-side without
echo.  I can never deny that I was chagrined; and when, after a little
more walking, Sim turned towards me and offered me a ram's horn of snuff,
with the question 'Do ye use it?' I answered, with some animation,
'Faith, sir, I would use pepper to introduce a little cordiality.'  But
even this sally failed to reach, or at least failed to soften, my
companions.

At this rate we came to the summit of a ridge, and saw the track descend
in front of us abruptly into a desert vale, about a league in length, and
closed at the farther end by no less barren hilltops.  Upon this point of
vantage Sim came to a halt, took off his hat, and mopped his brow.

'Weel,' he said, 'here we're at the top o' Howden.'

'The top o' Howden, sure eneuch,' said Candlish.

'Mr. St. Ivey, are ye dry?' said the first.

'Now, really,' said I, 'is not this Satan reproving sin?'

'What ails ye, man?' said he.  'I'm offerin' ye a dram.'

'Oh, if it be anything to drink,' said I, 'I am as dry as my neighbours.'

Whereupon Sim produced from the corner of his plaid a black bottle, and
we all drank and pledged each other.  I found these gentlemen followed
upon such occasions an invariable etiquette, which you may be certain I
made haste to imitate.  Each wiped his mouth with the back of his left
hand, held up the bottle in his right, remarked with emphasis, 'Here's to
ye!' and swallowed as much of the spirit as his fancy prompted.  This
little ceremony, which was the nearest thing to manners I could perceive
in either of my companions, was repeated at becoming intervals, generally
after an ascent.  Occasionally we shared a mouthful of ewe-milk cheese
and an inglorious form of bread, which I understood (but am far from
engaging my honour on the point) to be called 'shearer's bannock.'  And
that may be said to have concluded our whole active intercourse for the
first day.

I had the more occasion to remark the extraordinarily desolate nature of
that country, through which the drove road continued, hour after hour and
even day after day, to wind.  A continual succession of insignificant
shaggy hills, divided by the course of ten thousand brooks, through which
we had to wade, or by the side of which we encamped at night; infinite
perspectives of heather, infinite quantities of moorfowl; here and there,
by a stream side, small and pretty clumps of willows or the silver birch;
here and there, the ruins of ancient and inconsiderable fortresses--made
the unchanging characters of the scene.  Occasionally, but only in the
distance, we could perceive the smoke of a small town or of an isolated
farmhouse or cottage on the moors; more often, a flock of sheep and its
attendant shepherd, or a rude field of agriculture perhaps not yet
harvested.  With these alleviations, we might almost be said to pass
through an unbroken desert--sure, one of the most impoverished in Europe;
and when I recalled to mind that we were yet but a few leagues from the
chief city (where the law courts sat every day with a press of business,
soldiers garrisoned the castle, and men of admitted parts were carrying
on the practice of letters and the investigations of science), it gave me
a singular view of that poor, barren, and yet illustrious country through
which I travelled.  Still more, perhaps, did it commend the wisdom of
Miss Gilchrist in sending me with these uncouth companions and by this
unfrequented path.

My itinerary is by no means clear to me; the names and distances I never
clearly knew, and have now wholly forgotten; and this is the more to be
regretted as there is no doubt that, in the course of those days, I must
have passed and camped among sites which have been rendered illustrious
by the pen of Walter Scott.  Nay, more, I am of opinion that I was still
more favoured by fortune, and have actually met and spoken with that
inimitable author.  Our encounter was of a tall, stoutish, elderly
gentleman, a little grizzled, and of a rugged but cheerful and engaging
countenance.  He sat on a hill pony, wrapped in a plaid over his green
coat, and was accompanied by a horse-woman, his daughter, a young lady of
the most charming appearance.  They overtook us on a stretch of heath,
reined up as they came alongside, and accompanied us for perhaps a
quarter of an hour before they galloped off again across the hillsides to
our left.  Great was my amazement to find the unconquerable Mr. Sim thaw
immediately on the accost of this strange gentleman, who hailed him with
a ready familiarity, proceeded at once to discuss with him the trade of
droving and the prices of cattle, and did not disdain to take a pinch
from the inevitable ram's horn.  Presently I was aware that the
stranger's eye was directed on myself; and there ensued a conversation,
some of which I could not help overhearing at the time, and the rest have
pieced together more or less plausibly from the report of Sim.

'Surely that must be an _amateur drover_ ye have gotten there?' the
gentleman seems to have asked.

Sim replied, I was a young gentleman that had a reason of his own to
travel privately.

'Well, well, ye must tell me nothing of that.  I am in the law, you know,
and _tace_ is the Latin for a candle,' answered the gentleman.  'But I
hope it's nothing bad.'

Sim told him it was no more than debt.

'Oh, Lord, if that be all!' cried the gentleman; and turning to myself,
'Well, sir,' he added, 'I understand you are taking a tramp through our
forest here for the pleasure of the thing?'

'Why, yes, sir,' said I; 'and I must say I am very well entertained.'

'I envy you,' said he.  'I have jogged many miles of it myself when I was
younger.  My youth lies buried about here under every heather-bush, like
the soul of the licentiate Lucius.  But you should have a guide.  The
pleasure of this country is much in the legends, which grow as plentiful
as blackberries.'  And directing my attention to a little fragment of a
broken wall no greater than a tombstone, he told me for an example a
story of its earlier inhabitants.  Years after it chanced that I was one
day diverting myself with a Waverley Novel, when what should I come upon
but the identical narrative of my green-coated gentleman upon the moors!
In a moment the scene, the tones of his voice, his northern accent, and
the very aspect of the earth and sky and temperature of the weather,
flashed back into my mind with the reality of dreams.  The unknown in the
green-coat had been the Great Unknown!  I had met Scott; I had heard a
story from his lips; I should have been able to write, to claim
acquaintance, to tell him that his legend still tingled in my ears.  But
the discovery came too late, and the great man had already succumbed
under the load of his honours and misfortunes.

Presently, after giving us a cigar apiece, Scott bade us farewell and
disappeared with his daughter over the hills.  And when I applied to Sim
for information, his answer of 'The Shirra, man!  A'body kens the
Shirra!' told me, unfortunately, nothing.

A more considerable adventure falls to be related.  We were now near the
border.  We had travelled for long upon the track beaten and browsed by a
million herds, our predecessors, and had seen no vestige of that traffic
which had created it.  It was early in the morning when we at last
perceived, drawing near to the drove road, but still at a distance of
about half a league, a second caravan, similar to but larger than our
own.  The liveliest excitement was at once exhibited by both my comrades.
They climbed hillocks, they studied the approaching drove from under
their hand, they consulted each other with an appearance of alarm that
seemed to me extraordinary.  I had learned by this time that their
stand-off manners implied, at least, no active enmity; and I made bold to
ask them what was wrong.

'Bad yins,' was Sim's emphatic answer.

All day the dogs were kept unsparingly on the alert, and the drove pushed
forward at a very unusual and seemingly unwelcome speed.  All day Sim and
Candlish, with a more than ordinary expenditure both of snuff and of
words, continued to debate the position.  It seems that they had
recognised two of our neighbours on the road--one Faa, and another by the
name of Gillies.  Whether there was an old feud between them still
unsettled I could never learn; but Sim and Candlish were prepared for
every degree of fraud or violence at their hands.  Candlish repeatedly
congratulated himself on having left 'the watch at home with the
mistress'; and Sim perpetually brandished his cudgel, and cursed his
ill-fortune that it should be sprung.

'I willna care a damn to gie the daashed scoon'rel a fair clout wi' it,'
he said.  'The daashed thing micht come sindry in ma hand.'

'Well, gentlemen,' said I, 'suppose they do come on, I think we can give
a very good account of them.'  And I made my piece of holly, Ronald's
gift, the value of which I now appreciated, sing about my head.

'Ay, man?  Are ye stench?' inquired Sim, with a gleam of approval in his
wooden countenance.

The same evening, somewhat wearied with our day-long expedition, we
encamped on a little verdant mound, from the midst of which there welled
a spring of clear water scarce great enough to wash the hands in.  We had
made our meal and lain down, but were not yet asleep, when a growl from
one of the collies set us on the alert.  All three sat up, and on a
second impulse all lay down again, but now with our cudgels ready.  A man
must be an alien and an outlaw, an old soldier and a young man in the
bargain, to take adventure easily.  With no idea as to the rights of the
quarrel or the probable consequences of the encounter, I was as ready to
take part with my two drovers, as ever to fall in line on the morning of
a battle.  Presently there leaped three men out of the heather; we had
scarce time to get to our feet before we were assailed; and in a moment
each one of us was engaged with an adversary whom the deepening twilight
scarce permitted him to see.  How the battle sped in other quarters I am
in no position to describe.  The rogue that fell to my share was
exceedingly agile and expert with his weapon; had and held me at a
disadvantage from the first assault; forced me to give ground
continually, and at last, in mere self-defence, to let him have the
point.  It struck him in the throat, and he went down like a ninepin and
moved no more.

It seemed this was the signal for the engagement to be discontinued.  The
other combatants separated at once; our foes were suffered, without
molestation, to lift up and bear away their fallen comrade; so that I
perceived this sort of war to be not wholly without laws of chivalry, and
perhaps rather to partake of the character of a tournament than of a
battle _a outrance_.  There was no doubt, at least, that I was supposed
to have pushed the affair too seriously.  Our friends the enemy removed
their wounded companion with undisguised consternation; and they were no
sooner over the top of the brae, than Sim and Candlish roused up their
wearied drove and set forth on a night march.

'I'm thinking Faa's unco bad,' said the one.

'Ay,' said the other, 'he lookit dooms gash.'

'He did that,' said the first.

And their weary silence fell upon them again.

Presently Sim turned to me.  'Ye're unco ready with the stick,' said he.

'Too ready, I'm afraid,' said I.  'I am afraid Mr. Faa (if that be his
name) has got his gruel.'

'Weel, I wouldnae wonder,' replied Sim.

'And what is likely to happen?' I inquired.

'Aweel,' said Sim, snuffing profoundly, 'if I were to offer an opeenion,
it would not be conscientious.  For the plain fac' is, Mr. St. Ivy, that
I div not ken.  We have had crackit heids--and rowth of them--ere now;
and we have had a broken leg or maybe twa; and the like of that we drover
bodies make a kind of a practice like to keep among oursel's.  But a corp
we have none of us ever had to deal with, and I could set nae leemit to
what Gillies micht consider proper in the affair.  Forbye that, he would
be in raither a hobble himsel', if he was to gang hame wantin' Faa.  Folk
are awfu' throng with their questions, and parteecularly when they're no
wantit.'

'That's a fac',' said Candlish.

I considered this prospect ruefully; and then making the best of it,
'Upon all which accounts,' said I, 'the best will be to get across the
border and there separate.  If you are troubled, you can very truly put
the blame upon your late companion; and if I am pursued, I must just try
to keep out of the way.'

'Mr. St. Ivy,' said Sim, with something resembling enthusiasm, 'no' a
word mair!  I have met in wi' mony kinds o' gentry ere now; I hae seen o'
them that was the tae thing, and I hae seen o' them that was the tither;
but the wale of a gentleman like you I have no sae very frequently seen
the bate of.'

Our night march was accordingly pursued with unremitting diligence.  The
stars paled, the east whitened, and we were still, both dogs and men,
toiling after the wearied cattle.  Again and again Sim and Candlish
lamented the necessity: it was 'fair ruin on the bestial,' they declared;
but the thought of a judge and a scaffold hunted them ever forward.  I
myself was not so much to be pitied.  All that night, and during the
whole of the little that remained before us of our conjunct journey, I
enjoyed a new pleasure, the reward of my prowess, in the now loosened
tongue of Mr. Sim.  Candlish was still obdurately taciturn: it was the
man's nature; but Sim, having finally appraised and approved me,
