
"I should have been supplanted by this time," said Warner, "by a girl or
a woman! It would have been just as bad!"

"Why there was your friend Walter Gerard; he was the same as you, and
yet now he gets two pound a-week; at least I have often heard you say
so."

"Walter Gerard is a man of great parts," said Warner, "and might have
been a master himself by this time had he cared."

"And why did he not?"

"He had no wife and children," said Warner; "he was not so blessed."

The baby woke and began to cry.

"Ah! my child!" exclaimed the mother. "That wicked Harriet! Here Amelia,
I have a morsel of crust here. I saved it yesterday for baby; moisten
it in water, and tie it up in this piece of calico: he will suck it; it
will keep him quiet; I can bear anything but his cry."

"I shall have finished my job by noon," said Warner; "and then, please
God, we shall break our fast."

"It is yet two hours to noon," said his wife. "And Barber always keeps
you so long! I cannot bear that Barber: I dare say he will not advance
you money again as you did not bring the job home on Saturday night. If
I were you, Philip, I would go and sell the piece unfinished at once to
one of the cheap shops."

"I have gone straight all my life," said Warner.

"And much good it has done you," said his wife.

"My poor Amelia! How she shivers! I think the sun never touches this
house. It is indeed a most wretched place!"

"It will not annoy you long, Mary," said her husband: "I can pay no
more rent; and I only wonder they have not been here already to take the
week."

"And where are we to go?" said the wife.

"To a place which certainly the sun never touches," said her husband,
with a kind of malice in his misery,--"to a cellar!"

"Oh! why was I ever born!" exclaimed his wife. "And yet I was so happy
once! And it is not our fault. I cannot make it out Warner, why you
should not get two pounds a-week like Walter Gerard?"

"Bah!" said the husband.

"You said he had no family," continued his wife. "I thought he had a
daughter."

"But she is no burthen to him. The sister of Mr Trafford is the Superior
of the convent here, and she took Sybil when her mother died, and
brought her up."

"Oh! then she is a nun?"

"Not yet; but I dare say it will end in it."

"Well, I think I would even sooner starve," said his wife, "than my
children should be nuns."

At this moment there was a knocking at the door. Warner descended from
his loom and opened it.

"Lives Philip Warner here?" enquired a clear voice of peculiar
sweetness.

"My name is Warner."

"I come from Walter Gerard," continued the voice. "Your letter reached
him only last night. The girl at whose house your daughter left it has
quitted this week past Mr Trafford's factory."

"Pray enter."

And there entered SYBIL.




Book 2 Chapter 14



"Your wife is ill?" said Sybil.

"Very!" replied Warner's wife. "Our daughter has behaved infamously to
us. She has quitted us without saying by your leave or with your leave.
And her wages were almost the only thing left to us; for Philip is not
like Walter Gerard you see: he cannot earn two pounds a-week, though why
he cannot I never could understand."

"Hush, hush, wife!" said Warner. "I speak I apprehend to Gerard's
daughter?"

"Just so."

"Ah! this is good and kind; this is like old times, for Walter Gerard
was my friend, when I was not exactly as I am now."

"He tells me so: he sent a messenger to me last night to visit you this
morning. Your letter reached him only yesterday."

"Harriet was to give it to Caroline," said the wife. "That's the girl
who has done all the mischief and inveigled her away. And she has left
Trafford's works, has she? Then I will be bound she and Harriet are
keeping house together."

"You suffer?" said Sybil, moving to the bed-side of the woman; "give me
your hand," she added in a soft sweet tone. "'Tis hot."

"I feel very cold," said the woman. "Warner would have the window open,
till the rain came in."

"And you, I fear, are wet," said Warner, addressing Sybil, and
interrupting his wife.

"Very slightly. And you have no fire. Ah! I have brought some things for
you, but not fuel."

"If he would only ask the person down stairs," said his wife, "for a
block of coal; I tell him, neighbours could hardly refuse; but he never
will do anything; he says he has asked too often."

"I will ask," said Sybil. "But first, I have a companion without," she
added, "who bears a basket for you. Come in, Harold."

The baby began to cry the moment a large dog entered the room; a young
bloodhound of the ancient breed, such as are now found but in a few old
halls and granges in the north of England. Sybil untied the basket, and
gave a piece of sugar to the screaming infant. Her glance was sweeter
even than her remedy; the infant stared at her with his large blue eyes;
for an instant astonished, and then he smiled.

"Oh! beautiful child!" exclaimed Sybil; and she took the babe up from
the mattress and embraced it.

"You are an angel from heaven," exclaimed the mother, "and you may well
say beautiful. And only to think of that infamous girl, Harriet, to
desert us all in this way."

Sybil drew forth the contents of the convent basket, and called Warner's
attention to them. "Now," she said, "arrange all this as I tell you, and
I will go down stairs and speak to them below as you wish, Harold rest
there;" and the dog laid himself down in the remotest corner.

"And is that Gerard's daughter?" said the weaver's wife. "Only think
what it is to gain two pounds a-week, and bring up your daughters in
that way--instead of such shameless husseys as our Harriet! But with
such wages one can do anything. What have you there, Warner? Is that
tea? Oh! I should like some tea. I do think tea would do me some good.
I have quite a longing for it. Run down, Warner, and ask them to let us
have a kettle of hot water. It is better than all the fire in the world.
Amelia, my dear, do you see what they have sent us. Plenty to eat. Tell
Maria all about it. You are good girls; you will never be like that
infamous Harriet. When you earn wages you will give them to your poor
mother and baby, won't you?"

"Yes, mother," said Amelia.

"And father, too," said Maria.

"And father, too," said the wife. "He has been a very good father to you
all; and I never can understand why one who works so hard should earn
so little; but I believe it is the fault of those machines. The police
ought to put them down, and then every body would be comfortable."

Sybil and Warner re-entered; the fire was lit, the tea made, the meal
partaken. An air of comfort, even of enjoyment, was diffused over this
chamber, but a few minutes back so desolate and unhappy.

"Well," said the wife, raising herself a little up in her bed, "I feel
as if that dish of tea had saved my life. Amelia, have you had any tea?
And Maria? You see what it is to be good girls; the Lord will never
desert you. The day is fast coming when that Harriet will know what the
want of a dish of tea is, with all her fine wages. And I am sure," she
added, addressing Sybil, "what we all owe to you is not to be told. Your
father well deserves his good fortune, with such a daughter."

"My father's fortunes are not much better than his neighbours," said
Sybil, "but his wants are few; and who should sympathise with the poor,
but the poor? Alas! none else can. Besides, it is the Superior of our
convent that has sent you this meal. What my father can do for you, I
have told your husband. 'Tis little; but with the favour of heaven, it
may avail. When the people support the people, the divine blessing will
not be wanting."

"I am sure the divine blessing will never be wanting to you," said
Warner in a voice of great emotion.

There was silence; the querulous spirit of the wife was subdued by the
tone of Sybil; she revolved in her mind the present and the past; the
children pursued their ungrudged and unusual meal; the daughter of
Gerard, that she might not interfere with their occupation, walked to
the window and surveyed the chink of troubled sky, which was visible in
the court. The wind blew in gusts; the rain beat against the glass. Soon
after this, there was another knock at the door. Harold started from his
repose, and growled. Warner rose, and saying, "they have come for the
rent. Thank God, I am ready," advanced and opened the door. Two men
offered with courtesy to enter.

"We are strangers," said he who took the lead, "but would not be such. I
speak to Warner?"

"My name."

"And I am your spiritual pastor, if to be the vicar of Mowbray entitles
me to that description."

"Mr St Lys."

"The same. One of the most valued of my flock, and the most influential
person in this district, has been speaking much of you to me this
morning. You are working for him. He did not hear of you on Saturday
night; he feared you were ill. Mr Barber spoke to me of your distress,
as well as of your good character. I came to express to you my respect
and my sympathy, and to offer you my assistance."

"You are most good, sir, and Mr Barber too, and indeed, an hour ago, we
were in as great straits--."

"And are now, sir," exclaimed his wife interrupting him. "I have been in
this bed a-week, and may never rise from it again; the children have
no clothes; they are pawned; everything is pawned; this morning we had
neither fuel, nor food. And we thought you had come for the rent which
we cannot pay. If it had not been for a dish of tea which was charitably
given me this morning by a person almost as poor as ourselves that is to
say, they live by labour, though their wages are much higher, as high as
two pounds a-week, though how that can be I never shall understand, when
my husband is working twelve hours a day, and gaining only a penny an
hour--if it had not been for this I should have been a corpse; and yet
he says we were in straits, merely because Walter Gerard's daughter, who
I willingly grant is an angel from heaven for all the good she has done
us, has stepped into our aid. But the poor supporting the poor, as she
well says, what good can come from that!"

During this ebullition, Mr St Lys had surveyed the apartment and
recognised Sybil.

"Sister," he said when the wife of Warner had ceased, "this is not the
first time we have met under the roof of sorrow."

Sybil bent in silence, and moved as if she were about to retire: the
wind and rain came dashing against the window. The companion of Mr St
Lys, who was clad in a rough great coat, and was shaking the wet off an
oilskin hat known by the name of a 'south-wester,' advanced and said to
her, "It is but a squall, but a very severe one; I would recommend you
to stay for a few minutes."

She received this remark with courtesy but did not reply.

"I think," continued the companion of Mr St Lys, "that this is not the
first time also that we have met?"

"I cannot recall our meeting before," said Sybil.

"And yet it was not many days past; though the sky was so very
different, that it would almost make one believe it was in another land
and another clime."

Sybil looked at him as if for explanation.

"It was at Marney Abbey," said the companion of Mr St Lys.

"I was there; and I remember, when about to rejoin my companions, they
were not alone."

"And you disappeared; very suddenly I thought: for I left the ruins
almost at the same moment as your friends, yet I never saw any of you
again."

"We took our course; a very rugged one; you perhaps pursued a more even
way."

"Was it your first visit to Marney?"

"My first and my last. There was no place I more desired to see; no
place of which the vision made me so sad."

"The glory has departed," said Egremont mournfully.

"It is not that," said Sybil: "I was prepared for decay, but not for
such absolute desecration. The Abbey seems a quarry for materials to
repair farm-houses; and the nave a cattle gate. What people they must
be--that family of sacrilege who hold these lands!"

"Hem!" said Egremont. "They certainly do not appear to have much feeling
for ecclesiastical art."

"And for little else, as we were told," said Sybil. "There was a fire at
the Abbey farm the day we were there, and from all that reached us, it
would appear the people were as little tendered as the Abbey walls."

"They have some difficulty perhaps in employing their population in
those parts."

"You know the country?"

"Not at all: I was travelling in the neighbourhood, and made a diversion
for the sake of seeing an abbey of which I had heard so much."

"Yes; it was the greatest of the Northern Houses. But they told me the
people were most wretched round the Abbey; nor do I think there is any
other cause for their misery, than the hard hearts of the family that
have got the lands."

"You feel deeply for the people!" said Egremont looking at her
earnestly.

Sybil returned him a glance expressive of some astonishment, and then
said, "And do not you? Your presence here assures me of it."

"I humbly follow one who would comfort the unhappy."

"The charity of Mr St Lys is known to all."

"And you--you too are a ministering angel."

"There is no merit in my conduct, for there is no sacrifice. When I
remember what this English people once was; the truest, the freest, and
the bravest, the best-natured and the best-looking, the happiest and
most religious race upon the surface of this globe; and think of them
now, with all their crimes and all their slavish sufferings, their
soured spirits and their stunted forms; their lives without enjoyment
and their deaths without hope; I may well feel for them, even if I were
not the daughter of their blood."

And that blood mantled to her cheek as she ceased to speak, and her dark
eye gleamed with emotion, and an expression of pride and courage hovered
on her brow. Egremont caught her glance and withdrew his own; his heart
was troubled.

St Lys. who had been in conference with the weaver, left him and went
to the bedside of his wife. Warner advanced to Sybil, and expressed his
feelings for her father, his sense of her goodness. She, observing that
the squall seemed to have ceased, bade him farewell, and calling Harold,
quitted the chamber.




Book 2 Chapter 15



"Where have you been all the morning, Charles?" said Lord Marney coming
into his brother's dressing-room a few minutes before dinner; "Arabella
had made the nicest little riding party for you and Lady Joan, and you
were to be found nowhere. If you go on in this way, there is no use of
having affectionate relations, or anything else."

"I have been walking about Mowbray. One should see a factory once in
one's life."

"I don't see the necessity," said Lord Marney; "I never saw one, and
never intend. Though to be sure, when I hear the rents that Mowbray gets
for his land in their neighbourhood, I must say I wish the worsted works
had answered at Marney. And if it had not been for our poor dear father,
they would."

"Our family have always been against manufactories,
railroads--everything," said Egremont.

"Railroads are very good things, with high compensation," said Lord
Marney; "and manufactories not so bad, with high rents; but, after all,
these are enterprises for the canaille, and I hate them in my heart."

"But they employ the people, George."

"The people do not want employment; it is the greatest mistake in the
world; all this employment is a stimulus to population. Never mind that;
what I came in for, is to tell you that both Arabella and myself think
you talk too much to Lady Maud."

"I like her the best."

"What has that to do with it my dear fellow? Business is business. Old
Mowbray will make an elder son out of his elder daughter. The affair
is settled; I know it from the best authority. Talking to Lady Maud is
insanity. It is all the same for her as if Fitz-Warene had never died.
And then that great event, which ought to be the foundation of your
fortune, would be perfectly thrown away. Lady Maud, at the best, is
nothing more than twenty thousand pounds and a fat living. Besides, she
is engaged to that parson fellow, St Lys.

"St Lys told me to-day that nothing would ever induce him to marry. He
would practise celibacy, though he would not enjoin it."

"Enjoin fiddle-stick! How came you to be talking to such a sanctified
imposter; and, I believe, with all his fine phrases, a complete radical.
I tell you what, Charles, you must really make way with Lady Joan. The
grandfather has come to-day, the old Duke. Quite a family party. It
looks so well. Never was such a golden opportunity. And you must be
sharp too. That little Jermyn, with his brown eyes and his white hands,
has not come down here, in the month of August, with no sport of any
kind, for nothing."

"I shall set Lady Firebrace at him."

"She is quite your friend, and a very sensible woman too, Charles, and
an ally not to be despised. Lady Joan has a very high opinion of her.
There's the bell. Well, I shall tell Arabella that you mean to put up
the steam, and Lady Firebrace shall keep Jermyn off. And perhaps it is
as well you did not seem too eager at first. Mowbray Castle, my dear
fellow, in spite of its manufactories, is not to be despised. And with
a little firmness, you could keep the people out of your park. Mowbray
could do it, only he has no pluck. He is afraid people would say he was
the son of a footman."

The Duke, who was the father of the Countess de Mowbray, was also lord
lieutenant of the county. Although advanced in years, he was still
extremely handsome; with the most winning manners; full of amenity
and grace. He had been a roue in his youth, but seemed now the perfect
representative of a benignant and virtuous old age. He was universally
popular; admired by young men, adored by young ladies. Lord de Mowbray
paid him the most distinguished consideration. It was genuine. However
maliciously the origin of his own father might be represented, nobody
could deprive him of that great fact, his father-in-law; a duke, a duke
of a great house who had intermarried for generations with great houses,
one of the old nobility, and something even loftier.

The county of which his grace was Lord Lieutenant was very proud of its
nobility; and certainly with Marney Abbey at one end, and Mowbray Castle
at the other, it had just cause; but both these illustrious houses
yielded in importance, though not in possessions, to the great peer who
was the governor of the province.

A French actress, clever as French actresses always are, had persuaded,
once upon a time, an easy-tempered monarch of this realm, that the
paternity of her coming babe was a distinction of which his majesty
might be proud. His majesty did not much believe her; but he was a
sensible man, and never disputed a point with a woman; so when the
babe was born, and proved a boy, he christened him with his name;
and elevated him to the peerage in his cradle by the title of Duke of
Fitz-Aquitaine and Marquis of Gascony.

An estate the royal father could not endow him with, for he had spent
all his money, mortgaged all his resources, and was obliged to run in
debt himself for the jewels of the rest of his mistresses; but he did
his best for the young peer, as became an affectionate father or a
fond lover. His majesty made him when he arrived at man's estate
the hereditary keeper of a palace which he possessed in the north of
England; and this secured his grace a castle and a park. He could wave
his flag and kill his deer; and if he had only possessed an estate, he
would have been as well off as if he had helped conquer the realm with
King William, or plundered the church for King Harry. A revenue must
however be found for the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine, and it was furnished
without the interference of Parliament, but with a financial dexterity
worthy of that assembly--to whom and not to our sovereigns we are
obliged for the public debt. The king granted the duke and his heirs for
ever, a pension on the post-office, a light tax upon coals shipped to
London, and a tithe of all the shrimps caught on the southern coast.
This last source of revenue became in time, with the development of
watering-places, extremely prolific. And so, what with the foreign
courts and colonies for the younger sons, it was thus contrived very
respectably to maintain the hereditary dignity of this great peer.

The present Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine had supported the Reform Bill, but
had been shocked by the Appropriation clause; very much admired Lord
Stanley, and was apt to observe, that if that nobleman had been the
leader of the conservative party, he hardly knew what he might not have
done himself. But the duke was an old whig, had lived with old whigs all
his life, feared revolution, but still more the necessity of taking his
name out of Brookes', where he had looked in every day or night since he
came of age. So, not approving of what was going on, yet not caring to
desert his friends, he withdrew, as the phrase runs, from public
life; that is to say, was rarely in his seat; did not continue to Lord
Melbourne the proxy that had been entrusted to Lord Grey; and made tory
magistrates in his county though a whig lord lieutenant.

When forces were numbered, and speculations on the future indulged in
by the Tadpoles and Tapers, the name of the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine was
mentioned with a knowing look and in a mysterious tone. Nothing more
was necessary between Tadpole and Taper; but, if some hack in statu
pupillari happened to be present at the conference, and the gentle
novice greedy for party tattle, and full of admiring reverence for
the two great hierophants of petty mysteries before him, ventured to
intimate his anxiety for initiation, the secret was entrusted to him,
"that all was right there; that his grace only watched his opportunity;
that he was heartily sick of the present men; indeed, would have gone
over with Lord Stanley in 1835, had he not had a fit of the gout, which
prevented him from coming up from the north; and though to be sure his
son and brother did vote against the speaker, still that was a mistake;
if a letter had been sent, which was not written, they would have voted
the other way, and perhaps Sir Robert might have been in at the present
moment."

The Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine was the great staple of Lady Firebrace's
correspondence with Mr Tadpole. "Woman's mission" took the shape to her
intelligence of getting over his grace to the conservatives. She was
much assisted in these endeavours by the information which she so
dexterously acquired from the innocent and incautious Lord Masque.

Egremont was seated at dinner to-day by the side of Lady Joan.
Unconsciously to himself this had been arranged by Lady Marney. The
action of woman on our destiny is unceasing. Egremont was scarcely in a
happy mood for conversation. He was pensive, inclined to be absent; his
thoughts indeed were of other things and persons than those around him.
Lady Joan however only required a listener. She did not make enquiries
like Lady Maud, or impart her own impressions by suggesting them as your
own. Lady Joan gave Egremont an account of the Aztec cities, of which
she had been reading that morning, and of the several historical
theories which their discovery had suggested; then she imparted her own,
which differed from all, but which seemed clearly the right one. Mexico
led to Egypt. Lady Joan was as familiar with the Pharaohs as with the
Caciques of the new world. The phonetic system was despatched by the
way. Then came Champollion; then Paris; then all its celebrities,
literary and especially scientific; then came the letter from Arago
received that morning; and the letter from Dr Buckland expected
to-morrow. She was delighted that one had written; wondered why the
other had not. Finally before the ladies had retired, she had invited
Egremont to join Lady Marney in a visit to her observatory, where they
were to behold a comet which she had been the first to detect.

Lady Firebrace next to the duke indulged in mysterious fiddle-fadde as
to the state of parties. She too had her correspondents, and her letters
received or awaited. Tadpole said this; Lord Masque, on the contrary,
said that: the truth lay perhaps between them; some result developed by
the clear intelligence of Lady Firebrace acting on the data with
which they supplied her. The duke listened with calm excitement to
the transcendental revelations of his Egeria. Nothing appeared to be
concealed from her; the inmost mind of the sovereign: there was not
a royal prejudice that was not mapped in her secret inventory; the
cabinets of the whigs and the clubs of the tories, she had the "open
sesame" to all of them. Sir Somebody did not want office, though he
pretended to; and Lord Nobody did want office, though he pretended he
did not. One great man thought the pear was not ripe; another that it
was quite rotten; but then the first was coming on the stage, and the
other was going off. In estimating the accuracy of a political opinion,
one should take into consideration the standing of the opinionist.

At the right moment, and when she was sure she was not overheard, Lady
Firebrace played her trump card, the pack having been previously cut by
Mr Tadpole.

"And who do you think Sir Robert would send to Ireland?" and she looked
up in the face of the Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine.

"I suppose the person he sent before," said his grace.

Lady Firebrace shook her head.

"Lord Haddington will not go to Ireland again," replied her ladyship,
mysteriously; "mark me. And Lord De Grey does not like to go; and if he
did, there are objections. And the Duke of Northumberland, he will not
go. And who else is there? We must have a nobleman of the highest rank
for Ireland; one who has not mixed himself up with Irish questions; who
has always been in old days for emancipation; a conservative, not an
orangeman. You understand. That is the person Sir Robert will send, and
whom Sir Robert wants."

"He will have some difficulty in finding such a person," said the duke.
"If, indeed, the blundering affair of 1834 had not occurred, and things
had taken their legitimate course, and we had seen a man like Lord
Stanley for instance at the head of affairs, or leading a great party,
why then indeed your friends the conservatives,--for every sensible
man must be a conservative, in the right sense of the word,--would have
stood in a very different position; but now--," and his grace shook his
head.

"Sir Robert will never consent to form a government again without Lord
Stanley," said Lady Firebrace.

"Perhaps not," said the duke.

"Do you know whose name I have heard mentioned in a certain quarter
as the person Sir Robert would wish to see in Ireland?" continued Lady
Firebrace.

His grace leant his ear.

"The Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine," said Lady Firebrace.

"Quite impossible," said the duke. "I am no party man; if I be anything,
I am a supporter of the government. True it is I do not like the way
they are going on, and I disapprove of all their measures; but we must
stand by our friends, Lady Firebrace. To be sure, if the country were in
danger, and the Queen personally appealed to one, and the conservative
party were really a conservative party, and not an old crazy faction
vamped up and whitewashed into decency--one might pause and consider.
But I am free to confess I must see things in a very different condition
to what they are at present before I could be called upon to take that
step. I must see men like Lord Stanley--"

"I know what you are going to say, my dear Duke of Fitz-Aquitaine. I
tell you again Lord Stanley is with us, heart and soul; and before long
I feel persuaded I shall see your grace in the Castle of Dublin."

"I am too old; at least, I am afraid so," said the Duke of
Fitz-Aquitaine, with a relenting smile.




Book 2 Chapter 16



About three miles before it reaches the town, the river Mowe undulates
through a plain. The scene, though not very picturesque, has a glad and
sparkling character. A stone bridge unites the opposite banks by three
arches of good proportion; the land about consists of meads of a vivid
colour, or vegetable gardens to supply the neighbouring population,
