years, with round Kaffir eyes, black and cruel, coarse black hair that
grew low upon his brow, full red lips, the lower drooping so that the
large white teeth and a line of gums could be seen within. Great-limbed
he was also, firm-footed and bull-strengthed, showing his face the
cruelty and the cunning of a black race, mingled with the mind and
mastery of the white; an evil and a terrible man, knowing no lord
save his own passions, and no religion but black witchcraft and vile
superstition; a foe to be feared indeed, but one who loved better to
stab in the dark than to strike in the open day.

"Well, myn Heer van Vooren," mocked Ralph, "you could fling your arms
about a helpless girl and put her to shame before the eyes of men, now
do the same by me if you can," and he took one step towards him.

"What is this monkey's chatter?" asked Piet, in his slow voice. "Is it
because I gave the girl a kiss that you would fix a quarrel upon me?
Have you not done as much yourself many times, and for a less stake than
the life of one who has been doomed to die?"

"If I have kissed her," answered Ralph, "it is with her consent, and
because she will be my wife; but you worked upon her pity to put her to
shame and now you shall pay the price of it. Do you see that whip?" and
he nodded toward the sjambock that was lying on the grass. "Let him who
proves the best man use it upon the other."

"Will be your wife----" sneered Piet, "the wife of the English castaway!
She might have been, but now she never shall, unless she cares to wed
a carcase cut into rimpis. You want a flogging, and you shall have it,
yes, to the death, but Suzanne shall be--not your wife but----"

He got no further, for at that moment Ralph sprang at him like a wild
cat, stopping his foul mouth with a fearful blow upon the lips. Then
there followed a dreadful struggle between these two. Black Piet rushed
again and again, striving to clasp his antagonist in his great arms and
crush him, whereas Ralph, who, like all Englishmen, loved to use his
fists, and knew that he was no match for Piet in strength, sought
to avoid him and plant blow after blow upon his face and body. This,
indeed, he did with such success that soon the Boer was covered with
blood and bruises. Again and again he charged at him, roaring with pain
and rage, and again and again Ralph first struck and then slipped to one
side.

At length Piet's turn came, for Ralph in leaping back caught his foot
against a stone and stumbled, and before he could recover himself
the iron arms were round his middle, and they were wrestling for the
mastery.

Still, at the first it was Ralph who had the best of it, for he was
skilful at the game, and before Swart Piet could put out his full
strength he tripped him so that he fell heavily upon his back, Ralph
still locked in his arms. But he could not keep him there, for the Boer
was the stronger; moreover, as they fought they had worked their way up
the steep side of the kloof so that the ground was against him. Thus it
came about that soon they began to roll down hill fixed to each other as
though by ropes, and gathering speed at every turn. Doubtless, the end
of this would have been Ralph's defeat, and perhaps his death, for I
think that, furious as he was, Black Piet would certainly have killed
him had he found himself the master. But it chanced that his hand was
stayed, and thus. Near the bottom of the slope lay a sharp stone, and
as they rolled in their fierce struggle, Piet's head struck against this
stone so that for a few moments he was rendered helpless. Feeling
the grip of his arms loosen, Ralph freed himself, and running to the
sjambock snatched it from the ground. Now Piet sat up and stared at
him stupidly, but he made no effort to renew the fight, whereon Ralph
gasped:

"I promised you a flogging, but since it is chance that has conquered
you more than I, I will take no advantage of it, save this----" and he
struck him once or twice across the face with the whip, but not so as to
draw blood, and added, "Now, at least, I am free from a certain promise
that I made--that I would not kill you--and should you attempt further
harm or insult towards Suzanne Botmar, kill you I will, Piet van
Vooren."

At first Swart Piet did not seem to feel the blows, but presently he
awoke, as it were, and touched his cheeks where the sjambock had struck
him as though to assure himself that he was not dreaming some evil
dream. Then he spoke in a hollow, unnatural voice. "You have won for
this time, Ralph Kenzie," he said, "or, rather, Fate fighting for you
has won. But it would have been better for you and your dear also, if
you had never struck those blows, for I tell you, Ralph Kenzie, that as
your whip touched me something broke in my brain, and now I think that I
am mad."

"Mad or bad, it is all one to me," replied Ralph. "You have had your
warning, and you had best keep sane enough to remember it." Then turning
he went to his horse, which was standing close by, mounted and rode
away, the other answering him nothing.

Still Ralph did not get home without another adventure, for when he had
gone a little way he came to a stream that ran from a hillside which was
thick with trees, and here he stopped to doctor his hurts and bruises,
since he did not wish to appear at the house covered with blood. Now
this was a foolish enough thing to do, seeing the sort of man with
whom he had to deal, and that there was bush where anyone could hide
to within a hundred and twenty yards of his washing place. So it proved
indeed, for just as Ralph had mounted his horse and was about to ride
on, he felt a sharp stinging pain across his shoulders, as though
someone had hit him on the back with a stick, and heard the sound of
a gunshot fired from the cover of the bush, for there above the green
leaves hung a cloud of smoke.

"That is Swart Piet who has crept round to cut me off," Ralph thought to
himself, and for a moment was minded to ride to the smoke to seek him.
Then he remembered that he had no gun, and that that of his enemy might
be loaded again before he found him, and judged it wisest to canter into
the open plain and so homewards. Of the hurt which he had taken from the
bullet he thought little, yet when he reached the house it was seen that
his escape had been narrow indeed, for the great ball had cut through
his clothes beneath his shoulders, so that they hung down leaving his
back naked. Also it had furrowed the skin, causing the blood to flow
copiously, and making so horrible a sight of him that Suzanne nearly
fainted when she saw it. For my part I made certain that the lad was
shot through the body, although, as it turned out, in a week, except for
some soreness he was as well as ever.

Now this matter caused no little stir among us, and Jan was so angry
that, without saying a word to anyone, he mounted his horse and, taking
some armed servants with him, set out to seek Black Piet, but not to
find him, for the man had gone, nobody knew whither. Indeed this was as
well, or so we thought at the time, for though Jan is slow to move, when
once he is moved he is a very angry man, and I am sure that if he had
met Piet van Vooren that day the grasses would have been richer by the
blood of one or both of them. But he did not meet him and so the thing
passed over, for afterwards we remembered that Ralph had been the
aggressor, since no one would take count of this story of the kissing of
a girl, and also that there was no proof at all that it was Piet who had
attempted his life, as that shot might have been fired by anyone.

Now from this day forward Suzanne went in terror of Swart Piet, and
whenever Ralph rode, he rode armed, for though it was said that he had
gone on one of his long journeys trading among the Kaffirs, both of them
guessed that they had not seen the last of Van Vooren. Jan and I were
afraid also, for we knew the terrible nature of the man and of his
father before him, and that they came of a family which never forgot a
quarrel or left a desire ungratified.

About fourteen days after Ralph had been shot at and wounded, a Kaffir
brought a letter for Jan, which, on being opened, proved to have been
written by Swart Piet, or on his behalf, since his name was set at the
bottom of it. It read thus:--


"To the Heer Jan Botmar,

"Well-beloved Heer, this is to tell you that your daughter, Suzanne,
holds my heart, and that I desire to make her my wife. As it is not
convenient for me to come to see you at present, I write to ask you that
you will consent to our betrothal. I will make a rich woman of her as I
can easily satisfy you, and you will find it better to have me as a dear
son-in-law and friend than as a stranger and an enemy, for I am a good
friend and a bad enemy. I know there has been some talk of love between
Suzanne and the English foundling at your place; but I can overlook
that, although you may tell the lad that if he is impertinent to me
again as he was the other day, he will not for the second time get off
with a whipping only. Be so good as to give your answer to the bearer,
who will pass it on to those that can find me, for I am travelling about
on business, and do not know where I shall be from day to day. Give also
my love to Suzanne, your daughter, and tell her that I think often of
the time when she shall be my wife.

"I am, well-beloved Heer, your friend,

"Piet van Vooren."


Now, when Ralph had finished reading this letter aloud, for it had been
given to him as the best scholar among us, you might have thought there
were four crazy people in the room, so great was our rage. Jan and Ralph
said little indeed, although they looked white and strange with anger,
and Suzanne not over much, for it was I who talked for all of them.

"What is your answer, girl?" asked her father presently with an angry
laugh.

"Tell the Heer Piet van Vooren," she replied, smiling faintly, "that if
ever his lips should touch my face again it will be only when that face
is cold in death. Oh! Ralph," she cried, turning to him suddenly and
laying her hand upon his breast, "it may be that this man will bring
trouble and separation on us; indeed, my heart warns me of it, but,
whatever chances, remember my words, dead I may be, but faithful I shall
be--yes, to death and through death."

"Son, take pen and write," said Jan before Ralph could answer. So Ralph
wrote down these words as Jan told them to him:


"Piet van Vooren,

"Sooner would I lay my only child out for burial in the grave than lead
her to the house of a coloured man, a consorter with witch-doctors and
black women and a would-be murderer. That is my answer, and I add
this to it. Set no foot within a mile of my house, for here we shoot
straighter than you do, and if we find you on this place, by the help of
God we will put a bullet through your carcase."


At the foot of this writing, which he would not suffer to be altered,
Jan printed his name in big letters; then he went out to seek the
messenger, whom he found talking to Sihamba, and having given him the
paper bade him begone swiftly to wherever it was he came from. The man,
who was a strong red-coloured savage, marked with a white scar across
the left cheek, and naked except for his moocha and the kaross rolled up
upon his shoulders, took the letter, hid it in his bundle, and went.

Jan also turned to go, but I who had followed him and was watching him,
although he did not know it, saw him hesitate and stop.

"Sihamba," he said, "why were you talking to that man?"

"Because it is my business to know of things, Father of Swallow, and I
wished to learn whence he came."

"Did you tell you then?"

"Not altogether, for someone whom he fears has laid a weight upon
his tongue, but I learned that he lives at a kraal far away in the
mountains, and that this kraal is owned by a white man who keeps wives
and cattle at it, although he is not there himself just now. The rest I
hope to hear when Swart Piet sends him back again, for I have given the
man a medicine to cure his child, who is sick, and he will be grateful
to me."

"How do you know that Swart Piet sent the man?" asked Jan.

She laughed and said: "Surely that was easy to guess; it is my business
to twine little threads into a rope."

Again he turned to go and again came back to speak to her.

"Sihamba," he said, "I have seen you talking to that man before. I
remember the scar upon his face."

"The scar upon his face you may remember," she answered, "but you have
not seen us talking together, for until this hour we never met."

"I can swear it," he said angrily. "I remember the straw hat, the shape
of the man's bundle, the line where the shadow fell upon his foot, and
the tic-bird that came and sat near you. I remember it all."

"Surely, Father of Swallow," Sihamba replied, eyeing him oddly, "you
talk of what you have just seen."

"No, no," he said, "I saw it years ago."

"Where?" she asked, staring at him.

He started and uttered some quick words. "I know now," he said. "I saw
it in your eyes the other day."

"Yes," she answered quietly, "I think that, if anywhere, you saw it
in my eyes, since the coming of this messenger is the first of all the
great things that are to happen to the Swallow and to those who live in
her nest. I do not know the things; still, it may happen that another
who has Vision may see them in the glass of my eyes."



CHAPTER XII

WHAT THE COW SHOWED ZINTI

Twelve days passed, and one morning when I went out to feed the
chickens, I saw the red Kaffir with the scar on his face seated beyond
the _stoep_ taking snuff.

"What is it?" I asked.

"A letter," he answered, giving me a paper.

I took it into the house, where the others were gathered for breakfast,
and as before Ralph read it. It was to this effect:


"Well-beloved Heer Botmar,--I have received your honoured letter, and I
think that the unchristian spirit which it shows cannot be pleasing to
our Lord. Still, as I seek peace and not war, I take no offence, nor
shall I come near your place to provoke the shedding of the blood of
men. I love your daughter, but if she rejects me for another, I have
nothing more to say, except that I hope she may be happy in the life she
has chosen. For me, I am leaving this part of the country, and if you,
Heer Botmar, like to buy my farm, I shall be happy to sell it to you at
a fair price; or perhaps the Heer Kenzie will buy it to live on after he
is married; if so, he can write to me by this messenger. Farewell."


Now, when they heard this letter, the others looked more happy; but for
my part I shook my head, seeing guile in it, since the tone of it was
too humble for Swart Piet. There was no answer to it, and the messenger
went away, but not, as I learned, before he had seen Sihamba. It seems
that the medicine which she gave him had cured his child, for which he
was so grateful that he drove her down a cow in payment, a fine beast,
but very wild, for handling was strange to it; moreover, it had been
but just separated from its calf. Still, although she questioned him
closely, the man would tell Sihamba but little of the place where he
lived, and nothing of the road to it.

Here I will stop to show how great was the cunning of this woman, and
yet how simple the means whereby she obtained the most of her knowledge.
She desired to learn about this hiding-place, since she was sure that it
was one of the secret haunts of Swart-Piet, but when she asked him the
messenger grew deaf and blind, and she could find no one else who knew
anything of the matter. Still she was certain that the cow which had
been brought to her would show the way to its home, if there were
anybody to follow it thither and make report of the path.

Now when Sihamba had been robbed and sentenced to death by Swart Piet,
the most of her servants and people who lived with her had been taken
by him as slaves. Still two or three had escaped, either then or
afterwards, and settled about in the neighbourhood of the farm where
they knew that their mistress dwelt. From among these people, who still
did her service, she chose a young man named Zinti, who, although he
was supposed to be stupid, was still very clever about many things,
especially the remembering of any path that he had once trodden, and of
every _kopje_, stream, or pan by which it could traced. This youth she
bade to herd the cow which had been given her, telling him to follow it
whithersoever it should wander, even if it led him a ten days' journey,
and when he saw that it had reached home, to return himself without
being seen, and to give to her an exact report of the road which it had
travelled.

Now all happened as Sihamba expected, for on the first day that the cow
was turned out, watched by the lad, who was provided with food and a
blanket, so soon as it had filled itself it started straight over the
hills, running at times, and at times stopping to graze, till night came
on. Then it lay down for a while and its herd beside it, for he had
tied his wrist to its tail with a rimpi lest it should escape in the
darkness.

At the first breaking of the light the cow rose, filled itself with
grass and started forward on its homeward path, followed by Zinti. For
three days they travelled thus, the herd milking the cow from time to
time when its udder was full. On the evening of the third day, however,
the beast would not lie down, but walked forward all night, lowing now
and again, by which Zinti, who found it difficult to keep it in sight
because of the darkness, guessed that it must be near its home. So it
proved indeed, for when the sun rose Zinti saw a kraal before him
hidden away in a secret valley of the mountains over which they had been
travelling. Still following the cow, though at a distance, he moved
down towards the kraal and hid himself in a patch of bush. Presently the
cattle were let out to graze, and the cow rushed to them lowing loudly,
till a certain calf came to it, which it made much of and suckled, for
it was its own calf.

Now Zinti's errand was done, but still he lay hid in the bush a while,
thinking that he might learn some more, and lying thus he fell asleep,
for he was weary with travel. When he woke the sun was high, and he
heard women talking to each other close by him, as they laboured at
their task of cutting wands, such as are used for the making of huts.
He rose to run away, then thought better of it and sat down again,
remembering that should he be found, it would be easy to tell them that
he was a wanderer who had lost his path. Presently one of the women
asked:

"For whom does Bull-Head build this fine new hut in the secret krantz
yonder?"

Now Zinti opened his ears wide, for he knew that this was the name which
the natives had given to Swart Piet, taking it from his round head and
fierce eye, according to their custom when they note any peculiarity in
a man.

"I do not know," answered a second woman, who was young and very pretty,
"unless he means to bring another wife here; if so, she must be a
chief's daughter, since men do not build such huts for girls of common
blood."

"Perhaps," said the other; "but then I think that he has stolen her from
her father without payment; else he would not wish to hide her away in
the secret krantz. Well, let her come, for we women must work hard here
