She needed a refuge, for Count Lenkenstein was singularly brutal in his
bearing toward her.  He let her know that he had come to Meran to
superintend the hunt for the assassin, Angelo Guidascarpi.  He attempted
to exact her promise in precise speech that she would be on the spot to
testify against Angelo when that foul villain should be caught.  He
objected openly to Laura's children going about with her.  Bitter talk
on every starting subject was exchanged across the duchess's table.
She herself was in disgrace on Laura's account, and had to practise
an overflowing sweetness, with no one to second her efforts.  The two
noblemen spoke in accord on the bubble revolution.  The strong hand--ay,
the strong hand!  The strong hand disposes of vermin.  Laura listened to
them, pallid with silent torture.  "Since the rascals have taken to
assassination, we know that we have them at the dregs," said Count
Lenkenstein.  "A cord round the throats of a few scores of them, and the
country will learn the virtue of docility."

Laura whispered to her sister: "Have you espoused a hangman?"

Such dropping of deadly shells in a quiet society went near to scattering
it violently; but the union was necessitous.  Count Lenkenstein desired
to confront Vittoria with Angelo; Laura would not quit her side, and
Amalia would not expel her friend.  Count Lenkenstein complained roughly
of Laura's conduct; nor did Laura escape her father's reproof.  "Sir, you
are privileged to say what you will to me," she responded, with the
humility which exasperated him.

"Yes, you bend, you bend, that you may be stiff-necked when it suits
you," he snapped her short.

"Surely that is the text of the sermon you preach to our Italy!"

"A little more, as you are running on now, madame, and our Italy will be
froth on the lips.  You see, she is ruined."

"Chi lo fa, lo sa," hummed Laura; "but I would avoid quoting you as that
authority."

"After your last miserable fiasco, my dear!"

"It was another of our school exercises.  We had not been good boys and
girls.  We had learnt our lesson imperfectly.  We have received our
punishment, and we mean to do better next time."

"Behave seasonably, fittingly; be less of a wasp; school your tongue."

"Bianca is a pattern to me, I am aware," said Laura.

"She is a good wife."

"I am a poor widow."

"She is a good daughter."

"I am a wicked rebel."

"And you are scheming at something now," said the little nobleman,
sagacious so far; but he was too eager to read the verification of the
tentative remark in her face, and she perceived that it was a guess
founded on her show of spirit.

"Scheming to contain my temper, which is much tried," she said.  "But I
suppose it supports me.  I can always keep up against hostility."

"You provoke it; you provoke it."

"My instinct, then, divines my medicine."

"Exactly, my dear; your personal instinct.  That instigates you all.  And
none are so easily conciliated as these Austrians.  Conciliate them, and
you have them."  Count Serabiglione diverged into a repetition of his
theory of the policy and mission of superior intelligences, as regarded
his system for dealing with the Austrians.

Nurse Assunta's jealousy was worked upon to separate the children from
Vittoria.  They ran down with her no more to meet the vast bowls of
grapes in the morning and feather their hats with vine leaves.  Deprived
of her darlings, the loneliness of her days made her look to Wilfrid for
commiseration.  Father Bernardus was too continually exhortative, and
fenced too much to "hit the eyeball of her conscience," as he phrased it,
to afford her repose.  Wilfrid could tell himself that he had already
done much for her; for if what he had done were known, his career, social
and military, was ended.  This idea being accompanied by a sense of
security delighted him; he was accustomed to inquire of Angelo's
condition, and praise the British doctor who was attending him
gratuitously.  "I wish I could get him out of the way," he said, and
frowned as in a mental struggle.  Vittoria heard him repeat his "I wish!"
It heightened greatly her conception of the sacrifice he would be making
on her behalf and charity's.  She spoke with a reverential tenderness,
such as it was hard to suppose a woman capable of addressing to other
than the man who moved her soul.  The words she uttered were pure thanks;
it was the tone which sent them winged and shaking seed.  She had spoken
partly to prompt his activity, but her self-respect had been sustained by
his avoidance of the dreaded old themes, and that grateful feeling made
her voice musically rich.

"I dare not go to him, but the doctor tells me the fever has left him,
Wilfrid; his wounds are healing; but he is bandaged from head to foot.
The sword pierced his side twice, and his arms and hands are cut
horribly.  He cannot yet walk.  If he is discovered he is lost.  Count
Lenkenstein has declared that he will stay at the castle till he has him
his prisoner.  The soldiers are all round us.  They know that Angelo is
in the ring.  They have traced him all over from the Valtellina to this
Ultenthal, and only cannot guess where he is in the lion's jaw.  I rise
in the morning, thinking, 'Is this to be the black day?' He is sure to be
caught."

"If I could hit on a plan," said Wilfrid, figuring as though he had a
diorama of impossible schemes revolving before his eyes.

"I could believe in the actual whispering of an angel if you did.  It was
to guard me that Angelo put himself in peril."

"Then," said Wilfrid, "I am his debtor.  I owe him as much as my life is
worth."

"Think, think," she urged; and promised affection, devotion, veneration,
vague things, that were too like his own sentiments to prompt him
pointedly.  Yet he so pledged himself to her by word, and prepared his
own mind to conceive the act of service, that (as he did not reflect)
circumstance might at any moment plunge him into a gulf.  Conduct of this
sort is a challenge sure to be answered.

One morning Vittoria was gladdened by a letter from Rocco Ricci, who had
fled to Turin.  He told her that the king had promised to give her a warm
welcome in his capital, where her name was famous.  She consulted with
Laura, and they resolved to go as soon as Angelo could stand on his feet.
Turin was cold--Italy, but it was Italy; and from Turin the Italian army
was to flow, like the Mincio from the Garda lake.  "And there, too, is a
stage," Vittoria thought, in a suddenly revived thirst for the stage and
a field for work.  She determined to run down to Meran and see Angelo.
Laura walked a little way with her, till Wilfrid, alert for these
occasions, joined them.  On the commencement of the zig-zag below, there
were soldiers, the sight of whom was not confusing.  Military messengers
frequently came up to the castle where Count Lenkenstein, assisted by
Count Serabiglione, examined their depositions, the Italian in the manner
of a winding lawyer, the German of a gruff judge.  Half-way down the zig-
zag Vittoria cast a preconcerted signal back to Laura.  The soldiers had
a pair of prisoners between their ranks; Vittoria recognized the men who
had carried Captain Weisspriess from the ground where the duel was
fought.  A quick divination told her that they held Angelo's life on
their tongues.  They must have found him in the mountain-pass while
hurrying to their homes, and it was they who had led him to Meran.  On
the Passeyr bridge, she turned and said to Wilfrid, "Help me now.  Send
instantly the doctor in a carriage to the place where he is lying."

Wilfrid was intent on her flushed beauty and the half-compressed quiver
of her lip.

She quitted him and hurried to Angelo.  Her joy broke out in a cry of
thankfulness at sight of Angelo; he had risen from his bed; he could
stand, and he smiled.

"That Jacopo is just now the nearest link to me," he said, when she
related her having seen the two men guarded by soldiers; he felt
helpless, and spoke in resignation.  She followed his eye about the room
till it rested on the stilet.  This she handed to him.  "If they think of
having me alive!"  he said softly.  The Italian and his wife who had
given him shelter and nursed him came in, and approved his going, though
they did not complain of what they might chance to have incurred.  He
offered them his purse, and they took it.  Minutes of grievous
expectation went by; Vittoria could endure them no longer; she ran out to
the hotel, near which, in the shade of a poplar, Wilfrid was smoking
quietly.  He informed her that his sister and the doctor had driven out
to meet Captain Gambier; his brother-in-law was alone upstairs.  Her look
of amazement touched him more shrewdly than scorn, and he said, "What on
earth can I do?"

"Order out a carriage.  Send your brother-in-law in it.  If you tell him
'for your health,' he will go."

"On my honour, I don't know where those three words would not send him,"
said Wilfrid; but he did not move, and was for protesting that he really
could not guess what was the matter, and the ground for all this urgency.

Vittoria compelled her angry lips to speak out her suspicions explicitly,
whereupon he glanced at the sun-glare in a meditation, occasionally
blinking his eyes.  She thought, "Oh, heaven!  can he be waiting for me
to coax him?" It was the truth, though it would have been strange to him
to have heard it.  She grew sure that it was the truth; never had she
despised living creature so utterly as when she murmured, "My best
friend!  my brother!  my noble Wilfrid!  my old beloved!  help me now,
without loss of a minute."

It caused his breath to come and go unevenly.

"Repeat that--once, only once," he said.

She looked at him with the sorrowful earnestness which, as its meaning
was shut from him, was so sweet.

"You will repeat it by-and-by?--another time?  Trust me to do my utmost.
Old beloved!  What is the meaning of 'old beloved'?  One word in
explanation.  If it means anything, I would die for you!  Emilia, do you
hear?--die for you!  To me you are nothing old or by-gone, whatever I may
be to you.  To me--yes, I will order the carriage you are the Emilia--
listen! listen!  Ah!  you have shut your ears against me.  I am bound in
all seeming, but I--you drive me mad; you know your power.  Speak one
word, that I may feel--that I may be convinced .  .  , or not a single
word; I will obey you without.  I have said that you command my life."

In a block of carriages on the bridge, Vittoria perceived a lifted hand.
It was Laura's; Beppo was in attendance on her.  Laura drove up and said:
"You guessed right; where is he?"  The communications between them were
more indicated than spoken.  Beppo had heard Jacopo confess to his having
conducted a wounded Italian gentleman into Meran.  "That means that the
houses will be searched within an hour," said Laura; "my brother-in-law
Bear is radiant."  She mimicked the Lenkenstein physiognomy spontaneously
in the run of her speech.  "If Angelo can help himself ever so little, he
has a fair start."  A look was cast on Wilfrid; Vittoria nodded--Wilfrid
was entrapped.

"Englishmen we can trust," said Laura, and requested him to step into her
carriage.  He glanced round the open space.  Beppo did the same, and
beheld the chasseur Jacob Baumwalder Feckelwitz crossing the bridge on
foot, but he said nothing.  Wilfrid was on the step of the carriage, for
what positive object neither he nor the others knew, when his sister and
the doctor joined them.  Captain Gambier was still missing.

"He would have done anything for us," Vittoria said in Wilfrid's hearing.

"Tell us what plan you have," the latter replied fretfully.

She whispered: "Persuade Adela to make her husband drive out.  The doctor
will go too, and Beppo.  They shall take Angelo.  Our carriage will
follow empty, and bring Mr. Sedley back."

Wilfrid cast his eyes up in the air, at the monstrous impudence of the
project.  "A storm is coming on," he suggested, to divert her reading of
his grimace; but she was speaking to the doctor, who readily answered her
aloud: "If you are certain of what you say."  The remark incited Wilfrid
to be no subordinate in devotion; handing Adela from the carriage, while
the doctor ran up to Mr. Sedley, he drew her away.  Laura and Vittoria
watched the motion of their eyes and lips.

"Will he tell her the purpose?"  said Laura.

Vittoria smiled nervously: "He is fibbing."

Marking the energy expended by Wilfrid in this art, the wiser woman said:
"Be on your guard the next two minutes he gets you alone."

"You see his devotion."

"Does he see his compensation?  But he must help us at any hazard."

Adela broke away from her brother twice, and each time he fixed her to
the spot more imperiously.  At last she ran into the hotel; she was
crying.  "A bad economy of tears," said Laura, commenting on the dumb
scene, to soothe her savage impatience.  "In another twenty minutes we
shall have the city gates locked."

They heard a window thrown up; Mr. Sedley's head came out, and peered at
the sky.  Wilfrid said to Vittoria: "I can do nothing beyond what I have
done, I fear."

She thought it was a petition for thanks, but Laura knew better; she
said: "I see Count Lenkenstein on his way to the barracks."

Wilfrid bowed: "I may be able to serve you in that quarter."
