
True; still she should have remembered her promise in the Vicentino.

She did indeed; but how could she quit her wounded friend Merthyr?

Perhaps not: then, why had she sent word to him from Milan that she would
be at Pallanza?

This question knocked at a sealed chamber.  She was silent, and Carlo had
to brood over something as well.  He gave her hints of his foolish pique,
his wrath and bitter baffled desire for her when, coming to Pallanza, he
came to an empty house.  But he could not help her to see, for he did not
himself feel, that he had been spurred by silly passions, pique, and
wrath, to plunge instantly into new political intrigue; and that some of
his worst faults had become mixed up with his devotion to his country.
Had he taken Violetta for an ally in all purity of heart?  The kiss he
had laid on the woman's sweet lips had shaken his absolute belief in
that.  He tried to set his brain travelling backward, in order to
contemplate accurately the point of his original weakness.  It being
almost too severe a task for any young head, Carlo deemed it sufficient
that he should say--and this he felt--that he was unworthy of his
beloved.

Could Vittoria listen to such stuff?  She might have kissed him to stop
the flow of it, but kissings were rare between them; so rare, that when
they had put mouth to mouth, a little quivering spire of flame, dim at
the base, stood to mark the spot in their memories.  She moved her hand,
as to throw aside such talk.  Unfretful in blood, chaste and keen, she at
least knew the foolishness of the common form of lovers' trifling when
there is a burning love to keep under, and Carlo saw that she did, and
adored her for this highest proof of the passion of her love.

"In three days you will be mine, if I do not hear from Milan?  within
five, if I do?"  he said.

Vittoria gave him the whole beauty of her face a divine minute, and bowed
it assenting.  Carlo then led her to his mother, before whom he embraced
her for the comfort of his mother's heart.  They decided that there
should be no whisper of the marriage until the couple were one.  Vittoria
obtained the countess's permission to write for Merthyr to attend her at
the altar.  She had seen Weisspriess fall in combat, and she had perfect
faith in her lover's right hand.




CHAPTER XXXIX

ANNA OF LENKENSTEIN

Captain Weisspriess replied to Carlo Ammiani promptly, naming Camerlata
by Como, as the place where he would meet him.

He stated at the end of some temperate formal lines, that he had given
Count Ammiani the preference over half-a-dozen competitors for the honour
of measuring swords with him; but that his adversary must not expect him
to be always ready to instruct the young gentlemen of the Lombardo-
Venetian province in the arts of fence; and therefore he begged to
observe, that his encounter with Count Ammiani would be the last occasion
upon which he should hold himself bound to accept a challenge from Count
Ammiani's countrymen.

It was quite possible, the captain said, drawing a familiar illustration
from the gaming-table, to break the stoutest Bank in the world by a
perpetual multiplication of your bets, and he was modest enough to
remember that he was but one man against some thousands, to contend with
all of whom would be exhausting.

Consequently the captain desired Count Ammiani to proclaim to his
countrymen that the series of challenges must terminate; and he requested
him to advertize the same in a Milanese, a Turin, and a Neapolitan
journal.

"I am not a butcher," he concluded.  "The task you inflict upon me is
scarcely bearable.  Call it by what name you will, it is having ten shots
to one, which was generally considered an equivalent to murder.  My sword
is due to you, Count Ammiani; and, as I know you to be an honourable
nobleman, I would rather you were fighting in Venice, though your cause
is hopeless, than standing up to match yourself against me.  Let me add,
that I deeply respect the lady who is engaged to be united to you, and
would not willingly cross steel either with her lover or her husband.  I
shall be at Camerlata at the time appointed.  If I do not find you there,
I shall understand that you have done me the honour to take my humble
advice, and have gone where your courage may at least appear to have done
better service.  I shall sheathe my sword and say no more about it."

All of this, save the concluding paragraph, was written under the eyes of
Countess Anna of Lenkenstein.

He carried it to his quarters, where he appended the as he deemed it--
conciliatory passage: after which he handed it to Beppo, in a square of
the barracks, with a buon'mano that Beppo received bowing, and tossed to
an old decorated regimental dog of many wounds and a veteran's gravity.
For this offence a Styrian grenadier seized him by the shoulders, lifting
him off his feet and swinging him easily, while the dog arose from his
contemplation of the coin and swayed an expectant tail.  The Styrian had
dashed Beppo to earth before Weisspriess could interpose, and the dog had
got him by the throat.  In the struggle Beppo tore off the dog's medal
for distinguished conduct on the field of battle.  He restored it as soon
as he was free, and won unanimous plaudits from officers and soldiers for
his kindly thoughtfulness and the pretty manner with which he dropped on
one knee, and assuaged the growls, and attached the medal to the old
dog's neck.  Weisspriess walked away.  Beppo then challenged his Styrian
to fight.  The case was laid before a couple of sergeants, who shook
their heads on hearing his condition to be that of a serving-man, the
Styrian was ready to waive considerations of superiority; but the "judge"
pronounced their veto.  A soldier in the Imperial Royal service, though
he was merely a private in the ranks, could not accept a challenge from
civilians below the rank of notary, secretary, hotel- or inn-keeper, and
suchlike: servants and tradesmen he must seek to punish in some other
way; and they also had their appeal to his commanding officer.  So went
the decision of the military tribunal: until the Styrian, having
contrived to make Beppo understand, by the agency of a single Italian
verb, that he wanted a blow, Beppo spun about and delivered a stinging
smack on the Styrian's cheek; which altered the view of the case, for,
under peculiar circumstances--supposing that he did not choose to cut him
down--a soldier might condescend to challenge his civilian inferiors:
"in our regiment," said the sergeants, meaning that they had relaxed the
stringency of their laws.

Beppo met his Styrian outside the city walls, and laid him flat.  He
declined to fight a second; but it was represented to him, by the aid of
an interpreter, that the officers of the garrison were subjected to
successive challenges, and that the first trial of his skill might have
been nothing finer than luck; and besides, his adversary had a right to
call a champion.  "We all do it," the soldiers assured him.  "Now your
blood's up you're ready for a dozen of us;" which was less true of a
constitution that was quicker in expending its heat.  He stood out
against a young fellow almost as limber as himself, much taller, and
longer in the reach, by whom he was quickly disabled with cuts on thigh
and head.  Seeing this easy victory over him, the soldiers, previously
quite civil, cursed him for having got the better of their fallen
comrade, and went off discussing how be had done the trick, leaving him
to lie there.  A peasant carried him to a small suburban inn, where he
remained several days oppressed horribly by a sense that he had forgotten
something.  When he recollected what it was, he entrusted the captain's
letter to his landlady;--a good woman, but she chanced to have a scamp
of a husband, who snatched it from her and took it to his market.  Beppo
supposed the letter to be on its Way to Pallauza, when it was in General
Schoneck's official desk; and soon after the breath of a scandalous
rumour began to circulate.

Captain Weisspriess had gone down to Camerlata, accompanied by a Colonel
Volpo, of an Austro-Italian regiment, and by Lieutenant Jenna.  At
Camerlata a spectacled officer, Major Nagen, joined them.  Weisspriess
was the less pleased with his company on hearing that he had come to
witness the meeting, in obedience to an express command of a person who
was interested in it.  Jenna was the captain's friend: Volpo was
seconding him for the purpose of getting Count Ammiani to listen to
reason from the mouth of a countryman.  There could be no doubt in the
captain's mind that this Major Nagen was Countess Anna's spy as well as
his rival, and he tried to be rid of him; but in addition to the
shortness of sight which was Nagen's plea for pushing his thin
transparent nose into every corner, he enjoyed at will an intermittent
deafness, and could hear anything without knowing of it.  Brother
officers said of Major Nagen that he was occasionally equally senseless
in the nose, which had been tweaked without disturbing the repose of his
features.  He waited half-an-hour on the ground after the appointed time,
and then hurried to Milan.  Weisspriess waited an hour.  Satisfied that
Count Ammiani was not coming, he exacted from Volpo and from Jenna their
word of honour as Austrian officers that they would forbear-to cast any
slur on the courage of his adversary, and would be so discreet on the
subject as to imply that the duel was a drawn affair.  They pledged
themselves accordingly.  "There's Nagen, it's true," said Weisspriess, as
a man will say and feel that he has done his best to prevent a thing
inevitable.

Milan, and some of the journals of Milan, soon had Carlo Ammiani's name
up for challenging Weisspriess and failing to keep his appointment.  It
grew to be discussed as a tremendous event.  The captain received fifteen
challenges within two days; among these a second one from Luciano Romara,
whom he was beginning to have a strong desire to encounter.  He repressed
it, as quondam drunkards fight off the whisper of their lips for liquor.
"No more blood," was his constant inward cry.  He wanted peace; but as he
also wanted Countess Anna of Lenkenstein and her estates, it may possibly
be remarked of him that what he wanted he did not want to pay for.

At this period Wilfrid had resumed the Austrian uniform as a common
soldier in the ranks of the Kinsky regiment.  General Schoneck had
obtained the privilege for him from the Marshal, General Pierson refusing
to lift a finger on his behalf.  Nevertheless the uncle was not sorry to
hear the tale of his nephew's exploits during the campaign, or of the
eccentric intrepidity of the white umbrella; and both to please him, and
to intercede for Wilfrid, the tatter's old comrades recited his deeds as
a part of the treasured familiar history of the army in its late arduous
struggle.

General Pierson was chiefly anxious to know whether Countess Lena would
be willing to give her hand to Wilfrid in the event of his restoration to
his antecedent position in the army.  He found her extremely excited
about Carlo Ammiani, her old playmate, and once her dear friend.  She
would not speak of Wilfrid at all.  To appease the chivalrous little
woman, General Pierson hinted that his nephew, being under the protection
of General Schoneck, might get some intelligence from that officer.  Lena
pretended to reject the notion of her coming into communication with
Wilfrid for any earthly purpose.  She said to herself, however, that her
object was pre-eminently unselfish; and as the General pointedly refused
to serve her in a matter that concerned an Italian nobleman, she sent
directions to Wilfrid to go before General Schoeneck the moment he was
off duty, and ask his assistance, in her name, to elucidate the mystery
of Count Ammiani's behaviour.  The answer was a transmission of Captain
Weisspriess's letter to Carlo.  Lena caused the fact of this letter
having missed its way to be circulated in the journals, and then she
carried it triumphantly to her sister, saying:

"There!  I knew these reports were abase calumny."

"Reports, to what effect?"  said Anna.

"That Carlo Ammiani had slunk from a combat with your duellist."

"Oh! I knew that myself," Anna remarked.

"You were the loudest in proclaiming it."

"Because I intend to ruin him."

"Carlo Ammiani?  What has he done to you?"

Anna's eyes had fallen on the additional lines of the letter which she
had not dictated.  She frowned and exclaimed:

"What is this?  Does the man play me false?  Read those lines, Lena, and
tell me, does the man mean to fight in earnest who can dare to write
them?  He advises Ammiani to go to Venice.  It's treason, if it is not
cowardice.  And see here--he has the audacity to say that he deeply
respects the lady Ammiani is going to marry.  Is Ammiani going to marry
her?  I think not."

Anna dashed the letter to the floor.

"But I will make use of what's within my reach," she said, picking it up.

"Carlo Ammiani will marry her, I presume," said Lena.

"Not before he has met Captain Weisspriess, who, by the way, has obtained
his majority.  And, Lena, my dear, write to inform him that we wish to
offer him our congratulations.  He will be a General officer in good
time."

"Perhaps you forget that Count Ammiani is a perfect swordsman, Anna."

"Weisspriess remembers it for me, perhaps;--is that your idea, Lena?"

"He might do so profitably.  You have thrown him on two swords."

"Merely to provoke the third.  He is invincible.  If he were not, where
would his use be?"

"Oh, how I loathe revenge!"  cried Lena.

"You cannot love!"  her sister retorted.  "That woman calling herself
Vittoria Campa shall suffer.  She has injured and defied me.  How was it
that she behaved to us at Meran?  She is mixed up with assassins; she is
insolent--a dark-minded slut; and she catches stupid men.  My brother, my
country, and this weak Weisspriess, as I saw him lying in the Ultenthal,
cry out against her.  I have no sleep.  I am not revengeful.  Say it, say
it, all of you! but I am not.  I am not unforgiving.  I worship justice,
and a black deed haunts me.  Let the wicked be contrite and washed in
tears, and I think I can pardon them.  But I will have them on their
knees.  I hate that woman Vittoria more than I hate Angelo Guidascarpi.
Look, Lena.  If both were begging for life to me, I would send him to the
gallows and her to her bedchamber; and all because I worship justice, and
believe it to be the weapon of the good and pious.  You have a baby's
heart; so has Karl.  He declines to second Weisspriess; he will have
nothing to do with duelling; he would behold his sisters mocked in the
streets and pass on.  He talks of Paul's death like a priest.  Priests
are worthy men; a great resource!  Give me a priests lap when I need it.
Shall I be condemned to go to the priest and leave that woman singing?
If I did, I might well say the world's a snare, a sham, a pitfall, a
horror!  It's what I don't think in any degree.  It's what you think,
though.  Yes, whenever you are vexed you think it.  So do the priests,
and so do all who will not exert themselves to chastise.  I, on the
contrary, know that the world is not made up of nonsense.  Write to
Weisspriess immediately; I must have him here in an hour."

Weisspriess, on visiting the ladies to receive their congratulations,
was unprepared for the sight of his letter to Carlo Ammiani, which Anna
thrust before him after he had saluted her, bidding him read it aloud.
He perused it in silence.  He was beginning to be afraid of his mistress.

"I called you Austria once, for you were always ready," Anna said, and
withdrew from him, that the sung of her words might take effect.

"God knows, I have endeavoured to earn the title in my humble way,"
Weisspriess appealed to Lena.

"Yes, Major Weisspriess, you have," she said.  "Be Austria still, and
forbear toward these people as much as you can.  To beat them is enough,
in my mind.  I am rejoiced that you have not met Count Ammiani, for if
you had, two friends of mine, equally dear and equally skilful, would
have held their lives at one another's mercy."

"Equally!"  said Weisspriess, and pulled out the length of his moustache.

"Equally courageous," Lena corrected herself.  "I never distrusted Count
Ammiani's courage, nor could distrust yours."

"Equally dear!"  Weisspriess tried to direct a concentrated gaze on her.

Lena evaded an answer by speaking of the rumour of Count Ammiani's
marriage.

Weisspriess was thinking with all the sagacious penetration of the
military mind, that perhaps this sister was trying to tell him that she
would be willing to usurp the piece of the other in his affections; and
if so, why should she not?

"I may cherish the idea that I am dear to you, Countess Lena?"

"When you are formally betrothed to my sister, you will know you are very
dear to me, Major Weisspriess."

"But," said he, perceiving his error, "how many persons am I to call out
before she will consent to a formal betrothal?"

Lena was half smiling at the little tentative bit of sentiment she had so
easily turned aside.  Her advice to him was to refuse to fight, seeing
that he had done sufficient for glory and his good name.

He mentioned Major Nagen as a rival.

Upon this she said: "Hear me one minute.  I was in my sister's bed-room
on the first night when she knew of your lying wounded in the Ultenthal.
She told you just now that she called you Austria.  She adores our
Austria in you.  The thought that you had been vanquished seemed like our
Austria vanquished, and she is so strong for Austria that it is really
out of her power to fancy you as defeated without suspecting foul play.
So when she makes you fight, she thinks you safe.  Many are to go down
because you have gone down.  Do you not see?  And now, Major Weisspriess,
I need not expose my sister to you any more, I hope, or depreciate Major
Nagen for your satisfaction."

Weisspriess had no other interview with Anna for several days.  She
shunned him openly.  Her carriage moved off when he advanced to meet her
at the parade, or review of arms; and she did not scruple to speak in
public with Major Nagen, in the manner of those who have begun to speak
together in private.  The offender received his punishment gracefully,
as men will who have been taught that it flatters them.  He refused every
challenge.  From Carlo Ammiani there came not a word.

It would have been a deadly lull to any fiery temperament engaged in
plotting to destroy a victim, but Anna had the patience of hatred--that
absolute malignity which can measure its exultation rather by the
gathering of its power to harm than by striking.  She could lay it aside,
or sink it to the bottom of her emotions, at will, when circumstances
appeared against it.  And she could do this without fretful regrets,
