The ardour of the poet appeared to communicate itself to the audience.
Their wild and sun-burnt countenances assumed a fiercer and more
animated expression; all bent forward towards the reciter, many sprung
up and waved their arms in ecstasy, and some laid their hands on their
swords. When the song ceased, there was a deep pause, while the aroused
feelings of the poet and of the hearers gradually subsided into their
usual channel.

The Chieftain, who, during this scene had appeared rather to watch the
emotions which were excited than to partake their high tone of
enthusiasm, filled with claret a small silver cup which stood by him.
'Give this,' he said to an attendant, 'to Mac-Murrough nan Fonn (i.e.
of the songs), and when he has drank the juice, bid him keep, for the
sake of Vich Ian Vohr, the shell of the gourd which contained it.' The
gift was received by Mac-Murrough with profound gratitude; he drank the
wine, and, kissing the cup, shrouded it with reverence in the plaid
which was folded on his bosom. He then burst forth into what Edward
justly supposed to be an extemporaneous effusion of thanks and praises
of his Chief. It was received with applause, but did not produce the
effect of his first poem. It was obvious, however, that the clan
regarded the generosity of their Chieftain with high approbation. Many
approved Gaelic toasts were then proposed, of some of which the
Chieftain gave his guest the following versions:--

'To him that will not turn his back on friend or foe.' 'To him that
never forsook a comrade.' 'To him that never bought or sold justice.'
'Hospitality to the exile, and broken bones to the tyrant.' 'The lads
with the kilts.' 'Highlanders, shoulder to shoulder,'--with many other
pithy sentiments of the like nature.

Edward was particularly solicitous to know the meaning of that song
which appeared to produce such effect upon the passions of the company,
and hinted his curiosity to his host. 'As I observe,' said the
Chieftain, 'that you have passed the bottle during the last three
rounds, I was about to propose to you to retire to my sister's
tea-table, who can explain these things to you better than I can.
Although I cannot stint my clan in the usual current of their
festivity, yet I neither am addicted myself to exceed in its amount,
nor do I,' added he, smiling, 'keep a Bear to devour the intellects of
such as can make good use of them.'

Edward readily assented to this proposal, and the Chieftain, saying a
few words to those around him, left the table, followed by Waverley. As
the door closed behind them, Edward heard Vich Ian Vohr's health
invoked with a wild and animated cheer, that expressed the satisfaction
of the guests and the depth of their devotion to his service.





CHAPTER XXI

THE CHIEFTAIN'S SISTER


The drawing-room of Flora Mac-Ivor was furnished in the plainest and
most simple manner; for at Glennaquoich every other sort of expenditure
was retrenched as much as possible, for the purpose of maintaining, in
its full dignity, the hospitality of the Chieftain, and retaining and
multiplying the number of his dependants and adherents. But there was
no appearance of this parsimony in the dress of the lady herself, which
was in texture elegant, and even rich, and arranged in a manner which
partook partly of the Parisian fashion and partly of the more simple
dress of the Highlands, blended together with great taste. Her hair was
not disfigured by the art of the friseur, but fell in jetty ringlets on
her neck, confined only by a circlet, richly set with diamonds. This
peculiarity she adopted in compliance with the Highland prejudices,
which could not endure that a woman's head should be covered before
wedlock.

Flora Mac-Ivor bore a most striking resemblance to her brother Fergus;
so much so that they might have played Viola and Sebastian with the
same exquisite effect produced by the appearance of Mrs. Henry Siddons
and her brother, Mr. William Murray, in these characters. They had the
same antique and regular correctness of profile; the same dark eyes,
eye-lashes, and eye-brows; the same clearness of complexion, excepting
that Fergus's was embrowned by exercise and Flora's possessed the
utmost feminine delicacy. But the haughty and somewhat stern regularity
of Fergus's features was beautifully softened in those of Flora. Their
voices were also similar in tone, though differing in the key. That of
Fergus, especially while issuing orders to his followers during their
military exercise, reminded Edward of a favourite passage in the
description of Emetrius:

    --whose voice was heard around,
    Loud as a trumpet with a silver sound.

That of Flora, on the contrary, was soft and sweet--'an excellent thing
in woman'; yet, in urging any favourite topic, which she often pursued
with natural eloquence, it possessed as well the tones which impress
awe and conviction as those of persuasive insinuation. The eager glance
of the keen black eye, which, in the Chieftain, seemed impatient even
of the material obstacles it encountered, had in his sister acquired a
gentle pensiveness. His looks seemed to seek glory, power, all that
could exalt him above others in the race of humanity; while those of
his sister, as if she were already conscious of mental superiority,
seemed to pity, rather than envy, those who were struggling for any
farther distinction. Her sentiments corresponded with the expression of
her countenance. Early education had impressed upon her mind, as well
as on that of the Chieftain, the most devoted attachment to the exiled
family of Stuart. She believed it the duty of her brother, of his clan,
of every man in Britain, at whatever personal hazard, to contribute to
that restoration which the partisans of the Chevalier St. George had
not ceased to hope for. For this she was prepared to do all, to suffer
all, to sacrifice all. But her loyalty, as it exceeded her brother's in
fanaticism, excelled it also in purity. Accustomed to petty intrigue,
and necessarily involved in a thousand paltry and selfish discussions,
ambitious also by nature, his political faith was tinctured, at least,
if not tainted, by the views of interest and advancement so easily
combined with it; and at the moment he should unsheathe his claymore,
it might be difficult to say whether it would be most with the view of
making James Stuart a king or Fergus Mac-Ivor an earl. This, indeed,
was a mixture of feeling which he did not avow even to himself, but it
existed, nevertheless, in a powerful degree.

In Flora's bosom, on the contrary, the zeal of loyalty burnt pure and
unmixed with any selfish feeling; she would have as soon made religion
the mask of ambitious and interested views as have shrouded them under
the opinions which she had been taught to think patriotism. Such
instances of devotion were not uncommon among the followers of the
unhappy race of Stuart, of which many memorable proofs will recur to
the minds of most of my readers. But peculiar attention on the part of
the Chevalier de St. George and his princess to the parents of Fergus
and his sister, and to themselves when orphans, had riveted their
faith. Fergus, upon the death of his parents, had been for some time a
page of honour in the train of the Chevalier's lady, and, from his
beauty and sprightly temper, was uniformly treated by her with the
utmost distinction. This was also extended to Flora, who was maintained
for some time at a convent of the first order at the princess's
expense, and removed from thence into her own family, where she spent
nearly two years. Both brother and sister retained the deepest and most
grateful sense of her kindness.

Having thus touched upon the leading principle of Flora's character, I
may dismiss the rest more slightly. She was highly accomplished, and
had acquired those elegant manners to be expected from one who, in
early youth, had been the companion of a princess; yet she had not
learned to substitute the gloss of politeness for the reality of
feeling. When settled in the lonely regions of Glennaquoich, she found
that her resources in French, English, and Italian literature were
likely to be few and interrupted; and, in order to fill up the vacant
time, she bestowed a part of it upon the music and poetical traditions
of the Highlanders, and began really to feel the pleasure in the
pursuit which her brother, whose perceptions of literary merit were
more blunt, rather affected for the sake of popularity than actually
experienced. Her resolution was strengthened in these researches by the
extreme delight which her inquiries seemed to afford those to whom she
resorted for information.

Her love of her clan, an attachment which was almost hereditary in her
bosom, was, like her loyalty, a more pure passion than that of her
brother. He was too thorough a politician, regarded his patriarchal
influence too much as the means of accomplishing his own
aggrandisement, that we should term him the model of a Highland
Chieftain. Flora felt the same anxiety for cherishing and extending
their patriarchal sway, but it was with the generous desire of
vindicating from poverty, or at least from want and foreign oppression,
those whom her brother was by birth, according to the notions of the
time and country, entitled to govern. The savings of her income, for
she had a small pension from the Princess Sobieski, were dedicated, not
to add to the comforts of the peasantry, for that was a word which they
neither knew nor apparently wished to know, but to relieve their
absolute necessities when in sickness or extreme old age. At every
other period they rather toiled to procure something which they might
share with the Chief, as a proof of their attachment, than expected
other assistance from him save what was afforded by the rude
hospitality of his castle, and the general division and subdivision of
his estate among them. Flora was so much beloved by them that, when
Mac-Murrough composed a song in which he enumerated all the principal
beauties of the district, and intimated her superiority by concluding,
that 'the fairest apple hung on the highest bough,' he received, in
donatives from the individuals of the clan, more seed-barley than would
have sowed his Highland Parnassus, the bard's croft, as it was called,
ten times over.

From situation as well as choice, Miss Mac-Ivor's society was extremely
limited. Her most intimate friend had been Rose Bradwardine, to whom
she was much attached; and when seen together, they would have afforded
an artist two admirable subjects for the gay and the melancholy muse.
Indeed Rose was so tenderly watched by her father, and her circle of
wishes was so limited, that none arose but what he was willing to
gratify, and scarce any which did not come within the compass of his
power. With Flora it was otherwise. While almost a girl she had
undergone the most complete change of scene, from gaiety and splendour
to absolute solitude and comparative poverty; and the ideas and wishes
which she chiefly fostered respected great national events, and changes
not to be brought round without both hazard and bloodshed, and
therefore not to be thought of with levity. Her manner, consequently,
was grave, though she readily contributed her talents to the amusement
of society, and stood very high in the opinion of the old Baron, who
used to sing along with her such French duets of Lindor and Cloris,
etc., as were in fashion about the end of the reign of old Louis le
Grand.

It was generally believed, though no one durst have hinted it to the
Baron of Bradwardine, that Flora's entreaties had no small share in
allaying the wrath of Fergus upon occasion of their quarrel. She took
her brother on the assailable side, by dwelling first upon the Baron's
age, and then representing the injury which the cause might sustain,
and the damage which must arise to his own character in point of
prudence--so necessary to a political agent, if he persisted in
carrying it to extremity. Otherwise it is probable it would have
terminated in a duel, both because the Baron had, on a former occasion,
shed blood of the clan, though the matter had been timely accommodated,
and on account of his high reputation for address at his weapon, which
Fergus almost condescended to envy. For the same reason she had urged
their reconciliation, which the Chieftain the more readily agreed to as
it favoured some ulterior projects of his own.

To this young lady, now presiding at the female empire of the
tea-table, Fergus introduced Captain Waverley, whom she received with
the usual forms of politeness.





CHAPTER XXII

HIGHLAND MINSTRELSY


When the first salutations had passed, Fergus said to his sister, 'My
dear Flora, before I return to the barbarous ritual of our forefathers,
I must tell you that Captain Waverley is a worshipper of the Celtic
muse, not the less so perhaps that he does not understand a word of her
language. I have told him you are eminent as a translator of Highland
poetry, and that Mac-Murrough admires your version of his songs upon
the same principle that Captain Waverley admires the original,--because
he does not comprehend them. Will you have the goodness to read or
recite to our guest in English the extraordinary string of names which
Mac-Murrough has tacked together in Gaelic? My life to a moor-fowl's
feather, you are provided with a version; for I know you are in all the
bard's councils, and acquainted with his songs long before he rehearses
them in the hall.'

'How can you say so, Fergus? You know how little these verses can
possibly interest an English stranger, even if I could translate them
as you pretend.'

'Not less than they interest me, lady fair. To-day your joint
composition, for I insist you had a share in it, has cost me the last
silver cup in the castle, and I suppose will cost me something else
next time I hold cour pleniere, if the muse descends on Mac-Murrough;
for you know our proverb,--"When the hand of the chief ceases to
bestow, the breath of the bard is frozen in the utterance."--Well, I
would it were even so: there are three things that are useless to a
modern Highlander,--a sword which he must not draw, a bard to sing of
deeds which he dare not imitate, and a large goat-skin purse without a
louis-d'or to put into it.'

'Well, brother, since you betray my secrets, you cannot expect me to
keep yours. I assure you, Captain Waverley, that Fergus is too proud to
exchange his broardsword for a marechal's baton, that he esteems
Mac-Murrough a far greater poet than Homer, and would not give up his
goat-skin purse for all the louis-d'or which it could contain.'

'Well pronounced, Flora; blow for blow, as Conan [Footnote: See Note
23.] said to the devil. Now do you two talk of bards and poetry, if not
of purses and claymores, while I return to do the final honours to the
senators of the tribe of Ivor.' So saying, he left the room.

The conversation continued between Flora and Waverley; for two
well-dressed young women, whose character seemed to hover between that
of companions and dependants, took no share in it. They were both
pretty girls, but served only as foils to the grace and beauty of their
patroness. The discourse followed the turn which the Chieftain had
given it, and Waverley was equally amused and surprised with the
account which the lady gave him of Celtic poetry.

'The recitation,' she said, 'of poems recording the feats of heroes,
the complaints of lovers, and the wars of contending tribes, forms the
chief amusement of a winter fire-side in the Highlands. Some of these
are said to be very ancient, and if they are ever translated into any
of the languages of civilised Europe, cannot fail to produce a deep and
general sensation. Others are more modern, the composition of those
family bards whom the chieftains of more distinguished name and power
retain as the poets and historians of their tribes. These, of course,
possess various degrees of merit; but much of it must evaporate in
translation, or be lost on those who do not sympathise with the
feelings of the poet.'

'And your bard, whose effusions seemed to produce such effect upon the
company to-day, is he reckoned among the favourite poets of the
mountains?'

'That is a trying question. His reputation is high among his
countrymen, and you must not expect me to depreciate it. [Footnote: The
Highland poet almost always was an improvisatore. Captain Burt met one
of them at Lovat's table.]

'But the song, Miss Mac-Ivor, seemed to awaken all those warriors, both
young and old.'

'The song is little more than a catalogue of names of the Highland
clans under their distinctive peculiarities, and an exhortation to them
to remember and to emulate the actions of their forefathers.'

'And am I wrong in conjecturing, however extraordinary the guess
appears, that there was some allusion to me in the verses which he
recited?'

'You have a quick observation, Captain Waverley, which in this instance
has not deceived you. The Gaelic language, being uncommonly vocalic, is
well adapted for sudden and extemporaneous poetry; and a bard seldom
fails to augment the effects of a premeditated song by throwing in any
stanzas which may be suggested by the circumstances attending the
recitation.'

'I would give my best horse to know what the Highland bard could find
to say of such an unworthy Southron as myself.'

'It shall not even cost you a lock of his mane. Una, mavourneen! (She
spoke a few words to one of the young girls in attendance, who
instantly curtsied and tripped out of the room.) I have sent Una to
learn from the bard the expressions he used, and you shall command my
skill as dragoman.'

Una returned in a few minutes, and repeated to her mistress a few lines
in Gaelic. Flora seemed to think for a moment, and then, slightly
colouring, she turned to Waverley--'It is impossible to gratify your
curiosity, Captain Waverley, without exposing my own presumption. If
you will give me a few moments for consideration, I will endeavour to
engraft the meaning of these lines upon a rude English translation
which I have attempted of a part of the original. The duties of the
tea-table seem to be concluded, and, as the evening is delightful, Una
will show you the way to one of my favourite haunts, and Cathleen and I
will join you there.'

Una, having received instructions in her native language, conducted
Waverley out by a passage different from that through which he had
entered the apartment. At a distance he heard the hall of the Chief
still resounding with the clang of bagpipes and the high applause of
his guests. Having gained the open air by a postern door, they walked a
little way up the wild, bleak, and narrow valley in which the house was
situated, following the course of the stream that winded through it. In
a spot, about a quarter of a mile from the castle, two brooks, which
formed the little river, had their junction. The larger of the two came
down the long bare valley, which extended, apparently without any
change or elevation of character, as far as the hills which formed its
boundary permitted the eye to reach. But the other stream, which had
its source among the mountains on the left hand of the strath, seemed
to issue from a very narrow and dark opening betwixt two large rocks.
These streams were different also in character. The larger was placid,
and even sullen in its course, wheeling in deep eddies, or sleeping in
dark blue pools; but the motions of the lesser brook were rapid and
furious, issuing from between precipices, like a maniac from his
confinement, all foam and uproar.

It was up the course of this last stream that Waverley, like a knight
of romance, was conducted by the fair Highland damsel, his silent
guide. A small path, which had been rendered easy in many places for
Flora's accommodation, led him through scenery of a very different
description from that which he had just quitted. Around the castle all
was cold, bare, and desolate, yet tame even in desolation; but this
narrow glen, at so short a distance, seemed to open into the land of
romance. The rocks assumed a thousand peculiar and varied forms. In one
place a crag of huge size presented its gigantic bulk, as if to forbid
the passenger's farther progress; and it was not until he approached
its very base that Waverley discerned the sudden and acute turn by
which the pathway wheeled its course around this formidable obstacle.
In another spot the projecting rocks from the opposite sides of the
chasm had approached so near to each other that two pine-trees laid
across, and covered with turf, formed a rustic bridge at the height of
at least one hundred and fifty feet. It had no ledges, and was barely
three feet in breadth.

While gazing at this pass of peril, which crossed, like a single black
line, the small portion of blue sky not intercepted by the projecting
rocks on either side, it was with a sensation of horror that Waverley
beheld Flora and her attendant appear, like inhabitants of another
region, propped, as it were, in mid air, upon this trembling structure.
She stopped upon observing him below, and, with an air of graceful ease
which made him shudder, waved her handkerchief to him by way of signal.
He was unable, from the sense of dizziness which her situation
conveyed, to return the salute; and was never more relieved than when
the fair apparition passed on from the precarious eminence which she
seemed to occupy with so much indifference, and disappeared on the
other side.

Advancing a few yards, and passing under the bridge which he had viewed
with so much terror, the path ascended rapidly from the edge of the
brook, and the glen widened into a sylvan amphitheatre, waving with
birch, young oaks, and hazels, with here and there a scattered
yew-tree. The rocks now receded, but still showed their grey and shaggy
crests rising among the copse-wood. Still higher rose eminences and
peaks, some bare, some clothed with wood, some round and purple with
heath, and others splintered into rocks and crags. At a short turning
the path, which had for some furlongs lost sight of the brook, suddenly
placed Waverley in front of a romantic waterfall. It was not so
remarkable either for great height or quantity of water as for the
beautiful accompaniments which made the spot interesting. After a
broken cataract of about twenty feet, the stream was received in a
large natural basin filled to the brim with water, which, where the
bubbles of the fall subsided, was so exquisitely clear that, although
it was of great depth, the eye could discern each pebble at the bottom.
Eddying round this reservoir, the brook found its way as if over a
broken part of the ledge, and formed a second fall, which seemed to
seek the very abyss; then, wheeling out beneath from among the smooth
dark rocks which it had polished for ages, it wandered murmuring down
the glen, forming the stream up which Waverley had just ascended.
[Footnote: See Note 24.] The borders of this romantic reservoir
corresponded in beauty; but it was beauty of a stern and commanding
cast, as if in the act of expanding into grandeur. Mossy banks of turf
were broken and interrupted by huge fragments of rock, and decorated
with trees and shrubs, some of which had been planted under the
direction of Flora, but so cautiously that they added to the grace
without diminishing the romantic wildness of the scene.

Here, like one of those lovely forms which decorate the landscapes of
Poussin, Waverley found Flora gazing on the waterfall. Two paces
further back stood Cathleen, holding a small Scottish harp, the use of
which had been taught to Flora by Rory Dall, one of the last harpers of
the Western Highlands. The sun, now stooping in the west, gave a rich
and varied tinge to all the objects which surrounded Waverley, and
seemed to add more than human brilliancy to the full expressive
darkness of Flora's eye, exalted the richness and purity of her
complexion, and enhanced the dignity and grace of her beautiful form.
Edward thought he had never, even in his wildest dreams, imagined a
figure of such exquisite and interesting loveliness. The wild beauty of
the retreat, bursting upon him as if by magic, augmented the mingled
feeling of delight and awe with which he approached her, like a fair
enchantress of Boiardo or Ariosto, by whose nod the scenery around
seemed to have been created an Eden in the wilderness.

Flora, like every beautiful woman, was conscious of her own power, and
pleased with its effects, which she could easily discern from the
respectful yet confused address of the young soldier. But, as she
possessed excellent sense, she gave the romance of the scene and other
accidental circumstances full weight in appreciating the feelings with
which Waverley seemed obviously to be impressed; and, unacquainted with
the fanciful and susceptible peculiarities of his character, considered
his homage as the passing tribute which a woman of even inferior charms
might have expected in such a situation. She therefore quietly led the
way to a spot at such a distance from the cascade that its sound should
rather accompany than interrupt that of her voice and instrument, and,
sitting down upon a mossy fragment of rock, she took the harp from
Cathleen.

'I have given you the trouble of walking to this spot, Captain
Waverley, both because I thought the scenery would interest you, and
because a Highland song would suffer still more from my imperfect
translation were I to introduce it without its own wild and appropriate
accompaniments. To speak in the poetical language of my country, the
seat of the Celtic Muse is in the mist of the secret and solitary hill,
and her voice in the murmur of the mountain stream. He who woos her
must love the barren rock more than the fertile valley, and the
solitude of the desert better than the festivity of the hall.'

Few could have heard this lovely woman make this declaration, with a
voice where harmony was exalted by pathos, without exclaiming that the
muse whom she invoked could never find a more appropriate
representative. But Waverley, though the thought rushed on his mind,
found no courage to utter it. Indeed, the wild feeling of romantic
delight with which he heard the few first notes she drew from her
instrument amounted almost to a sense of pain. He would not for worlds
have quitted his place by her side; yet he almost longed for solitude,
that he might decipher and examine at leisure the complication of
emotions which now agitated his bosom.

Flora had exchanged the measured and monotonous recitative of the bard
for a lofty and uncommon Highland air, which had been a battle-song in
former ages. A few irregular strains introduced a prelude of a wild and
peculiar tone, which harmonised well with the distant waterfall, and
the soft sigh of the evening breeze in the rustling leaves of an aspen,
which overhung the seat of the fair harpress. The following verses
convey but little idea of the feelings with which, so sung and
accompanied, they were heard by Waverley:--

    There is mist on the mountain, and night on the vale,
    But more dark is the sleep of the sons of the Gael.
    A stranger commanded--it sunk on the land,
    It has frozen each heart, and benumb'd every hand!

    The dirk and the target lie sordid with dust,
    The bloodless claymore is but redden'd with rust;
    On the hill or the glen if a gun should appear,
    It is only to war with the heath-cock or deer.

    The deeds of our sires if our bards should rehearse,
    Let a blush or a blow be the meed of their verse!
    Be mute every string, and be hush'd every tone,
    That shall bid us remember the fame that is flown.

    But the dark hours of night and of slumber are past,
    The morn on our mountains is dawning at last;
    Glenaladale's peaks are illumined with the rays,
    And the streams of Glenfinnan leap bright in the blaze.

[Footnote: The young and daring adventurer, Charles Edward, landed at
Glenaladale, in Moidart, and displayed his standard in the valley of
Glenfinnan, mustering around it the Mac-Donalds, the Camerons, and
other less numerous clans, whom he had prevailed on to join him. There
is a monument erected on the spot, with a Latin inscription by the late
Doctor Gregory.]

    O high-minded Moray! the exiled! the dear!
    In the blush of the dawning the STANDARD uprear!
    Wide, wide on the winds of the north let it fly,
    Like the sun's latest flash when the tempest is nigh!

[Footnote: The Marquis of Tullibardine's elder brother, who, long
exiled, returned to Scotland with Charles Edward in 1745.]

    Ye sons of the strong, when that dawning shall break,
    Need the harp of the aged remind you to wake?
    That dawn never beam'd on your forefathers' eye,
    But it roused each high chieftain to vanquish or die.

    O, sprung from the Kings who in Islay kept state,
    Proud chiefs of Clan Ranald, Glengarry, and Sleat!
    Combine like three streams from one mountain of snow,
    And resistless in union rush down on the foe!

    True son of Sir Evan, undaunted Lochiel,
    Place thy targe on thy shoulder and burnish thy steel!
    Rough Keppoch, give breath to thy bugle's bold swell,
    Till far Coryarrick resound to the knell!

    Stern son of Lord Kenneth, high chief of Kintail,
    Let the stag in thy standard bound wild in the gale!
    May the race of Clan Gillean, the fearless and free,
    Remember Glenlivat, Harlaw, and Dundee!

    Let the clan of grey Fingon, whose offspring has given
    Such heroes to earth and such martyrs to heaven,
    Unite with the race of renown'd Rorri More,
    To launch the long galley and stretch to the oar.

    How Mac-Shimei will joy when their chief shall display
    The yew-crested bonnet o'er tresses of grey!
    How the race of wrong'd Alpine and murder'd Glencoe
    Shall shout for revenge when they pour on the foe!

    Ye sons of brown Dermid, who slew the wild boar,
    Resume the pure faith of the great Callum-More!
    Mac-Neil of the islands, and Moy of the Lake,
    For honour, for freedom, for vengeance awake!

Here a large greyhound, bounding up the glen, jumped upon Flora and
interrupted her music by his importunate caresses. At a distant whistle
he turned and shot down the path again with the rapidity of an arrow.
'That is Fergus's faithful attendant, Captain Waverley, and that was
his signal. He likes no poetry but what is humorous, and comes in good
time to interrupt my long catalogue of the tribes, whom one of your
saucy English poets calls

    Our bootless host of high-born beggars,
    Mac-Leans, Mac-Kenzies, and Mac-Gregors.'

Waverley expressed his regret at the interruption.

'O you cannot guess how much you have lost! The bard, as in duty bound,
has addressed three long stanzas to Vich Ian Vohr of the Banners,
enumerating all his great properties, and not forgetting his being a
cheerer of the harper and bard--"a giver of bounteous gifts." Besides,
you should have heard a practical admonition to the fair-haired son of
the stranger, who lives in the land where the grass is always
green--the rider on the shining pampered steed, whose hue is like the
raven, and whose neigh is like the scream of the eagle for battle. This
valiant horseman is affectionately conjured to remember that his
ancestors were distinguished by their loyalty as well as by their
courage. All this you have lost; but, since your curiosity is not
satisfied, I judge, from the distant sound of my brother's whistle, I
may have time to sing the concluding stanzas before he comes to laugh
at my translation.'

    Awake on your hills, on your islands awake,
    Brave sons of the mountain, the frith, and the lake!
    'T is the bugle--but not for the chase is the call;
    'T is the pibroch's shrill summons--but not to the hall.

    'T is the summons of heroes for conquest or death,
    When the banners are blazing on mountain and heath:
    They call to the dirk, the claymore, and the targe,
    To the march and the muster, the line and the charge.

    Be the brand of each chieftain like Fin's in his ire!
    May the blood through his veins flow like currents of fire!
    Burst the base foreign yoke as your sires did of yore,
    Or die like your sires, and endure it no more!





CHAPTER XXIII

WAVEELEY CONTINUES AT GLENNAQUOICH


As Flora concluded her song, Fergus stood before them. 'I knew I should
find you here, even without the assistance of my friend Bran. A simple
and unsublimed taste now, like my own, would prefer a jet d'eau at
Versailles to this cascade, with all its accompaniments of rock and
roar; but this is Flora's Parnassus, Captain Waverley, and that
fountain her Helicon. It would be greatly for the benefit of my cellar
if she could teach her coadjutor, Mac-Murrough, the value of its
influence: he has just drunk a pint of usquebaugh to correct, he said,
the coldness of the claret. Let me try its virtues.' He sipped a little
water in the hollow of his hand, and immediately commenced, with a
theatrical air,--

    'O Lady of the desert, hail!
     That lovest the harping of the Gael,
     Through fair and fertile regions borne,
     Where never yet grew grass or corn.

But English poetry will never succeed under the influence of a Highland
Helicon. Allons, courage!

    O vous, qui buvez, a tasse pleine,
    A cette heureuse f ontaine,
    Ou on ne voit, sur le rivage,
      Que quelques vilains troupeaux,
    Suivis de nymphes de village,
      Qui les escortent sans sabots--'

'A truce, dear Fergus! spare us those most tedious and insipid persons
of all Arcadia. Do not, for Heaven's sake, bring down Coridon and
Lindor upon us.'

'Nay, if you cannot relish la houlette et le chalumeau, have with you
in heroic strains.'

'Dear Fergus, you have certainly partaken of the inspiration of
Mac-Murrough's cup rather than of mine.'

'I disclaim it, ma belle demoiselle, although I protest it would be the
more congenial of the two. Which of your crack-brained Italian
romancers is it that says,

                               Io d'Elicona niente
    Mi curo, in fe de Dio; che'l bere d'acque
    (Bea chi ber ne vuol) sempre mi spiacque!

[Footnote:

    Good sooth, I reck nought of your Helicon;
    Drink water whoso will, in faith I will drink none.]

But if you prefer the Gaelic, Captain Waverley, here is little Cathleen
shall sing you Drimmindhu. Come, Cathleen, astore (i.e. my dear),
begin; no apologies to the cean-kinne.'

Cathleen sung with much liveliness a little Gaelic song, the burlesque
elegy of a countryman on the loss of his cow, the comic tones of which,
though he did not understand the language, made Waverley laugh more
than once. [Footnote: This ancient Gaelic ditty is still well known,
both in the Highlands and in Ireland It was translated into English,
and published, if I mistake not, under the auspices of the facetious
Tom D'Urfey, by the title of 'Colley, my Cow.']

'Admirable, Cathleen!' cried the Chieftain; 'I must find you a handsome
husband among the clansmen one of these days.'

Cathleen laughed, blushed, and sheltered herself behind her companion.

In the progress of their return to the castle, the Chieftain warmly
pressed Waverley to remain for a week or two, in order to see a grand
hunting party, in which he and some other Highland gentlemen proposed
to join. The charms of melody and beauty were too strongly impressed in
Edward's breast to permit his declining an invitation so pleasing. It
was agreed, therefore, that he should write a note to the Baron of
Bradwardine, expressing his intention to stay a fortnight at
Glennaquoich, and requesting him to forward by the bearer (a gilly of
the Chieftain's) any letters which might have arrived for him.

This turned the discourse upon the Baron, whom Fergus highly extolled
as a gentleman and soldier. His character was touched with yet more
discrimination by Flora, who observed he was the very model of the old
Scottish cavalier, with all his excellencies and peculiarities. 'It is
a character, Captain Waverley, which is fast disappearing; for its best
point was a self-respect which was never lost sight of till now. But in
the present time the gentlemen whose principles do not permit them to
pay court to the existing government are neglected and degraded, and
many conduct themselves accordingly; and, like some of the persons you
have seen at Tully-Veolan, adopt habits and companions inconsistent
with their birth and breeding. The ruthless proscription of party seems
to degrade the victims whom it brands, however unjustly. But let us
hope a brighter day is approaching, when a Scottish country gentleman
may be a scholar without the pedantry of our friend the Baron, a
sportsman without the low habits of Mr. Falconer, and a judicious
improver of his property without becoming a boorish two-legged steer
like Killancureit.'

Thus did Flora prophesy a revolution, which time indeed has produced,
but in a manner very different from what she had in her mind.

The amiable Rose was next mentioned, with the warmest encomium on her
person, manners, and mind. 'That man,' said Flora, 'will find an
inestimable treasure in the affections of Rose Bradwardine who shall be
so fortunate as to become their object. Her very soul is in home, and
in the discharge of all those quiet virtues of which home is the
centre. Her husband will be to her what her father now is, the object
of all her care, solicitude, and affection. She will see nothing, and
connect herself with nothing, but by him and through him. If he is a
man of sense and virtue, she will sympathise in his sorrows, divert his
fatigue, and share his pleasures. If she becomes the property of a
churlish or negligent husband, she will suit his taste also, for she
will not long survive his unkindness. And, alas! how great is the
chance that some such unworthy lot may be that of my poor friend! O
that I were a queen this moment, and could command the most amiable and
worthy youth of my kingdom to accept happiness with the hand of Rose
Bradwardine!'

'I wish you would command her to accept mine en attendant,' said
Fergus, laughing.

I don't know by what caprice it was that this wish, however jocularly
expressed, rather jarred on Edward's feelings, notwithstanding his
growing inclination to Flora and his indifference to Miss Bradwardine.
This is one of the inexplicabilities of human nature, which we leave
without comment.

'Yours, brother?' answered Flora, regarding him steadily. 'No; you have
another bride--Honour; and the dangers you must run in pursuit of her
rival would break poor Rose's heart.'

With this discourse they reached the castle, and Waverley soon prepared
his despatches for Tully-Veolan. As he knew the Baron was punctilious
in such matters, he was about to impress his billet with a seal on
which his armorial bearings were engraved, but he did not find it at
his watch, and thought he must have left it at Tully-Veolan. He
mentioned his loss, borrowing at the same time the family seal of the
Chieftain.

'Surely,' said Miss Mac-Ivor, 'Donald Bean Lean would not--'

'My life for him in such circumstances,' answered her brother;
'besides, he would never have left the watch behind.'

'After all, Fergus,' said Flora, 'and with every allowance, I am
surprised you can countenance that man.'

'I countenance him? This kind sister of mine would persuade you,
Captain Waverley, that I take what the people of old used to call "a
steakraid," that is, a "collop of the foray," or, in plainer words, a
portion of the robber's booty, paid by him to the Laird, or Chief,
through whose grounds he drove his prey. O, it is certain that, unless
I can find some way to charm Flora's tongue, General Blakeney will send
a sergeant's party from Stirling (this he said with haughty and
emphatic irony) to seize Vich lan Vohr, as they nickname me, in his own
castle.'

'Now, Fergus, must not our guest be sensible that all this is folly and
affectation? You have men enough to serve you without enlisting
banditti, and your own honour is above taint. Why don't you send this
Donald Bean Lean, whom I hate for his smoothness and duplicity even
more than for his rapine, out of your country at once? No cause should
induce me to tolerate such a character.'

'No cause, Flora?' said the Chieftain significantly.
