
In an hour two men came up from the farm house carrying a huge pot
filled with strong soup. Another brought a great dish of stew. Women
carried wooden platters, bowls of stewed fruit, and loaves of bread; and
the soldiers, seated upon the grass, fell to with an appetite such as
they had not experienced for weeks. With the meal was an abundant supply
of the rough but wholesome wine of the country.

To the Scottish soldiers after the hardships they had passed through,
this secluded valley seemed a perfect paradise. They had nought to do
save to eat their meals, to sleep on the turf in the shade, or to wander
in the woods and gardens free to pick what fruit they fancied. Under
these circumstances they rapidly picked up strength, and in a week after
their arrival would hardly have been recognized as the feeble band who
had left the Swedish camp at Old Brandenburg.

On Sunday the pastor arrived. He did not live permanently at the
village, but ministered to the inhabitants of several villages scattered
among the hills, holding services in them by turns, and remaining a few
days in each. As the congregation was too large for the room in the farm
house the service was held in the open air. The Scotch soldiers were all
present, and joined heartily in the singing, although many of them were
ignorant of the language, and sang the words of Scotch hymns to the
German tunes.

Even the roughest of them, and those who had been longest away from
their native country, were much moved by the service. The hush and
stillness, the air of quiet and peace which prevailed, the fervour with
which all joined in the simple service, took them back in thought to the
days of their youth in quiet Scottish glens, and many a hand was passed
hastily across eyes which had not been moistened for many a year.

The armour and arms were now cleaned and polished, and for a short time
each day Malcolm exercised them. The martial appearance and perfect
discipline of the Scots struck the villagers with admiration the first
time they saw them under arms, and they earnestly begged Malcolm that
they might receive from him and Sergeant Sinclair some instruction in
drill.

Accordingly every evening when work was done the men of the village were
formed up and drilled. Several of the soldiers took their places with
them in the ranks in order to aid them by their example. After the drill
there was sword and pike exercise, and as most of the men had already
some knowledge of the use of arms they made rapid progress, and felt an
increased confidence in their power to defend the village against the
attacks of any small bands of plunderers. To Malcolm the time passed
delightfully. His kind hosts vied with each other in their efforts to
make him comfortable, and it was in vain that he assured them that he
no longer needed attention and care. A seat was always placed for him
in the coolest nook in the room, fresh grapes and other fruit stood in
readiness on a table hard by. The farmer's daughters, busy as they were
in their household avocations, were always ready to sit and talk with
him when he was indoors, and of an evening to sing him the country
melodies.

At the end of a fortnight the men were all fit for duty again, but the
hospitable farmer would not hear of their leaving, and as news from
time to time reached them from the outer world, and Malcolm learned that
there was no chance of any engagement for a time between the hostile
armies, he was only too glad to remain.

Another fortnight passed, and Malcolm reluctantly gave the word that on
the morrow the march must be recommenced. A general feeling of sorrow
reigned in the village when it was known that their guests were about to
depart, for the Scottish soldiers had made themselves extremely popular.
They were ever ready to assist in the labours of the village. They
helped to pick the apples from the heavily laden trees, they assisted to
thrash out the corn, and in every way strove to repay their entertainers
for the kindness they had shown them.

Of an evening their camp had been the rendezvous of the whole village.
There alternately the soldiers and the peasants sang their national
songs, and joined in hearty choruses. Sometimes there were dances, for
many of the villagers played on various instruments; and altogether
Glogau had never known such a time of festivity and cheerfulness before.

Late in the evening of the day before they had fixed for their departure
the pastor rode into the village.

"I have bad news," he said. "A party of Pappenheim's dragoons, three
hundred strong, are raiding in the district on the other side of the
hills. A man came in just as I mounted my horse, saying that it was
expected they would attack Mansfeld, whose count is a sturdy Protestant.
The people were determined to resist to the last, in spite of the fate
of Magdeburg and Frankenhausen, but I fear that their chance of success
is a small one; but they say they may as well die fighting as be
slaughtered in cold blood."

"Is Mansfeld fortified?" Malcolm asked.

"It has a wall," the pastor replied, "but of no great strength. The
count's castle, which stands on a rock adjoining it, might defend itself
for some time, but I question whether it can withstand Pappenheim's
veterans.

"Mansfeld itself is little more than a village. I should not say it
had more than a thousand inhabitants, and can muster at best about two
hundred and fifty men capable of bearing arms."

"How far is it from here?" Malcolm asked after a pause.

"Twenty-four miles by the bridle path across the hills."

"When were the Imperialists expected to arrive?"

"They were ten miles away this morning," the pastor replied; "but as
they were plundering and burning as they went they will not probably
arrive before Mansfeld before the morning. Some of the more timid
citizens were leaving, and many were sending away their wives and
families."

"Then," Malcolm said, "I will march thither at once. Twenty good
soldiers may make all the difference, and although I have, of course, no
orders for such an emergency, the king can hardly blame me even if the
worst happens for striking a blow against the Imperialists here. Will
you give me a man," he asked the farmer, "to guide us across the hills?"

"That will I right willingly," the farmer said; "but it seems to me a
desperate service to embark in. These townspeople are of little good for
fighting, and probably intend only to make a show of resistance in order
to procure better terms. The count himself is a brave nobleman, but I
fear that the enterprise is a hopeless one."

"Hopeless or not," Malcolm said, "I will undertake it, and will at once
put the men under arms. The wagon and horses with the baggage I will
leave here till I return, that is if we should ever come back again."

A tap of the drum and the soldiers came running in hastily from various
cottages where they were spending their last evening with their village
friends, wondering at the sudden summons to arms. As soon as they had
fallen in, Malcolm joined them.

"Men," he said, "I am sorry to disturb you on your last evening here,
but there is business on hand. A party of Pappenheim's dragoons are
about to attack the town of Mansfeld, where the people are of the
Reformed Religion. The siege will begin in the morning, and ere that
time we must be there. We have all got fat and lazy, and a little
fighting will do us good."

The thought of a coming fray reconciled the men to their departure
from their quiet and happy resting place. Armour was donned, buckles
fastened, and arms inspected, and in half an hour, after a cordial adieu
from their kind hosts, the detachment marched off, their guide with a
lighted torch leading the way. The men were in light marching order,
having left everything superfluous behind them in the wagon; and they
marched briskly along over hill and through forest without a halt, till
at three o'clock in the morning the little town of Mansfeld, with its
castle rising above it, was visible before them in the first light of
morning.

As they approached the walls a musketoon was fired, and the alarm bell
of the church instantly rang out. Soon armed men made their appearance
on the walls. Fearing that the burghers might fire before waiting to
ascertain who were the newcomers, Malcolm halted his band, and advanced
alone towards the walls.

"Who are you who come in arms to the peaceful town of Mansfeld?" an
officer asked from the wall.

"I am an officer of his Swedish Majesty, Gustavus, and hearing that
the town was threatened with attack by the Imperialists, I have marched
hither with my detachment to aid in the defence."

A loud cheer broke from the walls. Not only was the reinforcement a most
welcome one, small as it was, for the valour of the Scottish soldiers
of the King of Sweden was at that time the talk of all Germany, but the
fact that a detachment of these redoubted troops had arrived seemed a
proof that the main army of the Swedish king could not be far away.
The gates were at once opened, and Malcolm with his band marched into
Mansfield.



CHAPTER VIII THE SIEGE OF MANSFELD


"Will it please your worship at once to repair to the castle?" the
leader of the townspeople said. "The count has just sent down to inquire
into the reason of the alarm."

"Yes," Malcolm replied, "I will go at once. In the meantime, sir, I
pray you to see to the wants of my soldiers, who have taken a long night
march and will be none the worse for some refreshment. Hast seen aught
of the Imperialists?"

"They are at a village but a mile distant on the other side of the
town," the citizen said. "Yesterday we counted eighteen villages in
flames, and the peasants who have come in say that numbers have been
slain by them."

"There is little mercy to be expected from the butchers of Magdeburg,"
Malcolm replied; "the only arguments they will listen to are steel and
lead, and we will not be sparing of these."

A murmur of assent rang through the townsfolk who had gathered round,
and then the burgomaster himself led Malcolm up the ascent to the
castle. The news that the newcomers were a party of Scots had already
been sent up to the castle, and as Malcolm entered the gateway the count
came forward to welcome him.

"You are welcome indeed, fair sir," he said. "It seems almost as if you
had arrived from the clouds to our assistance, for we had heard that the
Swedish king and his army were encamped around Old Brandenburg.

"His majesty has moved west, I hear," Malcolm said; "but we have been a
month away from the camp. My detachment consisted of a body of invalids
who came up among the hills to get rid of the fever which was playing
such havoc among our ranks. I am glad to say that all are restored, and
fit as ever for a meeting with the Imperialists. I heard but yestereven
that you were expecting an attack, and have marched all night to be here
in time. My party is a small one, but each man can be relied upon; and
when it comes to hard fighting twenty in good soldiers may turn the
day."

"You are heartily welcome, sir, and I thank you much for coming to our
aid. The townspeople are determined to do their best, but most of them
have little skill in arms. I have a score or two of old soldiers here in
the castle, and had hoped to be able to hold this to the end; but truly
I despaired of a successful defence of the town. But enter, I pray you;
the countess will be glad to welcome you."

Malcolm accompanied the count to the banquet hall of the castle. The
countess, a gentle and graceful woman, was already there; for indeed but
few in Mansfeld had closed an eye that night, for it was possible that
the Imperialists might attack without delay. By her side stood her
daughter, a girl of about fourteen years old. Malcolm had already stated
his name to the count, and the latter now presented him to his wife.

"We have heard so much of the Scottish soldiers," she said as she held
out her hand, over which Malcolm bent deeply, "that we have all been
curious to see them, little dreaming that a band of them would appear
here like good angels in our hour of danger."

"It was a fortunate accident which found me within reach when I heard of
the approach of the Imperialists. The names of the Count and Countess
of Mansfeld are so well known and so highly esteemed through Protestant
Germany that I was sure that the king would approve of my hastening to
lend what aid I might to you without orders from him."

"I see you have learned to flatter," the countess said smiling. "This is
my daughter Thekla."

"I am glad to see you," the girl said; "but I am a little disappointed.
I had thought that the Scots were such big fierce soldiers, and you
are not very big--not so tall as papa; and you do not look fierce at
all--not half so fierce as my cousin Caspar, who is but a boy."

"That is very rude, Thekla," her mother said reprovingly, while Malcolm
laughed gaily.

"You are quite right, Fraulein Thekla. I know I do not look very fierce,
but I hope when my moustache grows I shall come up more nearly to your
expectations. As to my height, I have some years to grow yet, seeing
that I am scarce eighteen, and perhaps no older than your cousin."

"Have you recently joined, sir?" the countess asked.

"I have served through the campaign," Malcolm replied, "and have seen
some hard knocks given, as you may imagine when I tell you that I was at
the siege of New Brandenburg."

"When your soldiers fought like heroes, and, as I heard, all died sword
in hand save two or three officers who managed to escape."

"I was one of the three, countess; but the tale is a long one, and can
be told after we have done with the Imperialists. Now, sir," he went on,
turning to the count, "I am at your orders, and will take post with my
men at any point that you may think fit."

"Before doing that," the count said, "you must join us at breakfast. You
must be hungry after your long march, and as I have been all night in
my armour I shall do justice to it myself. You will, of course, take
up your abode here. As to other matters I have done my best, and the
townspeople were yesterday all told off to their places on the walls.
I should think it were best that your band were stationed in the
marketplace as a reserve, they could then move to any point which might
be seriously threatened. Should the Imperialists enter the town the
citizens have orders to fall back here fighting. All their most valuable
goods were sent up here yesterday, together with such of their wives
and families as have not taken flight, so that there will be nothing to
distract them from their duty."

"That is good," Malcolm said. "The thought that one is fighting for
home and family must nerve a man in the defence, but when the enemy
once breaks in he would naturally think of home first and hasten away to
defend it to the last, instead of obeying orders and falling back with
his comrades in good order and discipline."

The meal was a cheerful one. Malcolm related more in detail how he and
his detachment happened to be so far removed from the army.

Just as the meal came to an end a drum beat in the town and the alarm
bells began to ring. The count and Malcolm sallied out at once to the
outer wall, and saw a small party of officers riding from the village
occupied by the Imperialists towards the town.

"Let us descend," the count said. "I presume they are going to demand
our surrender."

They reached the wall of the town just as the Imperialist officers
approached the gate.

"In the name of his majesty the emperor," one of them cried out, "I
command you to open the gate and to surrender to his good will and
pleasure."

"The smoking villages which I see around me," Count Mansfeld replied,
"are no hopeful sign of any good will or pleasure on the part of his
majesty towards us. As to surrendering, we will rather die. But I am
willing to pay a fair ransom for the town if you will draw off your
troops and march away."

"Beware, sir!" the officer said. "I have a force here sufficient to
compel obedience, and I warn you of the fate which will befall all
within these walls if you persist in refusing to admit us."

"I doubt not as to their fate," the count replied; "there are plenty of
examples before us of the tender mercy which your master's troops show
towards the towns you capture.

"Once again I offer you a ransom for the town. Name the sum, and if it
be in reason such as I and the townspeople can pay, it shall be yours;
but open the gates to you we will not."

"Very well," the officer said; "then your blood be on your own heads."
And turning his horse he rode with his companions back towards the
village.

On their arrival there a bustle was seen to prevail. A hundred horsemen
rode off and took post on an eminence near the town, ready to cut off
the retreat of any who might try to escape, and to enter the town when
the gates were forced open. The other two hundred men advanced on foot
in a close body towards the principal gate.

"They will try and blow it open with petards," Malcolm said. "Half of
my men are musketeers and good shots, and I will, with your permission,
place them on the wall to aid the townsfolk there, for if the gate is
blown open and the enemy force their way in it will go hard with us."

The count assented, and Malcolm posted his musketeers on the wall,
ordering Sergeant Sinclair with the remainder to set to work to erect
barricades across the street leading from the gate, so that, in case
this were blown in, such a stand might be made against the Imperialists
as would give the townspeople time to rally from the walls and to gather
there.

The Imperialists heralded their advance by opening fire with pistols and
musketoons against the wall, and the defenders at once replied. So heavy
was the fire that the head of the column wavered, many of the leading
files being at once shot down, but, encouraged by their officers, they
rallied, and pushed forward at a run. The fire of the townspeople at
once became hurried and irregular, but the Scots picked off their men
with steady aim. The leader of the Imperialists, who carried a petard,
advanced boldly to the edge of the ditch. The fosse was shallow and
contained but little water, and he at once dashed into it and waded
across, for the drawbridge had, of course, been raised. He climbed up
the bank, and was close to the gate, when Malcolm, leaning far over
the wall, discharged his pistol at him. The ball glanced from the steel
armour.

Malcolm drew his other pistol and again fired, this time more
effectually, for the ball struck between the shoulder and the neck at
the junction of the breast and back pieces, and passed down into the
body of the Austrian, who, dropping the petard, fell dead; but a number
of his men were close behind him.

"Quick, lads!" Malcolm cried. "Put your strength to this parapet. It is
old and rotten. Now, all together! Shove!"

The soldiers bent their strength against the parapet, while some of the
