"I have a wish," said Paaker firmly, "that you should knit once more the
old ties of affection with your relations; the estrangement has lasted
long enough."

"Much too long!" cried Setchem.

The pioneer looked in silence at the ground, and obeyed his mother's sign
to sit down beside her.

"I knew," she said, taking his hand, "that this day would bring us joy;
for I dreamt of your father in Osiris, and when I was being carried to
the temple, I was met, first by a white cow, and then by a wedding
procession.  The white ram of Anion, too, touched the wheat-cakes that I
offered him."--[It boded death to Germanicus when the Apis refused to eat
out of his hand.]

"Those are lucky presages," said Paaker in a tone of conviction.

"And let us hasten to seize with gratitude that which the Gods set before
us," cried Setchem with joyful emotion.  "I will go to-morrow to my
sister and tell her that we shall live together in our old affection, and
share both good and evil; we are both of the same race, and I know that,
as order and cleanliness preserve a house from ruin and rejoice the
stranger, so nothing but unity can keep up the happiness of the family
and its appearance before people.  What is bygone is bygone, and let it
be forgotten.  There are many women in Thebes besides Nefert, and a
hundred nobles in the land would esteem themselves happy to win you for a
son-in-law."

Paaker rose, and began thoughtfully pacing the broad space, while Setchem
went on speaking.

"I know," she said, that I have touched a wound in thy heart; but it is
already closing, and it will heal when you are happier even than the
charioteer Mena, and need no longer hate him.  Nefert is good, but she is
delicate and not clever, and scarcely equal to the management of so large
a household as ours.  Ere long I too shall be wrapped in mummy-cloths,
and then if duty calls you into Syria some prudent housewife must take my
place.  It is no small matter.  Your grandfather Assa often would say
that a house well-conducted in every detail was a mark of a family owning
an unspotted name, and living with wise liberality and secure solidity,
in which each had his assigned place, his allotted duty to fulfil, and
his fixed rights to demand.  How often have I prayed to the Hathors that
they may send you a wife after my own heart."

"A Setchem I shall never find!"  said Paaker kissing his mother's
forehead, "women of your sort are dying out."

"Flatterer!" laughed Setchem, shaking her finger at her son.  But it is
true.  Those who are now growing up dress and smarten themselves with
stuffs from Kaft,--[Phoenicia]--mix their language with Syrian words, and
leave the steward and housekeeper free when they themselves ought to
command.  Even my sister Katuti, and Nefert--

"Nefert is different from other women," interrupted Paaker, "and if you
had brought her up she would know how to manage a house as well as how to
ornament it."

Setchem looked at her son in surprise; then she said, half to herself:
"Yes, yes, she is a sweet child; it is impossible for any one to be angry
with her who looks into her eyes.  And yet I was cruel to her because you
were hurt by her, and because--but you know.  But now you have forgiven,
I forgive her, willingly, her and her husband."

Paaker's brow clouded, and while he paused in front of his mother he said
with all the peculiar harshness of his voice:

"He shall pine away in the desert, and the hyaenas of the North shall
tear his unburied corpse."

At these words Setchem covered her face with her veil, and clasped her
hands tightly over the amulets hanging round her neck.  Then she said
softly:

"How terrible you can be!  I know well that you hate the charioteer, for
I have seen the seven arrows over your couch over which is written 'Death
to Mena.'

"That is a Syrian charm which a man turns against any one whom he desires
to destroy.  How black you look!  Yes, it is a charm that is hateful to
the Gods, and that gives the evil one power over him that uses it.  Leave
it to them to punish the criminal, for Osiris withdraws his favor from
those who choose the fiend for their ally."

"My sacrifices," replied Paaker, "secure me the favor of the Gods; but
Mena behaved to me like a vile robber, and I only return to him the evil
that belongs to him.  Enough of this!  and if you love me, never again
utter the name of my enemy before me.  I have forgiven Nefert and her
mother--that may satisfy you."

Setchem shook her head, and said: "What will it lead to!  The war cannot
last for ever, and if Mena returns the reconciliation of to-day will turn
to all the more bitter enmity.  I see only one remedy.  Follow my advice,
and let me find you a wife worthy of you."

"Not now!" exclaimed Paaker impatiently.  "In a few days I must go again
into the enemy's country, and do not wish to leave my wife, like Mena, to
lead the life of a widow during my existence.  Why urge it?  my brother's
wife and children are with you--that might satisfy you."

"The Gods know how I love them," answered Setchem; "but your brother
Horns is the younger, and you the elder, to whom the inheritance belongs.
Your little niece is a delightful plaything, but in your son I should see
at once the future stay of our race, the future head of the family;
brought up to my mind and your father's; for all is sacred to me that my
dead husband wished.  He rejoiced in your early betrothal to Nefert, and
hoped that a son of his eldest son should continue the race of Assa."

"It shall be by no fault of mine that any wish of his remains
unfulfilled.  The stars are high, mother; sleep well, and if to-morrow
you visit Nefert and your sister, say to them that the doors of my house
are open to them.  But stay!  Katuti's steward has offered to sell a herd
of cattle to ours, although the stock on Mena's land can be but small.
What does this mean?"

"You know my sister," replied Setchem.  "She manages Mena's possessions,
has many requirements, tries to vie with the greatest in splendor, sees
the governor often in her house, her son is no doubt extravagant--and so
the most necessary things may often be wanting."

Paaker shrugged his shoulders, once more embraced his mother and left
her.

Soon after, he was standing in the spacious room in which he was
accustomed to sit and to sleep when he was in Thebes.  The walls of this
room were whitewashed and decorated with pious glyphic writing, which
framed in the door and the windows opening into the garden.

In the middle of the farther wall was a couch in the form of a lion.  The
upper end of it imitated a lion's head, and the foot, its curling tail; a
finely dressed lion's skin was spread over the bell, and a headrest of
ebony, decorated with pious texts, stood on a high foot-step, ready for
the sleeper.

Above the bed various costly weapons and whips were elegantly displayed,
and below them the seven arrows over which Setchem had read the words
"Death to Mena."  They were written across a sentence which enjoined
feeding the hungry, giving drink to the thirsty, and clothing the naked;
with loving-kindness, alike to the great and the humble.

A niche by the side of the bed-head was closed with a curtain of purple
stuff.

In each corner of the room stood a statue; three of them symbolized the
triad of Thebes-Anion, Muth, and Chunsu--and the fourth the dead father
of the pioneer.  In front of each was a small altar for offerings, with a
hollow in it, in which was an odoriferous essence.  On a wooden stand
were little images of the Gods and amulets in great number, and in
several painted chests lay the clothes, the ornaments and the papers of
the master.  In the midst of the chamber stood a table and several stool-
shaped seats.

When Paaker entered the room he found it lighted with lamps, and a large
dog sprang joyfully to meet him.  He let him spring upon him, threw him
to the ground, let him once more rush upon him, and then kissed his
clever head.

Before his bed an old negro of powerful build lay in deep sleep.  Paaker
shoved him with his foot and called to him as he awoke--

"I am hungry."

The grey-headed black man rose slowly, and left the room.

As soon as he was alone Paaker drew the philter from his girdle, looked
at it tenderly, and put it in a box, in which there were several flasks
of holy oils for sacrifice.  He was accustomed every evening to fill the
hollows in the altars with fresh essences, and to prostrate himself in
prayer before the images of the Gods.  To-day he stood before the statue
of his father, kissed its feet, and murmured: "Thy will shall be done.--
The woman whom thou didst intend for me shall indeed be mine--thy eldest
son's."

Then he walked to and fro and thought over the events of the day.

At last he stood still, with his arms crossed, and looked defiantly at
the holy images; like a traveller who drives away a false guide, and
thinks to find the road by himself.

His eye fell on the arrows over his bed; he smiled, and striking his
broad breast with his fist, he exclaimed, "I--I--I--"

His hound, who thought his master meant to call him, rushed up to him.
He pushed him off and said--"If you meet a hyaena in the desert, you fall
upon it without waiting till it is touched by my lance--and if the Gods,
my masters, delay, I myself will defend my right; but thou," he continued
turning to the image of his father, "thou wilt support me."

This soliloquy was interrupted by the slaves who brought in his meal.

Paaker glanced at the various dishes which the cook had prepared for him,
and asked: "How often shall I command that not a variety, but only one
large dish shall be dressed for me?  And the wine?"

"Thou art used never to touch it?"  answered the old negro.

"But to-day I wish for some," said the pioneer."  Bring one of the old
jars of red wine of Kakem."

The slaves looked at each other in astonishment; the wine was brought,
and Paaker emptied beaker after beaker.  When the servants had left him,
the boldest among them said: "Usually the master eats like a lion, and
drinks like a midge, but to-day--"

"Hold your tongue!"  cried his companion, "and come into the court, for
Paaker has sent us out beer.  The Hathors must have met him."

The occurrences of the day must indeed have taken deep hold on the inmost
soul of the pioneer; for he, the most sober of all the warriors of
Rameses, to whom intoxication was unknown, and who avoided the banquets
of his associates--now sat at the midnight hours, alone at his table, and
toped till his weary head grew heavy.

He collected himself, went towards his couch and drew the curtain which
concealed the niche at the head of the bed.  A female figure, with the
head-dress and attributes of the Goddess Hathor, made of painted
limestone, revealed itself.

Her countenance had the features of the wife of Mena.

The king, four years since, had ordered a sculptor to execute a sacred
image with the lovely features of the newly-married bride of his
charioteer, and Paaker had succeeded in having a duplicate made.

He now knelt down on the couch, gazed on the image with moist eyes,
looked cautiously around to see if he was alone, leaned forward, pressed
a kiss to the delicate, cold stone lips; laid down and went to sleep
without undressing himself, and leaving the lamps to burn themselves out.

Restless dreams disturbed his spirit, and when the dawn grew grey, he
screamed out, tormented by a hideous vision, so pitifully, that the old
negro, who had laid himself near the dog at the foot of his bed, sprang
up alarmed, and while the dog howled, called him by his name to wake him.

Paaker awoke with a dull head-ache.  The vision which had tormented him
stood vividly before his mind, and he endeavored to retain it that he
might summon a haruspex to interpret it.  After the morbid fancies of the
preceding evening he felt sad and depressed.

The morning-hymn rang into his room with a warning voice from the temple
of Amon; he cast off evil thoughts, and resolved once more to resign the
conduct of his fate to the Gods, and to renounce all the arts of magic.

As he was accustomed, he got into the bath that was ready for him.  While
splashing in the tepid water he thought with ever increasing eagerness of
Nefert and of the philter which at first he had meant not to offer to
her, but which actually was given to her by his hand, and which might by
this time have begun to exercise its charm.

Love placed rosy pictures--hatred set blood-red images before his eyes.
He strove to free himself from the temptations, which more and more
tightly closed in upon him, but it was with him as with a man who has
fallen into a bog, who, the more vehemently he tries to escape from the
mire, sinks the deeper.

As the sun rose, so rose his vital energy and his self-confidence, and
when he prepared to quit his dwelling, in his most costly clothing, he
had arrived once more at the decision of the night before, and had again
resolved to fight for his purpose, without--and if need were--against the
Gods.

The Mohar had chosen his road, and he never turned back when once he had
begun a journey.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Blossom of the thorny wreath of sorrow
Eyes kind and frank, without tricks of glance
Money is a pass-key that turns any lock
Repugnance for the old laws began to take root in his heart
Thou canst say in words what we can only feel
Whether the form of our benevolence does more good or mischief





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK UARDA BY GEORG EBERS, V2 ***

******This file should be named 5440.txt or 5440.zip ********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

