"The Lady Clara's arm is still very blue," said Herbert.

"And I suppose it took you half an hour to weep over it?" continued
his sister.

"Exactly, by Shrewsbury clock."

"And while you were weeping over the arm, what happened to the hand?
She did not surrender it, did she, in return for so much tenderness
on your part?"

Emmeline thought that Mary was very pertinacious in her badinage, and
was going to bid her hold her tongue; but she observed that Herbert
blushed, and walked away without further answer. He went to the
further end of the long room, and there threw himself on to a sofa.
"Could it be that it was all settled?" thought Emmeline to herself.

She followed him to the sofa, and sitting beside him, took hold of
his arm. "Oh, Herbert! if there is anything to tell, do tell me."

"Anything to tell!" said he. "What do you mean?"

"Oh! you know. I do love her so dearly. I shall never be contented to
love any one else as your wife--not to love her really, really with
all my heart."

"What geese you girls are!--you are always thinking of love, and
weddings, and orange-blossoms."

"It is only for you I think about them," said Emmeline. "I know there
is something to tell. Dear Herbert, do tell me."

"There is a young bachelor duke coming here to-morrow. He has a
million a year, and three counties all his own; he has blue eyes, and
is the handsomest man that ever was seen. Is that news enough?"

"Very well, Herbert. I would tell you anything."

"Well; tell me anything."

"I'll tell you this. I know you're in love with Clara Desmond, and
I'm sure she's in love with you; and I believe you are both engaged,
and you're not nice at all to have a secret from me. I never tease
you, as Mary does, and it would make me so happy to know it."

Upon this he put his arm round her waist and whispered one word into
her ear. She gave an exclamation of delight; and as the tears came
into her eyes congratulated him with a kiss. "Oh dear, oh dear! I am
so happy!" she exclaimed.

"Hush--sh," he whispered. "I knew how it would be if I told you."

"But they will all know to-morrow, will they not?"

"Leave that to me. You have coaxed me out of my secret, and you
are bound to keep it." And then he went away well pleased. This
description of delight on his sister's part was the first instalment
of that joy which he had promised himself from the satisfaction of
his family.

Lady Fitzgerald had watched all that had passed, and had already
learned her mistake--her mistake in that she had prophesied that no
immediate proposal was likely to be made by her son. She now knew
well enough that he had made such a proposal, and that he had been
accepted.

And this greatly grieved her. She had felt certain from the few
slight words which Sir Thomas had spoken that there were valid
reasons why her son should not marry a penniless girl. That
conversation, joined to other things, to the man's visit, and her
husband's deep dejection, had convinced her that all was not right.
Some misfortune was impending over them, and there had been that in
her own early history which filled her with dismay as she thought of
this.

She had ardently desired to caution her son in this respect,--to
guard him, if possible, against future disappointment and future
sorrow. But she could not do so without obtaining in some sort her
husband's assent to her doing so. She resolved that she would talk it
over with Sir Thomas. But the subject was one so full of pain, and he
was so ill, and therefore she had put it off.

And now she saw that the injury was done. Nevertheless, she said
nothing either to Emmeline or to Herbert. If the injury were done,
what good could now result from talking? She doubtless would hear it
all soon enough. So she sat still, watching them.

On the following morning Sir Thomas did not come out to breakfast.
Herbert went into his room quite early, as was always his custom; and
as he left it for the breakfast-parlour he said, "Father, I should
like to speak to you just now about something of importance."

"Something of importance, Herbert; what is it? Anything wrong?" For
Sir Thomas was nervous, and easily frightened.

"Oh dear, no; nothing is wrong. It is nothing that will annoy you; at
least I think not. But it will keep till after breakfast. I will come
in again the moment breakfast is over." And so saying he left the
room with a light step.

In the breakfast-parlour it seemed to him as though everybody was
conscious of some important fact. His mother's kiss was peculiarly
solemn and full of solicitude; Aunt Letty smirked as though she was
aware of something--something over and above the great Protestant
tenets which usually supported her; and Mary had no joke to fling at
him.

"Emmeline," he whispered, "you have told."

"No, indeed," she replied. But what mattered it? Everybody would know
now in a few minutes. So he ate his breakfast, and then returned to
Sir Thomas.

"Father," said he, as soon as he had got into the arm-chair, in which
it was his custom to sit when talking with Sir Thomas, "I hope what
I am going to tell you will give you pleasure. I have proposed to a
young lady, and she has--accepted me."

"You have proposed, and have been accepted!"

"Yes, father."

"And the young lady--?"

"Is Lady Clara Desmond. I hope you will say that you approve of it.
She has no fortune, as we all know, but that will hardly matter to
me; and I think you will allow that in every other respect she is--"

Perfect, Herbert would have said, had he dared to express his true
meaning. But he paused for a moment to look for a less triumphant
word; and then paused again, and left his sentence incomplete, when
he saw the expression of his father's face.

"Oh, father! you do not mean to say that you do not like her?"

But it was not dislike that was expressed in his father's face, as
Herbert felt the moment after he had spoken. There was pain there,
and solicitude, and disappointment; a look of sorrow at the tidings
thus conveyed to him; but nothing that seemed to betoken dislike of
any person.

"What is it, sir? Why do you not speak to me? Can it be that you
disapprove of my marrying?"

Sir Thomas certainly did disapprove of his son's marrying, but he
lacked the courage to say so. Much misery that had hitherto come upon
him, and that was about to come on all those whom he loved so well,
arose from this lack of courage. He did not dare to tell his son that
he advised him for the present to put aside all such hopes. It would
have been terrible for him to do so; but he knew that in not doing so
he was occasioning sorrow that would be more terrible.

And yet he did not do it. Herbert saw clearly that the project was
distasteful to his father,--that project which he had hoped to have
seen received with so much delight; but nothing was said to him which
tended to make him alter his purpose.

"Do you not like her?" he asked his father, almost piteously.

"Yes, yes; I do like her, we all like her, very much indeed,
Herbert."

"Then why--"

"You are so young, my boy, and she is so very young, and--"

"And what?"

"Why, Herbert, it is not always practicable for the son even of a man
of property to marry so early in life as this. She has nothing, you
know."

"No," said the young man, proudly; "I never thought of looking for
money."

"But in your position it is so essential if a young man wishes to
marry."

Herbert had always regarded his father as the most liberal man
breathing,--as open-hearted and open-handed almost to a fault. To
him, his only son, he had ever been so, refusing him nothing, and
latterly allowing him to do almost as he would with the management
of the estate. He could not understand that this liberality should
be turned to parsimony on such an occasion as that of his son's
marriage.

"You think then, sir, that I ought not to marry Lady Clara?" said
Herbert very bitterly.

"I like her excessively," said Sir Thomas. "I think she is a sweet
girl, a very sweet girl, all that I or your mother could desire to
see in your wife; but--"

"But she is not rich."

"Do not speak to me in that tone, my boy," said Sir Thomas, with an
expression that would have moved his enemy to pity, let alone his
son. His son did pity him, and ceased to wear the angry expression of
face which had so wounded his father.

"But, father, I do not understand you," he said. "Is there any real
objection why I should not marry? I am more than twenty-two, and you,
I think, married earlier than that."

In answer to this Sir Thomas only sighed meekly and piteously.

"If you mean to say," continued the son, "that it will be
inconvenient to you to make me any allowance--"

"No, no, no; you are of course entitled to what you want, and as long
as I can give it, you shall have it."

"As long as you can give it, father!"

"As long as it is in my power, I mean. What can I want of anything
but for you--for you and them?"

After this Herbert sat silent for a while, leaning on his arm. He
knew that there existed some mischief, but he could not fathom
it. Had he been prudent, he would have felt that there was some
impediment to his love; some evil which it behoved him to fathom
before he allowed his love to share it; but when was a lover prudent?

"We should live here, should we not, father? No second establishment
would be necessary."

"Of course you would live here," said Sir Thomas, glad to be able to
look at the subject on any side that was not painful. "Of course you
would live here. For the matter of that, Herbert, the house should be
considered as your own if you so wished it."

Against this the son put in his most violent protest. Nothing on
earth should make him consider himself master of Castle Richmond as
long as his father lived. Nor would Clara,--his Clara, wish it. He
knew her well, he boasted. It would amply suffice to her to live
there with them all. Was not the house large enough? And, indeed,
where else could he live, seeing that all his interests were
naturally centred upon the property?

And then Sir Thomas did give his consent. It would be wrong to say
that it was wrung from him. He gave it willingly enough, as far
as the present moment was concerned. When it was once settled, he
assured his son that he would love Clara as his daughter. But,
nevertheless--

The father knew that he had done wrong; and Herbert knew that he
also, he himself, had done wrongly. He was aware that there was
something which he did not understand. But he had promised to see
Clara either that day or the next, and he could not bring himself
to unsay all that he had said to her. He left his father's room
sorrowful at heart, and discontented. He had expected that his
tidings would have been received in so far other a manner; that he
would have been able to go from his father's study up stairs to his
mother's room with so exulting a step; that his news, when once
the matter was ratified by his father's approval, would have flown
about the house with so loud a note of triumph. And now it was so
different! His father had consented; but it was too plain that there
was no room for any triumph.

"Well, Herbert!" said Emmeline, jumping up to meet him as he returned
to a small back drawing-room, through which he had gone to his
father's dressing-room. She had calculated that he would come there,
and that she might thus get the first word from him after the
interview was over.

But there was a frown upon his brow, and displeasure in his eyes.
There was none of that bright smile of gratified pride with which
she had expected that her greeting would have been met. "Is there
anything wrong?" she said. "He does not disapprove, does he?"

"Never mind; and do leave me now. I never can make you understand
that one is not always in a humour for joking." And so saying, he put
her aside, and passed on.

Joking! That was indeed hard upon poor Emmeline, seeing that her
thoughts were so full of him, that her heart beat so warmly for his
promised bride. But she said nothing, shrinking back abashed, and
vanishing out of the way. Could it be possible that her father should
have refused to receive Lady Clara Desmond as his daughter-in-law?

He then betook himself to a private territory of his own, where he
might be sure that he would remain undisturbed for some half-hour or
so. He would go to his mother, of course, but not quite immediately.
He would think over the matter, endeavouring to ascertain what it was
that had made his father's manner and words so painful to him.

But he could not get his thoughts to work rightly;--which getting of
the thoughts to work rightly is, by-the-by, as I take it, the hardest
work which a man is called upon to do. Not that the subject to be
thought about need in itself be difficult. Were one to say that
thoughts about hydrostatics and pneumatics are difficult to the
multitude, or that mental efforts in regions of political economy
or ethical philosophy are beyond ordinary reach, one would only
pronounce an evident truism, an absurd platitude. But let any man
take any subject fully within his own mind's scope, and strive to
think about it steadily, with some attempt at calculation as to
results. The chances are his mind will fly off, will-he-nill-he,
to some utterly different matter. When he wishes to debate within
himself that question of his wife's temper, he will find himself
considering whether he may not judiciously give away half a dozen
pairs of those old boots; or when it behoves him to decide whether it
shall be manure and a green crop, or a fallow season and then grass
seeds, he cannot keep himself from inward inquiry as to the meaning
of that peculiar smile on Mrs. Walker's face when he shook hands with
her last night.

Lord Brougham and Professor Faraday can, no doubt, command their
thoughts. If many men could do so, there would be many Lord Broughams
and many Professor Faradays.

At the present moment Herbert Fitzgerald had no right to consider
himself as following in the steps of either one or other of these
great men. He wished to think about his father's circumstances, but
his mind would fly off to Clara Desmond and her perfections. And
thus, though he remained there for half an hour, with his back to the
fire and his hands in his pockets, his deliberations had done him no
good whatever,--had rather done him harm, seeing that he had only
warmed himself into a firmer determination to go on with what he was
doing. And then he went to his mother.

She kissed him, and spoke very tenderly, nay affectionately, about
Clara; but even she, even his mother, did not speak joyously; and she
also said something about the difficulty of providing a maintenance
for a married son. Then to her he burst forth, and spoke somewhat
loudly.

"I cannot understand all this, mother. If either you or my father
know any reason why I should be treated differently from other sons,
you ought to tell me; not leave me to grope about in the dark."

"But, my boy, we both think that no son was ever entitled to more
consideration, or to kinder or more liberal treatment."

"Why do I hear all this, then, about the difficulty of my marrying?
Or if I hear so much, why do I not hear more? I know pretty well, I
believe, what is my father's income."

"If you do not, he would tell you for the asking."

"And I know that I must be the heir to it, whatever it is,--not that
that feeling would make any difference in my dealings with him, not
the least. And, under these circumstances, I cannot conceive why he
and you should look coldly upon my marriage."

"I look coldly on it, Herbert!"

"Do you not? Do you not tell me that there will be no income for me?
If that is to be so; if that really is the case; if the property has
so dwindled away, or become embarrassed--"

"Oh, Herbert! there never was a man less likely to injure his son's
property than your father."

"I do not mean that, mother. Let him do what he likes with it,
I should not upbraid him, even in my thoughts. But if it be
embarrassed; if it has dwindled away; if there be any reason why
I should not regard myself as altogether untrammelled with regard
to money, he ought to tell me. I cannot accuse myself of expensive
tastes."

"Dearest Herbert, nobody accuses you of anything."

"But I do desire to marry; and now I have engaged myself, and will
not break from my engagement, unless it be shown to me that I am
bound in honour to do so. Then, indeed--"

"Oh, Herbert! I do not know what you mean."

"I mean this: that I expect that Clara shall be received as my wife
with open arms--"

"And so she shall be if she comes."

"Or else that some reason should be given me why she should not come.
As to income, something must be done, I suppose. If the means at our
disposal are less than I have been taught to believe, I at any rate
will not complain. But they cannot, I think, be so small as to afford
any just reason why I should not marry."

"Your father, you see, is ill, and one can hardly talk to him fully
upon such matters at present."

"Then I will speak to Somers. He, at any rate, must know how the
property is circumstanced, and I suppose he will not hesitate to tell
me."

"I don't think Somers can tell you anything."

"Then what is it? As for the London estate, mother, that is all
moonshine. What if it were gone altogether? It may be that it is that
which vexes my father; but if so, it is a monomania."

"Oh, my boy, do not use such a word!"

"You know what I mean. If any doubt as to that is creating this
despondency, it only shows that though we are bound to respect and
relieve my father's state of mind, we are not at all bound to share
it. What would it really matter, mother, if that place in London were
washed away by the Thames? There is more than enough left for us all,
unless--"

"Ah, Herbert, that is it."

"Then I will go to Somers, and he shall tell me. My father's interest
in this property cannot have been involved without his knowledge; and
circumstanced as we and my father are, he is bound to tell me."

"If there be anything within his knowledge to tell, he will tell it."

"And if there be nothing within his knowledge, then I can only look
upon all this as a disease on my poor father's part. I will do all I
can to comfort him in it; but it would be madness to destroy my whole
happiness because he labours under delusions."

Lady Fitzgerald did not know what further to say. She half believed
that Sir Thomas did labour under some delusion; but then she half
believed also that he had upon his mind a sorrow, terribly real,
which was in no sort delusive. Under such circumstances, how could
she advise her son? Instead of advising him, she caressed him.

"But I may claim this from you, mother, that if Somers tells me
nothing which ought to make me break my word to Clara, you will
receive her as your daughter. You will promise me that, will you
not?"

Lady Fitzgerald did promise, warmly; assuring him that she already
dearly loved Clara Desmond, that she would delight in having such
a daughter-in-law, and that she would go to her to welcome her as
such as soon as ever he should bid her do so. With this Herbert was
somewhat comforted, and immediately started on his search after Mr.
Somers.

I do not think that any person is to be found, as a rule, attached
to English estates whose position is analogous to that of an Irish
agent. And there is a wide misunderstanding in England as to these
Irish functionaries. I have attempted, some pages back, to describe
the national delinquencies of a middleman, or profit-renter. In
England we are apt to think that the agents on Irish properties are
to be charged with similar shortcomings. This I can assert to be a
great mistake; and I believe that, as a class, the agents on Irish
properties do their duty in a manner beneficial to the people.

That there are, or were, many agents who were also middlemen, or
profit-renters, and that in this second position they were a nuisance
to the country, is no doubt true. But they were no nuisance in their
working capacity as agents. That there are some bad agents there can
be no doubt, as there are also some bad shoemakers.

The duties towards an estate which an agent performs in Ireland
are, I believe, generally shared in England between three or four
different persons. The family lawyer performs part, the estate
steward performs part, and the landlord himself performs part;--as to
small estates, by far the greater part.

In Ireland, let the estate be ever so small--eight hundred a year we
will say--all the working of the property is managed by the agent. It
is he who knows the tenants, and the limits of their holdings; it is
he who arranges leases, and allows--or much more generally does not
allow--for improvements. He takes the rent, and gives the order for
the ejection of tenants if he cannot get it.

I am far from saying that it would not be well that much of this
should be done by the landlord himself;--that all of it should be so
done on a small property. But it is done by agents; and, as a rule
is, I think, done honestly.

Mr. Somers was agent to the Castle Richmond property, and as he took
to himself as such five per cent. on all rents paid, and as he was
agent also to sundry other small properties in the neighbourhood,
he succeeded in making a very snug income. He had also an excellent
house on the estate, and was altogether very much thought of; on the
whole, perhaps, more than was Sir Thomas. But in this respect it was
probable that Herbert might soon take the lead.

He was a large, heavy, consequential man, always very busy, as though
aware of being one of the most important wheels that kept the Irish
clock agoing; but he was honest, kind-hearted in the main, true as
steel to his employers, and good-humoured--as long as he was allowed
to have his own way. In these latter days he had been a little soured
by Herbert's interference, and had even gone so far as to say that,
"in his humble judgment, Mr. Fitzgerald was wrong in doing"--so and
so. But he generally called him Herbert, was always kind to him, and
in his heart of hearts loved him dearly. But that was a matter of
course, for had he not been agent to the estate before Herbert was
born?

Immediately after his interview with his mother, Mr. Herbert rode
over to Mr. Somers's house, and there found him sitting alone in his
office. He dashed immediately into the subject that had brought him
there. "I have come, Mr. Somers," said he, "to ask you a question
about the property."

"About the Castle Richmond property?" said Mr. Somers, rather
surprised by his visitor's manner.

"Yes; you know in what a state my poor father now is."

"I know that Sir Thomas is not very well. I am sorry to say that it
is long since he has been quite himself."

"There is something that is preying upon his spirits."

"I am afraid so, Herbert."

"Then tell me fairly, Mr. Somers, do you know what it is?"

"Not--in--the least. I have no conception whatever, and never have
had any. I know no cause for trouble that should disquiet him."

"There is nothing wrong about the property?"

"Not to my knowledge."

"Who has the title-deeds?"

"They are at Coutts's."

"You are sure of that?"

"Well; as sure as a man can be of a thing that he does not see. I
have never seen them there; indeed, have never seen them at all; but
I feel no doubt in my own mind as to their being at the bankers."

"Is there much due on the estate?"

"Very little. No estate in county Cork has less on it. Miss Letty has
her income, and when Poulnasherry was bought,--that townland lying
just under Berryhill, where the gorse cover is, part of the purchase
money was left on mortgage. That is still due; but the interest is
less than a hundred a year."

"And that is all?"

"All that I know of."

"Could there be encumbrances without your knowing it?"

"I think not. I think it is impossible. Of all men your father is the
last to encumber his estates in a manner unknown to his agent, and to
pay off the interest in secret."

"What is it then, Mr. Somers?"

"I do not know." And then Mr. Somers paused. "Of course you have
heard of a visit he received the other day from a stranger?"

"Yes; I heard of it."

"People about here are talking of it. And he--that man, with
a younger man--they are still living in Cork, at a little
drinking-house in South Main Street. The younger man has been seen
down here twice."

"But what can that mean?"

"I do not know. I tell you everything that I do know."

Herbert exacted a promise from him that he would continue to tell him
everything which he might learn, and then rode back to Castle
Richmond.

"The whole thing must be a delusion," he said to himself; and
resolved that there was no valid reason why he should make Clara
unhappy by any reference to the circumstance.




CHAPTER XIII.

MR. MOLLETT RETURNS TO SOUTH MAIN STREET.


I must now take my readers back to that very unsavoury public-house
in South Main Street, Cork, in which, for the present, lived Mr.
Matthew Mollett and his son Abraham.

I need hardly explain to a discerning public that Mr. Matthew Mollett
was the gentleman who made that momentous call at Castle Richmond,
and flurried all that household.

"Drat it!" said Mrs. Jones to herself on that day, as soon as she
had regained the solitude of her own private apartment, after having
taken a long look at Mr. Mollett in the hall. On that occasion she
sat down on a low chair in the middle of the room, put her two hands
down substantially on her two knees, gave a long sigh, and then made
the above exclamation,--"Drat it!"

Mrs. Jones was still thoroughly a Saxon, although she had lived for
so many years among the Celts. But it was only when she was quite
alone that she allowed herself the indulgence of so peculiarly Saxon
a mode of expressing either her surprise or indignation.

"It's the same man," she said to herself, "as come that day, as sure
as eggs;" and then for five minutes she maintained her position,
cogitating. "And he's like the other fellow too," she continued.
"Only, somehow he's not like him." And then another pause. "And yet
he is; only it can't be; and he ain't just so tall, and he's older
like." And then, still meditating, Mrs. Jones kept her position for
full ten minutes longer; at the end of which time she got up and
shook herself. She deserved to be bracketed with Lord Brougham and
Professor Faraday, for she had kept her mind intent on her subject,
and had come to a resolution. "I won't say nothing to nobody,
noways," was the expression of her mind's purpose. "Only I'll tell
missus as how he was the man as come to Wales." And she did tell so
much to her mistress--as we have before learned.

Mr. Mollett had gone down from Cork to Castle Richmond in one
of those delightful Irish vehicles called a covered car. An
inside-covered car is an equipage much given to shaking, seeing that
it has a heavy top like a London cab, and that it runs on a pair of
wheels. It is entered from behind, and slopes backwards. The sitter
sits sideways, between a cracked window on one side and a cracked
doorway on the other; and as a draught is always going in at the ear
next the window, and out at the ear next the door, it is about as
cold and comfortless a vehicle for winter as may be well imagined.
Now the journey from Castle Richmond to Cork has to be made right
across the Boggeragh Mountains. It is over twenty miles Irish; and
the road is never very good. Mr. Mollett, therefore, was five hours
in the covered car on his return journey; and as he had stopped for
lunch at Kanturk, and had not hurried himself at that meal, it was
very dark and very cold when he reached the house in South Main
Street.

I think I have explained that Mr. Mollett senior was not absolutely
a drunkard; but nevertheless, he was not averse to spirits in cold
weather, and on this journey had warmed himself with whisky once or
twice on the road. He had found a shebeen house when he crossed the
Nad river, and another on the mountain-top, and a third at the point
where the road passes near the village of Blarney, and at all these
convenient resting-spots Mr. Mollett had endeavoured to warm himself.

There are men who do not become absolutely drunk, but who do become
absolutely cross when they drink more than is good for them; and of
such men Mr. Mollett was one. What with the cold air, and what with
the whisky, and what with the jolting, Mr. Mollett was very cross
when he reached the Kanturk Hotel, so that he only cursed the driver
instead of giving him the expected gratuity.

"I'll come to yer honour in the morning," said the driver.

"You may go to the devil in the morning," answered Mr. Mollett; and
this was the first intimation of his return which reached the ears of
his expectant son.

"There's the governor," said Aby, who was then flirting with Miss
O'Dwyer in the bar. "Somebody's been stroking him the wrong way of
the 'air."

The charms of Miss O'Dwyer in these idle days had been too much for
the prudence of Mr. Abraham Mollett; by far too much, considering
that in his sterner moments his ambition led him to contemplate a
match with a young lady of much higher rank in life. But wine, which
"inspires us" and fires us


   "With courage, love, and joy,"


had inspired him with courage to forget his prudence, and with love
for the lovely Fanny.

"Now, nonsense, Mr. Aby," she had said to him a few minutes before
the wheels of the covered car were heard in South Main Street. "You
know you main nothing of the sort."

"By 'eavens, Fanny, I mean every word of it; may this drop be my
poison if I don't. This piece of business here keeps me and the
governor hon and hoff like, and will do for some weeks perhaps; but
when that's done, honly say the word, and I'll make you Mrs. M. Isn't
that fair now?"

"But, Mr. Aby--"

"Never mind the mister, Fan, between friends."

"La! I couldn't call you Aby without it; could I?"

"Try, my darling."

"Well--Aby--there now. It does sound so uppish, don't it? But tell
me this now; what is the business that you and the old gentleman is
about down at Kanturk?"

Abraham Mollett hereupon had put one finger to his nose, and then
winked his eye.

"If you care about me, as you say you do, you wouldn't be shy of just
telling me as much as that."

"That's business, Fan; and business and love don't hamalgamate like
whisky and sugar."

"Then I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Aby; I don't want to have
anything to do with a man who won't show his rispect by telling me
his sacrets."

"That's it, is it, Fan?"

"I suppose you think I can't keep a sacret. You think I'd be telling
father, I suppose."

"Well, it's about some money that's due to him down there."

"Who from?"

"He expects to get it from some of those Fitzgerald people."

In saying so much Mr. Mollett the younger had not utterly abandoned
all prudence. He knew very well that the car-driver and others would
be aware that his father had been to Castle Richmond; and that it was
more than probable that either he or his father would have to make
further visits there. Indeed, he had almost determined that he would
go down to the baronet himself. Under these circumstances it might be
well that some pretext for these visits should be given.

"Which Fitzgerald, Mr. Aby? Is it the Hap House young man?"

"Hap House. I never heard of such a place. These people live at
Castle Richmond."

"Oh--h--h! If Mr. Mollett have money due there, sure he have a good
mark to go upon. Why, Sir Thomas is about the richest man in these
parts."

"And who is this other man; at 'Appy--what is it you call his place?"

"Hap House. Oh, it's he is the thorough-going young gentleman.
Only they say he's a leetle too fast. To my mind, Mr. Owen is the
finest-looking man to be seen anywhere's in the county Cork."

"He's a flame of yours, is he, Fan?"

"I don't know what you main by a flame. But there's not a girl in
Cork but what likes the glance of his eye. They do say that he'd have
Lady Clara Desmond; only there ain't no money."

"And what's he to these other people?"

"Cousin, I believe; or hardly so much as that, I'm thinking. But all
the same if anything was to happen to young Mr. Herbert, it would all
go to him."

"It would, would it?"

"So people say."

"Mr. 'Erbert is the son of the old cock at Castle Richmond, isn't
he?"

"Just so. He's the young cock; he, he, he!"
