his life, she felt that moment would be her last.  For, now, to sate
her eyes with gazing on him, to hear the sound of his voice, to receive
his smiles, seemed to her a joy she could only surrender with her
existence.  What then was the prospect of so soon losing him, even to
crown himself with honor, but to her a living death?

TO defer his departure was all her study--all her hope; and fearful that
his restless valor might urge him to accompany Murray in his intended
convoy of Helen to the Tweed, she determined to persuade her nephew to
set off without the knowledge of his general.  She did not allow that
it was the youthful beauty, and more lovely mind of her
daughter-in-law, which she feared; even to herself she cloaked her
alarm under the plausible excuse of care for the chieftain's safety.
Composed by this mental arrangement, her disturbed features became
smooth, and with even a sedate air she received her lord and his brave
friends, when they soon after entered the chamber.

But the object of her wishes did not appear.  Wallace had taken Lord
Lennox to view the dispositions of the fortress.  Ill satisfied as she
was with his prolonged absence, she did not fail to turn it to
advantage; and while her lord and his friends were examining a draft of
Scotland (which Wallace had sketched after she left the
banqueting-room), she took Lord Andrew aside, to converse with him on
the subject now nearest to her heart.

"It certainly belongs to me alone, her kinsman and friend, to protect
Helen to the Tweed, if there she must go," returned Murray; "but, my
good lady, I cannot comprehend why I am to lead my fair cousin such a
pilgrimage.  She is not afraid of heroes! you are safe in Dumbarton,
and why not bring her here also?"

"Not for worlds!" exclaimed the countess, thrown off her guard.  Murray
looked at her with surprise.  It recalled her to self-possession, and
she resumed: "So lovely a creature in this castle would be a dangerous
magnet.  You must have known that it was the hope of obtaining her
which attracted the Lord Soulis and Earl de Valence to Bothwell.  The
whole castle rung with the quarrel of these two lords upon her account,
when you so fortunately effected her escape.  Should it be known that
she is here, the same fierce desire of obtaining her would give double
incitement to De Valence to recover the place; and the consequences,
who can answer for?"

By this argument Murray was persuaded to relinquish the idea of
conveying Helen to Dumbarton; but remembering what Wallace had said
respecting the safety of a religious sanctuary, he advised that she
should be left at St. Fillan's till the cause of Scotland might be more
firmly established.  "Send a messenger to inform her of the rescue of
Dumbarton, and of your and my uncle's health," continued he, "and that
will be sufficient to make her happy."

That she was not to be thrown in Wallace's way satisfied Lady Mar; and
indifferent whether Helen's seclusion were under the Elidon tree or the
Holyrood, she approved Murray's decision.  Relieved from apprehension,
her face became again dressed in smiles, and, with a bounding step, she
rose to welcome the re-entrance of Wallace with the Earl of Lennox.

Absorbed in one thought, every charm she possessed was directed to the
same point.  She played finely on the lute and sung with all the grace
of her country.  What gentle heart was not to be affected by music?
She determined it should be once of the spells by which she meant to
attract Wallace.  She took up one of the lutes (which with other
musical instruments decorated the apartments of the luxurious De
Valence), and touching it with exquisite delicacy, breathed the most
pathetic air her memory could dictate.

   "If on the heath she moved, her breast was whiter than the down of Cana;
    If on the sea-beat shore, than the foam of the rolling ocean.
    Her eyes were two stars of light.  Her face was Heaven's bow in showers;
    Her dark hair flowed around it, like the streaming clouds,
    Thou wert the dweller of souls, white-handed Strinadona!"

Wallace rose from his chair, which had been placed near her.  She had
deigned that these tender words of the bard of Morven should suggest to
her hearer the observation of her own resembling beauties.  But he saw
in them only the lovely dweller of his own soul; and walking toward a
window, stood there with his eyes fixed on the descending sun.  "So
hath set all my joys.  So is life to me, a world without a sun-cold,
cold, and charmless!"

The countess vainly believed that some sensibility advantageous to her
new passion had caused the agitation with which she saw him depart from
her side; and, intoxicated with the idea, she ran through many a
melodious descant, till toughing on the first strains of Thusa ha measg
na reultan mor, she saw Wallace start from his contemplative position,
and with a pale countenance leave the room.  There was something in
this abruptness which excited the alarm of the Earl of Lennox, who had
also been listening to the songs; he rose instantly, and overtaking the
chief at the threshold, inquired what was the matter?  "Nothing,"
answered Wallace, forcing a smile, in which the agony of his mind was
too truly imprinted; "but music displeased me."  With this reply he
disappeared.  The excuse seemed strange but it was true; for she whose
notes were to him sweeter than the thrush--whose angel strains used to
greet his morning and evening hours--was silent in the grave!  He should
no more see her white hand upon the lute; he should no more behold that
bosom, brighter than foam upon the wave, to him?  A soulless sound, or
a direful knell, to recall the remembrance of all he had lost.

Such were his thoughts when the words of Thusa ha measg rung from Lady
Mar's voice.  Those were the strains which Halbert used to breathe from
his heart to call Marion to her nightly slumbers--those were the strains
with which that faithful servant had announced that she slept to wake
no more!

What wonder, then, that Wallace fled from the apartment, and buried
himself, and his aroused grief, amid the distant solitudes of the
beacon-hill!

While looking over the shoulder of his uncle, on the station which
Stirling held amid the Ochil hills, Edwin had at intervals cast a
side-long glance upon the changing complexion of his commander; and no
sooner did he see him hurry from the room, than fearful of some
disaster having befallen the garrison (which Wallace did not choose
immediately to mention), he also stole out of the apartment.

After seeking the object of his anxiety for a long time, without avail,
he was returning on his steps, when, attracted by the splendor of the
moon silvering the beacon-hill, he ascended, to once at least tread
that acclivity in light which he had so miraculously passed in
darkness.  Scarce a zephyr fanned the sleeping air.  He moved on with a
flying step, till a deep sigh arrested him.  He stopped and listened:
it was repeated again and again.  He gently drew near, and saw a human
figure reclining on the ground.  The head of the apparent mourner was
unbonneted, and the brightness of the moon shone on his polished
forehead.  Edwin thought the sound of those sighs was the same he had
often heard from the object of his search.  He walked forward.  Again
the figure sighed; but with a depth so full of piercing woe, that Edwin
hesitated.

A cloud had passed over the moon; but, sailing off again, displayed to
the anxious boy that he had indeed drawn very near his friend.  "Who
goes there?" exclaimed Wallace, starting on his feet.

"Your Edwin," returned the youth.  "I feared something wrong had
happened, when I saw you look so sad, and leave the room abruptly."

Wallace pressed his hand in silence.  "Then some evil has befallen
you?" inquired Edwin, in an agitated voice; "you do not speak!"

Wallace seated himself on a stone, and leaned his head upon the hilt of
his sword.  "No new evil has befallen me, Edwin; but there is such a
thing as remembrance, that stabs deeper than the dagger's point."

"What remembrance can wound you, my general?  The Abbott of St. Colomba
has often told me that memory is a balm to every ill with the good; and
have not you been good to all?  The benefactor, the preserver of
thousands!  Surely, if man can be happy, it must be Sir William
Wallace!"

"And so I am, my Edwin, when I contemplate the end.  But, in the
interval, with all thy sweet philosophy, is it not written here 'that
man was made to mourn?'"  He put his hand on his heart; and then, after
a short pause, resumed: "Doubly I mourn, doubly am I bereaved, for, had
it not been for an enemy, more fell than he who beguiled Adam of
Paradise, I might have been a father; I might have lived to have
gloried in a son like thee; I might have seen my wedded angel clasp
such a blessing to her bosom; but now, both are cold in clay!  These
are the recollections which sometimes draw tears down thy leader's
cheeks.  And do not believe, brother of my soul," said he, pressing the
now weeping Edwin to his breast, "that they disgrace his manhood.  The
Son of God wept over the tomb of his friend; and shall I deny a few
tears, dropped in stealth, over the grave of my wife and child?"

Edwin sobbed aloud.  "No son could love you dearer than I do.  Ah, let
my duty, my affection, teach you to forget you have lost a child.  I
will replace all to you but your Marion; and her, the pitying Son of
Mary will restore to you in the kingdom of heaven."

Wallace looked steadfastly at the young preacher.  "'Out of the mouths
of babes we shall hear wisdom!'  Thine, dear Edwin, I will lay to
heart.  Thou shalt comfort me when my hermit-soul shuts out all the
world besides."

"Then I am indeed your brother!" cried the happy youth; "admit me but
to your heart, and no fraternal, no filial tie, shall be more strongly
linked than mine."

"What tender affections I can spare from those resplendent regions,"
answered Wallace, pointing to the skies, "are thine.  The fervors of my
once ardent soul are Scotland's, or I die.  But thou art too young, my
brother," added he, interrupting himself, "to understand all his
feelings, all the seeming contradictions, of my contending heart."

"Not so," answered Edwin, with a modest blush; "what was Lady Marion's,
you now devote to Scotland.  The blaze of those affections which were
hers, would consume your being, did you not pour it forth on your
country.  Were you not a patriot, grief would prey upon your life."

"You have read me, Edwin," replied Wallace; "and that you may never
love to idolatry, learn this also.  Though Scotland lay in ruins, I was
happy; I felt no captivity while in Marion's arms; even oppression was
forgotten when she made the sufferer's tears cease to flow.  She
absorbed my thoughts, my wishes, my life!-and she was wrested from me,
that I might feel myself a slave, that the iron might enter into my
soul, with which I was to pull down tyranny, and free my country.  Mark
the sacrifice, young man," cried Wallace, starting on his feet; "it now
even smokes, and the flames are here inextinguishable."  He struck his
hand upon his breast.  "Never love as I have loved, and you will be a
patriot, without needing to taste my bitter cup!"

Edwin trembled; his tears were checked.  "I can love no one better than
I do you, my general! and is there any crime in that?"

Wallace in a moment recovered from the transient wildness which had
possessed him.  "None, my Edwin," replied he; "the affections are never
criminal but when by their excess they blind us to other duties.  The
offense of mine is judged, and I bow to the penalty.  When that is
paid, then may my ashes sleep in rescued Scotland!  Then may the God of
victory and of mercy grant that the seraph spirits of my wife and
infant may meet my pardoned soul in paradise."  Edwin wept afresh.
"Cease, dear boy!" said he; "these presages are very comforting; they
whisper that the path of glory leads thy brother to his home."  As he
spoke he took the arm of the silent Edwin (whose sensibility locked up
the powers of speech), and putting it through his, they descended the
hill together.

On the open ground before the great tower they were met by Murray.  "I
come to seek you," cried he.  "We have had woe on woe in the citadel
since you left it."

"Nothing very calamitous," returned Wallace, "if we may guess by the
merry aspect of the messenger."

"Only a little whirlwind of my aunt's, in which we have had airs and
showers enough to wet us through and blow us dry again."

The conduct of the lady had been even more extravagant than her nephew
chose to describe.  After the knight's departure, when the chiefs
entered into conversation respecting his future plans, and Lennox
mentioned that when his men should arrive (for whom he had that evening
dispatched Ker), it was Wallace's intention to march immediately for
Stirling, whither, it could hardly be doubted, Aymer de Valence had
fled, "I shall be left here," continued the earl, "to assist you, Lord
Mar, in the severer duties attendant on being governor of this place."

No sooner did these words reach the ears of the countess than, struck
with despair, she hastened toward her husband, and earnestly exclaimed,
"You will not suffer this!"

"No," returned the earl, mistaking her meaning; "not being able to
perform the duties attendant on the responsibilities station with which
Wallace would honor me, I shall relinquish it altogether to Lord
Lennox, and be amply satisfied in finding myself under his protection."

"Ah, where is protection without Sir William Wallace?" cried she.  "If
he go, our enemies will return.  Who then will repel them from these
walls?  Who will defend your wife and only son from falling again into
the hands of our doubly incensed foes?"

Mar observed Lord Lennox color at this imputation on his bravery, and
shocked at the affront which his unreflecting wife seemed to give so
gallant a chief, he hastily replied, "Though this wounded arm cannot
boast, yet the Earl of Lennox is an able representative of our
commander."

"I will die, madam," interrupted Lennox, "before anything hostile
approaches you or your children."

She attended slightly to this pledge, and again addressed her lord with
fresh arguments for the detention of Wallace.  Sir Roger Kirkpatrick,
impatient under all this foolery, as he justly deemed it, abruptly
said, "Be assured, fair lady, Israel's Samson was not brought into the
world his duty better than allow himself to be tied to any nursery
girdle in Christendom."

The brave old earl was offended with this roughness, but ere he could
so express himself, the object darted her own severe retort on
Kirkpatrick, and then, turning to her husband, with an hysterical sob,
exclaimed, "It is well seen what will be my fate when Wallace is gone!
Would he have stood by and beheld me thus insulted?"

Distressed with shame at her conduct, and anxious to remove her fears,
Lord Mar softly whispered her, and threw his arm about her waist.  She
thrust him from her.  "You care not what may become of me, and my heart
disdains your blandishments."

Lennox rose in silence, and walked to the other end of the chamber.
Sir Roger Kirkpatrick followed him, muttering, pretty audibly, his
thanks to St. Andrew that he had never been yoked with a wife.
Scrymgeour and Murray tried to allay the storm in her bosom by
circumstantially detailing how the fortress must be equally safe under
the care of Lennox as of Wallace.  But they discoursed in vain; she was
obstinate, and at last left the room in a passion of tears.

On the return of Wallace, Lord Lennox advanced to meet him.  "What
shall we do?" said he.  "Without you have the witchcraft of Hercules,
and can be in two places at once, I fear we must either leave the rest
of Scotland to fight for itself, or never restore peace to this castle!"

Wallace smiled, but before he could answer, Lady Mar, having heard his
voice ascending the stairs, suddenly entered the room.  She held her
infant in her arms.  Her air was composed, but her eyes yet shone in
tears.  At this sight Lord Lennox, sufficiently disgusted with the
lady, taking Murray by the arm, withdrew with him from the apartment.

She approached Wallace: "You are come, my deliverer, to speak comfort
to the mother of this poor babe.  My cruel lord here, and the Earl of
Lennox, say you mean to abandon us in this castle?"

"It cannot be abandoned," returned the chief, "while they are in it.
But if so warlike a scene alarms you, would not a religious sanctuary-"

"Not for worlds!" cried she, interrupting him; "what altar is held
sacred by the enemies of our country!  O! wonder not, then," added she,
putting her face to that of her child, "that I should wish this
innocent babe never to be from under the wing of such a protector."

"But that is impossible, Joanna," rejoined the earl; "Sir William
Wallace has duties to perform superior to that of keeping watch over
any private family.  His presence is wanted in the field, and we should
be traitors to the cause did we detain him."

"Unfeeling Mar," cried she, bursting into tears, "thus to echo the
words of the barbarian Kirkpatrick; thus to condemn us to die!  You
will see another tragedy: your own wife and child seized by the
returning Southrons, and laid bleeding at your feet!"

Wallace walked from her much agitated.

"Rather inhuman, Joanna," whispered Lord Mar to her in an angry voice,
"to make such a reference to the presence of our protector!  I cannot
stay to listen to a pertinacity as insulting to the rest of our brave
leaders as it is oppressive to Sir William Wallace.  Edwin, you will
come for me when your aunt consents to be guided by right reason."
While yet speaking he entered the passage that led to his own apartment.

Lady Mar sat a few minutes silent.  She was not to be warned from her
determination by the displeasure of a husband whom she now regarded
with the impatience of a bondwoman toward her taskmaster; and only
solicitous to compass the detention of Sir William Wallace, she
resolved, if he would not remain at the castle, to persuade him to
conduct her himself to her husband's territories in the Isle of Bute.
She could contrive to make the journey occupy more than one day, and
for holding him longer she would trust to chance and her own
inventions.  With these resolutions she looked up.  Edwin was speaking
to Wallace.  "What does he tell you?" said she; "that my lord has left
me in displeasure?  Alas! he comprehends not a mother's anxiety for her
sole remaining child.  One of my sweet twins, my dear daughter, died on
my being brought a prisoner to this horrid fortress, and to lose this
also would be more than I could bear.  Look at this babe," cried she,
holding it up to him; "let it plead to you for its life!  Guard it,
noble Wallace, whatever may become of me!"

The appeal of a mother made instant way to Sir William's heart; even
her weaknesses, did they point to anxiety respecting her offspring,
were sacred with him.  "What would you have me do, madam?  If you fear
to remain here, tell me where you think you would be safer, and I will
be your conductor?"

She paused to repress the triumph with which this proposal filled her,
and then, with downcast eyes, replied: "In the seagirt Bute stands
Rothsay, a rude, but strong castle of my lord's.  It possesses nothing
to attract the notice of the enemy, and there I might remain in perfect
safety.  Lord Mar may keep his station here until a general victory
sends you, noble Wallace, to restore my child to its father."

Wallace bowed his assent to her proposal; and Edwin, remembering the
earl's injunction, inquired if he might inform him of what was decided.
When he left the room, Lady mar rose, and suddenly putting her son
into the arms of Wallace, rose, and said: "Let his sweet caresses thank
you."  Wallace trembled as he pressed its little mouth to his; and,
mistranslating this emotion, she dropped her face upon the infant's,
and in affecting to kiss it, rested her head upon the bosom of the
chief.  There was something in this action more than maternal; it
surprised and disconcerted Wallace.  "Madam," said he, drawing back,
and relinquishing the child.  "I do not require any thanks for serving
the wife and son of Lord Mar."

At that moment the earl entered.  Lady mar flattered herself that the
repelling action of Wallace, and his cold answer, had arisen from the
expectation of this entrance; yet blushing with something like
disappointment, she hastily uttered a few agitated words, to inform her
husband that Bute was to be her future sanctuary.

Lord Mar approved it, and declared his determination to accompany her.
"In my state, I can be of little use here," said he; "my family will
require protection, even in that seclusion; and therefore, leaving Lord
Lennox sole governor of Dumbarton, I shall unquestionably attend them
to Rothsay myself."

This arrangement would break in upon the lonely conversations she had
meditated to have with Wallace and therefore the countess objected to
the proposal.  But none of her arguments being admitted by her lord,
and as Wallace did not support them by a word, she was obliged to make
a merit of necessity, and consent to her husband being their companion.




Chapter XXVI.

Renfrewshire.


Toward evening the next day, Ker not only returned with the Earl of
Lennox's men, but brought with them Sir Eustace Maxwell of Carlaveroch.
That brave knight happened to be in the neighborhood the very same
night in which De Valence fled before the arms of Wallace across the
Clyde; and he no sooner saw the Scottish colors on the walls of
Dumbarton, than, finding out who was their planter, his soul took fire;
and stung with a generous ambition of equaling in glory his equal in
years, he determined to assist, while he emulated the victor.

To this end, he traversed the adjoining country, striving to enlighten
the understandings of the stupidly satisfied and to excite the
discontented, to revolt.  With most he failed.  Some took upon them to
lecture him on "fishing in troubled waters;" and warned him, if he
would keep his head on his shoulders, to wear his yoke in peace.
Others thought the project too arduous for men of small means; they
wished well to the arms of Sir William Wallace; and, should he continue
successful, would watch the moment to aid him with all their little
power.  Those who had much property, feared to risk its loss by
embracing a doubtful struggle.  Some were too great cowards to fight
for the rights they would gladly regain by the exertions of others.
And others, again, who had families, shrunk from taking part in a cause
which, should it fail, would not only put their lives in danger, but
expose their offspring to the revenge of a resentful enemy.  This was
the best apology of any that had been offered; natural affection was
the pleader; and though blinded to its true interest, such weakness had
an amiable source, and so was pardoned.  But the other pleas were so
basely selfish, so undeserving of anything but scorn, that Sir Eustace
Maxwell could not forbear expressing it.  "When Sir William Wallace is
entering full sail, you will send your hirelings to tow him in! but if
a plank could save him now, you would not throw it to him!  I
understand you, sirs, and shall trouble your patriotism no more."

In short, none but about a hundred poor fellows whom outrages had
rendered desperate, and a few brave spirits who would put all to the
hazard for so good a cause, could be prevailed on to hold themselves in
readiness to obey Sir Eustace, when he should see the moment to conduct
them to Sir William Wallace.  He was trying his eloquence among the
clan at Lennox, when Ker arriving, stamped his persuasions with truth;
and above five hundred men arranged themselves under their lord's
standard.  Maxwell gladly explained himself to Wallace's lieutenant;
and summoning his little reserve, they marched with flying pennons
through the town of Dumbarton.  At sight of so much larger a power than
they expected would venture to appear in arms, and sanctioned by the
example of the Earl of Lennox (whose name held a great influence in
those parts), several, who before had held back, from doubting their
own judgment, now came forward; and nearly eight hundred well-appointed
men marched into the fortress.

So large a reinforcement was gratefully received by Wallace; and he
welcomed Maxwell with a cordiality which inspired that young knight
with an affection equal to his zeal.

A council being held respecting the disposal of the new troops, it was
decided that the Lennox men must remain with their earl in garrison;
while those brought by Maxwell, and under his command, should follow
Wallace in the prosecution of his conquests along with his own especial
people.

These preliminaries being arranged, the remainder of the day was
dedicated to more mature deliberations--to the unfolding of the plan of
warfare which Wallace had conceived.  As he first sketched the general
outline of his design, and then proceeded to the particulars of each
military movement, he displayed such comprehensiveness of mind; such
depths of penetration; clearness of apprehension; facility in
expedients; promptitude in perceiving, and fixing on the most favorable
points of attack; explaining their bearings upon the power of the
enemy; and where the possession of such a castle would compel the
neighboring ones to surrender; and where occupying the hills with bands
of resolute Scots, would be a more efficient bulwark than a thousand
towers--that Maxwell gazed on him with admiration, and Lennox with
wonder.

Mar had seen the power of his arms; Murray had already drunk the
experience of a veteran from his genius; hence they were not surprised
on hearing that which filled strangers with amazement.

Lennox gazed on his leader's youthful countenance, doubting whether he
really were listening to military plans, great as general ever formed;
or were visited, in vision, by some heroic shade, who offered to his
sleeping fancy designs far vaster than his waking faculties could have
conceived.  He had thought that the young Wallace might have won
Dumbarton by a bold stroke, and that when his invincible courage should
be steered by stroke, and that when his invincible courage should be
steered by graver heads, every success might be expected from his arms;
and saw that when turned to any cause of policy, "the Gordian knot of
it he did unloose, familiar as his garter," he marveled, and said
within himself, "Surely this man is born to be a sovereign!"

Maxwell, though equally astonished, was not so rapt.  "You have made
arms the study of your life?" inquired he.

"It was the study of my earliest days," returned Wallace.  "But when
Scotland lost her freedom, as the sword was not drawn in her defense, I
looked not where it lay.  I then studied the arts of peace; that is
over; and now the passion of my soul revives.  When the mind is bent on
one object only, all becomes clear that leads to it; zeal, in such
cases, is almost genius."

Soon after these observations, it was admitted that Wallace might
attend Lord mar and his family on the morrow to the Isle of Bute.

When the dawn broke, he arose from his heather bed in the great tower;
and having called forth twenty of the Bothwell men to escort their
lord, he told Ireland he should expect to have a cheering account of
the wounded on his return.

"But to assure the poor fellows," rejoined the honest soldier, "that
something of yourself still keeps watch over them.  I pray you leave me
the sturdy sword with which you won Dumbarton.  It shall be hung up in
their sight,** and a good soldier's wound will heal by looking on it."

**This tower, within the fortress of Dumbarton, is still called
Wallace's tower; and a sword is shown there as the one that belonged to
Wallace.

Wallace smiled.  "Were it our holy King David's we might expect such a
miracle.  But you are welcome to it; and here let it remain till I take
it hence.  Meanwhile, lend me yours, Stephen, for a truer never fought
for Scotland."

A glow of conscious valor flushed the cheek of the veteran.  "There, my
dear lord," said he, presenting it; "it will not dishonor your hand,
for it cut down many a proud Norwegian on the field of Largs."

Wallace took the sword, and turned to meet Murray with Edwin in the
portal.  When they reached the citadel, Lennox and all the officers in
the garrison were assembled to bid their chief a short adieu.  Wallace
spoke to each separately, and then approaching the countess, led her
down the rock to the horses which were to convey them tot he Frith of
Clyde.  Lord Mar, between Murray and Edwin, followed; and the servants
and guard completed the suit.

Being well mounted, they pleasantly pursued their way, avoiding all
inhabited places, and resting in the deepest recesses of the hills.
Lord Mar proposed traveling all night; but at the close of the evening
his countess complained of fatigue, declaring she could not advance
further than the eastern bank of the River Cart.  No shelter appeared
in sight, excepting a thick and extensive wood of hazels; but the air
being mild, and the lady declaring her inability of moving on, Lord Mar
at last became reconciled to his wife and son passing the night with no
other canopy than the trees.  Wallace ordered cloaks to be spread on
the ground for the countess and her women; and seeing them laid to
rest, planted his men to keep guard around the circle.

The moon had sunk in the west before the whole of his little camp were
asleep; but when all seemed composed, he wandered forth by the dim
light of the stars to view the surrounding country--a country he had so
often traversed in his boyish days.  A little onward, in green
Renfrewshire, lay the lands of his father; but that Ellerslie of his
ancestors, like his own Ellerslie of Clydesdale, his country's enemies
had leveled with the ground.  He turned in anguish of heart toward the
south, for there less racking remembrances hovered over the distant
hills.

Leaning on the shattered stump of an old tree, he fixed his eyes on the
far-stretching plain, which alone seemed to divide him from the
venerable Sir Ronald Crawford and his youthful haunts at Ayr.  Full of
thoughts of her who used to share those happy scenes, he heard a sigh
behind him.  He turned round, and beheld a female figure disappear
among the trees. He stood motionless; again it met his view; it seemed
to approach.  A strange emotion stirred within him.  When he last
passed these borders, he was bringing his bride from Ayr!  What then
was this ethereal visitant?  The silver light of the stars was not
brighter than its airy robes, which floated in the wind.  His heart
paused--it beat violently--still the figure advanced.  Lost in the
wilderness of his imagination, he exclaimed, "Marion!" and darted
forward, as if to rush into her embrace.  But it fled, and again
vanished.  He dropped upon the ground in speechless disappointment.

"'Tis false!" cried he, recovering from his first expectation; "'tis a
phantom of my own creating.  The pure spirit of Marion would never fly
from me; I loved her too well.  She would not thus redouble my grief.
But I shall go to thee, wife of my soul!" cried he; "and that is
comfort.  Balm, indeed, is the Christian's hope!"

Such were his words, such were his thoughts, till the coldness of the
hour and the exhaustion of nature putting a friendly seal upon his
senses, he sunk upon the bank, and fell into a profound sleep.

When he awoke the lark was caroling above his head; and to his surprise
he found a plaid was laid over him.  He threw it off, and beheld Edwin
seated at his feet.  "This has been your doing, my kind brother," said
he, "but how came you to discover me?"

"I missed you when the dawn broke, and at last found you here, sleeping
under the dew."

"And has none else been astir?" inquired Wallace, thinking of the
figure he had seen.

"None that I know of.  All were fast asleep when I left the party."

Wallace began to fancy that he had been laboring under the impressions
of some powerful dream, and saying no more, he returned to the wood.
Finding everybody ready, he took his station; and setting forth, all
proceeded cheerfully, though slowly, through the delightful valleys of
Barochan.  By sunset they arrived at the point of embarkation.  The
journey ought to have been performed in half the time; but the countess
petitioned for long rests, a compliance with which the younger part of
the cavalcade conceded with reluctance.




Chapter XXVII.

The Frith of Clyde.


At Gourock, Murray engage two small vessels; one for the earl and
countess, with Wallace as their escort; the other for himself and
Edwin, to follow with a few of the men.

It was a fine evening, and they embarked with everything in their
favor.  The boatmen calculated on reaching Bute in a few hours; but ere
they had been half an hour at sea, the wind, veering about, obliged
them to woo its breezes by a traversing motion, which, though it
lengthened their voyage, increased its pleasantness by carrying them
often within near views of the ever-varying shores.  Sailing under a
side-wind, they beheld the huge irregular rocks of Dunoon, overhanging
the ocean; while from their projecting brows hung every shrub which can
live in that saline atmosphere.

"There," whispered Lady mar, gently inclining toward Wallace, "might
the beautiful mermaid of Corie Vrekin keep her court!  Observe how
magnificently those arching cliffs overhang the hollows, and how richly
they are studded with shells and sea-flowers!"

No flower of the field or of the ocean that came within the ken of
Wallace, wasted its sweetness unadmired.  He assented to the remarks of
Lady Mar, who continued to expatiate on the beauties of the shores
which they passed; and thus the hours flew pleasantly away, till,
turning the southern point of the Cowal Mountains, the scene suddenly
changed.  The wind, which had gradually been rising, blew a violent
gale from that part of the coast; and the sea, being pent between the
rocks which skirt the continent and the northern side of Bute, became
so boisterous, that the boatmen began to think they should be driven
upon the rocks of the island, instead of reaching its bay.  Wallace
tore down the sails, and laying his nervous arms to the oar, assisted
to keep the vessel off the breakers, against which the waves were
driving her.  The sky collected into a gloom; and while the teeming
clouds seemed descending even to rest upon the cracking masts, the
swelling of the ocean threatened to heave her up into their very bosoms.

Lady Mar looked with affright at the gathering tempest, and with
difficulty was persuaded to retire under the shelter of a little
awning.  The earl forgot his debility in the general terror; and tried
to reassure the boatmen.  But a tremendous sweep of the gale, driving
the vessel far across the head of Bute, shot her past the mouth of Loch
Fyne, toward the perilous rocks of Arran.  "Here our destruction is
certain!" cried the master of the bark, at the same time confessing his
ignorance of the navigation on this side of the island.  Lord Mar,
seizing the helm from the stupefied master, called to Wallace, "While
you keep the men to their duty," cried he, "I will steer."

The earl being perfectly acquainted with the coast, Wallace gladly saw
the helm in his hand.  But he had scarcely stepped forward himself to
give some necessary directions, when a heavy sea, breaking over the
deck, carried two of the poor mariners overboard.  Wallace instantly
threw out a couple of ropes.  Then, amidst a spray so blinding that the
vessel appeared in a cloud, and while buffeted on each side by the
raging of waves, which seemed contending to tear her to pieces, she lay
to for a few minutes, to rescue the men from the yawning gulf; one
caught a rope and was saved, but the other was seen no more.

Again the bark was set loose to the current.  Wallace, now with two
rowers only, applied his whole strength to their aid.  The master and
the third man were employed in the unceasing toil of laying out the
accumulating water.

While the anxious chief tugged at the oar, and watched the thousand
embattled cliffs which threatened destruction, his eye looked for the
vessel that contained his friends.  But the liquid mountains which
rolled around him prevented all view; and, with hardly a hope of seeing
them again, he pursued his attempt to preserve the lives of those
committed to his care.

All this while Lady Mar lay in a state of stupefaction.  Having fainted
at the first alarm of danger, she had fallen from swoon to swoon, and
now remained almost insensible upon the bosoms of her maids.  In a
moment the vessel struck with a great shock, and the next instant it
seemed to move with a velocity incredible.  "The whirpool! the
whirlpool!" resounded from every lip.  But again the rapid motion was
suddenly checked, and the women, fancying they had struck on the Vrekin
Rock, shrieked aloud.  The cry, and the terrified words which
accompanied it, aroused Lady Mar.  She started from her trance, and,
while the confusion redoubled, rushed toward the dreadful scene.

The mountainous waves and lowering clouds, borne forward by the blast,
anticipated the dreariness of night.  The last rays of the setting sun
had long passed away, and the deep shadows of the driving heavens cast
the whole into a  gloom, even more terrific than absolute darkness;
while the high and beetling rocks, towering aloft in precipitous walls,
mocked the hopes of the sea-beaten mariner, should he even buffet the
waters to reach their base; and the jagged shingles, deeply shelving
beneath the waves, or projecting their pointed summits upward, showed
the crew where the rugged death would meet them.

A little onward, a thousand massy fragments, rent by former tempests
from their parent cliffs, lay at the foundations of the immense
acclivities which faced the cause of their present alarm--a whirlpool
almost as terrific as that of Scarba.  The moment the powerful blast
drove the vessel within the influence of the outward edge of the first
circle of the vortex.  Wallace leaped from the deck on the rocks, and,
with the same rope in his hand with which he had saved the life of the
seaman, he called to the two men to follow him, who yet held similar
ropes, fastened like his own to the prow of the vessel; and being
obeyed, they strove by towing it along, to stem the suction of the
current.

It was at this instant that Lady Mar rushed forward upon deck.

"In for your life, Joanna!" exclaimed the earl.  She answered him not,
but looked wildly around her.  Nowhere could she see Wallace.

"Have I drowned him?" cried she, in a voice of frenzy, and striking the
women from her, who would have held her back.  "Let me clasp him, even
in the deep waters!"

Happily, the earl lost the last sentence in the roaring of the storm.

"Wallace, Wallace!" cried she, wringing her hands, and still struggling
with her women.  At that moment a huge wave, sinking before her,
discovered the object of her fears, straining along the surface of a
rock, and followed by the men in the same laborious task, tugging
forward the ropes to which the bark was attached.  She gazed at them
with wonder and affright, for, notwithstanding the beating of the
elements (which seeming to find their breasts of iron and their feet
armed with some preternatural adhesion to the cliff), they continued to
bear resolutely onward.  Fortunately, they did not now labor against
the wind.  Sometimes they pressed forward on the level edge of the
rock; then a yawning chasm forced them to leap from cliff to cliff, or
to spring on some more elevated projection.  Thus, contending with the
vortex and the storm, they at last arrived at the doubling of
Cuthonrock,** the point that was to clear them of this minor Corie
Vrekin.  But at that crisis the rope which Wallace held broke, and,
with the shock, he fell backward into the sea.  The foremost man
uttered a dreadful cry; but ere it could be echoed by his fellows,
Wallace had risen above the waves, and, beating their whelming waters
with his invincible arm, soon gained the vessel and jumped upon the
deck.  The point was doubled, but the next moment the vessel struck,
and in a manner that left no hope of getting her off.  All must take to
the water or perish, for the second shock would scatter her piecemeal.

**Cuthon means the mournful sound of waves.

Again Lady Mar appeared.  At sight of Wallace she forgot everything but
him; and perhaps would have thrown herself into his arms, had not the
anxious earl caught her in his own.

"Are we to die?" cried she to Wallace, in a voice of horror.

"I trust that God has decreed otherwise," was his reply.  "Compose
yourself; all may yet be well."

Lord Mar, from his yet unhealed wounds, could not swim; Wallace
therefore tore up the benches of the rowers, and binding them into the
form of a small raft, made it the vehicle for the earl and countess,
with her two maids and the child.  While the men were towing it, and
buffeting with it through the breakers, he too threw himself into the
sea to swim by its side, and be in readiness in case of accident.

Having gained the shore, or rather the broken rocks, that lie at the
foot of the stupendous craigs which surround the Isle of Arran, Wallace
and his sturdy assistants conveyed the countess and her terrified women
up their acclivities.  Fortunately for the shipwrecked voyagers, though
the wind raged, its violence was of some advantage, for it nearly
cleared the heavens of clouds, and allowed the moon to send forth her
guiding light.  By her lamp one of the men discovered the mouth of a
cavern, where Wallace gladly sheltered his dripping charges.

The child, whom he had guarded in his own arms during the difficult
ascent, he now laid on the bosom of its mother.  Lady mar kissed the
hand that relinquished it, and gave way to a flood of grateful tears.

The earl, as he sunk almost powerless against the side of the cave, yet
had strength enough to press Wallace to his heart.  "Ever preserver of
me and mine!" cried he, "how must I bless thee!-My wife, my child-"

"Have been saved to you, my friend," interrupted Wallace, "by the
presiding care of Him who walked the waves!  Without His especial arm
we must all have perished in this awful night; therefore let our
thanksgivings be directed to Him alone."

"So be it!" returned the earl, and dropping on his knees, he breathed
forth so pathetic and sublime a prayer of thanks, that the countess
trembled, and bent her head upon the bosom of her child.  She could not
utter the solemn Amen, that was repeated by every voice in the cave.
Her unhappy infatuation saw no higher power in this great preservation
than the hand of the man she adored.  She felt that guilt was cherished
in her heart; and she could not lift her eyes to join with those who,
with the boldness of innocence, called on Heaven to attest the sanctity
of their vows.

Sleep soon sealed every weary eye, excepting those of Wallace.  A
racking anxiety respecting the fate of the other vessel, in which were
the brave men of Bothwell, and his two dear friends, filled his mind
with dreadful forebodings that they had not outlived the storm.
Sometimes, when wearied nature for a few minutes sunk into slumber, he
would start, grief-struck, from the body of Edwin floating on the briny
flood, and as he awoke, a cold despondence would tell him that his
dream was, perhaps, too true.  "Oh!  I love thee, Edwin!" exclaimed he
to himself; "and if my devoted heart was to be separated from all but a
patriot's love!-why did I think of loving thee?-must thou, too, die,
that Scotland may have no rival, that Wallace may feel himself quite
alone!"

Thus he sat musing, and listening, with many a sigh, to the yelling
gusts of wind, and louder roaring of the water.  At last the former
gradually subsided, and the latter, obeying the retreating ride, rolled
away in hoarse murmurs.

Morning began to dawn, and spreading upon the mountains of the opposite
shore, shed a soft light over their misty sides.  All was tranquil and
full of beauty.  That element, which so lately in its rage had
threatened to ingulf them all, now flowed by the rocks at the foot of
the cave in gentle undulations; and where the spiral cliffs gave a
little resistance, the rays of the rising sun, striking on the bursting
waves, turned their vapory showers into dropping gems.

While his companions were still wrapped in sleep, Wallace stole away to
seek some knowledge respecting the part of the Isle of Arran on which
they were cast.  Close by the mouth of the cave he discovered a cleft
in the rock, into which he turned, and finding the upward footing
sufficiently secure, clambered to the summit.  Looking around, he found
himself at the skirt of a chain of high hills, which seemed to stretch
from side to side over the island, while their tops, in alpine
succession, rose in a thousand grotesque and pinnacled forms.  The
ptarmigan and capercailzie were screaming from those upper regions; and
the nimble roes, with their fawns, bounding through the green defiles
below.  No trace of human habitation appeared; but from the size and
known population of the island, he knew he could not be far from
inhabitants; and thinking it best to send the boatmen in search of
them, he retraced his steps.  The morning vapors were fast rolling
their snowy wreaths down the opposite mountains, whose heads, shining
in resplendent purple, seemed to view themselves in the bright
reflections of the now smooth sea.  Nature, like a proud conqueror,
appeared to have put on a triumphal garb, in exultation of the
devastation she had committed the night before.  Wallace shuddered, as
the parallel occurred to his mind, and turned from the scene.

On re-entering the cave he dispatched the seamen, and disposed himself
to watch by the sides of his still sleeping friends.  An hour hardly
had elapsed before the men returned, bringing with them a large boat
and its proprietor.  But, alas! no tidings of Murray and Edwin, whom he
had hoped might have been driven somewhere on the island.  In bringing
the boat round to the creek under the rock, the men discovered that the
sea had driven their wreck between two projecting rocks, where it now
lay wedged.  Though ruined as a vessel, sufficient held together to
warrant their exertions to save the property.  Accordingly they entered
it, and drew thence most of the valuables which belonged to Lord Mar.

While this was doing, Wallace reascended to the cave, and finding the
earl awake, told him a boat was ready for their re-embarkation.  "But
where, my friend, are my nephews?" inquired he; "Alas! has this fatal
expedition robbed me of them?"

Wallace tried to inspire him with a hope he scarcely dare credit
himself, that they had been saved on some more distant shore.  The
voices of the chiefs awakened the women, but the countess still slept.
Aware that she would resist trusting herself to the waves again, Lord
Mar desired that she might be moved on board without disturbing her.
This was readily done, the men having only to take up the extremities
of the plaid on to the boat.  The earl received her head on his bosom.
All were then on board, the rowers struck their oars, and once more the
little party found themselves launched upon the sea.

While they were yet midway between the isles, with a bright sun playing
its sparkling beams upon the gently rippling waves, the countess,
heaving a deep sigh, slowly opened her eyes.  All around glared with
the light of day; she felt the motion of the boat, and raising her
head, saw that she was again embarked on the treacherous element on
which she had lately experienced so many terrors.  She grew deadly
pale, and grasped her husband's hand.  "My dear Joanna," cried he, "be
not alarmed, we are all safe."

"And Sir William Wallace has left us?" demanded she.

"No, madam," answered a voice from the steerage, "not till this party
is safe at Bute do I quit it."

She looked round with a grateful smile; "Ever generous!  How could I
for a moment doubt our preserver?"

Wallace bowed, but remained silent; and they passed calmly along till
the vessel came in sight of a birling,** which, bounding over the
waves, was presently so near the earl's, that the figures in each could
be distinctly seen.  In it the chiefs, to their rapturous surprise,
beheld Murray and Edwin.  The latter, with a cry of joy, leaped into
the sea; the next instant he was over the boat's side, and clasped in
the arms of Wallace.  Real transport, true happiness, now dilated the
heart of the before desponding chief.  He pressed the dear boy again
and again to his bosom, and kissed his white forehead with all the
rapture of the fondest brother.  "Thank God! thank God!" was all that
Edwin could say; while, at every effort to tear himself from Wallace,
to congratulate his uncle on his safety, his heart overflowing toward
his friend, opened afresh, and he clung the closer to his breast; till
at last, exhausted with happiness, the little hero of Dumbarton gave
way to the sensibility of his tender age, and the chief felt his bosom
wet with the joy--drawn tears of his youthful banneret.

While this was passing, the birling had drawn close to the boat; and
Murray, shaking hands with his uncle and aunt, exclaimed to Wallace,
"That urchin is such a monopolizer, I see you have not a greeting for
any one else."  On this Edwin raised his face, and turned to the
affectionate welcomes of Lord Mar.  Wallace stretched out his hand to
the ever-gay Lord Andrew; and, inviting him into the boat, soon
learned, that on the portentous beginning of the storm, Murray's
company made direct to the nearest creek in Bute, being better seamen
than Wallace's helmsman who, until danger stopped him, had foolishly
continued to aim for Rothsay.  By this prudence, without having been in
much peril, or sustained any fatigue, Murray's party had landed safely.
The night came on dark and tremendous; but not doubting that the
earl's rowers had carried him into a similar haven, the young chief and
his companion kept themselves very easy in a fisher's hut till morning.
At an early hour, they then put themselves at the head of the Bothwell
men; and, expecting they should come up with Wallace and his party at
Rothsay, walked over to the castle.  Their consternation was
unutterable when they found that Lord Mar was not there, threw
themselves into a birling, to seek their friends upon the seas; and
when they did espy them, the joy of Edwin was so great, that not even
the unfathomable gulf could stop him from flying to the embrace of his
friend.

**Birling is a small boat generally used by fishers.

While mutual felicitations passed, the boats, now nearly side by side,
reached the shore; and the seamen, jumping on the rocks, moored their
vessels under the projecting towers of Rothsay.  The old steward
hastened to receive a master who had not blessed his aged eyes for many
a year; a master who had the infant in his arms that was to be the
future representative of the house of Mar, he wept aloud.  The earl
spoke to him affectionately, and then walked on with Edwin, whom he
called to support him up the bank.  Murray led the countess out of the
boat; while the Bothwell men so thronged about Wallace, congratulating
themselves on his safety, that she saw there was no hope of his arm
being then offered to her.

Having entered the castle, the steward led them into a room, in which
he had spread a plentiful repast.  Here Murray (having recounted the
adventures of his voyage) called for a history of what had befallen his
friends.  The earl gladly took up the tale, and, with many a glance of
gratitude to Wallace, narrated the perilous events of their shipwreck,
and providential preservation on the Isle of Arran.

Happiness now seemed to, have shed her heavenly influence over every
bosom.  All hearts owned the grateful effects of the late rescue.  The
rapturous joy of Edwin burst into a thousand sallies of ardent and
luxurious imagination.  The high spirits of Murray turned every
transient subject into a "mirth-moving jest".  The veteran earl seemed
restored to health and to youth; and Wallace felt the sun of
consolation expanding in his bosom.  He had met a heart, though a young
one, on which his soul might repose; that dear selected brother of his
affection was saved from the whelming waves; and all his superstitious
dreams of a mysterious doom vanished before this manifestation of
heavenly goodness.  His friend, too, the gallant Murray, was spared.
How many subjects had he for unmurmuring gratitude!  And with an
unclouded brow and a happy spirit, he yielded to the impulse of the
scene.  He smiled; and, with an endearing graciousness, listened to
every fond speaker; while his own ingenuous replies bespoke the
treasures of love which sorrow, in her cruelest aspect, had locked
within his heart.

The complacency with which he regarded every one--the pouring out of his
beneficent spirit, which seemed to embrace all, like his dearest
kindred--turned every eye and heart toward him, as to the source of
every bliss; as to a being who seemed made to love, and be beloved by
every one.  Lady mar looked at him, listened to him, with her rapt soul
seated in her eyes.  In his presence all was transport.

But when he withdrew for the night, what was then the state of her
feelings!  The overflowing of heart he felt for all, she appropriated
solely for herself.  The sweetness of his voice, the unutterable
expression of his countenance, while, as he spoke, he veiled his eyes
under their long brown lashes, had raised such vague hopes in her
bosom, that--he being gone--she hastened her adieus to the rest, eager to
retire to bed, and there uninterruptedly muse on the happiness of
having at last touched the heart of a man for whom she would resign the
world.




Chapter XXVIII.

Isle of Bute.


The morning would have brought annihilation to the countess'
new-fledged hopes, had not Murray been the first to meet her as she
came from her chamber.

While walking on the cliffs at some distance from the castle to observe
the weather, he met Wallace and Edwin.  They had already been across
the valley to the haven, and ordered a boat round, to convey them back
to Gourock.  "Postpone your flight, for pity's sake!" cried Murray, "if
you would not, by discourtesy, destroy what your gallantry has
preserved!"  He then told them that Lady Mar was preparing a feast in
the glen, behind the castle; "and if you do not stay to partake it,"
added he, "we may expect all the witches in the isle will be bribed to
sink us before we reach the shore."
