"You are but a weak girl," said I, meditating.

"Aye: but there's a dozen troopers on the landing below."

"Then, my dear, you must lock me up," I decided gloomily, and fell to
whistling----

    "Vivre en tout cas,
     C'est le grand soulas--"

A workman's hammer in the court below chim'd in, beating out the tune,
and driving the moral home. I heard a low sob behind me. The jailer's
daughter was going.

"Lend me your bodkin, my dear, for a memento."

She pull'd it out and gave it to me.

"Thank you, and now good-bye! Stop: here's a kiss to take to my dear
mistress. They shan't hang me, my dear."

The girl went out, sobbing, and lock'd the door after her.

I sat down for a while, feeling doleful. For I found myself extremely
young to be hang'd. But soon the _whang--whang!_ of the hammer below
rous'd me. "Come," I thought, "I'll see what that rascal is doing, at
any rate," and pulling the file from my pocket, began to attack the
window bar with a will. I had no need for silence, at this great height
above the ground: and besides, the hammering continued lustily.

Daylight was closing as I finish'd my task and, pulling the two pieces
of the bar aside, thrust my head out at the window.

Directly under me, and about twenty feet from the ground, I saw a beam
projecting, about six feet long, over a sort of doorway in the wall.
Under this beam, on a ladder, was a carpenter fellow at work, fortifying
it with two supporting timbers that rested on the sill of the doorway.
He was merry enough over the job, and paused every now and again to
fling a remark to a little group of soldiers that stood idling below,
where the fellow's workbag and a great coil of rope rested by the
ladder's foot.

"Reckon, Sammy," said one, pulling a long tobacco pipe from his mouth
and spitting, "'tis a long while since thy last job o' the sort."

"Aye, lad: terrible disrepair this place has fall'n into. But send us a
cheerful heart, say I! Instead o' the viper an' owl, shall henceforward
be hangings of men an' all manner o' diversion."

I kept my head out of sight and listen'd.

"What time doth 'a swing?" ask'd another of the soldiers.

"I heard the Colonel give orders for nine o'clock to-morrow," answer'd
the first soldier, spitting again.

The clock over the barbican struck four: and in a minute was being
answer'd from tower after tower, down in the city.

"Four o'clock!" cried the man on the ladder: "time to stop work, and
here goes for the last nail!" He drove it in and prepar'd to descend.

"Hi!" shouted a soldier, "you've forgot the rope."

"That'll wait till to-morrow. There's a staple to drive in, too. I tell
you I'm dry, and want my beer."

He whipp'd his apron round his waist, and gathering up his nails,
went down the ladder. At the foot he pick'd up his bag, shoulder'd
the ladder, and loung'd away, leaving the coil of rope lying there.
Presently the soldiers saunter'd off also, and the court was empty.

Now up to this moment I had but one idea of avoiding my fate, and that
was to kill myself. 'Twas to this end I had borrow'd the bodkin of the
maid. Afterward I had a notion of flinging myself from the window as
they came for me. But now, as I look'd down on that coil of rope lying
directly below, a prettier scheme struck me. I sat down on the floor of
my cell and pull'd off my boots and stockings.

'Twas such a pretty plan that I got into a fever of impatience. Drawing
off a stocking and picking out the end of the yarn, I began to unravel
the knitting for dear life, until the whole lay, a heap of thread, on
the floor. I then serv'd the other in the same way: and at the end had
two lines, each pretty near four hundred yards in length: which now I
divided into eight lines of about a hundred yards each.

With these I set to work, and by the end of twenty minutes had plaited
a rope--if rope, indeed, it could be called--weak to be sure, but long
enough to reach the ground with plenty to spare. Then, having bent my
bodkin to the form of a hook, I tied it to the end of my cord, weighted
it with a crown from my pocket, and clamber'd up to the window. I was
going to angle for the hangman's rope.

'Twas near dark by this; but I could just distinguish it on the paving
stones below, and looking about the court, saw that no one was astir.
I wriggled first my head, then a shoulder, through the opening, and let
the line run gently through my hand. There was still many yards left,
that could be paid out, when I heard my coin tinkle softly on the
pavement.

Then began my difficulty. A dozen times I pull'd my hook across the coil
before it hitch'd; and then a full three score of times the rope slipped
away before I had rais'd it a dozen yards. My elbow was raw, almost,
with leaning on the sill, and I began to lose heart and head, when, to
my delight, the bodkin caught and held. It had fasten'd on a kink in
the rope, not far from the end. I began to pull up, hand over hand,
trembling all the while like a leaf.

For I had two very reasonable fears. First, the rope might slip away and
tumble before it reach'd my grasp. Secondly, it might, after all, prove
a deal too short. It had look'd to me a new rope of many fathoms, not
yet cut for to-morrow's purpose; but eyesight might well deceive at that
distance, and surely enough I saw that the whole was dangling off the
ground long before it came to my hand.

But at last I caught it, and slipping back into the room, pull'd it
after me, yard upon yard. My heart went loud and fast. There was nothing
to fasten it to but an iron staple in the door, that meant losing the
width of my cell, some six feet. This, however, must be risk'd, and I
made the end fast, lower'd the other out of window again, and climbing
to a sitting posture on the window sill, thrust out my legs over the
gulf.

Thankful was I that darkness had fallen before this, and hidden the
giddy depths below me. I gripp'd the rope and push'd myself inch by
inch through the window, and out over the ledge. For a moment I dangled,
without courage to move a hand. Then, wreathing my legs round the rope,
I loosed my left hand, and caught with it again some six inches lower.
And so, down I went.

Minute follow'd minute, and left me still descending, six inches at a
time, and looking neither above nor below, but always at the grey wall
that seem'd sliding up in front of me. The first dizziness was over, but
a horrible aching of the arms had taken the place of it. 'Twas growing
intolerable, when suddenly my legs, that sought to close round the rope,
found space only. I had come to the end.

I look'd down. A yard below my feet the beam of the gallows gleam'd
palely out of the darkness. Here was my chance. I let my hands slip down
the last foot or so of rope, hung for a moment, then dropp'd for the
beam.

My feet miss'd it, as I intended they should; but I flung both arms out
and caught it, bringing myself up with a jerk. While yet I hung clawing,
I heard a footstep coming through the gateway between the two wards.

Here was a fix. With all speed and silence I drew myself up to the beam,
found a hold with one knee upon it, got astride, and lay down at length,
flattening my body down against the timber. Yet all the while I felt
sure I must have been heard.

The footsteps drew nearer, and pass'd almost under the gallows. 'Twas an
officer, for, as he pass'd, he called out---

"Sergeant Downs! Sergeant Downs!"

A voice from the guardroom in the barbican answer'd him through the
darkness.

"Why is not the watch set?"

"In a minute, sir: it wants a minute to six."

"I thought the Colonel order'd it at half past five?"

In the silence that follow'd, the barbican clock began to strike, and
half a dozen troopers tumbled out from the guardroom, some laughing,
some grumbling at the coldness of the night. The officer return'd to the
inner ward as they dispersed to their posts: and soon there was silence
again, save for the _tramp-tramp_ of a sentry crossing and recrossing
the pavement below me.

All this while I lay flatten'd along the beam, scarce daring to breathe.
But at length, when the man had pass'd below for the sixth time, I
found heart to wriggle myself toward the doorway over which the gallows
protruded. By slow degrees, and pausing whenever the fellow drew near,
I crept close up to the wall: then, waiting the proper moment, cast my
legs over, dangled for a second or two swinging myself toward the sill,
flung myself off, and, touching the ledge with one toe, pitch'd forward
in the room.

The effect of this was to give me a sound crack as I struck the
flooring, which lay about a foot below the level of the sill. I pick'd
myself up and listen'd. Outside, the regular tramp of the sentry prov'd
he had not heard me; and I drew a long breath, for I knew that without a
lantern he would never spy, in the darkness, the telltale rope dangling
from the tower.

In the room where I stood all was right. But the flooring was uneven to
the foot, and scatter'd with small pieces of masonry. 'Twas one of the
many chambers in the castle that had dropp'd into disrepair. Groping my
way with both hands, and barking my shins on the loose stones, I found
a low vaulted passage that led me into a second chamber, empty as the
first. To my delight, the door of this was ajar, with a glimmer of light
slanting through the crack. I made straight toward it, and pull'd the
door softly. It open'd, and show'd a lantern dimly burning, and the
staircase of the keep winding past me, up into darkness.

My chance was, of course, to descend: which I did on tiptoe, hearing no
sound. The stairs twisted down and down, and ended by a stout door with
another lamp shining above it. After listening a moment I decided to be
bold, and lifted the latch. A faint cry saluted me.

I stood face to face with the jailer's daughter.

The room was a small one, well lit, and lin'd about the walls with cups
and bottles. 'Twas, as I guess'd, a taproom for the soldiers: and the
girl had been scouring one of the pewter mugs when my entrance startled
her. She stood up, white as if painted, and gasp'd--

"Quick--quick! Down here behind the counter for your life!"

There was scarce time to drop on my knees before a couple of troopers
loung'd in, demanding mull'd beer. The girl bustled about to serve them,
while the pair lean'd their elbows on the counter, and in this easy
attitude began to chat.

"A shrewd night!"

"Aye, a very freezing frost! Lucky that soldiering is not all sentry
work, or I for one 'ud ensue my natural trade o' plumbing. But let's be
cheerful: for the voice o' the turtle is heard i' the land."

"Hey?"

The man took a pull at his hot beer before explaining.

"The turtle signifieth the Earl o' Stamford, that is to-night visiting
Colonel Essex in secret: an' this is the import--war, bloody war. Mark
me."

"Stirring, striving times!"

"You may say so! 'A hath fifteen thousand men, the Earl, no farther off
than Taunton--why, my dear, how pale you look, to be sure!"

"'Tis my head that aches," answer'd the girl.

The men finish'd their drink, and saunter'd out. I crept from under the
counter, and look'd at her.

"Father'll kill me for this!"

"Then you shall say--Is it forward or back I must go?"

"Neither." She pull'd up a trap close beside her feet, and pointed out a
ladder leading down to the darkness. "The courts are full of troopers,"
she added.

"The cellar?"

She nodded.

"Quick! There's a door at the far end. It leads to the crypt of St.
John's Chapel. You'll find the key beside it, and a lantern. Here is
flint and steel." She reach'd them down from a shelf beside her. "Crouch
down, or they'll spy you through the window. From the crypt a passage
takes you to the governor's house. How to escape then, God knows! 'Tis
the best I can think on."

I thank'd her, and began to step down the ladder. She stood for a moment
to watch, leaving the trap open for better light. Between the avenue of
casks and bins I stumbled toward the door and lantern that were just to
be discern'd at the far end of the cellar. As I struck steel on flint,
I heard the trap close: and since then have never set eyes on that
kind-hearted girl.

The lantern lit, I took the key and fitted it to the lock. It turned
noisily, and a cold whiff of air struck my face. Gazing round this new
chamber, I saw two lines of squat pillars, supporting a low arch'd roof.
'Twas the crypt beneath the chapel, and smelt vilely. A green moisture
trickled down the pillars, and dripp'd on the tombs beneath them.

At the end of this dreary place was a broken door, consisting only of a
plank or two, that I easily pull'd away: and beyond, a narrow passage,
over which I heard the tread of troopers plainly, as they pac'd to and
fro; also the muffled note of the clock, sounding seven.

The passage went fairly straight, but was block'd here and there
with fallen stones, over which I scrambled as best I could. And then,
suddenly I was near pitching down a short flight of steps. I held the
lantern aloft and look'd.

At the steps' foot widen'd out a low room, whereof the ceiling, like
that of the crypt, rested on pillars. Between these, every inch of space
was pil'd with barrels, chests, and great pyramids of round shot. In
each corner lay a heap of rusty pikes. Of all this the signification was
clear. I stood in the munition room of the Castle.

But what chiefly took my notice was a great door, studded with iron
nails, that barr'd all exit from the place. Over the barrels I crept
toward it, keeping the lantern high, in dread of firing any loose
powder. 'Twas fast lock'd.

I think that, for a moment or two, I could have wept. But in a while the
thought struck me that with the knife in my pocket 'twas possible to cut
away the wood around the lock. "Courage!" said I: and pulling it forth,
knelt down to work.

Luck in life has always used me better than my deserts. At an hour's end
there I was, hacking away steadily, yet had made but little progress.
And then, pressing the knife deep, I broke the blade off short. The door
upon the far side was cas'd with iron.

_Tramp--tramp!_

'Twas the sound of man's footfall, and to the ear appear'd to be
descending a flight of steps on the other side of the door. I bent my
ear to the keyhole: then stepp'd to a cask of bullets that stood handy
by. I took out a dozen, felt in my pocket for Delia's kerchief that she
had given me, caught up a pike from the pile stack'd in the corner, and
softly blowing out my light, stood back to be conceal'd by the door,
when it open'd.

The footsteps still descended. I heard an aged voice muttering--

"Shrivel my bones--ugh!--ugh! Wintry work--wintry work! Here's an hour
to send a grandfatherly man a-groping for a keg o' powder!"

A wheezy cough clos'd the sentence, as a key was with difficulty fitted
in the lock.

"Ugh--ugh! Sure, the lock an' I be a pair, for stiff joints."

The door creak'd back against me, and a shaft of light pierc'd the
darkness.

Within the threshold, with his back to me, stood a grey-bearded servant,
and totter'd so that the lantern shook in his hand. It sham'd me to lift
a pike against one so weak. Instead, I dropp'd it with a clatter, and
leap'd forward. The old fellow jumped like a boy, turn'd, and fac'd me
with dropp'd jaw, which gave me an opportunity to thrust four or five
bullets, not over roughly, into his mouth. Then, having turn'd him on
his back, I strapp'd Delia's kerchief tight across his mouth, and took
the lantern from his hand.

Not a word was said. Sure, the poor old man's wits were shaken, for he
lay meek as a mouse, and star'd up at me, while I unstrapp'd his belt
and bound his feet with it. His hands I truss'd up behind him with his
own neckcloth; and catching up the lantern, left him there. I lock'd
the door after me, and slip'd the key into my pocket as I sprang up the
stairs beyond.

But here a light was shining, so once more I extinguish'd my lantern.
The steps ended in a long passage, with a handsome lamp hanging at the
uttermost end, and beneath this lamp I stepp'd into a place that fill'd
me with astonishment.

'Twas, I could not doubt, the entrance hall of the governor's house. An
oak door, very massive, fronted me; to left and right were two smaller
doors, that plainly led into apartments of the house. Also to my
left, and nigher than the door on that side, ran up a broad staircase,
carpeted and brightly lit all the way, so that a very blaze fell on me
as I stood. Under the first flight, close to my left shoulder, was a
line of pegs with many cloaks and hats depending therefrom. Underfoot, I
remember, the hall was richly tiled in squares of red and white marble.

Now clearly, this was a certain place wherein to be caught. "But,"
thought I, "behind one of the two doors, to left or to right, must lie
the governor's room of business; and in that room--as likely as not--his
keys." Which door, then, should I choose? For to stay here was madness.

While I stood pondering, the doubt was answer'd for me. From behind the
right-hand door came a burst of laughter and clinking of glasses, on top
of which a man's voice--the voice of Colonel Essex--call'd out for more
wine.

I took a step to the door on the left, paus'd for a second or two with
my hand on the latch, and then cautiously push'd it open. The chamber
was empty.

'Twas a long room, with a light burning on a square centre table, and
around it a mass of books, loose papers and documents strewn, seemingly
without order. The floor too was litter'd with them. Clearly this was
the Colonel's office.

I gave a rapid glance around. The lamp's rays scarce illumin'd the far
corners; but in one of these stood a great leathern screen, and over
the fireplace near it a rack was hanging, full of swords, pistols, and
walking canes. Stepping toward it I caught sight of Anthony's sword,
suspended there amongst the rest (they had taken it from me on the day
of my examination); which now I took down and strapp'd at my side. I
then chose out a pistol or two, slipped them into my sash, and advanced
to the centre table.

Under the lamplight lay His Majesty's letter, open.

My hand was stretch'd out to catch it up, when I heard across the hall a
door open'd, and the sound of men's voices. They were coming toward the
office.

There was scarce time to slip back, and hide behind the screen, before
the door latch was lifted, and two men enter'd, laughing yet.

"Business, my lord--business," said the first ('twas Colonel Essex): "I
have much to do to-night."

"Sure," the other answer'd, "I thought we had settled it. You are to
lend me a thousand out of your garrison--"

"Which, on my own part, I would willingly do. Only I beg you to
consider, my lord, that my position here hangs on a thread. The extreme
men are already against me: they talk of replacing me by Fiennes--"

"Nat Fiennes is no soldier."

"No: but he's a bigot--a stronger recommendation. Should this plan
miscarry, and I lose a thousand men---"

"Heavens alive, man! It _cannot_ miscarry. Hark ye: there's Ruthen of
Plymouth will take the south road with all his forces. A day's march
behind I shall follow--along roads to northward--parallel for a way, but
afterward converging. The Cornishmen are all in Bodmin. We shall come
on them with double their number, aye, almost treble. Can you doubt the
issue?"

"Scarcely, with the Earl of Stamford for General."

The Earl was too far occupied to notice this compliment.

"'Twill be swift and secret," he said, "as Death himself--and as sure.
Let be the fact that Hopton is all at sixes and sevens since the Marquis
shipp'd for Wales: and at daggers drawn with Mohun."

Said the Colonel slowly--"Aye, the notion is good enough. Were I not in
this corner, I would not think twice. Listen now: only this morning they
forc'd me to order a young man's hanging, who might if kept alive be
forc'd in time to give us news of value. I dar'd not refuse."

"He that you caught with the King's letter?"

"Aye--a trumpery missive, dealing with naught but summoning of the
sheriff's posse and the like. There is more behind, could we but wait to
get at it."

"The gallows may loosen his tongue. And how of the girl that was taken
too?"

"I have her in safe keeping. This very evening I shall visit her, and
make another trial to get some speech. Which puts me in mind--"

The Colonel tinkled a small hand bell that lay on the table.
