
"I wished to speak sternly; but it is my great misfortune, my prevalent
weakness, that I cannot be stern when I ought to be.  It is with me in
life as in art.  I never could on the stage have taken the part of a
Norma or a Medea.  If I attempt in fiction a character which deserves
condemnation, I am untrue to poetic justice.  I cannot condemn and
execute; I can but compassionate and pardon the creature I myself have
created.  I was never in the real world stern but to one; and then, alas!
it was because I loved where I could no longer love with honour; and I,
knowing my weakness, had terror lest I should yield.

"So Gustave did not comprehend from my voice, my manner, how gravely I
was in earnest.  But, himself softened, affected to tears, he confessed
his own faults--ceased to argue in order to praise; and--and--uttering
protestations seemingly the most sincere, he left me bound to him still
--bound to him still--woe is me!"

It is true that Isaura had come more directly under the influence of
religion than she had been in the earlier dates of this narrative.  There
is a time in the lives of most of us, and especially in the lives of
women, when, despondent of all joy in an earthly future, and tortured by
conflicts between inclination and duty, we transfer all the passion and
fervour of our troubled souls to enthusiastic yearnings for the Divine
Love; seeking to rebaptise ourselves in the fountain of its mercy, taking
thence the only hopes that can cheer, the only strength that can sustain
us.  Such a time had come to Isaura.  Formerly she had escaped from the
griefs of the work-a-day world into the garden-land of Art.  Now, Art had
grown unwelcome to her, almost hateful.  Gone was the spell from the
garden-land; its flowers were faded, its paths were stony, its sunshine
had vanished in mist and rain.  There are two voices of Nature in the
soul of the genuine artist,--that is, of him who, because he can create,
comprehends the necessity of the great Creator.  Those voices are never
both silent.  When one is hushed, the other becomes distinctly audible.
The one speaks to him of Art, the other of Religion.

At that period several societies for the relief and tendance of the
wounded had been formed by the women of Paris,--the earliest, if I
mistake not, by ladies of the highest rank--amongst whom were the
Comtesse de Vandemar and the Contessa di Rimini--though it necessarily
included others of stations less elevated.  To this society, at the
request of Alain de Rochebriant and of Enguerrand, Isaura had eagerly
attached herself.  It occupied much of her time; and in connection with
it she was brought much into sympathetic acquaintance with Raoul de
Vandemar--the most zealous and active member of that Society of St.
Francois de Sales, to which belonged other young nobles of the Legitimist
creed.  The passion of Raoul's life was the relief of human suffering.
In him was personified the ideal of Christian charity.  I think all, or
most of us, have known what it is to pass under the influence of a nature
that is so far akin to ours that it desires to become something better
and higher than it is--that desire being paramount in ourselves--but
seeks to be that something in ways not akin to, but remote from, the ways
in which we seek it.  When this contact happens, either one nature, by
the mere force of will, subjugates and absorbs the other, or both, while
preserving their own individuality, apart and independent, enrich
themselves by mutual interchange, and the asperities which differences of
taste and sentiment in detail might otherwise provoke melt in the
sympathy which unites spirits striving with equal earnestness to rise
nearer to the unseen and unattainable Source, which they equally
recognise as Divine.

Perhaps, had these two persons met a year ago in the ordinary intercourse
of the world, neither would have detected the sympathy of which I speak.
Raoul was not without the prejudice against artists and writers of
romance, that is shared by many who cherish the persuasion that all is
vanity which does not concentrate imagination and intellect in the
destinies of the soul hereafter; and Isaura might have excited his
compassion, certainly not his reverence.  While to her, his views on all
that seeks to render the actual life attractive and embellished, through
the accomplishments of Muse and Grace, would have seemed the narrow-
minded asceticism of a bigot.  But now, amid the direful calamities of
the time, the beauty of both natures became visible to each.  To the eyes
of Isaura tenderness became predominant in the monastic self-denial of
Raoul.  To the eyes of Raoul, devotion became predominant in the gentle
thoughtfulness of Isaura.  Their intercourse was in ambulance and
hospital-in care for the wounded, in prayer for the dying.  Ah! it is
easy to declaim against the frivolities and vices of Parisian society as
they appear on the surface; and, in revolutionary times, it is the very
worst of Paris that ascends in scum to the top.  But descend below the
surface, even in that demoralising suspense of order, and nowhere on
earth might the angel have beheld the image of humanity more amply
vindicating its claim to the heritage of heaven.




CHAPTER XVII.

The warning announcement of some great effort on the part of the
besieged, which Alain had given to Lemercier, was soon to be fulfilled.

For some days the principal thoroughfares were ominously lined with
military _convois_.  The loungers on the Boulevards stopped to gaze on
the long defiles of troops and cannons, commissariat conveyances, and,
saddening accompaniments! the vehicles of various ambulances for the
removal of the wounded.  With what glee the loungers said to each other
"_Enfin_!"  Among all the troops that Paris sent forth, none were so
popular as those which Paris had not nurtured--the sailors.  From the
moment they arrived, the sailors had been the pets of the capital.  They
soon proved themselves the most notable contrast to that force which
Paris herself had produced--the National Guard.  Their frames were hardy,
their habits active, their discipline perfect, their manners mild and
polite.  "Oh, if all our troops were like these!" was the common
exclamation of the Parisians.

At last burst forth upon Paris the proclamations of General Trochu and
General Ducrot; the first brief, calm, and Breton-like, ending with
"Putting our trust in God.  March on for our country:" the second more
detailed, more candidly stating obstacles and difficulties, but fiery
with eloquent enthusiasm, not unsupported by military statistics, in the
400 cannon, two-thirds of which were of the largest calibre, that no
material object could resist; more than 150,000 soldiers, all well armed,
well equipped, abundantly provided with munitions, and all (_j'en a
l'espoir_) animated by an irresistible ardour.  "For me," concludes the
General, "I am resolved.  I swear before you, before the whole nation,
that I will not re-enter Paris except as dead or victorious."

At these proclamations, who then at Paris does not recall the burst of
enthusiasm that stirred the surface?  Trochu became once more popular;
even the Communistic or atheistic journals refrained from complaining
that he attended mass, and invited his countrymen to trust in God.
Ducrot was more than popular--he was adored.

The several companies in which De Mauleon and Enguerrand served departed
towards their post early on the same morning, that of the 28th.  All the
previous night, while Enguerrand was buried in profound slumber, Raoul
remained in his brother's room; sometimes on his knees before the ivory
crucifix which had been their mother's last birthday gift to her youngest
son--sometimes seated beside the bed in profound and devout meditation.
At daybreak, Madame de Vandemar stole into the chamber.  Unconscious of
his brother's watch, he had asked her to wake him in good time, for the
young man was a sound sleeper.  Shading the candle she bore with one
hand, with the other she drew aside the curtain, and looked at
Enguerrand's calm fair face, its lips parted in the happy smile which
seemed to carry joy with it wherever its sunshine played.  Her tears fell
noiselessly on her darling's cheek; she then knelt down and prayed for
strength.  As she rose she felt Raoul's arm around her; they looked at
each other in silence; then she bowed her head and wakened Enguerrand
with her lips.  "_Pas de querelle, mes amis_," he murmured, opening his
sweet blue eyes drowsily.  "Ah, it was a dream!  I thought Jules and
Emile [two young friends of his] were worrying each other; and you know,
dear Raoul, that I am the most officious of peacemakers.  Time to rise,
is it?  No peacemaking to-day.  Kiss me again, mother, and say 'Bless
thee.'"

"Bless thee, bless thee, my child," cried the mother, wrapping her arms
passionately round him, and in tones choked with sobs.

"Now leave me, _maman_," said Enguerrand, resorting to the infantine
ordinary name, which he had not used for years.  "Raoul, stay and help me
to dress.  I must be _tres beau_ to-day.  I shall join thee at breakfast,
_maman_.  Early for such repast, but _l'appetit vient en mangeant_.  Mind
the coffee is hot."

Enguerrand, always careful of each detail of dress, was especially so
that morning, and especially gay, humming the old air, "_Partant pour la
Syrie_."  But his gaiety was checked when Raoul, taking from his breast a
holy talisman, which he habitually wore there, suspended it with loving
hands round his brother's neck.  It was a small crystal set in Byzantine
filigree; imbedded in it was a small splinter of wood, said by pious
tradition to be a relic of the Divine Cross.  It had been for centuries
in the family of the Contessa di Rimini, and was given by her to Raoul,
the only gift she had ever made him, as an emblem of the sinless purity
of the affection that united those two souls in the bonds of the
beautiful belief.

"She bade me transfer it to thee to-day, my brother," said Raoul, simply;
"and now without a pang I can gird on thee thy soldier's sword."

Enguerrand clasped his brother in his arms, and kissed him with
passionate fervour.  "Oh, Raoul, how I love thee! how good thou hast ever
been to me! how many sins thou hast saved me from! how indulgent thou
hast been to those from which thou couldst not save!  Think on that, my
brother, in case we do not meet again on earth."

"Hush, hush, Enguerrand!  No gloomy forebodings now!  Come, come hither,
my half of life, my sunny half of life!" and uttering these words, he led
Enguerrand towards the crucifix, and there, in deeper and more solemn
voice, said, "Let us pray."  So the brothers knelt side by side, and
Raoul prayed aloud as only such souls can pray.

When they descended into the salon where breakfast was set out, they
found assembled several of their relations, and some of Enguerrand's
young friends not engaged in the sortie.  One or two of the latter,
indeed, were disabled from fighting by wounds in former fields; they left
their sick-beds to bid him good-bye.  Unspeakable was the affection this
genial nature inspired in all who came into the circle of its winning
magic; and when, tearing himself from them, he descended the stair, and
passed with light step through the _Porte cochere_, there was a crowd
around the house--so widely had his popularity spread among even the
lower classes, from which the Mobiles in his regiment were chiefly
composed.  He departed to the place of rendezvous amid a chorus of
exhilarating cheers.

Not thus lovingly tended on, not thus cordially greeted, was that equal
idol of a former generation, Victor de Mauleon.  No pious friend prayed
beside his couch, no loving kiss waked him from his slumbers.  At the
grey of the November dawn he rose from a sleep which had no smiling
dreams, with that mysterious instinct of punctual will which cannot even
go to sleep without fixing beforehand the exact moment in which sleep
shall end.  He, too, like Enguerrand, dressed himself with care--unlike
Enguerrand, with care strictly soldier-like.  Then, seeing he had some
little time yet before him, he rapidly revisited the pigeonholes and
drawers in which might be found by prying eyes anything he would deny to
them curiosity.  All that he found of this sort were some letters in
female handwriting, tied together with faded ribbon, relics of earlier
days, and treasured throughout later vicissitudes; letters from the
English girl to whom he had briefly referred in his confession to
Louvier,--the only girl he had ever wooed as his wife.  She was the only
daughter of highborn Roman Catholics, residing at the time of his youth
in Paris.  Reluctantly they had assented to his proposals; joyfully they
had retracted their assent when his affairs had become so involved; yet
possibly the motive that led him to his most ruinous excesses--the
gambling of the turf--had been caused by the wild hope of a nature, then
fatally sanguine, to retrieve the fortune that might suffice to satisfy
the parents.  But during his permitted courtship the lovers had
corresponded.  Her letters were full of warm, if innocent, tenderness--
till came the last cold farewell.  The family had long ago returned to
England; he concluded, of course, that she had married another.

Near to these letters lay the papers which had served to vindicate his
honour in that old affair, in which the unsought love of another had
brought on him shame and affliction.  As his eye fell on the last, he
muttered to him self, "I kept these, to clear my repute.  Can I keep
those, when, if found, they might compromise the repute of her who might
have been my wife had I been worthy of her?  She is doubtless now
another's; or, if dead,--honour never dies."  He pressed his lips to the
letters with a passionate, lingering, mournful kiss; then, raking up the
ashes of yesterday's fire, and rekindling them, he placed thereon those
leaves of a melancholy romance in his past, and watched them slowly,
reluctantly smoulder away into tinder.  Then he opened a drawer in which
lay the only paper of a political character which he had preserved.  All
that related to plots or conspiracies in which his agency had committed
others, it was his habit to destroy as soon as received.  For the sole
document thus treasured he alone was responsible; it was an outline of
his ideal for the future constitution of France, accompanied with
elaborate arguments, the heads of which his conversation with the
Incognito made known to the reader.  Of the soundness of this political
programme, whatever its merits or faults (a question on which I presume
no judgment), he had an intense conviction.  He glanced rapidly over its
contents, did not alter a word, sealed it up in an envelope, inscribed,
"My Legacy to my Countrymen."  The papers refuting a calumny relating
solely to himself he carried into the battle-field, placed next to his
heart,--significant of a Frenchman's love of honour in this world--as the
relic placed round the neck of Enguerrand by his pious brother was
emblematic of the Christian hope of mercy in the next.




CHAPTER XVIII.

The streets swarmed with the populace troops as they passed to their
destination.  Among those of the Mobiles who especially caught the eye
were two companies in which Enguerrand de Vandemar and Victor de Mauleon
commanded.  In the first were many young men of good family, or in the
higher ranks of the bourgeoisie, known to numerous lookers-on; there was
something inspiriting in their gay aspects, and in the easy carelessness
of their march.  Mixed with this company, however, and forming of course
the bulk of it, were those who belonged to the lower classes of the
population; and though they too might seem gay to an ordinary observer,
the gaiety was forced.  Many of them were evidently not quite sober; and
there was a disorderly want of soldiership in their mien and armament
which inspired distrust among such vieux moustaches as, too old for other
service than that of the ramparts, mixed here and there among the crowd.

But when De Mauleon's company passed, the _vieux moustaches_ impulsively
touched each other.  They recognised the march of well-drilled men; the
countenances grave and severe, the eyes not looking on this side and that
for admiration, the step regularly timed; and conspicuous among these men
the tall stature and calm front of the leader.

"These fellows will fight well," growled a _vieux moustache_, "where did
they fish out their leader?"

"Don't you know?" said a bourgeois_.  "Victor de Mauleon.  He won the
cross in Algeria for bravery.  I recollect him when I was very young; the
very devil for women and fighting."

"I wish there were more such devils for fighting and fewer for women,"
growled again _le vieux moustache_.

One incessant roar of cannon all the night of the 29th.  The populace had
learned the names of the French cannons, and fancied they could
distinguish the several sounds of their thunder.  "There spits
'Josephine'!" shouts an invalid sailor.  "There howls our own
'Populace'!" cries a Red Republican from Belleville.

     [The "Populace" had been contributed to the artillery,
     _sou d sou_, by the working class.]

"There sings 'Le Chatiment'!" laughed Gustave Rameau, who was now become
an enthusiastic admirer of the Victor Hugo he had before affected to
despise.  And all the while, mingled with the roar of the cannon, came,
far and near from the streets, from the ramparts, the gusts of song--song
sometimes heroic, sometimes obscene, more often carelessly joyous.  The
news of General Vinoy's success during the early part of the day had been
damped by the evening report of Ducrot's delay in crossing the swollen
Marne.  But the spirits of the Parisians rallied from a momentary
depression on the excitement at night of that concert of martial music.

During that night, close under the guns of the double redoubt of Gravelle
and La Faisanderie, eight pontoon-bridges were thrown over the Marne; and
at daybreak the first column of the third army under Blanchard and
Renoult crossed with all their artillery, and, covered by the fire of the
double redoubts, of the forts of Vincennes, Nogent, Rossuey, and the
batteries of Mont Avron, had an hour before noon carried the village of
Champingy, and the first echelon of the important plateau of Villiers,
and were already commencing the work of intrenchment, when, rallying from
the amaze of a defeat, the German forces burst upon them, sustained by
fresh batteries.  The Prussian pieces of artillery established at
Chennevieres and at Neuilly opened fire with deadly execution; while a
numerous infantry, descending from the intrenchments of Villiers, charged
upon the troops under Renoult.  Among the French in that strife were
Enguerrand and the Mobiles of which he was in command.  Dismayed by the
unexpected fire, these Mobiles gave way, as indeed did many of the line.
Enguerrand rushed forward to the front: "On, _mes enfans_, on!  What will
our mothers and wives say of us if we fly?  _Vive la France_!--On!"
Among those of the better class in that company there rose a shout of
applause, but it found no sympathy among the rest.  They wavered, they
turned.  "Will you suffer me to go on alone, countrymen?" cried
Enguerrand; and alone he rushed on towards the Prussian line--rushed, and
fell, mortally wounded, by a musket-ball.  "Revenge, revenge!" shouted
some of the foremost; "Revenge!" shouted those in the rear; and, so
shouting, turned on their heels and fled.  But ere they could disperse
they encountered the march, steadfast though rapid, of the troop led by
Victor de Mauleon.  "Poltroons!" he thundered, with the sonorous depth of
his strong voice, "halt and turn, or my men shall fire on you as
deserters."

"Va, citoyen," said one fugitive, an officer-popularly elected, because
he was the loudest brawler in the club of the Salle Favre,--we have seen
him before--Charles, the brother of Armand Monnier;--"men can't fight
when they despise their generals.  It is our generals who are poltroons
and fools both."

"Carry my answer to the ghosts of cowards," cried De Mauldon, and shot
the man dead.

His followers, startled and cowed by the deed, and the voice and the look
of the death-giver, halted.  The officers, who had at first yielded to
the panic of their men, took fresh courage, and finally led the bulk of
the troop back to their, post "enlevis a la baionette," to use the phrase
of a candid historian of that day.

Day, on the whole, not inglorious to France.  It was the first, if it was
the last, really important success of the besieged.  They remained
masters of the ground, the Prussians leaving to them the wounded and the
dead.

That night what crowds thronged from Paris to the top of the Montmartre
heights, from the observatory on which the celebrated inventor Bazin had
lighted up, with some magical electric machine, all the plain of
Gennevilliers from Mont Valerien to the Fort de la Briche!  The splendour
of the blaze wrapped the great city;--distinctly above the roofs of the
houses soared the Dome des Invalides, the spires of Notre Dame, the giant
turrets of the Tuileries;--and died away on resting on the _infames
scapulos Acroceraunia_, the "thunder crags" of the heights occupied by
the invading army.

Lemercier, De Breze, and the elder Rameau--who, despite his peaceful
habits and grey hairs, insisted on joining in the aid of _la patrie_--
were among the National Guards attached to the Fort de la Briche and the
neighbouring eminence, and they met in conversation.

"What a victory we have had!" said the old Rameau.

"Rather mortifying to your son, M. Rameau," said LeMercier.

"Mortifying to my son, sir!--the victory of his countrymen.  What do you
mean?"

"I had the honour to hear M. Gustave the other night at the club de la
Vengeance."

"Bon Dieu! do you frequent those tragic reunions?" asked De Breze.

"They are not at all tragic: they are the only comedies left us, as one
must amuse one's self somewhere, and the club de la Vengeance is the
prettiest thing of the sort going.  I quite understand why it should
fascinate a poet like your son, M. Rameau.  It is held in a _salle de
cafe chantant_--style _Louis Quinze_--decorated with a pastoral scene
from Watteau.  I and my dog Fox drop in.  We hear your son haranguing.
In what poetical sentences he despaired of the Republic!  The Government
(he called them _les charlatans de l'Hotel de Ville_) were imbeciles.
They pretended to inaugurate a revolution, and did not employ the most
obvious of revolutionary means.  There Fox and I pricked up our ears:
what were those means?  Your son proceeded to explain: 'All mankind were
to be appealed to against individual interests.  The commerce of luxury
was to be abolished.  Clearly luxury was not at the command of all
mankind.  Cafes and theatres were to be closed for ever--all mankind
could not go to cafes and theatres.  It was idle to expect the masses to
combine for anything in which the masses had not an interest in common.
The masses had no interest in any property that did not belong to the
masses.  Programmes of the society to be founded, called the Ligue
Cosmopolite Democratique, should be sent at once into all the States of
the civilised world--how?  by balloons.  Money corrupts the world as now
composed: but the money at the command of the masses could buy all the
monarchs and courtiers and priests of the universe.'  At that sentiment,
vehemently delivered, the applauses were frantic, and Fox in his
