the manuscript in his hand.

"Son of perfidious Albion," said Savarin, gayly, "we feared you had
deserted the French alliance.  Welcome back to Paris, and the _entente
cordiale_."

"Would I could stay to enjoy such welcome! but I must again quit Paris."

"Soon to return, _n'est ce pas_?  Paris is an irresistible magnet to _les
beaux esprits_.  _A propos_ of _beaux esprits_, be sure to leave orders
with your bookseller, if you have one, to enter your name as subscriber
to a new journal."

"Certainly, if Monsieur Savarin recommends it."

"He recommends it as a matter of course; he writes in it," said Rameau.

"A sufficient guarantee for its excellence.  What is the name of the
journal?"

"Not yet thought of," answered Savarin.  "Babes must be born before they
are christened; but it will be instruction enough to your bookseller to
order the new journal to be edited by Gustave Rameau."

Bowing ceremoniously to the editor in prospect, Graham said, half
ironically, "May I hope that in the department of criticism you will not
be too hard upon poor Tasso?"

"Never fear; the Signorina, who adores Tasso, will take him under her
special protection," said Savarin, interrupting Rameau's sullen and
embarrassed reply.

Graham's brow slightly contracted.  "Mademoiselle," he said, "is then to
be united in the conduct of this journal with M. Gustave Rameau?"

"No, indeed!" exclaimed Isaura, somewhat frightened at the idea.

"But I hope," said Savarin, "that the Signorina may become a contributor
too important for an editor to offend by insulting her favourites, Tasso
included.  Rameau and I came hither to entreat her influence with her
intimate and illustrious friend, Madame de Grantmesnil, to insure the
success of our undertaking by sanctioning the announcement of her name as
a contributor."

"Upon social questions,--such as the laws of marriage?" said Graham, with
a sarcastic smile, which concealed the quiver of his lip and the pain in
his voice.

"Nay," answered Savarin, "our journal will be too sportive, I hope, for
matters so profound.  We would rather have Madame de Grantmesnil's aid in
some short _roman_, which will charm the fancy of all and offend the
opinions of none.  But since I came into the room, I care less for the
Signorina's influence with the great authoress," and he glanced
significantly at the manuscript.

"How so?" asked Graham, his eye following the glance.

"If the writer of this manuscript will conclude what she has begun, we
shall be independent of Madame de Grantmesnil."

"Fie!" cried Isaura, impulsively, her face and neck bathed in blushes,--
"fie!  such words are a mockery."

Graham gazed at her intently, and then turned his eyes on Savarin.  He
guessed aright the truth.  "Mademoiselle then is an author?  In the style
of her friend Madame de Grantmesnil?"

"Bah!" said Savarin, "I should indeed be guilty of mockery if I paid the
Signorina so false a compliment as to say that in a first effort she
attained to the style of one of the most finished sovereigns of language
that has ever swayed the literature of France.  When I say, 'Give us this
tale completed, and I shall be consoled if the journal does not gain the
aid of Madame de Grantmesnil,' I mean that in these pages there is that
nameless charm of freshness and novelty which compensates for many faults
never committed by a practised pen like Madame de Grantmesnil's.  My dear
young lady, go on with this story,--finish it; when finished, do not
disdain any suggestions I may offer in the way of correction,--and I will
venture to predict to you so brilliant a career as author, that you will
not regret should you resign for that career the bravoes you could
command as actress and singer."

The Englishman pressed his hand convulsively to his heart, as if smitten
by a sudden spasm.  But as his eyes rested on Isaura's face, which had
become radiant with the enthusiastic delight of genius when the path it
would select opens before it as if by a flash from heaven, whatever of
jealous irritation, whatever of selfish pain he might before have felt;
was gone, merged in a sentiment of unutterable sadness and compassion.
Practical man as he was, he knew so well all the dangers, all the snares,
all the sorrows, all the scandals menacing name and fame, that in the
world of Paris must beset the fatherless girl who, not less in authorship
than on the stage, leaves the safeguard of private life forever behind
her, who becomes a prey to the tongues of the public.  At Paris, how
slender is the line that divides the authoress from the _Bohemienne_!
He sank into his chair silently, and passed his hand over his eyes,
as if to shut out a vision of the future.

Isaura in her excitement did not notice the effect on her English
visitor.  She could not have divined such an effect as possible.  On the
contrary, even subordinate to her joy at the thought that she had not
mistaken the instincts which led her to a nobler vocation than that of
the singer, that the cage-bar was opened, and space bathed in sunshine
was inviting the new-felt wings,--subordinate even to that joy was a joy
more wholly, more simply woman's.  "If," thought she, in this joy, "if
this be true, my proud ambition is realized; all disparities of worth and
fortune are annulled between me and him to whom I would bring no shame of
mesalliance!" Poor dreamer, poor child!

"You will let me see what you have written," said Rameau, somewhat
imperiously, in the sharp voice habitual to him, and which pierced
Graham's ear like a splinter of glass.

"No, not now; when finished."

"You will finish it?"

"Oh, yes; how can I help it after such encouragement?"  She held out her
hand to Savarin, who kissed it gallantly; then her eyes intuitively
sought Graham's.  By that time he had recovered his self-possession.  He
met her look tranquilly, and with a smile; but the smile chilled her, she
knew not why.

The conversation then passed upon books and authors of the day, and was
chiefly supported by the satirical pleasantries of Savarin, who was in
high good-spirits.

Graham, who, as we know, had come with the hope of seeing Isaura alone,
and with the intention of uttering words which, however guarded, might
yet in absence serve as links of union, now no longer coveted that
interview, no longer meditated those words.  He soon rose to depart.

"Will you dine with me to-morrow?" asked Savarin.  "Perhaps I may induce
the Signorina and Rameau to offer you the temptation of meeting them."

"By to-morrow I shall be leagues away."

Isaura's heart sank.  This time the manuscript was fairly forgotten.

"You never said you were going so soon," cried Savarin.  "When do you
come back, vile deserter?"

"I cannot even guess.  Monsieur Rameau, count me among your subscribers.
Mademoiselle, my best regards to Signora Venosta.  When I see you again,
no doubt you will have become famous."

Isaura here could not control herself.  She rose impulsively, and
approached him, holding out her hand, and attempting a smile.

"But not famous in the way that you warned me from," she said in
whispered tones.  "You are friends with me still?"  It was like the
piteous wail of a child seeking to make it up with one who wants to
quarrel, the child knows not why.  Graham was moved, but what could he
say?  Could he have the right to warn her from this profession also;
forbid all desires, all roads of fame to this brilliant aspirant?  Even a
declared and accepted lover might well have deemed that that would be to
ask too much.  He replied, "Yes, always a friend, if you could ever need
one."  Her hand slid from his, and she turned away wounded to the quick.

"Have you your _coupe_ at the door?" asked Savarin.

"Simply a _fiacre_."

"And are going back at once to Paris?"

"Yes."

"Will you kindly drop me in the Rue de Rivoli?"

"Charmed to be of use."




CHAPTER XI.

As the _fiacre_ bore to Paris Savarin and Graham, the former said, "I
cannot conceive what rich simpleton could entertain so high an opinion of
Gustave Rameau as to select a man so young, and of reputation though
promising so undecided, for an enterprise which requires such a degree of
tact and judgment as the conduct of a new journal,--and a journal, too,
which is to address itself to the beau monde.  However, it is not for me
to criticise a selection which brings a god-send to myself."

"To yourself?  You jest; you have a journal of your own.  It can only be
through an excess of good-nature that you lend your name and pen to the
service of M. Gustave Rameau."

"My good-nature does not go to that extent.  It is Rameau who confers a
service upon me.  _Peste! mon cher_, we French authors have not the rents
of you rich English milords.  And though I am the most economical of our
tribe, yet that journal of mine has failed me of late; and this morning I
did not exactly see how I was to repay a sum I had been obliged to borrow
of a money-lender,--for I am too proud to borrow of friends, and too
sagacious to borrow of publishers,--when in walks _ce cher petit_ Gustave
with an offer, for a few trifles towards starting this new-born journal,
which makes a new man of me.  Now I am in the undertaking, my _amour
propre_ and my reputation are concerned in its success; and I shall take
care that collaborateurs of whose company I am not ashamed are in the
same boat.  But that charming girl, Isaura!  What an enigma the gift of
the pen is!  No one can ever guess who has it until tried."

"The young lady's manuscript, then, really merits the praise you bestowed
on it?"

"Much more praise, though a great deal of blame, which I did not bestow,
--for in a first work faults insure success as much as beauties.
Anything better than tame correctness.  Yes, her first work, to judge by
what is written, must make a hit,--a great hit.  And that will decide her
career.  A singer, an actress, may retire,--often does when she marries
an author; but once an author always an author."

"Ah! is it so?  If you had a beloved daughter, Savarin, would you
encourage her to be an author?"

"Frankly, no: principally because in that case the chances are that she
would marry an author; and French authors, at least in the imaginative
school, make very uncomfortable husbands."

"Ah! you think the Signorina will marry one of those uncomfortable
husbands,--M. Rameau, perhaps?"

"Rameau!  Hein! nothing more likely.  That beautiful face of his has
its fascination.  And to tell you the truth, my wife, who is a striking
illustration of the truth that what woman wills heaven wills, is bent
upon that improvement in Gustave's moral life which she thinks a union
with Mademoiselle Cicogna would achieve.  At all events, the fair Italian
would have in Rameau a husband who would not suffer her to bury her
talents under a bushel.  If she succeeds as a writer (by succeeding I
mean making money), he will see that her ink-bottle is never empty; and
if she don't succeed as a writer, he will take care that the world shall
gain an actress or a singer.  For Gustave Rameau has a great taste for
luxury and show; and whatever his wife can make, I will venture to say
that he will manage to spend."

"I thought you had an esteem and regard for Mademoiselle Cicogna.  It is
Madame your wife, I suppose, who has a grudge against her?"

"On the contrary, my wife idolizes her."

"Savages sacrifice to their idols the things they deem of value;
civilized Parisians sacrifice their idols themselves, and to a thing that
is worthless."

"Rameau is not worthless; he has beauty and youth and talent.  My wife
thinks more highly of him than I do; but I must respect a man who has
found admirers so sincere as to set him up in a journal, and give him
_carte blanche_ for terms to contributors.  I know of no man in Paris
more valuable to me.  His worth to me this morning is thirty thousand
francs.  I own I do not think him likely to be a very safe husband; but
then French female authors and artists seldom take any husbands except
upon short leases.  There are no vulgar connubial prejudices in the pure
atmosphere of art.  Women of genius, like Madame de Grantmesnil, and
perhaps like our charming young friend, resemble canary-birds,--to sing
their best you must separate them from their mates."

The Englishman suppressed a groan, and turned the conversation.

When he had set down his lively companion, Vane dismissed his _fiacre_,
and walked to his lodgings musingly.

"No," he said inly; "I must wrench myself from the very memory of that
haunting face,--the friend and pupil of Madame de Grantmesnil, the
associate of Gustave Rameau, the rival of Julie Caumartin, the aspirant
to that pure atmosphere of art in which there are no vulgar connubial
prejudices!  Could I--whether I be rich or poor--see in her the ideal of
an English wife?  As it is--as it is--with this mystery which oppresses
me, which, till solved, leaves my own career insoluble,--as it is, how
fortunate that I did not find her alone; did not utter the words that
would fain have leaped from my heart; did not say, 'I may not be the rich
man I seem, but in that case I shall be yet more ambitious, because
struggle and labour are the sinews of ambition!  Should I be rich, will
you adorn my station?  Should I be poor, will you enrich poverty with
your smile?  And can you, in either case, forego--really, painlessly
forego, as you led me to hope--the pride in your own art?'  My ambition
were killed did I marry an actress, a singer.  Better that than the
hungerer after excitements which are never allayed, the struggler in a
career which admits of no retirement,--the woman to whom marriage is no
goal, who remains to the last the property of the public, and glories to
dwell in a house of glass into which every bystander has a right to peer.
Is this the ideal of an Englishman's wife and home?  No, no!--woe is me,
no!"





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PARISIANS, B5, LYTTON ***

****** This file should be named 7741.txt or 7741.zip ********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.
