them through the winter either eating them in this state or boiling
them as before mentioned. the bear and many birds also feed on these
burries. the wild hysop sage, fleshey leaf thorn, and some other herbs
also grow in the plains and hills, particularly the arromatic herb on
which the Antelope and large hare feed. The soil has now changed it's
texture considerably; the base of the hills and river bottoms continue
the same and are composed of a rich black loam while the summits of the
hills and about half their hight downwards are of a light brown colour,
poor sterile and intermixed with a coarse white sand. about 12 OClock
the wind veered about to the N. W. and blew so hard that we were
obliged to Ly by the ballance of the day. we saw great quantities of
game as usual. the bottom lands still becomeing narrower.

About sunset it began to rain, and continued to fall a few drops at a
time untill midnight; the wind blew violently all night.




[Clark, May 12, 1805]
May 12th Sunday 1805.
Set out at an early hour, the morning Clear and Calm, Capt. Lewis
walked on Shore this morning about 12 oClock the wind becam Strong from
the E. about half past one oClock the wind Shifted round to the N. W.
and blew verry hard all the latter part of the day, which obliged us to
Lay by--The Countrey is hilley & rugged and the earth of a lightish
brown and but indifferent, Some Small Cedar is Scattered on the Sides
of the hils & in the hollars, Some pine ridges is also to be Seen on
the North Side, we observe great quantites of game as usual. I killed a
beaver in the water, Saw Several Sitting on the bank near the waters
edge about Sunset it began to rain, and rained very moderately only a
fiew drops at a time for about half the night, wind Continued violent
all night




[Lewis, May 13, 1805]
Monday May 13th 1805.
The wind continued to blow so violently this morning that we did not
think it prudent to set out. sent out some hunters. At 1 P.M. the wind
abated, and altho the hunters had not all returned we set out; the
courant reather stronger than usual and the water continues to become
reather clearer, from both which I anticipate a change of Country
shortly. the country much the same as yesterday; but little timber in
the bottoms and a scant proportion of pine an cedar crown the Stard.
hills. Capt C. who was on shore the greater part of the day killed a
mule and a Common deer, the party killed several deer and some Elk
principally for the benefit of their skins which are necessary to them
for cloathing, the Elk skins I now begin to reserve for making the
leather boat at the falls. the hunters joined us this evening; Gibson
had wounded a very large brown bear but it was too late in the evening
to pursue him.




[Clark, May 13, 1805]
13th of May Monday 1805
The wind Continued to blow hard untill one oClock P M. to day at which
time it fell a little and we Set out and proceeded on verry well about
9 miles and Camped on the Lard Side. the countrey much the Same
appearance as yesterday but little timber in the bottoms; Some Pine in
places on the Stard. Hills. I killed two deer this evening one a mule
deer & the other a common Deer, the party killed Several this morning
all for the use of their Skins which are now good, one man Gibson
wounded a verry large brown bear, too late this evening to prosue him-
We passed two Creeks in a bend to the Lard Side neither them had any
water, are somewhat wider; passed some high black bluffs. saw immence
herds of buffaloe today also Elk deer wolves and Antelopes. passed
three large creeks one on the Stard. and two others on the Lard. side,
neither of which had any runing water. Capt Clark walked on shore and
killed a very fine buffaloe cow. I felt an inclination to eat some veal
and walked on shore and killed a very fine buffaloe calf and a large
woolf, much the whitest I had seen, it was quite as white as the wool
of the common sheep. one of the party wounded a brown bear very badly,
but being alone did not think proper to pursue him. In the evening the
men in two of the rear canoes discovered a large brown bear lying in
the open grounds about 300 paces from the river, and six of them went
out to attack him, all good hunters; they took the advantage of a small
eminence which concealed them and got within 40 paces of him
unperceived, two of them reserved their fires as had been previously
conscerted, the four others fired nearly at the same time and put each
his bullet through him, two of the balls passed through the bulk of
both lobes of his lungs, in an instant this monster ran at them with
open mouth, the two who had reserved their fires discharged their
pieces at him as he came towards them, boath of them struck him, one
only slightly and the other fortunately broke his shoulder, this
however only retarded his motion for a moment only, the men unable to
reload their guns took to flight, the bear pursued and had very nearly
overtaken them before they reached the river; two of the party betook
themselves to a canoe and the others seperated an concealed themselves
among the willows, reloaded their pieces, each discharged his piece at
him as they had an opportunity they struck him several times again but
the guns served only to direct the bear to them, in this manner he
pursued two of them seperately so close that they were obliged to throw
aside their guns and pouches and throw themselves into the river altho
the bank was nearly twenty feet perpendicular; so enraged was this
anamal that he plunged into the river only a few feet behind the second
man he had compelled take refuge in the water, when one of those who
still remained on shore shot him through the head and finally killed
him; they then took him on shore and butched him when they found eight
balls had passed through him in different directions; the bear being
old the flesh was indifferent, they therefore only took the skin and
fleece, the latter made us several gallons of oil; it was after the sun
had set before these men come up with us, where we had been halted by
an occurrence, which I have now to recappitulate, and which altho
happily passed without ruinous injury, I cannot recollect but with the
utmost trepidation and horror; this is the upseting and narrow escape
of the white perogue It happened unfortunately for us this evening that
Charbono was at the helm of this Perogue, in stead of Drewyer, who had
previously steered her; Charbono cannot swim and is perhaps the most
timid waterman in the world; perhaps it was equally unluckey that Capt.
C. and myself were both on shore at that moment, a circumstance which
rarely happened; and tho we were on the shore opposite to the perogue,
were too far distant to be heard or to do more than remain spectators
of her fate; in this perogue ____ were embarked, our papers,
Instruments, books medicine, a great part of our merchandize and in
short almost every article indispensibly necessary to further the
views, or insure the success of the enterprize in which we are now
launched to the distance of 2200 miles. surfice it to say, that the
Perogue was under sail when a sudon squawl of wind struck her
obliquely, and turned her considerably, the steersman allarmed, in
stead of puting her before the wind, lufted her up into it, the wind
was so violent that it drew the brace of the squarsail out of the hand
of the man who was attending it, and instantly upset the perogue and
would have turned her completely topsaturva, had it not have been from
the resistance mad by the oarning against the water; in this situation
Capt. C and myself both fired our guns to attract the attention if
possible of the crew and ordered the halyards to be cut and the sail
hawled in, but they did not hear us; such was their confusion and
consternation at this moment, that they suffered the perogue to lye on
her side for half a minute before they took the sail in, the perogue
then wrighted but had filled within an inch of the gunwals; Charbono
still crying to his god for mercy, had not yet recollected the rudder,
nor could the repeated orders of the Bowsman, Cruzat, bring him to his
recollection untill he threatend to shoot him instantly if he did not
take hold of the rudder and do his duty, the waves by this time were
runing very high, but the fortitude resolution and good conduct of
Cruzat saved her; he ordered 2 of the men to throw out the water with
some kettles that fortunately were convenient, while himself and two
others rowed her ashore, where she arrived scarcely above the water; we
now took every article out of her and lay them to drane as well as we
could for the evening, baled out the canoe and secured her; there were
two other men beside Charbono on board who could not swim, and who of
course must also have perished had the perogue gone to the bottom.
while the perogue lay on her side, finding I could not be heard, I for
a moment forgot my own situation, and involluntarily droped my gun,
threw aside my shot pouch and was in the act of unbuttoning my coat,
before I recollected the folly of the attempt I was about to make,
which was to throw myself into the river and indevour to swim to the
perogue; the perogue was three hundred yards distant the waves so high
that a perogue could scarcely live in any situation, the water
excessively could, and the stream rappid; had I undertaken this project
therefore, there was a hundred to one but what I should have paid the
forfit of my life for the madness of my project, but this had the
perogue been lost, I should have valued but little.--After having all
matters arranged for the evening as well as the nature of circumstances
would permit, we thought it a proper occasion to console ourselves and
cheer the sperits of our men and accordingly took a drink of grog and
gave each man a gill of sperits.




[Clark, May 14, 1805]
14th of May Tuesday 1805
A verry Clear Cold morning a white frost & some fog on the river the
Thermomtr Stood at 32 above 0, wind from the S. W. we proceeded on
verry well untill about 6 oClock a Squawl of wind Struck our Sale broad
Side and turned the perogue nearly over, and in this Situation the
Perogue remained untill the Sale was Cut down in which time She nearly
filed with water--the articles which floated out was nearly all caught
by the Squar who was in the rear. This accident had like to have cost
us deerly; for in this perogue were embarked our papers, Instruments,
books, medicine, a great proportion of our merchandize, and in short
almost every article indispensibly necessary to further the views, or
insure the success of the enterprize in which, we are now launched to
the distance of 2,200 miles. it happened unfortunately that Capt. Lewis
and myself were both on shore at the time of this occurrence, a
circumstance which seldom took place; and tho we were on the shore
opposit to the perogue were too far distant to be heard or do more than
remain spectators of her fate; we discharged our guns with the hope of
attracting the attention of the crew and ordered the sail to be taken
in but such was their consternation and confusion at the instant that
they did not hear us. when however they at length took in the sail and
the perogue wrighted; the bowsman Cruzatte by repeated threats so far
brought Charbono the Sternman to his recollection that he did his duty
while two hands bailed the perogue and Cruzatte and two others rowed
her on shore were she arrived scarcely above the water. we owe the
preservation of the perogue to the resolution and fortitude of Cruzatte

The Countrey like that of yesterday, passed a Small Island and the
enterence of 3 large Creeks, one on the Stard. & the other 2 on the
Lard Side, neither of them had any running water at this time--Six good
hunters of the party fired at a Brown or Yellow Bear Several times
before they killed him, & indeed he had like to have defeated the whole
party, he pursued them Seperately as they fired on him, and was near
Catching Several of them one he pursued into the river, this bear was
large & fat would way about 500 wt; I killed a Buffalow, & Capt. Lewis
a Calf & a wolf this evening.




[Lewis, May 15, 1805]
Wednesday May 15th
as soon as a slight shower of rain passed over this morning, we spread
the articles to dry which had got wet yesterday in the white perogue;
tho the day proved so cloudy and damp that they received but little
benifit from the sun or air; we were enabled to put them in such a
state as to prevent their sustaining further injury. our hunters killed
several deer, and saw three bear one of which they wounded.




[Clark, May 15, 1805]
May 15th Wednesday 1805
Our medisons, Instruments, merchandize, Clothes, provisions &c. &c.
which was nearly all wet we had put out to air and dry. the day being
Cloudy & rainey those articles dried but little to day--our hunters
killed Several deer &c. and Saw three Bear one of which they wounded &c.

We see Buffalow on the banks dead, others floating down dead, and
others mired every day, those buffalow either drown in Swiming the
river or brake thro the ice




[Lewis, May 16, 1805]
Thursday May 16th
The morning was fair and the day proved favorable to our operations; by
4 oClock in the evening our Instruments, Medicine, merchandize
provision &c, were perfectly dryed, repacked and put on board the
perogue. the loss we sustained was not so great as we had at first
apprehended; our medicine sustained the greatest injury, several
articles of which were intirely spoiled, and many others considerably
injured; the ballance of our losses consisted of some gardin seeds, a
small quantity of gunpowder, and a few culinary articles which fell
overboard and sunk, the Indian woman to whom I ascribe equal fortitude
and resolution, with any person onboard at the time of the accedent,
caught and preserved most of the light articles which were washed
overboard all matters being now arranged for our departure we lost no
time in seting out; proceeced on tolerably well about seven miles and
encamped on the Stard. side. in the early part of the day two of our
men fired on a panther, a little below our encampment, and wounded it;
they informed us that it was very large, had just killed a deer partly
devoured it, and in the act of concealing the ballance as they
discovered him. we caught two Antelopes at our encampment in attempting
to swim the river; these anamals are but lean as yet, and of course not
very pleasant food. I walked on shore this evening and killed a
buffaloe cow and calf, we found the calf most excellent veal. the
country on either side of the river is broken and hills much higher
than usual, the bottoms now become narrow and the timber more scant;
some scattering pine and cedar on the steep declivities of the hills.-
this morning a white bear toar Labuiche's coat which he had left in the
plains.




[Clark, May 16, 1805]
May 16th Thursday 1805 a fair morning our articles all out to Dry at 4
oClock we had every thing that was Saved dry and on bord, our loss is
Some medison, Powder, Seeds, & Several articles which Sunk, and maney
Spoiled had a medn. altitude which gave for Latd. _ deg. _' _" N.--two of our
men fired at a pant hr a little below our Camp, this animale they say
was large, had Caught a Deer & eate it half & buried the ballance. a
fiew antilope Swam the river near our Camp two of them were Cought by
the party in the river. at half past 4 oClock we Set out and proceeded
on verry well ____ miles and incamped on the Std. Side the Countrey as
before hilley & broken verry Small proprotion of timber in the points,
Some little pine & Ceader in the hills

Buffalow & Deer is yet plenty on the river in the small timbered
bottoms Capt Lewis walked out on the Std. Side and killed a Cow & Calf
the calf was verry fine their bases. it is somewhat singular that the
lower part of these hills appear to be formed of a dark rich loam while
the upper region about 150 feet is formed of a whiteish brown sand, so
hard in many parts as to resemble stone; but little rock or stone of
any kind to be seen in these hills. the river is much narrower than
usual, the bed from 200 to 300 yards only and possessing a much larger
proportion of gravel than usual. a few scattering cottonwood trees are
the only timber near the river; the sandbars, and with them the willow
points have almost entirely disappeared. greater appearance than usual
of the saline incrustations of the banks and river hills. we passed two
creeks the one on Stard. side, and the other just below our camp on the
Lard. side; each of these creeks afford a small quantity of runing
water, of a brackish tast. the great number of large beds of streams
perfectly dry which we daily pass indicate a country but badly watered,
which I fear is the case with the country through which we have been
passing for the last fifteen or twenty days. Capt Clark walked on shore
this evening and killed an Elk; buffaloe are not so abundant as they
were some days past. the party with me killed a female brown bear, she
was but meagre, and appeared to have suckled young very recently. Capt.
Clark narrowly escaped being bitten by a rattlesnake in the course of
his walk, the party killed one this evening at our encampment, which he
informed me was similar to that he had seen; this snake is smaller than
those common to the middle Atlantic States, being about 2 feet 6 inches
long; it is of a yellowish brown colour on the back and sides,
variagated with one row of oval spots of a dark brown colour lying
transversely over the back from the neck to the tail, and two other
rows of small circular spots of the same colour which garnis the sides
along the edge of the scuta. it's bely contains 176 scuta on the belly
and 17 on the tale. Capt Clark informed me that he saw some coal which
had been brought down by the water of the last creek we passed; this
creek also throws out considerable quantities of Driftwood, though
there is no timber on it which can be perceived from the Missouri; we
called this stream rattlesnake creek. Capt Clark saw an Indian
fortifyed camp this evening, which appeared to have been recently
occupyed, from which we concluded it was probable that it had been
formed by a war party of the Menetares who left their vilage in March
last with a view to attack the blackfoot Indians in consequence of
their having killed some of their principal warriors the previous
autumn. we were roused late at night by the Sergt. of the guard, and
warned of the danger we were in from a large tree that had taken fire
and which leant immediately over our lodge. we had the loge removed,
and a few minutes after a large proportion of the top of the tree fell
on the place the lodge had stood; had we been a few minutes later we
should have been crushed to attoms. the wind blew so hard, that
notwithstanding the lodge was fifty paces distant from the fire it
sustained considerable injury from the burning coals which were thrown
on it; the party were much harrassed also by this fire which
communicated to a collection of fallen timber, and could not be
extinguished.




[Clark, May 17, 1805]
May 17th Friday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N W. mercury at 60 deg. a 0. river falling a
little. we Set out at an early hour and proceeded on verry well by the
assistance of the Toe rope principally, the Countrey verry rugged &
hills high and the river washing the base on each Side, Great
appearance of the Salt Substance. a fiew Cotton trees is the only
timber which is Scattered in the bottoms & the hills contain a fiew
Pine & Cedar, which is Scattered. river much narrower than below from 2
to 300 yards wide, the bottoms muddey & hills rich earth except near
their topes--We passed 2 large Creeks to day one on the Starbd Side and
the other just below our camp on the Lard. Side each of those creeks
has a little running water near their mouthes which has a brackish
taste, I was nearly treading on a Small fierce rattle Snake different
from any I had ever Seen &c. one man the party killed another of the
Same kind. I walked on Shore after dinner & killed an Elk--the party in
my absence Killed a female Brown or yellow Bear which was meagre the
appearances of the Hills & Countrey is as before mentioned except a
greater appearance of the white appearance of Salts or tarter and Some
Coal which has been thrown out by the floods in the last Creek-
Buffalow & Deer is not plenty to day, Elk is yet to be Seen in
abundance we Camped in the upper part of a Small timbered bottom on the
Lard. Side in which I Saw a fortified Indian Camp, which I Suppose is
one of the Camps of a Mi ne tar re war party of about 15 men, that Set
out from their village in March last to war against the Blackfoot
Indians.

we were roused late at night and warned of the danger of fire from a
tree which had Cought and leaned over our Lodge, we had the lodge moved
Soon after the Dry limbs & top of the tree fell in the place the Lodge
Stood, the wind blew hard and the dry wood Cought & fire flew in every
direction, burnt our Lodge verry much from the Coals which fell on it
altho at Some distance in the plain, the whole party was much disturbed
by this fire which could not be extinguished &c




[Lewis, May 18, 1805]
Saturday May 18th 1805.
The wind blew hard this morning from the West. we were enabled to
employ our toe line the greater part of the day and therefore proceeded
on tolerably well. there are now but few sandbars, the river is narrow
and current gentle. the timber consists of a few cottonwood trees along
the verge of the river; the willow has in a great measure disappeared.
in the latter part of the day the hills widened, the bottoms became
larger, and contained more timber. we passed a creek on the Stard. side
about three oclock, which afforded no water; came too and encamped on
the Lard. side opposite to the lower point of a small Island, two miles
short of the extremity of the last course of this day. Capt Clark in
the course of his walk this evening killed four deer, two of which were
the black tailed or mule deer; the skins are now good, they have not
yet produced their young.--we saw a number of buffaloe, Elk, deer and
Antelopes.--the saline substance frequently mentioned continues to
appear as usual.-




[Clark, May 18, 1805]
May 18th Satturday 1805
A windey morning wind from the West we proceeded on verry well with the
assistance of the Toe Coard, river narrow but flew Sand bars, & current
jentle, but a few Cotton Trees Contained in the bottoms willow is not
common on the bears as usial Some little on the Sides of the river is
yet to be Seen, the after part of the day was Cloudy & at about 12
oClock it began to rain and continued moderately for about 11/2 hours,
not Sufficient to wet a man thro his clothes; this is the first rain
Since we Set out this Spring The hills widen and the bottoms Contain
more timber than for Several days past, we passed a Wisers Creek on the
Std. Side about 3 oClock and Camped on the Lard Side opposit the lower
point of a handsom little Island near the middle of the river. I walked
on Shore and killed four Deer, 2 common & 2 mule deer, one of which had
3 fauns, 2 others had 2 each, those deer are fat, & their Skins
tolerable good, which are now in demand with us for clothes Such as
Legins & Mockersons, I Saw great numbers of Buffalows & Elk; Some of
the party Shoot & Catch beaver every day & night




[Lewis, May 19, 1805]
Sunday May 19th 1805.
The last night was disagreeably could; we were unable to set out untill
8 oclock A.M. in consequence of a heavy fogg, which obscured the river
in such a manner that we could not see our way; this is the first we
have experienced in any thing like so great a degree; there was also a
fall of due last evening, which is the second we have experienced since
we have entered this extensive open country. at eight we set out and
proceeded as yesterday by means of the cord principally, the hills are
high and the country similar to that of yesterday. Capt Clark walked on
shore with two of the hunters and killed a brown bear; notwithstanding
that it was shot through the heart it ran at it's usual pace near a
quarter of a mile before it fell. one of the party wounded a beaver,
and my dog as usual swam in to catch it; the beaver bit him through the
hind leg and cut the artery; it was with great difficulty that I could
stop the blood; I fear it will yet prove fatal to him. on Capt. Clark's
return he informed me that he had from the top of one of the adjacent
hights discovered the entrance of a large stream which discharged
itself into the Missouri on the Lard. side distant 6 or seven miles;
from the same place he also saw a range of Mountains, bearing W.
distant 40 or 50 miles; they appeared to proceed in a S. S. W.
direction; the N. N. E. extremity of these mountains appeared abrupt.

This afternoon the river was croked, rappid and containing more sawyers
than we have seen in the same space since we left the entrance of the
river Platte. Capt. C. in the course of his walk killed three deer and
a beaver, I also walked on shore this evening a few miles and killed an
Elk, a buck, and a beaver. the party killed and caught 4 other beaver &
3 deer.

The men complain much of sore eyes and imposthumes.




[Clark, May 19, 1805]
May 19th Sunday 1805
a verry cold night, the murckery Stood at 38 at 8 oClock this morning,
a heavy dew which is the 2d I have Seen this Spring. The fog (which was
the first) was So thick this morning that we could not Set out untill
the Sun was about 2 hours up, at which time a Small breeze Sprung up
from the E. which Cleared off the fog & we proceeded on by means of the
Cord The hills are high & rugged the Countrey as yesterday--I walked on
Shore with two men we killed a white or grey bear; not withstanding
that it was Shot through the heart it ran at it's usial pace near a
quarter of a mile before it fell. Capt Lewis's dog was badly bitten by
a wounded beaver and was near bleading to death-. after killing the
Bear I continued my walk alone, & killed 3 Deer & a Beaver; finding
that the Perogues were below I assended the highest hill I could See,
from the top of which I Saw the mouth of M. Shell R & the meanderings
of the Missouri for a long distance. I also Saw a high mountain in a
westerley direction, bearing S. S W. about 40 or 50 miles distant, in
the evening the river was verry Crooked and much more rapid &
Containing more Sawyers than any which we have passed above the River
Platte Capt Lewis walked on Shore this after noon & killed an Elk, Buck
& a Beaver, I kiled three Deer at dinner, the hunters killed three
other Deer to day Several beaver also killed. We Camped on the Stard
Side in a bottom of Small Cotton wood




[Lewis, May 20, 1805]
Monday May 20th 1805
Set out at an early hour as usual, the banks being favourable and water
strong we employed the toe rope principally; river narrow and croked;
country much as that of yesterday; immence number of the prickley pears
in the plains and on the hills. At the distance of 21/4 miles passed
the entrance of a large Creek, affording but little water; this stream
we named Blowing Fly Creek, from the immence quantities of those
insects found in this neighbourhood, they infest our meat while
roasting or boiling, and we are obliged to brush them off our provision
as we eat. At 11 A.M. we arrived at the entrance of a handsome bold
river which discharges itself into the Missouri on the Lard. side; this
stream we take to be that called by the Minnetares the ____ or
Muscleshell River; if it be the same, of which I entertain but little
doubt, it takes it's rise, by their information in the 1st Chain of the
Rocky Mountains at no great distance from the Yellow stone river, from
whence in it's course to this place it passes through a high and broken
country pretty well timbered, particularly on it's borders, and
intersperced with handsome fertile plains and medows. but from the
circumstance of the same Indians informing us that we should find a
well timbered country in the neighbourhood of it's mouth, I am induced
to beleive that the timbered country of which they speak is similar to
that we have passed for a day or two, or that in our view above, which
consists of nothing more than a few scattering small scrubby pine and
dwarf cedar on the summits of some of the highest hills nine tenths of
the country being wholy destitute of timber of any kind, covered with a
short grass, arromatic herbs and the prickley pear; the river bottom
however, so far as we have explored it or 8 m. are well stocked with
Cottonwood timber of tollerable size, & lands of excellent quality. We
halted at thentrance of the river on the point formed by it's junction
with the Missouri determining to spend the day, make the necessary
observations and send out some hunters to explore the country. The
Muscle Shell river falls into the Missouri 2270 miles above it's mouth,
and is 110 yards in width, it affords much more water than streams of
it's width generally do below, it's courant is by no means rappid, and
from appearances it might be navigated with canoes a considerable
distance; it's bed is coarse sand and gravel principally with an
occasion mixture of black mud; it's banks abbrupt and about 12 feet
high yet never appear to overflow; the waters of this river is of a
greenish yellow cast, much more transparent than the Missouri, which
last is also much more transparent than below but still retains it's
whiteish hue and a proportion of it's sedement. the Missouri opposite
to this point is deep, gentle in it's courant, and 222 yards in width.
The hunters returned this evening and informed us that the country
continued much the same in appearance as that we saw where we were or
broken, and that about five miles abe the mouth of shell river a
handsome river of about fifty yards in width discharged itself into the
shell river on the Stard. or upper side; this stream we called
Sah-ca-gar me-ah or bird woman's River, after our interpreter the Snake
woman. Shields also found a bould spring or fountain issuing from the
foot of the Lard. hills about 4 miles up the Missouri; a fountain in
this plain country is a great novelty; I have not seen a bould fountain
of pure water except one since I left the Mandans; there a number of
small ones but all without exception are impregnated with the salts
which abound in this country, and with which I believe the Missoury
itself considerably impregnated but to us in the habit of useing it not
perceptible; the exception I make is a very fine fountain under the
bluffs on the Lard. side of the Missouri and at a distance from the
river about five miles below the entrance of the yellowstone River. The
sands of the Missouri are not so abundant as they have been for some
time past, being confined to the points only; the bed of the river
principally mud and still too deep to use the seting pole. Capt. Clark
walked out today and killed two deer and an Elk, the hunters killed 4
deer and elk and a buffaloe. I saw two large Owls with remarkable long
feathers on the sides of the head which resembled ears; I take them to
be the large hooting owl tho they are somewhat larger and their colours
brighter than those common to the J States.-




[Clark, May 20, 1805]
May 20th Monday 1805
a fine morning wind from the N E. river falling a little We Set out at
7 oClock and proceeded on verry well as usial by the assistance of the
Cord passed Some verry Swift water, river narrow and Crooked, at 11
oClock arrived at the mouth of Shell river on the Lard Side and formed
a Camp for the present. haveing passed a large Creek about 4 miles
below on the Ld Side which we call Blowing fly Creek from the emence
quantites of those insects which geather on our meat in Such numbers
that we are oblige to brush them off what we eate.

muscle Shell River falls in on Lard Side 2270 miles up Contains a
greater perportion of water than Rivers of its Size below, I measured
it and find it to be 110 yards wide, the water of a Greenish yellow
Colour, and appers to be navagable for Small Craft, The Minetarras
inform us that this river heads in the 1st of the rockey Mountains &
passes through a broken Countrey. its head at no great distance from
the Yellow Stone River The Countrey about this river as described
yesterday we took the Meredian altitude 59 deg. 50' 0" back observation and
found the Latd. to be 47 deg. 0' 24"

The Missouri at the mouth of Shell River is 222 yards wide with a Smoth
Current the Missouri water is not So muddey as below, but retains
nearly its usial Cholour, and the Sands principally Confined to the
points I killed two Deer & an Elk, the hunters killed an Elk & Several
deer mearly for their Skins to make Leagins,--Sent men out in every
derection, the Countrey generally verry broken Some leavel plains up
the Shell river The bottoms of the Shell river is well timbered as also
a Small river which falls into that river on the upper Side 5 miles
above its mouth. The hills on the Lard. Contain Scattering Pine & Cedar.




[Lewis, May 21, 1805]
Tuesday May 21st 1805
A delightfull morning set out at an early hour and proceeded on very
well, imployed the chord principally; the shores are abbrupt and bould
and composed of a black and yellow clay; see no extensive collection of
pure sand, the bars are composed black mud and a small poportion of
fine sand; the courant still pretty strong. the Missouri in it's course
downward makes a suddon and extensive bend to receive the Muscle shell
river, the point of country thus formed tho high is still much lower
than that surrounding it, thus forming a valley of wavey country which
extends itself for a great distance in a Northerly direction; the soil
is fertile, produces a fine turf of low grass and some herbs, also
immence quantities of the Prickley pear, without a stick of timber of
any discription. the country on the South side is high broken and
crowned with some scrubby pines and dwarf cedar; the leaf of this pine
is much longer than the common pitch or red pine of Virginia, the cone
is also longer and slimer, and the imbrications wider and thicker, and
the whole frequently covered with rosin. Mineral appearances as usual.
the growse or praire hen are now less abundant on the river than they
were below; perhaps they betake themselves to the open plains at a
distance from the river at this season.-

The wind which was moderate all the fore part of the day continued to
encrease in the evening, and about dark veered about to N. W. and blew
a storm all night, in short we found ourselves so invelloped with
clouds of dust and sand that we could neither cook, eat, nor sleep; and
were finally compelled to remove our lodge about eight oClock at night
to the foot of an adjacent hill where we were covered in some measure
from the wind by the hills. several loose articles blown over board and
lost. our first station was on a bar on Stard. opposite the lower point
of a small Island, which we now called windy Island. the bends of the
river are short and suddon, the points covered with some cottonwood,
larger willow, or broadleafed willow with an abundance of the wild rose
and some small honeysuckle bushes constitute the undergrowth, the
redwood is also found in small quantities. Capt. C walked on shore
today and killed 2 Elk; the party killed several deer and a buffaloe
Cow.-




[Clark, May 21, 1805]
May 21st Tuesday 1805.
a butifull morning, wind from the West, river falling a little, we Set
out at an early hour and proceed on in the usial way by the assistance
of the Coard principally, but little use of the Oares & less with the
poles as the bottoms are muddey, we Se no great bodies of pure Sand the
bars & points are rich mud mixed with fine Sand. I walked on Shore
Stard. Side the river makes a great bend to the South to receve Shell
River, the boint for many miles out in a Northerley direction is a rich
uneaven valley Contain Some Short grass, and Prickley pears without
timber The Countrey on the South Side of the Missouri is high, Soil and
mineral appearance as usial, more Scattering pine & Cedar on the hills,
the wind which blew moderatly all the forepart of the day increassd and
about Dark Shifted to the N W. and Stormed all night, Several loose
articles were blown over board, our lodge & Camp which was on a Sand
bar on the Std. Side & opposite to the lower point of an Island we were
obliged to move under the hills, the dust & Sand blew in clouds. The
bends of the river are Short and points Covered with Cotton wood under
groth wild rose bushes I killed 2 Elk to day Several Deer Killd. & a
Buffalow Cow.




[Lewis, May 22, 1805]
Wednesday May 22cd 1805.
The wind blew so violently this morning that we did not think it
prudent to set out untill it had in some measure abated; this did not
happen untill 10 A.M. when we proceeded principally by the toe lines
the bottoms somewhat wider than usual, the lands fertile or apparently
so tho the short grass and the scantey proportion of it on the hills
would indicate no great fertility. passed Windy Island on Lard. at 1 M.
51/2 miles above passed a large Island in a bend on Stard. side, and
three miles further on the same side passed the entrance of grows Creek
20 yds wide, affords but little water. this creek we named from seeing
a number of the pointed tail praire hen near it's mouth, these are the
fist we have seen in such numbers for some days. I walked on shore this
morning the country is not so broken as yesterday tho still high and
roling or wavy; the hills on Lard. side possess more pine than usual;
some also on the Stard. hills. Salts and other mineral appearances as
usual. the river continues about the same width or from 200 to 250 yds.
wide, fewer sandbars and the courant more gentle and regular; game not
so abundant as below the Muscle Shell river. I killed a deer in the
course of my walk today. Capt. C. also walked out this evening and took
a view of the country from a conspicuous point and found it the same as
has been discribed. we have caught but few fish since we left the
Mandans, they do not bite freely, what we took were the white cat of 2
to 5 lbs. I presume that fish are scarce in this part of the river. We
encamped earlyer this evening than usual in order render the oil of a
bear which we killed. I do not believe that the Black bear common to
the lower part of this river and the Atlantic States, exists in this
quarter; we have neither seen one of them nor their tracks which would
be easily distinguished by it's shortness of tallons when compared with
the brown grizly or white bear. I believe that it is the same species
or family of bears which assumes all those colours at different ages
and seasons of the year.




[Clark, May 22, 1805]
May 22nd Wednesday 1805
The wind Continued to blow So violently hard we did not think it
prudent to Set out untill it luled a little, about 10 oClock we Set out
the morning Cold, passed a Small Island in the bend to the Lard Side, &
proceeded on at 5 miles higher passed a Island in a bend to the Stard
Side, and a Creek a Short distance above on the Stard Side 20 yds. w
Capt Lewis walked out before dinner & Killed a Deer, I walked out after
dinner and assended & but a few miles to view the Countrey, which I
found roleing & of a verry rich Stickey Soil produceing but little
vegitation of any kind except the prickley-piar, but little grass &
that verry low. a great deal of Scattering Pine on the Lard Side & Some
fur on the Stard. Sd. The mineral productions as described in the
proceeding days, game not So abundant as below, the river Continue
about the Same width, fewer Sand bars & current more regular, river
falls about an inch a day We camped on the Stard. Side, earlier than we
intend on account of Saveing the oil of a bear which the party killed
late this afternoon.

Maney of the Creeks which appear to have no water near ther mouths have
Streams of running water higher up which rise & waste in the Sand or
gravel. the water of those Creeks are So much impregnated with the Salt
Substance that it cannot be Drank with pleasure.




[Lewis, May 23, 1805]
Thursday May 23rd 1805.
Set out early this morning, the frost was severe last night, the ice
appeared along the edge of the water, water also freized on the oars.
at the distance of one mile passed the entrance of a creek 15 yds. wide
on Stard. side, this we call Teapot Creek, it affords no water at it's
mouth but has runing water at some small distance above, this I beleive
to be the case with many of those creekes which we have passed since we
entered this hilley country, the water is absorbed by the earth near
the river and of course appear dry; they afford but little water at any
rate, and that is so strongly impregnated with these salts that it is
unfit for uce; all the wild anamals appear fond of this water; I have
tryed it by way of experiment & find it moderately pergative, but
painfull to the intestens in it's opperation. this creek runs directly
towards some low mountains which lye N. W. of it and appear to be about
30 mes. distant, perhaps it heads in them. This range of mountains
appear to be about 70 miles long runing from E to W. having their
Eastern extremity about 30 mes. distant in a northwardly direction from
pot Island.--also passed two small creeks on Lard. and two others on
Stard. all inconsiderable and dry at their entrances. just above the
entrance of Teapot Creek on the stard. there is a large assemblage of
the burrows of the Burrowing Squirrel they generally seelect a south or
a south Easterly exposure for their residence, and never visit the
brooks or river for water; I am astonished how this anamal exists as it
dose without water, particularly in a country like this where there is
scarcely any rain during Yi of the year and more rarely any due; yet we
have sometimes found their villages at the distance of five or six
miles from any water, and they are never found out of the limits of the
ground which their burrows occupy; in the Autumn when the hard frosts
commence they close their burrows and do not venture out again untill
spring, indeed some of them appear to be yet in winter quarters. passed
3 Islands the two first covered with tall cottonwood timber and the
last with willows only. river more rappid, & the country much the same
as yesterday. some spruce pine of small size appears among the pitch
pine, and reather more rock than usual on the face of the hills. The
musquetoes troublesome this evening, a circumstance I did not expect
from the temperature of the morning. The Gees begin to lose the
feathers of their wings and are unable to fly. Capt Clark walked on
shore and killed 4 deer and an Elk. We killed a large fat brown bear
which took the water after being wounded and was carried under some
driftwood where he sunk and we were unable to get him. Saw but few
buffaloe today, but a great number of Elk, deer, some antelopes and 5
bear. The wild rose which is now in blume are very abundant, they
appear to differ but little from those common to the Atlantic States,
the leaves of the bushes and the bush itself appear to be of somewhat
smaller size.




[Clark, May 23, 1805]
May 23rd Thursday 1805
a Severe frost last night, the Thrmotr. Stood at the freesing point
this morning i e 32 a 0. wind S W. the water freeses on the oars. Ice
on the edge of the river we Set out at an early hour and passed the
mouth a Creek at 1 mile on the Stard. Side which heads in a mountain N
W of its mouth 30 or _____ miles, the Countrey on each Side is as
passed yesterday passed 2 Small Creeks on the Stard & 2 on the Lard.
Side to day. a mountain which appears to be 60 or 70 miles long bearing
E. & W is about 25 miles distant from this river on the Stard Side
Notherley of Pot Island I walked on Shore and killed 4 deer & an Elk, &
a beaver in the evening we killed a large fat Bear, which we
unfortunately lost in the river, after being Shot took the water & was
Carried under a drift passed in course of this day three Islands, two
of them Covered with tall timber & a 3rd with willows

The after part of this day was worm & the Misquitors troublesome. Saw
but five Buffalow a number of Elk & Deer & 5 bear & 2 Antilopes to day.
the river beginning to rise, and Current more rapid than yesterday, in
maney places I saw Spruces on the hills Sides Stard. this evening.




[Lewis, May 24, 1805]
Friday May 24th 1805.

The water standing in the vessels freized during the night 1/8 of an
inch thick, ice also appears along the verge of the river. the folage
of some of the cottonwood trees have been entirely distroyed by the
frost and are again puting forth other buds. the high country in which
we are at present and have been passing for some days I take to be a
continuation of what the Indians as well as the French Engages call the
Black hills. This tract of country so called consists of a collection
of high broken and irregular hills and short chain of mountains
sometimes 120 miles in width and again becomeing much narrower, but
always much higher than the country on either side; they commence about
the head of the Kanzas river and to the West of that river near the
Arkansas, from whence they take their course a little to the W. of N.
W. approaching the rockey Mountains obliquely, passing the river platte
above the forks and intercepting the Yellowstone river near the big
bend and passing the Missouri at this place and probably continuing to
swell the country as far North as the Saskashawan river tho they are
lower here than they are discribed to the Sth. and may therefore
probably terminate before they reach the Suskashawan. the black hills
in their course nothwardly appear to approach more nearly to the Rocky
Mountains.

We set out at an early hour this morning and proceed on principally by
the chord untill about 9 A.M. when a fine breeze sprung up from the S.
E. and enabled us though the ballance of the day to employ our sails to
advantage; we proceed at a pretty good pace notwithstanding the courant
of the river was very strong. we passed two large and four small
Islands; also several streams on either side; the first of these is a
large Creek or small river which disinboged on the Stard. side about
11/2 miles above our encampment of last evening, it is 30 yards wide
and contains some water. the bed is gravley and intermixed with some
stone, it takes its rise in the mountains which are situated in a
Northwardly direction from its entrance, distant about 30 miles. the
air is so pure in this open country that mountains and other elivated
objects appear much nearer than they really are; these mountains do not
appear to be further than 15 m. we sent a man up this creek to explore
the country he returned late in the evening and informed that he had
proceeded ten miles directly towards these mountains and that he did
not think himself by any mean half way these mountains are rockey and
covered with some scattering pine. This stream we call North Mountain
creek. the next stream in order is a creek which falls in on Lard. 21/2
miles higher; this is 15 yds. wide no water; a large village of the
burrowing or barking squirrels on the Stard. side opposite it's
entrance, hence the name Little dog Ck. that being the name by which
the French Engages call this anamal. at three miles and at 10 ms. from
hence still ascending 2 Small creek fall in on the Stard. side, no
water. 51/2 miles higher a small river falls in on Lard. side this we
called South Mountain creek as from it's direction it appeared to take
it's rise in a range of Mountains lying in a S. Westerly direction from
it's entrance distant 50 or 60 m.; this creek is 40 yards wide and
discharges a handsome stream of water. it's bed is rockey with gravel
and sand, the banks high and country broken it's bottom narrow and no
timber. The country high and broken, a considerable portion of black
rock and brown sandy rock appear in the faces of the hills; the tops of
the hills covered with scattering pine spruce and dwarf cedar; the soil
poor and sterile, sandy near the tops of the hills, the whole producing
but little grass; the narrow bottoms of the Missouri producing little
else but Hysop or southern wood and the pulpy leafed thorn. Capt. Clark
walked on shore this evening and killed a buffaloe cow, we left 2
Canoes and six men to dress the Cow and bring on the meat, they did not
overtake us this evening. game is becoming more scarce, particularly
beaver, of which we have seen but few for several days the beaver
appears to keep pace with the timber as it declines in quantity they
also become more scarce.




[Clark, May 24, 1805]
May 24th Friday 1805
a Cold night the water in the Small vestles frosed 1/8 of an inch
thick, and the thermometer Stood this morning at the freesing point. we
Set out at an early hour and proceeded on, at 9 oClock we had a Breeze
from the S E which Continued all day. This Breeze afforded us good
Sailing, the river rising fast Current verry rapid. passed Several
Small Islands, two large & two Small Creeks, the 1st of those Creeks or
Small rivers 11/2 m. above our Camp is 30 yards wide and Contains water
and appears to take its rise in the North Mountns. which is Situated in
a northerley detection about 20 miles distant. 21/2 m. higher a Creek
falls in on the Lard. Side, opposit a large village of Barking
Squirels. 3 miles Still higher a Small Creek falls in on the Stard. 13
miles higher up a Small river falls in on the Lard Side which is 40
yards wide and has running water. This Stream appears to take its rise
in the South Mountains which is Situated in a Southerly direction 30 or
40 miles distant. I walked on the high countrey on the Stard. Side
found it broken & Dry Some pine, Spruce & Dwarf Cedar on the hill
sides, I Sent one man 10 mile out he reports a Similarity of Countrey
back I killed a fat buffalow a Short distance below the place we dined
2 Canoes & 6 men we left to get the meat did not join us this evening.
we Camped on the Lard point. the Cotton wood in this point is beginning
to put out a Second bud, the first being killed by the frost




[Lewis, May 25, 1805]
Saturday May 25th 1805.
The Two canoes which we left behind yesterday to bring on the meat did
not arrive this morning untill 8 A M. at which time we set out; the
wind being against us we did not proceed with so much ease or
expedition as yesterday, we imployed the toe line principally which the
banks favored the uce off; the courant strong particularly arround the
points against which the courant happened to set, and at the entrances
of the little gullies from the hills, those rivulets having brought
down considerable quantities of stone and deposited it at their
entrances forming partial barriers to the water of the river to the
distance of 40 or 50 feet from the shore, arround these the water run
with great violence, and compelled us in some instances to double our
force in order to get a perorogue or canoe by them. as we ascended the
river today I saw several gangs of the bighorned Anamals on the face of
the steep bluffs and clifts on the Stard. side and sent drewyer to kill
one which he accomplished; Capt. Clark and Bratton who were on shore
each killed one of these anamals this evening. The head and horns of
the male which Drewyer killed weighed 27 lbs. it was somewhat larger
than the male of the common deer, the boddy reather thicker deeper and
not so long in proportion to it's hight as the common deer; the head
and horns are remakably large compared with the other part of the
anamal; the whole form is much more delicate than that of the common
goat, and there is a greater disparity in the size of the male and
female than between those of either the deer or goat. the eye is large
and prominant, the puple of a deep sea green and small, the iris of a
silvery colour much like the common sheep; the bone above the eye is
remarkably prominant; the head nostrils and division of the upper lip
are precisely in form like the sheep. there legs resemble the sheep
more than any other animal with which I am acquainted tho they are more
delicately formed, like the sheep they stand forward in the knee and
the lower joint of the foreleg is smallest where it joins the knee, the
hoof is black & large in proportion, is divided, very open and roundly
pointed at the toe, like the sheep; is much hollowed and sharp on the
under edge like the Scotch goat, has two small hoofs behind each foot
below the ankle as the goat sheep and deer have. the belley, inside of
the legs, and the extremity of the rump and butocks for about two
inches arround the but of the tale, are white, as is also the tale
excet just at it's extremity on the upper side which is of a dark
brown. the tail is about three inches in length covered with short
hair, or at least not longer than that of the boddy; the outher parts
of the anamal are of a duskey brown or reather a leadcoloured light
brown; the anamal is now sheding it's winter coat which is thick not
quite as long as that of the deer and appears to be intermixed with a
considerable quantity of a fine fur which lyes next to the skin &
conceald by the coarcer hear; the shape of the hair itself is celindric
as that of the antelope is but is smaller shorter, and not compressed
or flattened as that of the deer's winter coat is, I believe this
anamal only sheds it's hair once a year. it has eight fore teeth in the
under jaw and no canine teeth. The horns are lagest at their base, and
occupy the crown of the head almost entirely. they are compressed, bent
backwards and lunated; the surface swelling into wavy rings which
incircleing the horn continue to succeed each other from the base to
the extremity and becoming less elivated and more distant as they
recede from the head. the horn for about two thirds of it's length is
filled with a porus bone which is united with the frontal bone. I
obtained the bones of the upper part of the head of this animal at the
big bone lick. the horns of the female are small, but are also compress
bent backwards and incircled with a succession of wavy rings. the horn
is of a light brown colour; when dressed it is almost white extreemly
transparent and very elastic. this horn is used by the natives in
constructing their bows; I have no doubt but it would eligant and
ucefull hair combs, and might probably answer as many valuable purposes
to civilized man, as it dose to the savages, who form their watercups
spoons and platters of it. the females have already brought forth their
young indeed from the size of the young I suppose that they produce
them early in March. they have from one to two at a birth. they feed on
grass but principally on the arromatic herbs which grow on the clifts
and inaccessable hights which they usually frequent. the places they
gerally celect to lodg is the cranies or cevices of the rocks in the
faces of inacessable precepices, where the wolf nor bear can reach them
and where indeed man himself would in many instancies find a similar
deficiency; yet these anamals bound from rock to rock and stand
apparently in the most careless manner on the sides of precipices of
many hundred feet. they are very shye and are quick of both sent and
sight.

At the distance of two 3/4 miles above our encampment of last evening
we passed a Creek 20 yard wide affording no runing water, we also
passed 7 Islands in the course of the day. The Country on either hand
is high broken and rockey; the rock is either soft brown sand stone
covered with a thin strata of limestone, or a hard black rugged
grannite, both usually in horizontal stratas and the Sandy rock
overlaying the other.--Salts and quarts still appear, some coal and
pumice stone also appear; the river bottoms are narrow and afford
scarcely any timber. the bars of the river are composed principally of
gravel, but little pine on the hills. We saw a Pole-cats this evening
it is the first we have seen for many days. buffalow are now scarce and
I begin to fear our harvest of white puddings are at an end.




[Clark, May 25, 1805]
May 25th Satturday 1805"
The two Canoes left for meat yesterday did not joint us untill 8 oClock
this morning at which time we Set out, the morning Cool & pleasent wind
a head all day from the S. W. we pass a Creek on the Lard. Side about
20 yards wide, which does not run, we also passd 7 Islands, I walked on
Shore and killed a female Ibex or big horn animal in my absence Drewyer
& Bratten killed two others, this animale is a species peculiar to this
upper part of the Missouri, the head and horns of the male which
Drewyer killed to day weighed 27 lbs it was Somewhat larger than the
Mail of the Common Deer;) The body reather thicker deeper and not So
long in proportion to its hight as the common Deer; the head and horns
of the male are remarkably large Compared with the other parts of the
animal; the whole form is much more delicate than that of the common
goat, and there is a greater disparity in the Size of the mail and
female than between those of either the deer or goat. the eye is large
and prominant, the puple of a deep Sea green and Small, the iris of a
Silvery Colour much like the common Sheep; the bone above the Eye is
remarkably prominant; the head nostrils and division of the upper lip
are precisely in form like the Sheep. their legs resemble the Sheep
more than any other animal with which I am acquainted tho they are more
delicately formed, like the Sheep they stand foward in the Knee and the
lower joint of the fore leg is Smallest where it joins the Knee, the
hoof is black and large in perpotion, is divided, very open and roundly
pointed at the toe; like the Sheep; is much hollowed and Sharp on the
under edge like the Scotch goat, has two Small Hoofs behind each foot
below the ankle as the goat Sheep and Deer have. the belley, iner Side
of the legs, and the extremity of the rump and buttocks for about two
inches 1/2 around the but of the tail, are white, as is also the tail
except just at its extremity on the upper Side which is of a dark
brown. the tail is about 3 inches in length covered with Short hair, or
at least not longer than that of the boddy; the outer part of the
animal are of a duskey brown or reather a lead coloured light brown;
the animal is now Sheding its winter coat which is thick not quite as
long as that of the Deer and appears to be inter mixt with a
considerable quantity of fine fur which lies next to the Skin and
concealed by the Coarcer hair; the Shape of the hair itself is
cylindric as that of the Antilope is, but is Smaller, Shorter and not
Compressed or flattened as that of the deers winter Coat is. I believe
this animal only Sheds it's hair once a year. it has Eight fore teeth
in the underjaw and no canine teeth. The Horns are large at their base,
and occupy the Crown of the head almost entirely, they are compressed,
bent backwards and lunated; the Surface Swelling into wavey rings which
incircleing the horn continue to Succeed each other from the base to
the extremity and becomeing less elivated and more distant as they
receed from the head. The horn for about two thirds of its length is
filled with a porus bone which is united with the frontal bone (Capt.
Lewis obtained the bones of the upper part of the head of this Animal
at the big Bone Lick in the State of Kentucky which I Saw and find to
be the Same in every respect with those of the Missouri and the Rockey
Mountains) the horns of the female are Small, but are also compressed
and bent backwards and incircled with a Succession of wavy rings. the
horn is of a light brown Colour; when Dressed it is almost white
extreamly transparent and very elastic. this horn is used by the nativs
in constructing their bows; I have no doubt of it's elegance and
usefullness in hair Combs, and might probably answer as maney valuable
purpoces to civilized man, as it does to the native indians, who form
their water Cups, Spoons and platters of it. the females have already
brought forth their young indeed from the Size of the young, I Suppose
that they produce them early in March. they have from one to two at a
birth. they feed on grass, but principally on the arramatic herbs which
grow on the Clifts and inaccessable hights which they frequent most
commonly, and the places they generally collect to lodge is the Cranies
or Cevices of the rocks in the face of inaccessable precepices, where
the wolf nor Bear Can reach them, and where indeed man himself would in
maney instances find a Similar deficiency; yet those animals bound from
rock to rock and Stand apparently in the most Careless manner on the
Side of precipices of maney hundred feet. they are very Shy and quick
of both Sent and Sight. The flesh of this animal is dark and I think
inferior to the flesh of the Common Deer, and Superior to the antilope
of the Missouri and the Columbian Plains-. In my walk of this day I saw
mountts. on either side of the river at no great distance, those
mountains appeared to be detached, and not ranges as laid down by the
Minetarrees, I also think I saw a range of high mounts. at a great
distance to the S S W. but am not certain as the horozon was not clear
enough to view it with Certainty. The country on either side is high
broken and rockey a dark brown hard rugid Stone intermixed with a Soft
white Sand Stone. the hills contain Coal or cabonated wood as below and
Some Scattering pumistone. the Sides of the river is bordered with
coars gravel, which in maney places have washed either together or down
Small brooks and forms bars at Some distance in the water, around which
the current passes with great valocity. the bottoms between hills and
river are narrow and Contain Scercely any timber. The appearence of
Salts, and bitumun Still Continue. we Saw a polecat to day being the
first which we have Seen for Some time past. The Air of this quarter is
pure and helthy. the water of the Missouri well tasted not quite So
muddy as it is below, not withstanding the last rains has raised the
river a little it is less muddy than it was before the rain.




[Lewis, May 26, 1805]
Sunday May 26th 1805.
Set out at an early hour and proceeded principally by the toe line,
using the oars mearly to pass the river in order to take advantage of
the shores. scarcely any bottoms to the river; the hills high and
juting in on both sides, to the river in many places. the stone
tumbleing from these clifts and brought down by the rivulets as
mentioned yesterday became more troublesome today. the black rock has
given place to a very soft sandstone which appears to be washed away
fast by the river, above this and towards the summits of the hills a
hard freestone of a brownish yellow colour shews itself in several
stratas of unequal thicknesses frequently overlain or incrusted by a
very thin strata of limestone which appears to be formed of concreted
shells. Capt. Clark walked on shore this morning and ascended to the
summit of the river hills he informed me on his return that he had seen
mountains on both sides of the river runing nearly parrallel with it
and at no great distance; also an irregular range of mountains on lard.
about 50 mes. distant, the extremities of which boar W and N. W. from
his station. he also saw in the course of his walk, some Elk, several
herds of the Big horn, and the large hare; the latter is common to
every part of this open country. scarcely any timber to be seen except
the few scattering pine and spruce which crown the high hills, or in
some instances grow along their sides. In the after part of the day I
also walked out and ascended the river hills which I found sufficiently
fortiegueing. on arriving to the summit one of the highest points in
the neighbourhood I thought myself well repaid for any labour; as from
this point I beheld the Rocky Mountains for the first time, I could
only discover a few of the most elivated points above the horizon, the
most remarkable of which by my pocket compass I found bore N. 65 deg. W.
being a little to the N. of the N. W. extremity of the range of broken
mountains seen this morning by Capt. C. these points of the Rocky
Mountains were covered with snow and the sun shone on it in such manner
as to give me the most plain and satisfactory view. while I viewed
these mountains I felt a secret pleasure in finding myself so near the
head of the heretofore conceived boundless Missouri; but when I
reflected on the difficulties which this snowey barrier would most
probably throw in my way to the Pacific, and the sufferings and
hardships of myself and party in them, it in some measure
counterballanced the joy I had felt in the first moments in which I
gazed on them; but as I have always held it a crime to anticipate evils
I will believe it a good comfortable road untill I am compelled to
beleive differently. saw a few Elk & bighorns at a distance on my
return to the river I passed a creek about 20 yds. wide near it's
entrance it had a handsome little stream of runing water; in this creek
I saw several softshelled Turtles which were the first that have been
seen this season; this I believe proceeded reather from the season than
from their non existence in the portion of the river from the Mandans
hither. on the Stard. shore I killed a fat buffaloe which was very
acceptable to us at this moment; the party came up to me late in the
evening and encamped for the night on the Lard. side. it was after dark
before we finished butchering the buffaloe, and on my return to camp I
trod within five inches of a rattle snake but being in motion I passed
before he could probably put himself in a striking attitude and
fortunately escaped his bite, I struck about at random with my
espontoon being directed in some measure by his nois untill I killed
him. Our hunters had killed two of the Bighorned Anamals since I had
left them. we also passed another creek a few miles below Turtle Creek
on the Stard. 30 yds in width which also had runing water bed rockey.-
late this evening we passed a very bad rappid which reached quite
across the river, the party had considerable difficulty in ascending it
altho they doubled their crews and used both the rope and the pole.
while they were passing this rappid a female Elk and it's fawn swam
down throught the waves which ran very high, hence the name of Elk
rappids which they instantly gave this place, these are the most
considerable rappids which we have yet seen on the missouri and in
short the only place where there has appeared to be a suddon decent.
opposite to these rappids there is a high bluff and a little above on
Lard. a small cottonwood bottom in which we found sufficient timber for
our fires and encampment. here I rejoined the party after dark. The
appearances of coal in the face of the bluffs, also of birnt hills,
pumice stone salt and quarts continue as yesterday. This is truly a
desert barren country and I feel myself still more convinced of it's
being a continuation of the black hills. we have continued every day to
pass more or less old stick lodges of the Indians in the timbered
points, there are two even in this little bottom where we lye.-




[Clark, May 26, 1805]
May 26th Sunday 1805
We Set out early and proceeded as yesterday wind from the S. W. the
river enclosed with very high hills on either Side. I took one man and
walked out this morning, and ascended the high countrey to view the
mountains which I thought I Saw yesterday, from the first Sumit of the
hill I could plainly See the Mountains on either Side which I Saw
yesterday and at no great distance from me, those on the Stard Side is
an errigular range, the two extremities of which bore West and N. West
from me. those Mountains on the Lard. Side appeared to be Several
detached Knobs or mountains riseing from a leven open Countrey, at
different distances from me, from South West to South East, on one the
most S. Westerly of those Mountains there appeared to be Snow. I
crossed a Deep holler and assended a part of the plain elevated much
higher than where I first viewed the above mountains; from this point I
beheld the Rocky Mountains for the first time with Certainty, I could
only discover a fiew of the most elivated points above the horizon. the
most remarkable of which by my pocket Compas I found bore S. 60 W.
those points of the rocky Mountain were Covered with Snow and the Sun
Shown on it in Such a manner as to give me a most plain and
Satisfactory view. whilst I viewed those mountains I felt a Secret
pleasure in finding myself So near the head of the heretofore Conceived
boundless Missouri; but when I reflected on the difficulties which this
Snowey barrier would most probably throw in my way to the Pacific
Ocean, and the Sufferings and hardships of my Self and party in them,
it in Some measure Counter ballanced the joy I had felt in the first
moments in which I gazed on them; but as I have always held it little
Short of Criminality to anticipate evils I will allow it to be a good
Comfortable road untill I am Compelled to believe otherwise The high
Country in which we are at present and have been passing for Some days
I take to be a continuation of what the Indians as well as the French
Engages call the Black hills. This tract of Country So Called Consists
of a Collection of high broken and irregular hills and Short Chains of
Mountains, sometimes 100 miles in width and again becoming much
narrower, but always much higher than the Country on either Side; they
commence about the head of the Kanzas river and to the west of that
river near the Arkansaw river, from whence they take their Cource a
little to the west of N. W. approaching the Rocky Mountains obliquely
passing the river Platt near the forks, and intersepting the River
Rochejhone near the big bend of that river, and passing the Missouri at
this place-, and probably Continueing to Swell the Country as far North
as the Saskashawan river. tho they are lower here than they are
discribed to the South and may therefore termonate before they reach
the Saskashawan. the Black hills in their Course northerly appear to
approach more nearly the Rocky Mountains. I Saw a great number of white
brant, also the common brown brant, Geese of the common Size & kind and
a Small Species of geese, which differs considerably from the Common or
Canadian Goose; their necks, head and backs are considerably thicker,
Shorter and larger than the other in propotion to its Size they are
also more than a third Smaller, and their note more like that of the
brant or young goose which has not perfectly acquired his note, in all
other respect they are the Same in Colour habits and the number of
feathers in the tail, they frequently also ascocate with the large
Geese when in flocks, but never Saw them pared off with the larger or
common goose. The white Brant ascocates in very large flocks, they do
not appear to be mated or pared off as if they intended to raise their
young in this quarter, I therefore doubt whether they reside here
dureing the Summer for that purpose. this bird is larger than the
Common brown brant or 2/3 of the common goose. it is not So long by Six
inches from point to point of the wings when extended as the other; the
back head and neck are also larger and Stronger; their beak, legs and
feet are of a redish flesh coloured white. the eye of a moderate Size,
the puple of a deep Sea green encircled with a ring of yellowish brown.
it has 16 feathers of equal length in the tail their note differs but
little from the Common brant. they are of a pure white except the large
feathers of the 1st and 2d joint of the wings which are jut black.

The country which borders the river is high broken and rocky, generally
imbeded with a Soft Sand Stone higher up the hill the Stone is of a
brownish yellow hard and gritty those Stones wash down from the hills
into the river and cause the Shore to be rocky &c. which we find
troublesom to assend there is Scerce any bottom between the Hills &
river and but a fiew trees to be Seen on either Side except Scattering
pine on the Sides of the emence hills; we passed 2 Creeks on the Stard
Side both of them had running water in one of those Creek Capt Lewis
tells me he saw Soft Shell Turtle Capt Lewis in his walk killed a fat
Buffalow which we were in want of our hunters killed 2 Mountain rams or
bighorns in the evening late we passed a rapid which extended quite
across the river we assended it by the assistance of a Cord & poles on
the Lard. Side the Cliffs jut over, the opposit Side is a Small leavel
bottom, we Camped a little above in a Small grove of Cotton trees on
the Lard. Side in the rapid we saw a Dow Elk & her faun, which gave
rise to the name of Elk & faun Riffle we had a few drops of rain at
Dark.--the Salts Coal & Burnt hills & Pumicston Still Continue, game
Scerce this Countrey may with propriety I think be termed the Deserts
of America, as I do not Conceive any part can ever be Settled, as it is
deficent in water, Timber & too Steep to be tilled. We pass old Indian
lodges in the woody points everry day & 2 at our camp &c




[Lewis, May 26, 1805]
May 26, 1805.
One of the party killed a bighorned, the head and horns of which
weighed 27 lbs. a hare was also killed which weighed 81/2 lbs. the hare
are now of a plale lead brown colour-




[Lewis, May 27, 1805]
Monday May 27th 1805.
The wind blew so hard this morning that we did not sent out untill 10
A.M. we employed the chord most of the day; the river becomes more
rappid and is intercepted by shoals and a greater number of rocky
points at the mouths of the little gulies than we experienced
yesterday. the bluffs are very high steep rugged, containing
considerable quantities of stone and border the river closely on both
sides; once perhaps in the course of several miles there will be a few
acres of tolerably level land in which two or thre impoverished
cottonwood trees will be seen. great quantities of stone also lye in
the river and garnish it's borders, which appears to have tumbled from
the bluffs where the rains had washed away the sand and clay in which
they were imbeded. the bluffs are composed of irregular tho horizontal
stratas of yellow and brown or black clay, brown and yellowish white
sand, of soft yellowish white sand stone and a hard dark brown free
stone, also of large round kidneyformed and irregular seperate masses
of a hard black Iron stone, which is imbeded in the Clay and sand. some
little pine spruce and dwarf cedar on the hills. some coal or
carbonated wood still makes it's appearance in these bluffs,
pumicestone and birnt hills it's concommutants also are seen. the salts
and quarts are seen but not in such abundance. the country more broken
and barren than yesterday if possible. about midday it was very warm to
this the high bluffs and narrow channel of the river no doubt
contributed greatly. we passed a small untimbered Island this morning
on the Lard. side of the river just above our encampment of last
evening. saw a few small herds of the Bighorned anamals and two Elk
only, of the last we killed one, the river is generally about 200 yds.
wide, very rappid and has a perceptable fall or declination through
it's whole course.

This evening we encamped, for the benefit of wood, near two dead toped
cottonwood trees on the Lard. side; the dead limbs which had fallen
from these trees furnished us with a scanty supply only, and more was
not to be obtained in the neighbourhood.-




[Clark, May 27, 1805]
May 27th Monday 1805.
The wind blew hard from the S W. which detained us untill about 10
oClock, at which time we Set out and proceeded on, passed a Small
nacked Island on the Lard Side imediately above the timber in which we
Camped The river is verry Shoaley and the bad places are verry
numerous, i e at the mouth of every Drean the rocks which is a hard
dark gritey Stone is thrown out Some distance in the river which Cause
a Considerable riffle on that Side, the hills approach the river verry
Close on either Side, river narrow & no timber except Some Scattering
pine on the hills & hill Sides, the Salts, Coal, burn hills & Pumice
Stone &c. Continue, the hills are Generally Bluffs of various Coloured
earth most commonly black with different quallities stone intermixed
Some Stratums of Soft Sand Stone, Some hard, Some a dark brown & yellow
hard grit, those Stones are loosened by the earths washing from them
into the river and ultimately role down into the river, which appears
to be Crowded with them. This day is verry worm--we only Saw a fiew
Small herds of the big horn animals on the hills, and two Elk one of
which We killed, we Camped at 2 dead top trees on the Lard Side. The
river is Genly about 200 yards wide and Current very Swift to day and
has a verry perceptiable fall in all its Course--it rises a little.




[Lewis, May 28, 1805]
Tuesday May 28th 1805.
This morning we set forward at an early hour; the weather dark and
cloudy, the are smokey, had a few drops of rain; we employed the chord
generally to which we also gave the assistance of the pole at the
riffles and rocky points; these are as numerous and many of them much
worse than those we passed yesterday; arround those points the water
drives with great force, and we are obliged in many instaces to steer
our vessels through the appertures formed by the points of large sharp
rocks which reach a few inches above the surface of the water, here
sould our chord give way the bough is instantly drivin outwards by the
stream and the vessel thrown with her side on the rocks where she must
inevitably overset or perhaps be dashed to peices; our ropes are but
slender, all of them except one being made of Elk's skin and much
woarn, frequently wet and exposed to the heat of the weather are weak
and rotten; they have given way several times in the course of the day
but happily at such places that the vessel had room to wheel free of
the rocks and therefore escaped injury; with every precaution we can
take it is with much labour and infinite risk that we are enabled to
get around these points. found a new indian lodge pole today which had
been brought down by the stream, it was woarn at one end as if draged
by dogs or horses; a football also, and several other articles were
found, which have been recently brought down by the courant; these are
strong evedences of Indians being on the river above us, and probably
at no great distance; the football is such as I have seen among the
Minetaries and therefore think it most probable that they are a band of
the Minetaries of Fort de Prarie. the river country &c continued much
as yesterday untill late in the evening when we arrived at the entrance
of a large Creek discharges itself on the Stard. side, is 35 Yd. wide
and contains runing water; here the hills recede from the river on both
sides, the bottoms extensive particularly on the Stard. side where the
hills are comparitively low and open into three large vallies which
extend for a considerable distance in a Northwardly direction; here
also the river spreads to more than 3 times it's former width and is
filled with a number of small and handsome Islands covered with
cottonwood some timber also in the bottoms, the land again fertile.
These appearances were quite reviving after the drairy country through
which we had been passing. Capt. C. walked on shore in the early part
of the day and killed a big horned anamal; he saw a great number of
them as well as ourselves in the broken country. at 10 A.M. a few drops
of rain again fell and were attended with distant thunder which is the
first we have heated since we left the Mandans.--This evening we
encamped on Stard. opposite to the entrance of a small Creek. I beleive
the bighorn have their young at a very early season, say early in March
for they appear now to be half grown. One of the party saw a very large
bear today but being some distance from the river and no timber to
conceal him he did not think proper to fire on him.




[Clark, May 28, 1805]
May 28th Tuesday 1805
a Cloudy morning Some fiew drops of rain and verry Smokey wind from the
S. W. we Set out at an early hour, the Shoaley places are verry
numerous and Some bad to get around we have to make use of the Cord &
Poles, and our tow. ropes are all except one of Elkskin, & Stretch and
Sometimes brake which indanger the Perogues or Canoe, as it imedeately
turns and if any rock Should chance to be below, the rapidity of the
current would turn her over, She Should chance to Strike the rock we
observe great Caution at those places.

I walked on Shore found the Countrey ruged and as described yesterday,
I Saw great numbers of the Big horned animals, one of which I killed
their fauns are nearly half grown--one of the Party Saw a verry large
bear, picked up on the Shore a pole which had been made use of by the
Nativs for lodge poles, & haul'd by dogs it is new and is a Certain
Sign of the Indians being on the river above a foot ball and Several
other articles are also found to Substantiate this oppinion-. at 1
oClock we had a few drops of rain and Some thunder whic is the first
thunder we have had Sinc we Set out from Fort Mandan; at 10 miles the
the hills begin to widen & the river Spreds & is crouded with Islands
the bottoms Contain Some Scattering Cotton wood the Islands also
Contain timber--passed a Creek of running water on the Stard Side about
35 yards wide and camped imedeately opposit to a Small Creek on the
Lard. Side we call Bull Creek from the Circumstance of a Buffalow Bull
swiming from the opposit Side and comeing out of the river imedeately
across one of the Perogues without Sinking or injureing any thing in
the Perogue, and passing with great violence thro our Camp in the night
makeing 3 angles without hurting a man, altho they lay in every
direction, and it was very dark The Creek below 35 yards wide I call
Thompsons Creek after a valuable member of our party--this Creek
contains a Greater preportion of running water than Common.




[Lewis, May 29, 1805]
Wednesday May 29th 1905.
Last night we were all allarmed by a large buffaloe Bull, which swam
over from the opposite shore and coming along side of the white
perogue, climbed over it to land, he then alarmed ran up the bank in
full speed directly towards the fires, and was within 18 inches of the
heads of some of the men who lay sleeping before the centinel could
allarm him or make him change his course, still more alarmed, he now
took his direction immediately towards our lodge, passing between 4
fires and within a few inches of the heads of one range of the men as
they yet lay sleeping, when he came near the tent, my dog saved us by
causing him to change his course a second time, which he did by turning
a little to the right, and was quickly out of sight, leaving us by this
time all in an uproar with our guns in or hands, enquiring of each
other the case of the alarm, which after a few moments was explained by
the centinel; we were happy to find no one hirt. The next morning we
found that the buffaloe in passing the perogue had trodden on a rifle,
which belonged to Capt. Clark's black man, who had negligently left her
in the perogue, the rifle was much bent, he had also broken the
spindle, pivit, and shattered the stock of one of the bluntderbushes on
board, with this damage I felt well content, happey indeed, that we had
sustaned no further injury. it appears that the white perogue, which
contains our most valuable stores, is attended by some evil gennii.
This morning we set out at an early hour and proceded as usual by the
Chord. at the distance of 21/2 miles passed a handsome river which
discharged itself on the Lard. side, I walked on shore and acended this
river about a mile and a half in order to examine it. I found this
river about 100 yds. wide from bank to bank, the water occupying about
75 yard. the bed was formed of gravel and mud with some sand; it
appeared to contain much more water as the Muscle-Shell river, was more
rappid but equally navigable; there were no large stone or rocks in
it's bed to obstruct the navigation; the banks were low yet appeared
seldom to overflow; the water of this River is Clear than any we have
met with great abundance of the Argalia or Bighorned animals in the
high country through which this river passes Cap. C who assended this
R. much higher than I did has thought proper to call it Judieths River.
The bottoms of this stream as far as I could see were wider and
contained more timber than the Missouri; here I saw some box alder
intermixed with the Cottonwood willow rose bushes and honeysuckle with
some red willow constitute the undergrowth. on the Missouri just above
the entrance of the Big Horn River I counted the remains of the fires
of 126 Indian lodges which appeared to be of very recent date perhaps
12 or 15 days. Capt. Clark also saw a large encampent just above the
entrance of this river on the Stard. side of reather older date,
probably they were the same Indians. The Indian woman with us exmined
the mockersons which we found at these encampments and informed us that
they were not of her nation the Snake Indians, but she beleived they
were some of the Indians who inhabit the country on this side of Rocky
Mountains and North of the Missoury and I think it most probable that
they were the Minetaries of Fort de Prarie. At the distance of six 1/2
ms. from our encampment of last night we passed a very bad rappid to
which we gave the name of the Ash rappid from a few trees of that wood
growing near them; this is the first ash I have seen for a great
distance. at this place the hills again approach the river closely on
both sides, and the same seen which we had on the 27th and 28th in the
morning again presents itself, and the rocky points and riffles reather
more numerous and worse; there was but little timber; salts coal &c
still appear. today we passed on the Stard. side the remains of a vast
many mangled carcases of Buffalow which had been driven over a
precipice of 120 feet by the Indians and perished; the water appeared
to have washed away a part of this immence pile of slaughter and still
their remained the fragments of at least a hundred carcases they
created a most horrid stench. in this manner the Indians of the
Missouri distroy vast herds of buffaloe at a stroke; for this purpose
one of the most active and fleet young men is scelected and disguised
in a robe of buffaloe skin, having also the skin of the buffaloe's head
with the years and horns fastened on his head in form of a cap, thus
caparisoned he places himself at a convenient distance between a herd
of buffaloe and a precipice proper for the purpose, which happens in
many places on this river for miles together; the other indians now
surround the herd on the back and flanks and at a signal agreed on all
shew themselves at the same time moving forward towards the buffaloe;
the disguised indian or decoy has taken care to place himself
sufficiently nigh the buffaloe to be noticed by them when they take to
flight and runing before them they follow him in full speede to the
precepice, the cattle behind driving those in front over and seeing
them go do not look or hesitate about following untill the whole are
precipitated down the precepice forming one common mass of dead an
mangled carcases; the decoy in the mean time has taken care to secure
himself in some cranney or crivice of the clift which he had previously
prepared for that purpose. the part of the decoy I am informed is
extreamly dangerous, if they are not very fleet runers the buffaloe
tread them under foot and crush them to death, and sometimes drive them
over the precepice also, where they perish in common with the
buffaloe.--we saw a great many wolves in the neighbourhood of these
mangled carcases they were fat and extreemly gentle, Capt. C. who was
on shore killed one of them with his espontoon. just above this place
we came too for dinner opposite the entrance of a bold runing river 40
yds. wide which falls in on Lard. side. this stream we called slaughter
river. it's bottoms are but narrow and contain scarcely any timber. our
situation was a narrow bottom on the Stard. possessing some cottonwood.
soon after we landed it began to blow & rain, and as there was no
appearance of even wood enough to make our fires for some distance
above we determined to remain here untill the next morning, and
accordingly fixed our camp and gave each man a small dram.
notwithstanding the allowance of sperits we issued did not exceed 1/2
pn. man several of them were considerably effected by it; such is the
effects of abstaining for some time from the uce of sperituous liquors;
they were all very merry.--The hunters killed an Elk this evening, and
Capt. C. killed two beaver.




[Clark, May 29, 1805]
May 29th Wednesday 1805
In the last night we were alarmed by a Buffalow which Swam from the
opposit Shore landed opposit the Perogue in which Capt Lewis & my Self
were in he Crossed the perogue, and went with great force up to the
fire where Several men were Sleeping and was 18 inches of their heads,
when one man Sitting up allarmed him and he turned his course along the
range of men as they lay, passing between 4 fires and within a fiew
Inches of Some of the mens heads as they lay imediately in a direction
to our lodge about which Several men were lying. our Dog flew out & he
changed his course & passed without doeing more damage than bend a
rifle & brakeing hir Stock and injureying one of the blunder busts in
the perogue as he passed through--We Set out this morning at the usial
hour & proceeded on at 21/2 miles passed the mouth of a river ____
yards wide, discharging a great quantity of water, and Containing more
wood in its bottoms than the Missouri--this river Capt Lewis walked up
for a Short distance & he Saw an old encampment of Indians (I also saw
large encampment on the Stard Side at the mouth of a Small Creek of
about 100 Lodges which appeared to be 5 or 6 weeks past, the Indian
woman examined the mockersons &c. and told us they were the Indians
which resided below the rocky mountains & to the North of this
river,that her nation make their mockersons differently) at 61/2 miles
passed a considerable rapid at which place the hills approach near the
river on both Sides, leaveing a narrow bottom on the Stard. Side, (ash
rapid) and continue Close all day but little timber, I walked on the
bank in the evening and saw the remains of a number of buffalow, which
had been drove down a Clift of rocks I think from appearances that
upwards of 100 of those animals must have perished here, Great numbers
of wolves were about this place & verry jentle I killed one of them
with my Spear. The hills above ash rapid Contains more rock and Coal,
and the more rapid points. we Came too for Dinner opposit the enterence
of a Small river which falls in on the Lard Side and is about ____
yards wide, has a bold running Stream, Soon after we Came too it began
to rain & blow hard, and as we were in a good harbor & Small point of
woods on the Stard Side, and no timber for some distance above, induced
us to conclude to Stay all night. we gave the men a dram, altho verry
Small it was Sufficent to effect Several men. one of our hunters killed
an elk this evening--I killed 2 beaver on the Side of the bank a table
Spoon full of water exposed to the air in a Saucer would avaperate in
36 hours when the mercury did not Stand higher than the temperate point
in the heat of the day.




[Lewis, May 30, 1805]
Thursday May 30th 1805.
The rain which commenced last evening continued with little
intermission untill 11this morning when we set out; the high wind which
accompanied the rain rendered it impracticable to procede earlyer. more
rain has now fallen than we have experienced since the 15th of
September last. many circumstances indicate our near approach to a
country whos climate differs considerably from that in which we have
been for many months. the air of the open country is asstonishingly dry
as well as pure. I found by several experiments that a table spoon full
of water exposed to the air in a saucer would avaporate in 36 hours
when the murcury did not stand higher than the temperate point at the
greatest heat of the day; my inkstand so frequently becoming dry put me
on this experiment. I also observed the well seasoned case of my
sextant shrunk considerably and the joints opened. The water of the
river still continues to become clearer and notwithstanding the rain
which has fallen it is still much clearer than it was a few days past.
this day we proceded with more labour and difficulty than we have yet
experienced; in addition to the imbarrasments of the rappid courant,
riffles, & rockey point which were as bad if not worse than yesterday,
the banks and sides of the bluff were more steep than usual and were
now rendered so slippery by the late rain that the men could scarcely
walk. the chord is our only dependance for the courant is too rappid to
be resisted with the oar and the river too deep in most places for the
pole. the earth and stone also falling from these immence high bluffs
render it dangerous to pass under them. the wind was also hard and
against us. our chords broke several times today but happily without
injury to the vessels. we had slight showers of rain through the course
of the day, the air was could and rendered more disagreeable by the
rain. one of the party ascended the river hills and reported on his
return that there was snow intermixed with the rain which fell on the
hights; he also informed us that the country was level a little back
from the river on both sides. there is now no timber on the hills, an
only a few scattering cottonwood, ash, box Alder and willows to be seen
along the river. in the course of the day we passed several old
encampment of Indians, from the apparent dates of which we conceived
that they were the several encampments of a band of about 100 lodges
who were progressing slowly up the river; the most recent appeared to
have been evacuated about 5 weeks since. these we supposed to be the
Minetares or black foot Indians who inhabit the country watered by the
Suskashawan and who resort to the establishment of Fort de Prarie, no
part of the Missouri from the Minetaries to this place furnishes a
perminent residence for any nation yet there is no part of it but what
exhibits appearances of being occasionally visited by some nation on
hunting excurtions. The Minnetares of the Missoury we know extend their
excurtions on the S. side as high as the yellowstone river; the
Assinniboins still higher on the N. side most probably as high as about
Porcupine river and from thence upwards most probably as far as the
mountains by the Minetares of Fort de Prarie and the Black Foot Indians
who inhabit the S. fork of the Suskashawan. I say the Missouri to the
Rocky mountains for I am convinced that it penetrates those mountains
for a considerable distance.--Two buffaloe killed this evening a little
above our encampment.




[Clark, May 30, 1805]
May 30th Thursday 1805
The rain conmmenced yesterday evining, and continued moderately through
the course of the night, more rain has now fallin than we have
experienced Since the 15th of September last, the rain continued this
morning, and the wind too high for us to proceed, untill about 11
oClock at which time we Set out, and proceeded on with great labour, we
were obliged to make use of the Tow rope & the banks were So muddey &
Slipery that the men could Scercely walk not with Standing we proceeded
on as well as we could wind hard from the N W. in attempting to assend
a rapid our toe Cord broke & we turned without injurey, those rapids or
Shoaley points are noumerous and dificuelt, one being at the mouth of
every drean Some little rain at times all day one man assended the high
Countrey and it was raining & Snowing on those hills, the day has
proved to be raw and Cold. Back from the river is tollerably leavel, no
timber of any kind on the hills, and only a fiew Scattering cotton
willow & ash near the river, much hard rock; & rich earth, the Small
portion of rain which has fallen causes the rich earth as deep as is
wet to Slip into the river or bottoms &c.

we discover in Several places old encampments of large bands of
Indians, a fiew weeks past and appear to be makeing up the river--Those
Indians we believe to be the Blackfoot Inds. or Menetares who inhabit
the heads of the Saskashowin & north of this place and trade a little
in the Fort de Prarie establishments. we Camped in a grove of Cotton
trees on the Stard Side, river rise 11/2 In.




[Lewis, May 31, 1805]
Friday May 31st 1805.
This morning we proceeded at an early hour with the two perogues
leaving the canoes and crews to bring on the meat of the two buffaloe
that were killed last evening and which had not been brought in as it
was late and a little off the river. soon after we got under way it
began to rain and continued untill meridian when it ceased but still
remained cloudy through the ballance of the day. The obstructions of
rocky points and riffles still continue as yesterday; at those places
the men are compelled to be in the water even to their armpits, and the
water is yet very could, and so frequent are those point that they are
one fourth of their time in the water, added to this the banks and
bluffs along which they are obliged to pass are so slippery and the mud
so tenacious that they are unable to wear their mockersons, and in that
situation draging the heavy burthen of a canoe and walking ocasionally
for several hundred yards over the sharp fragments of rocks which
tumble from the clifts and garnish the borders of the river; in short
their labour is incredibly painfull and great, yet those faithfull
fellows bear it without a murmur. The toe rope of the white perogue,
the only one indeed of hemp, and that on which we most depended, gave
way today at a bad point, the perogue swung and but slightly touched a
rock, yet was very near overseting; I fear her evil gennii will play so
many pranks with her that she will go to the bottomm some of those
days.--Capt. C. walked on shore this morning but found it so
excessively bad that he shortly returned. at 12 OCk. we came too for
refreshment and gave the men a dram which they received with much
cheerfullness, and well deserved.

The hills and river Clifts which we passed today exhibit a most
romantic appearance. The bluffs of the river rise to the hight of from
2 to 300 feet and in most places nearly perpendicular; they are formed
of remarkable white sandstone which is sufficiently soft to give way
readily to the impression of water; two or thre thin horizontal stratas
of white free-stone, on which the rains or water make no impression,
lie imbeded in these clifts of soft stone near the upper part of them;
the earth on the top of these Clifts is a dark rich loam, which forming
a graduly ascending plain extends back from 1/2 a mile to a mile where
the hills commence and rise abruptly to a hight of about 300 feet more.
The water in the course of time in decending from those hills and
plains on either side of the river has trickled down the soft sand
clifts and woarn it into a thousand grotesque figures, which with the
help of a little immagination and an oblique view at a distance, are
made to represent eligant ranges of lofty freestone buildings, having
their parapets well stocked with statuary; collumns of various
sculpture both grooved and plain, are also seen supporting long
galleries in front of those buildings; in other places on a much nearer
approach and with the help of less immagination we see the remains or
ruins of eligant buildings; some collumns standing and almost entire
with their pedestals and capitals; others retaining their pedestals but
deprived by time or accident of their capitals, some lying prostrate an
broken othes in the form of vast pyramids of connic structure bearing a
sereis of other pyramids on their tops becoming less as they ascend and
finally terminating in a sharp point. nitches and alcoves of various
forms and sizes are seen at different hights as we pass. a number of
the small martin which build their nests with clay in a globular form
attatched to the wall within those nitches, and which were seen
hovering about the tops of the collumns did not the less remind us of
some of those large stone buildings in the U States. the thin stratas
of hard freestone intermixed with the soft sandstone seems to have
aided the water in forming this curious scenery. As we passed on it
seemed as if those seens of visionary inchantment would never have and
end; for here it is too that nature presents to the view of the
traveler vast ranges of walls of tolerable workmanship, so perfect
indeed are those walls that I should have thought that nature had
attempted here to rival the human art of masonry had I not recollected
that she had first began her work. These walls rise to the hight in
many places of 100 feet, are perpendicular, with two regular faces and
are from one to 12 feet thick, each wall retains the same thickness at
top which it possesses at bottom. The stone of which these walls are
formed is black, dence and dureable, and appears to be composed of a
large portion of earth intermixed or cemented with a small quantity of
sand and a considerable portion of talk or quarts. these stones are
almost invariably regular parallelepipeds, of unequal sizes in the
walls, but equal in their horizontal ranges, at least as to debth.
these are laid regularly in ranges on each other like bricks, each
breaking or covering the interstice of the two on which it rests. thus
the purpendicular interstices are broken, and the horizontal ones
extend entire throughout the whole extent of the walls. These stones
seem to bear some proportion to the thickness of the walls in which
they are employed, being larger in the thicker walls; the greatest
length of the parallelepiped appears to form the thickness of the
thiner walls, while two or more are employed to form that of the
thicker walls. These walls pass the river in several places, rising
from the water's edge much above the sandstone bluffs, which they seem
to penetrate; thence continuing their course on a streight line on
either side of the river through the gradually ascending plains, over
which they tower to the hight of from ten to seventy feet until) they
reach the hills, which they finally enter and conceal themselves. these
walls sometimes run parallel to each other, with several ranges near
each other, and at other times interscecting each other at right
angles, having the appearance of the walls of ancient houses or
gardens. I walked on shore this evening and examined these walls
minutely and preserved a specimine of the stone. I found the face of
many of the river hills formed of Clifts of very excellent free stone
of a light yellowish brown colour; on these clifts I met with a species
of pine which I had never seen, it differs from the pitchpine in the
particular of it's leaf and cone, the first being vastly shorter, and
the latter considerably longer and more pointed. I saw near those
bluffs the most beautiful) fox that I ever beheld, the colours appeared
to me to be a fine orrange yellow, white and black, I endevoured to
kill this anamal but it discovered me at a considerable distance, and
finding that I could get no nearer, I fired on him as he ran, and
missed him; he concealed himself under the rocks of the clift; it
appeared to me to be about the size of the common red fox of the
Atlantic states, or reather smaller than the large fox common to this
country; convinced I am that it is a distinct species. The appearance
of coal continues but in small quantities, but little appearance of
birnt hills or pumice stones the mineral salts have in some measure
abated and no quarts. we saw a great number of the Bighorn some mule
deer and a few buffaloe and Elk, no antelopes or common deer. Drewyer
who was with me and myself killed two bighorned anamals; the sides of
the Clifts where these anamals resort much to lodg, have the peculiar
smell of the sheepfolds. the party killed in addition to our hunt 2
buffaloe and an Elk. the river today has been from 150 to 250 yds. wide
but little timber today on the river.




[Clark, May 31, 1805]
May 31st Friday 1805.
A cloudy morning we dispatched all the Canoes to Collect the meat of 2
Buffalow killed last night a head and a little off the river, and
proceeded on with the perogues at an early hour. I attempted to walk on
Shore Soon found it verry laborious as the mud Stuck to my mockersons &
was verry Slippery. I return'd on board. it continued to rain
moderately untill about 12 oClock when it ceased, & Continued Cloudy.
the Stone on the edge of the river continue to form verry Considerable
rapids, which are troublesom & dificuelt to pass, our toe rope which we
are obliged to make use of altogether broke & we were in Some danger of
turning over in the perogue in which I was, we landed at 12 and
refreshed the men with a dram, our men are obliged to under go great
labour and fatigue in assending this part of the Missouri, as they are
compelled from the rapidity of the Current in many places to walk in
the water & on Slippery hill Sides or the Sides of rocks, on Gravel &
thro a Stiff mud bear footed, as they Cannot keep on Mockersons from
the Stiffness of the mud & decline of the Slipy. hills Sides--the Hills
and river Clifts of this day exhibit a most romantick appearance on
each Side of the river is a white Soft Sand Stone bluff which rises to
about half the hight of the hills, on the top of this Clift is a black
earth on points, in maney places this Sand Stone appears like antient
ruins some like elegant buildings at a distance, Some like Towers &c.
&c. in maney places of this days march we observe on either Side of the
river extraodanary walls of a black Semented Stone which appear to be
regularly placed one Stone on the other, Some of those walls run to the
hite of 100 feet, they are from about 1 foot to 12 feet thick and are
perpendicular, those walls Commence at the waters edge & in Some places
meet at right angles--those walls appear to Continue their Course into
the Sand Clifts, the Stones which form those walls are of different
Sizes all Squar edged, Great numbers has fallen off from the walls near
the river which cause the walls to be of uneaquil hite, in the evening
the Countrey becomes lower and the bottoms wider, no timber on the
uplands, except a few Cedar & pine on the Clifts a few Scattering
Cotton trees on the points in the river bottoms, The apparance of Coal
Continus Capt Lewis walked on Shore & observed a Species of Pine we had
never before Seen, with a Shorter leaf than Common & the bur different,
he also Collected Some of the Stone off one of the walls which appears
to be a Sement of Isin glass black earth we Camped on the Stard Side in
a Small timbered bottom above the mouth of a Creek on the Stard Side
our hunters killed, 2 animals with big horns, 2 Buffalow & an Elk, we
Saw Great numbers of those big horned animals on the Clifts, but fiew
Buffalow or Elk, no antelope, a fiew mule deer, Saw a fox to day. The
river rises a little it is from 150 to 250 yds. wide




[Clark, May 31, 1805]
May 31st Friday 1805
Cloudy morning, we proceeded on at an early hour with the two Perogues
leaving the Canoes and crews to bring on the meat of two Buffalow that
were killed last evening and which had not been brought in as it was
late and a little off the river. Soon after we got under way it began
to rain and Continued untill 12 oClock when it Seased but Still
remained cloudy through the ballance of the day. the obstructions of
rocky points and riffles Still continue as yesterday; at those places
the men are compelled to be in the water even to their armpits, and the
water is yet very cold, and So frequent are those points that they are
one fourth of their time in the water. added to this the bank and bluff
along which they are obliged to pass are So Slippery and the mud So
tenatious that they are unable to bare their mockersons, and in that
Situation dragging the heavy burthen of a Canoe and Walking
occasionally for Several hundred yards over the Sharp fragments of
rocks which tumble from the Clifts; and in Short their labour is
incredibly painfull and great, yet those faithfull fellows bear it
without a murmer.

The toe rope of the white perogue, the only one indeed of hemp, and
that on which we most depended, gave way to day at a bad point, the
perogue Swong and but slightly touched a rock, yet was very near
oversetting; I fear her evil Ginnie will play So many pranks with her
that She will go to the bottom Some of those days.

I attempted to walk on Shore this morning but found it so excessivily
bad that I Soon returned on board. at 12 oClock we came too for
refreshment and gave the men a dram which they received with much
Chearfulness, and well deserved all wet and disagreeable. Capt. Lewis
walked on Shore, he informed one that he Saw "the most butifull fox in
the world" the Colour appeared to him to be of a fine Orrange yellow,
white and black, he fired at this fox running and missed him, he
appeared to be about the size of the common red fox of the united
States, or rather smaller.

The hills and river clifts which we pass to day exhibit a most romantic
appearance. The Bluffs of the river rise to the hight of from 2 to 300
feet and in most places nearly perpendicular; they are formed of
remarkable white Sandstone which is Sufficiently Soft to give way
readily to the impression of water; two or three thin horizontal
Stratas of white free Stone, on which the rains or water make no
impression, lie imbeded in those clifts of Soft Stone near the upper
part of them; the earth on the top of these clifts is a dark rich loam,
which forming a gradual ascending plain extend back from 1/2 a mile to
a mile where the hills commence and rise abruptly to the hight of about
300 feet more. The water in the Course of time acecending from those
hills and plains on either Side of the river has trickled down the Soft
Sand Clifts and woarn it into a thousand grotesque figures; which with
the help of a little imagination and an oblique view at a distance are
made to represent elegant ranges of lofty freestone buildings, haveing
their parapets well Stocked with Statuary; Colloms of various
Sculptures both Grooved and plain, are also Seen Supporting long
galleries in part of those buildings; in other places on a much nearer
approach and with the with the help of less immagination we See the
remains of ruins of eligant buildings; Some Collumns Standing and
almost entire with their pedestals and Capitals, others retaining their
pedestals but deprived by time or accedint of their capitals, Some
lying prostrate and broken, others in the form of vast Pyramids of
connic Structure bearing a Serious of other pyramids on their tops
becomeing less as they ascend and finally termonateing in a Sharp
point. nitches and alcoves of various forms and Sizes are Seen at
different hights as we pass. a number of the Small martin which build
their nests with Clay of a globular form attached to the wall within
those nitches, and which were Seen hovering about the top of the
collumns did not the less remind us of Some of those large Stone
buildings in the United States. The thin Stratas of hard free Stone
intermixed with the Soft Sand Stone Seems to have aided the water in
forming this Curious Scenery.

as we passed on it Seemed as if those Seens of Visionary enchantment
would never have an end; for here it is too that nature presents to the
view of the traveler vast ranges of walls of tolerable workmanship, So
perfect indeed are those walls that I Should have thought that nature
had attempted here to rival the human art of Masonry had I not
recollected that She had first began her work. These walls rise to the
hight in many places of 100 feet, are perpindicular, with two regular
faces, and are from one to 12 feet thick, each wall retains the Same
thickness to the top which it possesses at bottom. The Stone of which
these walls are formed is black, dense and dureable, and appears to be
Composed of a large portion of earth intermixed or Cemented with a
Small quantity of Sand and a Considerable portion of quarts. these
Stones are almost invariably regular parallelepipeds, of unequal Sizes
in the wall, but equal in their horizontal ranges, at least as to
debth. These are laid regularly in ranges on each other like bricks,
each breaking or covering this interstice of the two on which it rests,
thus the pirpendicular interstices are broken, and the horizontal ones
extend entire throughout the whole extent of the walls. These Stones
Seam to bear Some proportion to the thickness of the walls in which
they are employd, being larger in the thicker walls; the greatest
length of the parallelepiped appear to form the thickness of the thiner
walls, while two or more are employed to form that of the thicker
walls. Those walls pass the river in Several places rising from the
waters edge much above the Sand Stone Bluffs, which they Seam to
penetrate; thence Continueing their course on a Streight line on either
Side of the river thorough the gradually ascending plains over which
they tower to the hight of from ten to 90 feet untill they reach the
hills which they finally enter and Conceal themselves. these walls
Sometimes run parallel to each other, with Several ranges near each
other, and at other times intersecting each other at right angles,
haveing the appearance of the walls of ancient houses or gardins. both
Capt Lewis and My self walked on Shore this evening and examined those
walls minutely and preserved a Specimine of the Stone.--I found many
clifts of very excellent free Stone of a light yellowish brown Colour.
Capt. Lewis observed a Species of pine which I had never Seen, it
differs from the pitch pine in the particular of its leaf and Cone, the
first being partly Shorter, and the latter considerably longer and more
pointed. The appearance of Coal Continues but in Smaller quantities,
but little appearance of burnt hills or pumicestone. the mineral Salt
in Some measure have abated and no quarts. we Saw a great number of the
Big Horn, Some mule deer, and a few Buffalow and Elk, no antelopes or
Common Deer-. Capt. Lewis killed a Big horn animal. the party killed 2
Buffalow one Elk and a Big horn or Ibex to day-. The river has been
from 150 to 250 yards wide but little timber on the river to day. river
less muddy than it was below.




[Lewis, June 1, 1805]
Saturday June 1st 1805
The moring was cloudy and a few drops of rain. Set out at an early hour
and proceeded as usual by the help of our chords. the river Clifts and
bluffs not so high as yesterday and the country becomes more level. a
mountain or a part of the N. Mountain appears to approach the river
within 8 or 10 ms. bearing N. from our encampment of the last evening.
Capt C. who walked on shore today informed me that the river hills were
much lower than usual and that from the tops of those hills he had a
delightfull view of rich level and extensive plains on both sides of
the river; in those plains, which in many places reach the river
clifts, he observed large banks of pure sand which appeared to have
been driven by the S W. winds from the river bluffs and there
deposited. the plains are more fertile at some distance from the river
than near the bluffs where the surface of the earth is very generally
covered with small smothe pebbles which have the appearance of having
been woarn by the agitation of the waters in which they were no doubt
once immerced. A range of high Mountains appear to the S. W. at a
considerable distance covered with snow, they appear to run Westerly.
no timber appears on the highlands; but much more than yesterday on the
river and Islands. rockey points and shoals less freequent than
yesterday but some of them quite as bad when they did occur. the river
from 2 to 400 yards wide, courant more gentle and still becoming
clearer. game is by no means as abundant as below; we killed one male
bighorn and a mule deer today; saw buffalow at a distance in the plains
particularly near a small Lake on Lard. side about 8 ms. distant. some
few drops of rain again fell this evening. we passed six Islands and
encamped on the 7th; they are all small but contain some timber. the
wind has been against us all day.--I saw the choke cherry the yellow
and red courant bushes; the wild rose appears now to be in full bloom
as are also the prickley pear which are numerous in these plains.--We
also saw some Indian Lodges of sticks today which did not appear to
have been long evacuated.--some coal appear in the bluffs.




[Clark, June 1, 1805]
June 1st Satterday 1805
a Cloudy morning we Set out at an early hour and proseeded on as usial
with the toe rope The Countrey appears to be lower and the Clifts not
So high or Common, a mountain or a part of the north Mountain about 8
or 10 miles N. of this place, I walked on Shore to day found the Plains
much lower than we have Seen them and on the top we behold an extencive
plain on both Sides, in this plain I observed maney noles of fine Sand
which appeared to have blown from the river bluffs and collected at
these points Those plains are fertile near the river a great no. of
Small Stone, I observed at Some distance to the S. W. a high mountain
which appears to bear westerly The Cole appear as usial, more Cotton
trees Scattered on the Shores & Islands than yesterday--no timber on
the high land, the river from 2 to 400 yards wide & current more jentle
than yesterday but fiew bad rapid points to day--the wild animals not
So plenty as below we only killed a ram & mule Deer to day, we Saw
Buffalow at a distance in the plains, particularly near a Lake on the
Lard. Side about 8 miles distant from the river--We passed Six Islands
and encamped on the 7th all those Islands are Small but contain Some
timber on them The river riseing a little Wind to day from the S. W.
Som fiew drops of rain in the morning and also in the evening, flying
Clouds all day

Saw Several Indian camps made of Sticks & bark Set up on end and do not
appear to belong evacuated--The roses are in full bloome, I observe
yellow berries, red berry bushes Great numbers of Wild or choke
Cheries, prickley pares are in blossom & in great numbers




[Lewis, June 2, 1805]
Sunday June 2ed 1805
The wind blew violently last night and was attended by a slight shower
of rain; the morning was fair and we set out at an early hour. imployed
the chord as usual the greater part of the day. the courant was strong
tho regular, and the banks afforded us good toeing. the wind was hard
and against us yet we proceded with infinitely more ease than the two
precedeing days. The river bluffs still continue to get lower and the
plains leveler and more extensive; the timber on the river increases in
quantity; the country in all other rispects much as discribed
yesterday. I think we are now completely above the black hills we had a
small shower of rain today but it lasted only a few minutes and was
very moderate. Game becomeing more abundant this morning and I thought
it best now to loose no time or suffer an opportunity to escape in
providing the necessary quantity of Elk's skins to cover my leather
boat which I now expect I shall be obliged to use shortly. Accordingly
I walked on shore most of the day with some of the hunters for that
purpose and killed 6 Elk 2 buffale 2 Mule deer and a bear. these
anamals were all in good order we therefore took as much of the meat as
our canoes and perogues could conveniently carry. the bear was very
near catching Drewyer; it also pursued Charbono who fired his gun in
the air as he ran but fortunately eluded the vigilence of the bear by
secreting himself very securely in the bushes untill Drewyer finally
killed it by a shot in the head; the shot indeed that will conquer the
farocity of those tremendious anamals.--in the course of the day we
passed 9 Islands all of them small and most of them containing some
timber.

we came too on the Lard. side in a handsome bottom of small cottonwood
timber opposite to the entrance of a very considerable river; but it
being too late to examine these rivers minutely to night we determined
to remain here untill the morning, and as the evening was favourable to
make some obsevations.-




[Clark, June 2, 1805]
June 2nd Sunday 1805
we had a hard wind and a little rain last night, this morning fair we
Set out at an early hour, wind from the S W. Some little rain to day
wind hard a head, the Countrey much like that of yesterday as discribed
Capt Lewis walked on Shore, himself & the hunters killed 6 Elk & a Bear
and 2 mule deer, and 2 buffalow which was all in good order a beaver
also killed to day, passed 9 Islands to day the Current Swift but
regular, we Camped on the Lard Side at the forks of the river the
Currents & Sizes of them we Could not examine this evening a fair night
we took Some Luner observations of moon & Stears




[Lewis, June 3, 1805]
Monday June 3rd 1805
This morning early we passed over and formed a camp on the point formed
by the junction of the two large rivers. here in the course of the day
I continued my observations as are above stated. An interesting
question was now to be determined; which of these rivers was the
Missouri, or that river which the Minnetares call Amahte Arz zha or
Missouri, and which they had discribed to us as approaching very near
to the Columbia river. to mistake the stream at this period of the
season, two months of the traveling season having now elapsed, and to
ascend such stream to the rocky Mountain or perhaps much further before
we could inform ourselves whether it did approach the Columbia or not,
and then be obliged to return and take the other stream would not only
loose us the whole of this season but would probably so dishearten the
party that it might defeat the expedition altogether. convinced we were
that the utmost circumspection and caution was necessary in deciding on
the stream to be taken. to this end an investigation of both streams
was the first thing to be done; to learn their widths, debths,
comparitive rappidity of their courants and thence the comparitive
bodies of water furnished by each; accordingly we dispatched two light
canoes with three men in each up those streams; we also sent out
several small parties by land with instructions to penetrate the
country as far as they conveniently can permiting themselves time to
return this evening and indeavour if possible to discover the distant
bearing of those rivers by ascending the rising grounds. between the
time of my A.M. and meridian Capt. C & myself stroled out to the top of
the hights in the fork of these rivers from whence we had an extensive
and most inchanting view; the country in every derection around us was
one vast plain in which innumerable herds of Buffalow were seen
attended by their shepperds the wolves; the solatary antelope which now
had their young were distributed over it's face; some herds of Elk were
also seen; the verdure perfectly cloathed the ground, the weather was
pleasent and fair; to the South we saw a range of lofty mountains which
we supposed to be a continuation of the S. Mountains, streching
themselves from S. E. to N. W. terminating abbrubtly about S. West from
us; these were partially covered with snow; behind these Mountains and
at a great distance, a second and more lofty range of mountains
appeared to strech across the country in the same direction with the
others, reaching from West, to the N of N. W., where their snowey tops
lost themselves beneath the horizon. this last range was perfectly
covered with snow. the direction of the rivers could be seen but little
way, soon loosing the break of their channels, to our view, in the
common plain. on our return to camp we boar a little to the left and
discovered a handsome little river falling into the N. fork on Lard.
side about 11/2 ms. above our camp. this little river has as much
timber in it's bottoms as either of the larger streams. there are a
great number of prickley pears in these plains; the Choke cherry grows
here in abundance both in the river bottoms and in the steep ravenes
along the river bluffs. saw the yellow and red courants, not yet ripe;
also the goosberry which begins to ripen; the wild rose which grows
here in great abundance in the bottoms of all these rivers is now in
full bloom, and adds not a little to the beaty of the cenery. we took
the width of the two rivers, found the left hand or S. fork 372 yards
and the N. fork 200. The noth fork is deeper than the other but it's
courant not so swift; it's waters run in the same boiling and roling
manner which has uniformly characterized the Missouri throughout it's
whole course so far; it's waters are of a whitish brown colour very
thick and terbid, also characteristic of the Missouri; while the South
fork is perfectly transparent runds very rappid but with a smoth
unruffled surface it's bottom composed of round and flat smooth stones
like most rivers issuing from a mountainous country. the bed of the N.
fork composed of some gravel but principally mud; in short the air &
character of this river is so precisely that of the missouri below that
