
"Would ye lie there idle?" cried Matcham.  "Let us back into the open.
We have the better chance; he cannot steal upon us unawares."

"Not I," said Dick.  "My time is come, and peradventure he may pass us
by."

"Bend me, then, your bow!" cried the other.  "What! will ye be a man?"

Dick crossed himself.  "Would ye have me shoot upon a leper?" he cried.
"The hand would fail me.  Nay, now," he added--"nay, now, let be!  With
sound men I will fight, but not with ghosts and lepers.  Which this is, I
wot not.  One or other, Heaven be our protection!"

"Now," said Matcham, "if this be man's courage, what a poor thing is man!
But sith ye will do naught, let us lie close."

Then came a single, broken jangle on the bell.

"He hath missed his hold upon the clapper," whispered Matcham.  "Saints!
how near he is!"

But Dick answered never a word; his teeth were near chattering.

Soon they saw a piece of the white robe between some bushes; then the
leper's head was thrust forth from behind a trunk, and he seemed narrowly
to scan the neighbourhood before he once again withdrew.  To their
stretched senses, the whole bush appeared alive with rustlings and the
creak of twigs; and they heard the beating of each other's heart.

Suddenly, with a cry, the leper sprang into the open close by, and ran
straight upon the lads.  They, shrieking aloud, separated and began to
run different ways.  But their horrible enemy fastened upon Matcham, ran
him swiftly down, and had him almost instantly a prisoner.  The lad gave
one scream that echoed high and far over the forest, he had one spasm of
struggling, and then all his limbs relaxed, and he fell limp into his
captor's arms.

Dick heard the cry and turned.  He saw Matcham fall; and on the instant
his spirit and his strength revived; With a cry of pity and anger, he
unslung and bent his arblast.  But ere he had time to shoot, the leper
held up his hand.

"Hold your shot, Dickon!" cried a familiar voice.  "Hold your shot, mad
wag!  Know ye not a friend?"

And then laying down Matcham on the turf, he undid the hood from off his
face, and disclosed the features of Sir Daniel Brackley.

"Sir Daniel!" cried Dick.

"Ay, by the mass, Sir Daniel!" returned the knight.  "Would ye shoot upon
your guardian, rogue?  But here is this"--And there he broke off, and
pointing to Matcham, asked: "How call ye him, Dick?"

"Nay," said Dick, "I call him Master Matcham.  Know ye him not?  He said
ye knew him!"

"Ay," replied Sir Daniel, "I know the lad;" and he chuckled.  "But he has
fainted; and, by my sooth, he might have had less to faint for!  Hey,
Dick?  Did I put the fear of death upon you?"

"Indeed, Sir Daniel, ye did that," said Dick, and sighed again at the
mere recollection.  "Nay, sir, saving your respect, I had as lief 'a' met
the devil in person; and to speak truth, I am yet all a-quake.  But what
made ye, sir, in such a guise?"

Sir Daniel's brow grew suddenly black with anger.

"What made I?" he said.  "Ye do well to mind me of it!  What?  I skulked
for my poor life in my own wood of Tunstall, Dick.  We were ill sped at
the battle; we but got there to be swept among the rout.  Where be all my
good men-at-arms?  Dick, by the mass, I know not!  We were swept down;
the shot fell thick among us; I have not seen one man in my own colours
since I saw three fall.  For myself, I came sound to Shoreby, and being
mindful of the Black Arrow, got me this gown and bell, and came softly by
the path for the Moat House.  There is no disguise to be compared with
it; the jingle of this bell would scare me the stoutest outlaw in the
forest; they would all turn pale to hear it.  At length I came by you and
Matcham.  I could see but evilly through this same hood, and was not sure
of you, being chiefly, and for many a good cause, astonished at the
finding you together.  Moreover, in the open, where I had to go slowly
and tap with my staff, I feared to disclose myself.  But see," he added,
"this poor shrew begins a little to revive.  A little good canary will
comfort me the heart of it."

The knight, from under his long dress, produced a stout bottle, and began
to rub the temples and wet the lips of the patient, who returned
gradually to consciousness, and began to roll dim eyes from one to
another.

"What cheer, Jack!" said Dick.  "It was no leper, after all; it was Sir
Daniel!  See!"

"Swallow me a good draught of this," said the knight.  "This will give
you manhood.  Thereafter, I will give you both a meal, and we shall all
three on to Tunstall.  For, Dick," he continued, laying forth bread and
meat upon the grass, "I will avow to you, in all good conscience, it irks
me sorely to be safe between four walls.  Not since I backed a horse have
I been pressed so hard; peril of life, jeopardy of land and livelihood,
and to sum up, all these losels in the wood to hunt me down.  But I be
not yet shent.  Some of my lads will pick me their way home.  Hatch hath
ten fellows; Selden, he had six.  Nay, we shall soon be strong again; and
if I can but buy my peace with my right fortunate and undeserving Lord of
York, why, Dick, we'll be a man again and go a-horseback!"

And so saying, the knight filled himself a horn of canary, and pledged
his ward in dumb show.

"Selden," Dick faltered--"Selden"--And he paused again.

Sir Daniel put down the wine untasted.

"How!" he cried, in a changed voice.  "Selden?  Speak!  What of Selden?"

Dick stammered forth the tale of the ambush and the massacre.

The knight heard in silence; but as he listened, his countenance became
convulsed with rage and grief.

"Now here," he cried, "on my right hand, I swear to avenge it!  If that I
fail, if that I spill not ten men's souls for each, may this hand wither
from my body!  I broke this Duckworth like a rush; I beggared him to his
door; I burned the thatch above his head; I drove him from this country;
and now, cometh he back to beard me?  Nay, but, Duckworth, this time it
shall go bitter hard!"

He was silent for some time, his face working.

"Eat!" he cried, suddenly.  "And you here," he added to Matcham, "swear
me an oath to follow straight to the Moat House."

"I will pledge mine honour," replied Matcham.

"What make I with your honour?" cried the knight.  "Swear me upon your
mother's welfare!"

Matcham gave the required oath; and Sir Daniel re-adjusted the hood over
his face, and prepared his bell and staff.  To see him once more in that
appalling travesty somewhat revived the horror of his two companions.
But the knight was soon upon his feet.

"Eat with despatch," he said, "and follow me yarely to mine house."

And with that he set forth again into the woods; and presently after the
bell began to sound, numbering his steps, and the two lads sat by their
untasted meal, and heard it die slowly away up hill into the distance.

"And so ye go to Tunstall?" Dick inquired.

"Yea, verily," said Matcham, "when needs must!  I am braver behind Sir
Daniel's back than to his face."

They ate hastily, and set forth along the path through the airy upper
levels of the forest, where great beeches stood apart among green lawns,
and the birds and squirrels made merry on the boughs.  Two hours later,
they began to descend upon the other side, and already, among the
tree-tops, saw before them the red walls and roofs of Tunstall House.

"Here," said Matcham, pausing, "ye shall take your leave of your friend
Jack, whom y' are to see no more.  Come, Dick, forgive him what he did
amiss, as he, for his part, cheerfully and lovingly forgiveth you."

"And wherefore so?" asked Dick.  "An we both go to Tunstall, I shall see
you yet again, I trow, and that right often."

"Ye'll never again see poor Jack Matcham," replied the other, "that was
so fearful and burthensome, and yet plucked you from the river; ye'll not
see him more, Dick, by mine honour!"  He held his arms open, and the lads
embraced and kissed.  "And, Dick," continued Matcham, "my spirit bodeth
ill.  Y' are now to see a new Sir Daniel; for heretofore hath all
prospered in his hands exceedingly, and fortune followed him; but now,
methinks, when his fate hath come upon him, and he runs the adventure of
his life, he will prove but a foul lord to both of us.  He may be brave
in battle, but he hath the liar's eye; there is fear in his eye, Dick,
and fear is as cruel as the wolf!  We go down into that house, Saint Mary
guide us forth again!"

And so they continued their descent in silence, and came out at last
before Sir Daniel's forest stronghold, where it stood, low and shady,
flanked with round towers and stained with moss and lichen, in the lilied
waters of the moat.  Even as they appeared, the doors were opened, the
bridge lowered, and Sir Daniel himself, with Hatch and the parson at his
side, stood ready to receive them.




BOOK II--THE MOAT HOUSE


CHAPTER I--DICK ASKS QUESTIONS


The Moat House stood not far from the rough forest road.  Externally, it
was a compact rectangle of red stone, flanked at each corner by a round
tower, pierced for archery and battlemented at the top.  Within, it
enclosed a narrow court.  The moat was perhaps twelve feet wide, crossed
by a single drawbridge.  It was supplied with water by a trench, leading
to a forest pool and commanded, through its whole length, from the
battlements of the two southern towers.  Except that one or two tall and
thick trees had been suffered to remain within half a bowshot of the
walls, the house was in a good posture for defence.

In the court, Dick found a part of the garrison, busy with preparations
for defence, and gloomily discussing the chances of a siege.  Some were
making arrows, some sharpening swords that had long been disused; but
even as they worked, they shook their heads.

Twelve of Sir Daniel's party had escaped the battle, run the gauntlet
through the wood, and come alive to the Moat House.  But out of this
dozen, three had been gravely wounded: two at Risingham in the disorder
of the rout, one by John Amend-All's marksmen as he crossed the forest.
This raised the force of the garrison, counting Hatch, Sir Daniel, and
young Shelton, to twenty-two effective men.  And more might be
continually expected to arrive.  The danger lay not therefore in the lack
of men.

It was the terror of the Black Arrow that oppressed the spirits of the
garrison.  For their open foes of the party of York, in these most
changing times, they felt but a far-away concern.  "The world," as people
said in those days, "might change again" before harm came.  But for their
neighbours in the wood, they trembled.  It was not Sir Daniel alone who
was a mark for hatred.  His men, conscious of impunity, had carried
themselves cruelly through all the country.  Harsh commands had been
harshly executed; and of the little band that now sat talking in the
court, there was not one but had been guilty of some act of oppression or
barbarity.  And now, by the fortune of war, Sir Daniel had become
powerless to protect his instruments; now, by the issue of some hours of
battle, at which many of them had not been present, they had all become
punishable traitors to the State, outside the buckler of the law, a
shrunken company in a poor fortress that was hardly tenable, and exposed
upon all sides to the just resentment of their victims.  Nor had there
been lacking grisly advertisements of what they might expect.

At different periods of the evening and the night, no fewer than seven
riderless horses had come neighing in terror to the gate.  Two were from
Selden's troop; five belonged to men who had ridden with Sir Daniel to
the field.  Lastly, a little before dawn, a spearman had come staggering
to the moat side, pierced by three arrows; even as they carried him in,
his spirit had departed; but by the words that he uttered in his agony,
he must have been the last survivor of a considerable company of men.

Hatch himself showed, under his sun-brown, the pallour of anxiety; and
when he had taken Dick aside and learned the fate of Selden, he fell on a
stone bench and fairly wept.  The others, from where they sat on stools
or doorsteps in the sunny angle of the court, looked at him with wonder
and alarm, but none ventured to inquire the cause of his emotion.

"Nay, Master Shelton," said Hatch, at last--"nay, but what said I?  We
shall all go.  Selden was a man of his hands; he was like a brother to
me.  Well, he has gone second; well, we shall all follow!  For what said
their knave rhyme?--'A black arrow in each black heart.'  Was it not so
it went?  Appleyard, Selden, Smith, old Humphrey gone; and there lieth
poor John Carter, crying, poor sinner, for the priest."

Dick gave ear.  Out of a low window, hard by where they were talking,
groans and murmurs came to his ear.

"Lieth he there?" he asked.

"Ay, in the second porter's chamber," answered Hatch.  "We could not bear
him further, soul and body were so bitterly at odds.  At every step we
lifted him, he thought to wend.  But now, methinks, it is the soul that
suffereth.  Ever for the priest he crieth, and Sir Oliver, I wot not why,
still cometh not.  'Twill be a long shrift; but poor Appleyard and poor
Selden, they had none."

Dick stooped to the window and looked in.  The little cell was low and
dark, but he could make out the wounded soldier lying moaning on his
pallet.

"Carter, poor friend, how goeth it?" he asked.

"Master Shelton," returned the man, in an excited whisper, "for the dear
light of heaven, bring the priest.  Alack, I am sped; I am brought very
low down; my hurt is to the death.  Ye may do me no more service; this
shall be the last.  Now, for my poor soul's interest, and as a loyal
gentleman, bestir you; for I have that matter on my conscience that shall
drag me deep."

He groaned, and Dick heard the grating of his teeth, whether in pain or
terror.

Just then Sir Daniel appeared upon the threshold of the hall.  He had a
letter in one hand.

"Lads," he said, "we have had a shog, we have had a tumble; wherefore,
then, deny it?  Rather it imputeth to get speedily again to saddle.  This
old Harry the Sixt has had the undermost.  Wash we, then, our hands of
him.  I have a good friend that rideth next the duke, the Lord of
Wensleydale.  Well, I have writ a letter to my friend, praying his good
lordship, and offering large satisfaction for the past and reasonable
surety for the future.  Doubt not but he will lend a favourable ear.  A
prayer without gifts is like a song without music: I surfeit him with
promises, boys--I spare not to promise.  What, then, is lacking?  Nay, a
great thing--wherefore should I deceive you?--a great thing and a
difficult: a messenger to bear it.  The woods--y' are not ignorant of
that--lie thick with our ill-willers.  Haste is most needful; but without
sleight and caution all is naught.  Which, then, of this company will
take me this letter, bear me it to my Lord of Wensleydale, and bring me
the answer back?"

One man instantly arose.

"I will, an't like you," said he.  "I will even risk my carcase."

"Nay, Dicky Bowyer, not so," returned the knight.  "It likes me not.  Y'
are sly indeed, but not speedy.  Ye were a laggard ever."

"An't be so, Sir Daniel, here am I," cried another.

"The saints forfend!" said the knight.  "Y' are speedy, but not sly.  Ye
would blunder me headforemost into John Amend-All's camp.  I thank you
both for your good courage; but, in sooth, it may not be."

