coming to, when young maids may flout their elders. I wonder that you do
not correct her, my fair lord."

"Nay, my heart's comfort, I never raised hand to woman yet, and it would
be a passing strange thing if I began on my own flesh and blood. It was
a woman's hand which cast this lime into mine eyes, and though I saw
her stoop, and might well have stopped her ere she threw, I deemed it
unworthy of my knighthood to hinder or balk one of her sex."

"The hussy!" cried Lady Loring clenching her broad right hand. "I would
I had been at the side of her!"

"And so would I, since you would have been the nearer me my own. But
I doubt not that you are right, and that Maude's wings need clipping,
which I may leave in your hands when I am gone, for, in sooth, this
peaceful life is not for me, and were it not for your gracious kindness
and loving care I could not abide it a week. I hear that there is talk
of warlike muster at Bordeaux once more, and by St. Paul! it would be a
new thing if the lions of England and the red pile of Chandos were to
be seen in the field, and the roses of Loring were not waving by their
side."

"Now woe worth me but I feared it!" cried she, with the color all struck
from her face. "I have noted your absent mind, your kindling eye, your
trying and riveting of old harness. Consider my sweet lord, that you
have already won much honor, that we have seen but little of each other,
that you bear upon your body the scar of over twenty wounds received
in I know not how many bloody encounters. Have you not done enough for
honor and the public cause?"

"My lady, when our liege lord, the king, at three score years, and my
Lord Chandos at three-score and ten, are blithe and ready to lay lance
in rest for England's cause, it would ill be-seem me to prate of service
done. It is sooth that I have received seven and twenty wounds. There is
the more reason that I should be thankful that I am still long of breath
and sound in limb. I have also seen some bickering and scuffling. Six
great land battles I count, with four upon sea, and seven and fifty
onfalls, skirmishes and bushments. I have held two and twenty towns,
and I have been at the intaking of thirty-one. Surely then it would
be bitter shame to me, and also to you, since my fame is yours, that I
should now hold back if a man's work is to be done. Besides, bethink
you how low is our purse, with bailiff and reeve ever croaking of empty
farms and wasting lands. Were it not for this constableship which the
Earl of Salisbury hath bestowed upon us we could scarce uphold the state
which is fitting to our degree. Therefore, my sweeting, there is the
more need that I should turn to where there is good pay to be earned and
brave ransoms to be won."

"Ah, my dear lord," quoth she, with sad, weary eyes. "I thought that at
last I had you to mine own self, even though your youth had been spent
afar from my side. Yet my voice, as I know well, should speed you on to
glory and renown, not hold you back when fame is to be won. Yet what can
I say, for all men know that your valor needs the curb and not the
spur. It goes to my heart that you should ride forth now a mere knight
bachelor, when there is no noble in the land who hath so good a claim to
the square pennon, save only that you have not the money to uphold it."

"And whose fault that, my sweet bird?" said he.

"No fault, my fair lord, but a virtue: for how many rich ransoms have
you won, and yet have scattered the crowns among page and archer and
varlet, until in a week you had not as much as would buy food and
forage. It is a most knightly largesse, and yet withouten money how can
man rise?"

"Dirt and dross!" cried he.

"What matter rise or fall, so that duty be done and honor gained.
Banneret or bachelor, square pennon or forked, I would not give a denier
for the difference, and the less since Sir John Chandos, chosen flower
of English chivalry, is himself but a humble knight. But meanwhile fret
not thyself, my heart's dove, for it is like that there may be no war
waged, and we must await the news. But here are three strangers, and
one, as I take it, a soldier fresh from service. It is likely that he
may give us word of what is stirring over the water."

Lady Loring, glancing up, saw in the fading light three companions
walking abreast down the road, all gray with dust, and stained with
travel, yet chattering merrily between themselves. He in the midst was
young and comely, with boyish open face and bright gray eyes, which
glanced from right to left as though he found the world around him both
new and pleasing. To his right walked a huge red-headed man, with
broad smile and merry twinkle, whose clothes seemed to be bursting and
splitting at every seam, as though he were some lusty chick who was
breaking bravely from his shell. On the other side, with his knotted
hand upon the young man's shoulder, came a stout and burly archer, brown
and fierce eyed, with sword at belt and long yellow yew-stave peeping
over his shoulder. Hard face, battered head piece, dinted brigandine,
with faded red lion of St. George ramping on a discolored ground, all
proclaimed as plainly as words that he was indeed from the land of war.
He looked keenly at Sir Nigel as he approached, and then, plunging his
hand under his breastplate, he stepped up to him with a rough, uncouth
bow to the lady.

"Your pardon, fair sir," said he, "but I know you the moment I clap eyes
on you, though in sooth I have seen you oftener in steel than in velvet.
I have drawn string besides you at La Roche-d'Errien, Romorantin,
Maupertuis, Nogent, Auray, and other places."

"Then, good archer, I am right glad to welcome you to Twynham Castle,
and in the steward's room you will find provant for yourself and
comrades. To me also your face is known, though mine eyes play such
tricks with me that I can scarce be sure of my own squire. Rest awhile,
and you shall come to the hall anon and tell us what is passing in
France, for I have heard that it is likely that our pennons may flutter
to the south of the great Spanish mountains ere another year be passed."

"There was talk of it in Bordeaux," answered the archer, "and I
saw myself that the armorers and smiths were as busy as rats in a
wheat-rick. But I bring you this letter from the valiant Gascon knight,
Sir Claude Latour. And to you, Lady," he added after a pause, "I bring
from him this box of red sugar of Narbonne, with every courteous and
knightly greeting which a gallant cavalier may make to a fair and noble
dame."

This little speech had cost the blunt bowman much pains and planning;
but he might have spared his breath, for the lady was quite as much
absorbed as her lord in the letter, which they held between them, a
hand on either corner, spelling it out very slowly, with drawn brows and
muttering lips. As they read it, Alleyne, who stood with Hordle John a
few paces back from their comrade, saw the lady catch her breath, while
the knight laughed softly to himself.

"You see, dear heart," said he, "that they will not leave the old dog
in his kennel when the game is afoot. And what of this White Company,
archer?"

"Ah, sir, you speak of dogs," cried Aylward; "but there are a pack
of lusty hounds who are ready for any quarry, if they have but a good
huntsman to halloo them on. Sir, we have been in the wars together, and
I have seen many a brave following but never such a set of woodland boys
as this. They do but want you at their head, and who will bar the way to
them!"

"Pardieu!" said Sir Nigel, "if they are all like their messenger, they
are indeed men of whom a leader may be proud. Your name, good archer?"

"Sam Aylward, sir, of the Hundred of Easebourne and the Rape of
Chichester."

"And this giant behind you?"

"He is big John, of Hordle, a forest man, who hath now taken service in
the Company."

"A proper figure of a man at-arms," said the little knight. "Why, man,
you are no chicken, yet I warrant him the stronger man. See to that
great stone from the coping which hath fallen upon the bridge. Four of
my lazy varlets strove this day to carry it hence. I would that you two
could put them to shame by budging it, though I fear that I overtask
you, for it is of a grievous weight."

He pointed as he spoke to a huge rough-hewn block which lay by the
roadside, deep sunken from its own weight in the reddish earth. The
archer approached it, rolling back the sleeves of his jerkin, but with
no very hopeful countenance, for indeed it was a mighty rock. John,
however, put him aside with his left hand, and, stooping over the stone,
he plucked it single-handed from its soft bed and swung it far into the
stream. There it fell with mighty splash, one jagged end peaking out
above the surface, while the waters bubbled and foamed with far-circling
eddy.

"Good lack!" cried Sir Nigel, and "Good lack!" cried his lady, while
John stood laughing and wiping the caked dirt from his fingers.

"I have felt his arms round my ribs," said the bowman, "and they crackle
yet at the thought of it. This other comrade of mine is a right learned
clerk, for all that he is so young, hight Alleyne, the son of Edric,
brother to the Socman of Minstead."

"Young man," quoth Sir Nigel, sternly, "if you are of the same way of
thought as your brother, you may not pass under portcullis of mine."

"Nay, fair sir," cried Aylward hastily, "I will be pledge for it that
they have no thought in common; for this very day his brother hath set
his dogs upon him, and driven him from his lands."

"And are you, too, of the White Company?" asked Sir Nigel. "Hast had
small experience of war, if I may judge by your looks and bearing."

"I would fain to France with my friends here," Alleyne answered; "but I
am a man of peace--a reader, exorcist, acolyte, and clerk."

"That need not hinder," quoth Sir Nigel.

"No, fair sir," cried the bowman joyously. "Why, I myself have served
two terms with Arnold de Cervolles, he whom they called the archpriest.
By my hilt! I have seen him ere now, with monk's gown trussed to his
knees, over his sandals in blood in the fore-front of the battle. Yet,
ere the last string had twanged, he would be down on his four bones
among the stricken, and have them all houseled and shriven, as quick as
shelling peas. Ma foi! there were those who wished that he would have
less care for their souls and a little more for their bodies!"

"It is well to have a learned clerk in every troop," said Sir Nigel. "By
St. Paul, there are men so caitiff that they think more of a scrivener's
pen than of their lady's smile, and do their devoir in hopes that they
may fill a line in a chronicle or make a tag to a jongleur's romance. I
remember well that, at the siege of Retters, there was a little, sleek,
fat clerk of the name of Chaucer, who was so apt at rondel, sirvente, or
tonson, that no man dare give back a foot from the walls, lest he find
it all set down in his rhymes and sung by every underling and varlet
in the camp. But, my soul's bird, you hear me prate as though all were
decided, when I have not yet taken counsel either with you or with my
lady mother. Let us to the chamber, while these strangers find such fare
as pantry and cellar may furnish."

"The night air strikes chill," said the lady, and turned down the road
with her hand upon her lord's arm. The three comrades dropped behind and
followed: Aylward much the lighter for having accomplished his mission,
Alleyne full of wonderment at the humble bearing of so renowned
a captain, and John loud with snorts and sneers, which spoke his
disappointment and contempt.

"What ails the man?" asked Aylward in surprise.

"I have been cozened and bejaped," quoth he gruffly.

"By whom, Sir Samson the strong?"

"By thee, Sir Balaam the false prophet."

"By my hilt!" cried the archer, "though I be not Balaam, yet I hold
converse with the very creature that spake to him. What is amiss, then,
and how have I played you false?"

"Why, marry, did you not say, and Alleyne here will be my witness, that,
if I would hie to the wars with you, you would place me under a leader
who was second to none in all England for valor? Yet here you bring me
to a shred of a man, peaky and ill-nourished, with eyes like a moulting
owl, who must needs, forsooth, take counsel with his mother ere he
buckle sword to girdle."

"Is that where the shoe galls?" cried the bowman, and laughed aloud.
"I will ask you what you think of him three months hence, if we be all
alive; for sure I am that----"

Aylward's words were interrupted by an extraordinary hubbub which broke
out that instant some little way down the street in the direction of the
Priory. There was deep-mouthed shouting of men, frightened shrieks of
women, howling and barking of curs, and over all a sullen, thunderous
rumble, indescribably menacing and terrible. Round the corner of the
narrow street there came rushing a brace of whining dogs with tails
tucked under their legs, and after them a white-faced burgher, with
outstretched hands and wide-spread fingers, his hair all abristle and
his eyes glinting back from one shoulder to the other, as though some
great terror were at his very heels. "Fly, my lady, fly!" he screeched,
and whizzed past them like bolt from bow; while close behind came
lumbering a huge black bear, with red tongue lolling from his mouth, and
a broken chain jangling behind him. To right and left the folk flew for
arch and doorway. Hordle John caught up the Lady Loring as though
she had been a feather, and sprang with her into an open porch; while
Aylward, with a whirl of French oaths, plucked at his quiver and tried
to unsling his bow. Alleyne, all unnerved at so strange and unwonted a
sight, shrunk up against the wall with his eyes fixed upon the frenzied
creature, which came bounding along with ungainly speed, looking the
larger in the uncertain light, its huge jaws agape, with blood and
slaver trickling to the ground. Sir Nigel alone, unconscious to all
appearance of the universal panic, walked with unfaltering step up
the centre of the road, a silken handkerchief in one hand and his gold
comfit-box in the other. It sent the blood cold through Alleyne's veins
to see that as they came together--the man and the beast--the creature
reared up, with eyes ablaze with fear and hate, and whirled its great
paws above the knight to smite him to the earth. He, however, blinking
with puckered eyes, reached up his kerchief, and flicked the beast twice
across the snout with it. "Ah, saucy! saucy," quoth he, with gentle
chiding; on which the bear, uncertain and puzzled, dropped its four legs
to earth again, and, waddling back, was soon swathed in ropes by the
bear-ward and a crowd of peasants who had been in close pursuit.

A scared man was the keeper; for, having chained the brute to a stake
while he drank a stoup of ale at the inn, it had been baited by stray
curs, until, in wrath and madness, it had plucked loose the chain, and
smitten or bitten all who came in its path. Most scared of all was he
to find that the creature had come nigh to harm the Lord and Lady of the
castle, who had power to place him in the stretch-neck or to have the
skin scourged from his shoulders. Yet, when he came with bowed head
and humble entreaty for forgiveness, he was met with a handful of
small silver from Sir Nigel, whose dame, however, was less charitably
disposed, being much ruffled in her dignity by the manner in which she
had been hustled from her lord's side.

As they passed through the castle gate, John plucked at Aylward's
sleeve, and the two fell behind.

"I must crave your pardon, comrade," said he, bluntly. "I was a fool not
to know that a little rooster may be the gamest. I believe that this man
is indeed a leader whom we may follow."



CHAPTER XI. HOW A YOUNG SHEPHERD HAD A PERILOUS FLOCK.


Black was the mouth of Twynham Castle, though a pair of torches burning
at the further end of the gateway cast a red glare over the outer
bailey, and sent a dim, ruddy flicker through the rough-hewn arch,
rising and falling with fitful brightness. Over the door the travellers
could discern the escutcheon of the Montacutes, a roebuck gules on a
field argent, flanked on either side by smaller shields which bore the
red roses of the veteran constable. As they passed over the drawbridge,
Alleyne marked the gleam of arms in the embrasures to right and left,
and they had scarce set foot upon the causeway ere a hoarse blare
burst from a bugle, and, with screech of hinge and clank of chain, the
ponderous bridge swung up into the air, drawn by unseen hands. At the
same instant the huge portcullis came rattling down from above, and shut
off the last fading light of day. Sir Nigel and his lady walked on in
deep talk, while a fat under-steward took charge of the three comrades,
and led them to the buttery, where beef, bread, and beer were kept ever
in readiness for the wayfarer. After a hearty meal and a dip in the
trough to wash the dust from them, they strolled forth into the bailey,
where the bowman peered about through the darkness at wall and at keep,
with the carping eyes of one who has seen something of sieges, and is
not likely to be satisfied. To Alleyne and to John, however, it appeared
to be as great and as stout a fortress as could be built by the hands of
man.

Erected by Sir Balwin de Redvers in the old fighting days of the twelfth
century, when men thought much of war and little of comfort, Castle
Twynham had been designed as a stronghold pure and simple, unlike those
later and more magnificent structures where warlike strength had been
combined with the magnificence of a palace. From the time of the Edwards
such buildings as Conway or Caernarvon castles, to say nothing of Royal
Windsor, had shown that it was possible to secure luxury in peace as
well as security in times of trouble. Sir Nigel's trust, however, still
frowned above the smooth-flowing waters of the Avon, very much as the
stern race of early Anglo-Normans had designed it. There were the broad
outer and inner bailies, not paved, but sown with grass to nourish the
sheep and cattle which might be driven in on sign of danger. All round
were high and turreted walls, with at the corner a bare square-faced
keep, gaunt and windowless, rearing up from a lofty mound, which made it
almost inaccessible to an assailant. Against the bailey-walls were rows
of frail wooden houses and leaning sheds, which gave shelter to the
archers and men-at-arms who formed the garrison. The doors of these
humble dwellings were mostly open, and against the yellow glare from
within Alleyne could see the bearded fellows cleaning their harness,
while their wives would come out for a gossip, with their needlework in
their hands, and their long black shadows streaming across the yard.
The air was full of the clack of their voices and the merry prattling of
children, in strange contrast to the flash of arms and constant warlike
challenge from the walls above.

"Methinks a company of school lads could hold this place against an
army," quoth John.

"And so say I," said Alleyne.

"Nay, there you are wide of the clout," the bowman said gravely. "By my
hilt! I have seen a stronger fortalice carried in a summer evening.
I remember such a one in Picardy, with a name as long as a Gascon's
pedigree. It was when I served under Sir Robert Knolles, before the days
of the Company; and we came by good plunder at the sacking of it. I had
myself a great silver bowl, with two goblets, and a plastron of Spanish
steel. Pasques Dieu! there are some fine women over yonder! Mort de ma
vie! see to that one in the doorway! I will go speak to her. But whom
have we here?"

"Is there an archer here hight Sam Aylward?" asked a gaunt man-at-arms,
clanking up to them across the courtyard.

"My name, friend," quoth the bowman.

"Then sure I have no need to tell thee mine," said the other.

"By the rood! if it is not Black Simon of Norwich!" cried Aylward. "A
mon coeur, camarade, a mon coeur! Ah, but I am blithe to see thee!" The
two fell upon each other and hugged like bears.

"And where from, old blood and bones?" asked the bowman.

"I am in service here. Tell me, comrade, is it sooth that we shall have
another fling at these Frenchmen? It is so rumored in the guard-room,
and that Sir Nigel will take the field once more."

"It is like enough, mon gar., as things go."

"Now may the Lord be praised!" cried the other. "This very night will I
set apart a golden ouche to be offered on the shrine of my name-saint. I
have pined for this, Aylward, as a young maid pines for her lover."

"Art so set on plunder then? Is the purse so light that there is not
enough for a rouse? I have a bag at my belt, camarade, and you have but
to put your fist into it for what you want. It was ever share and share
between us."

"Nay, friend, it is not the Frenchman's gold, but the Frenchman's blood
that I would have. I should not rest quiet in the grave, coz, if I had
not another turn at them. For with us in France it has ever been fair
and honest war--a shut fist for the man, but a bended knee for the
woman. But how was it at Winchelsea when their galleys came down upon it
some few years back? I had an old mother there, lad, who had come down
thither from the Midlands to be the nearer her son. They found her
afterwards by her own hearthstone, thrust through by a Frenchman's bill.
My second sister, my brother's wife, and her two children, they were but
ash-heaps in the smoking ruins of their house. I will not say that we
have not wrought great scath upon France, but women and children have
been safe from us. And so, old friend, my heart is hot within me, and I
long to hear the old battle-cry again, and, by God's truth! if Sir
Nigel unfurls his pennon, here is one who will be right glad to feel the
saddle-flaps under his knees."

"We have seen good work together, old war-dog," quoth Aylward; "and,
by my hilt! we may hope to see more ere we die. But we are more like to
hawk at the Spanish woodcock than at the French heron, though certes
it is rumored that Du Guesclin with all the best lances of France have
taken service under the lions and towers of Castile. But, comrade, it is
in my mind that there is some small matter of dispute still open between
us."

"'Fore God, it is sooth!" cried the other; "I had forgot it. The
provost-marshal and his men tore us apart when last we met."

"On which, friend, we vowed that we should settle the point when next we
came together. Hast thy sword, I see, and the moon throws glimmer enough
for such old night-birds as we. On guard, mon gar.! I have not heard
clink of steel this month or more."

"Out from the shadow then," said the other, drawing his sword. "A vow is
a vow, and not lightly to be broken."

"A vow to the saints," cried Alleyne, "is indeed not to be set aside;
but this is a devil's vow, and, simple clerk as I am, I am yet the
mouthpiece of the true church when I say that it were mortal sin to
fight on such a quarrel. What! shall two grown men carry malice for
years, and fly like snarling curs at each other's throats?"

"No malice, my young clerk, no malice," quoth Black Simon. "I have not
a bitter drop in my heart for mine old comrade; but the quarrel, as he
hath told you, is still open and unsettled. Fall on, Aylward!"

"Not whilst I can stand between you," cried Alleyne, springing before
the bowman. "It is shame and sin to see two Christian Englishmen turn
swords against each other like the frenzied bloodthirsty paynim."

"And, what is more," said Hordle John, suddenly appearing out of the
buttery with the huge board upon which the pastry was rolled, "if either
raise sword I shall flatten him like a Shrovetide pancake. By the black
rood! I shall drive him into the earth, like a nail into a door, rather
than see you do scath to each other."

"'Fore God, this is a strange way of preaching peace," cried Black
Simon. "You may find the scath yourself, my lusty friend, if you raise
your great cudgel to me. I had as lief have the castle drawbridge drop
upon my pate."

"Tell me, Aylward," said Alleyne earnestly, with his hands outstretched
to keep the pair asunder, "what is the cause of quarrel, that we may see
whether honorable settlement may not be arrived at?"

The bowman looked down at his feet and then up at the moon. "Parbleu!"
he cried, "the cause of quarrel? Why, mon petit, it was years ago in
Limousin, and how can I bear in mind what was the cause of it? Simon
there hath it at the end of his tongue."

"Not I, in troth," replied the other; "I have had other things to think
of. There was some sort of bickering over dice, or wine, or was it a
woman, coz?"

"Pasques Dieu! but you have nicked it," cried Aylward. "It was indeed
about a woman; and the quarrel must go forward, for I am still of the
same mind as before."

"What of the woman, then?" asked Simon. "May the murrain strike me if I
can call to mind aught about her."

"It was La Blanche Rose, maid at the sign of the 'Trois Corbeaux' at
Limoges. Bless her pretty heart! Why, mon gar., I loved her."

"So did a many," quoth Simon. "I call her to mind now. On the very day
that we fought over the little hussy, she went off with Evan ap Price,
a long-legged Welsh dagsman. They have a hostel of their own now,
somewhere on the banks of the Garonne, where the landlord drinks so much
of the liquor that there is little left for the customers."

"So ends our quarrel, then," said Aylward, sheathing his sword. "A Welsh
dagsman, i' faith! C'etait mauvais gout, camarade, and the more so when
she had a jolly archer and a lusty man-at-arms to choose from."

"True, old lad. And it is as well that we can compose our differences
honorably, for Sir Nigel had been out at the first clash of steel; and
he hath sworn that if there be quarrelling in the garrison he would
smite the right hand from the broilers. You know him of old, and that he
is like to be as good as his word."

"Mort-Dieu! yes. But there are ale, mead, and wine in the buttery, and
the steward a merry rogue, who will not haggle over a quart or two.
Buvons, mon gar., for it is not every day that two old friends come
together."

The old soldiers and Hordle John strode off together in all good
fellowship. Alleyne had turned to follow them, when he felt a touch upon
his shoulder, and found a young page by his side.

"The Lord Loring commands," said the boy, "that you will follow me to
the great chamber, and await him there."

"But my comrades?"

"His commands were for you alone."

Alleyne followed the messenger to the east end of the courtyard, where a
broad flight of steps led up to the doorway of the main hall, the outer
wall of which is washed by the waters of the Avon. As designed at first,
no dwelling had been allotted to the lord of the castle and his family
but the dark and dismal basement story of the keep. A more civilized or
more effeminate generation, however, had refused to be pent up in such
a cellar, and the hall with its neighboring chambers had been added for
their accommodation. Up the broad steps Alleyne went, still following
his boyish guide, until at the folding oak doors the latter paused, and
ushered him into the main hall of the castle.

On entering the room the clerk looked round; but, seeing no one, he
continued to stand, his cap in his hand, examining with the greatest
interest a chamber which was so different to any to which he was
accustomed. The days had gone by when a nobleman's hall was but a
barn-like, rush-strewn enclosure, the common lounge and eating-room of
every inmate of the castle. The Crusaders had brought back with them
experiences of domestic luxuries, of Damascus carpets and rugs of
Aleppo, which made them impatient of the hideous bareness and want of
privacy which they found in their ancestral strongholds. Still stronger,
however, had been the influence of the great French war; for, however
well matched the nations might be in martial exercises, there could be
no question but that our neighbors were infinitely superior to us in the
arts of peace. A stream of returning knights, of wounded soldiers,
